OTANOL O'GIA.

THE British Physician: OR, The NATURE and VIRTUES OF ENGLISH PLANTS.

Exactly describing such Plants as grow Naturally in our Land, with their
several Names, Greek, Latin, or English, Natures, Places where they grow,
Times when they flourish, and are most proper to be gathered; their degrees of
Temperature, Applications and Virtues, Physical and Astrological Uses, treated
of; each Plant appropriated to the several Diseases they cure, and directions
for their Medicinal Uses, throughout the whole Body of Man; being most special
helps for sudden Accidents, Acute and Chronick Distempers.

By means whereof People may gather their own Physic under every Hedge, or in
their own Gardens, which may be most conducing to their Health; so that
observing the direction in this Book, they may become their own Physicians: For
what Climate soever is subject to any particular Disease, in the same Place
there grows a Cure.

With two exact Tables, the one of the English and Latin Names of the Plants;
the other of the Diseases, and Names of each Plant appropriated to the
Diseases, with their Cures.

By ROBERT TURNER, Botanolog. Stud.

London, Printed by R. Wood for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1664.

Viro optimo Prudentia spectatissimo, omnique Virtutum genere Cumulatissimo
Richardo Chawortho, Equiti Aurato, Legum Doctori, (Nec non Reverendissimo in
Christo Patri Domino Gilberto, Providentia Divina, Cantuar. Archi-Episcopo,
totiusque Angliae Primati and Metropolitano, ET Reverendo in Christo Patri
Humfredo, permissione Divina, London. Episcopo) In Cancellarium merito ac rite
cooptato, Hanc suam Botanologiam, Robertus Turnerus Summo suae erga eum
observantiae indicio, and utilitatis publicae desiderio, Patrociniique spe
exoptatissimi, pie submisseque Dat, Dicat, Dedicat.

To the READER.
Reader,
THere are now some few Years overpast since I last appeared public amongst
you; yet I cannot think my self quite forgotten and obliterated out of your
Memories, or at least of some of you, by whom I presume I have been often read,
though not seen: Give me leave after some silence to trouble you once more; and
I doubt not after you have well considered the subject, you will easily
dispense with the trouble and pains I give you; finding that vanquished by the
pleasure and profit you will reap by it: For if the Axiom be true, as
undoubtedly it is, that three things principally concur as the moving causes
in the achievement of every Action, viz. Pleasure, Profit, and Honesty, you
will find them all conspired together in the Enterprise of this Work: A Work
perchance, which at first blush will be by some (especially by those of the
Romantique Physicians Tribe) censured as superfluous; and by others objected
against as not copious enough for their thoughts, although too perfect and
complete for their practice: they may both easily be answered, and if they will
soberly consider it, the Book it self sufficiently answers all objections may
be made against it; there being compendiously contained in it the complete body
of Medicinal Vegetables; the several names both Latin, Greek, and English; the
degrees of Temperature, whereby their Nature and Faculties are known and
distinguished of all such Herbs, Plants, Seeds, Fruits, and Roots as are useful
in Physic, whether naturally growing in England, or common to be had at our
Druggists and Apothecaries Shops: so that when I tell you the Virtues of Fruits
or Drugs which grow in the East or West Indies, I do not bid you go thither and
fetch them; the more industrious Merchant has saved you that labor, and
brought them home to your Doors. And this has not been exactly performed by
any English Physician in such a Method before.

I have likewise set down to many Plants the Astral influence assigned unto
them by Astrologers: those that are studious in that Science may soon acquaint
themselves with the rest, which I have willingly omitted; having to every Plant
laid down the Degrees of the Temperature thereof, whereby the Nature, Virtue,
or Danger thereof is easily known: and indeed he fell a great deal too short,
that pretends he studied to find a reason why such a Herb cured such a
Disease, and concludes he found it in (the secondary Cause I grant) the Stars;
but if he would have added a little Christianity to his study, it would have
raised his Contemplation higher, and he would have found the true reason and
primary Cause to have come from above the Stars, from him that gave the Stars
their Virtues; and concluded with the same reason that the Heathen Poet did,
touching the Creation of the World, and the Stars themselves, Sic onus inclusum
numero distinxit eodem
Cura Dei. --
Even so it seemed to the Creator best.
Nevertheless let us give the Stars their due, and all the candid and ingenious
Students and Contemplators of their Celestial Virtues and Influences; but let
us not abuse them, and dishonor the Creator of all, as the spurious
Sigilators, and Talesmen, or Telesmemongers do. Let us likewise be thankful
unto Almighty God for those blessings he has bestowed upon us, in enduing the
Plants and Grass of the Field with such salubrious Faculties for our health and
preservation; but let us not offer Sacrifices unto them, and say Charms over
them as the Druids of old, and other Heathens; and so do some Cacochymists,
Medean Hags, and Sorcerers now adays; who not contented with the lawful use of
the Creatures, out of some Diabolical intention, search after the more Magical
and occult Virtues of Herbs and Plants to accomplish some wicked ends; and for
that very cause King Hezekiah fearing lest the Herbals of Solomon should come
into profane Hands caused them to be burned.

God has imprinted upon the Plants, Herbs, and Flowers, as it were in
Hieroglyphics, the very signature of their Virtues; as the learned Grollius
and others well observe: as, the Nutmeg being cut, resembles the Brain, the
Papaver Erraticum, or red Poppey flower, resembles at its bottom the settling
of the Blood in the Plurisie; and how excellent is that flower in Diseases of
the Plurisie and Surfeits, has sufficiently been experienced. In the
Heliotrope and Marigold, Subjects may learn their duty to their Sovereign;
which his Sacred Majesty King Charles the First mentions in his Princely
Meditations, walking in a Garden in the Isle of Wight, in the following Words,
viz.

The Marigold observes the Sun

More then my Subjects me have done, etc. Reader I shall not trouble you any
longer without doors, but only give you one advertisement by the way, and
conclude. The Book, for the more ready finding any Plant you would look for in
it, is composed according to the order of the Letters in the Alphabet; and
besides an Alphabetical Table of each Plant contained in the Book: Now because
one Plant may have several appellations, when you look for any one in the Table
in the page of the Book which you are directed to, perhaps you may not find
the same name in the Title of the Plant there treated of; then do but cast your
eye to the Names under the Description of the Plant you find in that Page you
are directed to, and there you will find the Plant here described called by
the same name you look for. I shall at present say no more, but wish this Book,
and the Students therein happy success, and their desires both in pleasure and
profit; subscribing my self

Reader, Your devoted Friend, Robert Turner.
Christopher Alley in St. Martins le Grand, London. 23. March, 1663/4.
To his Esteemed Friend Mr. Robert Turner, on this his Excellent and Useful
Treatise, entitled, BOTANOLOGIA.
OUr Age has been with Books so fully Blessed,
And Arts and Learning have advanced their Crest
So high therein; a Thousand Years before
Has not produced [in English] Equal Store:
And should we judge of the Study, Brain, or Wit,
Fancy, and whatsoever appends to it,
Of Former Times, and these our Present Days,
And to the best deserving give the Bays;
Antiquity must strike it sail, and say,
This Age Arts truest Honor does enjoy!
The Muses Sons here purchase all anew,
Their Trebled-trials vouch their Studies true:
No Antic Crutches yields Support to them;
Their Grandsires Knowledge gives no Diadem!
As Poets, so an Herbarist, is Born;
Without Celestial Succor, he is a Scorn:
Not all the Acquisitions Schools can lend,
Will make True Science a poor Mortal's Friend!
Yet where both Art and Nature do unite,
In one Physician; -- He Is the only Wight!
And thus it is here: -- Our Author has for Friend,
Not only Learning; which does aptly lend
Wings to Industry: -- But Nature too,
Has give him Stars, Great Things in Arts to do.
In's Book he has a Method plain devised,
All parts of it, so curiously comprised;
That Vulgar men, which have but skill to read,
May be their own Physicians at need:
The better sort are hereby taught, how all
Things springing from Earths Bowels, safely shall
By Love or Sympathy and Antipathy.
Hatred, [as the Stars dispose]
Each Sickness cure, that in the Body grows.
Learned Physicians, (whose better hands
And Brains are subject unto Fates Commands)
Who have the Fortune, [maugre all their skill]
As many Patients, for to suffer ill;
As (ever) find a Cure! -- Let them but look
With serious Aspect over this Learned Book;
They Will find the Cause of their Unhappiness,
And unto safer means themselves Address.
Let Us then the Author thank, who thus imparts
(For public good) these secret useful Arts:
And when we Read him, wish All Men as free,
As Learned and Able (that shall write) as He.
John Gadbury, (...).
Ad Lectorem in laudem Operis, and Authoris (...).
COnsere nunc Hortum Lector tibi candide laetum,
Vnde aegrotantem tu medicare queas.
Turneroque tuo grates persolve, quod Herbas
Expertus, quicquid prosuit art canat.
Perge igitur Turnere, tuum nomenque per Orbem
Sparge Libris, raras pande salutis opes.
Jo. B. (...).
To the Author upon his useful and excellent BOTANOLOGIA, or, The British
Physician.
FOr the Sea-encompast Little World [our Isle]
A flowery Wreath your fragrant Leaves compile;
Her secret (and reserved) worth you sing,
The precious Herbs of the odoriferous Spring,
Prove Antic days, had reason good to style
(Long since) Britannia, the Happy Isle.
I once admired, yet wonder now no more,
Old Rome's ambitious Eagles stormed our Shore;
That Picts from Mountains periwigg'd with Snow,
Infest a Region where such Simples grow;
That treacherous Saxons sack what Picts did spare,
And from Sea-Rovers turn our Land to share;
That the encroaching irreligious Dane
Should the usurping Saxon down again;
That the audacious Norman did lay down
A meaner Ducall for a Regal Crown.
Let not tanned Africa boast the Wealth does hide,
Nor swelling Asia, [the first Nurse of Pride]
Nor the yet-barbarous New World Roots unfold,
Weeds and Diseases to confound the Old;
Our World (our Isle but searched) affords store
Against most of Natures foes. If we need more,
You show the Virtue; you the worth commend
Of Drugs soft Asia, Drugs scorcht Africa send;
Drugs our politer Europe, Drugs that home
From that great Monarch, remote Nations come;
From some of whom kind Phoebus goes not down,
But's never discontinued Rays do crown.
March 10. 1663 William Smith, late of Clare-Hall, Cambr.

To my truly Ingenious Friend Mr. Robert Turner, upon his well accomplished
Botanologia; or, The British Physician.
THat rude seditious Quack (who sought to raise
A Monument to himself, a lasting praise
In that licentious Time, by wronging those
With his illiterate filthy Nonsense, whose
Substantial, Solid, and deserving worth,
His Dirt made with more splendour issue forth)
You scorn to Ape; nor mention of him make,
But when reforming of some Grand Mistake.
How are we all engaged! the Apothecary,
Surgeon, Physician, has his short Library
Included in this Book: your worthy pains
Miss not one Herb, that Flora on the Plains,
When she her verdant Mantle spreads, does show;
What Star does govern each is told by you.
Then lets conclude in you, and you alone
Comprised are Gerrard and old Perkinson.
March 8th 1663/4 Barthol. Goodrick. M. Licent.

THE British Physician: OR, The Virtues of English Plants.
Adders Tongue. Ophioglossum.
THis Herb arises out of the ground with one leaf, The Description.
much like a Water-plantain Leaf, being of an oyley substance, and a little
more then half a finger long: at the bottom of the leaf sprouts forth a tender
stalk about three inches long, and at the top thereof grows a little speer like
a snakes tongue: sometimes, but very seldom, there springs forth two or three
crooked stings, or tongues, like the rest; but this latter sort is seldom found.

Place.] It grows in moist low grounds and Meadows in many places of England:
as in the Meadows of Holshot in Hampshire, and near Colbrooke; and many other
places.

Time] It springs in April, flouriseth in May, and is gone quite in June, or
July, at the furthest.

Names.] It is called in Latin, Ophyogl^ssum, Lingua Serpentis, Linquoce
Lingualace, Lancea Christi, Enephillon, and Lingua vulneraria. In English,
Adders' tongue, Serpents tongue, and of some, Adders grass; in Dutch
Natertonguen; in high Dutch Nater-zungelin.

Temperature and Virtues.] Adders Tongue is hot and dry in the third degree, a
Herb of the Sun in Aries: It is an excellent wound Herb, and thereof may be
made an excellent Balsome for green wounds after this manner: take the leaves
of the Herb and pound them in a stone Mortar, till they are sufficiently
bruised and macerated, then boil them in a sufficient quantity of oil Olive,
till the herbs be dry, afterward strain it, and reserve it for the purpose
aforesaid, as a precious Medecin. The green Herb bruised, or the juice thereof
applied to any green wound at the time of the year when it may be had, works
the same effects.

Agrimony. Eupatoria.
OF this Plant there be two kinds,

Place and Time.] It grows frequently in Hedge-rowes of Corn Fields, and by
highway sides, and in Woods and Copses; in the fields and Woods near
Rochester, and toward Dulwich in Surry, you may gather loads of it; about July
it is in its prime, the seed is ripe toward the latter end of Summer: you may
gather the herb any time of the year.

Names.] It is called in Greek (...), in Latin Eupatorium and Eupatoria, in
Italian and Spanish Agrimonia. The Germans call it Odermeng Bruckwurtz. The Low
Dutch, French, and English call it Agrimony and Egrimony.

Nature and Virtues.] Agrimony is an Herb of Jupiter, and is of temperature
moderately hot and dry, having a fine binding quality; it removes obstructions
of the Liver, and strengthens the same, and therefore is profitable in diet
drinks for naughty Livers and Consumptions: the decoction thereof is good for
infirmities of the Kidneys, and for such as piss blood by any inward bruise, as
experience has taught me. The leaves made into an unguent with Hogs Lard,
heals and closes up Ulcers; and the herb or seed boiled in Wine helps Fluxes
which proceed from weakness of the Liver, especially if you boil a little
Scabious with it.

Water Agrimony. Eupatorium
IT has stalks of a dark purple color,

Place and Time.] It grows almost in every Ditch, it flowers about the middle
of Summer, the leaves and stalks wither in Winter. The Latins call it,
Eupatorium Cannabium, and Hepatorium, because it is good for the Liver: It Is
called in English Water-hemp, Bastard and Water Agrimony.

Nature and Virtues.] This Plant is hot and dry in the second degree, and of a
bitter taste, it has a scouring opening quality, it cleanses the blood, and
attenuates gross humors, purging them by Urine.

Agarick. Vide Larch tree.

Ague-tree. Vide Sassasras.

Agnus, or, the Chaste-tree.
THis Plant grows up somewhat higher then a Shrub, having many dark colored
branches, being very flexible like Willow; the leaves are long and narrow,
somewhat smaller then Willow leaves, and jagged like those of hemp. The flowers
are of a white color, and grow in spikes on the tops of the Branches: the
seeds are round, almost like pepper, having also a biting taste.

Place and Time.] It grows in moist grounds, and by waters sides in hot
Countries; as in Spain, and Italy, and other hot Countries: the seeds are
brought hither, and sold by our Druggists and Apothecaries.

Temperature and Virtues.] It is reputed by Authors to he hot and dry in the
third degree, of a subtle essence, and of a sharp astringent quality. This Herb
has a great antipathy to Venus, and by its nature must needs be judged to be
under the dominion of Mars in Capricorn; for the seeds of Agnus taken in any
manner do dry up the natural seed, and restrain all venerious motions; and yet
it is of the temperature of Pepper which incites thereunto.

A Pultis being made of the leaves of Agnus Castus, and Vine leaves stamped
together with Butter, and applied to the Cods, dissolveth and asswageth the
hard swelling thereof.

The seeds being parched, or fried, and eaten, dissolve wind, and being taken
with pennyroyal in powder in wine, it is effectual against the Dropsy, and
Spleen, and provokes Urine, and resists the poisons of venomous Beasts: An
Ointment may be made therewith to heat and mollisie benummea Members. Being
used with honey, it is good for sores of the mouth and throat; it takes away
freckles being used with Niter and Vinegar.

The hot sumes of the decoction of the leaves and seeds is good for women to
sit over who are subject to fits of the Mother, or troubled with inflammations
in their privy parts. And a pultis made therewith eases pains of the head, and
being mixed with oil and vinegar, it is effectual against the Frenzy and
Lethargy.

Alecoast, Maudlyn, or Costmary. Costus hortorum.
THere are found six sorts of this herb, The kinds and Description.
three whereof are common to us, viz. Ale-cost, or Cost-mary, common Maudlin,
and white Maudlyn.

Place and Time.] Alecost is a sweet herb, having pale long green leaves,
jagged finely about the edges, and flowers are yellow, the seeds small, flat,
and long: it grows plentifully in our Gardens, and I think is known to most
housewifes, it flowers about July.

Names.] The first is called in Latin Costus hortorum, Balsamita major, or
Mas, Mentha Graeca, Sacracenica officinarum, Salvia Romana, Herba lassulata,
Herba Sanctae Mariae. In English Costmary and Alecost. And Maudlyn is called in
Latin Costus hortorum minor, and in Greek (...).

Temperature and Virtues.] Alecoast and Maudlyn are both of a nature hot and
dry in the second degree, and qualified by Jupiter to help cold and weak
Livers; for which purpose it is a singular herb; or to be used in Ale, it will
make it drink both pleasant to the taste, and far exceeding Coffee and
Chocolate for health.

It may also be used in an Electuary for the purposes aforesaid; it opens
obstructions of the Breast, Liver, Spleen, Kidneyes, and Bladder, provokes
Urine, women's courses, expells Choler and Phlegm: a Conserve made thereof
helps Defluxions of Rheumes, flowing from the brain. The decoction of the
flowers kills Lice in the head, and cures Scabs therein, they being washed
therewith.

It helps also the Rickets and worms in Children, strengthens the stomach, and
stays vomiting, and is good for them that have eaten Hemlock, or the like.

Alehoof, or Ground Ivy. Hedera terrestris.
THis Plant creeps along upon the ground, having a round leaf dented about the
edges of a dark green color, the flowers are hollow and long, of a blueish
purple color, the root small and fibrous.

Place and Time.] It grows almost under every hedge, and also under-house
sides; it flowers betimes in the year, the leaves are to be found usually all
the Winter.

Names.] In the Country, especially in Hampshire, it is generally known by the
name of Hay-hoe, and Gill-go-by-ground; it is also called Ale-hoof, Ground Ivy,
and in Latin Hedera Terrestris.

Temperature and Virtues.] It has an opening cleansing quality, of temperature
hot and dry, in taste bitter. Culpepper ascribes it to Venus, I rather judge it
to be Solar. The Country people often make use of it to sweeten and cleanse
musty Bottles, by filling them with the decoction thereof; it is a singular herb
for the Eyes. The juice thereof with the juyces of Celandine and Daisies being
clarisied, and some fine Sugar dissolved therein, helps the Pin and Web,
Filmes, watering and redness of the Eyes: it is likewise a good wound Herb,
helps Ulcers of the Lungs, and expells windy and choleric, humors, Venom,
and the Plague: It opens obstructions of the Gall, Liver, and Spleen, and
therefore is good for the yellow Jaundies, it provokes Urine and women's terms.
The decoction of the herb in wine being taken, gives ease in the pains of the
Gout and Sciatica, and by adding thereto some honey, and a little burnt allome,
it is excellent for to gargle sore mouths and throats, and also to wash soul
Ulcers of the privy parts; and the juice thereof used with honey and
verdigrease, cleanses Ulcers, and stays their spreading, and cures the Itch
and Scabs, or other breakings out: it is sometimes used as a partner with hops
in drink, and in diet drinks I have found it effectual for the Lungs.

All-heal. Panax Herculeum.
I Shall forbear much description hereof, because it is not growing with us in
England, unless it be in Gardens; it has many large rough leaves growing upon
one foot-stalk, of a hot biting taste; it yields a yellowish juice called
Opponax, which is to be had at our shops: it is called by some Hercules
Woundwort, and All-heale, and in Latin Panax Herculeum.

Place and Time.] It grows in America, and in some places of Italy; it flowers
and seeds in the latter part of Summer.

Temperature and Virtues.] The Gum called Opopanax is hot and dry, hot in the
third degree, and dry in the second; it is effectual, being taken with Wine,
against the sores of the bladder, and Strangury; it purges tough phlegm, and is
profitable against an old Cough, and difficulty of breathing; helps also
windiness, Convulsion, Cramps, and the Gout, expells women's Courses; is good
against the Dropsy, and the biting of venomous creatures; it dissolves
congealed Blood, caused by falls and bruises; it is good to stop hollow teeth,
and the decoction thereof in Vinegar eases pains of the teeth, the mouth being
washed therewith; it is also effectual to be applied in plasters against the
Kings Evil, and hard swellings, as also to Boils, and other sores.

Alexanders. Hipposelinum.
THis Herb is generally known in most Gardens, the leaves are of a dark green,
and much jagged about the edges, and of a hot bitter taste, the flowers white,
the seeds black and streaked; it is called in Latin Hypposelinum, and olus
Atrum, in English, Alexanders.

Time.] It flowers in June and July, and the seed is ripe in August.

Temperature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the third degree, of a
cleansing quality, and therefore is frequently used in broth in Spring time to
cleanse and rarifie the blood: the roots stewed in the Spring time cleanse the
Stomach from slimy humors, it opens obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and
for that purpose, and to help a weak stomach, the roots are a good sauce being
pickled: the seeds given in white wine, powerfully drives down the Courses, and
expells the after birth, it likewise provokes Urine, breaks Wind, and helps
the Strangury: The dose of it in powder is from one Scruple to two Scruples; it
is very good also for the Chollick.

Black Alder-Tree. Alnus nigra.
THis grows up like a small shrub, Frangula, and Alnus nigra baccifera; in
Hampshire we usually know it by the name of Dogwood.

Place and Time] It grows commonly in moist Woods, and boggy places, as in a
Wood called Dane-Moor in Hampshire: it flowers in May, the berries are ripe
toward Michaelmas.

Temperature and Virtues.] It Is of a purging dry quality, and the inner bark
thereof being steeped in Wine and drunk, is a strong vomit, and cleanses the
stomach, it purges also hydropick humors, and a decoction thereof made together
with Agrimony, Wormwood, Dodder, Hops, and some of the five opening roots, and
drunk every morning, cures the Dropsy and Jaundies: The bark ought to be dried
before it be used, and being boiled in Vinegar, it is a good remedy to kill lice
and cure scabs and itch. Some write that the leaves are good fodder for Cattle,
to cause them to give good store of milk, but I could never see any Cow that
would eat them.

Alleluiah, Vide Wood Sorrel.

Almond-Tree. Amigdalum.
OF this tree there be two kinds, the one bears fruit sweet, the other bitter,
they grow bigger then any Peach tree: I have seen a bitter Almond-tree in
Hampshire as big as a great Plumtree, it has leaves much like Peach-leaves, it
is called in Latin Amigdalum; they grow plentifully in Turkey and Barbary.

Nature and Virtues.] The sweet Almonds are hot and moist in the first degree,
the bitter dry in the second; it is a Plant of Jupiter: the sweet Almonds
nourish the body and increase seed, they strengthen the Breath, cleanse the
Kidneyes, and open the passages of Urine. There is a fine pleasant oil drawn
out of the sweet Almonds, which being taken with Sugar Candy is excellent
against dry Coughs and hoarseness, it is good for those that have any inward
sore, and for such who are troubled with the Stone, because it makes slippery
the passages of the Urine. Bitter Almonds also opens obstructions of the Liver
and Spleen, cleanses the Lungs from Phlegm, and provokes Urine; they expel
Wind, and provokes women's Courses, the oil of them kills worms, and helps
pains of the Womb. Some write that the bitter Almonds preserve from
drunkenness, five or six being eaten fasting; the oil of both cleanse the skin,
it eases pains of the head, the temples being anointed therewith; and the oil
with honey, powder of liquorish, oil of roses, and white wax, makes a good
oynment to help dimness of sight.

Alkekengi, or Winter-Cherries.
THis Plant grows up with a stalk about two foot high,

Names, Place, and Time.] Some have taken this plant for a kind of Nightshade,
and therefore call it Solanum: it is generally called in shops Alkekengi, and
winter Cherries; it grows only in Gardens, flowers in August, and the fruit is
ripe in October.

Temperature and Virtues.] It is an herb of Saturn, cold and dry, the leaves
cool, and the fruit opens; the distilled water of the fruit, or leaves, or
both together, is good to be drunk morning and evening with a little milk
against the heat of the Urine, and therefore is effectual in virulent
Gonorrhea's; it cleanses foul Ulcers in the reins and bladder, dissolves the
stone in the reins, kidneyes, and bladder, opens the uritory passages, and
provokes Urine, and helps those that make foul or bloody Urine, the decoction
of the fruit being taken in wine or water; it likewise opens the liver and
gall, and therefore is good for the yellow Jaundies.

Angelica.
THere is both garden Angelica, and wild Angelica, some also reckon up a water
kind; it grows up with great hollow stalks four or five foot high, having
broad divided leaves of a pale green color, at the top comes forth large
umbells of white flowers; after which succeeds flat round seeds, somewhat
whitish, the root perishes every year, if it be suffered to seed, not else.

Names, Place, and Time.] It Is common name with us both for Latin and English
is Angelica, it grows common in our Gardens, and wild likewise in many places,
flowers about July, and the seed is ripe soon after.

Temperature and Virtues.] It is an herb of the Sun, hot and dry almost to the
third degree, it opens and digesteth; it is a great cordial for the heart, in
defending it from poison; a dram thereof in powder being taken in the distilled
water of the same plant, and sweat upon it, it heats and comforts the Blood and
Spirits, and is good against the Plague, Pestilence, and other infections: the
root being taken green, helps such as are troubled with stuffings in their
Stomach, it also abates lust; the water thereof, and some of the root in powder
helps cold and wind, the Colic and Strangury, Coughs, Ptisick, and other
diseases of the Lungs and Breast; it provokes women's Courses, and helps to
expel the afterbirth, it likewise provokes Urine, and helps the Chollick and
Strangury: The decoction helps inward bruises, discusseth congealed blood, it
helps digestion, is an excellent remedy for a Surfeit. The decoction helps an
Ague at two or three times taking, if it be drunk and sweat upon before the fit
comes. The roots being taken in powder, and made into a plaster with a little
pitch, helps the bitings of venomous creatures and mad dogs; the water or juice
being dropped into the eyes and ears, helps dimness of sight and (...).

The Apple Tree. Pomus
IT is needless to describe the Apple trees, nor reckon up their several
kinds, many sorts of them being generally known to almost every boy, and is
out of my purpose here; many of them are early ripe in Summer, others more late
toward Winter, which are most durable to keep; some of them are sweet,
fragrant and odoriferous, others more sharp.

The Names.] The tree is called in Latin, Pomus and malus, the fruit Pomum and
malum. The English name you have already.

Places and Time.] They grow wild in the hedge rows and Woods in many places
of this Land, but the best are manured in Orchards; they flower in April, the
fruit of the latest is ripe in October, which is the John Apple.

Temperature, and Virtues.] There is a great difference in Apples, in regard
there are both sweet, sour, and bitter, they are generally held to be cold and
moist, but the sweet and bitter do somewhat incline to heat; but to omit the
general use which is made of Apples both in City and Country, they are
effectual in hot diseases, cooling the stomach and heart. The Apple called a
Pomewater being roasted, and the pulp labored in fair water, till it be like
that we call Lambs-wool, and drunk going to bed, helps such as are troubled
with an involuntary passage of the seed, either in dreams or otherwise; and is
also effectual for such as piss by drops, Rotten apples are good to be applied
to the eyes which are blood-shotten, or bruised by any stripe or stroke. Apples
expel melancholy humors, and stir up mirth, being roasted and eaten with rose
water and sugar: Cider and also Verjuyce do both singularly cool the stomach,
and is effectual in hot Agues, and is good against casting and vomiting; and
the verjuyce being applied to burnings or scaldings, draws out the fire, and
cools and heals the same.

Apricock-Tree. Malus Armeniaca.
THis plant needs no description, being very well known, yet it is a tender
plant in our cold Countries; for if a frost meet with the flowers, or young
fruit, they are quickly gone.

Names.] It is called in Latin Malus Armeniaca, the fruit, Malum Armeniacum.
In English Apricocks.

Place and Time.] They are planted against walls in most Gentlemen's Gardens,
and against the walls of houses too in many places. They flower in March, and
the fruit is ripe about the latter end of July.

Temperature and Virtues.] This is one of Venus plums, and is cold in the first
degree and moist in the second; the fruit is better to be eaten before meals
then after, because of their quick descension into the belly, they cause other
meats to descend the sooner. There may an oil be pressed out of the kernells of
the stones; which being taken in wine, helps the Chollick, and drives forth
the stone out of the reins and bladder, helps pains in the ears, hoarseness of
the voice, inflammations of the Piles, Ulcers, and the roughness of the tongue
and throat. The leaves I have proved effectual to dry up the corrupt matter of
hot running scabs.

Archangel, or Dead nettles. Lamium.
THis herb is generally known, it needs no description.

Names.] It Is called in Latin Lamium, and Vrtica mortua. In English dead or
blind Nettle, or Archangel. Herbarists reckon up eight sorts hereof, but I
shall here mention only three which are common; and those are, that with the
white flower, the red, and the yellow.

Places and Time.] And these may be found under hedges, old walls amongst
rubbish, by high ways sides, and in corners of Gardens which are not dug
nor planted; they flower about the Spring of the year, and so continue all
Summer.

Temperature and Virtues.] Archangel is hot and dry in the first degree, bitter
in taste, under the dominion of Mars, and it is good against Quartain Agues;
the flowers of the Archangel, or the distilled waters stays the whites in
women, and the flowers of the red Archangel stays the reds: The herb is
effectual for Tumors or swellings of the Kings Evil in the throat to dissolve
them, being bruised with some Hogs Lard and applied thereunto. It also allayes
the pains of the Gout or Sciatica, and aches of the joints; being used in like
manner, it opens obstructions, and dissolveth the hardness of the Spleen, by
drinking the decoction of the herb in wine, and applying the herb hot
pultiswise to the Region of the Spleen; it is a good repercussive in
inflammations, and stays the corroding of old Ulcers; it cures the rising up
of the skin about the roots of the nails, being applied thereunto; and is said
to stanch bleeding at the nose, the bruised herb being applied to the nape of
the neck.

Aron, Vide Cuckoo pintle.

Arrach wild and stinking. Atriplex.
STinking Arrach grows up with a little stalk,

Names, Places, and Time.] It is called in Latin Vulvaria, and Atriplex, in
English stinking Arrach; you may find it upon most Dunghills, under old walls,
about the mud walls in the fields about London it grows plentifully, and also
by ditches sides: It flowers and seeds from June till after Bartholomewtide.

Temperature and Virtues.] This Plant Saturn rules; it is cold, moist, and
earthy, an excellent plant for Women's diseases. It cures fits of the Mother,
Dislocation, or falling out of the Womb, being taken inwardly: It cools the
over much heat of the womb, and causes easy Delivery; being rubbed and held to
the nostrils, it causes the Womb to descend to its right place, and cleanses
and strengthens it. It provokes the Terms if stopped, and also stops the
immoderate flowing of them; and makes Barren women fruitful. It is therefore
good for such Women as are subject to be troubled with any of the
aforementioned Distempers, to prepare and keep always by them, a Syrup made of
the juice of this Herb and sugar, or honey, which is best to cleanse the Womb,
otherwise sugar is more proper.

Arsmart. Persicaria
THis Herb grows with a little joynted greenish stalk, the leaves growing at
the joints of the stalks, being not very long, many times having blackish spots
upon them: the flowers grow in spiky heads of a blush color, after them come
little blackish flat seeds; the root is fibrous and perishes every year. There
is dead or mild Arsmart, and biting Arsmart, which if you taste of, it will
bite your tongue very much.

The Names.] It is called in Latin Piper Aquaticum, and Persicaria, because
the leaves do something resemble Peach leaves; in English Water Pepper, and
Arsmart.

Place and time.] It is common in most ditches, especially such as are muddy,
and grows also upon dunghils of mud which has been cast out of ditches. I have
seen them covered with it in Hampshire, and other places. It is in flower in
June, and seeds about August.

Temperature and Virtues.] The mild is said to be cold and dry, the biting hot
and dry; then sure there Mars and Saturn grow together: The biting Arsmart
being rubbed upon a tired horses back, will make him go again lively; it is
good to kill Fleas, being strewed in Chambers. The powder of the mild Arsmart
being given to the quantity of two drams at a time in a little Vinegar, opens
obstructions of the Liver; being bruised with rue and Wormwood, and fried with
Butter or Suet, and applied to the belly or stomach, destroys the worms in
them: the distilled water thereof mixed with a little oil of Spike, and the
gall of an Ox, is good to ease the pains of the Gout, the grieved place being
anointed therewith, and a blue woollen cloth applied upon it; so likewise
being mixed with Aqua vitae it takes away Aches: The herb being stamped with
Wine and applied to the Matrix draws down the Terms. The leaves being stamped
and applied to green Wounds, cools them, and defends them from inflammations.
The root or seed applied to an aching Tooth, takes away the pain; and the juice
of the Herb dropped into the ears, kills worms in them, and is good against
Deafness.

Alkanet. Fucus Herba.
THere are accounted four kinds of this Plant, England, though Culpepper says
there is one kind grows commonly in this Nation; which is as true as the story
he tells of one of his Disciples, whose horses shoes were pulled off by riding
over Moonwort, (as he says.)

The red great Alkanet grows up about a foot and a half high, having usually
one round stalk, with many leaves prickly and hoary over like small Bugloss,
the flowers much like them of Echium, or small Bugloss, of a sky color,
tending to purple, yielding a small pale colored seed, somewhat long; the root
is about the thickness of ones finger, having a woody pith within, of a bloody
color, dying whatsoever it touches.

The other kind has more plenty of leaves, more hairy and woolly then the
former, the stalks grow higher having yellow flowers, the root of a shining
purple color, yielding more juice then the first.

The third kind has a greater and more juycie root then the former, but the
plant smaller, and the leaves narrower, the flowers red like those of small
Bugloss, the seeds are ash color, tasting like Bugloss; and the fourth kind
is much like common Summer Savory, the flowers blueish or sky color.

Names.] It is called in Greek (...), from the Greek word (...), Illinere
succo, vel Pigmentis, to color or paint, because of its painting property; it
is also called Fucus herba, and Onocleia Buglossa Hispanica, or Spanish
Bugloss, and Orchanet and Alkanet in English, and in Shops likewise Anchusa.

Place and Time.] They grow all naturally about Narbone and Montpelier in
France, and may be had, especially the Roots, at our Shops; yet Gerhard says
he found them in the Isle of Thanet in Kent, but that is contradicted by his
Reviser. They flourish in the Summer months, and best yield their juice in
Harvest time.

Nature and Virtues.] The roots are cold and dry according to Gallen; yet being
endued with some bitterness, argues them not very cold; they cleanse chollerick
humors, the leaves bind and dry, but not so powerfully as the roots.
Culpepper calls this herb one of the darlings of Venus, I suppose because he
had heard the Madams used it to paint their faces; and likewise it is used by
Gentlewomen to color Syrrups, Waters, and Jellies, as is also Turnsole; and
the root being used as a Pessary, draws forth the dead Birth: the decoction
inwardly drunk with Mead or honied water, cures the yellow Jaundies, diseases
of the Kidneys and Spleen, and is effectual in Agues: a Searcloath made with
the root and oil is good for Ulcers, and with parched Barley meal, it helps the
Leprosy, Tetter, and Ringworms, as says Dioscorides. But Culpepper teaches
how to kill Serpents with it, which he says is done, if any one has newly
eaten the root and spits in a Serpents mouth, the Serpent instantly dies; but
this is as ridiculous as Culpepper himself: yet the decoction is said to drive
out the Measels and small Pox, if it be drunk in the beginning with hot beer,
the leaves boiled in wine and drunk, is good against the Laske; the root boiled
in Wine and sweet butter without salt till it is red, is good for bruises
received by falls, and for green wounds made with pricks or thrusts. Make an
ointment of it thus, Take of Oil Olive one pint, the root of Alkanet two
ounces; Earthworms purged twenty in number, boil them together, and keep it as
a singular remedy for the use aforesaid.

Amara dulcis, Bitter-sweet, and Woody Nightshade is all one; therefore Vide
Bitter-sweet.

Amaranthus, Vide Blites, and Flower Gentle.

Anemonies. Herba venti.
THese are of various kinds, altering as they are often and frequently
transplanted out of one Garden into another, for whose adornment they are most
used, so that a further description is needless.

Names.] It is called in Greek (...), in Latin Anemone, and Herba venti,
because it reported these flowers never open but when the wind blows. The
Gardners commonly call them Emonies, and they are likewise called in English,
Wind flowers.

Nature and Virtues.] They are of a sharp hot quality, biting the tongue, and
of a binding quality; the wild ones called Pulsatilla's being stamped and
applied, will eat into the skin; they are all taken to be a kind of Crowfoot.

The leaves of Anemonies boiled in white Wine, and the decoction drunk,
powerfully provokes the Terms; the leaves and stalks being boiled with clean
blanched Barley, increases milk in Nurses, if they eat thereof: the juice of
the leaves snuffed up into the nose, or the root chewed in the mouth purges
the head mightily of watery and phlegmatic humors, by spitting, and being so
used, is good for the Lethargy; they cure the Leprosy, the body being bathed
with the decoction thereof; and an ointment thereof helps Inflammations of the
Eyes, the eyelids being anointed with it, and clears the sight by taking
away the Web or other spots therein: the same ointment also cleanses corroding
Ulcers being used for that purpose.

Artechokes, Cinara.
OF this Plant I need make no description, it is very well known to all that
desire it.

Names, Place, and Time.] It is called in Latin Cinara, in English Artechokes.
They are plentifully nourished by our Gardners about London, and in Gentlemen's
Gardens in the Country: They are ripe in June, and will flower at the latter
end of the Summer, if they be suffered to stand.

Temperature and Virtues.] They are of a temperate nature, inclining to heat,
certainly under the dominion of Venus, being great friends to venerious
persons, by whom they are dressed after all the luxurious ways as may be
thought on; they do mightily stir up lust by increasing seed, and therefore are
good for married persons who are weak in the act of generation: they restore
nature, and strengthen the stomach. The Decoction of the young buds in wine
provoke Urine, and though they increase seed, yet they stay the involuntary
flowing thereof in dreams, or otherwise.

Assarabacca, Asarum.
THis plant rises up with many heads shooting from the roots, from whence
spring the leaves, which are round much like a Violet leaf, but larger; they
are of a dark green shining color on the upper side, but paler underneath:
There springs up likewise amongst them round husks upon stalks, wherein are
contained many small seeds, much like the seeds of Violets, but somewhat
bigger.

Names, Place, and Time,] It is called by us commonly Asarum, and Assarabacca.
It is planted frequently in our Gardens. Their seed is ripe about the beginning
of July.

Temperature and Virtues.] The leaves are hot, and dry, and purging, having
likewise a binding quality after it; the roots are more hot and dry then the
leaves, a plant sure under the dominion of Mars. It is commonly given to Maids
who are inclinable to the Green Sickness; to take the juice of five or seven
leaves in a little posset drink, or white wine, does both cause Vomiting, and
purges downwards, and by Urine, cleansing the body of Choler and Phlegm;
being steeped in wine and drunk, it is good against the Dropsy and Jaundies,
and helps continual Agues. A dram of the root in powder given in white Wine, a
little before the fit of an Ague, at twice taking drives it away. A Conserve
made of the flowers hereof, strengthens the memory, and the hearing: It helps
likewise obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, being boiled in Whey; and the
juice thereof with a little Tutia, prepared and added to it, and dropped into
the corners of the Eyes, helps the dimness and mistiness of them, and sharpens
the sight.

Asparagus, Corruda.
IT grows up at first with a round greenish head, easily be mistaken one for
another; afterward they run up in long stalks, shooting out green leaves, like
Fennel, but smaller; at the joints come forth yellowish flowers, after which
come round green berries, which are red when they are ripe, and the seed is
black: the roots are spongious, and full of small strings.

Names.] It is called in Latin Corruda Asparagus, and in English Sperage and
Sparagus, by some Sparagrasse.

Places and Time.] It is nourished for a pleasant Sallet in our Gardens, the
tender shoots being in their prime to be eaten in April and May. They flower
about July, and have berries toward Michaelmas.

Temperature and Virtues.] Sparagus is of a fine temperate nature, a procurer
of lust, yet expelling the Stone and Gravel from the Reins, and Kidneys,
provokes Urine, and helps the Strangury, helps pains in the Reins and Back: The
root is good against the yellow Jaundies, falling Sickness, and fits of the
Mother, and eases pains of the Breast and Stomach, being boiled in white Wine
and the decoction drunk. The root does much open, and provokes Urine, by which
means it has acquired the title of one of the five opening Roots. The young
shoots are as pleasant meat as any grows in Venus Garden, and are effectual for
most of the purposes beforementioned.

The Ash-Tree, Fraxinus.
THis is so well known to every one, it needs no Description.

Names.] It is called in Latin Fraxinus, and the fruit is called Kitkeyes.

Place and Time.] The Ash grows plentifully in most Woods, and other places of
this Land, as in hedges, and walks where they have been planted; yet of late
they have been wastefully destroyed as well as other wood and timber. The
leaves and flowers come forth about April, and the keys are ripe about
September.

Temperature and Virtues.] This is a plant of Jupiter, the leaves and bark are
temperately hot and dry, the seed hot and dry in the second degree: A Lie made
of the Ashes of Ashen Bark, cures Scald, Scabby, and Leprous heads, they being
bathed therewith; the juice of three or four leaves taken constantly every
morning, prevents men's bodies from growing corpulent, or gross, and makes them
lean that are fat: the leaves and bark being boiled in vinegar and water,
stays vomiting, being laid upon the stomach. The leaves bark, and tender crops
being boiled in wine and drunk, are singular good for the Dropsy, the roots
boiled in Ale, and drunk morning and evening, does the same; the leaves and
bark being boiled in wine and drunk, do open the Liver and Spleen, and ease
pains of the Sides, and being boiled in oil, and applied outwardly, they work
the same effect: the Keys are good to be used in diet drinks for the purposes
aforesaid. The decoction of the leaves in white Wine do help the Jaundies, and
break the Stone; the seeds also, the husks being taken off, are good against
Wind, and provoke Urine.

Aspe, or Poplar Tree. Populus.
I Shall not need to describe this Tree,

Names,] It is called Poplar, Asp, and Aspen Tree, in Latin Populus.

Place and Time.] It grows plentifully in our Land, but in low and watery
grounds; the clammy buds thereof are gathered about the beginning of April to
make the Ointment called Vnguentum Populeon.

Temperature and Virtues.] The clammy substance of the black Poplar is hot and
dry, the white is of a watery warm nature, and of a cleansing quality; the Moon
rules them both in Aries the first. The ointment made of this plant before
spoke of, is a fine cooler of Inflammations in any part of the body, it
temperates the heat of Wounds, and is good to dry up milk in women's Breasts.
The juice of the leaves of white Poplar being extracted and dropped into the
Ears, eases pains of them, and cures Ulcers in the Ears: The seed drunk in
Vinegar, is held good against the Falling Sickness, and the water that drops
from hollow places of the black Poplar, takes away Wheals, Pushes, Warts, and
other such breakings out in the body.

Avens, Garyophillata.
THe Avens rise up from the root with many dark green leaves,

Names.] It is called in Latin Garyophillata, from the scent of the Roots, in
English Avens and Herb Bennet.

Place and Time.] Avens delight to grow most in shadowy places, and is to be
found in many places under hedge sides. They flower in May and June, and the
seed is ripe in July.

Quality and Virtues.] Avens is hot and dry, of a purging quality, a Plant of
the Sun, and a great comforter of the heart; it is a good preservative against
the Plague, or any other poison: it helps digestion, warms a cold Stomach, and
opens the Liver and Spleen, the roots thereof in the Spring being steeped in
Wine, and drunk thereof every morning fasting: it also helps the Wind,
Chollick, Fluxes, and is good for such as are troubled with Ruptures. The
Decoction of the herb takes away spots in the face, it being washed therewith;
the root may be dried and kept in powder, having the same virtue as the
Decoction. It expells crude humors from the Breast, Belly, and Stomach; it
dissolves congealed Blood, and helps the spitting of Blood, and heals inward
Wounds, and outward Wounds, if they be bathed with the decoction thereof.

Assafoetida, Vide Laserwort.

Balm, Melissa.
Balm grows up with diverse square green stalks, the leaves are dark green,
pointed at the ends, and a little dented round about the edges, having a
fragrant smell; the flowers are small and gaping, of a pale Carnation color,
the leaves and stalks dye every year, but the root abides in the ground,
sprouting out fresh every Spring.

Names. It is called in Latin Melissa, and in English Balm.

Place and Time.] It grows almost in every Country Housewifes Garden, and
flowers about August.

Nature and Virtues.] This is another Solar herb, hot and dry in the second
degree, of some thinness of parts, and 4 purging quality; an herb appropriated
to the Heart, against the passions whereof it is an Antidote: It makes the
heart merry, strengthens the Spirits, and is good against Swoonings and
Faintings; it drives away passions arising from Melancholy and burnt Phlegm:
the water thereof, or rather a Conserve of the flowers strengthens the Brain,
helps Digestion, and comforts a cold Stomach, and is good against the Plague,
it provokes the Terms, is good to sweeten a stinking Breath; it is good in an
Electuary for such as are troubled with difficulty of Breathing. The Sirrup of
Balm is good in Fevers, strengthening the Heart and Stomach: the juice thereof
with a little honey is good to clarify the sight, it is good to be used in
baths to comfort the Joints and Sinews, and eases pains of the Gout: it is
good against bitings of mad Dogs, and stinging of Venomous Creatures. In Oils
or Salves it is a good ingredient to heal green Wounds.

The Barberry-Tree. Oxyacantha.
IT arises up with many slender stalks from the root,

Names.] The Latins call it Oxyacantha, a term not well befitting it, in
English Barberries.

Place and Time.] It grows plentifully in Gardens, Orchards, and Closes near
dwelling houses, where it has been planted; it has been also found wild in
hedge-rowes, but I believe some Ditcher planted it there to mend his hedges
instead of Thorns: They blossom in May, and the fruit is ripe in September
about the latter end, or beginning of October.

Quality and Virtues.] Venus owns this plant, ( whatever Culpepper says) it is
cold and moist in the second degree, and of the fruit are made gallant cooling
medicines, both Conserves, and Preserves; the leaves beat like to Green sauce
while they be young, cools hot Stomachs, and hot burning Agues, procures
appetite, cools the Liver, and helps Belchings; so likewise does the Conserve
or Preserve of the Fruit, it represseth Choler, helps them that loath their
meat, by procuring an appetite; it cools Inflammations of the mouth and throat,
the mouth being gargled with some of the Conserve, dissolved in a little water
and vinegar, it stays Rheumes and Distillations, and fastens the Gums and
loose Teeth; it stays the immoderate Flux of Women's Courses, kills Worms,
being taken with a little Southernwood and Sugar: the decoction of the inner
Bark is effectual against the yellow Jaundies.

Barley.
IT is needless to say any thing more of this Grain here, but only of the
Physical use, it is other virtues being sufficiently known to the Husbandman,
and to the Brewer, and Alewife too; but these latter gain more by the Vices
attending it, then by its Virtues.

Temperature and Virtues.] It is cooling and drying in the first degree, of a
cleansing quality: Culpepper, as I remember, ascribes it to Venus; he would lay
all the fault of drunkenness upon women. But, etc. Barley indeed, the water
made thereof, and other things, does much nourish such as are troubled with
Agues, Fevers, and hot Stomachs. The French Barley is much used for diseases
of the Breast, and likewise in Fevers and other inward heats; as heat of the
Urine in a Gonorrhea, or otherwise, it does provoke Urine. The preparation of
the Barley water is thus; Take French Barley two ounces, boil it in two several
waters, casting the water away, then boil it the third time in a quart of water
to a pint and a half, adding Liquorish half an ounce, Violet leaves and
Strawberry leaves, of each an handful, sweeten it with Sugar or syrrup of
Violets: this is excellent in a Fever or Surfeit, being timely used. Barley
meal and Fleawort being boiled in water, and made into a pultis with honey and
oil of Lillies, cures Tumors, and Swellings being applied warm: A plaster made
thereof with Tar, Wax, and Oil, helps the hard swelling of the Kings Evil in
the throat, it eases pains of the sides and stomach and windiness of the
Spleen, being boiled with Melilot, Cammomil flowers, and some Linseed,
Fennigreek, and Rue in powder, and applied warm to the sides. Barley meal
boiled in Vinegar with some honey, and some dry Eigs added thereunto,
dissolveth hard Imposthumes, and excrescences growing upon the eyelids, and
asswageth inflammations, being applied thereunto.

Basil. Basilicum.
BAsil springs up with one stalk,

Names.] It is called in Latin Ocymum and Basilicum, in English Basil.

Place and Time.] Basil is nourished only in Gardens with us, and flowers in
the heat of Summer, the seed is soon ripe, the root perishes at Winter, it
must be new sown every year.

Nature and Virtues.] It is said to be hot in the second degree, but having a
superfluous moisture. Culpepper rails at large against this herb, that it ought
not to be taken inwardly; yet it may be corrected with oil and vinegar, and
eaten by women to dry up their milk; the same effect it has being bruised and
applied outwardly to the breasts: the much smelling thereunto, causes the Head
ache to those who have a weak brain; yet to those whose brains are stronger, it
comforts the brain and purges the head; it procures speedy delivery, and
provokes Urine and the Terms; it is good against pains of the head and the
Lethargy, being applied with oil of Roses, Mirtles, and Vinegar: the seeds are
used to expel melancholy and comfort the heart: and the juice or seeds being
bruised and put into the nostrils procures sneezing. The Herb used with honey
takes away spots in the face.

The Bay Tree. Laurus.
THis is so well known it needs no description.

Names.] It is called in Latin Laurus, and the berries Bacca Laurt.

Places and time.] It grows frequently in our Gardens, and is planted against
Walls, delighting rather in the shade then the Sun, it keeps green all the
year, the berries are ripe toward Winter.

Nature and Virtues.] Bays both the leaves and berries are hot and dry, a
plant of Jupiter; the berries taken in powder with honey is good against
infirmities of the Breast, as Consumptions, and shortness of breach; and
likewise helps Wind, and the Chollick, and griping pains of the Belly: they
provoke Urine, and are good against the Stone, and the windiness of the Mother,
they are good against poisons, and the stinging of venomous beasts, they open
the Liver and Spleen, procure an appetite, provoke women's Terms, cause speedy
delivery, and purge down the Aster-birth. A bath made of the Decoction of the
Leaves and Berries, is good for women to fit in for diseases of the Womb and
Mother, and obstractions of the Courses: the oil of the berries is good to
comfort the joints against cold Aches, Cramps, Palsies, and benummedness of any
parts: the oil or juice of the berries dropped into the ears, helps deafness,
and pains in the ears. Quicksilver killed in the oil or juice, helps the Itch,
and Wheals, or Scabs in the skin, the powder of them taken in white wine is
good against Cramps and contractions of the Sinews. The leaves may also be used
for many of the purposes aforesaid, and are excellent good three or four leaves
in broth to comfort the stomach.

Beans. Faba.
I Shall not need describe these neither, there being not scarce a boy or girl
but well enough knows, both the garden and field Beans, that is able to eat a
Bean.

Names.] In Latin a bean is called Faba.

Places and Time.] The greater sort is planted in Gardens, the other small
Beans are sown in Fields, and are meat for horses and hogs, and good to make
malt with too. The Garden beans are ripe in June and July, some earlier and
some later, according as they are planted, serving for good strong food in
harvest.

Temperature and Virtues.] They are more used with us for food then Physic,
and while they are green they are held to be cold and moist, when dry, cold and
dry; and the Physical uses are these; the distilled water of the green shells
is excellent good against the Stone, to be drunk in the mornings, and a little
butter unsalted eaten therewith. Bean meal helps Fellons, Boils, Bruises,
Imposthumes, and Swellings of Kernels about the Ears, being mixed with
Fennugreek and Honey, and applied to the place grieved: The distilled water of
the flowers cleanses and beautifieth the face and skin, and takes away spots
and wrinkles thereof. A pultis made of bean flower, oil, and vinegar, and
applied to the breasts of women which are swelled by abundance of milk, helps
the swelling, and represseth the milk, dissolving the curdling thereof. A
pultis bieng made with bean flower, wine, oil, and vinegar, helps the
swelling of the Cods; and being used with Rose leaves, the white if an Egg,
and a little Frankincense, it helps swellings, stripes, and watering eyes.
Beans are also a friend to Venus. And thus I shall leave them, hastening to
proceed to their affinity, viz.

French Beans. Phaseolus.
HAving now done with the English Bean,

Names.] In Latin it is called Phaseolus, in English French and Kidney Beans.

Place and Time.] They delight the grow in good ground, and must be planted
about the latter end of April, or beginning of May; for sooner the frost will
destroy them: their fruit is ripe about August, and September, sometimes in
July.

Temperature and Virtues.] Kidney beans are accounted hot and moist in the
first degree, easy of digestion; they nourish much, increase sperm, and are
very venerial; they excellently provoke Urine, and are great friends to the
Kidneys, they help shortness of breath by opening the Breast, and strengthen
the Liver and Stomach, and a weak back: the dried beans in Winter may be boiled
and eaten with butter as pease are, and being beaten to powder and given in
white wine, they are good against the Stone, and cleanse and strengthen the
Kidneys, taking the quantity of a dram at a time.

Bears-foot, Vide Hellebore:

Ladies Bedstraw. Gallium.
COmmon Ladies Bedstraw springs up with small square brown stalks,

Names.] It is called in Greek (...), and (...), and by some (...), and (...),
from (...) milk, because formerly they used it instead of Runnet to turn the
milk into a curd for to make Cheese, for which it is said to serve very well;
and therefore it is called Cheese Runnet, both here and beyond the Seas. The
Latins call it also Gallium, and that with white flowers Mollugo; in English
Ladies Bedstraw and Maids-hair, from the fineness of the leaves.

Place and Time.] The Common ladies Bedstraw grows in dry Pastures, Closes, and
Meadows, and sometimes in those that are wet: the white flowred grows in the
Abbey Orchard at St. Albans, and diverse other places; they flower in May and
June, and the seed is ripe in July and August.

Temperature and Virtues.] The name of this plant attributes it to the dominion
of Venus, but I judge Mercury is the chief ruler thereof; it challenges the
pre-eminence above Mugwort, for preventing the sore weariness of Travelers.
The decoction of the herb and flowers used warm, is excellent good to bathe the
surbated Feet of Footmen and Lackies in hot weather, and also to lissome and
mollisie the stiffness and weariness of their joints and sinews, being bathed
with the said decoction; the same may be done with an ointment, or oil made of
the said Herb and flowers, which you may always keep in readiness, which is
available not only for the same purpose, but also sor Burnings and Scaldings,
and for the dry Scab and Itch in Children. The way to make the oil, is by
infusing the herb and flower in a sufficient quantity of sallet Oil, and
setting it in the heat of the Sun for ten or twelve days, as oil of the
flowers of Cammomile, and other oils by infusion are made. The ointment you may
make by boiling the flowers and herb in Hogs Lard or Sallet Oil, adding to it
some melted Bees wax after it is strained: either of these may be used for
prevention before a Journey is taken: or afterward, for a cure; first bathe
the feet with the decoction, and afterward anoint them with either oil or
ointment; but you are not always sure to have the herb and flowers in
readiness for a decoction; therefore you may be provided with the Oil or
Ointment, or both, which will serve your turn without it. The Germans praise
that with white flowers to make an excellent bath to strengthen and comfort the
weak and weary Sinews, Arteries, and Joints. Some Cheshire dairy women use the
other as is reported in their Runnet, for which cause it obtained the name of
Cheese Runnet, as is said before. The decoction of the herb is likewise
effectual being drunk, to provoke Urine; it helps to break the Stone, and to
stay inward bleedings, and to heal inward wounds. The herb and flowers bruised
and put up into the nostrils, stays their bleeding, and so it does the
bleeding of Wounds, and being applied to a place that is burned, it draws out
the fire and heals it. Dioscorides reports that the Roots are good to stir up
Lust, which virtue some also attribute to the flowers.

Beets. Sicula.
THere are of Beets both white and red,

Names.] It is called in Latins Beta, and Sicula by some, in English Beets.

Place, and Time.] They grow only with us where they are planted in Gardens,
they continue green the first Winter, and afterward flower in July, the seed
is ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] The white Beet is temperate in heat and moisture, they
loosen the belly and provoke Urine, and are good against bitings of venomous
beasts: the juice thereof mixed with honey and dropped into the ears, eases
the pains and noise thereof; and snuffed up into the nose, it recovereth a lost
smelling; the decoction of the roots and leaves cleanses the head of Scurf,
Scales, and Nits, helps the falling of the hair, helps Freckles, Spots, and
kibed heels if they be first rubbed over with salt Peter: it helps running
Sores, Wheals, and Inflammations. They are likewise good against obstructions
of the Liver and Spleen, and the juice of them is good against the Headache
and Swimmings of the Brain, being snuffed up into the nostrills, it purges the
head by drawing forth Rheum, and being applied to the Temples, it eases pains
and helps inflammations of the Eyes: but if Beets be too frequently eaten, they
offend the Stomach, and therefore are most effectual and best, being seldom
used.

The Beech-Tree.
I Shall not need to take up room to describe this tree, he is very well known;
it is called in Latin Fagus, and the fruit Nuces fagi, in English Beech mast:
the fruit is ripe toward Michaelmas.

Temperature and Virtues.] The leaves are cooling and astringent, the fruit hot
and moist in the first degree, very astringent, a plant of Jupiter: The leaves
are good for Ulcers, being boiled to a pultis, or made into an ointment when
they are green, they are good for to take away Blisters and Gauls of the skin,
and to discuss hot swellings. There is a water found standing in the hollow of
old Beeches which cures the Itch, I have taken water out of an hollow Beech in
Bramsil Park in Hampshire which has cured the Itch R. Turner, Anno, 1644.
as I have proved. The leaves are good to chew against inflammations of the
Gums and Lips. The decoction of the Leaves, Bark, Buds, or Husks in running
water, stops the overflowing of women's Courses, being sat over, and causes
the Mattix and Fundament that are fallen down to go up to their right places:
the decoction thereof in red Wine with Cynamon and Sugar being drunk, does the
like; the mast or fruit being burned to ashes and mixed with honey is good for
a scald Head.

Water-Betony. Betonica Aquatica.
WAter-Betony springs up with a square hard stalk,

Names.] It is called in Latin Betonica Aquatica, in English Water-Betony and
Brook-Betony.

Place, and Time.] It grows plentifully by Brooks and Rivers sides, in moist
Ditches in watery places, as about the Rivers side between Hollshot-Bridge and
the Mill in Hampshire. The flower in July and August, and the seed is ripe in
September.

Temperature and Virtues.] Some write that Water-Betony is hot and dry, but I
rather judge it to be cold and dry; a Plant of Saturn, as its virtues and
operations will demonstrate: I am sure it is a good cooler in Burnings and
Scaldings; with it I cured ones Leg scalded all over, making the Medecin thus,
Take fresh Hogs Lard, new Sheeps Dung, and the leaves of Water-Betony, pound
them in a Mortar and make them into an Ointment. It is likewise good to
dissolve swellings and hard knobs, being stamped with Vinegar and applied three
times a day. The seed is good for the Sciatica, being taken in Wine with Myrrh
and Pepper: The decoction of the leaves in Spring Water is good for all unkind
heats, and is excellent to cure the Itch, Wheals, and Pushes. The distilled
water takes away Sun-burnings, Spots, and Redness of the Face ^ so do the
leave being stamped and made into an Ointment with Cream: the juice boiled with
Honey and Tents dipped therein is effectual to cure old and new Sores. The seed
is effectual to expel Worms out of the Belly, a dram thereof at a time being
taken in Wine: the Leaves stamped and applied to old Spreading and corrupt
Sores and Pocks heals them, and the juice of the Herb being drunk helps
bleeding at Nose, and them that spit Blood, and cures the botch in the Throat:
It is also commended for the Piles and Hemorrhoides, either applied outwardly,
or the powder thereof drunk or strewed upon the grieved place.

Wood-Betony. Betonica.
WOod-Betony springs up with many leaves from the root running up with a
tender stalk of about an handful, and sometimes more, the leaf growing at the
end thereof, and is somewhat broad and round at the end, of a darkish green
color, finely dented about the edges; the stalk runs up in the middle of these
leaves a foot high, or more, upon which grow leaves by two and two at a joint,
which are far smaller then the lower leaves; the flowers grow with spiked heads
on the top of the stalks, of a purple color; the root is fibrous, the stalk
perishes, but the leaves growing from the root are to be found all Winter.

Names.] In Latin it is called Betonica, Betony in English.

Place and Time.] It delights to grow in Woods and shady Hedge rows, in which
places if it be dry ground you shall not miss of it, and flowers in June and
July.

Nature and Virtues.] This herb is hot and dry, almost to the second degree, a
plant of Jupiter in Aries, and is appropriated to the Head and Eyes; for the
Infirmities whereof it is excellent, as also for the Breast and Lungs, being
boiled in milk and drunk, it takes away pains in the Head and Eyes. Probatum.
It would seem a miracle to tell what experience I have bad of it.
Some write it will cure those that are possessed with Devils, or Frantic, being
stamped and applied to the forehead; being boiled in white Wine with Vervain,
Horehound, and Hysop, and applied hot, it cures the Megrim. The powder of the
leaves drunk in Wine or Beer, or being eaten with slices of bread steeped in
Wine, does restore the Brain, helps noises and giddiness of the Head; or being
taken in pottage it comforts the Stomach and helps Digestion. A conserve of the
slowers, or an Electuary thereof helps the Jaundies, Palsy, falling Sickness,
Convulsions, Gout, Dropsies, and a continual Headache: The leaves or flowers
may also be boiled in broth for the same purposes. An Electuary made of the
powder with honey, cures Colds, Coughs, and the droppings of Rheum upon the
Lungs which causes Consumptions. The decoction of the Herb in Metheglin with a
little Pennyroyal is good against. Quartan Agues, and purges away superfluous
humors falling into the Eyes: it likewise kills Worms, opens the Liver and
Spleen, cures Stitches and Gripings in the Bowels, being boiled in Wine; it
likewise provokes the Terms and purges the Belly, being mixed with Honey; it
helps fits of the Mother, and causes speedy delivery: and the quantity of a
dram of it in powder taken in Syrrup of Vinegar does refresh those that are
wearied by Travel, stays bleeding at the Nose, and helps those that spit or
piss Blood. Many are the Virtues of Betony, so that I shall conclude with the
words I found in an old Manuscript, under the Virtues of it. More then all this
has been proved of Betony.

See more of this in the Expert Doctors Dispensatory, written by P. Morellus.

Bilberries, or Whorts. Vaccinia.
THis Shrub creeps along upon the ground, yard high, having small dark green
leaves, a little dented about the edges; at the foot of the leaves shoot forth
the flowers, which are small, and of a pale blush color, the brims having five
points with a small reddish thread in the middle; after which come small round
berries of a purple or blackish color, of a sharp sweetish taste, the root
spreads and creeps along in the ground, sprouting up in several places.

Names.] They are called in Latin Vaccinia, in English Biberries, Whorts, and
Whortle-Berries.

Places and Time.] They grow plentifully in dry Woods, and barren hilly places,
and abundantly in the Woods near Guilford in Surrey; so that the Country
people make Pyes and Tarts of them as we do with other Fruits, and they taste
almost like Damson Tarts: They are ripe in June and July.

Quality and Virtues.] The Bilberies are cold in the second degree, and do a
little bind and dry; the Berries are good for those that are troubled with an
old Cough, or Ulcer in the Lungs; but offensive to those that have a cold or
weak Stomach: and therefore it is better for them to take it either in a Syrrup
made of the Juice, or a Conserve made of the Pulp; and thus they are effectual
in hot Agues, and cool the heat of the Stomach and Liver, and do somewhat bind
the Belly, and stays Vomitings and Loathings, and by it is binding quality
stays Lasks and Fluxes of Blood.

Bifoil, or Twayblade. Bifolium.
THis Herb springs up with a slender stem or stalk, flowers, resembling Flies
or Knats, like the third kind of Serapio's or female Goatstones, and indeed it
is a kind of Serapio,

Names.] In Latin its called Bifolium and Ophris, the English names are above.

Place and Time.] It loves Meadow and Marsh grounds, moist and shadowy places,
flowers in May and June, and is soon gone like Orchis.

Nature and Virtues.] It inclines to cold and dryness, and is good in Unguents
and Balsoms for green Wounds, and Burstings or Ruptures.

Blue-Bottle, or Corn Flower. Cyanus.
THere may be reckoned up of these several kinds, Cyanus major, Vulgaris,
Purpureus, Albus, Violaceus, Variegata, That is the great Blue Bottle, or Corn
flower, the common, the purple, the white, the violet color, and the variable;
These are all of kin to the Corn Scabious, and useless in Physic, there being
better Medecines more known: what defects soever these have, the Scabious
supplies; therefore I Will say no more of it, but only that the Common Blue
Bottle is reputed good against inflamed eyes being of a cold Temperature.

Brank Vrsine, or Bears-breech. Acanthus.
IT is a stranger in England, only the Garden kind called Hortensis Acanthus
may be found in Physic Gardens, but is naturally a German plant, and is
reckoned amongst the kinds of Thistles.

The Garden kind is called Hortensis Acanthus; the wild Acanthus Sativus; the
one is a German, the other an Italian; yet Culpeppers Romancer would make an
English Physician of them.

Nature and Virtues.] The leaves hereof are of a mean Temperature; between hot
and cold, of a mollifying and digesting faculty, and may be used for Limbs
burnt with fire or out of joint, says Dioscorides; and the decoction helps the
Ptisick, and such as spit blood, or have bruised or overstrained themselves, as
Comphrey Roots does; and of the Roots are made a Plaster against the numness
of the hands and feet; it is also used in Glisters, and the decoction of the
Leaves provoke Urine, stop the Belly, help the Rupture, Cramp, and such as spit
Blood.

Bindeweed or Belflower. Campanella.
THe great blew Bindeweed springs up with many long and winding branches,

Names.] The various kinds of this flower, or weed as it is more generally
called, has obtained several names, as in Greek (...), and in Latin Smilax
laevis, and because it windeth about whatever is next to it, it is called Funus
Arborum, and Campanella, from the flowers resembling a little Bell. It is
called also Convolvulus, Orobanche, with many other names, which for brevities
sake I omit, and in English, Bindeweed, Withwinde, and Devils Gut, etc.

Place and Time.] They are taken into Gardens for the beauty of the flowers,
and may be also found in Corn Fields: I mean the common Bindeweed, and flower
about the latter end of Summer, seldom perfecting their seed in England.

Temperature and Virtues.] Bindeweeds are most of them hot and dry toward the
second degree: The decoction thereof in white Wine is a good remedy for the
Chollick, it purges Phlegmatic and Melancholy Humors, and kills worms;
yet it is apt to trouble the Stomach, and cause Vomitings. The juice of the
black Bindeweed being drunk, does loosen the Belly, so does the powder thereof
drunk in Wine, or any other liquor: and Galen says, the bruised Leaves applied
to Tumors and Knots in the Flesh, dissolveth them. It is also said, that if any
place where hair grows, if it be anointed with the juice hereof, after the
hair is plucked up by the roots, it suffers it not to grow there any more.

Bitter-sweet, or Woody Nightshade. Amara dulcis.
IT springs up with many slender, like little wings, of a pale green color,
but some of them have but one, and some none: at the tops and sides of the
branches upon short footstalks come forth the flowers, standing many together,
like a long Umbel one above another, consisting of five narrow and long leaves
of a Violet purple color, with a long gold yellow pointell sticking forth in
the middle; after which come round and somewhat long Berries, green at first,
but red and full of juice when they are ripe, of an unpleasant bitter taste,
yet sweet at first, having many flat white seeds in them; the root grows not
very great, but spreads it self with many strings under the ground.

Names.] In Greek (...), Amara dulcis in Latin, because the Bark being chewed,
tastes first bitter and sweet afterward; it is also called Solanum Lignosum,
in English Bitter-sweet, Woody Nightshade and Felonwort, because it cures
Felons on the Fingers.

Place and Time.] It grows by Ditches sides and Hedge whereon it runs
flowers about July, and the Berries are ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] The Leaves and Berries are hot and dry, cleansing and
wasting away, and if they must have a peculiar master, let Mars have them:
though Culpepper ascribes it to Mercury, because it cures Witchcraft, but Mars
may be as great a Witch as Mercury. The leaves or Berries of Bitter-sweet
bruised and stamped with rusty Bacon, or Hogs Grease and applied to Felons on
the joints of the fingers is a speedy remedy for the same: The leaves and
tender branches being infused in three pints of White Wine in a pot close
covered over the fire for the space of twelve hours, and afterward being
strained and drunk about a quarter of a pint in a morning, many mornings
together, is used with good success to open obstructions of the Liver, Gall,
and Spleen, for the yellow and black Jaundies, and to cleanse women newly
brought to bed, and is also available for difficulty of breathing, and
congealed blood in any part of the Body, Bruises, and Falls, and is good
against the Dropsy, gently purging away waterish, and other humors, both by
Urine and Stool: It is likewise good against putrid Fevers and Agues, for
Ruptures and Wounds, and when any Bone is broken, or out of joint. By a
specific property being hung about the neck, it removes such sudden
distempers as swimming in the Head, or giddiness; and therefore as Tragus
says, the German Shepherds hang it about their Sheeps necks when they are
troubled with a swimming in the head, causing them to turn round: but this is
far from Witchcraft.

The Birch Tee. Betula.
THis tree in many places grows to be a tall straight tree,

Names.] It is called in Latin Betula, in English Birch.

Place and Time.] They grow frequently and plentifully in most Countries of
this Land, as in the Woods of Hampshire in Danmore, at Holshot; but in some
Countries as in Oxford and Northamptonshire, it is a rarity: the Catkins come
forth in April, and the seed is ripe in September.

Quality and Virtues.] The leaves are cooling, but the Bark and Catkins are
hot. The decoction of the inner Bark does drive down the Terms and Afterbirth,
and cleanses the Womb from superfluities; the juice, or distilled water of the
young leares, or the water that issues out of the tree, being bored with an
augure, taken either before or after is is distilled again, is effectual to
break the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder, and to wash sore Mouths; for which
a Lie made of the inner Bark is effectual.

Birthwort. Aristolochia.
THe ordinary Birthwort shoots forth diverse long square stalks a foot long,

Names.] In Latin it is called Aristolochia, in English Birthwort.

Place and Time.] That with the long root grows naturally in England, about
Reading; but that with the round is found only in the Physic Garden at
Oxford, and other places of rareties: they grow naturally in Spain and Italy,
and about Montpelier, where they flower and seed in May, June, and July.

Quality and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the second degree, the root causes
speedy delivery in women, expells the Afterbirth, and provokes the Terms: it
purges Phlegm and Choler, and expells Wind, and is good against diseases of
the Breast, Spleen, Stomach, Brain, and Nerves, Convulsion, Ruptures, shortness
of Breath, and Falling Sickness, and cold Agues. The decoction thereof cures
Ulcers of the secret parts; the powder hereof cleanses the teeth: if it be
mixed with the powder of the roots of Flower de Luce and Honey, it cleanses
and heals old rotten Vclers; the powder hereof makes the Teeth white, being
rubbed therewith. It cures the Cancer and Pollypus in the Nose, being mixed
with Lime, powder of Aloes, and Honey, and made into an Ointment with a little
Wine, and Tents dipped therein and put into the Nostril. And though that with
the round root grow not in England, yet you may have of it at our Druggists, by
whom it is called Aristolochia vera and Rotunda.

Bishops-weed. Ammi.
IT springs up with a round straight stalk,

Names.] It is called in Latin Ameos, and Ammi, in English Bishops-weed,
Herb-William, and Bulwort of some.

Place and time.] It grows in diverse places of England and Wales, and namely by
the Hedges sides between Greenhythe and gravesend, they flower in June and
July, and seed in August.

Quality and Virtues.] Bishops-weed, especially the seeds is hot and dry in the
third degree. Culpepper ascribes it to Venus, because it stirs up lust. I think
Mars may do it as well as she; but besides this it is useful to dissolve
Wind, and and case the Chollick, being taken in Wine, and to provoke Urine and
Women's Terms, and profitable against the bitings of venomous Beasts, and is
successful to be used in Medicines made of Cantharides, by quallifying their
corroding operation upon the passages of the Urine; it takes away black and
blue marks caused by blows or bruises, being mixed with Honey and applied: and
being drunk or applied outwardly, it abates the redness of the face and nose,
caused by drinking or otherwise, being given with Raisins, as Wormseed is to
Children; it cleanses the Matrix, and so it does, the fume being received,
mixed with Rozin.

Bistort, or Snakeweed. Bistorta.
Form.] THis Herb has a thick short knobbed root, blackish without and reddish
within, crooked or wreathed together, of a harsh astringent taste, with diverse
blackish fibers thereon; from whence arises diverse leaves upon long foot
stalks, much like a dock leaf, a little pointed at the ends, of a blueish green
on the upper side, and of an Ash color gray, and a little purplish underneath,
having many veins therein: the stalks are small and slender, about half a yard
high, growing without leaves, which bears a spiky head of pale flesh colored
flowers, which produces small seed like unto Sorrel seed, but greater.

Names.] It is called Bistorta, and Serpentaria, in English Bistort and
Snakeweed.

Places and Time.] It grows in shadowy places at the foot of Hills in moist
Grounds and Meadows. I have found it in the Meadows by Wickomb in
Buckinghamshire. It flowers in May, and the seed is ripe in July.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the third degree, and astringent; it
is good against the bitings of Snakes and Serpents, from whence it got its
name, and the poison of Toads, Spiders, and other venomous Creatures, if the
place be washed with the distilled water of the Roots and leaves: It stays all
Fluxes, cures inward Bleeding, and Spitting of Blood, and Vomiting, the powder
of the root being taken in Wine, or the Decoction being drunk: the juice is
good against the Polipus; and other Sores of the Nose; both the Leaves and
Roots resist poison. The root in powder taken in drink, the quantity of a dram
at a time, expells the venom of the Plague, small Pox, Measels, Purples, and
other Infectious Diseases, driving it out by seating: The Root in powder, or
the Decoction thereof being drunk, helps Ruptures and Bruises, dissolving
congealed Blood. The Decoction in Wine hinders Abortion, the leaves kill Worms
in Children, and helps them that cannot hold their Water, if some juice of
Plantain be added thereto, and outwardly applied; it helps the running of the
Reins: A dram of the root in powder taken in the water thereof, wherein some
Steel has been quenched, is essectual for the same, the body being first
purged. The decoction of the whole plant is good for Wounds or Sores, the
decoction of the roots in water with some Pomegranate Pills and Flowers is a
good injection to reduce the Matrix to its right place, and stop the
overflowing of the Courses; the Roots will keep good a year or two. The Dose in
powder is from a Scruple to a Dram in decoction, from one dram to two or three,
which may be made in posset drink, bruising the root only.

See more of this in Adam in Eden, by W. Coals.

Blackthorn, or Sloebush. Spinus.
THe Black Thorn is very well known to every boy for its Sloes, so that it
needs no further description,

Names.] It is called in Latin Spinus, in English Black Thorn, and the Sloe
Tree.

Place and Time.] They grow plentifully in Hedgerowes in most places of this
Land; they flower usually in March, if the Spring be forward, yet the Sloes are
not ripe till October Frosts bite them.

Nature and Virtues.] Both the Sloe Tree and Fruit is cooling, drying, and the
Sloes howsoever used are effectual against Lasks, Looseness, and Fluxes of
Blood, either in men or women: The decoction of the bark of the root performs
the like effects, and caseth pains in the Sides, Bowels, and Guts, that come
by overmuch Scowring or Looseness; the Conserve has the same effect: the
distilled water of the Flowers steeped one night in Sack and drawn therefrom in
a body of glass, eases gnawings in the Stomach, Sides, and Bowels, to drink a
small quantity when they are troubled therewith. Sloes being stamped and tunned
up in an earthen pot with new Ale, and so drunk, helps pains in the Breast, and
the decoction of the Bark is good against pissing in bed. The distilled water
of the green Sloes, and Flowers, as also the decoction of the green leaves is
good to wash a sore Mouth, or Throat, and to stay distillations of Rheum into
the eyes, and to case hot pains of the Head, the Forehead, and Temples, being
bathed therewith.

See more of this in the Art of Simpling: written by W. Coals.

Blites. Blitue.
THere are two kinds of Blites, white and red, the white grows up two or
three foot, the leaves are somewhat like Beets, but smaller, rounder, and of a
whitish green color; the Flowers grow on the tops, in long tufts or clusters,
wherein is contained a small round seed, the roots is fibrous.

Names,] It is called in Latin Blitus, and Blitum, in English Blite and Blites.

Place and Time.] Both sorts are found wild in many places of this Land, and
are also nourished in some Gardens: they slourish all Summer, seeds about
August or September, and continues green all Winter.

Quality and Virtues.] Blites are cold and moist in the second degree, under
the dominion of Venus; their Physical use is to restrain Fluxes of Blood, other
in man or woman; the red stay the Reds, and the white the Whites in women: The
white Blite is proved a delightful bait to Fishes, as Anglers say.

Bloodwort. Vide Docks.

Borrage. Borrago.
THe Garden Borrage is so well known, it needs no Description. Borrago is the
Latin name thereof.

Place and Time.] It grows plentifully in Gardens in most places of this Land,
and flowers in July and August.

Quality and Virtues.] Borrage is one of Jupiters Cordials, hot and moist in
the first degree, all parts of it are cordial, and do expel Sadness and
Melancholy; it cleanses the Blood, and is effectual in putrid and
pestilential Fevers to defend the Heart. The juice made into a Syrrup is good
for the same purpose, and cleanses the Blood, and tempers the heat thereof;
the conserve of the Flowers is good for the same purposes, and is a good
Cordial for such as are in Consumptions; it comforts the Heart and Spirits, and
is therefore good for those that are troubled with Swoonings and Passions of
the heart. The distilled water is effectual for the same purposes, and helps
Inflammations and redness of the Eyes, they being washed therewith. The Herb in
Summer being boiled with some other Sallet Herbs, is an excellent Sallet and
grateful to the Stomach, being eaten with Butter and Vinegar.

The Bramble Bush. Rubus.
I Shall not need describe this Bush; if you go by a Hedge it will be
acquainted with you, if it can lay hold of your clothes.

Names.] The Greeks call it (...), Batus, in Latin Rubus and Sentis, of some
Cynosbatus, in English Bramble and Black-berry-bush: the fruit Black-berries,
which are called in shops Mora Bati.

Place and Time.] It is a companion for every hedge almost; most; it flowers in
July, and the berries are ripe toward Michaelmas.

Temperature and Virtues.] The Leaves, Root, and Berries of the Bramble are all
of an astringent quality; its a plant of Mars, and is good to stop Fluxes and
Lasks, and the decoction of the Flowers or unripe fruit, helps spitting of
Blood, they also help Ulcers and Sores of the Mouth and Throat: the Leaves
likewise are good to make Lotions for the sores of the Mouth and privy parts,
and to heal a cut finger too: the powder of the root expells the Stone and
Gravel of the Reins and Kidneys; the berries or flowers are good against the
poison of venomous Serpents. The decoction of them bind the Belly, and stop
the overflowing of women's Courses; the juice of the ripe berries being drunk
and the pumish of them (out of which it is strained) being outwardly applied to
swellings in the Neck and Throat, is a speedy remedy for those Distempers. The
distilled water of the flowers and fruit, is good in Fevers and heat of the
Body. A syrrup of the ripe berries may be kept all the year for the purposes
aforesaid.

See further in The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: by P. Morellus.

Bryony. Brionia.
THere are two sorts of Bryony growing here in England, the white Bryony or
wild Vine, and the black Bryony; the white Bryony springs up with long
tender stalks, with many clasping tendrells, by which it catches hold and
clambreth on those things that are near it; the leaves are like our Vine
leaves, but more hairy and whiter of color: the flowers be white and small,
consisting of five leaves apiece, the berries grow in clusters and are green at
first, but red when they are ripe, the root grows very big, and is bitter.

Names.] The Latin name is Bryonia, in English Bryony and wild Vine. Some
call the white root English Jollap, and use it instead thereof.

Place and Time.] It grows in Hedge-rowes and Coppices in many of our
Countries, and flowers in May, and the berries be ripe in Autumn.

Quality and Virtues.] The white Bryony is chiefly used in Physic, and is hot
and dry in the third degree or more, an herb of Mars; it purges with great
violence being taken alone, but a scruple or two of the powder of the root with
a third part of Cynamon and Ginger, being drunk in white Wine, draws away
water abundantly both by Vomit and Stool, and therefore is good for the
Dropsy: The compound water of Bryony, a spoonful being taken at a time, eases
the fits of the Mother, expells the Afterbirth, and cleanses the Womb: so
likewise does a Pessary of the root, and also draws forth the dead Child, it
provokes Urine and purges the Reins and Bladder, opens obstructions of the
Spleen, draws away Phlegm and Rheumes from the Head and Brain, and therefore
is profitable in the falling Sickness and swimming of the head; the juice
applied cleanses the skin from the Morphew and Leprosy; the root is good
against the bitings of venomous Creatures, kills Worms, and is good against the
Kings Evil, the juice being taken with equal parts of Wine and Honey: the
Berries and distilled water are good to take away spots and freckles in the
face.

See more of this in The Art of Smpling: by W. C.

Brookelime. Becabunga.
BRookelime grows up with thick stalks, tender foot stalks, the root is
white, having five strings fastened thereto at every joint.

Names.] It is usually called in Latin Becabunga, in English Brookelime.

Place and Time.] It grows in small Brooks, Ditches, and standing Waters; it
flowers in June and July.

Temperature and Virtues.] It is of a temperate moist quality, some say dry,
Culpepper ascribes it to Mars, but I am sure then his Logic is false, for it
grows not in martial places: I rather give Venus the rule of it. It is good
against Dropsies and Scurvies, and is used in Spring time in water Gruel to
purge the body from ill homours, and to cleanse the Blood; it is also used with
Watercresses and other Herbs for the same purpose: it is helpful to break the
Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder, provokes Urine, and women's Courses, and
expells the dead Birth: it helps the Strangury, and heals inward Scabs in the
Bladder, the juice being drunk in Wine: being fried with butter and vinegar,
and applied warm, it helps Tumors, and St. Anthonies fire being often renewed.

Butchers Broom. Bruscus.
THis grows up somewhat more then a foot high,

Names.] In Latin it is called Ruscus, and Bruscus, in English it is called
Knee-holme, Knee-holly, and Butchers broom, because Butchers use it to cleanse
their Stalls, and keep Flies away from the meat.

Places and Time.] It grows plentifully in dry waste grounds and near Holly
Bushes, you may often find it in most places of this Land in dry light ground:
The berries are ripe about September, and the leaves abide green all Winter.

Quality and Virtues.] The roots which are chiefly used in Physic are
moderately hot and dry, with a thin quality; it is one of the five opening
roots, and does open obstructions, provokes Urine, expels Gravel, and the
Stone, helps the Strangury, drives down the Terms, cleanses the Breast of
Phlegm, and the Chest of clammy humors, being taken with Honey: the berries
may be used in Electuaries for the same purpose. The juice being drunk, and a
pultis made of the berries and leaves being applied, is effectual in knitting
broken Bones, or parts out of joint. In diseases of the Reins and Bladder, a
Decoction of the sive opening roots is thus made; Take of this root, and the
roots of Parsley, Fennel, Smallage, and Grass, of each a like quantity, and
boil them in White Wine, and drink the decoction, respect being had to the
strength of the Pattent, in making it stronger or weaker. It may also be made
in water for want of wine, and sweetened with Sugar.

Broom, and Broomrape. Genista.
TDe Broom needs no description, the Broomrape springs up from the roots of
the Broom, in form like unto Bastard Orchis, called Birds-nest, having a root
like a Turnip or Rape.

Names.] It is called in Latin Genista, and the broomrape, Rapum Genistae.

Place and Time.] Broom delights to grow in dry grounds, and quickly over runs
whole Fields, if they lie a little untilled. My Fathers Grounds at Holshot in
Hampshire are never free from it altogether; it flowers about the latter end of
Summer.

Quality and Virtues.] Broom is hot and dry in the second degree, cleanses and
opens, purges phlegmatic and watery Humors, is very good for the Dropsy and
Green Sickness, and for the Gout, Sciatica, and other pains of the Joints,
helps the swellings of the Spleen, provokes Urine, and thereby cleanses the
Reins, Kidneyes, and Bladder, and breaks the Stone; the powder of the leaves
and seeds taken in Wine, cures the black Jaundies: and a Conserve of the
flowers is good against the Kings Evil, the distilled water is good for the
same. The flowers made into an Ointment with Hogs Grease, cures pains in the
Knees, the swellings of the Kings Evil, Wind, and Stitches in the sides, being
applied thereto, and the bitings of venomous Creatures. The Oil of the Roots
cleanses the body from Freckles; the pickled buds stir up an appetite to meat,
opens the Spleen, and provokes Urine: the Broom Rape infused in Oil, and set in
the Sun for certain days, makes an oil to take away Wheals and pushes from the
face, or any other part of the Body.

Buckshorn Plantain. Herbastella.
IT grows up at first with small long narrow green leaves like Grass,

Names.] It Is called in Latin, Cornu Cervinum, Herb stella, and Sanguinaria.

Place and Time.] It delights to grow in dry sandy Grounds, and flowers in the
Summer months; the leaves keep green all the Winter.

Quality and Virtues.] It is cooling, drying, and astringent, the decoction in
Wine strengthens the Reins and Back, and cools the heat of the Reins and
Kidneys; wherefore it is good for those that are troubled with the Stone: it
helps the Bloody Flux, and Lasks of the Belly, and other bleeding, helps the
Chollick, breaks the fits of Agues, stays bleedings at the Nose, and the
decoction either in ale or wine, stays the distillations of hot and sharp
Rheumes from the Head to the Eyes: it is a Plant under the dominion of Saturn.

Of Bugle. Consolida media.
BUgle has larger leaves then Self-heal,

Names.] It is called in Latin Consolida media, Buglum, and Bugula.

Place and Time.] It grows in wet Copses, and moist Fields, and flowers from
May to July, the root abides many years.

Quality and Virtues.] It is temperately hot and dry, and somewhat binding, an
herb of Venus; it wonderfully cures Ulcers and Sores, whether new or old, the
leaves being bruised and applied: the juice made into a Lotion with honey and
allome, cures sores of the Mouth and Gums, and all sores and ulcers of the
privy parts: The decoction in wine dissolves congealed blood, and helps inward
Bruises and Wounds, and is a special herb in wound Drinks, and for those that
are Liver grown. Take Bugle, Scabious, and Sanicle, boil them in hogs grease,
till the herbs be dry, then strain it and keep it for a singular ointment for
all sorts of hurts in the body.

Bugloss. Buglossum.
THis needs no description, it is Latin name is Buglossum; and for it is Virtues
I shall refer you to Borrage, they are both excellent cordial herbs, under the
dominion of Jupiter, strengthners of the heart and lungs, and breast: An
Electuary may be made of Bugloss roots for the Cough, and to condensate and
expectorate thin Phlegm, and Rheumatick distillations upon the Lungs.

Vipers Bugloss. Echium.
THis springs up with many rough leaves lying on the ground,

Names.] The Greeks call it (...), some Latins Echium, and Buglossum silvestre
Viperinum, Vipers Bugloss.

Place and Time.] It grows wild in many places of this Land, flowers and seeds
about the middle of Summer.

Temperature and Virtues.] It is cold and dry, yet the seeds and roots are good
to expel Melancholy, temper the Blood, and allay hot fits of Agues, procures
milk in women's Breasts, eases pains of the Reins and Kidneys, helps bitings of
venomous creatures, is effectual against poison, and poisonous Herbs. The
distilled water being used inwardly or outwardly, as occasion serves; a syrrup
may likewise be made thereof, which is good to expel sadness, and comfort the
heart.

See further in The Art of Simpling: by W. Coals.

Burnet. Pimpinella.
THis small herb sends forth diverse long winged leaves finely dented about
the edges,

Names.] Some call it in Latin Pimpinella, and Pampinula, and Sanguisorba.

Place and Time.] It grows wild in most dry hilly grounds, as all along the
way almost between Gravesend and Rochester, and is also nourished in Gardens;
it flowers in June and July, and the seed is ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] Burnet is hot and dry in the second degree, a plant of
the Sun, a great friend to the heart, and principal members, quickens the
spirits, and expells melancholy, defends the heart from infection, the juice
being taken in some proper drink, and the party sweating thereupon: It stops
fluxes of Blood, Scourings, and the overflowings of women's Courses and the
whites, helps chollerick belchings of the Stomach, and is a singular good wound
herb; and in Summer a little of this herb being put in a glass of Claret, gives
it a pleasing relish.

Burdock and Butter-burre. Bardana.
BUtter-burre sends forth his flowers before the leaves like Coltsfoot, Form.
which grow upon a thick stalk, of a deep red color, they quickly fall away,
then come the leaves which grow bigger then the Burdock, of a pale green color
above, and hoary underneath; the root is blackish without, and white in the
inside, of a bitter taste.

Names.] The Burdock is called in shops Bardana, and Lappa major, the
Butter-burre Petasites.

Place and Time.] They grow plentifully by Brooks, Ditches, and Highway sides,
delighting in good ground; the flowers and burrs come forth in July, and the
seed is ripe in September; the Butter-burr flowers in March, and the leaves
spring up in April.

Nature and Virtues.] The Burdock leaves are moderately cold and dry; the
butter-burr hot and dry in the second degree; the Burdock leaves reduce the
matrix to its right place, by drawing it up or down, applying the leaves to the
crown of the head, or soles of the feet, according as it is displaced; they are
good for sores, and Ulcers, to ease pains in the Sinews and Arteries, and the
Gout; it helps kibed heels, being bruised with the white of an Egg, it takes
the fire out of burnings: the juice or the roots drunk in wine, helps the
bitings of Serpents, and being beaten with a little salt and applied to the
place, it gives present ease; it also provokes Urine, helps Stitches,
Consumptions, and Ulcers of the Lungs: the root drunk in Malmsey with a little
Nutmeg, stays the running of the Reins, the Whites, and strengthens the Back;
the young stalks increase seed, being eaten raw with salt and pepper, or boiled.

The Butter-burr roots taken with Zeadory, and Angelica, helps fits of the
Mother, provokes the Courses, Urine, and kills Worms in the Belly, and are
effectual against pestilential diseases, by provoking sweat: and the decoction
in Wine helps those that are short winded.

Cabbage and Coleworts.
IT were labor more then needs to describe these, or give them any other
names; their places are in well manured Gardens. We proceed to their Nature and
Virtues.

Cabbages are of a drying astringent quality, salt or Nitrous, yielding small
nourishment, and ingendring melancholy blood: the decoction of them drunk with
honey helps hoarseness, allayeth the swellings, and takes away the pains of
gouty knees and legs, it helps old sores, pushes, and wheals in the skin; the
leaves draw abundantly, and therefore are good for filthy sores: the decoction
of the flowers provokes the terms. The juice boiled with honey and dropped into
the eye clears the sight, consumes Films, and the Canker growing therein.
Gerhard commends a raw Cabbage leaf to be eaten fasting against an involuntary
Gonorrhea.

Calamint. Calamintha.
THis herb seldom grows above a foot high,

Names.] In Latin Calamintha, in English Calamint, and Mountain mint.

Place, and Time,] it grows plentifully in hilly dry grounds, flower and seed
about July.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry near the third degree, of a biting
taste, an herb of Mars; it opens obstructions of the Liver, and cures hardness
of the Spleen, helps overflowing of the Gall, the tertian Ague, and old Coughs;
it drives down women's courses, helps the yellow Jaundies, and stays Vomiting,
being taken in Wine, it provokes Urine, helps Ruptures, Cramps; shortness of
breath, and inward pains proceeding from Choler.

See further in Adam in Eden: by W. Coals.

Calamus Aromaticus, or sweet Flag.
THis grows not with us in any great quantity, no not in our Gardens, but in
Turkey and Egypt, and those Countries it is very plentiful; it may be had at our
Druggists: wherefore I shall name its Virtues.

The roots are hot and dry in the second degree, of thin parts, they provoke
Urine, helps diseases of the Reins and Bladder, eases pains of the Sides,
Liver, Breast, Chollick, and Cramp, the decoction being taken in wine; the
powder of the roots strengthen a cold weak Stomach, and so they do preserved
with Sugar or Honey.

Camphire. Camphora.
THis is a tear or gum, dropping out of a tree in India; it is reputed to be
cold and dry in the third degree, yet there are different opinions about its
temperature, of a very strong scent: it is available for the running of the
Reins, and the Whites in women; it cools the heat of the Liver, resists
putrefaction, and fortifies the heart in contagious Diseases, taken in
Electuary or otherwise: in all Inflammations it is good, cools the heat of
Wounds and Ulcers: The dose of it inwardly is five or six grains. It has been
found effectual in Agues, being sowed in a cloth, and with a thread hung about
the neck, so that it might lie just upon the pit of the Stomach.

Camock, or Rest-harrow. Resta bovis.
Form.] CAmock grows up with woody stalks, and little roundish leaves of a
dark green color, having prickly thorns when they grow old; the flower grow at
top like pease blossoms, after which come small pods; the seed is small and
round, the root blackish and tough, growing deep in the ground.

Names.] It is called Resta bovis, and Remora aratri.

Place and Time.] It grows in many fields and good grounds, and is not easily
weeded out; it flowers in July, and the seed is ripe in August.

Quality and Virtues.] The root according to Gallen is hot in the third degree,
and though it be unprofitable to the Husbandman, the decoction in Vinegar helps
the Toothache of Rheum; the powder taken many days together in Wine consumes
the fleshy Rupture: the decoction opens the Liver and Spleen, helps the
Jaundies, Hemorrhoides, and Piles, expells Gravel and the Stone: the decoction
in Oximel is good for the salling Sickness. The fixed salt of the whole plant
is excellent good for the Stone.

Cammomile. Cammomilla.
THis grows so common upon every green and watery place it needs no description;
it is called in Latin Camomilla, and Cotula; it is also nourished in Gardens,
both to make pleasant banks, and also for its Physical uses.

Quality and Virtues.] Camomile is hot and dry in the first degree, as Gallen
says, moderately healing and drying, a Solar herb. Camomile is profitable for
Agues, proceeding of Phlegm or Melancholy: the decoction thereof helps the
Chollick, pains in the Sides, drives down women's Courses, provokes Urine and
Sweat, and expells cold humors; it comforts the Sinews, and mollifies
Swellings, helps the Jaundies and Dropsy: the oil made of the Flowers is good
against cold Aches and outward Pains.

Capers. Caparis.
THese grow upon a prickly shrub in Arabia, Italy, and Spain, they are called
in Latin Caparis; the bark of the roots is extreme bitter: it cleanses and
purges, cutteth and digesteth, the Capers are hot. The Capers we have here
pickled, cause appetite, open the Liver and Spleen, consume cold Phlegm in the
Stomach: the oil of Capers is good against the Rickets, Hypocondryack
melancholy, and pains in the Sides and Spleen.

Cardamomes. Cardamomum.
THey grow in the East Indies upon a small tree which bears them in husks,
and are brought hither for their use in Physic.

They are hot and dry in the third degree, astringent; they are called Grana
Paradisi, and Cardamomum: In English grains of Paradise, and Cardamomes: they
are good against the Cardiack passion, and distempers of the Stomach, it
draws forth watery humors from the head and stomach, being chewed in the
mouth; it comforts the stomach, and expells the shaking fits of Agues, it
provokes Urine, resists poison, and expells wind, it is profitable against
the falling Sickness and pains in the belly, a dram thereof in powder drunk at
a time in wine.

Of Carrots.
OF these there is the Garden manured Carrot, fit for food, and the wild
Carrot for Physic; the garden kind needs no description, the wild grows
much like the Garden kind, but the leaves are whiter and rougher, so are the
stalks, which bear tufts of white flowers, with a deep purple spot in the
middle; when the flowers begin to grow ripe, the whole umbel looks like a Birds
nest: the root is small, long, and hard, sharp and strong: it grows
plentifully by hedge sides, and untilled places, flower and seed about the
beginning of August.

Temperature and Virtues.] The roots are hot and moist temperately, the seeds
hot and dry.

The seed of Carrots expels Wind, helps gripings of the belly and the
Chollick, provokes Urine, and women's Courses. The seeds or powder of the root
of the wild Carrot drunk in wine, helps hurts by venomous beasts, resists
poison, and the Pestilence, it provokes venery, and helps Conception.

Cassia Fistula.
THis is the fruit of an Indian Tree, and is to be had at our Druggists; it is
hot and moist in the first degree. Cassia purges the Reins and Kidneys, and
cools and cleanses them; it likewise brings forth the Gravel and Stone, it is
effectual against all chollerick and melancholy diseases, being taken with
Rubarb, Anniseeds, and Liquorish; it cleanses the Stomach, Liver, and
misentery Veins from choler and phlegm, clearing the Blood and cooling it, and
is profitable in all hot Agues and Fevers.

Celandine. Chelidonia.
THis herb springs up with diverse round whitish green stalks,

Names.] It is called in Latin Chelidonia.

Place and Time.] It grows under old walls by hedges sides, and untilled
places: it flowers all Summer, the seed ripening in the mean time.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry, an herb of the Sun, and excellent for
the Eyes: the herb gathered Sol in Leo, and in trine to the Moon, and made into
an ointment with Hogs suet, is an excellent medicine for sore Eyes, or any
Filme or cloudiness thereof: the yellow juice or sap rubbed upon warts soon
takes them away. It likewise heals Tetters or Ringworms. The decoction of the
herb or roots in wine, opens the Liver and Gall, and helps the yellow Jaundies.
The juice or distilled water with a little Sugar taken sasting, is good against
the Pestilence, it eases pains of the Teeth, the mouth being gargled with the
juice or decoction thereof. The juice mixed with Brimstone, cures the Itch,
Morphew, and discolorings of the skin and Sun-burnings. It is likewise good
for the Toothache.

Centory. Centaurium.
THis plant is divided into two kinds, the greater and lesser; the last is
most used in Physic, whose description take as follows.

The Form.] The lesser Centory grows up with a round crested stalk about half
a foot high, at the top branching into many sprigs, whence comes an umbel of
pale red flowers, which open in the day time, and shut at night; the seed grows
in little husks, the leaves are small and roundish, the root small and hard.

Names.] There is Centaurium magnum, and Centaurium minus, which are the Latin
Names of both.

Places and Time.] The lesser grows almost every where in Fields, Pastures,
and Woods, in the high way going from Putney to Kingston. They flower in July,
and seed in August.

Nature and Virtues.] The greater is hot and dry in the third degree, the
lesser in the second degree, both bitter herbs of Mars. The decoction of the
lesser Centory in Wine or Ale, helps gripings in the Belly, the Chollick,
Costiveness, and Worms; it purges Phlegm and Choler, and provokes Sweat, helps
Agues, the Jaundies, opens the Liver, Gall, and Spleen; it helps the Dropsy,
green Sickness, and provokes the Terms, it is effectual in pains of the Joints,
Cramps, and Convulsions. The decoction in water provokes appetite, cleanses
the Stomach and Breast, and purges the Back and Reins. It is a good ingredient
in wound drinks, it helps the Strangury, and is good against the bitings of
venomous creatures, a dram of the root taken in powder, and the Wound washed
with the decoction thereof.

Ceterach, Vide Spleenwort.

Of the Cherry Tree. Cerasus.
THough there be many sorts of Cherries, as black, red, white, and red
hart-Cherries; yet I think they are all so well known, I shall not need make
any description thereof.

Names.] The Latin name is Cerasus.

Place, and Time.] Some of them grow wild in hedges, as I have seen them in
Hampshire and Kent, which Country is the most plentiful place for Cherry
Gardens. They are ripe in May, June, and July.

Nature and Virtues.] They are cold and moist in the first degree, plants of
Venus, they cool and loosen the belly, and slack thirst: the black strengthen
the Stomach, and being dried stop Lasks. The distilled water of them with the
stones bruised, is good to be given to them that have the falling Sickness,
provokes Urine, and breaks Wind; The Gum dissolved in wine and drunk, helps
the Gravel and Stone, is good for the Cough and Hoarseness, and excoriations of
the Throat, Lungs, and Breast: the preserved Cherries are good in severish,
hot, and thirsty diseases.

Chervil. Cerefolium.
CHervil grows up at first like Parsley, whitish green color, the stalk
rises half a yard high, and bears white flowers; the seeds are sharp pointed
and blackish, the root is small and long, and perishes every year after it
has born seed.

Names.] Its common name in Latin is Cerefolium, or Cherifolium, in English
Chervil.

Place and Time.] It is planted in Gardens, and is a good sallet herb at first
while it is young and tender, and grows also wild in many places, the seed
will be ripe about June; and being sown again presently, will spring again and
be a good sallet in Autumn.

Nature and Virtues.] Chervil is moderately hot and dry, it provokes Urine, and
eases the pricking pains of the Stone, and opens inward obstructions, it
warms the Stomach, and the decoction thereof provokes sleep, it provokes the
Terms, is effectual against the Plurisie, and pricking pains in the sides; and
according to Pliny, the root beaten with Mallows draws sorth splinters out of
the flesh: it is an herb of Mars.

The Chestnut Tree. Castanea.
THis grows to be a tall Tree,

Names.] Castanea, and Castaneum, are the usual Latin names thereof, in
English Chestnuts.

Place and Time.] They grow wild in the Woods in Heat, and in the hedges in
the Road to Canterbury; yet in other Counties of this Land are planted in
Orchards and Gardens: the fruit is ripe about Michaelmas time.

Nature and Virtues.] Chestnuts are dry and astringent, in a mean between hot
and cold, a plant of Jupiter, they are very windy, yet nourish much, and are
said to stir up Venery: the Nuts being powdered and made into an Electuary with
honey, is effectual for the Cough, bloody Flux spitting of Blood, or any Lask
or looseness; they are hard of digestion, and immoderately eaten, cause the
Headache: the same powder mixed with Barley Meal and Vinegar, helps swellings
of the Breasts, and unnatural Blastings. The best way to correct their
windiness is to prick them with a needle and roast them.

Chickweed. Alsine.
THis herb runs along upon the ground with many tender branches full of
joints,

Names.] The Greeks call it (...), and the Latins the same, namely Alsine,
anciently it has been called Hippia.

Place and Time.] It delights to grow in shadowy and moist places, it flowers
in the Spring, and the seed is ripe soon after.

Nature and Virtues. Chickweed is cold, moist, and watery, of the Moons
temperature; it is good to cool the heat of the Liver, being bruised and
outwardly applied to the Region thereof, or wet clothes dipped in the juice
thereof, and renewed as they dry: the decoction cools the Blood in Agues,
Hectic Fevers, Stomach and Liver, and cools the heat of the Back and Urine.
The juice taken in white Wine or Ale five days together, first and last is
effectual for the Jaundies; it is effectual to ripen Imposthumes and swellings,
being applied pultiswise, with mallow roots, and the powder of Fenugreek and
Linseed, with Hogs Lard, and asswages generally all pains in the body,
proceeding of heat: the juice or distilled water is good for Pushes, inflamed
Eyes, and the heat and sharpness of the Piles.

Sweet Cicely. Myrrhis.
THe ordinary garden sweet Cicely has leaves somewhat like Fern,

Names.] The Greeks call it Myrrhis, and Myrrha, so do the Latins; the English
Sweet Cicely, Sweet Chervil, and Sweet Fern.

Place and Time.] It is planted with us in Gardens, flowers in May, and the
seed is ripe in July.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot in the second degree, having thinness of parts:
This plant of Sol is excellent good for the Ptisick and Consumptions, and
diseases of the Lungs, being boiled in broth, and eaten, it expectorates Phlegm
from the Breast, warms a cold Stomach, is a good sallet herb; and the root
boiled and eaten with oil and vinegar, produces the like effects: The candid
root is excellent against the Plague, and infections. This herb procures
appetite, expells Wind, provokes the Terms, and expells a dead Child, and the
Afterbirth, provokes Urine; and the root sliced and steeped in white Wine all
night, gently purges, being drunk in the morning with a little Sugar.

See more of this in Adam in Eden, by Will.

Cinquefoil. Pentaphyllum.
I Suppose this herb needs little description,

Names.] The Latins call it Pentaphyllum, and Quinque-folium, in English, five
leaved grass, and five fingred grass.

Place and Time.] It grows by Ditches and Highway sides, and in low grounds,
and flowers from the beginning of May till the end of June, and may be found
green all Winter.

Nature and Virtues.] The herb and root is hot and dry, but the root more then
the herb, a plant of Mars. Culpepper affirms a scruple hereof given in white
Wine or vinegar, never misses cure of an Ague of what kind soever in three
sits: but my experience proves the contrary. It restrains Fluxes and bleeding
at Nose, the juice drunk in Ale or red Wine, and the root or herb applied to
the nose; it is good against venoms and infections, resisting putrefaction. The
roots boiled in milk stays the whites, reds, and bloody Flux, but you must
drink the milk then: the juice with honey helps hoarseness, is good against the
Cough of the Lungs, the Quinzy, yellow Jaundies, and Falling Sickness, and the
decoction of the root is good against the Toothache, being held in the mouth.

Cynamon. Cynamomum.
THis outlandish Bark needs no description here; the Latin name is Cynamomum,
it is hot and dry in the third degree, and is aromatical. The Chemical water
hereof comforts all the vital parts, helps passions of the heart, eases the
wind Chollick, provokes the Terms, strengthens the Retentive faculty, is good
against a Looseness, Dropsies, and cold and moist Diseases; it causes a good
color in the Face, (let old and cold folks use it though.) Cynamon is an
excellent spice, and the chemical oil thereof comforts the Stomach, helps pains
of the Breast, and causes good digestion, but it must be carefully used; if it
be mixed with honey it takes away spots in the face.

Cives, Vide Leeks.

Clarey. Horminum.
I Need not describe it, my Countreywomen so frequently planting it in their
Gardens for theirs and their Husbands backs.

Names.] The Latins call it Horminum, and Geminalis of some.

Place and Time.] Gardens is the place, it flowers and seeds about the latter
end of Summer.

Nature and Virtues.] Clary is hot and dry in the third degree, a plant of Sol,
and is good for diseases of the Eyes, the seed powdered and applied, being
mixed with honey, its a great strengthner of the back and reins, it brings down
the Terms and Secondine; the muscilage of the seed takes away Tumors and
Swellings, and draws forth Splinters and Thorns, it provokes venery; but the
overmuch eating of it hurts the head and brain: the powder of the leaves
snuffed into the nostrils, purges the head and brain by sneezing: the herb is
good for cold and moist Stomachs, and the purposes aforesaid being fried in
Tansies.

Cleavers, or Goosegrass. Aparine.
CLeavers is well known.

The Names,] It is called in Greek and Latin Aparine, and by Pliny Lappa
minor, and Asperugo; in English Cleavers, Clivers, and Goosegrass, because
young Goslings feed on it.

Place and Time.] It runs up by hedge sides, and hangs to what grows next it;
it flowers in June and July, and the seed is ripe in August, which sows it
self.

Nature and Virtues.] Cleavers are of thin parts, indifferently hot and dry, an
herb of Mars; the young herb boiled in Water Gruel in the Spring, cleanses the
Blood, and strengthens the Liver. An unguent made of the herb with Hogs Suet,
helps Wens, the Kings Evil, and Paps swollen with curdled milk. The distilled
water, and the decoction helps the yellow Jaundies, drunk twice a day, and
stops Fluxes. The juice dropped into the Ears takes away the pains of them; the
juice or bruised leaves applied to a green Wound stops the Bleeding, and closes
it up; so does the powder thereof, and helps old Ulcers.

Cloves. Caryophillus.
THis aromatical Indian Fruit does much comfort the Head, Heart, and vital
parts, they strengthen Nature, break Wind, and stir up Venery, helps Fluxes of
the Belly, is good against Infection, and stays Vomiting: the chemical oil is
good in a Quartain Ague, and weakness of the Stomach, and for the Headache,
two or three drops given in Beer or Wine, or other drink, it eases the
Toothache: let old and phlegmatic persons use it; young people and chollerick
are to refrain it.

Clove Gilly-flowers. Caryophylleus flos.
THis cordial flower is well known.

Nature and Virtues.] It is a temperate slower, no way exceeding in heat or
dryness, cold, or moisture, a plant of Sol; the Conserve and Syrrup of the
slowers are gallant cordials, comforting the Heart, it resists the Plague, or
any Venom, it strengthens Nature, and is good against Consumptions: the
flowers pickled are an excellent sauce, and stir up appetite, being set in a
glass in the Sun in vinegar, they make a good vinegar to preserve from the
Pestilence, and revive one in a Swoon, the Temples and Nostrils being washed
therewith.

See further in Adam in Eden: by W. Coals,

Clowns Woundwort. Sideritis.
IT springs up with square rough green stalks near two foot high,

Names.] Gerhard, as I remember, says, he gave it the name of Clowns-wort from
a clownishianswer he had of a man that had cut his Leg with his Sith; and it
is called Panax Coloni in Latin, and Sideritis.

Places and Time.] It grows by Ditches sides in most places of this Land,
flowers in August, and the seed is ripe in September.

Nature and Virtues.] It is dry in the first degree, and reputed hot in the
second, of an earthy Saturnine quality, it does cure green Wounds, and closes
them up to admiration, being stamped with Hogs Lard, and applied thereunto; it
stanches Blood, and dryes up Fluxes of humors in old Ulcers: a syrrup made
thereof, and taken inwardly heals inward Wounds, Veins broken, spitting,
pissing, or vomiting blood, and stays the bloody Flux. A Plaster or Unguent
of the Herb, and some Comphrey with it, helps swollen Veins, and consolidates a
cut muscle, and is excellent for Ruptures of the Belly, being applied to the
place.

Columbines. Aquilina.
THere are Columbines of several colors,

Names.] No good Latin name can I find for it, yet it is termed Aquileia,
Aquilina, and Aquilegia; the only English name Columbines.

Place and Time.] I have seen both the white and purple colored grow wild in
our Meadows in Hampshire, where the ground is somewhat dry: as in a place
called Gassen Mead in Holshot; but they frequently grow in Gardens: they flower
about the beginning of May, and are gone by the end of June.

Nature and Virtues.] They are temperately cold and dry, moderately digestive,
a plant of Venus, and sympathizingly cures sore Throats, Canker, and the Kings
Evil, the leaves boiled in milk, and given to the party affected: the seeds
drunk in Ale is good for the Quinzy, it also heals inflammations of the Mouth
and Jaws: a dram of the seed and half a penny weight of Saffron drunk in wine,
and the party covered to sweat, opens the Liver, and is good against the
Janudies. The decoction of the herb and root with some Ambergrease added, helps
Swoonings. The seed drunk in wine causes speedy delivery, and the juice is good
in the beginning of a Phrenzy, the patient eating with it pottage of Sage,
Valerian, and Rue.

Of Coloquintida, or the bitter Gourd.
THis outlandish Indian Plant, is hot and dry in the third degree, very bitter
of taste, and strongly purging, it may be taken to purge Phlegm, by strong
bodies, being corrected with oil of Roses, Gum Tragacanth, and Ginger, which
will help the griping pains, it will cause if taken alone; but being thus made
up with Rose Water into pills or trochis, it purges viscous humors, tough
Phlegm and Choler, and water from the Brain, Lungs, and Breast, and therefore
is good against Fluxes of Rheum, Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, and swimming of
the Head, the Jaundies, old Coughs, and rotten putrid Fevers, the Chollick and
Dropsy: the decoction thereof in Vinegar eases pains of the Teeth, they being
washed therewith, being steeped in vinegar, it helps the Morphew, Scurf, and
Scabs: in Glisters which is the safest way, it may be given thus; take the pulp
hereof two drams, Camomile flowers, M. 1. Anniseed, Comminseed, of each.ss.
make hereof a decoction fair water, and in a pint thereof dissolve honey of
Roses, and oil of Cammomile, each iii. The dose otherwise is from five grains
to ten.

Coltsfoot. Tussilago.
THis pectoral plant is well known, only hardly observed in this, that it
sends forth its flowers before the leaves.

Names.] Tussilago is the common Latin name, Foalsfoot, and Coltsfoot, the
English, because the leaves resemble a Horses foot.

Place, and Time.] It loves to grow in moist and low Grounds, in good Ground:
it flowers in the end of March, and beginning of April, the flowers and stalks
quickly fade away, afterward come the leaves which abide green all Summer.

Nature and Virtues.] It is cooling and drying being fresh, but when the
moisture is evaporated, it inclines to heat, and dryness; it is an herb of
Venus, very effectual for infirmities of the Lungs, wheesing, and shortness of
Breath: the leaves taken like Tobacco, draws away thin Rheumes, distilling upon
the Lungs, and helps the Cough: the distilled water, with Elder Flowers is good
against hot Agues, to drink about two ounces at a time; it likewise helps hot
Swellings, inflammations, as St. Anthonies fire, and cools the heat of the
Piles, clothes being wet therein and applied; it likewise takes away hot Pushes
and Wheals.

See further in Adam in Eden: by W. Coals.

Comfrey. Consolida.
THis herb I suppose needs no description, being generally known.

Names.] It is called Consolidae, of which there is major and minor, the
greater and lesser Consound. Comfrey is the greater, and is so called from
consolidating or knitting together, which faculty it has, and is therefore
called also Knit-back, or Backwort, because it binds and strengthens the Back.

Place and Time.] It grows in Meadows by rivers sides, and ditches in fruitful
grounds, as near Debtford in Kent it grows in abundance; it is also planted in
Gardens, they flower in May and June, and seed in August.

Nature and Virtues.] It is of a cold drying binding Saturning quality, it is
very good for the Back, and the running of the Reins, being boiled and eaten
with Butter and Vinegar, it is a very good Sallet; some boil it and eat it with
Bacon, which way it is also effectual for the aforesaid purpose; it stops
Fluxes, inward or outward Bleeding, and the Terms: the decoction of the roots
being drunk, it heals inward Wounds and Ulcers of the Lungs, it stops the Reds,
and Whites; the syrrup is effectual for all the said purposes, and the
distilled water is good to wash Wounds and Sores. The Roots bruised, and
applied, is good to close together the lips of green Wounds, and stays the
bleeding of the Piles and Hemorrhoides, and cools the Inflammations thereof; it
likewise eases the pains of the Gout, being so applied.

Walter Caltrops. Tribulus Aquaticus.
THey rise with long slender stalks from the bottom of the water,

Names.] The Greeks call it (...), the Latins, Tribulus Aquaticus, Tribulus
Lacustris, and the Apothecaries, Tribulus Marinus, in English Caltrops Saligot,
and Water Nuts, and the fruit is called Castania Aquatiles, or Water Chestnuts.

Place and Time.] It grows in lakes, standing waters, and Springs, in
Germany, Brabant, and the Low Countries; so that being an outlandish Plant, I
would not have troubled the Reader with a description, but to acquaint him that
it is thrust in by the writer of that Book, called Culpeppers English Physician
enlarged, amongst the English Plants, as a great many more are, both Outlandish
and useless: yet there is a small kind hereof called small Frogs Lettice,
which bears small whitish flowers, consisting of four leaves apiece, which
grows in the River by Droxford in Hampshire, always continuing under the
water, and is green both Winter and Summer, they all flower in June and July.

Nature and Virtues.] Caltrops are of a cold and moist nature, so that a pultis
made thereof is good against inflammations and hot swellings, and being boiled
with honey and water, it cures Cankers of the Mouth, sore Gums, and the almonds
of the Throat, knobs, and swellings, and the Kings Evil: The green Nuts drunk
with wine is good for the Stone and Grayel, and a powder thereof binds the
Belly, and is good for them that piss Blood. The same drunk which wine resists
poison, venom, and bitings of venomous creatures, and the herb applied
outwardly helps venomous bitings.

Campions, Wild Lychnis.
THere are diverse kinds hereof, both wild and in Gardens; Lychnis sylvestris
purpurea, called red Batchelors Buttons, and Lychnis alba, white Batchelors
Buttons: they are useless in Physic, yet Culpeppers writer will ascribe them
to Saturn, and says, The decoction stays inward bleedings, and the herb
outwardly applied does the like, and that being drunk, it provokes Urine,
expells the Gravel and Stone in the Reins and Kidneys, and two drams of the
seed drunk in wine, purges chollerick humors, helps venomous bitings, and may
be effectual for the Plague, and that the herb is useful in old sores, Ulcers,
and the like to cleanse and heal them. All this may be true for any thing
either he or I know to the contrary. Indeed most of the kinds hereof, except
the two first named, are strangers in England, and are only planted in Gardens
for the beauty of the flowers.

Carduus Benedictus, Vide Holy Thistle.

Carawayes. Carui.
CAraway has fine cut leaves much like Carrot leaves, but not so bushing,
lying on the ground in diverse stalks, of a quick taste, among which rises up a
square stalk, not so high as the Carrot, having the like leaves at the joints,
but smaller and finer, having at the top small open umbels of white slowers,
which produce a small blackish seed less then Anniseed, and hotter in taste:
the root is somewhat like a Parsnip, but is much less, and has a more
wrinckled bark, and a little hottish taste.

Names.] The Greeks call it (...), in Latin Caros, Carum, and Caruum, and in
the Shops Carui, in English Caraway and Carawayes.

Place and time.] It is sown in our English Gardens, flowers in June and July,
and the seed is ripe soon after.

Nature and Virtues.] The seeds are most used in Physic, and according to
Gallen are hot and dry almost in the third degree, of a moderate sharp quality:
the herb may be eaten raw with other herbs in Sallets, or boiled, and the roots
may be boiled and eaten as Parsnips; they break wind, comfort the Stomach, and
help Digestion. The herb, or seed and herb bruised and applied hot in a cloth
or bag to the bottom of the Belly, eases the wind Chollick, and is good
against hot swellings. The seeds eaten alone, or mixed with meat or medicine
comfort the Stomach, break Wind, and help digestion, for which purpose also
they are used to be put into bread: they also help cold griefs in the head,
windiness in the Bowels and Mother, and used to be mixed with purgative
medicines to correct their windiness; it also provokes Urine, helps the Cough,
and is good against the Phrensey and venomous bitings, being put into a poultis
it takes away black and blue spots which come by blows or bruises: and used
with allom, it helps Scabs, Tetters, and falling off the hair.

Earth Chest-nuts. Nucula terrestris.
THis root is round and knobbed, leaves, but finer, and toward the top like
dill: The flowers are white, and stand at the tops of the stalks in spoky
rundels like the tops of dill. The seeds not much unlike Fennel seed, but much
smaller, growing together by couples, having a good smell.

Names.] It is called Nucula terrestris, and Bolbocastanon, which is also the
Greek name; in English Earth Nuts, Kipper Nuts, and Pig Nuts: I suppose because
Hogs will greedily dig after them.

Place and Time.] They grow in dry Pastures and Corn Fields by the hedge rows,
as at Holshot in Hampshire, at Kensington, Paddington, and diverse other places
about London: they flower in June and July, perfecting their seed soon after,
the stalk dies at Winter. The roots are best in season about February and
March, before they begin to spring forth the Branches.

Nature and Virtues.] The roots are moderately hot and dry, the seeds hotter
and dryer, both seed and root provoke Urine, the root is good for them that
spit or piss Blood, eaten either raw or roasted: The Dutch eat them boiled and
buttered as we do Turnips, and being so dressed and eaten, they comfort the
Stomach, nourish the Kidneys and Bladder and increase seed.

See further in The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: by P. Morellus.

Cich Pease, or Cicers. Cicer.
A Description is needless of these outlandish Tares, there is a Garden kind
thereof sown in some of our London Gardens, but not common; they are all sown
in the Fields in Spain, Italy, and France, to feed their Cattle in Winter, as
we do Tares and Vetches.

The Garden Cich is windy, and is said to provoke lust, and engender seed; the
broth of them wastes the Stone, and provokes Urine, and a decoction thereof
with Rosemary is good for the Dropsy and yellow Jaundies, but it is hurtful
for such as have Ulcers in the Kidneys or Bladder.

Cives, Vide Leeks.

Cocks-Head, red Fitchling, and Medick Fitch. Onobrychis.
TWo kinds hereof I shall describe,

The first springs up with many small tender branches, like the Vines growing
through and about bushes, and whatever grows near it; the leaves and the rest
of the pulse or plant, are like the wild Vetch: the flowers grow at the tops
of the small naked stalks, like a pease blossom, of a purple color laid over
with blue, which turn into round prickly husks which are the seed.

The second has many stalks, especially when it is old, which are round, hard,
and leaning to the ground like other pulses, the leaves are like those of the
wild Vetch, of a loathsome scent and bitter taste, amongst which come forth
small round stems, whereon grow the flowers which are of a shining purple
color, growing spike fashion, three inches long, like the great Meadow
Trefoil, but longer, and without smell, after which come small Cods, containing
hard black seed in taste like the Vetch: The root is great and long, hard and
woody, spreading abroad and growing deep under ground.

Names.] The ancient name both Greek and Latin for this kind of pulse is
Onobrychis, its called also Caput Gallinaceum, and the second kind Onobrychis
flore, purpurec, in English Cocks-head, red Fitchling, and meddick Fitch.

Place and Time.] Gerhard says these two kinds grow upon Barron Hill, within
four miles of Lewton in Bedfordshire, upon the grassy balks between the Corn,
two miles from Cambridge, and in diverse places of the way between London and
Cambridge: they grow likewise in diverse places of this Land, in Fields, and
under Hedges. There are three other kinds hereof, which are strangers in
England, they flower in July and August, and the seed is ripe soon after.

Nature and Virtues.] Gallen says these herbs do rarifie, make thin, and waste
away, and therefore a Salve made of the green leaves and applied to hard
Kernels and Swellings, Knobs, and Nodes in the flesh, does waste and consume
them away, and may be effectually used in that swelling called Struma, or the
Kings Evil, and being rubbed on with oil, it causes Sweating; being dried and
drunk with wine, it cures the Strangury, says Dioscorides. It causes Cattle
to give good store of milk; and from thence Culpepper argues it is as good for
Nurses, he making no distinction between man and beast.

Corral. Corallium.
ALthough the Corral seems rather to be a stone, yet it is a vegetable Plant;
there are several kinds thereof, the red, and the white, most in use with us;
but the greater red Corral is the best, which grows upon Rocks in the Sea,
like unto a shrub with arm and branches breaking forth into sprigs, some
greater and some lesser, with craggy eminencies, of a whitish or pale red
color, for the most part when it is taken out of the water, but when it is
scraped and polished, it is very fair, it is very pliable whilst it is in the
water, but when it is kept a while out of the water, it becomes of a firm or
hard stony substance.

Names.] The Greeks call it (...), and the Latins Corallium, adding rubrum or
album for distinctions sake; the black sorts are called Antipathes, and there
is a sort of rough bristly black Corral called Sambeggia.

Place and Time.] They are found in the Isle of Sardinia, and other places of
the Mediterranean Sea. Gerhard says, the white and yellow Corral do grow upon
the Rocks in the West of England, about Saint Michaels Mount; they are all
times of the year found growing, and at all times to be had at our Druggists
Shops.

Nature and Virtues.] All the sorts of Corral do cool, and bind, yet the white
is thought to be colder then the red or black, it is an excellent astringent
for the Gonorrhea in men, and the whites in women; the red Corral stops
bleeding, being but held in the hands of those that bleed either at nose or
mouth, and is effectual for those that spit Blood, or for any Flux of Blood,
and being often taken in Wine or other drink, it does diminish the Spleen, it
helps the stoppage of Urine, and such as piss by drops: the powder of it being
burnt and taken in drink, helps the tormenting pains of the Stone in the
Bladder, it strengthens the Heart, Stomach, and Liver, and is useful in all
pestilent Fevers and malignant diseases, against venom, chears the Heart, and
resists Melancholy, especially the tincture of it, called Tinctura Coralii:
The powder taken in Wine, or distilled water brings rest to such as have Agues,
helps such as are troubled with the Cramp, and is commended against the Falling
Sickness, for which purpose some hang it about the necks of such as have that
Disease. It is said, if ten Grains of the powder be given to a Child as soon
as it is born in some black Cherry water, or the Mothers milk, that Child
shall never have the Falling Sickness: it is also affirmed to procure easy
Delivery in Childe-birth by a specific property, it is used to rub Childrens
Gums, to help them to breed Teeth, and is useful for all accidents that belong
unto the Teeth; it helps sore Gums and Ulcers in the Mouth, and heals up foul
hollow Ulcers in other parts, and is used in Medicines for the Eyes, to stay
the Flux of Rheum, cools and dryes up the moisture, and takes away the heat
and redness of the Eyes. The Chemical gyl and tincture may be used for any of
the aforesaid purposes.

Corral-wort, Vide Dog-toothed Violet.

Crabs Claws, or fresh Water Soldier. Sedum Aquatile.
THis has leaves much like Sempervivum,

Names.] Its called Sedum Aquatile, water Singreen, wading pondweed, fresh
water Soldier, Knights Pondwort, water Housleek, and the like.

Place and Time.] It grows in the Fenns in Lincolnshire, and other muddy
waters, and flowers to August.

Nature and Virtues.] This plant is of a cooling nature, and is good to keep
green Wounds from Inflammations; an ointment thereof is good against hot
Swellings, St. Anthonies fire, and other Inflammations. This herb is good for
bruises in the Reins and Kidneys, stops any flux of blood issuing thence, and
likewise to stop the terms; for which purposes a decoction of the herb, or a
dram of the dried herb in powder may be taken every morning in any convenient
Liquor, or other ^chule.

Cucumbers. Cucumer, Cucumis.
THis Garden Plant needs no Description, the names are above, the place is well
dunged Gardens, and the time when the fruit is ripe, the Journeymen Tailors in
London are very sensible of.

Nature and Virtues.] They are cold and moist in the third degree, some hold
but in the second, it must be the latter end of it then; the fruit is good
sauce for hot Stomachs and Livers, but being much eaten engender raw Humors;
the juice of them is good to cleanse the skin, and helps hot rheumes in the
Eyes, the seeds provoke Urine, cleanses the passages thereof, and is good for
such as have Ulcers in the bladder, for which purpose they are used in
Emulsions; as also to cool, the heat of the Urine in virulent Gonorrhea's: the
distilled water of the whole fruit takes away Sunburning, Freckles, and
Morphew, the face being washed therewith.

Wild Cucumbers. Cucumis agrestis, Elaterium.
THis plant grows not wild in England, of a hand, and oftentimes flies on
the face of them that touch it, making it smart a great while after, whereby it
got the name of Noli me tangere. The root is white, thick, and long lasting;
the whole plant and fruit bitter in taste.

Names.] In Greek its called (...), in Latin Agrestis, and Erraticus cucumis,
in Shops Cucumer Asminus, and the prepared juice is called Elaterium.

Place and Time.] It springs up in May, and the fruit is ripe in Autumn, it
grows amongst rubbish, and in untilled places in hot Countries, and is here
planted in Gardens.

Nature and Virtues.] The bitterness speaks them to be hot, the plant is hot
and cleansing, the juice hot in the second degree, and of thin parts; the
prepared juice called Elaterium, which is to be had at the Apothecaries,
purges Choler, Phlegm, and watery humors, both by seige and Vomit, prevails
against the Dropsy, and shortness of breath, and being snuffed up into the
nostrils with a little milk, it helps redness of the Eyes.

The juice of the root purges Phlegm and watery humors, and is good against
the Dropsy, but not so effectual as Elaterium. The dose of the juice may be
from half a grain to three grains, according to the strength or constitution of
the Patient: but Gerhard prescribes it to be given from five grains to half a
scruple, which I suppose is too much, it being a churlish Medicine.

Saracens Consound. Solidago.
THis plant grows up with long narrow green leaves dented about, stand many
pale yellow star-like flowers in green heads, after whith comes a long small
yellowish brown colored seed, enclosed in down, which is afterward carried
away with the wind: the root consists of a head of fibers, which lasts all
Winter. The plant has a strong unpleasant taste and smell.

Names.] It is called Consolida, and Solidago, as Comfrey is, only Saracenica,
to distinguish it; some also call it Herba fortis because of its strong smell.

Place, and Time.] They grow in moist wet grounds, flower about July, and the
seed is ripe in August or September.

Nature and Virtues.] Saracens Consound is hot and dry near the third degree,
and astringent, an herb of Mars, and an excellent wound herb, so that Mars can
cure as well as wound. The herb steeped in Wine, and then distilled, the water
is good for Wounds and Ulcers, whether inward or outward, so is the juice or
decoction: it cleanses green Wounds, and old sores from corruption, and heals
them; it likewise heals the sores of the privy parts and Ulcers of the mouth
and throat, they being gargled therewith. The decoction of the herb in wine
opens obstructions of the Gall and Liver, and is good for the yellow Jaundies,
and to prevent Dropsies: It also heals Ulcers of the Reins, and other inward
wounds.

See more of this in the Art of Simpling: written by W. Coals.

Coryander. Coriandrum.
I Shall not take up room to describe this stinking Saturning Plant.

Names.] The Latins call it Coriandrum.

Place and Time.] It is only sown and kept in Gardens; flowers in June and
July, and the seed is ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] The leaves and seeds being green, are cold and dry, and
hurtful to the body, if taken inwardly; but the seeds being steeped in Vinegar,
and dried, are moderately hot and dry, and then they are good for the Stomach,
and helps digestion: the Comfits of the prepared seeds repress Vapors that
ascend to the head, help digestion, and stay vomiting. The seeds taken in Wine,
kills Worms, and stops Fluxes, helps the Wind Chollick, and stopping of Urine.
The powder of the seed drunk in sweet Wine, provokes lust, the green herb
boiled with Barley meal, helps Inflammations, and the juice incorporated with
Vinegar and Oil of Roses, Ceruse, and Litharge of Silver, cures all
Inflammations, and St. Anthonies fire.

Cudweed. Gnaphalium.
THe common Cudweed springs up sometimes with one stalk,

Names.] Of the Greeks it is called (...), and Gnaphalium in Latin; yet it
has other Latin names, as Centunculus Cottonaria, and Albinum from the
whiteness, and Herbaimpia by Pliny.

Place and Time.] It grows in barren, dry, and sandy grounds, almost every
where in this Land, flowers in July, and the seed is ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] Cudweed is drying and astringent, Venus rules the Herb,
and it is good for the Mumps and Quinzy, the juice taken in Wine or Milk; it
stays Fluxes of Blood, and defluxions of Rheumes falling from the head: the
decoction made in red Wine, or the powder taken therein: it helps the Tenasmus,
burstings in Children, and the Worms, and stays the overflowing of the Terms;
the leaves are good to heat green Wounds, and so does the decoction or juice
thereof, and helps old Ulcers.

Cowslips. Arthriticae.
THese need no description of form, place, or time, all being well known; they
are called in Latin, Arthriticae, and Herbae Paralisis, being good against
pains of the Joints and Sinews.

Nature and Virtues.] Cowslips are Venus flowers, of temperature dry and
astringent, little hot; the flowers are most used in Physic, but an ointment
made of the leaves and Hogs Suet, is good to heal Wounds, and takes away spots,
wrinckles, and Sun-burnings, and freckles of the face; they are profitable for
pains in the head, and are good against Joint Aches, Palsy, and pains of the
Sinews, Convulsions, and Cramps: The decoction of the roots are good against
the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder, and the juice of the leaves for inward
hurts, or parts broken: The Conserve of the flowers is good against Palsies,
Convulsions, Cramps, and pains of the Sinews; so likewise are the flowers
pickled and eaten for sauce with meat.

See more of this in The Art of Simpling: written by W. Coals.

Cowslips of Jerusalem. Pulmonalis.
THis Herb has broad rough leaves,

Names.] In Latin it is called Pulmonalis, and Pulmonaria; in English Cowslips
of Jerusalem, Sage of Jerusalem, and Sage of Bethlehem.

Place and Time.] It is nourished in Gardens, flowers in April, and the seed is
ripe in May.

Nature and Virtues.] The leaves are cold and dry in the first degree, the
roots more dry and astringent, it is a good pot-herb to be used in broth for
the Lungs, being an excellent herb for any distemper of the Lungs: the
decoction thereof helps Coughs, shortness of Breath, exulcerations and stoppage
of the Lungs by reason of any corrupt matter, and spitting of Blood; it helps
also Wounds and hurts in the Entrals, and is good for Burstings, or Ruptures:
the flowers are wholesome in Sallets in the Spring time.

Couch-grass, or Dogs-grass. Gramen Caninum.
I Shall not need to describe the Couch, Gardners know it well enough, and
could wish that they were rid of it.

Names.] It is called in Latin Gramen Caninum, because Dogs eat the Grass when
they are sick: In English we call it Dogs Grass, Quich Grass, and Couch Grass.

Places and Time.] It is too plentiful both in Gardens and ploughed Fields, for
the owners store; although Culpepper holds half an Acre of it to be worth five
Acres of Carrots twice told over; yet if any of his Disciples be of his
opinion, I will undertake to help them to five Acres of it for one Acre of
Carrots: It Is very plentiful in my Fathers Garden at Holshot in Hampshire, and
cannot be gotten clear out of the ground where it has possession; it
flourishes most in Summer, but the roots endure all Winter.

Nature and Virtues.] It is moderate in coldness and moisutre, the seed more
cold and dry, harsh, and of thin parts, an herb of Venus; it opens the passages
of Urine, wastes the Stone in the Bladder, and Ulcers thereof: It is good to
kill Worms, the juice mixed with honey and powder of Southernwood; but for
Children, mix the juice with an Oxe-Gall, and dip a cloth therein, and apply it
to the Navel. The decoction in white Wine provokes Urine, opens the Liver and
Gall, and eases pains of the Belly and Inflammations. The seeds do also expel
Urine, stays Vomitings and Looseness.

Watercresses. Nasturtium Aquaticum.
Watercresses has weak fat hollow stalks running along upon the earth or
water where it grows,

Names.] Nasturtium Aquaticum is the Latin name.

Place and Time.] They grow upon ponds and watery ditches, and flower about June
and July.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the second degree, an Herb of
Jupiter in my judgment. Culpepper ascribes it to the Moon, it is very
profitable for the Scurvy; it provokes Urine, and cleanses the Reins and
Bladder, moves the Terms, and incites to Venery, it opens obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen, it is very good to make broth to purge and cleanse the blood
in the Spring time.

Sciatica Cresses. Iberis.
THey have many slender branches growing on a stalk a foot and a half high,
yellow, the seeds come in little chaffy husks, of a reddish gold color, sharp
and bitter in taste; the root is white, small, and tough, and of a biting taste.

Names.] In Latin it is called Iberis, and Nasturtium silvestre, and Lepidium,
in English Sciatica Cresses.

Place and Time.] It grows upon old walls, rough and untilled places, by high
way sides, and in Corn fields near Gravesend. It flowers in June and July.

Nature and Virtues.] Sciatica Cresses is hot in the fourth degree, according
to Gerrard; and as says Dioscorides, the roots gathered in Harvest time, and
made into a Plaster with Swines Grease, and applied to the grieved place of
such as are troubled with the Sciatica, is found effectual for the same, but it
is to lie on but four hours, and then taken away, and the place bathed with
warm water, and afterward wool and oil laid on it.

Crosswort: Cruciata.
IT is a low herb of a pale green color,

Names.] The Latin Names are Cruciata, and Cruciatis, in English Crosswort,
and golden Mugweet.

Place and Time.] It grows in low Meadows, and fertile Grounds, and flowers
almost all Summer.

Nature and Virtues.] It is dry and astringent, a Saturnine herb, it is
excellent to heal and consolidate wounds, and is good for inward Wounds or
Bruises, the herb being boiled in Wine and drunk; it is also effectual for
Ruptures or Burstness, the herb being boiled tender and applied to the place
pultis-wise, and the decoction thereof being drunk.

See further in The Art of Simpling: by W. Coals

Crowfoot. Ranunculus.
THere be many kinds of these dangerous herbs couched under the name of
Crowfoot,

Names.] Ranunculus, and Batrachion, Latin Authors call it; in English Gold
cups, Crowfoot, and Butter-flowers.

Place and Time.] They grow almost every where in Meadows and Pastures, flower
in the beginning of May, and continue many months after.

Nature and Virtues.] It is a fiery hot herb, and Martial, it will blister the
tongue, if it be tasted; the herb being bruised and applied, is good in the
beginning of a Plague sore arising, being bound to the middle of the Thigh, if
it arise in the Groin, and a little above the Elbow, if the swelling arise
under the Arm-pit, it draws the Pestilential Venom unto it self: it will draw
a blister as well as Cantharides, and may be applied to the Nape of the Neck,
to draw Rheum from the Eyes; an ointment of the herb and flowers will work the
same effects.

Cuckow-pintle, or Wake Robin. Arum.
I Shall bestow no time to describe this, for Children know it, using to gather
the pestles or spits to play with.

Names.] It is called in Latin Arum, and Aron; when I was a Child, my self
and my School-fellows well knew it by the name of Cuckoo spits: it is also
called Cuckoo Pintle, Priests Pintle, Wake Robin, and Starchwort, because white
Starch has been made of the root of it.

Places and Time.] They grow almost under every dry bank, and hedge, they shoot
forth their leaves in the Spring, and the spike appears about Cuckow-time.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the third degree, the leaves or
juice cleanses filthy Ulcers; and helps the Pollipus and stinking sores of the
Nose: the decoction of the roots clears the sight, and takes away films and
mists from the Eyes. The powder of the berries mixed with oil of Roses and
dropped into the Ears, eases pains of them. The roots or berries beaten
together with hot Ox dung, eases the pains of the Gout. The green laves
bruised and laid upon a Plague sore or boil, helps to draw out the infection.
An Electuary made of the dried root, helps shortness of breath, and rids away
phlegm from the Breast and Lungs, being boiled in milk it works the like
effects: It also provokes the Terms, and heals inward Ulcers. The fume of the
decoction is good to sit over for falling out of the Fundament, both herb and
root is very sharp and biting, and is a venerious plant.

Commyn. Cuminum.
THis seldom comes to maturity in our Country, but grows in hot Countries,
as Spain and Italy; it is called in Latin Cuminum, and Cyminum.

Nature and Virtues.] Commyn seed is hot and dry in the third degree, according
to Galen; being boiled in Wine and drunk, it breaks wind, and eases the
Chollick, being boiled with figs in Wine, it helps shortness of Breathing, old
Coughs and Diseases of the Breast, and is effectual for the Dropsy and
giddiness of the head; being boiled in Wine and made into a pultis with Barley
meal, it helps the swelling of the Cods, caused by wind or waterish humors,
and other cold pains and swellings, and gripings and torments of the Belly,
being applied thereunto; it also eases the Plurisie and Stitches in the sides,
being quilted in a bag with some salt, and heated hot and sprinkled with Wine
Vinegar, and applied hot to the side. The herb and root are of no use.

The Curran Tree. Ribes.
THese grow only in our Gardens, but naturally in Savoy, Austria, and those
places from whence they have been transplanted to us.

Names.] It is called Ribes, and Ribesius frutex, and Grossularia, in English
red and white Currants.

Temperature and Virtues.] Currants are cold and moist in the second degree, a
plant of Venus; they provoke appetite, allay the heat of the Stomach, quench
thirst, and therefore are good in hot Agues; they temper the heat of the Liver
and Choler, and resist putrefaction: they close the mouth of the Stomach, and
strengthen it. The dried juice or rob thereof is good against the Cough, stops
the Lask and Flux proceeding from Choler.

Contra Yerva, Vide Root of Peru.

The Cypress Tree. Cupressus.
THese are now frequently planted to adorn Gardens, but grow naturally in the
Eastern Countries; therefore I shall describe no more of them but the names,
nature, and virtues.

Names.] In Latin its called Cupressus, and the Nuts or Clogs, Nuces Cupressi.

Nature and Virtues.] The fruit and leaves are dry in the third degree, and
astringent: the decoction of the leaves in sweet Wine, helps the Strangury, and
the powder of the leaves provokes Urine. The decoction helps the Cough, short
windedness, Fluxes of the Belly, spitting of Blood, and the Rupture: the leaves
beaten with figs, softens tumors, and hardness of the Testicles, and the
Pollipus: the decoction of the nuts in Wine, causes the hair to grow black, it
being washed therewith. The filings of the Wood taken in Wine, provokes the
Courses, helps Venomous bitings, and causes a good color.

Daisies. Consolida minor.
IT were in vain to describe there, they need it not.

Names.] It is called in Latin Consolida minor, and Herba Margarita.

Place and Time.] They grow almost on every common, they flower in the Spring,
and last most part of Summer.

Nature and Virtues.] They are accounted cold and dry, an herb of Venus; the
juice of them, or the distilled water dropped into the eyes, clears the watring
of them: a decoction hereof made with Wall-wort and Egrimony, gives ease in
the Palsy, Sciatica, and Gout, the places being bathed therewith, and is good
against Ruptures and inward Burstings. A Salve made of the leaves with Wax,
Oil, and Turpentine, is singular good for Wounds, especially where there is any
Inflammation: The leaves bruised and applied, helps the swellings of the Cods,
and the decoction cures inward Ulcers of the secret parts, cools the Liver, and
abates the heat of Choler.

See further in The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: by P. Morellus.

Dandelion.
THis is counted amongst the kinds of Succory, and therefore I shall refer it
to that place.

Darnel. Lolium.
IT grows up with rough long leaves, with a slender joynted stalk; at the top
whereof grows a long spike with many heads one above another, containing
diverse husks on each side the stalk, wherein are contained the seeds, which
easily fall out, whereby it increases much to the prejudice of the Corn where
it usually grows.

Names.] It is called in Latin Lolium, in English Darnel and Ray.

Place and time.] It is too well known amongst Corn, and is ripe when the Corn
is.

Nature and Virtues.] Darnel is hot and dry, according to Galen, of a cleansing
quality, it restrains Fluxes, overflowing of the Terms, and the involuntary
passing away of Urine, therefore it is good for such as piss their beds: the
meal thereof it good to stay the spreading of fretting sores and Gangreens: the
decoction thereof in water and honey is good against the Sciatica, and it
cleanses the skin, helps the Leprosy and Morphew, being applied with sait and
rhadish roots; it also draws out splinters and thorns, being applied
pultis-wise with hogs grease; but it is very naught for the eyes and head,
causing giddiness, if the seeds get into bread amongst Corn, as often it does,
if not carefully prevented.

Danewort, Vide Dwarf Elder,

Dates. Dactyli.
THis Tree grows in the Eastern Countries, from whence the fruit is brought
to us. They are called in Latin Dactyli.

The ripe dates are said to be hot and moist in the second degree, they yield a
fat gross nourishment, they are good against Consumptions, Coughs, and
hoarseness, they stir up Venery, strengthen the Back, Liver, and Spleen: The
decoction of them cools hot Agues, and helps spitting of Blood they stay
Vomiting, Looseness, and Women's Courses, and the falling of the Fundament.

Devils Bit. Morsus Diaboli.
THis is a kind of Scabious, Sawes be true) the Devil did for envy, because
the herb is so beneficial for the health of mankind.

Names.] Its called in Latin Morsus Diaboli, because, as is said, the root
seems to be bitten almost in two; and in English, for the same reason, Devils
Bit, and of some Forebit.

Place and Time.] It delights in dry Meadows, Woods, and ways fides, grows
plentifully in Danemoor Wood in Hampshire, in Cobham Park in Kent, and sundry
other places: It flowreth in August,

Nature and Virtues.] Devils Bit is hot and dry in the latter end of the second
degree, somewhat bitter in taste; the decoction thereof drunk, drives forth
Wind, and eases pains of the Matrix or Mother: It is an excellent remedy
against old swellings of the Almonds, and upper part of the Throat: the mouth
being gargled with a decoction thereof, and a little honey of Roses, cleanses
the Jaws of slimy Phlegm, digesting and consuming it, and takes away swellings
in those parts. Devils Bit serves for all those infirmities which Scabious
does, being as effectual against the stingings of poisonous Beasts, poisons and
pestilent diseases, and to consume and waste away Plague sores, being bruised
and laid upon them.

Dogs-grass, Vide Couch-grass.

Down or Cotton Thistle. Acanthium.
THis common Thistle is so well known by his sharp prickles and douny heads,
that its needless to describe him further.

Names.] Its called in Greek (...), in Latin Acanthium, in English Down
Thistle, because the down may be gathered to stuff Pillows and Cushions; its
also called Cotton Thistle, Argentine, or silver Thistle.

Place and Time.] They grow by ditches sides, and highways, almost every
where: they flower from June till August, the second year after sowing, and
when the seed is ripe, the herb perishes.

Nature and Virtues.] Gallen says these are hot of temperature, and a
Decoction of the leaves and roots being drunk, is good for those that have
their necks turned awry, or backwards, or their bodies drawn together by a
Spasm or Convulsion.

Dwarf Elder or Dane Wort. Ebulus.
DWarf elder is as it were, standing by couples upon a thick ribbed stalk: the
flowers are white, tipped with red, and grow at the top of the stalks in tuffs,
having in them five little chives pointed with black, after which come black
berries like common Elder, having in them little long seed. The root is rough
and somewhat long.

Names.] In Greek its called (...), id est, humilis Sambucus, in Latin Ebulus,
and Ebulum, in English Dwarf Elder, Danewort, and Walwort.

Place and Time.] Dwarf Elder grows by common High ways, and in untilled
Fields, it grows plentifully in the road between Sittingburn and Canterbury,
and in the Lane near Hyedsor Wharf in Buckinghamshire, and in the grounds of
Mr. Hind there.

Nature and Virtues.] Dwarf Elder is hot and dry in the third degree, having a
wasting and consuming quality, according to Gallen: it has a purging faculty
by the stool, a scruple of the seed bruised and taken once a week in syrrup of
Roses, and a glass of Sack purges down watery humors, whereby it is available
in the Dropsy, and to ease the Gout; for which purpose the feed may be given
to the quantity of a dram. The leaves have the chiefest faculty to digest and
consume; therefore being applied in a pultis, bathe, or fomentation, they waste
away hard swellings. The young leaves applied with Barley Meal, cools hot
inflammations, and is good for burnings, scaldings, and bitings of mad Dogs: An
unguent made thereof with Bulls tallow, or Goats suet, eases the Gout. The
roots of Danewort are accounted of greatest force: a decoction of them in Wine
purges down watery humors, and is good against the Dropsy; if they be boiled
in a bath to sit in, they soften and open the Matrix, and correct the
infirmities thereof, and dissolve pains and swellings of the Belly; and the
juice of the root makes the hair of a black color, being used for that
purpose.

Wall-fern, or Osmond Royal. Osmunda.
IT has a great triangle stalk about a yard high,

Names.] It is called in Latin Osmunda, filix Palustris, and of some
Filicastrum, by Alchimists Lunaria major; in English Water-fern, Osmund Royal,
and Osmond the Water man.

Place and Time.] It grows in moist boggy Ditches, as in the Ditch near the
Well in Holshot Lane in Hampshire: it flourishes in Summer as the other Ferns
do, and the leaves decay in Winter, but the root continues long.

Nature and Virtues.] The roots are hot and dry, but not so hot as the other
Ferns; the root, especially the heart thereof, boiled or stamped and taken with
some convenient liquor, is good for those that are bruised by falls, dry
beaten, or wounded, for which cause it is used in wound drinks: it is reputed
to dissolve clotted blood in any inward part of the body, and that it can drive
it out by the wound: The young sprigs at their first coming forth are good for
all the said purposes, and to be put into Balsoms, Oils, and Plasters and
Unguents for wounds, punches, and the like,

Fig-wort, Vide Throat-wort.

Filipendula, Vide Dropwort.

Dill. Anethum.
IT grows up with one stalk, Fennel, that it is often mistaken for it; yet
the leaves are harder and thicker then Fennel, of a stronger and more
unpleasant smell, and has smaller Umbels of yellow flowers, and the seeds are
flatter and thinner then Fennel seed, and not of so pleasant a taste, the root
dies every year.

Names.] It is called in Latin Anethum, in English Dill.

Place and Time.] It is sown in Gardens, and being once sown, if the seeds be
suffered to shed, it needs no more sowing: it flowers in July, and seeds in
August.

Nature and Virtues.] Gerrard says it is dry in the beginning of the second
degree, and hot in the end thereof. Parkinson says it is hot in the third
degree, and dry in the second; an herb of Mercury; some say that it increases
milk in women's breasts, though many Authors deny it: it is good to expel Wind
and provoke Urine, ease pains in the body, and stay Vomiting; it strengthens
the Brain, stays Looseness, and stirs up lust, being boiled in Wine and drunk;
but taken in too much quantity, it dulls the sight: it digesteth raw and
viscous humors, and eases pains of wind. The oil is good to dissolve
Imposthumes, to procure sleep, and warm the Brain, Stomach, and Belly, the
parts being anointod therewith.

See further in Adam in Eden: by W. Coals,

Dittander, or Pepperwort. Lepidium.
IT has long broad sharp pointed leaves of a light blueish green color dented
about the edges, a round and tough stalk, a foot and a half high, having diverse
branches, and little white flowers, after which comes small seed in little
heads.

Names.] It is called in Latin Lepidium, and Piperitis.

Place and Time.] It grows naturally in many places of this land, in low
grounds, as in the Marshes by Rochester in Kent: it flowers about July.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the third degree, of a sharp taste,
it has a cleansing quality, and is a Martial plant: The leaves being made into
an ointment with Hogs suet, or bruised and applied to the place, helps the
Sciatica, Hip-Gout, and pain in the Joints, the part being afterward bathed
with Wine and Oil, and wrapped in Wool or Lambs Skins: some women give the
juice of Dittander, a spoonful or two in Ale to women in Travail to procure
easy delivery; it helps to take away the scars of Burning, Scabs, and scars in
the body, and cleanses discolorings of the Skin.

Docks. Rumex.
THere are many kinds of Docks, as the red Dock and Bloodwort, but they are
all so well known, I shall forbear any further description.

Names.] Its called in Latin Lapathum, and Rumex, and Bloodwort Lapathum
Sanguineum.

Their places and time of growth is very well known.

Nature and Virtues.] They are cold and dry generally, yet herbs of Jove, and
therefore good to strengthen the Liver and cleanse the Blood, especially
Bloodwort; they are good to cool hot Livers, and the red Dock root is good
against the yellow Jaundies: The root does also provoke Urine, and the Terms,
and expells Gravel out of the Bladder. The decoction of the seed helps
wamblings in the Stomach, and stops Fluxes. The distilled water cleanses the
Skin from the Morphew and Freckles.

Dodder of Time, or Epithymum.
DOdder shoots strings or threads out of the ground at first, grows or
fastneth: these strings have no leaves, but wind themselves thick about the
plant they lay hold on, ready sometimes to strangle it; after they have gotten
good hold they break off at bottom, and receive nourishment from the plant,
partaking of its nature; it puts forth clusters of small husks or heads, which
send forth small whitish flowers, and afterward small pale colored flat seed,
and twice as big as Poppey seed.

Names.] Dodder is called in Shops Cuscuta; but that which grows upon Time
Epithymum; it grows also upon Nettles, Flax, Fern, Savory, Tares, and other
Plants: that which grows upon Tares, the Husbandmen call Hellweed, because they
cannot destroy it.

Places and Time.] That of Time and Flax grow rarely in England, but those of
Nettles and Fern do: It flowers in July and August.

Nature and Virtues.] Dodders do partake of the nature of the Plant on which
they grow; and therefore Dodder of Time is hot and dry in the third degree,
whose virtues follow: It purges Choler and Phlegm, and therefore is good
against Melancholy, hardness of the Spleen, Madness, Faintings, and the
Quartane Ague, windiness, stopping of the Kidneys, Itch, Leprosy, Ulcers, and
the French Pox: It opens the Gall, cleanses the Blood, and is good against the
Jaundies, and strengthens the Liver and Spleen, and is good against all
hypocondriack passions. Dodder of Nettles and Broom provokes Urine, and the
other Dodders participate of the nature of the Plant whereon they grow, and
therefore have the same Virtues: so that Mr. Culpepper was besides the saddle
in attributing them all to the dominion of Saturn.

See more of this in the Expert Doctors Dispensatory: written by P. Morellus.

See more of this in Adam in Eden, by Will. Coals.

Dog-toothed Violet, or Corral-wort. Dentaria.
IT shoots forth one or two winged leaves upon a brownish foot-stalk,

Names.] It is called in Latin Dentaria, in English Corral-wort, and
Dog-toothed Violet.

Place and Time.] It has been found growing in Sussex, and about Croyden in
Surrey, and many other places: they flower in April and May, and are gone
before July.

Nature and Virtues.] The roots are drying, and binding, and do also
strengthen; it provokes Urine, and cleanses the Bladder of gravel: it should be
a Saturnine herb, yet Culpepper ascribes it to the Moon, it helps gripings in
the Belly and sides, and inward hurts in the Breast, Lungs, and Bowels: a dram
of the root taken in powder in red Wine, and used often, it stays Fluxes,
provided they proceed not from Choler, and is good for the Dropsy and
Ruptures, the same dose being given in the distilled water of Horse-tail; and
the decoction of the herb helps Maladies of the Teeth, the mouth being gargled
therewith, and so does the dry root being held between the Teeth, it
consolidates green wounds, and dryes up the moisture in Ulcers, causing them
thereby the sooner to heal, the decoction of the herb being applied unto them.

Doves-foot, or Cranes-Bill. Geranium Columbinum.
IT grows up with diverse small round pale green leaves,

Names.] It is called Geranium Columbinum, Gruinalis, and Gruinum; in English
Doves-foot, and Cranes-Bill.

Place and Time.] It grows frequently in pasture grounds in many places of this
Land, and flourishes most part of the Summer.

Nature and Virtues.] Doves-foot is cold and dry, with a binding quality,
rather Saturnine then Martial. It is good to expel Wind, and the Stone and
Gravel in the Kidneys, the decoction being drunk, which is also good for inward
Wounds, Ulcers, and Bruises, to dissolve congealed blood: The powder of the
herb and root taken in red Wine first and last, many days together, cures
Ruptures, young or old; in aged persons, mix with it the powder of nine red
Snails dried in an Oven; and being made into a Salve it heals outward Sores,
Ulcers, and Fistula's, and being bruised and applied to green Wounds, it
quickly heals them.

Ducks-meat. Aquae Lenticula.
IT needs no description being well known.

Names.] Aquae Lenticula, and Lens palustris, the Latins term it; in English
Grains, and Ducks meat.

Place and Time.] It grows on the tops of standing waters and ponds, and will
cover them quite over, if the Ducks meet not with it.

Nature and Virtues.] It is cold and moist, ascribed to the Moon and Cancer, it
is good in a pultis with Barley meal to ease the pains of the hot Gout, and
cool inflammations and St. Anthonies fire, and the swelling of the Cods, the
distilled water helps inward inflammations, redness of the Eyes, and is good in
Burning Fevers, and it eases pains of the head, coming of heat, the fresh herb
being applied to the forehead.

Dragons. Serpentaria.
THese are very well known in Gardens, and the stalks are speckled so like a
Snake, that he that knows one, may soon know the other.

Names.] It is called in Latin Serpentaria, Bisaria Colubrina, and
Dracunculus; in English Dragons.

Place and Time.] They are only planted in Gardens with us, they flower in
July, and the Berries are ripe in September.

Nature and Virtues.] It is a Martial herb, hot and dry, astringent, biting and
bitter in taste; it is somewhat of the nature of Cuckow-pintle, both incite to
Venery: it is good against Coughs, Catarrs, Convulsions, and Cramps, it
consumes gross humors, and cleanses the inward parts: the distilled water
helps Freckles, Morphew, and Sun-burning, and clears the sight, the juice helps
the pin and web in the Eye: An ointment thereof is good in Wounds, Ulcers,
Cankers, and Pollipus; the green leaves are good for Ulcers, green Wounds, and
venomous bitings: the distilled water is good against the Plague, Poison, and
pestilential Fevers, being drunk with Treacle or Mithridate. Women with child
are not to meddle with this herb.

Dropwort. Filipendula.
IT shoots forth long winged leaves,

Names.] Filipendula is the Latin name, and it is also called in English
Filipendula, and Dropwort.

Place and Time.] It grows in many places of this Land by hedges sides: they
flower in June and July, and the seed is ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] It is an herb of Venus, says Culpepper, but it is
contrary to her nature, being hot and dry in the third degree, opening,
cleansing, and a little binding; it is good to help the Strangury, or pissing
by drops, to expel the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder, being taken in a
decoction with white Wine, and a little Honey: it provokes women's Courses, and
is good against the Dropsy, Jaundies, and Falling Sickness. An Electuary of
the roots breaks Wind, helps diseases of the Lungs, the Cough, and brings away
Phlegm; the knots of the roots in powder is good for Fistula's and old Sores,
and allayes the swellings of the Piles or Hemorrhoides,

Elder. Sambucus.
THis is very well known, therefore I shall describe another kind called Dwarf
Elder.

Dwarf Elder rises in the Spring with a four square rough hairy stalk, four
foot high, or more; the leaves are narrower then those of the Elder Tree, but
very like them: the flowers stand also in Umbels like the other, being white
mixed with purple, but of a sweeter scent then Elder; after which come blackish
Berries, full of juice, wherein is contained hard kernels or seeds: the root
dies every year.

Names.] The common Elder Tree is called in Latin Sambucus, the dwarf Elder,
Humilis Sambucus, and Ebulus; and in English is known by the names of Walwort,
Danewort, and Dwarf Elder.

Place and Time.] There is scarce a Town or Village, but the common Elder grows
in its Hedges; the Dwarf Elder grows wild in many places of England,
particularly in the grounds of Mr. Hind at Hedsor in Buckinghamshire. The
Elder Flowers in June, the fruit is usually ripe in August; the Dwarf Elder is
somewhat later.

Nature and Virtues.] Elder is hot and dry in the second and third degree, the
Danewort something hotter, both under Mars; it is profitable for the Dropsy,
and to remove watery humors between the skin and the flesh; the young buds
boiled in broth purges Phlegm and Choler; the inner bark is commended for the
yellow Jaundies; medicines prepared of the bark opens obstructions: six drops
of the spirit of Elder salt taken in broth is good in the Scurvy. The decoction
of the root in wine cures the bitings of venomous Beasts, and mad Dogs,
mollifies hardness of the Mother, opens the Veins, and provokes the Terms, the
berries work the same effects, the juice of the green leaves helps
inflammations of the Eyes: there is hardly a disease from the head to the foot
but Elder is effectual for it; it is good for Melancholy, Madness, the Falling
Sickness, Palsy, Apoplexy, catharrs, Toothache; Deafness, diseases of the
Lungs, Mouth, and Throat, Hoarseness, Ptisick, sore Breasts, swoonings and
Faintings, Gout, Worms, Stone, Plague, Pox, Measles, and diseases of the
Stomach; Cum multis aliis, etc.

The Dwarf Elder is stronger then the other, for all the said purposes, and
has besides particular virtues, viz. the juice of the root cures the Kings
Evil and Quinzy, being applied to the Throat, and being put into the Fundament
stays it from falling down. The root being steeped in Wine all night, helps
Agues, a dram of the seeds in powder with a little Cinnamon taken in the
decoction of ground Pine, is good against the French Disease, Gout, Sciatica,
and joint Aches, by drawing away peccant humors: An Ointment made of the green
leaves with May Butter, mollifies starkness of the Nerves and Sinews, and
remedies outward Pains, Aches, Cramps, and Lameness.

See further in Adam in Eden: by W. Coals.

Elecampane. Enula.
IT grows up with a long hairy stalk,

Names.] Enula Campana, is the Latin Appellation.

Place and Time.] It delights in Meadows and fertile ground, flowers in June
and July, and the leaves fall in Autumn.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the third degree, a Solar herb, a
great friend to the Breast and Lungs, and a helper of shortness of Breath, it
opens the Liver and Spleen, and is good against poisons and venomous bitings,
and helps Cramps, Ruptures, and inward bruises, the decoction of the root being
drunk: the roots candied, warm a cold Stomach, helps the Cough and Wheesings:
An ointment made of the roots with Hogs grease, and a little flower of
Brimstone, is an excellent remedy for the Itch. The root chewed, fastens loose
Teeth, and preserves them from rotting. The distilled water of the green leaves
makes the face fair, cleanses the skin, and helps the Morphew. The decoction
thereof provokes Urine and the Terms, and cleanses the Breast and Lungs.

Elme-Tree. Ulmus.
THis Tree is so well known for its Timber, it needs no description; but we
proceed to the Physical use of it.

Names,] Vlmus the Latins call it.

Nature and Virtues.] The Leaves and Bark are moderately hot, having a
cleansing and glewing quality, and I believe Saturnine.

The water in the bladders upon the leaves are said to be good to help
burstness, clothes being wet in the water and applied, and the parts bound up
with a Truss, it also cleanses the Skin: The decoction of the Bark of the Root
softens hard swellings; the decoction of the middle bark is good to bathe
places burnt or scalded, and being boiled in wine and some syrrup of Mulberries
added to it, causes the pallat of the mouth to ascend, being fallen: the
decoction in water helps the Dandriff, Scurfs, and Leprosy. The leaves heal
green Wounds, and the water of the bladders that grow upon the leaves, being
put in a glass and set in Horse-dung for five and twenty days, the mouth of
the glass being stopped, and a lay of salt underneath; so that the feces may
settle, and the water become very clear, is a sovereign Balsome for green
wounds, being applied with sofe Tents; it may be set in the ground, if you be
not provided of Dung. An Unguent being made of Elm Bark, by boiling it to that
consistence, is a sovereign remedy to allay the pains of the Gout.

Endive. Endivia.
MAster Coals comprehends the Succory, Cichoreum, and Cichorea in Latin, and
the Endive Endivia; which Endive bears a larger leaf then Succory, and the root
perishes every year: it bears blue flowers and seed like Succory.

The names I have given you in the Description.

Place and Time.] It is an inhabitant only in Gardens; if it be sown in the
Spring it quickly flowers and seeds.

Nature and Virtues.] It is cold and dry, cleansing, Jovial, says Mr.
Culpepper; but I judge rather under Venus: it cools the sharpness of Urine, and
cleanses the uretory parts: The decoction of it, or the distilled water is good
in hot Agues and Inflammations to mittigate the heat; it helps the great heat
of the Stomach and Liver, stoppings of the Gall, and Urine, lack of sleep in
hot burning Fevers; being outwardly applied, it allayes Swellings, Pushes, and
Pimples, and is good to wash pestiferous sores and Ulcers.

See further in The expert Doctors Dispensatory: by P. Morellus.

Eringo, or Sea-holly. Eringium.
THe Sea-holly comes up with tender leaves at the first, green color, and
stand every one upon a long foot stalk, after comes a long crested stalk,
having several joints beset with leaves sharp and prickly, it bears round
prickly herds, out of which shoot blue flowers with whitish threads in the
middle; the root grows very long, and is about the bigness of a man's little
finger, having a pleasant taste, brownish without, but white within, with some
pith in the middle.

Names.] The Greeks call it (...), and the Latins Eringium, the Shop Eringus,
and Eringo; in English we call in Sea-holly.

Place and Time.] It grows about the Sea sides in most Countries of England; as
upon the Sea Sands by Yarmouth in Norfolk, and about Shuberry in Essex: it
flowers about the latter end of Summer, and seeds about a month after.

Nature and Virtues.] Sea-holly is temperate, of a cleansing drying nature, a
Venerial plant; the roots confected, stir up the affection to Venery, and are a
restorative against the consuming of old age: being decocted in Wine, they open
obstructions of the Spleen and Liver, provoke Urine, expel the Stone, and move
the Terms, helps the yellow Jaundies, Dropsy, pain in the Loins, and wind
Chollick. The roots bruised and applied to the Throat, helps the Kernels there,
and heals bitings of Serpents, being taken inwardly, and applied to the place;
and if the roots be boiled in Hogs Lard, and applied to thorns in the flesh, it
draws them out, and heals the place: the juice of the leaves helps Imposthumes
in the Ears. The distilled water of the whole herb being young, drives away
Melancholy, and helps Quartane and Quotidian Agues; the young tender shoots
may be eaten fresh, or pickled, they are a good Venerial Sallet.

See more of this in the Art of Simpling: written by W. Coals.

Eyebright. Ocularia.
IT is a small low herb, rising seldom above a span high,

Names.] Euphrasia is both a Greek and Latin name for it; it is also called in
Latin Opthalmica, and Ocularia, in English Eyebright.

Places and Time.] It grows plentifully in many places of this Land, by Hedge
rows, and on Hills sides: it grows in the High way between Gravesend and
Rochester, and in the Fields about Gravesend: They flower in August, which is
the best time to gather it, before it seeds.

Nature and Virtues.] It is a Solar herb, hot and dry, it is excellent to
clarify and preserve the sight from dimness, either the powder of the dry herb
being used; or the juice of the green plant: the distilled water clears the
dimness of the Eyes, either being dropped into the Eyes, or drunk in Wine or
Broth: a Conserve of the Flowers works the like effects, being eaten. It
restores a decayed Memory, and helps a weak Brain and Memory, being used any
of the aforesaid ways; if it were tunned up with Bear or Ale, it will work the
like effects. Some Authors write that Birds make use of it to repair their
sight; and Arnoldus says, that it did restore their sight who had been blind
a long while.

Fern. Filix.
ITs very well known; there is accounted a Male and Female, and Water Fern, or
Osmond Royal.

Names.] The Latin name for Fern is Filix, the Water Fern, Osmunda Regalis,
and St. Christophers Herb.

Place and Time.] Fern grows too plentiful in many places, and can hardly be
rooted out where it has possession: the seeds are small, trebble pointed,
black and shining, and may be gotten on Midsummer-eve at night, at which time I
have gathered it my self.

The Water Fern grows by wet Ditiches sides, bogs, and watrish places.

Nature and Virtues.] Fern is hot and dry, bitter, and somewhat astringent, a
Mercurial Plant: the roots of Fern boiled in Mead, kills worms in the Belly,
and abates swelling and hardness of the Spleen, and being bruised and boiled in
Oil or Hogs Grease, they make a good Ointment to heal Wounds and Bruises, and
cases the Chollick, and Diseases of the Spleen, especially those of the Water
Fern, A bath made of the leaves, is good to strengthen the Sinews: the powder
of the root dryes up the watery humors of Ulcers. A diet Drink being made of it
with other Capillary Herbs, is good for the Rickets.

The water Fern is effectual for Ruptures, an Ointment being made thereof; and
the decoction of the root in white Wine provokes Urine, and opens the uretory
passages.

Feathersew. Parthenium.
IT grows up with many large green leaves, very much torn, or cut about the
edges, the stalks are hard and round, beset with smaller leaves; the flowers
stand fingle, upon several foot stalks at the cop, consisting of final white
leaves standing round about a yellow thrum in the middle, the root is tough,
hard, and short, having many fibers thereat; the whole Plant of a strong scent,
and bitter taste.

Names.] Parthenium, from the Greek (...), and Matricaria, and Febrisuga in
Latin.

Place and Time.] It grows by diverse Walls and Hedges, and frequently in
Gardens; they continue in flower the gratest part of Summer.

Nature and Virtues.] Featherfew is hot and dry in the third degree, having a
quality of cleansing and opening; its temperature, scent, and taste attributes
it to Mars, but its virtues are ascribed to Venus; it is an excellent herb for
women's Diseases, for all Diseases of the Mother: the decoction being drunk, or
the fume set over, helps fits of the Mother, it drives down the Courses,
expells the dead Child and Afterbirth. The juice, with the juice of Motherwort
taken in old Ale, with a little gross Pepper, is good to prevent fits of the
Mother. The decoction with Sugar or HOney, helps the Cough and short
Windedness, and cleanses the Reins and Bladder, so does the powder of the herb,
and expells Melancholy, helps the swimming of the Head, and windiness in the
Stomach, and is good against the Dropsy; it is good for cold and moist bodies,
to stir up the procreative virtue, but it is naught for hot and dry bodies; its
a good remedy for such as have taken too much opium; being fried with Oil and
Wine, it eases the griping pains of wind being applied to the Stomach and
Belly. The distilled water cleanses the Skin.

Fellwort, Vide Gentian.

Fennel. Feniculus.
FEnnel is well known, its Latin name Feniculus, Gardens are his habitation;
he flowers in June and July, and the seed is ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] Most affirm Fennel to be hot in the third degree, and dry
in the first, and according to Gerrard, the seed is hot and dry in the third
degree; it is a Mercurial herb, says Culpepper, but I suppose rather Solar: it
is used to be boiled with Fish and other viscous meats to digest their crude
and phlegmatic qualities, and the seed is used in bread to break Wind, and
strengthen the breath. The distilled water cleanses the Eyes, being dropped
therein, and the condensate juice cleanses them from Mists and Films. It is
good to increase milk in Nurses, it provokes Urine, and eases the pains of the
Stone: The leaves, or rather the seeds, boiled in water, stay the Hiccock,
helps loathings of the Stomach of sick persons, and allayeth the heat thereof,
and is a remedy for such as have eaten poisonous herbs, and against bitings by
Serpents. The seed and root opens obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Gall,
helps shortness of breath. The roots in diet drink or broth, cleanses the
Blood, opens the Liver, provokes Urine, and helps the evil color of the face
after long Sickness, and causes a good habit throughout the body; the juice
kills worms in the Ears, being dropped therein. The ordinary Fennel is stronger
then the sweet Fennel, and therefore better for the purposes aforesaid.

Fennel Giant. Ferulago.
THis plant grows in Cyrene, Ammoniacum. which is hot and dry in the second
degree, which is good to dissolve Tumors, and taken inwardly it purges Phlegm,
opens stoppings of the Liver, helps Astma's and stoppings of breath, it
provokes Urine and the Terms, eases the Gout and Sciatica, softens Corns and
hard Swellings.

See further in Adam in Eden: written by Will. Celes.

Sow-Fennel, or Hogs-Fennel. Peucedanum.
IT has diverse branched stiff stalks,

Names.] Peucedanus, and Peucedanum, are the Latin names; in English
Hogs-Fennel, Sow-Fennel, Hore-strange, and Hore-strong, Sulpher-wort, or
Brimstone-wort.

Places and Time.] It grows in salt low Marshes, as by Whitstable and
Feaversham in Kent, and many other places: they flower and seed toward the end
of Summer.

Nature and Vertues] It is a Mercurial herb, hot in the second degree, and dry
in the beginning of the third. The juice dissolved in Wine, and dropped into
the Ears, helps such griefs thereof as proceed from a cold cause; the same used
with Vinegar and Rose Water, or the juice with a little Euphorbium put to the
Nose, helps the Phrenzy, Lethargy, Giddiness, falling Sickness, long and
inveterate Headache, the Palsy, Sciatica, Cramp, and generally all diseases
of the Nerves and Sinews, if it be used with Oil and Vinegar, as says
Dioscorides, and Gallen: the juice dissolved in Wine, or put in an Egg, is
good for the Cough, shortness of Breath, and wind in the body, it gently
purges the Belly, dissolves wind and hardness of the Spleen, gives ease to
women that have hard Labor, and eases pains of the Reins, Bladder, and Womb:
the juice put into a hollow tooth, eases the pain, and so does the root but
more slowly. The powder of the dried root cleanses foul Ulcers, and removes
splinters or broken bones out of the flesh, dryes up inveterate Sores, and is
of a great force in green Wounds.

Fig-wort. Vide Throat-wort.

Flax. Linum.
THis needs no description, good Housewifes know it well enough; it is called
in Latin Linum, which is somewhat near our English word Linen, fine linen
cloth being made thereof: it flowers from Midsummer till August, it is sown in
diverse places of this Land.

Nature and Virtues.] The seed thereof, which we call Linseed, which is only
used in Physic, is hot in the first degree, and in a mean between moist and
dry; but Dodoneus says it has a superfluous moisture and causes wind; and
that the Inhabitants of Middleborough in Zealand, for want of Corn, eat
thereof, to the great prejudice of their healths; but the seed being boiled in
water, and some honey put to it, is said to case the Chollick, Stitches, and
Inflammations, I fancy not that medicine; but the seed is a good ingredient in
pultisses with Fenugreek and Mallows, to mollisie and discuss Tumors in any
part of the body; and being used with Myrrh and Rozen, it helps Ruptures and
swellings of the cods: the decoction thereof in wine is good to stay the
spreading of silthy Sores, being used thereto; and being mixed with honey, or
suct, and wax, and applied, it helps hard swellings under the Ears and Throat,
and remedies spots and discolorings of the skin.

Fig Tree. Ficus.
THe Fig Tree seldom grows in England, but as it is planted against a Wall; yet
at the house of Rowland Hind Esquire, at Hedsor in Buckinghamshire, grows, or
lately did grow, a Fig Tree in his Court, having a body as big as an ordinary
Elm or Oak, growing low, and spreading much ground wiht great Boughs.

Names.] The Greeks call the Tree (...), and the fruit (...); in Latin both
tree and fruit is called Ficus.

Place and Time.] They grow plentifully in Spain and Italy, and bear fruit both
in the Spring, and in August, and September.

Nature and Virtues.] Figs are hot and moist almost in the third degree, and
yield good nourishment; but being immoderately eaten, they engender crude
humors in the Stomach, and hurt hot Livers, and chollerick Stomachs; they are
therefore best for old phlegmatic persons: being eaten with Almonds, they
cleanse the Breast and the Lungs. A decoction of them with Hysop and Liquorish,
is good for the Cough of the Lungs, and for the Reins and Bladder, and to
recover a good colur to them that have lost it by Sickness; it also cleanses
the Womb, and is useful for the Dropsy, Quinzy, and the falling Sickness; they
are a good Antidote against the Plague, Poison, and infections Air, being
stamped together with Salt, Rue, and Nut Kernels, and eaten fasting in the
mornings: a Fig sliced and toasted, and applied to an aching Tooth, sometimes
gives ease. The decoction of the leaves is good to wash sore heads, for the
Leprosy, Morphew, and running Sores; and a syrrup made thereof is good against
Coughs, shortness of Breath, and all diseases of the Breast and Lungs.

Filberd, Vide Hazel Nut.

Fistick Nuts. Pistacia.
THis tree grows in the East Indies, Persia, and Arabia, and the hot parts of
Italy,

Names.] It is called in Latin Pistacia, and Pistacium, in English the fruit
is called Pistacies, and Fistick Nuts.

Nature and Virtues.] They are under the dominion of Jupiter, of temperature
hot and moist; they increase seed, and stir up Venery, being eaten condited, or
otherwise, they recover strength in those bodies which are in Consumptions, and
are grateful to the Stomach; they are good against bitings of venomous
creatures; they open obstructions of the Liver, Chest, and Lungs, concocting
and digesting raw humors that offend them; they are a little astringent,
strengthening the Liver and Stomach, used either in meats or medicines; they
remove Sand and Gravel out of the Reins and Kidneys, assuage their pain, and
are good for Ulcers.

Fleawort. Herba pulicaria.
ORdinary Fleawort grows up with a stalk two foot high, or more, full of
branches on every side up to the top, and at every joint grow two small, long,
and narrow whitish green leaves, at the tops of every joint stand diverse short
small scaly or chaffy heads, out of which come small whitish yellow threads,
like those of plantain, which are the bloomings or flowers; the seed is small
and shining, while it is fresh, very like Fleas, but turning black when it
grows old: the root is white, hard, and woody, perishing every year. The whole
plant is whitish, hairy, and smelling somewhat like Rozin.

Names.] Its called in Latin Herba pulicaria, and in Shops, Psyllium, in
English Fleawort.

Place and time.] It grows with us no where but in Gardens, but there is
another kind much like the former, which grows in Fields near the Seacoasts:
they flower in July, or thereabouts with us, but in their natural Countries all
the Summer.

Nature and Virtues.] The seed of Fleawort which is chiefly used in Physic, is
cold in the second degree, and temperate in moisture and dryness, according to
Gallen and Serapio: it is a Saturnine Plant. The muscilage made with Rose
water, and taken with syrrup of Violets, or a little Sugar, purges Choler and
Phlegm, is useful in burning Fevers to lenisie chirst, and dryness of the mouth
and throat; it helps also Hoarseness, Inflammations of the Breast, Lungs, and
Head, and hot pains in the joints; the muscilage of the seed in an Electuary,
with Marmalade of Quinces and Sugarcandy, has the same effects, and stays the
fluxions of hot Rheumes. The seeds dried and taken with Plantain water, stays
fluxes of the Belly, and helps the gripings thereof, caused by Chollerick
humors, or the over-working of violent Medicines: the seeds bruised, or the
herb mixed with juice of Nightshade, or Housleek oil of Roses and Vinegar,
eases the hot Gout, and hot Imposthumes; the water wherein the seeds have been
steeped, is good against St. Anthonies fire: the juice with Honey put into the
Ears, stays the running thereof, and is good for sore Breasts, being often
applied thereunto; being mixed with Hogs Grease, and applied to corrupt Sores
and Ulcers, it heals them. The muscilage of the seed made in Plantain water,
and mixed with the yolk of an Egg, or two, and a little of the Unguent
Populeon, eases the pains of the Piles and Hemorrhoides, being bound thereto.
It is not safe for cold and moist bodies.

Flixweed. Thalictrum.
FLixweed springs up with a round upright hard stalk about two foot high,
spread into many branches, whereon grow many grayish green leaves, finely
jagged like Roman Wormwood; the flowers are small, of a dark yellow color, and
grows in a spiky fashion on the tops of the spriggy branches, after which grow
long pods, with small yellowish seed in them, The root is long, weedy, and
perishes every year.

Names.] It is called in Latin Pseudonasturtium Sylvestre, Thalictrum, and
Sophia Chirurgorum.

Places and Time.] It grows by Hedge sides, High ways, upon old walls in many
places of this Land, and flowers from the beginning of June, till the end of
September.

Nature and Virtues.] Its a drying astringent Saturnine Herb; the seed drunk in
Wine or water wherein Steell has been often quenched, stops the Lask, Bloody
Flux, and all other issues of Blood: the Herb boiled, performs the same
effects; and also it consolidates Bones broken or out of Joint, from which
virtue it obtained the name of Sophia Chirurgorum: a syrrup of it may be made
to be taken inwardly for the former purposes. The juice drunk in Wine, or the
decoction of the Herb kills Worms in the Stomach and Belly, and Worms which
sometimes breed in Ulcers: the juice or bruised herb put into Ointments or
Salves, quickly heals old Sores, how foul or malignant soever they be. They
whose Stomachs cannot brook any of the former Medicines, may take the
distilled water which works the same effects, but not so effectually or
powerfully.

Fluellin, or Lluellin. Veronica Mas.
OF this plant there is a male and a female kind, called male and female
Speedwell, before the Welch-man gave it her Country name Lluellin.

The common Speedwell has diverse soft leaves about the breadth of a two pence,
of a hoary green color, a little dented about the edges, set by couples at the
joints of the hairy brownish stalks, which lean upon the ground, never standing
upright, but shooting forth roots as they lie upon the ground; at diverse joints
the flowers grow one above another at the top, and are of a blueish purple
color, sometimes white: the seed is small and blackish contained in small flat
husks. The root is fibrous.

Names] In Latin it has been called Veronica Mas, and Veronica Femina, and
Betonica Pauli; in English Male and Female Speedwel, and Paul's Betony; but the
Shentleman of Wales has given it the name of Lluellin, because it saved her
Nose which the French Pox had almost gotten from her.

Place and Time.] They grow upon dry Banks and Wood sides, and in sandy grounds
in many places of this Land: They flower in June and July, and the seed is ripe
in August.

Nature and Virtues.] The Male is temperately hot and dry, the Female cooling
and drying; the Male is most common and of greatest use: they are both good
wound Herbs, a Salve being made therewith, with wax, oil, and Turpentine: it
also hinders the fretting of old Ulcers, stays Bleeding of Wounds, dissolves
Swellings, it strengthens the Heart, and expells Poison and Venom from thence;
it strengthens the Memory, eases swimmings and pains in the Head. The decoction
given in Wine, it cleanses the Blood, and helps the Leprosy, as is said. A
dram of it in powder in its own distilled water, helps the Cough, and diseases
of the Lungs and Breast. It opens the Liver and Spleen, cleanses Ulcers in the
Reins and Bladder: the distilled water is good to wash Wounds and Sores, and
helps Morphew, Scabs, and Freckles, a little Coper as being dissolved therein,
and bathed therewith. The Female Speedwel, or Fluellin, bruised and applied
with Barley Meal, helps watring Eyes caused by hot Rheumes flowing from the
Head, it stops the overflowing of the Terms, and all Fluxes of Blood, it helps
the inward parts which need consolidating and strengthening, the leaves being
sod in broth with a Hen, or piece of Veal. It is effectual to heal green
Wounds, and to cleanse and heal old soul Ulcers, and fretting Cancers. the
juice and decoction of the herb taken inwardly, and the herb used outwardly.

See more of this in The Art of Simpling: written by W. Coals.

Fox. Gloves. Digitalis.
IT is known so commonly almost to every Child in my Country of Hampshire,
that I shall forbear to make any large description of it.

Names.] Authors call it by many strange Latin names, as Digitalis, Virga,
Regia, Campanula silvestris, and many other affected names: We in English call
it Fox-Gloves, and in Hampshire it is very well known by the name of Poppers;
because if you hold the broad end of the flower close between your finger and
thumb, and blow at the small head, as into a bladder, till it be full of wind,
and then suddenly strike on it with your other hand, it will give a great crack
or pop.

Place and Time.] They grow generally in dry grounds, and under Hedges sides in
most Countries of England.

Nature and Virtues.] It is a Venerial Plant, says Culpepper, but he forgets
his Logic when he ascribed all bitter plants to Mars.

Fox-Gloves are bitter in taste, hot and dry, having a cleansing quality. The
Italians call this Herb Aralda, and use this proverb concerning it, Aralda,
tutte piaghe salda, Aralda salveth all Sores: they use it to heal green Wounds,
cutting the leaves and applying them; they use also the juice to cleanse and
dry up old Sores: it is found helpful for the Kings Evil, the flowers stamped
with fresh Butter and applied, or the juice in an Ointment; the bruised leaves
are also good being applied, but not so powerful; being boiled in water or
wine, it consumes thick phlegm, and viscous humors in the Chest and Stomach. A
syrrup may be made thereof with Sugar or honey for the same purpose, and to
cleanse the body of clammy humors, and open the Liver and Spleen; by later
experience it has been found to cure many of the falling Sickness, taking the
decoction of two handfuls thereof with four ounces of Pollipody of the Oak
bruised. Mr. Culpepper magnifies an Ointment thereof for a Scabby Head.

Fumitory. Fumaria.
IT is a tender sappy Plant, sending forth from one square slender stalk
(leaning downwards) many branches two or three foot long, with fine jagged
leaves of a pale blueish or Seagreen color; the flowers stand like a long
spike one above another on the tops of the branches, of a reddish purple
color, with whitish bellies commonly; yet in Cornwall it bears perfect white
flowers: it bears a small black seed contained in small round husks,; the root
is yellow and small, full of juice while it is green, but quickly perishes with
the ripe seed.

Names.] The Greeks call it (...), and (...), the Latins, Fumus terrae, and
Fumaria, in English Fumitory.

Places and Time.] It grows in Corn Fields almost every where, as well as in
Gardens: It flowers for the most part in May, and the seed is ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] It is a bitter herb, which shows it to be hot, and is
hot in the first degree, and dry in the second; it gently purges melancholy
and salt humors, opens and cleanses the Entrails, and strengthens those parts;
it purges chollerick humors by Urine, and helps soul diseases of the skin, as
the Itch, etc. arising from adust bumours, and the French Pox; it prevails in
chollerick Fevers, the Jaundies and Quartain Agues, and chronical diseases
arising from stoppings of the viscerous parts: three or four ounces of the
distilled water drunk morning and evening, cures the yellow Jaundies, and is
good against the Itch and Leprosy: A dram or two of London Treacle, and a
scruple of Bole-Armonick taken in two ounces of the water; is good in the
Pestilence; it provokes the Terms, and dissolves congealed blood: The decoction
helps the Gout, the feet being bathed therewith. The distilled Water with some
honey of Roses, helps Sores and Ulcers of the Mouth; the juice dropped into the
Eyes clears the sight, and the juice having a little Gum-Arabick dissolved
therein, and applied to the Eyelids where the hair has been pulled off, will
keep it from growing again: the juice mixed with the juice of Docks, Oximel,
and Vinegar, cures the Morphew; and a bath made of the same with Barley, Bran,
Mallows, Violets, Nep, and Dock Roots, cures Scabs, Itch, and Leprosy, Wheals,
and Pimples in the Face or elsewhere.

Fursbush, or Furs.
THese are so well known, they need no description.

Names.] In Norfolk they are called Whinns, in some Countries Goss, and in
Hampshire Furs.

Place and Time.] They plentifully grow in dry barren Heaths, and sandy
Grounds, and flower in the middle of Summer, and are seldom without flowers at
any time of the year.

Nature and Virtues.] They are under the dominion of Mars, hot and dry, the
flowers are effectual to open obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and the
decoction thereof is good against the yellow Jaundies, provokes Urine, and
cleanses the Kidneys and Bladder from the Gravel and Stone.

Galanga.
THis plant grows in the East Indies, and China, from whence it is brought to
us.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry almost in the third degree, it is
profitable in all cold Diseases of the Stomach; it helps concoction, expells
wind from it, being boiled in Wine and taken morning and evening; it helps a
moist brain and the Vertigo, trembling of the Heart, and knawings of the
Stomach; it cleanses the passages of the Urine, provokes Venery, helps
conception, and remedies cold and windy distempers of the Womb, being drunk
with the water or juice of Plantain; it stops the bloody Flux, and strengthens
nature, helps the trembling of the Heart, and comforts the brain: half a dram
of the powder thereof is the dose at one time, to be taken in the morning, or
an hour before meat.

Garlic. Allium.
IF you smell ones breath that has eaten it, you may know it by the scent.

Names.] Allium the Latins call it, and Gallen Theriaca Rusticorum,
Countreymans Treacle; in English Garlic.

It is planted in small cloves in Gardens, which grow to great heads by the
latter end of Summer.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the fourth degree, a Martial Plant,
it heats the body being eaten, digesting and consuming tough and clammy
humors, opens obstructions, remedies cold poisons, and the bitings of venomous
Beasts; it helps old Coughs, provokes Urine, kills Worms, breaks Wind, helps
the Chollick and Dropsy, proceeding of cold; it stirs up natural heat, and
helps a cold and moist Stomach; it is good against the biting of mad Dogs, for
shortness of breath, the cold Headache, Consumption of the Lungs, and pissing
of Blood; being tempered with Honey, and the parts anointed with it, cures
scabbed Heads, Scurff, Morphew and Tetters: the Ashes strewed in Ulcers heals
them, being applied with Figs and Commyn, it cures the biting of a Shrew-Mouse.

Vices.] Many are the Virtues of Garlic, yet accompanied with some Vices; it
is hurtful for young men and chollerick persons, for women with Child, and
such as give suck; and being eaten raw too liberally, it dims the sight,
offends the Stomach, and burns the Blood; it is good for old, cold, and
phlegmatic persons: the best way of preparing it is to boil it well, either in
milk, or otherwise, and eat it with Oil, or Vinegar.

Gentian, or Felwort, Gentiana.
MAster Coals reckons six sorts hereof to grow within Great Britain, Master
Culpepper but two, which I shall only describe.

The first hollow leaved Felwort, or English Gentian has small long roots,
deep in the ground, and abiding all Winter, having stalks of a brownish green
color, with long narrow dark green leaves set by couples up to the top: the
flowers are long and hollow, of a purple color, with five corners.

The other smaller sort has many stalks not a foot high, with several
branches; the leaves very like those of the lesser Centaury, of a whitish green
color; the flowers are blue, growing on the tops of the stalks: the root is
small and fibrous.

Names.] Gentiana in Latin, and Gentianella the lesser sort; in English,
Gentian, Felwort, Bitterwort, and Baldmony.

Place and Time.] The first grows in diverse places of Kent, as about
Southfleet, and Long Field near Gravesend; so likewise does the other, and upon
Barton Hills in Bedfordshire, and not far from St. Albans, upon a piece of
waste chalky ground as you go out of Dunstable way toward Gothambury: They
flower in August, and the seed is ripe in September,

Nature and Virtues.] The root which is chiefly in use, is hot and dry in the
third degree, a Martial plant; it strengthens the Heart and Stomach, resists
poison, putrefaction, and the Pestilence, and helps digestion; the powder of
the dry roots helps bitings of mad Dogs and Venomous Beasts, opens the Liver,
and procures an Appetite: Wine wherein the herb has been steeped being drunk,
refreshes such as are overwearied by Travel, or are lame in their Joints by
cold or bad Lodgings; it is good for bruises, and to help stitches and pains in
the sides: the decoction is good against Cramps and Convulsions, provokes
Urine, and the Terms; so that it is not to be given to women with Child: it
dissolves congealed Blood, is good in the Dropsy, strangling of the Mother,
drives down the dead Child, and Afterbirth, helps falling Sickness, Worms,
Cough, and shortness of Breath; it expells Wind, and is profitable in all cold
Diseases, the juice or powder of the root heals green Wounds, and cleanses and
heals up fretting rotten Ulcers, Fistula's and Cancers. The root is used by
Chyrurgions to enlarge the orifice of a Sore. The herb applied helps swellings
of the Kings Evil, and the juice clears the sight, being dropped into the Eyes;
it helps the bots in Cattle, and the swelling of a Cows Vdder, being bitten by
a Venomous Creature, the place being stroaked, and fomented with the decoction
of this Herb.

Germander. Trissago.
COmmon Germander shoots forth many branches leaning toward the Ground;
whereupon grow small leaves snipt about the edges like the teeth of a Saw: the
flowers are purple, small, and stand close to the leaves on the tops of the
branches, the root is slender and stringy, which spreading round about, causes
it to be very plentiful where it is once set.

Names.] Chamaedrys is the Greek name, and Latin name used in Shops, yet its
called by some Trissago, and Quercula minor, because the leaves resemble an Oak
leaf; in English it is called Germander, and English Treacle.

Place, and Time.] It is planted in Gardens usually with us, yet grows also
wild: It flowers about June and July.

Nature and Virtues.] Germander is hot and dry almost in the third degree, of
subtle parts, and has a cutting quality; it is a Mercurial Herb: the leaves of
Germander, and the seeds of Nigella quilted in a Cap, helps Catharrs and
distillations of cold Rheumes, being worn on the heads of them that are
troubled therewith. The Herb used with Honey cleanses foul Ulcers; the juice
mixed with Honey, helps dimness and moistness of the Eyes; the Herb being
bruised and applied, is good against venom and venomous bitings. The decoction
of the green Herb helps distempers of the Spleen, pains of the side, provokes
Urine, the Course, and used with Honey, it is good for Coughs; it quickens the
spirits, helps diseases of the Brain, falling Sickness, Lethargy, Palsy, and
Gout: a dram of the seed in powder is good for the yellow Jaundies, purging it
by Urine, and kills Worms.

Stinking Gladwin, Vide Orris, it is a kind of Flower De luce, which see in
Orris.

Ginger. Zinziber.
THis Indian Root is hot and dry in the third degree, the Latin name is
Zinziber; it is good for a cold Stomach, it warmeth it, and expells Wind there
and in the Bowels, and helps Digestion; it likewise corrects the rawness of
the Stomach, and clears the Breast; Green Ginger provokes lust, dryes up
moisture of the Stomach, phlegm of the Lungs, opens obstructions, and is good
in all cold griefs of the Stomach.

Golden Rod. Auria virga.
GOlden Rod grows up with brownish small stalks, found) dented about the
edges, and as seldom with strakes or white spots therein, divided at the tops
into many small branches, with diverse small yellow flowers on every one of
them, which are turned one way, and being ripe become down, and are blown away
with the wind: The root consists of diverse small fibers, not running deep in
the ground, yet abiding all Winter, sending forth new branches every year, the
old ones dying.

Names.] Auria virga it is called in Latin; in English Golden Rod.

Place and Time.] It grows both in moist and dry grounds in many places of this
Land, in Woods and Copses, in Hamsted Wood, and Kentish-Town, near Gravesend in
Swanscomb Wood, and Southfleet: It flowers about July.

Nature and Virtues.] Golden Rod is hot and dry in the second degree, with a
cleansing astringent quality, a reputed Herb of Venus; it is useful in lotions
for sores in the Mouth and Throat, and is a good Wound Herb for inward or
outward Wounds, Bleeding, or Bruises, and for Ruptures, to be used inwardly,
and out wardly; it stays Fluxes and Courses, it dryes up moist humors in old
Sores and Ulcers, which hinder their healing. The decoction helps to fasten
loose Teeth, and it is commended and approved to be good against the Gravel and
Stone in the Reins and Kidneys, and to provoke Urine.

Gooseberry Bush. Grossularia.
I Think it needs no description, it is called in Latin Vva Crispa, and
Grossularia; in some places, Feaberry, Dewbery, and Wineberry Bush, but most
commonly Gooseberry Bush in English.

Nature and Virtues.] The Berries before they be ripe are cold and dry, and
something binding; they are under the dominion of Venus, they cool the vehement
heat of the Stomach and Liver, and provoke appetite, being scalded and eaten
with Rose Water and Sugar, or made in Tarts, or stewed with Mutton; they also
make good sauce for Green Geese, and many other Dishes both Flesh and Fish;
they are good to boil in broth, for such as have hot Agues; they stay the
longings of Women with Child: being ripe they are pleasant to the Stomach. The
decoction of the leaves cool Inflammations, and St. Anthonies fire. The tender
leaves are good to break the Stone, and expel Gravel; but too much of the
fruit breeds Crudities and Worms, especially before it is ripe.

Gromel. Milium solis.
THere be accounted nine sorts of this Herb,

The great upright Gromel rises up with diverse upright, slender, hairy, woody,
brown crusted stalks very little branched, with long, hard, rough, sharp
pointed narrow green leaves; the flowers stand at the tops of the stalks, are
small and white: the seed is white, round, and shining, the root is hard and
woody, with many fibers; it abides all the year, but the stalks dye.

Names,] It is called Milium solis, and Granum solis in Shops, and also
Litho-spermum; in English Gromel, and Pearl Plant.

Place and Time.] The first grows in Gardens, the second and third grow wild
in many places of this Land, on barren grounds: they flower from Midsummer till
September, the seed ripening in the mean time.

Nature and Virtues.] Gromel-seeds are hot and dry in the second degree, under
Venus, says Culpepper; they are singular good to break the Stone, to open and
cleanse the Reins, Kidneys and Bladder, to drive forth the Gravel, provoke
Urine, and do expel Wind exceedingly: two drams of the seed in powder, given
in Breast milk to a woman in Travel, procures speedy delivery: The Herb it self
boiled in Wine and drunk, works all the same effects, but weaker then the
seeds.

See further in The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: by P. Morellus.

Winter Green. Pyrola.
THis sends up round pointed leaves, every one standing on a long foot stalk,
of a sad green color, almost like Pear Tree leaves, and so are the flowers;
the stalk is weak and slender, yet standing upright, bearing many small white
flowers, smelling sweet, consisting of five round pointed leaves, with many
yellowish threads in the middle, about a green head, which grows to be the
seed vessel, and is five square when it is ripe, with a small point; in it is
the seed as small as dust: it has a brownish creeping root.

Names.] It is called in Latin Pyrola; in English Winter green.

Place and Time.] It grows in the Northern parts of England: they flower
about July, or later.

Nature and Virtues.] Winter green is cold in the second degree, and dry in the
third, having a Glutinous and very binding quality, a Saturnine Herb; it is a
very good Wound Herb, to close and consolidate green Wounds, the green Herb or
juice applied, or a Salve made thereof with Hogs Lard, or with Sallet Oil, Wax,
and Turpentine: The decoction is good for inward hurts, used by it self, or
with other Herbs, as Comfrey, etc. and for Ulcers in the Kidneys or Bladder; it
stays Fluxes and overslowing of the Courses: it is good for foul Ulcers and
Fistula's. The distilled water performs the same. The herb may also be kept dry
to use in Decoctions, and made into powder to be taken in drink.

Ground Pine. Chamaepitie.
Ground Pine seldom grows above the height of a hand breadth from the ground,
it has many small branches, which are set with slender long, narrow, gray,
whitish leaves, hairy, and sometimes divided into three parts, many of them
growing together at a joint, and having a scent like Rozen or pitch; it yields
a pale yellow small flower, growing amongst the leaves at the joints of the
stalks; after which follow small long and round husks: the root is woody, but
small, and dies every year.

Names.] In shops it is usually called Chamaepitys, which name both Greeks and
Latins use; it is called also in Latin Abiga, and by some Thus terrae, and
Iva Arthrytica; in English Herb Ivy, Forget me not, Ground Pine, and Field
Cypress.

Place and Time.] It grows plentifully in Kent, about Gravesend, Cobham,
Southfleet, Dartford, and other places; flowers in June and july, and yields
its seed about August.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third: the
decoction of Ground pine being drunk, procures Women's Courses, helps diseases
of the Mother, expells a dead Child and Afterbirth, and is very powerful in
causing abortion: wherefore let not Women with Child meddle with it. The same
prevails against the Stranguary, and inward pains of the Reins, it opens the
Liver and Spleen, cleanses gross Blood. The decoction of the Herb in Wine,
taken inwardly, or outwardly applied, helps diseases of the Joints, as the
Gout, Sciatica, Cramps, Palsy, and Aches, for which purpose there is also a
Pill made with the powder of Ground pine, Hermodactil, and Venus Turpentine
which Pills are also good for the Dropsy and Jaundies, pains in the Belly and
Joints, and helps cold diseases of the Brain, and is good for the Falling
Sickness: its a good remedy against poisonous Herbs, as Aconites, and the
stinging of Venomous Beasts. The green herb, or the decoction applied,
dissolves Tumors in any part of the Body, and the hardness of Women's Breasts;
and the juice or herb applied with Honey, cleanses Ulcers, and soders up the
lips of green Wounds. The herb tunned up in drink, the Conserve of the Flowers,
and the distilled Water have the same effects for the forementioned diseases,
but more weakly.

See further in The Art of Simpling: written by W. Coals

Groundsel. Senecio.
GRoundsel rises up with a round,

Names.] The Greeks call it (...), and the Latins Senecio, because it soon
becomes hoary; it is called in English Groundsel, and Grunsel.

Place and Time.] It grows frequently in Gardens, and will not easily be wedded
out, it grows also on tops of old Walls, and at the bottom amongst any rubbish,
in untilled grounds, and by ditches sides about London plentifully, and is to
be found almost all the year.

Nature and Virtues.] Groundsel is cold and moist, and digesteth, and is by
Culpepper accounted to be the chiefest flower in Venus Nosegay; the decoction
thereof in Wine purges Choler by vomit, and so eases pains of the Stomach:
the juice thereof in drink, or the decoction thereof with a few Currants in
water, does the like; it provokes Urine also, and cleanses Gravel; it is good
also against the Jaundies and Falling Sickness, taken in wine, or a dram
thereof in Oxymel, it also provokes the Terms: and a pultis made of the herb
eases hot Inflammations and Swellings of the Breasts, privy parts, Arteries,
Joints or Sinews of man or woman, and helps to dissolve Knots or Kernels in any
part of the body of man or woman: the distilled water of the herb helps
Inflammations and watring of the Eyes, and so does the clarified juice.

Guaiacum.
THis Tree grows in the West Indies, and the Wood and Bark is prentifully
brought here into England; so that I shall forbear any further description
thereof.

Names.] The Latins call it Guaiacum, Lignum Indicum, Lignum sanctum, and
Lignum vitae; in English it is called Pockwood, because of its excellent
faculty for that purpose.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the second degree, and of a
cleansing quality; whereby it is an excellent remedy for the Pox, resisting
putrefaction, cleansing the blood, provoking sweat, and strengthening the Liver,
and is properly taken in a decoction thus made.

of Guiacum, lib. 1. of the Bark thereof two ounces; infuse them four and
twenty hours in fourteen pints of Spring Water, then boil them till half be
consumed, adding thereto Liquorice two ounces, Anniseeds one ounce; this is
also good against the Dropsy, Falling Sickness, shortness of Breath, Catharrs,
Rheumes, cold phlegmatic humors, Gout, Sciatica, and joint aches, and is good
against Scabs, Itch, and Leprosy, and it makes the teeth white and fastens
them if they be often washed with the decoction thereof. The bark may be given
in powder from half a dram to a dram, for the forementioned diseases.

Stinking Gladwin. Spatula Faetida.
IT has long narrow leaves like Iris (whereof if it is a kind) but smaller,
and being rubbed of a loathsome smell, having many stalks which are round
toward the top, out of which come the flowers, much like the Flower de Luce,
of an over-worn blue, or rather purple color, with some yellow and red streaks
in the midst, after which come great husks or cods in which is contained a red
berry of seed as big as a Pease; the root is long and threddy underneath,
reddish without and white within, and of a hot taste and evil smell.

Names.] It is called in Greek (...) by Diosiorides, and (...), by
Theophrastus; it is also called Spatula saetida, and Xyris: in English stinking
Gladwin and Spurgewort.

Place and Time.] It is planted in Gardens, and grows wild in many moist and
shadowy places and Woods near the Sea, and likewise in upland grounds; it
flowers in July and August, the seed is ripe in September.

Nature and Virtues.] Gladwin is hot and dry in the third degree, having a
heating and extenuating quality; the roots pounded and snuffed up into the
Nose, provoke sneezing, whereby they purge the head: the root is also effectual
against the Cough, being used in an Electuary or Lohoch for that purpose; it
digests gross humors, purges Choler and Phlegm, procures sleep, and helps
gripings in the Belly, Cramps, and Convulsions: the powder thereof being drunk
in Wine; also it eases the Gout, Sciatica, and the Strangury: a dram of the
seed beaten to powder and drunk in Wine, provokes Urine. A Pessary thereof
hastens the Birth, procures the Terms, but causes Abortion: the roots used in
a Plaster is good in Wounds, especially of the Head, and to cause the flesh to
grow where the bones be bare, and is good to assuage swellings of the Kings
Evil, and Buboes in the Groin; it stays the Flux, as Rhabarb and Asarum do,
by concocting and taking away the cause of the Lask, though it first moves to
the stool; for the decoction of the root, or leaves, or the infusion thereof in
Ale, purges Phlegm and Choler: the root also has great force to draw out
Thorns, Stubs, Prickles, Splinters, or any other thing sticking in the flesh,
by reason of his attracting drying, and digesting faculty: it is also good
against evil affections of the Breast and Lungs, being taken in sweet Wine with
some Spikenard, or in Whey, with a little Mastick; the juice of the leaves and
roots heals the Itch, Scabs, and Blemishes in the Skin, and being snuffed up
into the Nose, provokes sneezing, purging forth at the Nose filthy excrements,
keeping them from falling into other parts of the body to future prejudice of
health.

Goutwort, or Herb Gerrard. Herba Gerrardi.
THis is the second kind of Masterwort,

Names.] In Latin it is called Podagraria Germanica, from its faculty in
easing the Gout, and Herba Gerardi; in English Goutwort, Ashweed, and wild
Masterwort.

Place and Time.] It grows of it self in Gardens without any sowing, where
having once taken root, it will so increase, as hardly to be gotten out again,
destroying other herbs, it grows likewise by Hedges sides, and in the borders
and corners of Fields; it flowers from June till August.

Nature and Virtues.] Goutwort is hot and dry almost in the third degree, being
near the nature of Masterwort: the roots stamped and laid upon any part
troubled with the Gout, asswageth the pain, and takes away the swelling and
inflammation thereof. The Fundament being bathed with the decoction of the
leaves and roots, and the boiled leaves applied very hot thereunto cures the
Hemorrhoides,

Glasswort or Saltwort. Kali Geniculatum, Sive Salicornia.
IT has many thick round stalks a foot high, full of fat thick sprigs, with
many joints or knots, without any leaves, of a reddish green color: the whole
plant is like a branch of Corral; the root is very small and single.

There is another kind mentioned by Lobel, called by him Kali minus, having
many slender weak branches spread upon the ground, set with many round long
sharp pointed leaves, of a whitish green color: the seed is small and shining,
somewhat like sorrel seed, the root slender, with many fibers: the whole plant
is of a saltish taste. Dodoncus call this Kali album.

Names.] The Arabians call it Kali, and Alkali; the ashes hereof are by
Mathiolus called Sylvaticus soda, most usually (...), and Mumen Calinum; but
Alumen Calinum is the most proper name of the Ashes it self, and Sal Alkali,
the salt which is made of the Ashes: the herb is also called Kali articulatum,
or joynted Glasswort, and Salt-wort, Crab-grass, and Frog-grass in Enlish.

Place and Time.] Glass-wort is found in most salt Marshes about the Sea coast;
great store of it grows about the Sea Coast near Dover: they flourish in the
Summer months.

Nature and Virtues.] Glass-wort is hot and dry, the Ashes hotter and dryer to
the fourth degree, having a caustic or burning quality: The powder of Stones,
and the Ashes hereof mixed together, and melted, is the matter whereof Glass is
made, which when it is glowing hot in the Furnace, casts up a sat matter on the
top of it, which when it is cold, is hard and brittle, and is called Axungia
vitri; in English Sandiver, and in Italian Fior de Christallo, that is, Flower
of Crystal: A small quantity of the herb taken inwardly, mightily provokes
Urine, drives forth the dead Child, draws sorth by seige watery humors, and
purges away the Dropsy, but it must be used with discretion, for a great
quantity thereof is dangerous, hurtful, and deadly. The smoke of the Herb being
burnt, drives away Serpents and venomous worms. The Ashes may be mixed with
medicines to take away Scabs, Leprosy, and to cleanse the skin; and likewise
it consumes proud and superfluous flesh in poisonous and filthy Ulcers, as say
Avicen, and Serapio.

Sandiver does dry and takes away Scabs and Manginess, the foul parts being
washed and bathed with the water wherein it has been boiled.

See more of this in The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: by P. Morellus.

See further in Adam in Eden: written by Will. Coals.

Goats Thorn, or Gum Dragon. Tragacantha.
IT is a bushy plant, having thorns which represent a Goats beard, having a
great root; which being wounded with some instrument, yields a liquor, which
by the heat of the Sun is soon condensed into a shining white Gum, shrivelling
its self into little crooked pieces, sweet in taste.

Names, Place and Time.] It is called in Greek (...), and is known in Latin by
the name of Tragacantha, Gummi Tragacanthae; and Gum Trajant in English, and is
brought to us from Candy and Syria, where it yields his Gum in Autumn.

Nature and Virtues.] Gum Dragant is somewhat dry, having a quality to dull and
allay the sharpness of humors: a dram of it dissolved in sweet wine, and a
little burnt Hartsborn washed, and a little Allome mixed with it and drunk, is
good against the sharpness of the Urine, and helps pains of the Guts and
Bowels; being dissolved and mixed with other pectorals, it helps the Cough and
hoarseness of the Throat, salt, and sharp distillations upon the Lungs, being
taken as an Electuary, or put under the tongue, letting it distill gently down,
and so it taken away the roughness of the Tongue: The said Gum being torrefied,
or dried at the fire, and mixed with the juice or wine of Quinces, and used in
a Glister, is good against the bloody Flux; being boiled in wine with Stoechas
and drunk, it warmeth and cleanses the Breast, Stomach, and Bowels, being
afflicted with any cold, helps the Chollick and stopping of the Spleen and
Urine: it is also used in Medicines for the Eyes, to allay the heat and
sharpness of hot Rheumes; and being dissolved in milk and used, it takes away
white spots growing in the Eyes, the itching of them, and Wheals, and Scabs
that grow upon the Eyelids; it cleanses the face, and makes it white, if it
be steeped a night in Rose Water, and in the morning a little Borace or
Camphire be put thereto, and the face washed therewith; being dissolved in
Rose Water and strained, and some white starch mixed with it, it is effectual
to help sores and Chaps of the Mouth, Lips, and Hands, the place being anointed
therewith: the Muscilage mixed with Honey, does the same, and is good for the
Leprosy. The powder of it taken in broth is available for those that have
broken a Vein, or have the Cramp.

There is another kind hereof called in Greek (...), Poterion, because it
delights in watery places which grows in Candy, and about Marselles and
Montpelier in France; the root whereof being boiled in Wine and drunk, is
profitable against the poison of the Red Toad, and being made into a pultis,
and applied to any Nerve or Sinew that is cut, wounded, or hurt, does heal
them, and soder them together, and all other kinds of wounds and cuts. The
said decoction of the roots in Wine, is effectual to be drunk for the said
purposes, and for inward Wounds or Veins that are broken.

There is another Gum brought into England, and to be had at our Druggists
called Gum Arabic, which is effectual for many of the aforesaid purposes; but
especially for helping those frettings of the Reins and Bladder which cause
bloody Urine, being used in the same manner as Gum Tragant.

Harts-ease, or wild Pansies. Herba Trinitatis.
Viola (...), Herba Trinitatis (...) Trinity, and by some, Love in idleness,
Call me to you, and Three Faces under a hood.

Place and Time.] They grow as I said before as well in Fields as Gardens; they
flower all the Spring and Summer.

Nature and Virtues.] They are cold and moist, and much of the nature of
Violets, though nor so effectal; it is reputed to be Saturnine, and an
excellent anti-Venerial Medicine for the French Pox: a decoction used of the
herbs and flowers, or a syrrup made therewith; the spirit of it is good for the
Falling Sickness, Convulsions, Plurisie, and Inflammations of the Lungs and
Breast.

Hearts Tongue. Scolopendria.
Heart Tongue rises up with diverse leaves springing severally from the root,

Names.] It is known in Shops by the Latin name of Scolopendria, and
Scolopendrium, and is called also Lingua Cervina; in English Hearts tongue.

Place and Time.] It delights to grow in shadowy moist places, in the insides
of Wells, and by Walberton toward the Seaside, near Arundel in Sussex, it
grows so plentifully by the Highway sides on the banks of the Ditches, you may
gather loads of it: it bears no flower, but is green all the year, and brings
forth new leaves in the Spring and Summer.

Nature and Virtues.] Authors disagree whether it be hot or cold, but I judge
it to be moderately hot, of the nature of Jupiter; it has a binding drying
faculty, it is an excelcellent herb for all diseases of the Milt, by reducing
it to its right temper; whether it be too much opened, or swollen hard, or
stopped. The decoction thereof taken in Wine, and the herb boiled and laid to
the grieved place; it likewise mollifies, opens, and strengthens the Liver and
Stomach, and stops the Terms, spitting of blood, and other Fluxes. A decoction
made of Hearts Tongue, Knot-grass, and Comfrey roots, a draught thereof being
drunk every morning, and the boiled herbs applied to the grieved place, is a
good remedy against Burstness: it is also profitable in the Jaundies, Kings,
Evil, and bitings of venomous Beasts. The herb, or juice applied, cleanses
Wounds and Ulcers, and the distilled water is commended against the passion of
the Heart, Hiccop, and bleeding of the Gums.

See more of this in the Art of Simpling: written by W. Coals.

Hazel Nut Tree. Nux tenuis.
IT is so well known it needs no Description.

Names.] Nux tenuis, or Parva, some call it, to distinguish it from Walnuts,
others Corylus, and Nux Avellana. Those in Gardens are called in English
Filberds, and the wild kind, Hazel and Small Nuts.

Place and Time.] They are commoners in most Woods and Hedges; the fruit of
some of them is ripe in August, and of others not till the beginning of October.

Nature and Virtues.] Hazel Nuts fresh gathered, are hot and moist, but
afterward they grow dry; they are under the Planet Mercury: the skin that
covers the kernells is very astringent, so are the Katkins; a dram thereof in
wine stays Women's Courses: The parched kernels made into an Electuary, helps
and old Cough. On oil may be pressed from the kernells in the same manner, as
is made oil of sweet Almonds; which is very effectual for Coughs, Hoarseness,
and shortness of Breath; so that Nut Kernels do not altogether deferve the
blame which is usually laid upon them, for causing shortness of Breath.

Hawkweed. Hieracium.
HAwkweed has many leaves lying on the ground,

Names.] In Latin its called Hieracium, and Accipitrina, by some Lampuca,
Porcellia, and Hypochaeris and Hyoseris; in English only Hawkweed.

Place and Time.] It grows in untilled places, by the borders of Fields and
Ditches sides, in Meadows, Woods, and Mountains: they flower for the most part
all Summer.

Nature and Virtues.] Hawkweeds are all cold and dry, and withal astringent,
supposed to be a Saturnine Plant, appropriated to the Eyes; for which purpose
it is said Hawks eat it to clear their sight, and thence it takes its name: the
juice of it mixed with Woman's milk dropped into the Eyes, is very good for all
defects thereof, and so is the distilled water used in like manner; it is also
good against fretting and creeping Ulcers, and against Pushes, Inflammations,
St. Anthonies fire, and erruptions of heat. A plutis made of it with meal
applied to any place affected with the Cramp or Convulsions, gives it ease.
The juice taken in Wine, helps digestion, discusseth Wind, and crudities in
the Stomach, provokes Urine, helps venomous bitings, the herb also outwardly
applied. A scruple of the concreted juice taken in Wine, and Vinegar, is
profitable against the Dropsy. The decoction of the Herb with Honey, digesteth
Phlegm; being hoiled in Wine with wild Succory, and taken, it helps the Wind
Chollick, mollifies the Spleen, procures Sleep, abates Venery, and Nocturnal
pollutions, cools heat, purges the Stomach, increases Blood; and helps
diseases of the Reins and Bladder. The distilled water cleanses the skin from
Freckles, Spots, and Morphew.

Haw-thorne. Spina.
THis Shrub is well known in every hedge; there is reputed three kinds, our
common Haw-thorn; another lower Shrub which grow in Germany, and bears yellow
fruit, and a third which flowers twice a year, of which kind is that of
Glassenbury, and that in Whey-street in Rumney Marsh, and near Nantwich in
Cheshire.

Names and Time.] Spina is the Latin name; in English Haw-thorn, White-thorn,
and of some May, and May Bush, because its in flower about May day, and the
fruit is ripe in October, when the frost has bitten them.

Nature and Virtues.] It is of an astringent drying quality, both leaves,
flowers, and fruit. Culpepper ascribes it to Mars, because he would not have
him want Weapons; he may make use of the prickles, and let Saturn take the
fruit. The powder of the berries, or of the seeds in the berries, is reputed
good against the Stone, and the Dropsy, being drunk in Wine. The flowers
steeped three days in Wine, and then distilled in a Glass, and the water
thereof drunk, is good against the Plurisie and inward tormenting pains. The
water of the flowers also stays the Flux, or Lask, and so does the fruit
being eaten. Clothes or Spunges wet in the said water, and applied to the
place where Thorns or Splinters be in the flesh, will draw them forth.

Hedge-mustard, or Bank-cress. Erysimum.
IT springs up with one blackish green stalk,

Names.] Amongst other, Erysimum serves for a Latin title, and a Greek one
too; Gerhard calls it Bank-cress, and Parkinson Wild hedge-mustard.

Place and Time.] It is common by ways and hedge sides, walls, and sometimes
in open Fields, and flowers about July.

Nature and Virtues.] It is a Mercurial Plant, of a cleansing quality,
temperately hot, singular in all diseases of the Lungs, to help Hoarseness, and
recover a lost voice: the juice made into a syrrup or Lohoc, with Honey or
Sugar: it is profitable also against the Jaundies, Plurisie, pains in the Back
and Loins, and the griping of the Guts being used in Gi^sters. The seed is held
an Antidote against poison; it is good for the Gout, and Aches, Fistula's and
Ulcers, and for swellings or hardness in Women's Breasts, and the Testicles.

White Hellebore. Helleborus.
THere are accounted eight kinds of this Hellebore,

Names.] Helleborus albus, and Helleborum in Latin, and also Veratrum album;
in English Hellebore, and Neesewort.

Place and Time.] They grow in Germany, Austria, and Russia, and some about
Lancashire and Yorkshire: they flower about May, some earlier and some later.

Nature and Virtues.] The root is hot and dry in the third degree, one of Mars
his weapons to tame mud folks with; to be taken unprepared it is dangerous, and
extremely provokes Vomiting: but there is an Oximel made with it which is
useful against Madness and Melancholy, swimming of the Head, and Falling
Sickness, and the Quartain Ague; it brings down the Courses, and kills the
Child in the Womb: being put into the nostrills, it provokes sneezing, purges
the Head of superfluous Humors, and is good in the Lethargy, and such sleepy
diseases, especially if some leaves of Marjoram in powder be mixed with it: it
cures Itch, Scabs, and Leprosy, being mixed in Ointments, or with Hogs grease.
The dose of it inwardly is, in decoction or infusion, from a dram to two drams;
in substance from ten grains to a scruple.

See further in Adam in Eden: by W. Coals.

Black Hellebore. Helleborus niger.
BLack Hellebore has many green leaves springing from the root,

Names.] Helleborus niger, and Veratrum nigrum in Latin; in English it is
called Black Hellebore, and Christmas flower, because it flourishes about that
time.

Place and Time.] There is one kind which grows in some Woods in
Northamptonshire and other places of this Land, the other only in Gardens
where it is rare: it grows in Greece and Germany, in the Island of Anticyra;
whence grew a proverb, if any one was sad or melancholy, Naviga ad Anticyram:
It flowers in December and January.

Nature and Virtues.] Its much of the same temperature as the other, viz. hot
and dry in the third degree; it is effectual for Melancholy persons, purging
the Spleen, and burnt Choler from the Blood, and viscous Phlegm from the Head,
Entrails, and other parts; and therefore is useful in Giddiness of the Head,
Apoplexy, Madness, Falling Sickness, and hypocondriall diseases: it is good
also in the Quartain Ague, Leprosy, and the Kings Evil: it provokes Urine and
the Terms; it cures such as seem to be possessed with the Devil, and therefore
is by some called Fuga-daemonum: it is useful against the Cramp, Convulsions,
and pains in the body, and a decoction thereof helps the Toothache, and sores
of the Mouth, being gargled therewith, and put into the ears, it helps the
noise thereof. It may be taken in powder, infusion, or decoction, the dose as
the white, yet be careful of it; it is a churlish Plant. There is a bastard
kind called Bears-foot, which kills worms, a little of it in powder: if any
one hurt themselves by taking Hellebore, let them drink Goats Milk, or red
Cowes milk after it.

Hemlock. Cicuta.
IT springs up at first with broad winged leaves much like parsley,

Names.] It is called in Latin Cicuta; and in English Hemlock, Kex, and by
some Herb Bennet.

Places and Time.] It grows almost by every Ditches side, and in stinking
places, and flowers and seeds in July, or thereabouts.

Nature and Virtues.] Hemlock is one of Saturns nosegayes, it is cold in the
third, and dry in the second degree; it may safely be applied to Inflammations,
Tumors, and Swellings, and St. Anthonies sire, Wheals, and Pushes, and for
asswaging any violent pain, which it does by its cold benumming faculty: the
seeds beat small and moistened with Vinegar, and the Groin and Cods being
anointed therewith, it abates the desire to Venery, and helps the swelling and
coming out of the Matrix, and abates the excceding bigness of the Dugs; being
applied to the soles of the feet it brings down the humors that causes the
Falling Sickness: if any one mistake it for Parsley, or the root for a Parsnip,
and be troubled therewith, let them drink liberally of the strongest Sack.

Hemp. Cannabis.
IT is well known,

Names.] Both Greeks and Latins call it Cannabis; in English Hemp: some
Jesters call it Neck-weed, and Welsh Parsley; but let them have a care it does
not play in earnest with them.

Place and Time.] There be two kinds which grow together, as it is sown both
in Gardens and Fields: Summer Hemp which is ripe in July, and Winter Hemp which
bears the seed and is ripe in September.

Nature and Virtues.] It is a Saturnine plant, cold and dry; the seed of it
consumes and disperses windineses, and dryes up the natural seed; being boiled
in milk and taken it helps a hot dry Cough: An Emulsion is good against the
Jaundies, by opening obstructions of the Gall, and digesting Choler. A
decoction of the seed stays Lasks and Fluxes, and eases pains of the Bowels:
the juice is held good to kill Worms, and being dropped into the Ears, it kills
Worms in them. The decoction thereof allayeth Inflammations, eases pains of
the Gout, and shrinking of the Sinews. The fresh juice mixed with oil and
butter, is good for to apply to any place burnt with fire: nevertheless this
herb indiscreetly used breeds ill blood, is hard of digestion, and hurtful to
the Head and Stomach.

Henbane. Jusquiamus.
COmmon Henbane has very large,

Names.] It has gotten many fancied names amongst the Latins; in Shops it is
called Jusquiamus and Hyoseyamus; in English Hen-bane, because the seed is
hurtful to Hens,

Place and Time.] It grows commonly on every dunghill, and by stinking ditches
sides, and flowers about July.

Nature and Virtues.] It is cold almost in the fourth degree, of a benumming
Saturnine quality: the seeds, oil, and juice of it is hold good to ease pains
in the Teeth, though I think a T -- would do it better: the leaves of Hen-bane
cool Inflammations of the Eyes or other parts, and asswageth swelling of the
Cods, and women's Breasts, and asswageth pains of the Gout, Sciatica, and other
pains in the joints which proceed from a hot cause; being applied with Vinegar
to the Temples, it helps the Headache, and causes sleep: the oil of the seed
helps deafness, and noise in the Ears, being dropped therein: the decoction of
the herb or seed kills Lice in man or beast: if any one be distempered by
taking it inwardly unawares, let them drink Goats milk, or Fennel seed, Mustard
seed, Nettles seed, Onions, or Garlic in Wine.

Hagtaper, Vide Mullein.

Hysop. Hysopus.
IT needs no description; Hysopus is both the Greek and Latin name, and Hysop
with us.

Places and Time.] It is most frequent in Gardens, but I have seen it grow upon
Walls: it flowers in June or July, and the seed is ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] It is an herb of Jupiter, of temperature hot and dry in
the third degree, and of a cleansing quality; it is excellent good for
shortness of breath, and diseases of the Liver and Lungs, helps wheesings and
rheumatick distillations; it helps the Dropsy and Spleen; it is good against
the falling Sickness, provokes Urine, and women's Courses. The distilled water,
decoction, and syrrup, is very good for all stoppings and infirmities of the
Lungs; it takes away spots and bruises in the skin, being boiled, and the place
bathed therewith: it is good for the Quinzy, boiled with Figs and the throat
gargled therewith; and boiled with Vinegar, it helps the Toothache, being
bruised and mixed with Salt, Honey, and Commyn seed, it helps stinging of
Serpents: the green herb bruised with Sugar, or fresh Butter, soon heals a
green Wound. The oil kills Lice, and helps the Falling Sickness, expectorates
tough Phlegm, and is good in all cold Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, being
taken in syrrup, or other Medicines. Take two handfuls of the tops of unset
Hysop, as much of the tops of Rosemary, a few Anniseeds, and some Liquorish
s^eed, boil it in two quarts of running water, till a third part be consumed,
then sweeten it with Sugarcandy, and drink it for an ordinary drink. This I
have often proved effectual for the Ptisick, Coughs, Rheumes, Astma's, and
Catarrhs.

Holly. Aquifolium.
IT is well enough known, Aquifolium, and Agrifolium; we call it Holme, or
Holly Bush in English.

Place and Time.] Hedges, Woods, and Commons are well acquainted with it: they
flower about June, the berries ripe about Christmas, the leaves green all the
year. There is one kind called the Free Holly, because it has a smooth leaf;
the other prickly Holly, which most commonly bears the most berries.

Nature and Virtues.] The berries are by temperature hot and dry, says
Dodoneus; the plant Saturnine, says Culpepper, but I believe he forgot
himself: ten or twelve of the green berries taken inwardly, purge clammy and
phlegmatic humors, and help the Chollick: but being dried and taken in powder
in wine, or other drink, they bind the Belly, and stop Fluxes; the Bark does
the same more powerfully. A decocoction of the Bark of the roots is good to
mollify hardness, and tumors, where bones have been out of Joint, and helps
to consolidate broken bones. An handful of the berries boiled in a pint of Ale
till half be consumed, and then strained, and a little butter added to it, and
five or six spoonfuls taken at once, is said to be good to provoke Urine, and
remedy the stopping of the Stone. The Birdlime which is made of the Bark of
Holly is good to draw out Thorns and Splinters that are in the flesh.

See further in Adam in Eden: written by Will. Coals.

Holy-Thistle, or Carduus Benedictus.
IT needs no description, England: the names are in Latin Carduus Benedictus;
in English Holy and blessed Thistle.

Places and Time.] Its natural soil is Lemnos, and many of the Grecian Isles,
and being brought hither, it is diligently preserved in our Gardens, and
obtained its name from its singular virtues: it is in flower about July or
August, which is the best time to gather it to keep all the year. If it be
sown or sow it self in August, as sometimes it does, it will make its flower
in April.

Nature and Virtues.] Carduus Benedictus is hot and dry in the second degree,
having a cleansing opening quality; it is a bitter Martial Plant, yet Cordial,
a resister of Poison: the decoction thereof in posset drink, is good against
Stitches in the Sides and the Plurisie; it provokes Urine and the Courses,
cleanses the Stomach, strengthens the Memory, helps Deafness, and swimming in
the Head; it expells pestilential humors by sweat, and sometimes does good in
the beginning of Agues: in regard it resists putrefaction, it may be one of the
Sub-Committee, in curing the French Pox; but it can never cure it of it self,
neither by Sympathy nor Antipathy, as Culpepper affirms; but his Ballad-monger
has contradicted all by adding the coupling of the Song, viz. for Cure of al
Diseases, read my Riverius, and Riolanus in English; when as he pretends in the
title to cure all Diseases for three pence charge: and in truth was never
acquainted with those Authors, which are reported to be his Translation. But
(to avoid any further digressions) the herb is indeed somewhat Antivenerial;
the green herb has also notable effects, bruised and outwardly applied to
Plague Sores, Botches, and venomous bitings; the powder thereof stops bleeding
at Nose, and the juice and distilled water clears the sight; it is good also in
Gangreens and Ulcers, being mixed with Hogs grease and a little wheat flour.

Honey Suckles, or Woodbinde. Peryclymenum.
IT is very well known, Periclymenum, and Caprifolium; by some Sylvae matter,
and Lilium inter Spinas.

Place and Time.] It plentifully grows almost in every hedge, and is planted
upon Arbours and house Walls, where it will give a fragrant smell in at the
Windows. It begins flowring in April, and so continues all the Summer till the
latter end of October, if the season be mild; as the last October about the
latter end, the hedges were full of then all the way from Tilbury to Stanford
in Essex.

Nature and Virtues.] It is an herb of Mercury, and has a cleansing and
digesting quality, and is a very good herb in Mouth Waters for sores in the
Mouth; let Culpepper say what he will, experience proves it. A Syrrup or
Conserve of the flowers, or a decoction made of the herbs and flowers, a good
against diseases of the Lungs and Spleen, and to expectorate tough Phlegm: it
likewise does provoke Urine, and cause speedy delivery in Women, and helps
Cramps, Convulsions, and Palsies: the distilled water is good to dry up Ulcers,
and cleanse the face from Sun-burnings, Morphew, and other discolorings. The
seeds also help the Hiccock, and shortness of breathing; but the leaves and
flowers are more useful; the much use thereof causes barrenness in men and
women.

See more of this in The Art of Simpling: written by W. Coals.

Hops. Lupulus.
IT is a plant very well known, especially by the Brewers, and by the Greeks is
called (...), and (...); in Latin Lupulus.

Place and Time.] It grows in England both wild and manured; Kent flourishes
by them: they spring up in April, and are ripe about September.

Nature and Virtues.] Hops are hot and dry in the second degree, of a cleansing
quality, whereby they are reputed good to cleanse the Reins from Gravel, and
provoke Urine; being used in the decoction, they open obstructions of the Liver
and Spleen, cleanse the blood, and are good for the yellow Jaundies, and to
help breakings out in the Body: they do purge Choler from the Liver and
Stomach. The decoction of the flowers is good for those that have drunk poison,
and is likewise good in bathes for the hardness and swellings of the Mother,
and Strangury: they are most used to preserve Beer, whereby it is kept a long
time: but stale Beer is a cruel enemy to those who are afflicted with the
Stone: therefore let those that are subject to that distemper, drink plain
honest harmless old English Ale.

Horehound. Prasium.
IT grows up with square hoary stalks half a yard high or more,

Names.] Prasium is the common Latin name, and Horehound the English.

Place and time] It grows commonly in waste dry grounds in many places of this
Land: flowers in July, and the seed is ripe in August,

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third, as
says Gallen, an herb of Mercury says Mr. Culpepper; it is a very good
pectoral plant: the decoction or syrrup helps short windedness and infirmities
of the Lungs, and brings away tough Phlegm; it brings down women's Courses, and
expells the Afterbirth; is also good against poison and venomous bitings; it is
offensive to the Reins and Bladder, and to hot and dry bodies, but more safe if
used with Raisins and Liquorice: the leaves with honey purge foul Ulcers, and
made into an Ointment with old Hogs grease, it helps bitings of Dogs, and
swellings of Women's Breasts, and prickings of Thorns: the decoction is good for
women to sit over that have the Whites, and likewise to heal Scabs, the places
being hathed therewith.

Horse-tail. Cauda Equina.
IT springs up with heads somewhat like Sparagus,

Names.] It is called in Latin Cauda Equina, and Hippuris, and by diverse
Equisetum; in English Horse Tail.

Place and Time.] They delight to grow in low wet grounds; many Meadows and
Pastures are much troubled with them: they spring up in April, and perish about
September.

Nature and Virtues.] It does dry, and has a binding faculty, a Saturnine
Herb; the decoction or juice thereof drunk or applied outwardly, stanches
bleedings at Nose, and stays Fluxes and Lasks, pissing of Blood, and heals
inward Ulcers and Excoriations of the Entrails, and all other foul running
Ulcers: It is also good for Ruptures in Children. The decoction in Wine
provokes Urine, and helps the Stone. The juice or distilled water helps Pushes,
Wheals, and Inflammations in the skin, and eases swellings, heat, and
Inflammations of the privy parts, and cures Tetters and Ringworms.

Hounds Tongue. Cynoglossum.
THe leaves are long and somewhat narrow,

Names.] It is called in Latin Cynoglossum, and Lingua Canis; in English
Hounds Tongue, and of some Dogs piss.

Place and time,] It is a companion to Highways, and dry Ditches sides, and
flowers in May and June.

Nature and Virtues.] It is of a stinking scent, and a great drawing cleansing
quality, a Saturnine Plant, excellent to cleanse, dry, and cure old Sores and
putrified Ulcers, drawing all filth out of them, and cures the biting of Dogs,
either mad or tame. I lay fourteen weeks once under a Chyrurgions hand for a
cure of a Dogs biting; but at last I effected the cure my self only by
applying to the wound Hounds Tongue leaves, changing them once in four and
twenty hours: an ointment made thereof is also good against Burning and
Scalding. The powder of the root in Pills, or a decoction thereof, stays
fallings of Rheum out of the head upon the Stomach or Lungs, or into the Eyes
or Nose, and helps Coughs and shortness of Breath. A Suppository made of the
root (being baked in a wet paper under the Embers) and put up into the
Fundament helps pains of the Piles and Hemorrhoides. The distilled water is
useful for all the purposes aforesaid.

Housleek, or Singreen. Barba Jovis.
IT is well known, Barba Jovis, and some other Latin words Authors have
bestowed upon it, as Semper vivum majus; in English Housleek, or Singreen.
There is a lesser sort called in Latin Sedum, in English Prick-madam; but
beware you mistake not, and take Stone-crop instead of it, which is of a far
contrary quality, yet they are very like one another.

Place and Time.] It is planted and flourishes much upon the tyles of houses,
and stone walls: it flowers about June and July, the leaves are green all the
year

Nature and Virtues.] It is cold in the third degree, somewhat drying, and
having Jupiters badge, it must needs be his Herb: the juice being clarified, is
excellent good for hot Rheumes in the Eyes, and is commended for soreness in
the Gums, and the Scurvy in the Mouth; as also for all Inflammations, as St
Anthonies fire, and the like: a Posset made with the juice is good in hot
Agues, and to quench thirst; it eases Corns being applied thereunto, and
eases the Headache, caused through heat, being applied to the Temples; and
the bruised leaves laid upon the Crown of the head, quickly stays bleeding at
Nose: the distilled water is good for all the purposes aforesaid; and the
leaves rubbed upon any place stung with Bees or nertles, gives present ease,

See more of this in Adam in Eden: written by Will. Coals.

Hedge Hysop. Gratiola.
IT is a low plant about a span long,

Names.] It is called in Latin Gratia Dei, and Gratiola; and in English hedge
Hysop: the seed is called Gelbenech, being the Arabian name. There is a second
kind of hedge hysop called Gratiola angusti folia, which has a small fibrous
root, a reddish round crested stalk divided into many branches, set with leaves
like those of Knot-grass, of a pale green color, without any stalks, out of
the bosom of these leaves come four leaved flowers, set in longcups, of a fair
blue color, after which come longish seed vessels, wherein are contained a
small duskish seed: the plant is without smell or any manifest taste: the
leaves are sometimes narrower and sometimes broader. The plant sometimes but a
handful, and seldom above a foot high. Its called also in English Grass Poley.
There is also a third kind called Gratiola latifolia, or broad leaved hedge
Hysop, which has many four square small tender branches, somewhat hollow or
furrowed, set with leaves by couples one against another, like the former, but
shorter and broader, amongst which grow purple flowers spotted in the inside
with white, and of a brighter purple then the rest of the flower; after which
come little seed vessels, containing small yellowish seed of an extreme bitter
taste; the whole plant is bitter like the first: the root consists of a great
many whitish strings which increase and spread much abroad.

Place and Time.] The first grows naturally in moist and low places, the
second in grassy meers of the Champion Fields in Oxfordshire and such like
places. The third kind likewise in moist places, as about the Bogs or marish
ground at the further end of Hampsted Heath, and in such like places. The first
kind flowreth in May, the second in June and July, the third in August.

Nature and Virtues.] Hedge Hysop is of a hot and dry nature, the first kind
is only used in Physic: a scruple thereof being bruised and taken, mightily
purges watery gross, and slimy humors in great abundance: the herb boiled in
Wine, and the decoction drunk, helps Fevers, and is excellent in Dropsies,
and all Diseases springing from cold and watery causes. If it be boiled and the
decoction drunk or eaten with meat as a Sallet, it opens the Belly, scouring
and purging gross phlegm and chollerick humors. The extraction given with
powder of Cynamon, and a little juice of Calamint, prevails against Tertian
and Quotidian Fevers, as says Camerarius.

Herb Robert. Geranium Robertianum.
THis plant has slender,

Names.] Its called Geranium Robertianum in Latin, as being a kind of
Cranes-bill; it is also called Ruberta, Roberti herba, and Robertiana, and is
taken to be the 3. Sideritis of Dioscorid.

Place and Time.] It grows upon old Walls of Brick, Stone, or Mud, and amongst
Rubbish, in bodies of dead Trees, and in moist and shadowy banks of Ditches: it
flowers in April, and almost all the Summer. The herb continues green all
Winter.

Nature and Virtues.] Herb Robert is somewhat cold of temperature, having mixed
qualities, both scouring and somewhat binding; it is good to stanch blood, and
to heal up bleeding Wounds, and is good for Wounds and Ulcers in Women's Breasts
and Dugs, and also of the secret parts of Man or Woman, and may be also as
effectual as Cranes-Bill in Ruptures or inward Wounds. The dried herb and root
taken in powder in some convenient liquor, or the decoction thereof in Wine
being drunk for those purposes.

Herb True-love, Vide One berry.

St. John's Wort. Hypericum.
IT shoots forth brownish, upright, hard, round stalks, about two foot high,
spreading into diverse branches from the sides up to the top, having two small
perforated leaves set one against another all along, of a deep green color; at
the tops of the stalks and branches grow yellow flowers of five leaves apiece,
with yellow thrums in the middle, which being bruised, yield a reddish juice
like blood; after the flowers come small round heads, wherein is contained
small blackish seed, smelling like Rozen. The root is hard and woody, with many
fibers at it, of a brownish color which abides many years, but the stalks
perish every year.

Names.] It is called in Latin Hypericum, of some Fuga-daemonum, supposing it
to be good to drive away spirits, and by Paracelsus, Sol terrestris.

Places and Time.] It grows plentifully by Fields, by Woods sides, and Copses,
and in Hedge rows; flowers about Midsummer, and the seed is ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry, and of thin parts, an excellent Solar
Plant; it is profitable for all hurts and Wounds, and also for inward bruises,
being made into an Oil, Ointment, or Salve, Bathe, or Fomentation, and used
outwardly, or boiled in Wine and drunk; it opens obstructions, consolidates and
soders up the lips of Wounds, and strengthens weak and bruised parts: The
decoction of the herb and seed in Wine, helps spitting and Vomiting of Blood,
and heals inward bruises; it is likewise good for the Stone, and to provoke
Women's courses. The seed taken in powder in a little broth, purges choler, and
expells congealed blood in the Stomach. The dose is ii. The oil is excellent
both for old sores and green Wounds: the seed is commended for the Palsy, and
Falling Sickness, being drunk forty days together.

An excellent Balsome for Wounds and Venomous Bitings may be made of it after
this manner.

Take oil Olive one quart, St. John's Wort, Betony, Centory, Self-heal, and
Tobacco flowers, each two handfuls, let them stand in a glass in the Sun all
Summer, then strain the oil from the herbs, and keep it for your use.

Jack by the Hedge, Vide Sauce alone.

Ivy. Hedera.
THis is a companion lovingly embracing many old Oaks, and other Trees, Walls,
Houses, and Churches. The Latins call it Hedera: it flourishes about July,
and the Berries are ripe about Christmas, and may with Holly adorn a House
without superstition.

Nature and Virtues.] A Pugil of Ivy flowers, or a dram drunk twice a day in
red Wine, stops the Bloody Flux, and Lask; but Ivy being much taken inwardly,
its obnoxious to the Nerves and Sinews: but outwardly applied, it is helpful
unto them. The juice of the leaves and flowers mixed with a little oil of
bitter Almonds, and dropped into the ears, being warm, it helps lost hearing,
and old running sores of the Ears. The powder of the berries drunk in Wine,
help to break the Stone, and provoke Urine and Women's Terms. A Pessary likewise
of the Leaves and Flowers draws down the Courses, and dead Child. A
decoction of the fresh leaves in Vinegar, being applied hot to the sides, gives
ease against Aches and Stitches, being applied with Rose water, and Oil of
Roses to the Temples, it eases pains in the Head: The juice of the berries or
leaves purges the Head and Brain of thin Rheum, being snuffed into the
Nostrils, and cures Ulcers and stench in the Nose. To drink in an Ivy cup is
good for the Spleen, letting the drink stand a while in it. There is a great
Antipathy between Wine and Ivy, as is said. The powder of Ivy berries has
formerly been used as a good Medicine for the Plague; for which purpose it has
been planted about Pest-houses, it being given in Wine, and the party sweating
thereupon in the beginning of the Disease. The Ivy Gum eases the pain of
hollow Teeth, if it be put therein; it is of a strong scent, and good to smell
to against infection, and for such to carry about them as use to go amongst
noisome smells.

See further in The Art of Simpling: written by W. Coals

Ground Ivy, Vide Ale-hoof.

Juniper. Juniperus.
IN our Country it seldom or never arises higher then a Furze Bush, though in
other places it is a Tree: it spreads its self near the ground: the leaves are
much like those of Furze, but not so large nor so prickly, and of a blueish
green color; they continue all the year: the flowers are very small, yet may
be perceived of a yellow color by the dust that falls from them; after which
come small green berries, not being fully ripe till the second year, and then
they are somewhat like Pepper.

Names.] It is called in Latin Juniperus, and the berries Baccae Juniperi, and
Grana Juniperi.

Place and Time.] It grows much upon the Hills and woody grounds in Barkshire,
Oxfordshire, and Buckinghamshire, and likewise in Hampshire and Kent. It
flowers in may, and after two Summers and one Winter perfects its Seed.

Nature and Virtues.] Juniper is hot and dry in the third degree, the berries
are as hot, but not so dry; it is an Herb of Sol, a good counter poison: the
berries taken in wine are good against venomous bitings, the Plague,
Pestilence, and other infections. The decoction of the berries in Wine is good
against the wind Chollick, or four or five drops of the Chemical oil taken in
a morning in broth or Beer, or about a dozen of the berries eaten in the
morning fasting. A lie made of the ashes of Juniper, cures the Dropsy, it
provokes the Terms. Urine, and is good against the Stone and Strangury, helps
fits of the Mother, and strengthens the Stomach very much. A Lie made of the
Ashes of the Wood, cures Itches, Scabs, Leprosy, and erruptions in the skin;
the burning of the Wood drives away Flies, and Wasps, and such noisome
creatures. The berries are also good for the Cough, shortness of Breath,
Ruptures, Convulsions, Cramps, and Consumptions; they procure to Women speedy
delivery, strengthens the Brain, Memory, and the Sight, they comfort the heart
and other senses; being drunk in Wine, or the decoction taken in wine, they are
good for all sorts of Agues, and for the Gout and Sciatica, and strengthen all
the Members of the Body: they are good likewise against the Palsy, and falling
Sickness: it is effectual also to dry up the moisture of moist Ulcers,
Fistula's, and weeping running Sores.

Jujubes. Zizipha.
THis Tree grows in Arabia, Egypt, and Syria; it is called in Shops Jujube,
which is the Arabian name; the Greeks and Latins Zizipha, and Serica: in
English Jujabes.

Nature and Virtues.] They are temperately hot and moist, a Tree of Jupiter;
they gently purge Choler, cleanse the Blood, and open the Body; they are
profitable for all diseases of the Chest and Lungs, help shortness of Breath,
and hot distillations of Rheumes; they cool the heat and sharpness of the
Blood, are good in hot Agues, expectorate tough Phlegm, and help a Cough; they
cleanse the Reins and Bladder, and make the passages slippery, and likewise
stay Vomitings which are caused by sharp humors.

Kidney Beans, Vide French Beans.

Kidney-Wort, or Venus Navel-wort. Cotyledon.
IT has many thick fat round leaves,

Names.] The Latins call it Cotyledon, Vmbilicus Veneris, and Acetabulum, and
also Scutellum, and Terrae Vmbilicus; in English Navel-wort, and Venus Navel,
Wall-penny-wort, and Kidney-wort.

Place and Time.] It grows upon Stone and Mud Walls, upon Rocks, at the
bottoms and upon the bodies of old rotten Trees: it flowers about May, then
perishes till September, and then springs up afresh, and abides all Winter.

Nature and Virtues.] Kidney-wort is cold and moist, and somewhat astringent,
having a little bitterness; it cools, repelleth, cleanses, and discusseth:
it is a plant of Venus, and is of good use to heal sore and exulcerated
Kidneys. The juice being drunk in wine, or the distilled water, it is good for
the Dropsy, it provokes Urine, helps to break the Stone, and and cools
Inflammations of those parts, and eases pains of the Bowels and Bloody Flux:
and the juice or distilled water cools a hot and inflamed Stomach or Liver. The
bruised Herb outwardly applied helps St. Anthonies fire, pimples, and other
Inflammations; it eases pains of the Piles, or Hemorrhoides, and is called
Herba Coxendicum, or Hipwort, because it is effectual to ease pains in the
Hips, and the hot Gout, and Sciatica; it is also good for swellings of the
Cods, Kings Evil, Kibes, and Chilblanes, being used in an Ointment: it is
likewise good to stanch the blood of green Wounds, and heal them quickly.

Knotgrass. Polygonum.
GReat common Knotgrass shoots up many long and slender joynted branches,
lying upon the ground, with many long narrow leaves thereon, one for the most
part at a joint, whereat come forth the flowers, especially from the middle of
the branches upward, which are in some white, and in others purple, but so
small, that they can hardly be perceived, which afterward bring a square small
seed, much like Sorrel seed: the root is reddish, long, and slender, with many
fibers; it endures diverse Winters, but the leaves perish in Autumn, and arise
fresh in the Spring.

Names.] It is called both in Greek and Latin Polygonum, and likewise
Seminalis, Sanguinalis, and Sanguinaria, in some places Corrigiola, and
Centinodia; in English Knot-grass.

Place and Time.] It grows by highways sides, footpaths in Fields, and sides
of old Walls, and many other places.

Nature and Virtues.] It is cold and dry about the second degree, Saturnine;
the powder thereof taken in Wine, is good to provoke Urine, and cool the heat
thereof, and to expel gravel in the Reins and Bladder; being eaten in a Tansie
with Eggs, it is good to help the running of the Reins, and weakness of the
Back: the juice or decoction is good to stay bleeding at the mouth, to cool the
Blood and Stomach, to stop the bloody Flux, Women's Courses, and pissing of
Blood: the juice is good to be given before the fit of a Tertian or Quartain
Ague, to moderate the violence thereof: it is good against venomous bitings,
and defluxions of Rheumes upon the Stomach; it cures also Inflammations, hot
Swellings, St. Anthonies fire, Cancers, burning Sores, and filthy Ulcers,
especially of the privy parts; it helps fresh Wounds, stays the Blood, and
closes up the lips of them: the juice helps running matters of the Ears, and
Inflammations of the Eyes being dropped therein.

There is another kind much like this in nature called Knawel.

See more of this in the Art of Simpling: written by W. Coals.

Knapweed. Jacea nigra.
IT has long narrow leaves much like Devils Bit, cubits high, bluntly snipt
about the edges; the flowers grow at the top of the stalks, being first scaly
knops, like corn flowers or blue bottle, but greater; out of the midst whereof
grows a purple thrummy or threddy flower: the root is thick and short.

Names.] There are many more kinds hereof, but its needless to name them,
being all reckoned amongst the sorts of Scabious. This Knapweed is called Jacea
nigra, to distinguish it from Harts-ease, or Pancies, which is called Jacea
also; it is likewise called Materfillon, and Matrefillen; in English Matfellon,
Bull-weed, and Knapweed.

Place and Time.] Knapweed grows commonly in Pastures, as also Scabious does,
and flowers in June and July.

Nature and Virtues.] Knapweed is much of the temperature of Scabious (whereof
it is a kind, but not so proper in Physic as Scabious is) to whose faculties
I refer you for this. It is said to be good against the swellings of the Uvula,
as is Devils-Bit, but of less force and virtue; wherefore you may use the most
effectual, it growing as plentiful as this. I should not have mentioned this
plant, (as accounting it not worth while) had not the writer or publisher of
that piece which goes by the name of Culpeppers English Physician Enlarged,
made a scribble to no purpose about it: Indeed in that Book both Culpepper and
the Readers are abused, it being really none of his, all the useless and
frivolous additions being done since his death. Those true Copies of his which
have been printed since he dyed, are his School of Physic, and Last Legacy.

Ladies Mantle. Alchimilla.
IT has many leaves rising from the root, standing on long hairy foot stalks,
round, somewhat dented on the edges into eight or ten parts more or less,
seeming like a Star, with so many corners and points more finely dented about,
of a light green color, and as if it were plated and folded at the first, then
crumpled in diverse places, and hairy as the stalk is, which rises up amongst
them a foot high, sometimes more, with a few smaller leaves thereon, and being
weak, bends down toward the ground, divided at the top into two or three
small branches, with whitish green heads and yellowish green flowers breaking
out of them; which being past, there comes a yellowish seed in the husks: the
root is long and black, with many fibers thereat.

Names.] In Latin it is called Alchymilla, Stellaria, Pes leonis, and Pata
leonis, and of some Sanicula major; in English Ladies Mantle, great Sanicle,
Lions foot, and Lions paw.

Place and Time.] It grows in Pastures and Woods in Kent, and diverse other
places of this Land: it flowers in May and June, and continues green all the
Winter.

Nature and Virtues.] Ladies Mantle is hot and dry in the second degree at
least, very astringent and drying, an herb of Mars: the decoction thereof
drunk, and the green herb outwardly applied, helps the flagging, and
over-greatness of Maids and Women's Breasts, bringing them to their due bigness:
it is effectual in Inflammations, stops Bleedings, Vomitings, and Fluxes,
Bruises and Ruptures, stays the Whites: the distilled water drunk many days
together, helps Conception, and dryes up the too much humidity of the Matrix,
and reduces the Body to a good estate. It is a singular Wound herb, and dryes
up the humidity of Sores and Ulcers, and abates Inflammations: it quickly heals
fresh Wounds, consolidating up the lips thereof, and leaving no corruption
therein.

See further in The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: by P. Morellus.

Larch-Tree, and its Agarick. Larix.
IT grows about Italy, Asia; it is called (...), and Larix in Latin, and also
Agaricum, and Agaricus; the Agarick is an excrescense, or kind of a Mushroome,
that grows on this Tree, being within white, soft, and spongy, like a
Mushroom. The Agarick is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second; it
has an attenuating cleansing quality, and purges obstructions of the entrails
by stool; it purges Phlegm, Choler, and Melancholy, and cleanses the
Breast, Lungs, Liver, and Reins, provokes Urine, and the Terms, kills Worms,
helps pains in the Joints, and causes a good color.

It is not good to be taken alone without Corrigents; therefore the Syrrup of
Roses, solutive with Agarick, is good to be taken; it cures the yellow
Jaundies, and is excellent good for Agues, coming of thick Humors; for which
take the Pills of Hyera with Agarick; it may be given with Oximel for Agues of
all sorts, and gripings of the Belly; it is good against shortness of Breath,
the Ptisick, and Consumption; and half a dram thereof in Wine, is a good
Antidote against poisons.

Lavender. Lavendula.
THis needs no description, there is a greater and a lesser kind of it; the
Latin name of it is Lavendula: some call it Spike, because it gives a smell
somewhat like Spikenard.

Place and Time.] It grows plentifully in our Gardens, and flowers about the
beginning of July.

Nature and Virtues.] Lavender is hot and dry in the third degree, of thin
subtle parts; it is an herb of Mercury: the distilled water is comfortable for
the Brain, and is good for the Palsy and cold diseases of the Head, the
Temples, Nape of the Neck, and place behind the Ears, being washed therewith;
it is good against the Megrim and falling Sickness, and two or three spoonfuls
being drunk, recovers lost speech.

A decoction of the flowers of Lavender, Horehound, Fennel, and Asparagus
roots, with a little Cynamon, is good against the Falling Sickness and
Giddiness of the Brain; it is good also for Convulsions, Apoplexies, Cramps,
Lethargies, and gripings of the Body coming of cold; it helps the stoppings of
the Milt, heats the Belly, provokes the Terms, and being holden in the Mouth,
it helps Ulcers and pains in the Teeth: the water helps blisters of the Mouth,
being washed therewith; the smell thereof comforts the sight: it is not to be
used where the Body is full of Blood and humors. The lesser Lavender is good
against diseases of the Mother, for Women to be bathed with, and to help
forward their Travel, and is good against venomous bitings. The chemical Oil of
Lavender, called Oil of Spike, is good for the falling Sickness, Palsy, Gout,
and aches of the Joints being taken inwardly, and the parts anointed; but a few
drops of it amongst other things is sufficient to be taken inwardly or
outwardly.

Lavender Cotton. Chamaecyparissus.
IT is an Herb well known in Gardens; it is called by some in Latin
Chamaecyparissus, and some take it to be the Abrotanum Faemina of Dioscorides;
it flowers about July, or August.

Nature and Virtues.] Both herb and seed are hot and dry in the third degree,
the plant is also Mercurial; the seeds or the herb stamped and strained with
milk, and given fasting, kills Worms in the Belly, both of elder persons as
well as Children: half a dram of Lavender Cotton taken in Fether-few water,
every morning ten days together, is good to stay the Whites in Women, and the
running of the Reins in men: the leaves drunk in Wine, is good against the
Jaundies, and opens the Liver and Kidneys; it is good against all venomous
bitings, and the smell thereof drives away vermin. The decoction is good to
help Scabs and Itch; it is good in Bathes and Ointments, to help Burstness,
Cramps, Convulsions, shrinking of Sinews, to provoke Urine, and women's Courses.

Spurge Laurel. Laurcola.
IT rises up with one,

Names.] In Latin it is called Laureola; in English Spurge Laurel.

Place and Time.] There grows abundance of it in Cobham Park in Kent; some set
it in Gardens: the berries be ripe about June.

Nature and Virtues.] It is of a very hot and biting temperature, a churlish
Martial plant; fourteen or fifteen of the berries, or five or six of the leaves
taken, purge slimy Phlegm and waterish humors, and is good for the Dropsy;
but it purges very violently, and therefore must carefully be used: it provokes
vomiting, procures women's Courses, and eases pains of the Chollick. It may be
thus prepared, steep the leaves four and twenty hours in good Vinegar, then dry
them, and drink their powder in wine with Anniseeds, and Mastick, or else in
sweet Whey, or Capon Broth. The dose is ii. or i. A Glister may be made of the
flowers for the Dropsy in this manner,. the flowers of Laurel ii. roots of
Polipody and Agarick, ana. i.ss, Dodder iii. boil them in Wine or Water to the
consumption of a third part, then take of the decoction lb. i. of Benedicta
laxativa, ss. honey of Roses i. oils of Rue, Camomile and Flower de Luce, ana.
i. sal. gem. i. ss. mix them for a Glister.

Leeks and Cives. Porrum.
I Shall not need to describe either of them, the Latin name of a Leek is
Porrum; they grow plentifully in our Gardens: the Cives abide the coldest
Winter.

Nature and Virtues.] Leeks are hot and dry in the third degree; of subtle
parts, one of Mars his plants, which infuseth much valor into the Welshmen;
they are very unwholesome, being eaten raw, but the boiling abates their evil
qualities; whereby used in pottage, they are good for phlegmatic Bodies, and
help the Chollick and Stone: the distilled water drunk morning and evening, a
good draught or two, opens a costive Belly, helps pain of the Hips, purges the
Kidneys and Bladder, provokes Urine, and helps to break the Stone. The seeds
are good to kill worms in Children; they are also held good to expel rotten
Phlegm from the Chest and Lungs. The juice drunk with honey is good against the
bitings of venomous Beasts, and the herb stamped and laid thereon; being boiled
and eaten often, they make women fruitful, and increase lust in men.

Lettice. Lactuca.
IT is a common Sallet, manured in our Gardens; there is also a wild kind
called Lambs Lettice, or Corn Sallet.

Names.] Lactuca is the Latin name thereof; the place I have told you already:
it is sown usually in the Spring, and may be had all the year, if it be sown
at several seasons.

Nature and Virtues.] Lettice is cold and moist almost in the third degree, a
Lunar herb; it tempereth dryness and heat in the body, and increases milk in
Nurses who have hot dry bodies: it is good for a hot Stomach, and yields good
nourishment to the body, it causes sleep and rest, it loosens the belly,
either raw or boiled; it helps digestion, quenches thirst, and eases pains of
the Stomach and Liver that come of Choler; it abates lust, and cools the
Urine, which likewise does the seeds and distilled water: the juice of Lettice
with Oil of Roses applied to the forehead and Temples, eases the Headache, and
procures rest; and applied with Camphire to the Cods, it abates the heat of
Lust. The Lambs Lettice is a pleasant Sallet to be eaten with Oil and Vinegar.

Liquorice. Liqueritia.
THe root is very well known, and it is needless to describe the branches;
Liqueritia and Glycyrrhyza are the Latin names thereof.

Place and Time.] It is planted in our Gardens, which yield the best Liquorice
that is: it will flower in July, and yield a seed in September, if it be
suffered to grow many years without removing.

Nature and Virtues.] It is temperate in heat and moisture, an excellent
pectoral Plant, Mercury rules it; the root is a great opener of the Pipes, of
the Lungs, it ripens a Cough, and brings forth Phlegm; it is good against the
heat of the Mouth and Stomach, and quenches thirst; being boiled in water with
some Maidenhair and Figs, it helps a dry Cough, wheesing and shortness of
Breath, Hoarseness, digests and expectorates Phlegm, and is good for all griefs
of the Chest and Lungs, Ptisick, and Consumptions, it helps pain of the Reins,
Strangury, and heat of Urine, The juice of Liquorice dissolved in Rose Water
with some Gum Trajacanth, is a fine Lohoch for Hoarseness, Wheesing, roughness
in the Mouth and Throat; it expectorates tough Phlegm, and condensates thin
Rheumes which fall on the Lungs.

Lemon-Tree. Malus Limonia.
LEmons seldom come to maturity in our cold Country; therefore I shall not
describe the Tree, but proceed to the virtues of the fruit, which is well known
to us.

Nature and Virtues.] The rind of Lemmons is hot in the first degree, and dry
in the second, and the juice cold in the second degree, and dry in the first;
the Sun has dominion over it: the juice of Lemons drunk two or three times a
week, in white or Rhenish Wine, with some Sugar, strengthens the heart,
stomach, and head, resists poison, expells melancholy, makes a sweet Breath,
and cleanses the Reins and bladder, and helps to expel the Stone out of the
Kidneys: it kills and drives forth worms out of the belly. An Angel of gold, or
the weight thereof in leaf Gold steeped four and twenty hours in four ounces of
the juice of Lemons, and some of that juice given in a Cup of Wine, with some
powder of Angelica root, is very good to be given to such as are infected with
the Plague. The juice is good in Fevers to quench thirst, and so is the posset
made of it. A water distilled in a glass from the pulp of Lemons, provokes
Urine being drunk, and helps to break the Stone; it likewise cleanses the skin,
kills lice in the Head, helps running Scabs, and Wheals in the Skin. The seeds
preserve the Heart and vital Spirits from poison, and resists infection of
contagious diseases.

See further in Adam in Eden: written by Will. Coals.

Lilly Convally. Lilium Convallium.
IT has leaves somewhat like unto white Lillies, or rather those of the
smallest water Plantain; it has a slender small stalk, at the top of which
grow little small white flowers, like little Bells, with turned edges of a
pleasant smell; after which come small red berries, much like the berries of
Asparagus, wherein the seed is contained: the root is small, creeping far
abroad in the ground.

Names.] Lillium Convallium is the Latin name; in English Lilly of the Valley,
Conval Lilly, May Lilly, Wood Lillies, and Lilly Confancy.

Place and Time.] It grows upon Hamsted Heath, in Cobham Park in Kent, and
many other places of this Land: it flowers in May, and the fruit is ripe in
September.

Nature and Virtues.] It is temperately hot and dry, an herb of Mercury; it
cures the Apoplexy, and the flowers distilled with Wine, and a spoonful thereof
given at a time, restores lost speech to them that have the dumb Palsy; it
strengthens the Brain, helps a weak Memory, comforts the vital Spirits, and is
good against the Gout: the distilled water helps Inflammations of the Eyes. The
flowers steeped in new Wine and drunk, helps trembling of the Heart, and other
Members, and stops the spreading of the Leprosy. The flowers steeped in new
Wine a month, and then the Wine distilled five times over in a Limbeck, is a
precious water for the Apoplexy; being taken with a little Lavender water, and
six grains of Pepper, it eases the Chollick, comforts the brain, and is good
against the Falling Sickness; it likewise helps the Strangury, pricking about
the Heart, and Inflammations of the Liver, and stays the overmuch flowing of
the Terms.

See further in Adam in Eden: by W. Coals,

Water-Lilly. Nymphaea.
IT has large round leaves,

Names.] Both Latins and Greeks call it Nymphaea; it is called also in Shops
Nenuphar; it is called in English Water Rose, and Water Lilly,

Place and Time.] They grow always in standing Waters, and slow running
Rivers, and very plentifully in Holshot River in Hampshire, my native soil, all
along the River by Danmore Mead: They flower in May, and June, and the seed is
ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] The leaves and flowers are cold and moist, the seed and
roots cold and dry, an herb of Venus. The decoction of the seed cools and
binds, restrains lust, and nocturnal pollutions; but the frequent use thereof
extinguishes motions to Venery: it is available for the Running of the R^ins,
and the Whites, and to cool the heat of Urine the leaves cool Inflammations,
and the decoction thereof helps the inward heats of Agues, being drunk, they
also expel the Afterbirth, the syrrup of the Flowers allayes the heat of
Choler, and distempers of the Head, provokes sleep, and heap. hot distempers
of the Heart, Liver, Reins, and Matrix: the conserve and distilled water
works the same effects. The distilled water takes away spots, Sun-burning,
and Freckles of the Skin. The oil that is made of the flowers, helps the
Headache, causes sleep, prevents Venereous dreams, and takes down the
standing of the Yard, the head and privities being anointed therewith; it also
cures hot tumors, and the Inflammations of Ulcers.

Liver-wort. Lichen.
LIverwort grows close upon the ground,

Names.] It is called in Latin Lichen, Jecoraria, and of some Hepatica; in
English Liverwort.

Place and time,] Liverwort grows in moist and shadowy places, by the heads of
Springs and Ponds, and sometimes on the stones in the insides of Wells; it is
green all the year, and flowers in June and July.

Nature and Virtues.] It is a plant of Jupiter, and under the sign Cancer, by
temperature cold and dry, and somewhat binding; it is very good to help all
distempers of the Liver, and is effectually used in diet drinks for that
purpose; it cools and cleanses it, and helps Inflammations of that part, and
the yellow Jaundies: being bruised and boiled alone in beer, and drunk, it
cools the heat of the Liver and Kidneys, and helps the running of the Reins in
men, and the whites in Women: it is good against Hectic Fevers, and all other
Fevers and Agues, coming of Choker, and all other heats of the Liver, and takes
away the cause of Scabs, Blains, and Blisters; being stamped with Hogs Grease,
and applied, it heals Sores, Tetters, Ringworms, and fretting Ulcers.

See further in Adam in Eden: written by Will. Coals.

Loose-strife, or Willow-herb. Lysimachia.
THere are many kinds of it, I shall describe only the purple spike headed
Loose-strife, which grows with many woody square stalks full of joints,
about three foot high, having two leaves at every joint, like Willow leaves,
but shorter, and of a deeper green color, some of them being sometimes
brownish; the stalks branch forth into many long stems of spiky flowers, half a
foot long, growing in rundles one above another, out of small husks, somewhat
like the heads of Lavender, but far bigger, every flower consisting of five
round pointed leaves, of a purplish violet color, somewhat inclining to
redness; in the husks lies the seed after the flowers are fallen: the root
creeps under ground almost like Couch-grass, but is greater.

Names.] The Latins call it Lysimachia; in English Loose-strife, and
Willow-herb.

Place and Time.] It grows by Rivers, and Ditches sides, and in wet grounds
almost in every Country of this Land: the yellow Willow herb is more rare.
They flower about June and July.

Nature and Virtues.] They are all hot, dry, and binding, yet Culpepper says
they are cold, and ascribes them to the Moon: the distilled water of both the
purple and the yellow, is excellent good for green Wounds, being thus applied;
to every ounce of water, add two drams of May Butter unsalted, as much Sugar
and wax, boil them gently to an Ointment, then dip tents in the Liquor that
remains after it is cold, and put them into the Wound, covering it over with a
linen cloth, doubled and anointed with the Ointment: it also cleanses foul
Ulcers. The distilled water very much preserves the sight, helps hurts and
blows in the Eyes, and clears them of dust; it is good to gargle the Mouth
and Throat therewith against the Quinzy and Kings Evil; it is also good to take
away Warts and Scars of the Skin, it quenches thirst, is good to stay Fluxes
of the Belly, the overflowing of Women's Courses, and to bathe Sores and Ulcers
of the privy parts.

Lovage. Levisticum.
LOvage has many long great stalks of large winged leaves, divided like
smallage, but larger, of a dark green color, smooth and shining, every leaf
cut about the edges, and broader forward then toward the stalk; the stalks are
green and hollow, toward the tops of them come forth other smaller branches,
bearing at their tops large Umbels of yellow flowers, which turn into flat
brownish seed, like Angelica seed; the root is large, brownish without, and
white within: the whole Plant is of a strong smell, and in taste hot, sharp,
and biting.

Names.] It is called Levisticum in Latin.

Places and Time.] It is an inhabitant of the Garden, flowers in July, and
seeds in August.

Nature and Virtues.] Lovage is a Solar herb, hot and dry in the third degree,
and of thin parts; the dried root in powder drunk in Wine, is good for a cold
Stomach, consuming superfluouus moisture in the Stomach and Belly, and
expelling wind, and helps digestion; it likewise resists poison, and
infection. The decoction of the root in Wine or Barley water, cleanses the
Lungs, provokes Urine and Women's Courses, and heals inward wounds, The
decoction of the herb is good for any sort of Ague, and to help cold pains of
the Bowels. The seeds drunk in powder in white Wine fasting, or boiled therein,
purges upwards and downwards, and opens the stoppings of the Spleen: take with
the seeds the like quantity of Anniseeds and Fennil seeds to qualify them. The
distilled water is good for the Quinzy, and helps the plurisie, being drunk
three or four times; it takes away the redness of the Eyes, and helps the
dimness of them, being dropped therein, and takes away spots and Freckles of
the face. The leaves bruised and fried with Hogs Lard, and applied to a Botch
or Boil, will quickly break it.

Lungwort. Pulmonaria.
IT is a kind of Moss that grows on many Trees,

Names.] Pulmonaria Physicians call it in Latin, and of some Lichen Arborum,
or wood Liverword, and tree Lungwort.

Nature and Virtues.] It is of a cold and dry quality, but I suppose that
Jupiter rules it; it is very effectual for all diseases of the Lungs, for all
obstructions, Ulcers, and inward inflammations of the same, and also for
Coughs, Wheesing, spitting and pissing of Blood: it is good for Ulcers in the
privy parts, to stay Fluxes, Looseness, and Vomiting, the bloody Flux, and
other Scowrings, especially if they proceed of Choler.

Lupines. Lupinus.
THey grow only in Gardens here where they are planted; therefore I shall not
further describe them. Lupinus is the Latin name, and Lupines in English, and
of some they are called Fig beans, being flat, like a Fig that is pressed: they
flower in June and July, and the beans are ripe quickly after.

Nature and Virtues.] Lupines are very bitter in taste; by reason of their
bitterness they open, dissolve, digest, and cleanse. I suppose they are under
the dominion of Mars: the decoction thereof is good for the Spleen, being taken
with Rue and Pepper it will be the pleasanter; but if they be steeped two or
three days in water, they lose their bitterness: The said decoction is good to
kill worms, and so is the meal taken with Honey, or water and Vinegar, or mixed
with an Ox gall, and applied to the Navel: they also cleanse the Stomach, help
digestion, and provoke appetite, being first steeped in water, and then dried
and powdered, and taken with Vinegar. The decoction also provokes Urine, and
women's Courses, and being taken with Myrrh, it expells a dead Child; it is
also good to cleanse Scabs, Ulcers, Morphew, and Tetters, and cleanses the
Face and Skin from spots and other marks. The meal boiled in Vinegar,
discusseth hard Swellings, breaks Carbuncles and Imposthumes.

See more of this in The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: by P. Morellus.

Ladies Smock, Cuckoo Flowers, or wild Water Cresses. Cardamine.
THose kinds of these flowers which grow naturally with us in England, are a
kind of Watercresses; for which cause they are called Nasturtium aquaticum
minus, and also Flos cuculi, because they flower in April about the time the
Cuckoo uses to sing without hoarseness; but for the Virtues if they have any,
they are of the nature of Water Cresses, to which I refer you.

White Lillies. Lilium.
THe English white Lilly grows in most Gardens of England, and will increase
much by the root where it is planted: it is so vulgarly known, as needs no
further description. They flower from May to the end of June.

Names.] The white Lilly is called in Greek (...), in Latin Lilium, and Rosa
Junonis, or Juno's Rose, it being reported that it sprung up of her milk which
she spilt upon the ground, after Hercules had sucked her in her sleep.

Nature and Virtues.] The white Lilly is hot, partaking of a subtle substance,
the root dry in the first degree, and hot in the second: the leaves boiled in
red Wine, and applied to old Wounds, or Ulcers, does them much good in
expediting the cure, as says Gallen. The distilled water being drunk, causes
easy deliverance, and expels the Afterbirth, says Alexandrinus. The
flowers steeped in oil Olive, and set in the Sun in Summer in a glass, and
repeated two or three times, is good to harden the softness of the Sinews, and
help the hardness the Matrix. The root stamped and strained with Wine-and drunk
two or three days together, expels the Pestilence, causing it to break out:
and the juice thereof tempered with barley Meal, and baked in Cakes and eaten
ordinarily for a month or six weeks together, forbearing all other bread in
the mean time, helps to the cure of the Dropsy: the same root roasted in the
Embers, and stamped with some leaven of Rye Bread and Hogs grease, breaks
Plagues Sores, and Pestilential Botches, and ripens Venerial Imposthumes, and
Buboes in the Flank, or elsewhere. The same root stamped with Honey, and
applied, gleweth together Sinews that be cut; it consumes and cleanses away
the Ulcers of the head, called Achores, and all scurviness of the Beard and
Face; and being stamped with Vinegar, Henbane Leaves, or Barley Meal, it cures
Humors and Imposthumes of the privy parts.

Laserwort, and its Assa Faetida. Laserpitium.
THis is an Outlandish Plant, growing in Syria, America, and Libia. There
issues a Gum or liquor out of the same, called Laser; but that which is
gathered from those Plants in Media and Syria, is that stinking Gum, called in
our Shops, Assa Faetida, which is good to be applied unto the Navels of such
Women as are troubled with the rising of the Mother, and for them to smell unto
for that purpose: the reason whereof you may read in my Women's Counselor. The
root of Laserpitium is hot and dry in the third degree, and so is Laser. The
root well pounded with Oil, scatters clotted Blood, cures the Kings Evil,
and takes away black and blue marks, that come by stripes or bruises, the
places being anointed or plaistered therewith. The same root chewed in the
Mouth, asswageth the Toothache. A plaster made thereof with the oil of Ireos
and Wax, is good to help the Sciatica. The Laser or Gum of Laserpitium
dissolved in Water, and drunken, takes away a sudden Hoarseness; being supt up
with a rear Egg, it cures the Cough, and taken in broth is good against an old
Plurisie; being taken with dried Figs, it cures the Jaundies, and Dropsy. A
scruple thereof taken with a little Pepper and Myrrh, is good against the
shrinking of Sinews, and taken with syrrup of Vinegar, it is good against the
Falling Sickness. The same drunk in Wine with Pepper and Frankincense, is good
against the shaking's of Agues; being applied with Copperas and Verdigrease, it
takes away superfluous out-growings of the Flesh, Polypus in the Nose, and
nianginess; and applied with vinegar, pepper, and wine, it cures the Scurf of
the Head, and hinders the falling off the Hair,

Lignum Aloes, Vide Xylo-Aloe.

White Maidenhair, or Wall Rue. Ruta Muraria.
IT brings forth many small round slender leaves,

Names.] Its called in Latin Ruta muraria, and Salvia vitae; in English Wall
Rue, Stone Rue, or white Maidenhair.

Place and Time] It grows upon old Walls near unto Waters and Wells, is green
as well Winter as Summer, and bears neither flower nor seed.

Nature and Virtues.] Wall Rue is much like the other Maidenhair, both in
temperature and virtue; it is commended against Ruptures in young Children, and
affirmed to be good if the powder be taken continually for forty days
together; it is likewise good for the Cough, shortness of breath, pains and
stitches in the sides: the decoction of it being drunk, digesteth raw humors,
which stick in the Lungs, takes away the pain of the Kidneys and bladder,
gently provokes Urine, and expels the Stone.

See further of this in Culpeppers School of Physic. Sweet Maudlin, Vide
Alecoast.

Dogs Mercury. Cynocrambe.
IT is like the Garden Mercury,

Names.] Dogs Mercury is called in Greek (...); in Latin Cynocrambe Canina,
Mercurialis Sylvestris; in English Dogs Cole, and Dogs Mercury.

Place and Time.] It grows about Green Hithe and Gravesend in Kent, and about
Hamsted near London, and in many Woods, Copses, and Borders of Fields;
flourishes all the Summer.

Nature and Virtues.] Dogs Mercury comes near the other Mercury in Nature and
quality, though seldom used: it is also reported to cure the biting of mad
Dogs, from whence it is thought to obtain the name of Dogs Mercury.

Naile-wort, Vide Whitlow-grass.

Madder. Rubia Tinctorum.
THere be six kinds,

Names.] In Latin it is called Rubia Tinctorum; in English Madder.

Place and Time.] It is manured in Gardens, and flowers in June and July, and
the seed is ripe in August.

Nature and Vertues] Madder roots are hot in the second degree, and dry in the
^^rd, an Herb of Mars; it has an opening quality, and also a binding. The
decoction in Wine provokes Urine, Women's Courses, and also brings away the
Birth and Afterbirth; it cures the Jaundies, purges melancholy, and opens the
Spleen and Gall: it is good for inward bruises, and to dissolve congealed
Blood; wherefore it is much used in Wound drinks, and is good for the Dropsy,
Palsy, Sciatica, and Hip-Gout: the seeds taken with Vinegar and Honey, helps
hardness, and swelling of the Spleen. The decoction with Allome and Honey,
helps Ulcers of the Mouth. The juice or decoction helps venomous bitings, and
preserves the body from putrefaction. The fresh roots bruised and applied,
helps discoloring of the Skin, as the Morphew, and Freckles, The juice of the
root eases pains of the Ears, being dropped therein, it is said also to stay
the Reds in Women, and the Bloody Flux: Give it not to women with Child, nor
often to hot and dry bodies, and then the dose is about ii. in powder, and half
an ounce in decoction.

Maidenhair. Capillus Veneris.
THere is several kinds hereof reckoned up amongst Herbarists; here we shall
mention only three, English Maidenhair, Wall Rue, or white Maidenhair, and
golden Maidenhair.

Description.] Common Maidenhair does from many hard black fibers shoot forth
many blackish shining brittle stalks, scarce a span long at the most, set on
each side with small round dark green leaves, spotted on the back of them.

Names.] Capillus Veneris is the usual Latin name; the Wall Rue is called Ruta
muraria, and the Golden Maidenhair Adiantum Aureum.

Place and Time.] Maiden hair grows much upon old Stone Walls, by Springs,
and in rocky shadowy places; it is green all the Winter, but never yields any
flower.

Nature and Virtues.] It is in a mean between heat and coldness, it does dry,
make thin, and waste away, as Gallen says: All the kinds are under Mercury,
and alike in Temperature and faculty. A Lie made of Maidenhair is good in
cleanse the head from Scurf, and keep the hair from falling; it is good against
all diseases of the Breast and Lungs, Liver, and Reins, the decoction of the
herb being drunk; it helps the Cough and shortness of Breath, yellow Jaundies,
diseases of the Spleen, provokes Urine, and the Courses; and yet being dry, it
stays Bleeding and Fluxes of the Stomach and Belly; but being green, it
looseneth and drives Choler and Phlegm from the Stomach and Liver, and
cleanses the Lungs, and the Blood: they are said to be good against venomous
bitings, the Kings Evil, and other hard swellings: and the powder drunk
constantly forty days together, is good for Ruptures in Children.

See more of this in Adam in Eden: written by Will. Coals.

Mallows. Malva.
MAllows and Hollihocks too which are a kind of them are so commonly known,
they need no description.

Names.] Mallows are called in Latin Malva, which name most think it obtained,
because it softens the Belly, and hard tomours.

Place and Time.] They grow plentifully in every County: they slower about June
and July.

Nature and Virtues.] To Venus they are all ascribed: The common mallows are
moderately hot and moist: they are to be preferred before the Hollyhock.
Mallows are generally held to make the Belly solluble, they increase milk in
Nurses, being used in pottage, or boiled and buttered as other Sallets: being
applied plu^^s-wayes they assuage hardness of the Breasts, and other Tumors,
Inflammations, Imposthumes, and Swellings of the Cods, and hardness of the
Liver and Spleen, a Pultis being made with some Bean or Barley Flower, and oil
of Roses added to them. The decoction of the leaves and roots with Parsley, and
Fennel Roots, in Wine, Water, or Broth, do open the Body, and are good in hot
Agues, and Chollerick Distempers. The decoction of the same, and of the seeds
in milk or Wine, help exceriations of the Bowels, Ptisick, Plurisie, and other
diseases of the Chest and Lungs coming of hot causes: it likewise procures
speedy delivery to women: the leaves bruised with a little honey and applied to
the Eyes, helps impostumations of them. The head washed with the decoction,
takes away Scurf, Dandriff, helps dry Scabs, and the falling off the hair; it
is also good against Scaldings, Burnings, hot and painful swellings in any part
of the Body. The decoction of the flowers in Water, having a little honey added
to it, is good to gargle a sore mouth. Pliny says, that whosoever shall take a
spoonful of the juice of any of the Mallows in a morning, shall that day be
free from all diseases, and it is especial good for the falling Sickness. The
Syrrup and Conserve of the flowers in effectual for the same diseases.

Marshmallows. Althaea.
Marshmallows rises three or four foot high with diverse soft hairy white
stalks, very plyant, rough, and bending like Liquorice, whitish on the outside,
but whiter within.

Names.] The Latins from the Greeks have gotten in the name of Althaea; it is
also called Bismalva, being twice as good in effects as any other; in English
Marsh-Mallow, from the places where it grows.

Place and Time.] It grows in Marshes, and Moors; as in the salt Marshes from
Woolwich to the Sea, both on the Essex and Kentish Shores: they flourish in
July and August, continuing flowring till the Frost kills the stalks, springing
fresh every spring; at which time the roots are fittest to be gathered for
physical uses.

Nature and Virtues.] Marsh Mallows are moderately hot, but dry in the first
and second degree, of a softning quality, the roots and seeds are more dry, and
of thinner parts; it is likewise an herb of Venus: They abound with a slimy
viscous juice, whereby they are excellent good against excoriations of the
Guts, Reins, Bladder, and Yard; it opens the stait Passages, and makes them
slippery, easing thereby the pains of the Stone: it also helps diseases of the
Breast and Lungs, as Coughs, Hoarseness, and Plurisie; it is good for those
that are troubled with Ruptures, Convulsions, or Cramps: the decoction or
syrrup being drunk, is good for all the said diseases. The dried Roots boiled
in milk and drunk, are good for the Chin Cough. The decoction of the roots in
Wine are good for inward Bruises, Pains, and Aches in the Muscles. The leaves
and roots are of excellent use in decoctions for Glisters to ease gripings in
the Belly, and pains in the Reins and Bladder; being boiled in wine and
applied, they help swellings in Women's Breasts, in the Throat, and other
Inflammations. The muscilage of the Roots, and of Linseed and Fenugreek
together, is good in Pultisses and Ointments to mollify hard Tumors, and
digest inflammations. The root boiled in Vinegar and holden in the Mouth,
easieth the Toothache, The leaves applied with oil, helps Burnings, Scaldings,
and bitings of Men or Dogs; all sorts of Currs, and against the stinging of
Bees and Wasps: the ointment of Marsh Mallows does mollify heat, and moisten,
and is good against the Plurisie, and other pains of the Sides and Breast.

Maple Tree.
IT is a Tree well known to Turners, who use the Timber of it: it is said to be
under the dominion of Jupiter, and a strengthner of the Liver: The decoction of
the leaves or Bark being used, strengthens the Liver, and opens obstructions of
the Liver and Spleen: but I believe it is not much experienced, if at all.

Wild and Sweet Marjoram. Marjorana.
SWeet Marjoram is very well known,

Names. In Latin it is called Amaracus, and Marjorana; in English Sweet
Marjoram, and Marjoram gentle; and the wild kind Organy, Origanum, and
bastard Marjoram.

Place and Time.] The sweet grows only in Gardens, the wild kind in borders
of Corn Fields and Pastures in sundry places of this Land: It flowers about
July and August.

Nature and Virtues.] They are all Herbs of Mercury; the common Sweet Marjoram
is hot and dry in the second degree; it is comfortable in cold Diseases of the
Head, Stomach, Sinews, and other parts, taken inwardly; and outwardly applied,
it digesteth, opens, and strengthens, comforts the Brain, helps the Memory,
and is good against the Apoplexy: the Head being washed with a Lie made of it,
eases grievous pains thereof; it helps coldness of the Stomach and digestion,
being given in powder in wine. The oil of it is good to supple, warm, and
stretch forth stiff Joints, and hard Sinews; it helps cold griefs and windiness
of the Womb, and the dead Palsy, the back Bone being anointed with it; it
helps Spasmus Cynicus, which is a wrying of the mouth aside, being snuffed up
into the Nose; it is a gallant Oil to strengthen the Muscles, and other parts
of the Body; it helps noise of the Ears, being dropped into them. The decoction
of this Herb is good in the beginning of a Dropsy, it heats the inward
Members, softens the Milt, and asswageth the swelling of it; it helps those
that cannot make water, and eases pains of the Belly. The powder of the leaves
snuffed upon into the Nose, stays Rheum, cleanses and warms the Head. The
flower and herb being put into a fine Bag and applied to the Stomach, eases
pains thereof.

Marigolds. Calendula.
THis well known herb needs no description.

Names.] It is called in Latin Calendula, and of some Caltha; in English
Marigolds, and Ruds.

Place and Time.] I think there are few Gardens without them; they flower all
Summer, and in Winter too, if it be mild.

Nature and Virtues.] Marigold flowers are hot almost in the second degree,
especially being dried; it is a Solar Herb, and under the sign Leo, a great
comforter of the Heart; and though it be so plentiful, (and therefore less
regarded) it is not much inferior to Saffron: The Marigold Flowers resist
poison, and are good in contagious Fevers, and the Jaundies, and are very
expulsive; and therefore effectual in the Small Pox and Measles: they provoke
Sweat, and Women's Courses, and expel the Afterbirth. The Conserve of the
Flowers is very good against corrupted Air, and in time of Pestilence to
prevent Infection; it helps the trembling of the Heart being taken morning and
evening. The flowers used in Possets or Broth, either green or dry, do comfort
the Heart and Spirits, and expel Pestilential qualities that might annoy them.
The Juice takes away Warts, being washed therewith, and helps the Toothache;
and being mixed with vinegar, and a hot swelling bathed therewith asswages it,
and gives ease; and being dropped into the ears, it kills worms therein. The
distilled water is good for sore Eyes, and a Plaster made of the dry flowers
in Powder, Hogs Grease, Turpentine, and Rosin, and applied to the Breast,
comforts and strengthens the Heart in Fevers very much.

See further in The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: by P. Morellus.

Masterwort. Imperatoria.
IT has diverse great broad leaves divided into many parts,

Names.] It is called Imperatoria, Masterwort, and false Pellitory of Spain.

Places and Time.] It is usually kept in Gardens with us; flowers and seeds
about the end of August.

Nature and Virtues.] The root of Masterwort is hot in the third degree, and of
subtle parts, an herb of Mars: The dried root chewed in the mouth, draws
Rheum from the head; easing pains of the Head and Teeth, and draws away
defluxions of Rheum upon the Lungs, or Eyes; it dissolves wind, and is good
in cold grief of the Stomach and Body; it provokes Urine, helps to break the
Stone, and expells Gravel; it is good against the suffocation of the Mother,
drives down the Courses, and expells a dead Child; it is good against the
Dropsy, Cramp, and falling Sickness; it provokes Sweat, and is good against
all cold Poisons. The juice dropped, or Tents wet therein and applied to green
Wounds, or old fretting Ulcers, does soon cleanse and heal them; it is likewise
good for the cold Gout.

Mastick Tree. Lentiscus.
THis Outlandish Tree I shall not describe, but only sum up the Virtues of its
Gum, called Mastick. The Tree is called in Latin Lentiscus, the Gum Resina
Lentiscina, Mastiche, and Mastix.

Mastick is very good for the Toothache, being steeped in Rose water, and the
Mouth washed therewith; it fastens loose Teeth, and strengthens the Gums: being
held or chewed in the Mouth, it draws away phlegm, and causes a sweeet Breath;
it cleanses and dryes up Ulcers and Sores, being used in plasters and
ointments; it strengthens and comforts the Stomach, mollifies Tumors, and eases
pains of the Joints and Sinews: for all which purposes the chemical oil is most
effectual; being taken inwardly, it stays Vomiting, and brings good digestion;
it stops the Flux of the Belly, and taken with syrrup of Coltsfoot, it helps
Coughs; it is a good corrigent in strong purging Medicines, abating their
acrimony or sharpness.

Sweet Maudlin, Vide Alecoast, or Costmary.

Mechoacan and Jalap. Mechoacana.
THis plant grows in the West Indies, there are two kinds, white and black;
they are both not in the first degree, and dry in the second, of an airy
substance, and also an earthly quality.

Mechoacan is effectual for the Dropsy, purging water and phlegm, and
strengthens the Liver; it purges the Brain and Nerves, and is good for a long
continued Headache; it helps pains in the Joints, and also in the Bladder
and Reins, by provoking Urine; it expells Wind, eases the Chollick, and pains
of the Mother: it is said to have all the Virtues that are either in Agarick,
or Rhabarb, and therefore is commended in the French Pox, Kings Evil, Scurvy,
and Gout, and in inveterate Agues, and also in the Falling Sickness, Catharre,
old Cough, shortness of Breath, Jaundies, and stoppings of the Liver and
Spleen; it may be given to Children a scruple, or a scruple and a half of the
powder in white Wine; to strong bodies a dram or two. Jalap purges Phlegm,
Choler, and Melancholy, and watery humors. The dose thereof may be a dram in
white Wine, with a little Anniseeds and Ginger to correct it; otherwise it
troubles the Stomach, making it subject to Vomit.

Meadsweet, Vide Queen of the Meadows.

The Medlar Tree. Mespilus.
THis Tree is generally well known, being a companion in Orchards and Gardens
amongst other fruit Trees: it is called Mespilus, and the fruit Mespilum in
Latin: the Tree in English is called the Medlar, or Open-arse Tree, and the
fruit Mediars and Open-arses.

They flower in May, and the fruit is ripe about Michaelmas; and then when they
are gathered, they must lie till they are rotten before they be fit to eat.

Nature and Virtues.] Both leaves and fruit of the Medlar Tree are cold, dry,
and astringent, a plant of Saturn, The decoction of Medlars is good to gargle
the Mouth and Throat, it stays defluxions of humors, which might cause pains
and swellings there; it is also good to drink, and to bathe the Stomach warm,
that is subject to loathing or vomiting, for it fortifies digestion, and
strengthens the retentive faculty: A pultis or a plaster may be made for the
same purpose with dried Medlars, mixed and beaten together with the juice of
red Roses, a few Cloves, Nutmegs, and a little red Corral. The said decoction
is a good bath for women to sit in whose courses flow overmuch, and to stay the
bleeding of the Piles. The powder of the leaves is good to stay the bleeding of
fresh Wounds. The stones bruised to powder, and drunk in liquor wherein some
Parsley roots have been steeped all night, or a little boiled, does expel
stones and gravel from the Kidneys. The fruit is good to stay women's longings,
and is good for those that are apt to miscarry.

Melilot. Corona Regia.
COmmon Melilot springs up with many green stalks about half a yard high, or
more, from a tough, long, white root, which dies not every year, set round
about at the Joints, with small and somewhat long, strong, and well smelling
leaves, standing three together, dented about the edges unevenly: the flowers
are yellow, and well scented, standing in long spikes one above another a hand
breadth long or better; after the flowers come long crooked Cods, wherein are
contained brownish flat seeds.

Names.] The Latins call it Corona Regia, because the flowers crown the tops
of the stalks, but it is generally called Melilota, from the Greek; and in
English Melilot, Kings Claver, and Hearts Claver, because Deer delight to feed
upon it.

Place and Time.] It is found plentifully in many places of this Land, in Corn
Fields, the Corners of Meadows, and by Ditches sides.

Nature and Virtues.] It is a Plant of Mercury, and has mixed qualities like
him, binding, and yet digesting, and the hot faculty abounding more therein
then the cold. The seed thereof applied with Linseed, Fenugreek, and Camomile
flowers, asswages Tumors, and hard swellings, provokes the Courses, opens
obstructions of the Veins, and strengthens the parts. The compound Plaster of
Melilot is effectual to dissolve Tumors, windiness, and swellings of the
Spleen, Liver, and Belly; it eases the Hypocondria, or any other pain, and is
good for the Rickets. The other Plaster of Melilot is good to draw such sores
and wounds as need cleansing. The juice dropped into the ears, eases pains of
them, and being dropped into the eyes, it clears them of pearls and spots, and
takes away the Web, and clears the sight; being steeped in Rose water and
vinegar, and applied, it eases the Headache; it mollifieth all Tumors and
Inflammations either in the privy parts, or other places of the body, being
boiled in wine and applied, and sometimes the yolk of a roasted Egg, or the
powder of Linseed, Fenugreek, Poppy seed, Endive, or fine flower is added to
it. The flowers of Melilot and Camomile are much used in Glisters to ease
pains, and expel wind, and likewise in pultisses to assuage Swellings and
Tumors; being boiled in water, it helps Wens, and running Ulcers of the Head,
being applied with Chalk Wine, and Galls: it is effectual for those who have
suddenly lost their senses by any fit, and to strengthen the Memory, and
comfort the Head and Brain, to preserve them from pains, and the Apoplexy, the
head being often washed with the distilled water of the Herb and Flowers, or
with a Lie made thereof.

French and Dogs Mercury. Mercurialis.
BOth these kinds of Mercury have a male and a female.

The Dogs Mercury has many stalks smaller and lower then the other, and
without branches; the male has two leaves at every joint, somewhat greater
then the female, more pointed and harder; at the joints with the leaves come
forth longer stalks then the former, with two round hairy seeds on them, twice
as big as those of the other Mercury; from the joints of the female come forth
spikes of flowers like the female French Mercury. The root is fibrous, yet
abides the Winter, the stalks dying down to the ground, and springing every
year.

Names.] It is known in Latin by the name of Mercurialis, and the dogs
Mercury, Mercurialis Canina, and Cynocrambe.

Place and Time.] The French Mercury grows in Kent, and diverse other places of
this Land. The Dogs Mercury grows by hedges sides in many places: they flower
and seed in the Summer months.

Nature and Virtues.] Mercury is hot and dry about the second degree, having a
cleansing and digesting faculty: Mercury claims it for his names sake.

Mercury is much commended for Women's Diseases; the secret parts being fomented
therewith, it eases the pains of the Mother; the decoction thereof being
taken, procures the Terms, expells the Afterbirth; it is also good for the
Strangury, and diseases of the Reins and Bladder. Hypocrates commends it for
sore and watery Eyes, deafness and pains in the Ears, by dropping the juice
thereof into them, and bathing them afterward in white Wine: the juice taken
in Broth or drink, or the decoction of the leaves with a little Sugar, purges
chollerick and waterish humors: Broth made thereof with a Cock Chicken is good
against hot fits of an Ague, and cleanses the Breast and Lungs of phlegm; but
is a little offensive to the Stomach. The juice or water thereof snuffed up
into the nostrils purges the Head and Eyes of Rheum, and Cathars. Two or
three ounces of the distilled water with a little Sugar taken fasting, opens
and purges the body of gross viscous and melancholy humors. Mathiolus says,
That the seed of the male and the flowers of the female Mercury boiled with
Wormwood and drunk speedily, cures the yellow Jaundies. The leaves or juice
rubbed upon Warts, takes them away. The juice mixed with vinegar, helps the
Itch, running Scabs, Tetters, and Ring-worms, being applied pultis-wise to
Swellings, and Inflammations, it digesteth the humors which cause the same. It
is commonly used amongst other things in Glisters to evacuate the Belly from
offensive humors. Dogs Mercury may be likewise used to purge waterish and
melancholy humors in the same manner as the former. There are some fables
reported of this Plant which I shall forbear to relate.

Mill-Mountain. Linum sylvestre.
I Am induced to publish this plant, Sena does. The description Gerrard reports
to have had from a friend of his called Mr. Goodyer, which is as follows.

It rises up from a small white threddy crooked root, sometimes with one, but
most commonly with five or six, or more round stalks, about a foot or nine
inches high, of a brown on reddish color, every stalk dividing it self near
the top from the middle upward into many branches or parts of a greener color
then the lower part of the stalk; the leaves are small, smooth, of color
green, of the bigness of Lentil leaves, and have in the middle one rib, or
sinew, and no more, that may be perceived, and grow along the stalk in good
order by couples, one opposite against the other: at the tops of the small
branches grow the flowers, of a white color, consisting of five small leaves
apiece; the nails whereof are yellow: in the inside are placed small short
chieves also, of a yellow color; after which come up small little knobs or
buttons, the top whereof when the seed is ripe, divides it self into five
parts, wherein is contained small smooth flat slippery yellow seed, when the
seed is ripe the herb perishes; the whole herb is of a bitter taste and herby
smell.

Names.] Gerrard says when he first found this plant, he inserted it in his
Catalogue amongst the kinds of Lines or Flaxes, and called it Linum sylvestre
pusillum candidis floribus, until he had a further relation thereof from Mr.
Goodyer, who called it Linum sylvae Catharticum; because it was used to purge:
and in English it had acquired the name of Mill-Mountain.

Place and Time.] It grows plentifully in the unmanured Enclosures of
Hampshire, on chalkly Downs, and on Purfleet Hills in Essex, and many other
places. I have been told it grows near Wickomb in Buckinghamshire; and in July
about four years since, Mr. Dixon and I met a Chyrurgeon with some of it in his
hand in Kingston, which he said he had gathered by the way as he came from
London: It rises forth of the ground at the beginning of the Spring, and
flowreth all the Summer.

Nature and Virtues.] Its bitter taste argues the temperature thereof to
incline to heat: The use of it (as the same Mr. Goodyer reports) is as follows.

Take a handful of Mill Mountain, the whole plant, leaves, seeds, flowers and
all, bruise it and put it in a small Pipkin, with a pint of white Wine, and set
it on the Embers to infuse all night, and drink that wine in the morning
fasting: This he says he was told (by a servant of one Dr. Lake, who lived at
St. Cross near Winchester) would give eight or ten stools. This Dr. Lake was
afterward Bishop of Bath and Wells, and always used this herb for his purge
as his man affirmed.

Thus says Gerrard by the relation of Goodyer; but lately I have heard it
commended by some Physicians to be equalent in virtue to Sena: Therefore I have
put it down for the benefit of the studions, to make further trial and use of
it accordingly.

Mynts. Mentha.
BOth the Garden and wild Mint are well enough known; wherefore I shall pass
by their description to their names and virtues. Mentha is the Latin common
name; and Mint, or Spearmint for the Garden kind in English.

Place and Time.] The wild Mints grow in warry Ditches, the other only in
Gardens: they all flower in August: the plant increases much by the root, the
seed being seldom good.

Nature and Virtues.] Mynt is hot and dry in the beginning of the third degree,
bitter, binding, and of thin parts, and is said to be an herb of Venus: The
decoction cures a sore Mouth and Gums, the mouth being gargled therewith and
helps a stinking breath; being applied with honied water, it eases pains in the
Ears, and the roughness of the Tongue, it being rubbed therewith: The decoction
thereof is good to wash Childrens Heads, against Scabs, and breakings out, and
heals chaps of the Fundament. Two or three branches thereof taken with the
juice of Pomgranates, stays the Hiccough, Vomiting, and allayes Choler; being
applied with Barley meal, it dissolves Imposthumes; it is good to repress the
milk in Women's Breasts, and helps swollen or flagging Breasts; it causes
digestion, helps a cold Liver, strengthens the Belly and Stomach, helps
gnawings of the heart, procures appetite, opens the Liver, and provokes to
Venery; being bruised with salt it is good for the biting of a mad Dog. The
mouth being gargled with a decoction thereof, and Rue and Coriander, brings
the pallat of the mouth that is down to its right place; the powder of it taken
after meat, helps digestion, and those that are spleenatick, and taken in wine,
it helps women in their sore Travel in Child bearing; it is good against the
Strangury, and Gravel and Stone in the Kidneys; being boiled in milk before you
drink it, it will not curdle in the Stomach; and some say a Cheese will not
come, if it be put into the milk or Runnet: The distilled water is available
for all the aforesaid purposes, though more weakly: but the Chemical Spirit
drawn from the herb is most effectual. Chollerick persons must abstain from
Mint, for much of it taken makes the Blood thin, and turns it into choler. The
horse Mints are good to expel wind in the Stomach, to help the Chollick and
short windedness, and is good to help nocturnal pollutions, being applied to
the Cods.

Myrtles. Myrtilli.
THis Outlandish plant cannot endure the Winter with us unless it be kept in
pots within doors.

The Tree is called in Latin Myrtus, and the berries Myrtilli.

Nature and Virtues.] The myrtle has contrary qualities, cold and earthy, warm
and thin, powerfully binding and drying: The dry leaves beaten and boiled in
water and drunk, is good against Cathars, the Whites, Ulcers, and creeping
Sores. The berries and seed is good against passions of the Heart, stingings of
Serpents, and venomous Creatures, and the poison of Toadstools; being drunk in
Wine, it helps a stinking Breath, diseases of the Bladder, and provokes Urine:
The decoction is good for the falling down of the Fundament, and the Piles;
being mixed with oil of Roses and applied, it helps swelling of the Cods,
Imposthumes of the Fundament, and St. Anthonies fire. The decoction of the
berries makes the Hair black, and keeps it from falling, cures sores of the
Head, and helps those that are Bursten. The syrrup of Myrtles is good against
the Cough, and Ulcers of the Lungs, And although I have not told you where this
Tree grows, because I doubt you will not go so far to fetch it, you may have it
near home at the Druggists and Apothecaries.

Myrobalanes.
MYrobalanes are an East Indian Fruit, and are called in English by Mr.
Parkinson purging Plums. My Author reckons up five kinds of them, viz.
Cytrina, Chebula, Bellerica, Emblica, Indica.

Nature and Virtues.] They are all cold in the first degree and dry in the
second, and do purge, and also strengthen the Stomach. The Citrine Myrobalanes
purge Choler, strengthen the Stomach, Heart, and Liver, help such as have the
Hemorrhoides and Piles; they are good in Tertian Agues, cause a good color,
and hinder old Age: the Chebule purge Phlegm, quicken the brain and sight, and
strengthen the Stomach. They are good in the Dropsy, and for long continued
Agues. The Embellick, and Bellerick purge Phlegm from the Stomach, strengthens
the Brain, Joints, Heart, and Liver, helps passions of the Heart, provokes
Appetite, allayes Thirst, stays Vomiting, qualifies inward heat, and allayes
Choler, and gives ease to those that have the Piles. The Indies, or Black
Myrabolanes, purge Melancholy and adust Choler, and cause a good color, and
are good against Quartain Agues, the Leprosy, and all Paralytical Diseases.
The Citrine are also often used in Cholleries, with the juice of Fennel, or
Rose water, against Inflammations and flowing of humors to the Eyes; and
likewise in powder, with Mastick, or Rose water, to dry and heal Ulcers.

Misleto. Viscum.
I Think Misleto is so well known, that its needless to describe it. The
Latins call it Viscus, and Viscum, and so is the Birdlime called that is made
of the Berries. The Misleto of the Oak is called Viscus Quercini, and so of the
rest.

Places and Time.] Misleto grows plentifully upon Fruit Trees, as Apples,
Pear Trees, and Crab Trees in diverse Counties of the Land; sometimes on Ashes,
and Oaks; but that of the Oak is most rare in England: It flowers in the
Spring, and the Berries are ripe in October, abiding on the branches all the
Winter unless the Birds devour them.

Nature and Virtues.] Misleto is hot and dry in the third degree, the leaves
and berries do heat and dry, and are of subtle parts; and questionless
participates of the nature of that Tree it grows upon; as that which grows upon
the Oak partakes of the nature of the Oak, and therefore is ascribed to
Jupiter, and is the most effectual: It is held to be very effectual for the
curing of the Falling Sickness, and is by some prescribed to be taken in Pills
thus prepared,. Visci Quercini, seeds and roots of Piony, ana. i.. Nutmeg,
Anniseeds, ana. i,. Sacchari Buglossati, vii. make Pills thereof.

Mathiolus says that the Misleto of the Chestnut Tree made into powder and
given in drink, cures the Falling Sickness. Some attribute so great virtue unto
it, as they have called it, Lignum sanctae Crucis, and believe it to help the
Falling Sickness, Palsy, and Apoplexy, being only hung about their Necks.
Tragus says, that the juice of fresh Misleto dropped into the Ears of them
that have Imposthumes in them, eases them, and helps them in few days. The
Birdlime which is made of the Berries, ripens and discusses Tumors and
Imposthumes, and mollifies hard knots, and draws forth both thick and thin
Humors from the remote places of the Body, digesting and separating them, and
being mixed with equal parts of Wax and Rozen, it mollifieth the hardness of
the Spleen, being applied thereunto.

Gerrard says, being taken inwardly, it is mortal, I never did prove any of
it, but only the Birdlime upon Birds, and I am sure that has proved mortal to
them.

Money-wort, or Herb two pence. Nummularia.
MOney-wort shoots forth many long, times two yellow flowers, standing each
upon a small foot stalk, consisting of five narrow leaves; pointed at the ends,
with some yellow threads in the middle; after which come small round heads of
seed: the root is small and threddy.

Names.] It is called in Latin Nummularia, and Serpentaria; in English Two
Penny Grass, Herb Twopence, and Money-wort.

Place and Time.] It grows by Ditches sides, low Meadows, and watery places:
flowers about June and July, and the seed is ripe soon after.

Nature and Virtues.] Money-wort is an herb of Venus, and cold, drying, and
astringent: The flowers and leaves are good to heal green Wounds speedily, and
for old spreading Vlclers, especially if it be bruised and boiled in Sallet Oil
with some Rozen, Wax, and Turpentine added to it, or Tents dipped in the juice,
and put into the Wounds. The juice taken in Wine, or the decoction thereof,
stays the overflowing of Women's Courses, and the Whites, and also Lasks,
bloody Fluxes, inward and outward Bleedings, helps weakness of the Stomach that
is subject to Vomiting; being boiled in Wine and Honey, and taken, it cures
inward Wounds, and Ulcers of the Lungs, and is a remedy against the Chin-Cough
in Children.

Moonwort. Lunaria.
IT rises up with one dark, above this leaf about two inches, bearing many
branches of small long tongues, much like the spiky head of Adders Tongue, of a
brownish color, which afterward resolve into a mealy dust, so that you may
call them flowers or seed, which you please: the root is small and threddy.

Names.] It is called in Latin Lunaria; in English by some Unshooe the Horse,
but rightly Moon-wort.

Place and Time.] It delights to grow upon Hills, and Heaths amongst grass and
dry mossy places, and in diverse places of Kent, as near Maidstone: It may be
found about April and May; the heat of June banisheth it away.

Nature and Virtues.] Many idle Fables have been told of this Herb, by lying
Cachochymists, such as Culpeppers Commanders were that he prates on; for I
believe they never saw the Herb in their lives: and I am confident, though it
be the Moons herb; yet it is neither Smith, Farrier, nor Picklock, but is of
Temperature cold and dry, somewhat more then Adders Tongue, and is a good Wound
Herb, either for inward or outward Wounds, Blows, or Bruises; it likewise
helps to consolidate Fractures, and is good for Ruptures and Cancers of the
Breast: It may excellently be used with other wound herbs, to make Oils and
Balsoms for fresh and green Wounds: and being boiled in red wine and drunk, it
is excellent to stay the overflowing of women's Courses, and the Whites;
Bleeding, Vomiting, and other Fluxes. The learned Grollius says, that it is
good for the Cancers in Women's Breasts, its Signature speaking so much.

Moss. Muscus.
THere is Moss of Trees, and Ground Moss; but neither of them want a
description. The Apothecaries call it Vsnea; it is likewise called in Latin
Muscus.

Places and Time.] I have told you before where they grow. Nature and Virtues.]
The ground Moss is cold, dry, and astringent; that of the Trees is cool and
binding, yet it partakes somewhat of the nature of the Tree whereon it grows;
yet all Saturns pot herbs, as says Culpepper. The ground Moss is held good to
break the Stone, being boiled in Wine and the decoction drunk; it is likewise
good being boiled in water to allay Inflammations and hot pains. The Oak Moss
is good to stay Fluxes, and Lasks in man or woman, Vomitings, Bleedings,
spitting and pissing of Blood, and the Terms, the powder thereof being boiled
in Wine and drunk. The same being drunk, stays the Hiccough, as says Avicen.
And it procures deep sleep, says Serapio; and some say the powder thereof for
some time together taken in drink, is good against the Dropsy. Fresh Moss
steeped a while in Oil of Roses, and then boiled therein, and applied to the
Temples and Forehead, helps the Headache, that comes of a hot cause, and
distillations of hot Rheumes to the Eyes, or other parts. It was anciently used
in Ointments against Weariness, and to strengthen the Sinews.

There is a Moss that grows upon dead Men's Sculls, which is a principal
ingredient in the Weapon Salve; but the receipt is, it should be taken from the
Skull of one who dyed a violent death. I lately saw one which was brought out
of Ireland, all grown over with Moss.

Cup Moss if it be powdered and given in sweet Wine for certain days together,
is a remedy against the Falling Sickness, and the Chin cough in Children.

Motherwort. Cardiaca.
THis herb rises up with hard, joint, broad, and long, rough, and crumpled
with great veins of a dark green color, deeply jagged about the edges, almost
torn or divided: the flowers grow in sharp pointed rough husks, from the middle
of the branches to the top, round about them at distances, somewhat like Balm
or Horehound, but of a more red or purple color; after which comes plenty of
small round blackish seed; which shedding, fills the place about it with their
young growth. The root is fibrous, the plant of a rank smell and bitter taste.

Names.] It is called Cardiaca in the Latin, though Matricaria which is used
for Fetherfew, might be more proper for it; for it is effectual to help the
Mother as well as the Heart; and therefore with good reason is called in
English Motherwort. Place and Time.] It grows rarely with us but only in
Gardens, yet delights to grow by Walls sides, and amongst rubbish: it flowers
and seeds from the Spring till Winter, and then perishes; but the root abides
all the Year.

Nature and Virtues.] Motherwort is of temperature hot and dry in the second
degree, of a cleansing and astringent faculty, and is by Astrologers reputed to
be subject to the influences of Venus, and the Sign Leo; so that it is
excellent for the fits of the Mother, and diseases of the Womb, and also for
the trembling of the Heart, the Cramp, Convulsion, and Palse: it helps the hard
labor of Women, a spoonful thereof in powder being taken in Wine. For the fits
of the Mother, let little Bags of Motherwort, Camomile, Wormwood, Penntroyal,
and Lovage be applied warm to the bottom of the Belly of the Patient: The said
powder used as aforesaid, provokes Urine, and Women's Courses; it may also be
made into a Syrrup and Conserve; and being so used, it chears the Heart,
expelling Melancholy from thence, Expectorates Phlegm, opens obstructions of
the Entrails, and kills Worms in the Belly; it is likewise good being bruised
and applied to green Wounds to stop the Blood, cleanse and cure them, and is a
remedy against the Cough, Murrain, and other Diseases in Cattle.

See further in The Art of Simpling: written by W. Coals

Monsear. Pilosella.
COmmon Mousear creeps upon the ground by strings or wires much like the
Strawberry;

Names.] It is called Myosotis from the Greek word Myosota, and of some
Pilosella in Latin, because of its hairiness, and Auricula muris, because the
leaves resemble the ears of a Mouse; which also gives it the English name of
Mouseare.

Place and Time.] It grows on Banks and Ditches sides, which be dry and
sandy, and also in sandy grounds; they flower in June and July, and abide green
all the Winter.

Nature and Virtues. It is held to be subject to the Lunar Influence, but is by
temperature hot and dry, cleansing, binding, and consolidating, so that the
juice or decoction thereof taken stays Women's Courses, and the Whites, and
other Fluxes of Blood and inward bleedings, and is likewise good for the
Jaundies, to drink thereof morning and evening, and abstain from other drink
two or three hours after: it is good against the Stone, and gripings of the
Bowels, and to abate the fit of a quartain Ague being taken before it come. The
decoction with Succory and Centory is good against the Dropsy and Spleen. A
Syrrup of the juice of Mousear is good against the Cough and Ptisick, and helps
Ruptures, a spoonful or two being taken at a time; it is a singular Wound Herb
either for outward or inward Wounds. The juice of the green Herb, or being
dried in powder is good to stay fretting Ulcers or Cancers, either in the Mouth
or secret parts of Man or Woman, or elsewhere. The distilled water is available
for the said purposes, and to wash Wounds and Sores, and to dip the Tents and
Clothes therein that are to be applied thereto.

This herb is hurtful to sheep, in making them costive and lean; therefore
Shepherds should keep them from it.

Mugwort. Artemisia.
COmmon Mugwort grows with diverse jagged or dented leaves lying upon the
ground, much like to common Wormwood, but larger, darkish green on the upper
side, but white or hoary underneath: the stalks rise up two or three foot high,
sometimes more, having such leaves as below, but smaller, branching very much
toward the top, whereon grow small pale yellowish flowers like buttons, after
which comes small seed enclosed in round hands. The root is long and hard,
fastened in the ground with many fibers, which spread so in the ground, that it
can hardly be weeded out. The plant is of a reasonable good scent. The stalks
and leaves dye every Winter.

Names.] Artemisia is both the Greek and Latin name of it.

Place and Time.] It grows by the High ways and Ditches sides, and too
plentifully in light ground in Corn Fields, where it will not be gotten out, as
in Wokingham, a place I once lived in.

Nature and Virtues.] Mugwort is ascribed to the dominion of Venus, yet is
naturally hot and dry in the second degree, and of thin parts; but it helps
Women's Diseases: therefore it is reason a woman should be mistress of it. The
decoction of the leaves in Wine or water being drunk, drives down the Courses,
Birth, and Afterbirth, helps Inflammations, and stoppings of the Mother, and
provokes Urine, causes fruitfulness in Women, helps pains of the Matrix,
coldness, and Wind, and helps to retain it in its due place, it strengthens
the Nerves, opens the Pores, and corrects the Blood, helps stoppings of the
Liver and Spleen; and being boiled with Centory, it is good for the Jaundies:
The juice being taken, helps the biting of a mad Dog. The powder of the leaves
drunk in Wine, is good against the Sciatica. A decoction made thereof for Women
to sit over and receive the hot sum, performs the same effects, as being
taken inwardly, so does the juice made up with Myrrh, or the root used for a
Pessary. An ointment made of the Herb, with some Field Daisies, and Hogs
Grease, takes away Wens, Knots, and Kernels in the Neck and Throat. The fresh
herb, or the juice thereof is a good remedy for the overmuch taking of opium. A
decoction of the Herb with Camomile, Egrimony, and Sage, takes away pains of
the Sinews, and Cramp, the place being bathed hot therewith; and refreshes the
feet of those which are surbated with travel, they being bathed therein.

See more of this in the Art of Simpling: written by W. Coals

Mulberries. Morus.
I Shall not need to describe this Plant, it being very well known where it is
an Inhabitant.

Names.] The Latins call it Morus, and in Shops Morus Celsa; the Bramble
Berries being called Mora Bati.

Place and Time.] They are much nourished in the Levant and Eastern Countries,
and also in Italy to breed up their Silkworms. The fruit is ripe in August and
September.

Nature and Virtues.] It is assigned to Mercury, and of different parts like
him; the ripe Berries having a sweetness and slippery moisture, do open the
Belly; the unripe do bind it, especially being dried, and then are good to
stop Fluxes, Lasks, and overflowing of Women's Courses: the bark of the root
has a purging quality, and a bitterness: the leaves and tender tops are of a
temperate nature. The juice of the Berries or the syrrup made of them, helps
Inflammations and Sores in the Mouth and Throat, and the Pallat of the Mouth
being down. The juice of the leaves is good for such as have eaten Wolf-bane,
and is a remedy against the biting of Serpents; and being beaten with Vinegar,
it is good to apply to any place that is burnt with fire. The mouth being
washed with a decoction of the bark and leaves, eases the Touth-ache, It is
said, that if the root be a little slit or cut in the harvest time, and a small
hole made in the ground next unto it, there will issue forth a juice, which
being hardened, is good to help the Toothache, to dissolve knots, and purge
the Belly. The leaves are said to stay bleeding at Mouth and Nose, and of the
Piles, or of a wound being bound thereunto: It is reported, that if a branch of
the Tree be taken when the Moon is at full, and bound to the wrist of a woman
whose Courses flow too much, it will soon slay them. The Bark of the root
kills the broad Worms in the bodies of Men or Children. The powder of the
berries, is good to cure Tumors which grow upon the Cods, and about the
Fundament of some people.

Mulleyn. Candelaria.
COmmon white Mulleyn has many fair large woolly leaves lying next the ground,
somewhat longer then broad, pointed at the ends, and a little dented about the
edges; the stalk in rank ground rises four or five foot high, and is covered
over with such leaves as below (but lesser) up to the flowers, so thick as they
hide the stalk: the flowers come forth on all sides of the stalk without any
branches for the most part, and stand together in a long spike, generally of a
gold yellow color, but in some more pale, consisting of five round pointed
leaves, turning afterward into round heads, wherein is contained small
brownish seed; the root is long, white, and woody, but dies when the seed is
fallen.

Names.] It has been called Candela regia, and Candelaria, because the stalks
were wont to be used to burn, being dipped in grease: It is also called
Thapsus, Tapsus Barbatus; and in English Hightaper, and Hagtaper, Jupiters
Staff, Hares-beard, and Bullocks Lungwort.

Place and Time.] It grows by High ways sides, in Lanes and upon Dunghills in
many places of this Land, and flower about June and July.

Nature and Virtues.] Mulleyn is dry of temperature, like Saturn: The leaves
digest and cleanse. A decoction of the leaves is good for the Lungs, and an old
Cough, either in man or beast. A little quantity of the root taken in Wine is
good against Lasks and Fluxes of the Belly: and the decoction thereof eases
the Toothache, the mouth being washed therewith; and being drunk it is good
for Burstness, and for Cramps and Convulsions. The seed and flowers, and the
powder of dried Venice Turpentine, being cast upon a Chasing-dish of Coals, and
set in a Close-Stool, for the Patient to sit over it that is troubled with the
Piles, or the falling down of the Fundament, it gives much ease also to such
who are troubled with an often desire to go to Stool, and can do nothing, and
helps the Bloody Flux: An Oil made of the often infusion of the flowers is
also good for the Piles. The decoction of the root in red Wine (or water if
there be an Ague) wherein red hot Steel has been often quenched, stays the
Bloody Flux, and opens obstructions of the Bladder and Reins, when one cannot
make water: A decoction made with the leaves, and Sage, Marjoram, and Camomile
Flowers, eases and comfort Veins and Sinews that are stark or shrunk with
cold, or the Cramp, the places being bathed therewith. The distilled water of
the flowers drunk morning and evening the quantity of three ounces at a time
for some continuance, is said to be a good remedy for the Gout. The powder of
the root, or the juice of the leaves and flowers rubbed on rough Warts, takes
them away, but does no good to such as are smooth. The powder of the flowers is
good for the Chollick, and pains in the Belly. The decoction of the root and
leaves is effectual to dissolve Tumors and Inflammations of the Throat: The
seed and leaves boiled in Wine and applied, draws forth Thorns and Splinters
out of the flesh, easing the pains, and healing the place. The leaves bruised
and wrapped in double papers, and baked under the Embers, and then taken out
and applied warm to any Botch in the Groin or Share, does dissolve and heal it.
The seed bruised and boiled in wine and applied to any Member that is newly set
after it has been out of Joint, takes away the swellings and pains thereof.

The bruised leaves quickly heals a Horse Hoof that is pricked with a nail,
being applied thereunto.

See further of this in Culpeppers School of Physic.

Mustard. Sinapis.
IT is very well known, so as needs no describing.

Names.] It is called in Latin Sinapis and Sinapi.

Place and Time.] It grows in Gardens where it is planted, and is not easily
gotten out, having once took possession: it grows also wild about Tewksberry,
which place is famous for Mustard makers.

Nature and Virtues.] The seed is chiefly used, and is of temperature hot and
dry in the fourth degree, and does make thin: it is under the influence of
Mars. The seed taken in an Electuary or otherwise, stirs up bodily lust, and
provokes women's Courses; it is also good for the Falling Sickness, the
Lethargy, or drowsy evil, to use it both inwardly and outwardly to rub the
Nostrils, Forehead, and Temples therewith; it being first beaten to powder, and
little balls made thereof with Honey, and one or two of them swallowed fasting
every morning makes a clear voice, draws down Rheum, and viscous humors
which distill upon the Lungs and Chest; it cleanses the Breast, strengthens
the Heart, resists Poison, provokes Appetite, warms the Stomach, and helps
digestion, eases the pain of the Spleen, Sides, and Belly; and being used for
some times, wastes the Quartain Ague. The decoction of the seed in Wine is a
good gargle to send up the Pallat of the Mouth being fallen down; and a
Plaster wherein store of the seed is mixed being applied, helps the
Sciatica, and aches of the Joints, and dissolveth Tumors and Swellings about
the Throat: being also applied to the Shoulders, Sides, or Loins, which have
any ache or pain, it helps them by drawing forth the cause by Blisters; it
helps the salling of the hair, and being chewed in the mouth, is good against
the Toothache. The seed being bruised and mixed with Honey or Wax, takes away
Marks, black and blue spots of Bruises, Scabbedness, the Leprosy, and lousy
Evil, and helps the Crick, or drawing awry of the Neck. The distilled water of
the Herb when it is in flower is good to drink for the diseases aforesaid, to
wash the Mouth when the Pallat is down, and also to gargle the Throat; and
likewise for Scabs and Itch, and to cleanse the face from Morphew, Spots, and
Freckles. An Oil made of Mustard, by infusing four pounds of the seed (being
beaten) in four pound of Oil for ten days together, and then straining it, is
good for griefs of the Reins, Palsies, Gouts, Stitches and Swellings. The seed
ground with Vinegar, is a good sauce both with Fish and Flesh; it is good to
clarify the Blood, and to stir up Appetite in weak Stomachs; but it is hurtful
for chollerick people. And to make it the more pleasing to the Stomach, take
Mustard seed two ounces, Cynamon half an ounce well beaten, and make it up into
Balls or Cakes, with Honey and Vinegar, and dry them in the Sun, they will keep
a long while, and may presently be made into a sauce by being relented with a
little Vinegar.

Nep, or Cat-mint. Nepeta.
COmmon Garden Nep rises up with four square stalks, a Cubit high, or more,
having a little hoariness upon them, being full of Branches, and bears at
every joint two broad leaves, like unto Balm, but longer pointed, softer,
whiter, and more hoary, nicked about the edges, and of a strong sweet scent:
The flowers grow in large tufts upon the tops of the Branches, and underneath
them on the stalks, being many together, and of a whitish purple color: The
roots consist of many long strings or fibers, whereby it is strongly fastened in
the ground, and the leaves abide green all the Winter.

Names.] It is called in Latin Mentha Cattaria, but more commonly Nepeta; by
which name the Apothecaries call it.

Place and Time.] It is cherished in our Gardens, flowers in July and August,
and the seed is ripe in September.

Nature and Virtues.] Nep is hot and dry in the third degree, and is ascribed
particularly to the influence of the Planet Venus. It is effectual for the
rising of the Mother, Wind, and pains thereof, and warms and comforts the
womb, and dries up the overmuch moisture thereof, and brings it to a right
temper, taking away the cold and moist cause of Barrenness; it also provokes
the Terms, and is useful for pains of the head, proceeding from a cold cause,
as Rheum and Cathars, and giddiness of the Head; it is good also for windiness
of the Stomach and Belly, and is effectual to dissolve wind in cold Aches and
Cramps; it is effectual for Coughs, Colds, and shortness of Breath: The juice
thereof given in Mead or Wine, is a good remedy for inward Burstings and
Bruises by means of Falls, or otherwise. A bathe made thereof for Women to sit
in, or receive the Fumes, brings down their Courses, warmeth those parts, and
helps Barrenness. The herb bruised and applied to the Fundament, eases the
pains of the Piles in two or three hours space; and an ointment made up with
the juice and applied, does the same. The decoction in spring Water is good to
wash the Head to take away the Scabs thereof, and may be effectual for other
parts of the Body: the distilled water is useful for many of the aforesaid
purposes.

Nettles. Urtica.
STinging Nettles are very well known, or may be by feeling as well as sight;
so that a description may be forborne. It is called in Latin Vrtica, ab urendo,
because it raises Blisters like burning with sire.

Place and Time] They are common associates to most hedges, under walls,
amongst cubbish, and in untilled places you may find them plentifully: they
flower and seed in the end of Summer.

Nature and Virtues.] This plant is armed by Mars, and is by temperature hot
and dry in the third degree. A decoction of the roots and leaves of Nettles, or
the juice thereof taken in an Electuary with Honey or Sugar, is a good medicine
to open the obstructions of the Lungs, and a remedy against Wheesing, and
shortness of Breath; it expectorates tough Phlegm, and evacuates an
impostumated Plurisie by spittle; it is a good gargle to help swellings of the
Throat, and the Almonds of the Throat, and swellings in the Mouth: The leaves
boiled in Wine and drunk, provokes Women's Courses, helps suffocations, and
other diseases of the Mother, and so it does, being outwardly applied with a
little Myrrh. The same also, or the seed taken, provokes Urine, and expells
the Gravel or Stone out of the Reins and Bladder; it kills worms in Children,
eases pains in the sides, and dissolves windiness of the Spleen, and in the
Body; yet some do suppose it only effectual to provoke Venery. The juice of
the leaves taken two or three days together, stays bleeding at Mouth. The
seed taken in drink is a remedy against venomous bitings, and the biting of a
mad Dog, and resists the poison of Hemlock, Henbane, and Nightshade,
Mandrakes, and other stupifying Herbs; as also for the Lethargy, to rub it upon
the Forehead and Temples, and upon the places bitten or stung by venomous
Beasts, with a little Salt. The distilled water is effectual for the said
purposes, (yet more weak) and likewise to wash Sores and Wounds, to cleanse the
skin from the Morphew, Leprosy, and other deformities thereof. The seed or
leaves bruised and put into the Nestrils, stays Bleeding thereof, and takes
away the excrescense growing there called Pollipus. The juice of the leaves or
the decoction of them, or the roots, is good to wash old rotten Sores,
Fistula's, or Gangreens, and corroding Scabs, Manginess, or Itch in any part of
the Body, and is good also to wash green Wounds, or to apply the fresh bruised
herb thereunto, though the flesh were separated from the bones. The same is
good to refresh wearied members, and to comfort, dry, and strengthen such parts
as have been out of joint, and are set again; and also for Aches and Gouts, and
to easethe pains, and to dry and dissolve the defluxions of humors upon the
Joints and Sinews. An ointment made of the juice, oil, and wax, is good to rub
benumbed members to reduce them to their proper activity. A handful of green
Nettle leaves, and another of Danewort, or Wallwort, bruised and applied to the
Gout, Sciatica, or joint Aches, is a good help thereunto. The young tops of
Nettles being used in pottage in the Spring, are good to consume phlegmatic
superfluities in the Body, and clarify and warm the Blood: give Hens dry
Nettles cut small amongst their meat in Winter, and it will make them lay Eggs
the more plentifully.

Nigella.
GArden Nigella rises about a foot high with weak and brittle stalks,

Names.] The Greeks call it (...). The Latin Authors Melanthium, and Nigella.
We in England call it Gith, and Nigella Romana; it is also called by some
Fennel flower, Bishops-wort, St. Katherines flower; and of some, Kiss me twice
before I rise, and the Old Man's Beard.

Place and Time.] That which is most common with us is sown in Gardens; and
being sown in April, it will flower in July, and the seed be ripe in September.

Nature and Virtues.] The seeds of Nigella are hot and dry in the third degree,
and of thin parts; I suppose under the influence of Jupiter: The seed drunk in
Wine, helps shortness of Breath, expells wind, provokes Urine, and the
Courses, kills worms, is good against Poisons, and the bitings of venomous
Beasts; it likewise increases Milk in Women's Breasts, if moderately taken; but
otherwise it is hurtful to Nurses, and to all others that take it too often, or
in two great quantity: The Common dose of the seed therefore is from half a
dram to a dram. A dram thereof taken in wine or Posset drink before the sit, is
effectual in Tertian and Quartain Agues. It is an excellent remedy in other
distempers that need cleansing, heating, and drying, and opens obstructions
being boiled in Vinegar and so taken: being applied to the Navel with juice of
Wormwood, it kills Worms; being dried and quilted in Linen or Sarcenet, and
applied to the Head, it cures Cathars and Rheumes, dries the Brain, and
restores lost smelling; being mixed with Vinegar, and applied, it takes away
Scurf, Freckles, and hard swellings: the smoke of it drives away venomous
creatures, and kills Flies, Wasps, and Bees. The seed mixed with Oil of Flower
de Luce, and applied to the forehead, helps a cold Headache.

Nightshade. Solanum.
COmmon Nightshade has an upright green hollow stalk, and sometimes more,
bushing forth into many branches, whereon grow many dark green leaves, somewhat
broad, and pointed at the ends, soft and full of juice, somewhat like the
leaves of Bazil, but larger, and a little unevenly dented about the edges; at
the tops of the stalks and branches come forth four or five, and sometimes more
white flowers, consisting of five small pointed leaves apiece, standing on a
stalk together one by, or above another, with yellow pointels in the middle,
composed of four or five yellow threads, set together, which afterward turn
into so many pendulous green berries of the bigness of a small pease, full of
green juice, and small round whitish flat seeds lying within it; the root is
white, and a little woody, when it has given flower and fruit, with many small
fibers at it: the whole plant is of a watrish insipid taste. The juice in the
berries is somewhat viscous, like a thin muscilage, and of a cooling astringent
quality.

Names. In Latin it is called Solanum, and Solatrum, Vva Lupina, and Vva
Vulpis, Cuculus and Morella; in English Morrel, Petty Morrel, Nightshade, and
in some places Houndsberries: there is another sort called Dwall, or deadly
Nightshade, being of a poisonous, and excessive cold quality, which bears a
berry black and shining like jet, and about the bigness of a black Cherry.

Place and Time.] Common Nightshade grows upon Dunghills, and amongst
rubbish, under old Walls, and by the sides of Hedges and Fields, I have seen
the Dwall, or Deadly Nightshade, growing in a Ditch by the High ways side near
Alton in Hampshire, and near Croyden in Surrey, where it was about six foot
high. They slower in Summer till the beginning of Autumn; and the fruit is
ripe in August and September.

Nature and Vertuer.] They are all cold and Saturnine Plants, but the Dwall as
coal in the fourth degree.

The berries of common Nightshade are good to provoke Urine, and expel the
Stone, being moderately taken in white Wine, and cools hot Inslammations,
being inwardly or outwardly taken, so not in too great a quantity, for then it
procures the Phrenzy; but a remedy against it is to drink good store of warm
honied water. The juice eases pains and Inflammations of the Ears, being
dropped therein: and the juice clarified and mingled with Vinegar, is a good
gargarisme for the Mouth and Throat, being inflamed. The juice of the herb or
Berries incorporated in a leaden Mortar with Oil of Roses, Vinegar, and Ceruss,
is good to anoint the Eyes for all hot Inflammations. The juice made up with
Hendung and applied, is good for the Shingles, Ring-worms, Corroding Ulcers,
and moist Fistula's. A Pessary dipped in the Juice, and put up into the Matrix,
stays the immoderate flowing of the Courses. A cloth wet therein, and applied
to the Testicles or Cods, gives much ease in any hot swelling there, and
eases the Gout, coming of hot and sharp humors. The Dwall or deadly
Nightshade is by no means to be taken inwardly; yet if the Temples and Forehead
be a little bathed with the juice of the leaves and a little Vinegar, it
procures sleep, which is hindered by hot causes, and eases pains of the Head
proceeding of heat. The bruised leaves or juice may be applied to St. Anthonies
fire, the Shingles, and such hot Inflammations and fiery Cankers, to cool them,
and stay the spreading thereof. The distilled water of the common Nightshade
is safest to be given inwardly, but they are both dangerous, and the Dwall
deadly.

The Nutmeg Tree. Nux Moschata.
THis odoriferous tree grows in the East Indies, the fruit is called in
Latin Nux Moschata, and the Mace that grows also upon this Tree is called in
Latin Macis.

Nature and Virtues.] Nutmegs are hot and dry in the second degree, and
somewhat binding: Mace is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third.
Nutmegs do heat and strengthen a cold and weak Stomach, resist Vomiting, and
takes away the Hiccough; it helps pain and Wind in the Belly, and stoppings of
the Liver and Milt, and stopeth the Lask, being taken in red Wine; it is
profitable for the Mother, Kidneys, and Bladder, helps pissing by drops, and
other cold griefs in men and Women: the powder thereof with oil of Mints, is
good against the coldness of the Head, and dullness of Memory, the Forehead, and
Temples being anointed therewith; it is good in Cordials, and Receipts, to help
coldness of the Liver, stopping of the Milt, the Dropsy, Vomiting, Headache,
Swellings, bloody Fluxes; it helps trembling of the Heart, and comforts the
Veins and Muscles in cold people, and helps to expel Gravel from the Reins and
Bladder, being first steeped in Oil of Sweet Almonds. The Oil of Nutmegs does
likewise comfort a cold Stomach.

Mace is somewhat of the same nature with the Nutmeg, it stops the Lask, bloody
Flux, and Women's Courses, and helps trembling of the Heart. The oil of Mace
cures wamblings of the Stomach, and a desire to Vomit, the Stomach being
anointed therewith. The powder of a Pomgranate, large Mace, long Pepper and
Sugar, being drunk with Posset Ale, Malmsey, or Broth sodden together, is a
good remedy for the Black jaundies. Mace being used in Meats, causes lean
people to grow fat, warmeth those that are cold in their Venereous acts, and so
do Nutmegs, and are good to be taken in Broths or Milk; it is good also against
Fluxes, spitting of Blood, Vomit, and the Chollick.

See more of this in The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: by: by P. Morelius.

See further in The Art of Simpling: written by W. Celes.

Of the Oak. Quercus.
THis stately Tree is very well known; it is called in Latin Quercus, and
Robur, the Acorn Glans: the Cup Calix, and Cupula Glandis.

Place and Time.] Our Land did once so flourish with these lusty Trees, that it
was called Druina by some; but of late many of them are destroyed: The Catkins
come forth about April, the Acorns are not ripe till October.

Nature and Virtues.] The leaves and bark of the Oak and Acorn Cups do bind
and dry very much, and are somewhat cold; but the Acorns are not so cold nor
binding. The Acorns provoke Urine, and help to break the Stone in the Bladder:
the decoction of them and the Bark taken in milk, helps exulcerations of the
Bladder, and pissing of Blood cansed by poisonous Herbs, corroding Medicines,
and Cantharides. The powder of Acorns drunk in wine, is good to help Stitches
and pains in the Sides, especially if it be mixed with the powder of
Bay Berries. The inner Bark of the Tree, and the thin skin that covers the
Acorn, do stay the spitting of Blood, and the Bloody Flux. The decoction of the
Bark, and powder of the Cups stays Vomitings, spitting of Blood, bleeding at
Mouth, Lasks, the involuntary Flux of natural seed, and all other Fluxes in man
or woman. The fume of the leaves helps strangling of the Mother; and the
bruised leaves soder up Wounds, and keeps them from inflammations. The
distilled water of the Buds is likewise good to stay all Fluxes, to cool the
body in pestilential, and burning Fevers, and to resist the infection, and also
to cool the Kidneys, and heat of the Liver, and assuage all inflammations both
inwardly and outwardly. The water in old hollow Oaks is good against the Itch
and spreading Scabs.

See further in Adam in Eden: written by Will. Coals.

Oats. Avena.
THis Grain is well known, Avena is the Latin name; they are plentiful in most
places of England: they are sown in the Spring, and mown in Autumn, or before.

Nature and Virtues.] They are somewhat cold and drying, and are more used for
food both for Man and Beast then for Physic; yet being quilted in a Bag with
Bay Salt, and made hot in a frying pan, and applied hot as it can be endured,
eases pains and stitches in the sides, and the Chollick in the Belly. A pultis
made of the meal of Oats and Oil of Bays, helps the Itch and Leprosy,
Fistula's of the Fundament, and dissolveth hard Imposthumes. The meal of Oats
boiled in Vinegar and applied, takes away Spots and Freckles in the Face, or
other parts of the Body. Oatmeal is good in Broth, or Milk, to bind those that
have a Lask, or other Flux, and with Sugar it is good for them that have a
Cough or Cold. Raw Oat meal is unwholesome diet, especially for young Maids;
yet they are most apt to eat it, for want of something else which were better
for them.

Olive Tree. Olea Sativa.
THis Outlandish Tree I intend not to describe, but only the Virtues of the
fruit; the manured Olive Tree is called in Latin Olea Sativa, and the wild
Olive Tree, Oleaster, and the fruit Oliva.

Nature and Verturs.] Ripe Olives be temperately hot and moist; the unripe me
dry and binding, and so is their Oil: the green leaves are cooling and binding.
The oil of the ripe Olive usually called Sallet Oil, is the most excellent of
all simple Oils; it is very good to ease the Guts of the Chollick and Illiack
pashms which way soever used, either caten with bread like butter, drunk in
while Wine, or for those that love not to eat it, give it in a Glister with
Wine; it is effectual against all poisons, and therefore a remedy for them that
have eaten Ratsbane, or other poison, preserving the Stomach and Guts from the
violence of it; it is excellent good in Sallets and other Sauces with Vinegar;
it is a principal ingredient in Salves for curing Wounds and Scars. The Oil of
unripe Olives called Omphacinum being fresh, is grateful to the Stomach,
strengthens the Gums, and fastens the Teeth, and is good for those that are
much troubled with sweating. Picked Olives are a good sauce to strengthen the
Stomach, and stir up appetite; and being eaten with Vinegar, they loosen the
Belly; being burned and beaten to powder, they fasten loose Teeth, help loose
Gums, and cleanses foul Ulcers; The oil is an excellent remedy for any burning
or scalding; a piece of Lawn being first sowed about the part, and Oil and Snow
water laid thereon.

One Berry, Herb Paris, or True Love. Herba Paris.
ONe Berry, or Herb Paris, shoots forth stalks with leaves, some whereof
carry no Berries, and others do, every stalk being smooth without Joints, of a
blackish green color, about half a foot high, bearing at the top four leaves,
set directly one against another, like a True Lovers Knot, and are somewhat
like a Nightshade leaf, but broader; in the middle thereof rises a small
slender stalk, about an inch long, bearing at the top one flower like a Star,
consisting of four small and narrow long pointed leaves, of a yellowish green
color, and having four other lesser leaves lying between them; in the middle
whereof stands a round dark purplish button, compassed about with eight small
yellow mealy heads, when the leaves are withered, the berry in the middle
becomes of a black purplish color, and full of juice, of the bigness of a
Grape, of no hot, nor evil, nor yet any sweetish taste, having within it many
white seeds; the root is small, and creeps under the upper crust of the
earth, somewhat like a Couch-grass root, but not so white, and is of an
unpleasant loathsome taste.

Names.] It is by some called in Latin Herbae Paris, and Aconitum
Pardalianches, and Vva Versa, Vva Lupina, and Solanum Tetraphyllum.

Places and Time.] It grows in Woods and Copses in Kent, and diverse other
places; it springs up in April and May, and flowers soon after: the berries be
ripe by the beginning of June.

Nature and Virtues.] Herb One Berry is an exceeding cold Saturnine Plant;
wherefore the leaves by their mighty cooling quality do discuss Tumors, and
Swellings of the privy Parts, Cods, and Groin, which proceed from heat, and
allay all other Inflammations, and are good to cure green Wounds, and cleanse
and heal up old filthy Sores and Ulcers: the leaves or the juice applied to
Felons, or white flawes on the nails of the Hands or Toes, heals them in a
short space. The leaves and Berries are good to expel Poisons, especially that
of Aconites; as also the Plague and other Pestilential Diseases. Mathiolus and
others say, that a dram of the seeds or berries hereof taken every day in
powder for twenty days together, has helped those that have lain long in a
lingering Sickness, and others that by Witchcraft have been half foolish,
wanting their wits and senses: the leaves in powder have the like operation,
but weaker. The berries are thought to procure sleep, being taken at night in
drink. The roots made into powder and taken in Wine eases the pains of the
Chollick in a short space. The Chemical oil of the black berries, is said to be
effectual for all diseases of the eyes, so that it is called by some Anima
oculorum; it has been supposed to be poisonous, but Pena and Lobel making
experiment upon two dogs, found it was not dangerous, but effectual to expel
the deadly operation of Sublimatum and Arsenick.

Orchis, vide Satyrion.

Onions. Cepa.
THey need no description.

Names.] Cepa, and Cepe are the Latin names for an Onion.

Place and Time.] They are inhabitants in our Gardens, and prosper best in that
ground that is well dunged: they are sown about February: They which are for
seed must be set about that time; yet the seed seldom comes to any great
perfection in our Country.

Nature and Virtues.] Onions are hot and dry in the fourth degree, and are
particularly ascribed to the dominion of Mars: an onion being sticed and
steeped all night in white Wine, and the Wine drunk in the morning, and the
party walking an hour after, it is good for the Stone, and to provoke Urine and
Women's Courses; being mixed with a little Honey and Rue, they are good to help
the biting of a mad Dog, and other venomous Creatures, and are used to provoke
Appetite, and ease pains of the Belly; being roasted under the Embers and eaten
with Honey, Sugar, and Oil, they help an old Cough. Water wherein sliced Onions
have been steeped all night, kills the Worms in Children. Onions being sliced
and dipped in the juice of Sorrel, and given to those that have the Tertian
Ague, helps them in once or twice taking. The seed stirs up lust, and
increases natural seed. A great Onion made hollow, and the place filled up
with good Treacle, and well roasted under the Embers, and then the outermost
skin pulled off, and then beaten together and applied to a Plague Sore or
putrid Ulcer, is a sovereign remedy; the juice snussed up into the Nostrils
purges the Head, and helps the Leprosy, and is good for scalding or burning:
and being used with Vinegar, it takes away spots and blemishes in the skin, and
dropped into the ears, it eases the pains and noise in them. The juice mixed
with the decoction of Penniroyal, and a cloth wet therein and applied, eases
the Gout. The juice mixed with Honey causes Hair to grow, a bald Head being
anointed therewith. They help kibed Heels, being reasted and applied with
Butter or Hogs Grease; being applied with Figs, it helps to ripen Imposihumes;
and stamped with Vinegar and applied, they provoke the Hemorrhoides and Piles:
they are hurtful to Chollerick bodies; and immoderately eaten, especially raw,
they breed ill humors in the Stomach, offend the Blood, increase thirst, dull
the Sight and Memory, and cause the Headache.

Orange Tree. Aurantia.
I Shall not describe this fragrant Tree, it being Outlandish, yet may be seen
in some English Gardens, though it seldom comes to any perfection here.

Names.] They have been called Aurea mala Hesperidum, and by diverse Aurantia;
by Dodonaeus, Anarantium, and by Lobel, Malum Aureum: The flowers are called
Napha; and the Ointment made thereof Vnguentum ex Napha.

Nature and Virtues.] Oranges are not wholly of one temperature; the rind is
hot in the first degree, and dry in the second; and the juice is cold in the
second degree and dry in the first, and the sweeter are more hot then the sour
ones. The peel is very good to warm a cold Stomach, to break Wind, and avoid
cold Phlegm from thence; and being condited or preserved, they mend a stinking
Breath, help digestion, and strengthen the Heart and Spirits. The juice and
inner substance is good against Corruptions of the Air, the Plague, and other
hot Fevers, and is grateful to the Heart and Mouth of the Stomach, and
Strengthens the same; it helps also wambling of the G^^mach, heaviness and
trembling of the Heart, restraws Vomiting, and loathing of meat, and quenches
Thirst: the seeds resist poison and are good to kill and expel Worms: the
yntment made of the flowers, is good for a Cough, and to expectorate raw
Phlegm, the Stomach being anointed with it. The distilled water of the same
flowers is good for perfumes, being very odoriferous; it is good also to drink
against contagious diseases, and helps cold infirmities of the Mother.

Orpine. Telephium.
COmmon Orpine springs up with diverse round brittle stalks, thick set with
fat and fleshly leaves, without any order, and little or nothing dented, of a
pale green color: the flowers are white, or whitish, growing in tufts; after
which come small chaffy husks with seed, like dust in them: the roots consist
of diverse thick, round, white, tuberous clogs, not growing so big in some
places as in others, where it likes the ground better.

Names.] The Latins call it Telephium, and Sempervivum sylvestre; it is called
also by diverse other names amongst Authors, too tedious to rehearse; and in
English Orpine, and Live long.

Place and Time.] It is generally cherished in Gardens, but grows almost in
every County of this Land, in shadowy sides of Fields and Woods: they slower in
July, and the seed is ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] Dioscorides and Galen say the true Telephium is hot, and
of a drying cleansing quality; but that with us is cooling as Purslain, and
ascribed to the Moon by Culpepper. The leaves of Orpine bruised and applied to
the Throat, cures the Quinzy, which is an inflammation of the Throat and
Gullet, hindering breathing and swallowing: it is seldom used inwardly with us,
yet Mr. Culpepper brags much of a sycrup of it for the Quinzy, though not of
experience. But Tragus says, that in Germany the distilled water is used for
excoriations and knawing of the Bowels, and for Ulcers in the Lungs and Liver,
or other inward parts; as also in the Matrix, and stays sharpness of humors
in the bloody Flux, and other Fluxes of the Belly, or in Wounds. The root
performs the same effect: It is used outwardly to cool Inflammations of
Wounds, and heal them, and to heal scaldings and burnings, the juice beaten
with Sallet Oil, and the place anointed therewith: the leaf bruised and laid to
a green Wound in the Hands or Legs heals it. The root helps Burstness and
Ruptures.

See more of this in The Art of Simpling: by W. Coals.

One Blade. Unifolium.
THis plant springs up with one leaf,

Names.] Its called Monophyllon, which word is borrowed of the Greeks; and in
Latin Vnifolium; in English One Blade, or One Leaf.

Place and Time.] It grows in Woods, Pastures, and shadowy places, but is not
very common to be found: it flowers in May, and the fruit is ripe in September.

Nature and Virtues.] One Blade is of a hot and dry temperature, and is a
singular Wound Herb, especially in Wounds amongst the Nerves and Sinews; half a
dram of the root given in Wine, and the Patient Sweating upon it, is effectual
against Poisons and Pestilential Diseases: and the decoction of the Herb with
Comphrey is good against Ulcers of the Kidneys and Entrails.

Orris, or Flower de Luce. Iris alba.
ORris, or the Common Flower de Luce has long large flaggy leaves, like a
two-edged Sword; amongst which spring up smooth and plain stalks, half a yard
long, or longer, bearing flowers toward the top, composed of six leaves joined
together; whereof three that stand upright are bent inward one toward another,
and in those leaves that hang downwards, there are rough and hairy welts,
rising from the nether part of the leaf upward, almost of a yellow color: The
roots are long, thick, and knobby, with many hairy threads thereat; but being
dry, it is without them and white.

Names.] It is called in Latin Iris, and Radix Marica; in English Flower de
Luce, and Orris.

Place and Time.] They grow naturally in France, Italy, and those Countries,
and are nourished in Gardens with us: they flower about May and June, and the
seed is ripe in the end of August.

Nature and Virtues.] The green roots of Flower de Luce are hot almost in the
sourth degree, but when it is dry is hot only in the third: the juice of the
root extracted and clarified, and snuffed up into the Nostrils, purges the
head by sneezing, and eases pain of the head, and procures rest, being
applied with Rose Cake and Vinegar, and cleanses spots in the Eyes: an Oil
made of the roots, called Oleum Irinum, comfort cold Joints and Sinews,
eases the Gout and Sciatica, mollifieth and consumes scrophulous Tumors, and
helps the Cramp and Convulsions, and cold Rheumes distilling from the Head,
and makes thin tough and cold Phlegm, that it may be the easier spit out, the
Breast being anointed with it; it eases the Piles, helps pain and noise in the
Ears, and stench of the Nostrils: the root green, or in powder, cleanses and
incarnates Wounds, and heals up Fistula's and Cankers: half an ounce of the
root in powder, Cinnamon and Dill, of each two drams, and a scruple of Saffron
mixed together, and laid on a Scarlet Cloth, moistened (...) White Wine, and
applied to the Cods, helps pains and p^^bings of them. The green roots
bruised and applied, helps the Morphew, Spots, and other discolorings of the
skin. The mouth being gargled with a decoction of the roots, it eases the
Toothache, and mends a stinking breath; being mixed with honey and drunk it
purges gross phlegm and choler from the Stomach, and helps the Jaundies and
Dropsy by evacuating those humors upwards and downwards; it helps also
shakings of Agues, diseases of the Liver, Spleen, and the Stone in the Reins;
it is good against Worms, and eases pains in the Belly and Sides, Convulsions,
and Cramps, and helps the involuntary passing away of the natural seed; being
boiled in Vinegar and drunk, it helps the bitings of venomous Beasts; and
boiled in Wine and Drunk, it provokes Urine, and eases the Chollick: and
Electuary made hereof, is good for Astmah's, Coughs, and cold diseases of the
Lungs. If it be given in too great a dose, or to weak persons, it offends the
Stomach, and causes blood to be avoided. Let women with Child not meddle with
it, for it brings down their Courses: and a pessary made of the juice with
Honey, brings away the Birth. In gripings of the Bowels give it with Mastick,
in the joint Gout with Castor, in diseases of the Liver with Rhabarb and juice
of Egrimony; in the Dropsy with honey of Roses.

See further in Adam in Eden: written by Will, Coals.

See further in The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: by P. Morellus.

Garden or Common Flower de Luce. Iris vulgaris.
Description.
IT has long flaggy leaves, having two edges like a sword, amongst which
spring up smooth plain stalks, about two foot long, bearing blue flowers
toward the top, consisting of six leaves joined together, three whereof stand
upright, and are bent inwards one toward another, the other three hang
downwards, and have rough hairy welts rising from the nether part of the leaf
upward, almost of a yellow color, the Roots be thick, long, and knobby, having
many hairy threads hanging to them.

Names.] The Greek name is (...), and in Latin Iris and Radix Marica, because
of its faculty to cure the Piles: It is likewise called in Greek (...), quasi
sacra; whereupon it has been also called consecratrix, the Ancients having
accounted it holy.

Place and Time.] This Flower de Luce grows commonly in our Country Gardens,
the flowers being used for an ornament in houses; they flower in May and June,
and sometimes in April.

Nature and Virtues.] The green Roots of the Flower de Luce are hot almost in
the fourth degree, the dried Roots hot and dry in the third degree, burning the
mouth and throat of such as taste them; the root stamped with Rosewater, and
applied to the sace plaisterwise, takes away the blackness or blewness of any
stroke or bruise, yet it is apt to cause heat and inflammation in a tender
skin, unless prevented by laying a piece of Silk or fine Lawn between the
plaster and the skin; the juice of the Root vehemently draws forth phlegm
and watery humors, and is a special Purger for the Dropsy, being drunk in
Whey, or some such convenient liquour to allay the heat of it: The dry roots
attenuate or make thin, clammy, thick, and tough humors; so that they are good
in a lohoch, or licking medicine, for shortness of breath, the Cough and
infirmities of the Chest; they remedy evil Spleens, Convulsions, Cramps, and
bitings of Serpents, and running of the Reins, (as says Dioscorides) being
drunk with vinegar; and the decoction in wine being drunk, provokes Urine,
helps the Chollick, and brings down the Courses: The decoction used in bathes
for women softneth the Matrix; the roots being boiled soft, and laid to
plaisterwise, mollifieth hard knobs and swellings of the King's Evil; and the
juice of the root, or the root bruised applied to the Piles or Hemorrhoides
eases them much; the other Virtues which Culpeper has promiscuously
misapplyed to this, you may read in Orris, or White Flower de Luce in its
proper place; observe well the temperature of this common Flower de Luce, and
be careful how you use it; do not ask advice of the Moon, as Culpeper directs
you, lest your Cure prove lunatic.

Water Flag, or yellow Flower de Luce. Iris palustris Lutea.
THe Flag, or Water Flower de Luce, is like the Garden in roots, leaves, and
stalks; but both leaves and stalks grow much higher; the leaves are a lighter
green color, and have sharp edges like a two-edged sword, the flower is pefect
yellow, the root knobby like the other, but being cut, it looks like raw flesh.

Names.] The Flag is called in Latin Iris palustris Iutea, Pseudoatorus and
Acorus palustris, in English Water Flower de Luce, and Bastard Flower de Luce,
and Flags.

Place and Time.] They grow plenifully by Rivers sides, and about Ponds, Pools,
and standing Lakes, and flower in May and June.

Gerhard says, the Roots of Flags are cold and dry in the third degree; and
Dedoneus affirms them to be cold and dry in the second degree; but by their
taste they appear to be hot, if they be chewed in the mouth, they will so warm
the tongue of whosoever tastes them, that he will pronounce them to be hot and
dry, and that at least in the second degree; they are astringent, and do bind,
strengthen, and condense, and therefore is good in Fluxes of Blood, whether at
mouth, nose, or other parts, and to stop Lasks, and the immoderate flowing of
women's Courses; the distilled Water of the Herb and flowers is good to wash and
cleanse foul Ulcers in the privy parts of man or woman, Cancers, Inflammation
of women's breasts, and that spreading Ulcer called Noli me tangere; for which
outward purposes an Ointment made of the flowers is effectual

Parsley. Apium hortense.
It needs no description,

Names.] It is called Apium hortense in Latin.

Place and Time.] It grows only in Gardens in our Land, it perfects its seed
in August the second year after it is sown.

Nature and Virtues.] It is a Mercurial herb, and is hot and dry in the second
degree; the seed is hot in the second degree, and dry almost in the third; its
root is temperately hot; Parsley is excellent to provoke Urine, to break the
Stone, and ease the pains thereof; it provokes the Terms, and is comfortable to
the stomach, breaking wind both there and in the belly; the roots open
obstructions, and provokes urine mightily, and may be boiled and eaten like
Parsnips for the purposes aforesaid; for which the seed decocted in wine is
very effectual; it is profitable for the Yellow Jaundies, Falling Sickness, and
Dropsy: the root is one of the five opening roots, and is used amongst other
herbs and roots that move the belly downwards; the seeds are effectual against
venom and poison, and for them that have taken Litharge: it is also used
amongst other things for the Cough, and being boiled in white wine and drunk,
it brings away the Birth and Afterbirth. The leaves of Parsley eaten after
Onions or Garlic, takes away their offensive smell, and suppresseth the
Vapors that offend the head or eyes: the leaves laid to inflamed or swollen eyes
with bread or meal, does much help them, and it abates the hardness of women's
breasts caused by the curdling of their milk; it takes away black and blue
spots and marks which come by blows, bruises, and falls, if it be fried with
butter, and applied thereunto: the juice mixed with a little wine, and dropped
into the ears, eases pains thereof; the distilled water is good to give
Children for the frets, wind, or gripings in their bellies or stomachs.

Parsley-pert, or Break-stone. Calculum frangens.
THis rises up with many leaves spread upon the ground,

Names.] Lobel gave it the name of Percepier Anglorum, and it is called
Calculum frangens in Latin, in English, Break-stone.

Place and Time.] Parsley-pert delights in sandy and fallowed Ground, and also
amongst Corn; it grows commonly in most Countries of this Nation, it is found
from April to the end of October.

Nature and Virtues.] It is cold and dry about the second degree, I suppose
under the influence of Venus; it is singular to provoke Urine, and expel gravel
and the Stone in the Reins and Kidneys, washing it down by Urine, and expelling
it out of the Bladder, either to drink the decoction of the said herb in Wine
or water, or the juice in white Wine, taken morning and evening, or a dram of
the dried herb in powder drunk in white Wine or other drink first and last
diverse days together: it will make a good Sallet herb for the said purposes,
being pickled up like Sampire, and eaten as a sauce in Winter when the green
herb cannot be had.

Parsnip. Pastinaca.
I Think this needs no description, Pastinaca is their Latin appellation; they
are common amongst Gardners, and is a good root to be eaten buttered by it
self, or amongst salt Fish; their particular virtues you may read before in
Carrots, there being little difference but only in color.

Cow Parsnip. Spondylium.
THis plant is known by the name of wild Parsnip, it answering thereunto both
in his rank savor, and in the likeness of the root: the leaves hereof are long
and large, deeply notched, or cut about the edges, like the teeth of a Saw, of
an over-worn green color, having long hairy foot stalks: the flowers grow in
tufts like the wild Parsnips, in white, and sometimes reddish Umbels: the root
is long and white like to the Henbane root. The whole plant has an
ill-favored smell.

Names.] It is called in Greek (...), and in Latin also Spondylium; in English
Cow Parsnip, Meadow Parsnip, and Madnep.

Place and Time.] Cow Parsnip grows commonly in moist fertile Meadows and
Pastures, and flowreth in June and July, the seed is ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] It is manifestly hot of temperature, and of a cutting
faculty: the leaves hereof being, bruised and applied does consume and dissolve
cold swellings: the Oil wherein the leaves and roots hereof have been botled,
is good to anoint the Heads of such as are troubled with the Lethargy,
Forgetfulness, or the Headache, and much helps phrenctick or Melancholy
persons, their Heads being anointed with it. The seed of Cow-Parsnip being
drunk in convenient liquor, purges Phlegm out through the Guts, helps short
windedness, the strangling of the Mother, Jaundies, and falling Sickness; and
the sum of the seed will revive such as are sallen into a swoon, or deep
sleep, and helps women's passions of the Mother, the smoke being received
underneath: The juice of the flowers dropped into the ears, cleanses and
heals them of filthy matter, and stays the running thereof.

The Peach Tree. Nux Persica.
THis Tree is nourished only in Gardens, so that a description is needless.

Names.] It is called in Latin Nux Persica; I suppose the reason because they
came originally from Persia.

Nature and Vertu^s.] The fruit is cold in the first degree, and most in the
second; the Kernels be hot and dry: it is a tree ascribed to Venus. Pouches
moderately eaten (as all fruit ought to be) are good for hot constitutions, to
cool the Stomach, and to sea the Belly: according to Galen, the best time of
eating them is before meals, for then they mollisie the Belly, provoke
appetite, and qualify choler in the Stomach.

The Kernels of the Stones are profitable amongst other ingredients to break
the Stone, and do ease pains and gripings of the Belly, caused through
windiness and sharp humors: an oil drawn from them and put into Glisters does
the like. A milk or cream of the said Kernels being drawn forth with some
Vervain water, and applied to the Forehead and Temples, does procure rest to
sick persons; and so does the said oil, the places aforesaid being anointed
with it: the same Oil, or the juice of the leaves dropped into the Ears, eases
pains of them; and being bruised and boiled in Vinegar till they be thick, and
applied to a bald Head, it causes hair to grow. The leaves boiled in Ale, or
Milk, and drunk, loosens the Belly, and kills worms; and so they do being
bruised, and laid on the Belly; and being dried they discuss humors. The
powder whereof strewed upon fresh bleeding Wounds, stays the bleeding, and
closes them up: The flowers infused all night in Wine in a warm place, and
strained in the morning, and drunk gently, moves the Belly; or you may make a
syrrup of them, by infusing fresh flowers in the liquor six or seven times
still straining it, and then boil it to a syrrup with a convenient quantity of
Sugar, and take two spoonfuls thereof, and it will purge waterish humors
without trouble to the Stomach, or lower parts of the body. A conserve made of
the said flowers provokes Vomiting, and wastes hydropick humors. The liquor
that droppeth from the Tree, being wounded, is given in the decoction of
Coltsfoot for the Cough and shortness of Breath, by adding thereto some sweet
Wine and Saffron; and it is good for Hoarseness, and all diseases of the Lungs,
and for them that vomit or spit blood; two drams thereof taken in the juice of
Lemons or Radish, is good for the Stone.

The Pear Tree. Pyrus.
THere are diverse sorts of them, but all so well known, they need no
description.

Names.] The Latin name is Pyrus, and the wild Pear Pyraster; the Warden
Volema.

Nature and Virtues.] Culpepper ascribes all Pears and Apples to Venus, but he
might allow Jupiter some of them: they are said to be cold and moist in the
first degree, having an earthy substance, and binding quality; but the sweet
Pears do move the Belly, the harsh and sour bind as much: the Warden is most
commendable, and may be given to those that are sick, being first baked,
stewed, or roasted. Pears being boiled and taken with a little Honey, helps the
pains and oppression of the Stomach. Pears outwardly applied are good for hot
Tumors, and close and heal new Wounds, and so do the leaves; for which the
wild Pear is most effectual.

Perry is a cordial drink reviving the Spirits, comforting the Heart, and is a
healthy drink.

Pease. Pisum.
THey are very well known, and are called in Latin Pisum; in English Pease,
and Peason.

Nature and Virtues.] They are of a mean temperature, less flatuous then Beans,
yet pass not so soon through the body; they help the generative and procreative
faculty very much; they increase the seed and bodily lust, and also milk in
women's breasts: The dried pease sodden in water, and a lie made therewith,
helps spreading sores of the head, spots of the face, and other discolorings
of the skin. The broth wherein they have been boiled is good to take purgations
in, to cleanse the Stomach of cold and moist humors. The pottage is good for
the Strangury, and to take with Sena morning and evening for the Ague, and
Rhabarb for the Jaundies. The powder of them stops bleeding at the Nose. The
red Ciches have a cleansing faculty, they provoke Urine, and break the Stone.

Pellitory of Spain.
THis bears long leaves,

There is another kind which rises up with diverse brittle stalks, a yard high
and more, having narrow long leaves, finely dented about the edges, standing
one above another to the top, and has many white flowers which stand in tufts
like those of Yarrow, with a small yellowish thrum in the middle, which yields
a small seed: the root is of a sharp biting taste.

Places and Time.] The first grows only in Gardens, the latter by hedges
sides and paths in many places: it flowers in the latter end of June and July.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and moist, particularly ruled by Mercury, so
that it is a purger of the Brain: the herb or the root chewed in the mouth,
draws away phlegmatic humors, and eases pains of the Teeth, and hinders
distillations of the brain, upon the Eyes and Lungs, and by that means prevents
Coughs, Prisicks, and Consumptions, the Apoplexy and Falling Sickness, and is
good for the Lethargy: The herb made into an Ointment with Hogs Grease takes
away black and blue spots caused by blows or falls. It is said an ounce of the
juice taken in a draught of Muscadel, an hour before the fit, will drive away
an Ague at the second or third time taking at furthest.

Pellitory of the Wall. Herba muralis.
COmmon Pellitory of the Wall has many brownish red tender stalks, rising not
above a foot high at most; upon which grow at the several joints two leaves, of
a dark green color, afterward turning brownish, smooth on the edges, and
rough or hairy like the stalks at the joints with the leaves; from the middle
of the stalks upwards come many small pale purplish flowers in hairy heads or
husks; after which come small, black, rough seed, which will stick to any
Garment, or cloth: the root is somewhat long, with many fibers, of a dark
reddish color, which abides all Winter, though the stalks and leaves perish,
springing fresh every year,

Names.] It is commonly called Parietaria, and of some Herba muralis.

Place and Time.] It grows upon old stone Walls, as upon the Walls of Rochester
Castle in Kent, and amongst rubbish, and such like places; flowers in June and
July, and the seed is ripe soon after.

Nature and Virtues.] Pellitory of the Wall is reputed to be cold and moist,
yet it is thought to be hot, because it is effectual against Wind, and the
Stone; it is also ascribed to Mercury. The decoction of the herb taken with a
little honey, is a good Gargle for a sore Throat; and being drunk without
Honey, it eases pains of the Mother, provokes the Terms, and helps
obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Reins: three ounces of the juice taken
at a time, helps stopping of Urine, and expells the Stone and Gravel out of the
Reins and Kidneys, and is good in Glisters to ease pains of the Sides and Back
proceeding of Wind. The juice held in the mouth eases the Toothache. The
powder of the dried herb made into an Electuary with Honey, or the juice or
decoction taken with Sugar or Honey, is good for an old dry Cough, shortness of
Breath and Wheesing. The bruised herb being sprinkled with some Muscadine, and
warmed upon a Tyle, or a Chasing-dish of Coals, and applied to the Belly, works
the same effect. The leaves mixed with Oil of sweet Almonds, is good for the
Stone, Wind, or gripings, being laid to the pained parts; the juice dropped
into the ears, cease the noise, and eases the pains thereof: The juice
applied with a little salt does cleanse and heal Fistula's: the bruised herb
bound to a green wound heals it in two or three days: A Pultis made hereof
with Mallows boiled in wine, with wheat-bran, bean-flower, and some oil, and
applied warm to any bruised Sinew, Tendon, or Muscle, it restores them to their
strength in a short space, and caseth pains of bruises, and dissolves congealed
blood of beatings or falls: The juice or the distilled Water is useful for many
of the aforesaid purposes, and also to cleanse the skin from spots and
freckles, wheales, sun-burn, and morphew; and does assuage hot Imposthumes,
burnings, scaldings, or inflammations, as St. Anthonies fire, being often
bathed with wet clothes dipped therein; or the juice made into an ointment
with Ceruse and Oil of Roses, and anointed therewith, which also does cleanse
soul Ulcers, and running Scabs in childrens heads, and helps to stay the
falling off of the hair from the head.

Pennyroyal. Pulegium Regale.
THis is so well known to be a very wholesome herb, that it needs no other
report but only of its Virtues.

Names.] It is called in Latin Pulegium Regale; in English Pudding-grass,
(because it is used in Hogs-puddings) Pulial-Royal, and of some Organy.

Place and Time.] It grows upon Commons and other moist watery places, and is
also cherished in Gardens, and flowers about August or later.

Nature and Virtues.] Penniroyal is hot and dry in the third degree, as Gallen
says, of subtle parts, making thin, warming and digesting, and governed by
Venus: A decoction of it in beer or wine provokes the Courses, and being boiled
in wine it will expel a dead Child, and the afterbirth: It stays vomiting,
and helps gnawing of the stomach, being taken with water and vinegar; the
decoction is good in the Falling sickness, Dropsy, Jaundies, stopping of
Urine, and the Leprosy; being mixed with honey and salt it clears the breast,
opens the Lungs, helps Cramps, and purges melancholy humors by stool; and
being drunk in wine it helps such as are stung by venomous beasts: being beaten
with mint and some vinegar added to it, it is profitable against fainting and
swooning, being smelled to, or held in the mouth, and so it is good for the
Lethargy and Falling Sickness. The powder of the Herb, or the ashes of it
strengthens the gums; and being boiled in wine with honey and salt, helps the
toothache: It also eases the Gout, and profits those that are spleenatick or
liver-grown, being applied with some salt: A bathe made of it for women to sit
in, helps hardness of the Mother, and so it helps the Itch: The green herb
bruised with vinegar, takes away black and blue marks about the eyes, or other
places, and discolorings in the face, and cleanses and heals foul Ulcers;
it helps cold griefs in the joints, being fast bound to the place after a
bathing: The distilled Water is effectual for many of the same purposes.

Piony. Pionia.
OF this Plant there are generally accounted these two kinds, the male and the
female, which are both so well known, that they need not a particular
description, only this, the male is that which is called a single Piony,
bearing a single flower; and the female the double Piony, which has a very
thick flower.

Names.] Pionia is the common Latin name for it, yet it is called by some
Lunaria, because of its efficacy in curing the Falling Sickness and Lunacy.

Place and Time.] They grow only in Gardens, and flower in May, and the seed
is ripe in July.

Nature and Virtues.] It is temperately hot and dry, the root does gently
bind, it is a Solar Herb: The heads, roots, and seeds, but especially the
roots are very effectual for the Falling Sickness; being taken up and hung
fresh about Childrens necks, it cures them; the root infused in Sack twenty
four hours, and strained, and a good draught drunk first and last several days
before and after the full of the Moon, the body being first well prepared, and
Betony Posset being used, it effectually helps the Falling Sickness both in
children and elder people: The powder of the male Piony root drunk in wine or
posset drink, will do the same: and so does an extraction made of the roots,
and the syrrup made of the flowers: The root comforts and cherishes the body,
provokes urine, purges the Liver and Kidneys, and being boiled in wine and
drunk, it purges the blood, the terms, and secondine, the quantity of an Almond
being taken at a time: it helps gripings of the belly, and pain of the Kidneys
and Bladder, and the overflowing of the Gall, the Chollick, and cleanses the
guts, passions of the brain, and the Strangury, being boiled in wine and drunk:
The powder of the root with Saffron is good against the yellow Jaundies: the
black seed provokes the Terms; and helps those that are troubled with the
Nightmare, being taken night and morning: the same in powder drunk with wine,
comfort the senses, and restores lost speech.

Pepper. Piper.
I Shall not describe this foreign Tree, but only tell you the Virtues of the
fruit, being all that part of it which is to be seen in England.

Nature and Virtues.] There is brought to us black Pepper, white Pepper, and
long Pepper: It is hot and dry in the third degree, well near the fourth: The
black Pepper is most used, and is good to consume crude and moist humors in
the stomach, to provoke appetite, help digestion, and warm a cold stomach; it
dissolves wind, provokes urine, helps the Cough, and diseases of the Breast,
and is good against poisons and venomous bitings: being drunk in Posset Drink
before the fit of an Ague, it abates the shaking thereof; and being taken with
honey, it abates the swelling of a Quinzie: The powder snuffed up purges the
brain by sneazing, it consumes the Pin and Web in the Eye, and helps dimness of
the sight: It strengthens the Nerves and Muscles, dissolves the Kings Evil, and
hard cold swelling; being applied with pitch it draws out thorns: The powder of
long Pepper and Cinquefoil drunk in Ale eases the Chollick: But such as are of
hot constitutions must forbear the much use thereof.

See further of this in Culpeppers School of Physic.

Periwinckle. Vinca Pervinca.
THere be diverse sorts of Periwinckle,

Names.] It is most known by the names of Vinca Pervinea, though it is also
called Clematis Daphnoides, both in Greek and Latin, in English Pervinckle,
and Periwinckle.

Place and Time.] The common sort with the blue and that with the white flowers
grow under hedges in many places of this Land; the other only in curious
Gardens: They flower in March, April, and May.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot almost in the second degree, and somewhat dry
and astringent, it is appropriated to Venus, and said to increase milk in
women's breast^^, and to cause mutual love between man and wife, the leaves
being eaten by them both: and likewise the herb chewed stays bleeding at mouth
and nose, and is used by the French to stop the Terms: It is commended to be
drunk in wine against Lasks and Fluxes of the belly; the bruised herb applied
to the place is good against the biting of Adders, and the infusion of the herb
in vinegar drunk: It is reported that the branches or strings bound about the
legs defends from the Cramp; but I never tried it, being never troubled with
that disease.

St. Peters-wort.
THere is so little difference in form, and much less in virtue, between this
Herb and St. John's Wort, that I need say no more of it here, but refer you to
St. John's Wort.

Pimpernel. Anagallis.
PImpernel has diverse weak square stalks lying on the ground, being small. It
has a small fibrous root, perishing every Winter.

Names.] It is called Anagallis both in Greek and Latin, and by many other
useless names; yet by some Corallion, and the Composition thereof Diacorallion.

Place and Time.] It grows by Highways sides, in Corn fields, and in Gardens
too of its own accord almost every where: It flowers from May till August, some
of the seed ripening and falling in the mean time.

Nature and Virtues.] It is a Solar Herb, somewhat hot, and of a drying
faculty, and drawing; it draws thorns, thistles, and splinters out of any
part of the body, and cleanses and heals corrupt and fretting sores, being
bruised and applied thereunto: The decoction in wine is good against venomous
bitings, pain of the Kidneys and obstructions of the Liver, and is good in
contagious diseases, the Patient sweating in bed two hours hours after the
taking of it, that the venomous matter may be expelled; it helps also biting of
mad dogs and other venomous creatures, being inwardly and outwardly applied:
The juice mixed with honey and dropped into the eyes, cleanses them from mists
and films; it also eases pains of the Hemorrhoides and Piles: The distilled
water is good for all the aforesaid purposes, and beautifies the skin, making
it smooth, neat, and clear: The juice snuffed up into the nostrils purges the
head, and is said to help the Toothache.

Pine Tree. Pinus.
THis Foreign Plant I forbear to describe, he being only planted by the
curious in our Country. It is called Pinus in Latin, and the fruit Coni.

Nature and Virtues.] The Bark is drying and astringent, the Kernels do
moderately heat and concoct: the leaves are cooling, and belongs to Venus
Garden. The leaves boiled in Vinegar, is a good gargle for the Toothache. The
Kernels nourish much, they stir up bodily lust, and increase sperm, being taken
in an Electuary with powder of Penids and some sweet wine. They are good to
help shortness of Breath, wheesings and Hoarseness, Ulcers of the Lungs, an old
Cough, and to expectorate tough Phlegm. They lenifie the uritory passages,
ripen inward Imposthumes, and hearten and make fat lean Bodies, and help Palsy
and Numness. The scales of the Apple and bark of the Tree stop the Bloody Flux.

Plantain. Plantago.
PLantago is its Latin appellation, and by the name of Plantain it is well
known every where in England: it flourishes in June, and the seed ripens
shortly after.

Nature and Virtues.] Plantain is cold and dry in the second degree; the roots
and seeds are of subtle parts: It is by some ascribed to Mars, by Culpepper to
Venus; yet I think the Sun has most right to it: It helps Wounds and
Inflammations in the Tongue, Mouth, and Throat, and also Cankers, and eating
Sores, if it be mixed with Vinegar, Honey, and Allom, and the mouth often
gargled therewith: The juice or herb stays bleeding at nose, and bleeding of
wounds; the clarified juice or water dropped into the eyes, cools their heat,
takes away the pin and web, and dropped into the ears it eases their pains, and
helps deafness; and mixed with juice of Housleek, it is good against
inflammations, and burning or scalding; the temples and forehead being anointed
with the juice and oil of Roses, it eases pains of the head, which are caused
by heat, and helps lunatic persons, and the bitings of mad dogs and serpents:
The clarified juice drunk by it self, or in other liquor, heals a Vein broken
inwardly, and stays bleeding at the mouth, and spitting of blood, and heals
Ulcers in the Reins and Bladder, and in the Lungs, and hot Coughs, whereby it
is profitable against Consumptions; it stops the Terms and other Fluxes, and
helps torments and frettings in the guts; the decoction or powder of the root
or seeds is more binding then the herb, and is said to help Agues; a Cake made
of the seed in powder with wheaten flower, and the yolk of an egg, and baked,
stays vomiting: The he^^, but more especially the seeds, is good against the
Falling Sickness, the Dropsy, yellow Jaundies, and stopping of the Liver and
Reins; the powder of the leaves taken in drink kills worms; the green leaves
will soon skin the seat when the skin is off with riding, or any other place,
being applied: A Salve made thereof with Oil, Wax, and Turpentine, cures deep
wounds; the juice or herb bruised with vinegar helps surbated feet: a
decoction of the leaves kills worms in old foul Ulcers; the juice with oil of
Roses is good to be applied to hot Gouts, to cool the heat, and repress the
humors, and is good to be applied where a bone is out of joint, to hinder
inflammations, swellings, and pains thereof: one part of Plantain-water, and
two parts of the brine wherein Beaf has been powdered, boiled together and
clarified, heals spreading Scabs and Itch, Tetters and Ringworms, the Shingles,
and all running and fretting Sores.

Plum-Tree. Prunus.
THere are several kinds, yet they need no description.

Names.] They are called Prunus and Prunum in Latin: and Damsons are called
Pruna Damascena, or Damask Prunes, from Damascus where they naturally grow.
They commonly blossom in April, and yield their fruit in Summer, some early,
and some later.

Nature and Virtues.] They are cold and moist in the second degree, the sharp
and sour bind the belly, the sweet moisten the stomach, and move the belly:
Mr. Culpeper says, Venus shall eat them all, but I think it reason that
Jupiter should have some of them; the Plums which are of a firm substance are
the best, for those that are very moist do fill the body with corrupt blood and
waterish humors: being preserved they are the wholesomest, and most grateful
to the stomach either of the sick or healthful: The dried Prunes sold at the
Grocers, being stewed and eaten do procure appetite, a little open the belly,
allay choler, and cool the stomach, especially if a little Sena and Rhabarb be
stewed amongst them, for then they become more purging, and evacuate chollerick
humors, do help weak stomachs, and are good in Fevers and other hot diseases:
The Gum that issues out of the trees being drunk in wine is good against the
Stone, the said gum or the leaves being boiled in vinegar and applied, kills
Tetters, Ring-worms, and the Leprosy: A decoction of the leaves in wine is
good to gargle and wash the mouth and throat, and to dry up the flux of Rheum
that falls down to the Pallat, Gums, or Almonds of the Throat.

Poley-Mountain. Polium montanum.
THis Plant grows not naturally in England, but may be had at the Apothecaries
shop, to which I refer you: It is called in Latin Polium, but more usually
with the Epithet montanum.

Nature and Virtues.] Poley is dry in the third degree, and hot in the end of
the second, of a loathsome bitter taste: It is useful to open obstructions
especially of the Liver and Spleen; and the decoction thereof drunk helps
swelling of the Spleen, the Jaundies, and Dropsy, being boiled in Vinegar and
Water. It resists poison, and is used in Antidotes for that purpose; the
fumigation thereof drives away Vermin, it moves the belly and the terms, and
being applied green, it soders up the lips of wounds; and being dry it heals
foul sores or ulcers.

Polipody of the Oak. Polipodium.
POlipody of the Oak is a small Herb, consisting of nothing but roots and
leaves, bearing neither flower nor seed; from the root grows up three or four
leaves singly by themselves, winged and about a handful high, having many small
narrow leaves on each side the stalk, large below, and growing smaller and
smaller toward the top, cut into the middle rib, but not dented on the edges,
(as the male Fern is) of a sad green color, smooth on the upper side, but
rough on the under side, by reason of some yellowish spots thereon. The Root is
smaller then ones little finger, but long and creeping asloap, and has a
sweetish harshness in the taste.

Names. It is called in Latin Polipodium, in English Polipody of the Oak.

Places and Time.] That which grows upon Oaks is the best, yet Polipody is also
found upon old stumps of other trees, as Beech, Hazle, and Willow, and
sometimes in the woods under them, upon old walls, and slated Churches, and in
many other places: It is always green, and may be gathered at any time; yet it
shoots forth fresh leaves in the Spring.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the second degree, and that which
grows upon the Oak partakes of the nature of the Oak, and is an herb of
Jupiter, whatever others say. The herb taken in decoction, broth, or infusion,
purges burnt choler, tough and thick Phlegm, and dries up thin humors, and
is good for Melancholy and Quartain Agues; for which it may also be taken in
Whey, Barley-water, or honied water, or the broth of a Chicken with Epithymum,
or Beets and Mallows added thereto. The distilled water of the roots and leaves
taken with Sugarcandy, is good against wheazings, Coughs, and distillations of
thin Rheum upon the Lungs, which cause Ptisicks and Consumptions. It is good to
soften the Spleen, and ease Stitches in the sides, and the Chollick. A dram or
two of the Powder of the dried Roots taken in honeyed water, works gently for
the purposes aforesaid; the distilled water is likewise commended for Quartain
Agues, and against melancholy Dreams; it cures the disease in the Nose called
Polipus, and helps clefts or chops that come between the fingers or toes,
being applied thereunto. The fresh roots beaten small, or the powder of the
dried root mixed with honey, and applied to a member that has been out of
joint, and is newly set again, does much strengthen it; some put Fennel seeds,
Anniseeds, or Ginger to it to correct it, which it needs not, being a gentle
medicine of it self, and an Ounce of it may be taken at a time in a decoction,
if there be not Sena or some other stronger purger with it: I have found it
very effectual in decoctions with other Pectoral Herbs, for opening and
cleansing the Liver and Lungs.

Pome-Citron Tree. Malus Citria.
THis Outlandish Tree is called in Latin Malus Persica, and Malus Assyria, and
also Malus Citria, Pomum Citrium; and in English Citron.

Place and Time.] They grow in Spain and other hot Countries, and flower and
bear fruit all the year.

Nature and Virtues.] Avicen says the Seed is hot in the first degree, and dry
in the second; the Bark hot in the first, and dry in the end of the second; the
inner white substance hot and moist in the first degree, and the Juice cold and
dry in the third degree: It is a Solar Plant, and a sovereign Cordial for the
Heart, an Antidote against Poison and Infections, the outer rind being dried
and taken; it also warms and comforts a cold Stomach, expells and disperses
Wind and indigested humors therein, and in the Bowels, and helps digestion
and melancholy; it helps a stinking breath, being chewed in the mouth. The
outward rindes preserved are a good Cordial, and very effectual against
melancholy and infection. There is an Electuary made thereof which purges
cold phlegmatic humors; the Syrup of the Rindes strengthens the stomach and
heart, and helps faintings thereof, and resists poison, and strengthens nature,
and is good for such as are in Consumptions or Hectic Fevers: The Syrup of
the juice is effectual for most of the same purposes; the seeds preserve the
heart from infection of the Plague, Pox, and venomous Bitings; they kill Worms,
provoke the Terms, and cause Abortion: They dry up and consume moist humors
in the body, or outwardly in moist Sores or Ulcers: The sour juice is good in
Pestilential Fevers, suppressing the violence of Choler and hot distempers in
the Blood, corrects the Liver, quenches thirst, stirs up an appetite, resists
venom and infection, and refreshes fainting spirits.

The Pomegranate-Tree. Malus Granata.
THis Plant grows also in hot Countries, as in Spain and Italy, but chiefly
in Granado; yet it is useful in Medicine with us, therefore I shall not omit
its Virtues. It is called in Latin Malum Granatum, or Punicum, and Granatum:
the Flower Balaustium, the Rind Sidium, but more generally Cortex Granatorum.

Nature and Virtues.] Those that are sweet are helping to the stomach, and are
somewhat hot; but the sour ones and seeds of each are cold and astringent, it
is an Herb of Venus. The flowers and shells in powder help to stay blood in
Wounds, and the Kernels dried in the sun, stop fluxes of the Belly and Matrix,
and helps spitting of blood being drunk in raw water; and so do the flowers and
rindes: The Juice and the Kernels, or the Syrup, is good to quench thirst in
burning Fevers, and hot diseases; a Gargarisme or Lotion made of the Rindes is
good to bring down the hot swellings of the Almonds in the Throat; the juice of
the Kernels sodden with Honey is good for sores of the Yard, Mouth, and
Fundament, and for looseness of the skin about the nails, and swellings and
knots in any part of the body; a decoction of the seeds is good to strengthen
and fasten the Teeth.

Poplar, Vide Aspen Tree.

Poppy. Papaver.
THere be diverse kinds of Poppies, as white Garden Poppy, black Garden Poppy,
red wild Poppy, or Corn-rose; the two first grow only in Gardens where they
are sown; the other is so well known in almost every Corn field, that it needs
no description.

Names.] Papaver is the general Latin Name for Poppy, yet to the wild red
Poppy is added the Adjectives erraticum, rubrum, or sylvestre; and it is
generally known by the English Names of Redweed, Corn-rose, and Cheesebouls.

There is another kind called Papaver spumeum, Spatling Poppy, being usually
found with a froth like spittle upon the stalks and leaves more then upon any
other Plant: It has many weak tender stalks full of joints, about a foot or
half a yard long, usually lying on the ground, whereon grow many pale whitish
green leaves, two always set together at the joints, one against another,
having many times upon the leaves, but more often upon the stalks at the
joints, a white frothy substance, like that which is called Cuckow-spittle, or
Wood-seer: at the tops of the stalks upon many slender footstalk stand diverse
white slowers composed of five small leaves a piece, with a deep notch in the
middle of every one of them, standing in a thin loose striped husk, wherein
afterward is contained black seed. The Root is white, and spreads in the
ground, continuing many years, but the roots of all the other Poppies dye every
Winter.

Place and Time.] The two first (as I told you) grow only in Gardens where
they are sown; the red weed almost in every Corn Field; the spatling Poppey
grows also in Corn Fields, sometimes in Pastures, and by highway sides: they
begin flowring in May, and continue till the end of July. The seed is ripe
presently after.

Nature and Virtues.] The Moon claims particular dominion over these Herbs, and
assigns them these Virtues: A syrrup made of the Garden Poppey heads with the
seeds, procures rest and sleep in sick persons, and stays Catarrhs, and
defluxions of thin Rheumes from the Head upon the Stomach and Lungs, which
cause a continual Cough, the sore-runner of a Consumption: The seed of black
Poppey drunk in Wine, stops the Flux of the Belly, and the overflowing of the
Terms. A pultis made of the green knops, with Barley Meal and Barrows Grease,
helps St. Anthonies sire; and the green knops being stamped with Vinegar,
woman's Milk, and Saffron, mightily eases the Gout, and cures another kind of
St. Anthonies fire called Erysipelas; and put into the Fundament as a Glister
it causes sleep. The condensate juice is called Meconium, and is many times
used in Narcotick Medicines instead of the true opium which is brought from
Thebes, but it is weaker; it is an ingredient in Treacle and Mithridate, and
other Medicines made to procure rest and sleep, and to ease pains of the Head,
and other parts, and is used to cool Inflammations, Agues, and Phrenzies; but
it must be carefully used inwardly, for too great a quantity causes the
Lethargy, and sometimes death; it gives much ease in the Gout, being outwardly
applied, and eases the pain of hollow Teeth, being put therein. The Syrrup
made of the Redweed Flowers, or wild Poppey, is good against Surfeits, cools
the Blood, and may be safely given in Fevers, Phrensies, and hot Agues, and
other Inflammations. The distilled water of the said flowers is good to drink
morning and evening against Surfeits, and is effectual in the Plurifie, and all
other griefs of the Breast and Head. The dried flowers boiled in water, or the
powder of them drunk in the distilled water, or in some other drink, works
the same effect. The Syrrup of Meconium or Diacodium, which is made of the
heads of white and black Poppeys, may safely be given to those which are
troubled with hot and sharp Rheumes. According to Gallen, the seeds of spatling
Poppey purges Phlegm, and Dioscorides says it causes Vomiting; but being
taken in Mead or Honeyed Water, it is good for them that are troubled with the
Falling Sickness.

Purslain. Portulaca.
IT is a well known Garden Sallet Herb, and needs no description.

Names.] It is called Portulaca in Latin.

Place and Time.] It may be sown in March or April, and flourishes from June
till Michaelmas.

Nature and Virtues.] Purslain is cold in the third degree, and moist in the
second, and is also a Lunar Herb: it is a good Sallet eaten with Oil and
Vinegar, to provoke Appetite, and cool a hot Stomach; it fastneth the Teeth,
asswageth the swelling of the Gums, and cools the Mouth, and eases the pains
of the Teeth; it is good in hot Agues, and to cool the Liver, Blood, and Reins,
so that it stops Chollerick Fluxes of the Belly, Women's Courses, and the
Gonorrhea, distillations from the Head, and caseth pains proceeding from Heat,
want of sleep, or the Phrenzy: The seed cools the heat and sharpness of Urine,
abates the heat of Lust, and Venerious Dreams, and the overmuch use thereof
extinguisheth the natural seed: the seed bruised and boiled in Wine and given
to Children, kills Worms. The juice is singular good for all the said
purposes, and for Inflammations or Ulcers in the secret parts, and helps
excortations in the Bowels, and the Hemorrhoides. The said juice used with Oil
of Roses is good for Blastings by Lightning, burnings with Gunpowder, to-allay
the heat of sore Breasts, or of any other Sores. It is likewise effectual to
stay Vomitings, and taken with Sugar or Honey, it quenches immoderate thirst,
helps an old and dry Cough, shortness of Breath, and the Ptisick; and the
thickened juice made into Pills with Gum Traganth and Arabic, helps such as
make bloody water. The bruised herb being applied to the Forehead and Temples,
allayeth excessive heat therein, and applied to the Eyes, it helps redness and
Inflammations in them, and Pushes, and Wheals, and St. Anthonies fire in other
parts, especially having a little Vinegar put to it; and being mixed with the
like quantities of Galls and Linseed, it helps the Crick in the Neck, and
takes away pains therein, being applied thereunto.

Potatoes. Battata.
THese came originally to us from the Indies, and those which we call Jerusalem
Artechokes from Canada. The Spanish Potatoes are called Battata, Amotes,
Camotes, Pappus, and many other names. The Jerusalem Artichoke Heliotropium
Indicum tuberosum, etc.

Nature and Virtues.] The leaves are hot and dry, the roots of a temperate
quality, under the influence of Venus. Potatoes do much nourish and strengthen
the Body, and increase and stir up bodily lust, being eaten which way soever
they are dressed. They are used in Pyes, and are excellent good Preserved and
Candied, or roasted under the Embers, and eaten with Sack and Sugar. The
Virginia Potatoes are not so pleasant as the other, but the Jerusalem
Artichokes which you may have plentiful enough if you will let them once take
root in your Gardens, being boiled tender and then stewed with Butter and Wine,
or how you please, taste much like the bottom of an Artichoke, and are no less
nourishing then they.

See further of this in Culpeppers School of Physic.

Primrose. Primulae Veris.
THese are very well known to be the Ladies of the Spring, being the first that
flower; wherefore they are called in Latin Primulae Veris. They are somewhat
dry and astringent of temperature. The leaves are good to apply to
Inflammations, and to heal burnings and scaldings; and an Ointment made thereof
is excellent to heal green Wound; they are very near in nature unto Cowslips,
to whose particular Virtues I refer you.

Privet.
THis is seldom used in Physic, therefore I shall only read to you its Uses,
because they that have it near them may use it when they cannot get other
helps. It is usually planted in Hedges in Gardens to make walks and knots, and
grows wild in many Woods and Parks of this Land: It flowers in June and
July, and bears ripe berries in September.

Nature and Virtues.] Privet is a Lunar Herb, of temperature cold and dry; the
decoction of it is a good Lotion to wash sores and sore mouths, to cool
inflammations, and dry up Fluxes: The distilled water of the flowers is good
for the same purposes, and to stay women's Courses and Fluxes of the belly,
bleeding at mouth, and distillations of Rheums in the Eyes, being used with
Tutia: An Oil made by infusion of the Flowers is good for inflamed Wounds and
the Headache, proceeding of an hot cause, as says Mathiolus.

Queen of the Meadows, or Meadsweet. Regina Prati.
MEadsweet springs up with diverse broad winged leaves, somewhat rough, hard,
and crumpled like Elm-leaves, having lesser leaves with them like Agrimony, of
a sad color on the upper side, and grayish underneath, of a pleasant scent and
taste like unto Burnet; the stalks are reddish, and grow two or three foot
high, having on them such leaves as those below, but somewhat lesser; at the
tops whereof, and of the branches, stand many tufts of small white flowers
thick together, smelling sweeter then the leaves, after which come crooked and
cornered seed: The Root is somewhat woody, blackish on the outside, but
reddish within, and is nourished by fibers, so that it continues many years,
and has also a good smell.

Names.] It is called in Latin Vlmaria, (because of the likeness between its
leaves and Elm-leaves) and also Regina prati.

Place and Time.] It grows frequently in moist Meadows, by watery ditches and
rivers sides; it flowers in some place or other all the Summer Quarter.

Nature and Virtues.] Meadsweet is cold and dry, with an astringent quality,
and ascribed to Venus: Two or three of the leaves put into a cup of Claret,
gives it a fine relish, and also makes the heart merry and cheerful: The
decoction thereof in wine helps the Chollick, and taken warm with a little
honey it opens the belly, but being boiled in red wine and drunk, it stays
Looseness: The decoction thereof is good to heal sores in the mouth or secret
parts. The distilled water helps Inflammations of the Eyes, and clears the
Sight: The smell of the flowers make the heart cheerful, and therefore are
excellent to adorn houses; the root helps horses of the Bots and Worms, and so
it would do in men if they drink the decoction thereof; and therefore the
Germans call it Wormkrant, the worm-plant: The root likewise made into powder,
or boiled and drunk, powerfully s^^yes Women's Courses, the Whites, the Bloody
Flux, L^^k and all other Fluxes of Blood; and is good against vomiting; and it
is said that if it be boiled in wine and drunk, it first alters, and
afterward takes away the fits of Agues.

Quince-Tree. Malus Cydonia.
I Suppose the Tree, but especially the fruit to be so well known, they need no
description.

Names.] It is called in Latin Malus Cydonia, and Cotonea: The Spaniards call
it Membrillio and Marmello, from whence comes the word Marmalade.

Place and Time.] They delight to grow near ponds and waters sides, and are
plentiful in this Land: It flowers in April and May, and the Fruit is ripe
about Michaelmas.

Nature and Virtues.] They are cold in the first, and dry in the second degree,
they are earthy and binding; the Fruit is not durable, and is harsh and
unpleasant to eat raw, but being scalded, roasted, baked, or preserved, they
become very pleasant. They are Saturnine.

The Syrrup of the Juice of Quinces strengthens the heart and stomach, relieves
nature, stays looseness and vomiting; for looseness take a spoonful of it
before meat, for vomiting after meat: It corrects Choler and Phlegm, and helps
Digestion: To make Quinces purging, put honey to them instead of sugar; and if
you would have them more laxative then to purge Choler, add Rhabarb; for
Phlegm, Turbith; and for watery humors, Scammony: If you would have them bind
forceably, use the unripe Quinces with Roses, Acacia, or Hypocistis, and some
Rhabarb torrefied. The juice of raw Quinces is accounted an Antidote against
deadly poison; and it has been found certain, that the smell of a Quince has
taken away the strength of white Hellebore; outwardly to bind and cool hot
fluxes, the Oil of Quinces or other medicines made thereof are available to
anoint the belly or other parts therewith: It also strengthens the stomach,
belly, and sinews, and restrains immoderate sweatings: The muscilage of the
seeds boiled in water is good to allay the heat, and heal the sore breasts of
women; and with Sugar it is good to lenifie the hoarseness and harshness of the
throat, and roughness of the tongue: The Marmalade is both toothsome and
wholesome; and a decoction of the down that grows upon the Quinces is good to
restore lost hair, and being made up with Wax and applied as a plaster, it
brings hair to them that are bald, and keeps it from falling, if it be
ready to shed.

Radish. Rhaphanus.
THe Garden Radish needs no description, it is called in Latin Rhaphanus.

Nature and Virtues.] Radishes are rather a sauce then a nourishment, they are
hot in the third degree, and dry in the second, and do open and make thin, and
is governed by Mars. The roots do provoke urine, and so does the distilled
water; the root stamped with honey, and the powder of a sheeps heart, causes
hair to grow: The seed causes vomiting, and provokes urine, and being drunk
with Oximel or honied water, it drives forth Worms: The root boiled in broth is
good against an old Cough, it moves women's Courses, and increases milk, and is
good for the Dropsy, the Chollick, gripings in the belly, and griefs of the
Liver: It is good for them which are sick with eating Toadstools or other
poison; they are much used as sauce with meat to procure appetite, but they
breed ill blood, and cause belchings in the stomach.

Horseradish. Raphanus Rusticanus.
HOrse Radish rises with long leaves somewhat broad, and much cut on the edges
as if it were torn, of a dark green color, with a great rib in the middle, and
after these have been up a while, which are greater, rougher, broader, and
longer and not divided as the first, but a little roundly dented about the
edges; it does seldom bear flowers, but when it does, there rises up a great
stalk, three or four foot high, with a few lesser leaves thereon, spreading at
the top into many small branches of whitish flowers, consisting of four leaves
a piece; after which come small pods, like those of Shepherds-purse, but seldom
any seed in them: the root is long, white, and thick, of a biting taste like
Pepper.

Names.] Raphanus major some call it, and also Raphanus Rusticanus, and
Vulgaris; in English Mountain Radish, and Horse Radish.

Place and Time.] It is usually planted in Gardens, yet may be found naturally
growing in diverse moist and shadowy places of this Land: the way of propagating
it is by the root, for it seldom bears flower or seed; but when it does it
flowers in July, or August, and the seed is ripe in September.

Nature and Virtues.] Horse Radish is also under the dominion of Mars, and is
hot and dry in the third degree, of a drying, cleansing, and digesting quality:
the juice taken in drink is held to be effectual for the Scurvy; the root being
eaten for a sauce with Fish and other meats, as Mustard is, heateth the
Stomach, and causes good digestion. The root bruised helps the Sciatica,
Gout, Joynt-ache, or hard swelling of the Liver and Spleen, being applied to
the grieved place. The leaves boiled in Wine, and made in manner of a pultis
with a little oil Olive, does also mollify and take away hard swellings of the
Liver and Spleen; and being applied to the botom of the Belly, helps the
Strangury, and so do the roots sliced thin and eaten with Vinegar as a sauce,
and are also a remedy for the Chollick. The juice of the green root, or the
powder of the dry root given in Wine, or other convenient liquor, kills and
expels (...) in Children; and so does an ointment made thereof, the Childs
Belly being anointed therewith. The root being boiled in honey and vinegar into
an Electuary, is a good remedy in strong bodies for the Cough, Ptisick, and
other diseases of the Lungs, and provokes women's Courses. If any think it too
strong for their bodies, the distilled water may be taken with Sugar for all
the aforesaid purposes.

Ragwort. Jacobaea Senecio.
THere is the greater and the lesser; the greater common Ragwort has many long
and large green leaves lying on the ground,

Names] Lobel calls it Jacobaea Senecio, others Herba Sancti Jacobi, and
Jacobaea; in English Ragwort, Ragweed, and St. James-wort.

Place and Time.] They may be plentifully found in Pastures, and untilled
grounds: they flower in June and July, and the seed is ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] Ragwort is hot and dry in the second degree, and of a
bitter, discussing, and cleansing quality; and if Mars love bitter herbs, let
him take this too: The decoction thereof cleanses and heals Ulcers, and
Sores in the Mouth and Throat, they being washed therewith, and also swellings,
hardness, and Imposthumations, the Quinzy and Kings Evil, and stays Catarrhs
and defluctions of thin Rheumes upon the Fyes, Nose, or Lungs: the juice
heals green Wounds, and cleanses and heals old Ulcers in the ^rivities, or
other parts, and inward Wounds or Ulcers, and days the spreading of running
Cankers and hollow Fistula's; it helps also aches and pains in the fleshy
parts, Nerves, or Sinews, and the Sciatica, the parts being bathed with the
decoction of the herb, or anointed with an ointment made of the herb bruised
and boiled in Hogs grease, and after it is strained some Mastick and Olibanum
added to it in powder: It is also by some called Staggerwort, being found
effectual to cure the Staggers in Horses.

Rest-harrow, Vide Camock.

Red Rattle Grass, or Lousewort. Pedicularis.
IT has small brownish red jagged leaves and tender stalks,

Names.] Its called in Greek (...), in Latin Pedicularis, because it fills
Cattle that feed where it grows full of Lice; its also called Pistularia, and
Cristi galla; and in English Rattle Grass, and Lousewort,

Place and Time.] It grows in morst Meadows, to which it is an annoyance, and
also on wet Heaths: flowers in May and June.

Nature and Virtues.] Red Rattle grass is of temperature cold, dry, and
astringent, and is accounted good for Fistula's and hollow Ulcers; and being
boiled in red Wine and drunk to stay the Terms, or any other Flux of Blood.

There is also another kind of Rattle Grass that bears yellow flowers at the
top of its stems, after which come flat pouches covered over with little
bladders, open before like the mouth of a Fish; in the pouches are contained
flat yellowish seed, which when they are dry will rattle when they are shook;
from whence it took the name of yellow Rattle: its called also Crista galli,
Cocks-comb, and Penny-grass. It is a great annoyer of dry Meadows and Pastures,
which is all the properties are yet known of it.

Rocket. Eruca.
THere are many kinds hereof mentioned by Authors, viz. the Garden Rocket and
the wild Rocket; the Garden Rocket is generally known, the wild Rocket has
long narrow and much divided leaves, slenderly cut or jagged on both sides of
the middle rib, of a sad over-worn green color; amongst which rise up diverse
stiff stalks, about a foot high, having the like leaves, but smaller, branched
from the middle into many lesser stalks, bearing sundry yellow flowers on them,
consisting of our leaves apiece, as the others are, which afterward yield
small reddish seeds in little long pods, of a bitter and hot biting taste, and
so are the leaves: the root is small and woody.

Names.] It is called Eruca in Latin.

Place and Time.] The first is an inhabitant in Gardens, this which I have
described is found in many places of this Land. They flower about June and
July, and the seed is ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] It is an herb of Mars, hot and dry in the third degree,
and is seldom eaten alone; but all sorts of Rocket quicken Nature, and provoke
Lust: the wild kind it more strong then the Garden kind; it helps digestion,
and provokes Urine much: the seed excites to Venery as much or more then the
herb, and is good against the bitings of the Shrew Mouse, and other venomous
Beasts; it puts away the ill scent of the Armpits, increases milk in Nurses,
and ^asteth the Spleen; being mixed with Honey and applied it cleanses the
skin from the Morphew, and other spots; with Vinegar it takes away Freckles;
and redness in the face; it amendeth Scars, black and blue spots, and marks of
the small Pox, being used with an Ox gall. The herb boiled or stewed, and some
Sugar put to it, helps the Cough in Children, being taken often: the leaves may
be eaten with Lettice, and Purslain, and such cooling Herbs to correct the heat
of it, for eaten alone, their overmuch heat causes the Headache.

Roses Rosa.
THere is by Gerard mentioned fourteen kinds of Roses; but it were useless to
repeat them all here: I shall only treat of the red Rose, the white, the
damask Rose, and the Bryar, Canker, and the wild Rose: and these are so very
well known they need no further description but only of their virtues.

Nature and Virtues.] Roses have different qualities as well as colors, the
Damask purge, the white and red cool and bind; the white are held to bind
most, yet they are scarce used in Physic; the red Rose (according to Galen)
has also a watery substance and a warm quality, astringent and bitter: The
yellow threads in the middle do bind and dry more then the Rose it self: The
buds do cool and bind more then the full blown flowers; according to Mesue the
Rose is cold in the first degree, and dry in the second, and consists of
diverse substances, as watery, earthly, airy, aromatical, and hot, which causes
the bitterness and color; the fresh juice purges Choler and watery humors,
but being dried the heat is consumed, and then they are astringent: Of the
Roses are made many simple and compound Medicines, whereof it is too large here
to treat of. A decoction of the red Roses in wine, is a good Lotion for pains
in the lower Bowels, Fundament, and Matrix, the parts being bathed or put into
them: It is also good for the Headache and pains in the Eyes, Ears, Throat,
and Gums: The same decoction with the Roses eases Inflammations of the Heart,
being applied to the Region thereof, and also helps St. Anthonies fire and
Inflammations of the stomach: The dried Roses taken in powder in some steeled
Wine or Water, stays Women's Courses, and so do the yellow threads being
powdered and drunk in the distilled water of Quinces; and likewise stays
defluxions of Rheum upon the Gums and Teeth, fastens the loose Teeth, and
preserves them from corruption, if they be gargled therewith, and some Vinegar
of Squills. The red Roses do strengthen the heart, liver, and stomach, and the
retentive faculty, and mitigate hot pains and inflammations: The Conserve is
binding and cordial, and is profitable to stay Lasks and Fluxes of the Belly,
and is good for the Running of the Reins, being mixed with powder of Mastick;
it likewise strengthens the stomach, and helps digestion, and resists vomiting,
and helps faintings and tremblings of the heart, being mixed with Aromaticum
Rosarum: Sugar of Roses is also a very good Cordial to strengthen the heart,
and stay desluxions: The Syrrup of dried red Roses cools the overheated Liver
and Blood, comforts the heart, and resists putrefaction, and stays Fluxes.
There are Cordial Powders likewise made of them, as Diarhodon Abbatis, and
Aromaticom Rosarum, which help digestion, and strengthen the heart and stomach:
The heads with seed in powder or in decoction, stays the Lask and spitting of
blood: Red Rose Water is cooling and cordial, refreshing weak and faint
spirits, and is for that purpose used either in meats or broths, to wash the
Temples and smell to, or to receive the sweet vapor thereof out of a
perfuming-pot, or hot fireshovel; it is good against redness and inflammations
of the Eyes, and to bathe the Temples against the Headache, for which purpose
vinegar of Roses it also good; and to procure rest and sleep, take a piece of
red rose cake cut fit for the head, moisten it in Rosewater and Vinegar of
Roses, and heat it between a double-folded cloth on a Chafing Dish of coals,
with some beaten Nutmeg and Poppyseed strewed on the side which must lie next
the Forehead and Temples, and bind it on for all night. Of the Damask Roses
are made Syrrups both simple and compound; the simple solutive Syrrup is a safe
easy medicine, gently purging Choler, being taken from one ounce to four. The
Syrrup with Agarick works on Phlegm as well as Choler, and one ounce thereof
works more strongly then three of the simple. The compound Syrrup with
Hellebore works forceably upon melanchollick humors, and is available
against the French Disease, Tetters, Itch. etc. Honey of Roses solutive is also
opening and purging, and is often given in Glisters, and so is the Syrrup made
with sugar: The Conserve of Damask Roses do likewise gently open the belly: The
distilled water is much used for fumes, and to sweeten things, and the dried
leaves for Sweet-bags: Honey of red Roses is good to wash sores in the mouth,
throat, or elsewhere: The fruit of the wild Bryer, (which some call Heps,
(though in Hampshire we call them Canker-berries) being made into a Conserve
when they are fully ripe, do bind the belly, and stays defluxions from the
head upon the stomach, drying up the moisture thereof, and helping digestion,
and are of a pleasant taste. The pulp of them dried to a hard consistence, and
made into powder, and taken in drink, stays the Whites; the powder of the
Briar-ball eases the Chollick, provokes Urine, kills Worms, and is good to
break the Stone, being taken in drink.

Ros Solis; or, Sun-dew.
IT has many hollow,

Names.] It is called in Latin Ros solis, in English Sundew, Lustwort,
Moor-grass, and of some Redrot, because some think it rots sheep that feed
thereon; but of this be sure, if sheep feed much on the places where it grows,
they will quickly run to rot.

Places and Time.] It grows upon Bogs and moist wet places, and in moist boggy
Woods, as in lower Danemore in Holshot, and in a boggy piece of ground where my
Father dwells adjoining to the same Wood called the Grove, which will scarce
bear any thing else but this Plant: It flourishes from May till August, and
ought to be gathered in the heat of the day, for then it is fullest of dew.

Nature and Virtues.] Authors differ in opinion concerning this Herb; some
hold it to be Caustic, and much biting, and hot and dry in the fourth degree;
others, that it is sharp and a little drying and binding. Dodonaeus held it to
be extreme biting, and that the distilled Water is not safe to be taken
inwardly. But the truth is, it is an Herb of the Sun, and the distilled Water
is good against the Consumption of the Lungs, and is effectual against salt
Rheums distilling on the Lungs, which cause a Consumption; it also comforts the
heart and fainting spirits, and is available against whe^sings, Ptysick, Cough,
and Shortness of Breath, and heals Ulcers in the Lungs: The leaves outwardly
applied will raise Blisters, the Cordial Water made hereof, called Rosa solis,
is good against heart-qualms, and to strengthen the body.

Root of Peru. Radix Peruviana.
THis Cordial Root is known best in our shops by the name of Contra Yerva,
which title the Spaniards in the Indies gave it, being as much as to say, an
Antidote against Poison; because the powder thereof taken in wine is a present
remedy against poison, causing it to be cast up by vomit, or expelled by sweat:
It also kills worms in the belly; and being taken in the morning in powder in
a glass of wine, it strengthens the heart and vital spirits: A modern
Physician writes, that if it be beaten to powder and infused in wine two hours
before the fit of an Ague, and then drunk at the coming of the fit, and the
Patient covered to sweat upon it, it cures an Ague at twice or thrice; the Dose
may be from half a dram to two drams, according to the age, strength, and
constitution of the Patient.

Rosemary. Rosmarinus.
I Shall not need to describe this excellent Herb, being so well known in every
good Housewises Garden: It usually flowers in April and May.

Names.] It is called Rosmarinus and Rosmarinum in Latin; the Flowers are
called (...), and the Composition made thereof Dianthos.

Nature and Virtues.] It is accounted an Herb particularly under the Influence
of Sol in Aries; it is hot and dry in the second degree, having an astringent
quality, and consists of diverse parts, but partakes most of the earthly
substance.

Rosemary has a warming and comforting heat, helping all cold diseases of the
Head, Stomach, Liver, and Belly: The Herb, but especially the Flowers, are good
for all cold and moist infirmities of the Head and Brain, they dry the brain,
and quicken the senses and memory, and strengthens the sinewy part: It is also
good against all Fluxes. The flowers and leaves are profitable against the
Whites to be taken daily; the Conserve of the flowers is good to comfort the
heart, and expel the poison of the Pestilence; and the branches of Rosemary is
good to burn in infectious times, the dried leaves taken like Tobacco, dryes up
thin distillations, and therefore is good against any Cough, Ptysick, or
Consumption: Rosemary does also cleanse and comfort the Stomach, and makes a
sweet Breath being thus used: Take an handful of Rosemary with the flowers or
without, boil it a good while in white wine, adding thereto a little Cinnamon,
then drink it, and wash your mouth therewith, it makes the skin very clear
being used without Cinnamon. It helps cold Rheums falling into the eyes,
giddiness or swimming of the head, the Lethargy and Fallingsickness, the dumb
Palsy, or loss of Speech, if it be drunk, and the Temples bathed therewith. It
helps such as are livergrown, opening the Obstructions, and warmeth and
strengthens the same; it expells Wind powerfully in the Stomach, Bowels, and
Spleen, and helps the Hypocondriack passion: The Chemical Oil of the leaves and
flowers is effectual for all the Diseases aforesaid, being carefully applied,
it is very quick and piercing, and therefore the Dose must be very little at
once for inward griefs: It helps the Head and Brain, if the Temples and
Nostrils be touched with a drop or two; it likewise helps any cold joint,
sinew, or member, if it be anointed with two or three drops thereof.

True Rhabarb, Bastard and Moncks Rubarb. Rhabarbarum.
THe true Rubarb grows in China, and the Eastern Countries; therefore I shall
not describe it, the root being to be had in most Druggists Shops, yet I
confess it may be seen growing in some curious Gardens with us, but not in such
plenty as Mr. Culpepper seems to talk of through the multiplying glass of his
carping fancy.

Names.] It is called Rha, from the River Rha in China where it grows, and in
our Shops Rhabarbarum; the place I have told you: the roots are to be taken up
about October when the leaves and stalks are fully withered.

Nature and Virtues.] Rubarb is hot and dry in the second degree, of mixed
parts, airy, thin, and purging, and partly gross, earthly, drying, and binding:
the Bastard and Moncks Rubarb are also dry, but cooling. Rubarb is certainly a
herb af Jupiter; it is called the friend, the life, heart, and treacle of the
Liver, being so effectual for the same; it purges it of Choler, Phlegm, and
watery humors, and helps the hardness and coldness thereof, and is useful in
chollerick and long continued Fevers, in the Jaundies, Green Sickness, Dropsy,
and stoppings of the Liver, the powder steeped in White Wine all night, and
drunk fasting, or being taken amongst other purges; being taken in powder with
Cassia, and a little Venice Turpentine Washed, it cleanses the Reins, and
strengthens them, and is effectual to stay a Gonorrhea, or running of the
Reins; it is also good against pains, windiness, wambling, and weakness of the
stomach, Cramp, gnawings, and gripings of the Kidneys, Belly. and Bladder,
pains of the Breasts, Mother, and Sciatica; it helps spitting of blood, the
Hicket, bloody Flux, Lasks, and all venomous stingings and bitings, one dram
thereof taken in Hydromel, or honied water; it eases the Gout, helps those
that are troubled with Melancholy, and is good against pains and Swellings of
the Head: It is most properly insused in Whey or White Wine, which liquors make
it work more effectually in opening obstructions and purging the Liver and
Stomach. The oil wherein Rubarb has been boiled is good to anoint any bruised
place, to dissolve the clotted Blood; and Rubarb taken in powder with Mummy and
Madder-roots in red Wine, heals Burstings and broken parts as well inward as
outward, and dissolveth clotted Blood in the Body, occasioned by any fall or
bruise. Rubarb steeped in white Wine, or any other convenient liquor, and
strayned, is good to heal Ulcers in the Eyes and Eyelids, and to assuage
swellings and inflammations; and being applied with Honey or boiled in Wine, it
takes away all black and blue spots that happen therein. The seed of Bastard
Rubarb helps gripings knawings, and loathings of the Stomach. The roots help
ruggedness of the nails, and being boiled in Wine it helps the Kings Evil, and
swellings of the Kernels of the Ears; it also provokes Urine, helps such as are
troubled with the Stone, and dimness of sight; it is effectually used with
other things in opening and purging diet drinks to open the Liver, and cleanse
and cool the blood. The root of Monks Rubarb also purges, but more weakly then
either of the other; but the root thereof binds the Belly, and stays Lasks
and the bloody Flux; and so does the root of the true Rubarb, if it be toasted
and taken in Plantain water, red-Wine, or in conserve of Roses, or Marmalade of
Quinces, as I have often found to my great comfort: the distilled water hereof
is effectual to heal Scabs, and foul Sores, and to allay the inflammations of
them; for which purpose also the juice of the leaves or roots, or the decoction
thereof in Vinegar is an effectual remedy: some use Indian Spikenard with
Rubarb to correct it; yet it does not much need any corrigent.

See further in The Art of Simpling: by W. Coals.

Meadow Rue. Ruta Aquatica.
THis Herb springs up (from a yellow stringy root,

Names.] Ruta Aquatica, or Ruta Palustris may be the Latin names thereof.

Places and Time.] It grows by Ditches sides, and in the borders of moist
Meadows in many places of this Land.

Nature and Virtues.] The Meadow Rue is doubtless under the influence of Mars,
and is something of his temperature, hot and dry. Camcrarius reports that it is
used in Italy and in Saxony, against the Plague. And Dioscorides says, that
the bruised herb being applied heals old Sores; and the distilled water of
the herb and flowers does the same: some use it amongst other Pot Herbs to make
the body solluble. The roots washed clean, and boiled in Ale and drunk, provoke
to Stool gently; and being boiled in water, and the body bathed therewith warm,
it destroys Lice.

See more of this in The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: by P. Morellus.

Garden Rue, or Herb-Grace. Ruta.
THis herb is familiarly known; the Latin name is Ruta; in English Rue, Herb
Grace, and Servingmens joy: it is planted in Gardens, and propagated by slips,
seldom flowring with us, and therefore scarce ever bears any good seed.

Nature and Virtues.] Rue is hot and dry in the latter end of the third degree,
and of thin subtle parts, a Solar Herb; it preserves Chastity being eaten, it
quickneth the Sight, stirs up the Spirits, and sharpneth the Wit; it provokes
Urine and Women's Courses, being taken either in meat or drink; it is an
excellent antidote against poisons and infections; the very smell thereof is a
preservative against the Plague in the time of infection, The seed thereof
taken in Wine is a special Antidote against dangerous Medicines, or deadly
Poisons. A decoction made thereof with some Dill-leaves and flowers, eases
pains and torments being drunk inwardly, and applied outwardly to the grieved
place. The same decoction being drunk helps pains of the Chests and Sides,
Coughs, difficulty of breathing, and inflammations of the Lungs, and eases the
Sciatica, and pains of the Joints, being applied thereto, or the parts anointed
with an ointment made hereof; it helps also the shakings of Agues, a draught of
the decoction being drunk before the coming of the sit: an oil made of Rue by
infusion or decoction, helps the wind Chollick, hardness, windiness, and
suffocation of the Mother, the share and parts about it being anointed
therewith: A decoction thereof in Wine with a little Honey added to it, kills
and drives forth Worms out of the Body. Mithridates used a Counter-poison to
preserve himself against infection, made thus; take twenty leaves of Rue, two
Figs, two Walnuts, twenty Juniper berries, and a little Salt; which being
beaten together into a Mass was his dese. appointed for every morning. There is
another Electuary made of it, which is a remedy for pains or griefs of the
Chest and Stomach, Spleen, Belly and Sides, Wind, Stitches, and, Obstructions
of the Liver, Reins, and Bladder by stopping of Urine, and extenuates the
grossness of fat corpulent Bodies. and is thus made: Take of Niter, Pepper, and
Commin seed, each equal parts, leaves of Rue clean picked, as much in weight as
all the other, beat them well together, and add as much Honey as will make
thereof an Electuary; but first correct the Commin seed by steeping it twenty
four hours in Vinegar, and then dry it in a hot Fireshovel, or in an Oven. The
leaves of Rue boiled and kept in pickle are a good sauce to meat, to warm a
cold Stomach, and quicken the Sight. A decoction of Rue eases the Gout, being
bathed therewith, and being bruised and put into the Nostrils, it stays
bleeding at Nose. A decoction of Rue and Bay leaves helps swellings of the
Cods; it takes away Wheals and Pimples, being bruised with Myrtle leaves and
made up with wax and applied; being boiled in Wine with some Pepper and Nitre,
and the places rubbed therewith it takes away Warts, and cures the Morphew;
and with Allome and Honey it helps the dry Scab, or any Tetter, or Ring-worm.
The juice thereof warmed in a Pomegranate shell, helps pain of the Ears,
being dropped therein. An ointment made of the juice of Rue, with Oil of Roses,
Ceruss, and Vinegar, cures St. Anthonies fire, foul running Sores in the Head,
and Ulcers in the Nose, and other parts, they being anointed therewith. The
distilled water is very effectual for many of the said purposes.

Rupture-wort. Herniaria.
are, whereat grow forth abundance of small yellowish flowers, but scarce
discernable from the stalks and leaves, which turn into leaves as small as
dust; the root is small and long, growing deep into the ground: the taste
hereof is not perceivable at first, but after a little while there may be
perceived a somewhat astringent taste, a little bitter and sharp withal, but
without any manifest heat.

Names.] This plant has acquired several names, according to the various
opinions of Authors, as Polygonum minus by Mathiolus, and Castor durantes,
Herba Turca by Lobel; but the most usual and known Latin name is Herniaria,
from Hernia a Rupture; and in English Rupture-worb.

Place and Time.] It delights to grow in barren, sandy, and rocky grounds, as
upon the dry chalky and sandy grounds in Kent, and elsewhere, and flowers and
flourishes in the four Summer Months, which are spelled sine littera R.

Nature and Virtues.] Rupture-wort is very drying, binding, closing, and
sasting; Saturnine.

Its name speaks its Virtues, that is, to cure the disease called the Rupture
or Burstness, which is the falling down of the Guts into the Cods. A dram of
the herb in powder taken in wine for many days together, or the decoction of
the herb in Wine, or the juice or distilled water drunk in the same manner,
marvellously helps that Disease; and being so taken it stays Fluxes, Vomiting,
and the Gonorrhea; it helps the Strangury, stopping of Urine, Stone, or Gravel
in the Reins or Bladder, stitches in the Side, griping pains in the Stomach or
Belly, and obstructions of the Liver, and cures the yellow Jaundies, and
kills Worins in Children; it conglutinates Wound cheing outwardly applied,
and helps to stay defluctions of Rheumes from the head to the eyes, nose, and
teeth, the temples and nape of the Neck being bathed with the decoction of the
dried herb, or the green herb being bruised and bound thereto; it dryes up the
moisture of foul spreading and fistulous Ulcers, and is good to be bruised and
applied to the place of a Rupture, having a Truss bound thereunto.

Rice. Oriza.
THis is an East-Indian grain, and grows up there much like the stalk of
Wheat; but in regard it grows not with us, I shall describe it no further,
but proceed to declare its virtues, we having it plentifully brought hither by
industrious Merchants.

Names.] The Greeks call it (...), and the Latins following them call it Oryza.

Nature and Virtues.] Rice is binding and drying, temperate, and not exceeding
in heat or cold; the pottage made thereof with milk, and spiced with Sugar and
Cynamon, is pleasant and easy of digestion, and is reputed to increase seed;
it is very useful to stay all Lasks or Fluxes, being so eaten, or beaten to
powder, and mixed with yolks of Eggs, and fried with fresh Butter, and eat
morning and evening; and being so taken, it helps the bloody Flux; it is good
to put in Cataplasms to repeli humors, and being boiled in running Water, and
the face bathed therewith, it takes away spots and pimples; it is an excellent
and wholesome food, and in great estimation amongst the Indians, though not so
much in repute with us. Perhaps, because it is too cheap for the wanton rich,
and too dear for the pining poor, etc.

Rye. Secale.
THis Grain is well known in England, more for food then Physic; but the bread
and leaven of it is good to ripen Imposthumes, and Boils, or other swellings.
Mathiolus says, that water wherein the Ashes of Rye straw has been infused
four and twenty hours, heals chops of the hands and feet, being washed
therewith. Meal of Rye put between a double cloth and moistened with Vinegar,
and heated in a pewter Dish over a Chafing dish of Coals, and applied hot to
the head, eases continual pains thereof. Rye is more digesting then Wheat, but
it is windy and griping in the Bowels.

Saffron. Crocus.
THe Chives of the Flower commonly called Saffron are generally well known, so
that a description is needless.

Names.] Its Latin names are Crocus, and Crocum; it is also termed Filius ante
patrem, because it puts forth flowers before the leaves.

Place and Time.] It is plentifully manured in Fields in Essex, and
Cambridge-shire: Saffron-Walden takes her name from its growing there; it
begins to flower in September, and presently after the leaves shoot forth and
abide green all the Winter, dying again in April when it puts forth another
Crop of Flowers, which must be gathered as soon as it is blown, or else it is
lost; so that Jack Presbyter for covetousness of the profit can reach his
Sabbatarian Conscience to gather it on Sunday; and so he can to do any thing
else that redounds to his profit, though it destroy his Brother.

Nature and Virtues.] Saffron is hot in the second degree, and dry in the
first, of a little astringent quality; it is an Herb of the Sun, a great
Cordial, and comforter of the spirits; it expells venom from the Heart,
strengthens the Stomach, helps concoction, preserves the Entrails, and is very
useful in the Plague, Pestilence, small Pox, and such contagious diseases; the
Tincture thereof is profitable in fits of the Mother; it strengthens the
Memory, Head, Stomach, Spleen, Bladder, animal, vital, and natural spirits, and
helps cold diseases of the Brain and Nerves; it is profitable for the Lungs,
Consumption, and shortness of Breath; it is best for eld phlegmatic, and
melancholy persons; it is good against melancholy, and the Jaundies, and
stoppings of the Liver and Gall, and is profitable for the Plurisie, and
provokes Urine, and Venus; take ten grains of Saffron, two ounces of Walnut
Kernels, Figs two ounces, Mithridate one dram, and a few Sage leaves, stamp
them into a mass, with a sufficient quantity of Pimpernel water, and keep it
for use; twelve grains thereof taken fasting, is an excellent Antidote against
the Plague, and expels it from those that are infected.

Some write that two or three drams hereof taken brings death; doubtless too
great a quantity cannot do otherwise: it is not safe to be given to women with
child.

Sage. Salvia.
TO avoid prolixity we proceed to its virtues: The Latin name of it is Salvia,
and so wholesome an Herb reputed by Schola salerni, that they say,

Cur moritur homo, dum Salvia crescit in horto?

Nature and Virtues.] Sage is hot and dry in the third degree, an herb of
Jupiter; it restores natural heat, and comforts the vital spirits, and helps
the Memory, and quickens the senses; it is very healthful to be eaten in May
with Butter, and also to be drunk in Ale; it is good for women that are apt to
miscarry, or cannot conceive by reason of the overmuch moisture-or
slipperiness of their Wombs: Sage, Rosemary Honey-suckles, and Plantain boiled
in water, or wine, and some Honey and Allome added thereto, is a good gargle
for Cankers, or Sores in the Mouth or Throat, and for sores in the privy parts
of Man or Woman, and is good to be boiled with other comsortable and hot herbs
to bathe the cold Sinews, and to warm the Joints, and help Palsies and Cramps,
and to strengthen and comfort the parts; it is good against the Stitch, and
pains of the Side, coming of Wind, the Place being fomented with the decoction
thereof in Wine, and the boiled Sage afterward applied hot thereunto; and the
decoction thereof according to Dioscorides, provokes Urine, and women's Courses;
The juice of Sage taken in warm water, helps a hoarseness, and the Cough. Rue
is good to be planted amongst Sage, to prevent the poison which may be in it by
Toads frequenting amongst it, to relieve themselves of their poison, as is
supposed; but Rue being amongst it, they will not come near it.

Wood Sage. Salvia sylvestris.
WOod Sage springs up with square hoary stalks,

Names.] It is called in Latin Salvia sylvestris.

Place and Time.] It grows in Woods, and by Hedge sides, and High ways, and
flowers about July.

Nature and Virtues.] Wood Sage is hot and dry in the second degree, and
attributed to Venus; the decoction thereof provokes the Terms and Urine, and
provokes Sweat, digests humors, and dissolves swellings and nodes in the flesh,
and is therefore thought to be good against the French Pox. The decoction of
the green Herb in Wine is good for those that have any Vein inwardly broken by
a fall, bruise, or beating, to disperse the congealed blood, and consolidate
the Vein; and it is also good for such as are bursten, the drink taken
inwardly, and the herb applied outwardly: and in the same manner used it is
also good for the Palsy. The juice thereof or the herb in powder is goods to
dry moist Ulcers, and sores in the Legs, or other parts, thereby causing them
to heal the more speedily, and is also effectual in green Wounds.

Burnet Saxifrage, Pimpinella Saxifraga.
IT has great long roots like a Parsnip,

There is a lesser kind, little differing from the greater, but that the
stalks and veins of the leaves of the lesser are of a purplish color, and the
root hotter.

Names. It is called Pimpinella major, Saxifragia major, and the lesser kind
Saxifragia minor; in English great and small Saxifrage, and Burnet Saxifrage.

Place and Time.] They grow plentifully in dry Pastures and Meadows, and flower
from June to the end of August.

Nature and Virtues.] The leaves, seeds, and roots of both kinds are hot and
dry in the third degree, and of thin and subtle parts: The juice of the leaves
cleanses the face of Spots and Freckles, and causes a good color: The
distilled water thereof mingled with some Vinegar in the distillation, dears
the Sight, and helps the dimness thereof. The seed and root in powder drunk in
wine, or the decoction thereof made in Wine provokes Urine, breaks the Stone,
and is good against the Strangury and stoppings in the Kidneys, and Bladder.

The Service Tree. Sorbus.
THis grows to be a great Tree, delighting in Woods and Groves, and are also
planted in Orchards; there does grow of them in the Woods of Mr. Hind at
Hedsor, and in Woods and by High way sides I have found them in Surrey and
Kent: the Tree and fruit are both so well known, that a further description is
needless.

Names.] The Greeks call this Tree (...), the Latins Sorbus; and in English
Service, and Sorb-Tree.

Place and Time.] They flower in March, and the fruit is ripe in September, or
the beginning of October.

Nature and Virtues.] The Service berries are of temperature cold and binding,
and more being hard then when they are rotten; yet then people usually eat
them, but they yield no nourishment but what is gross and cold; therefore they
are better for medicine then meat; and being gathered while they be hard, and
cut and dried in the Sun, they may be kept all the year to stay bleedings of
Wounds, Mouth, or Nose, Fluxes, and Vomiting, the decoction drunk, or outwardly
applied.

Solomon's Seal. Sagillum Solomonis.
COmmon Solomon's Seal grows with a round stalk about half a yard high, May
Lilly, of a blueish green color, with some Ribs therein, and a little
yellowish underneath: at the foot of every leaf almost from the bottom it has
small, long, and white pendulous flowers, like those of May Lilly, but ending
in five longer points, for the most part two together, at the end of a small
foot stalk standing all on one side the stalk under the leaves, after which
come round berries, green at first, but afterward of blackish green, tending
to blue, wherein is contained small white, hard, stony seed: The root is white
and thick, full of knobs, or joints in some places, resembling the mark of a
Seal; the taste thereof is sweet at first, but afterward somewhat bitter and
sharp.

Names.] Its common Latin name is Sigillum Solomonis; and in English Solomon's
Seal, and sometimes white Wort, or white Root, Jacobs Ladder, and Scala Caeli
in Latin.

Place and Time.] It grows in diverse places of this Land, as about Odiham in
Hampshire, in a Wood within two miles of Canterbury, by Fish-pool Hill, and
between Newington and Sittingbourn in Kent, and diverse other places: it flowers
about May, and the seed is ripe in September.

Nature and Virtues.] The roots of Solomon's Seal are hot, and dry, and
astringent, a Saturnine Plant; the roots have great virtue in sealing or
closing up the rim of the Belly when it is bursten, the decoction thereof taken
in Wine, or the powder in broth or drink, and being outwardly applied to the
place; it is likewise good for other hurts, wounds, or outward sores, to heal
and close up green wounds, and to dry up and restrain the flux of humors into
old sores: it also slayes bleedings, vomitings, fluxes, the running of the
reins in men, and the whites and reds in women; it mightily conglutinates and
soders broken bones in man or beast, the bruised root applied to the place, and
the decoction thereof or infusion in wine being strained out hard and drunk; it
is likewise effectual for inward and outward bruises, falls, and blows, to
disperse the congealed blood, and take away the pains, and black and blue marks
that abide after the hurt: and the distilled water of the whole herb cleanses
the skin from Morphew, Freckles, and Spats, making it fair and smooth.

Sampire. Feniculum marinum.
ROck Sampire springs up with a tender green stalk,

Names.] The Greeks call it (...), the Latins, Feniculum Marinum, and in Shops
Creta marina; in English Sampire, and Sea Fennel.

Place and Time.] The Cliffts in the Isle of Wight abound with it, where it is
incredibly dangerous to gather; yet many adventure it, though they buy their
sauce with the price of their lives: It grows also about the Rocky Cliffts
upon the Sea coast in most parts of England. It flourishes in May and June,
and is fittest to be gathered in the beginning of August. It flowers and seeds
in August.

Nature and Virtues.] Sampire is of a cleansing faculty, and is hot and dry
about the second degree, and herb attributed to the influence of Jupiter.
Pickled Sampire is an excellent sauce for digestion of meats; it breaks the
Stone, and expells Gravel out of the Reins and Bladder, and provokes Urine, and
women's Courses. The decoction of the leaves, seeds, and roots in wine being
drunk, helps ill digestion, and opens obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and
of the Entrails, which are the causes of most diseases: it is grateful both to
the taste and sto^^ (...) and helps to whet a dull appetite, by the saltness
and spiciness that is in it. The way to preserve it in pickle, is to boil it in
water till it be tender, and then pickle it up in a Barrel with a liquor made
of Vinegar, Water, and Salt,

Saunders. Santalum.
THere are three sorts of this plant brought unto us, Kinds and Names.
viz. Santalum Rubrum, Red Saunders; Santalum Album, or white Saunders; and
Santalum Citrinum; or Flavum, yellow Saunders: they are all brought unto us
from the East Indies, where they naturally grow about the River Ganges, and in
the Isle of Timor, and provinces adjacent.

Nature and Virtues.] Of all these three kinds of Saunders the yellow is the
best, the next is the white, the red is least in use; they are Solar Plants,
yet by temperature cold and dry in the second degree: the red is more cooling
and binding; they open and cool the Liver, and ease pain of the Head, and are
good to strengthen and revive the Spirits, for which purpose they are used in
Jellies, Sauces, and Broths, etc. they are likewise good in hot burning
diseases, as Fevers, and such like. The red Saunders applied to Maids, or
Women's great Breasts, mixed with the juice of Purslain, abateth their
greatness, and represseth their growing too big; it is likewise effectual to
stanch Blood at the Nose, or other place, being taken in red Wine, and is used
to slay defluctions of thin Rheum from the head, and to cool and temper the
heat in hot Agues, hot Gouts, and Insflammations: In cordial medicines the
white and yellow Saunders are most effectual: by reason of their sweetness;
they help faintings of the Heart, and weak Stomachs, caused by heat, they
divert Melancholy, and procure Mirth, they stay the spermatical flux in man or
woman: The powder taken in a rear Egg, or mixed with other things for that
purpose, or being infused in red Wine all night in Balneo, or hot Embers, and
the Wing strained and drunk morning and evening, for all inflammations it is
very effectual, being mixed with the juice of Housleek, Nightshade or Purslain;
outwardly they are good in Fomentations and Epithems against the intemperate
heat of the Liver; and being applied with Rose water to the Temples, they ease
pains of the Head, and stay the flowing of humors into the Eyes.

Sanile. Sanicula.
SAnicle springs up with many leaves of a middle size,

Names.] It is called in Latin Sanicula, from its efficacy in healing Wounds,
and by Lobel, Diapensia; in English Sanicle; There is a sort called Pinguicula
Eboracensis, Butter-wort, and Butter-root, because of the oyliness of the leaf.

Place and Time.] It grows in woody shadowy places, and under hedges in many
places of this Land: it flowers in July, and the seed is ripe soon after.

nature and Virtues.] Sanicle is hot and dry in the second degree, bitter in
taste, and somewhat astringent: Culpepper ascribes it to Venus, but I judge
Mercury has the greater influence upon it; but the Sun most of all: It is an
excellent herb for any infirmity of the Lungs, and is a singular good wound
herb, speedily healing all green Wounds, and also Ulcers, Imposthumes, and
bleeding inwardly, and it dissipateth and represseth Tumors in any part of the
Body, if the decoction or juice be taken, or the powder in drink, and apply the
juice outwardly. The decoction of the leaves and root, with a little honey
added to it, heals putrid and malignant Ulcers in the Mouth, Throat, and
Privities, by gargling and washing them therewith; it helps to stay women's
Courses, and and all other Fluxes of blood and Lasks of the Belly, ulcerations
of the Kidneys, pains in the Bowels, and the running of the Reins, being boiled
in wine, or water, and drunk; it is effectual to heal Burstings or Ruptures
either inwardly or outwardly, as well as any of the Consounds, or other
vulnerary herb whatsoever: Of it also may be made an ointment good for
obstructions of the Liver, and a syrrup or conserve for the Lungs.

Sauce alone, or Jack by the Hedge.
THis herb as well as Wood-Sage is by some reckoned amongst the kinds of
Scordium; when it has given seed, and rises again of its own sowing. This
Plant being bruised, smells strong like Garlic, but more pleasant, and
tastes hot and sharp almost like Rocket.

Names.] It is called in English Poor man's Treacle, and English Treacle, and so
is Scordium.

Place and Time.] It grows in many places by Pathwayes, and under Walls and
hedges, and flowers in the Summer Months.

Nature and Virtues.] Jack by the hedge warmeth the stomach, and causes
digestion; and therefore is a good sauce to salt Fish, to digest the crudities,
and corrupt humors it ingenders: the juice thereof boiled with honey, is good
for the Cough, and to cut and expectorate tough Phlegm. The decoction of the
seed in wine being drunk, is good to help the wind Chollick, and the Stone,
and for fits of the Mother, to drink the decoction, and apply the seeds warm in
a cloth. The green leaves are accounted good to heal Ulcers in the Legs, and
the leaves and seed boiled is good to be used in Glisters to ease pains of the
Stone.

Sarsa-parilla. Smilax-aspera.
IT is called Smilax-aspera also in Latin; and in English Prickly Binde-weed:
it grows in the West Indies, as Peru, and Virginia.

Nature and Virtues.] It is of thin parts, and provokes sweat, and of
temperature hot and dry, near the second degree, Mars his herb surely, whereby
he cures himself when Venus has clapped him: The decoction being excellent for
the French Pen, and likewise is good in Rheumes, Gouts, and cold Diseases of
the Read, and Stomach, and expels wind from the Stomach and Mother; it
helps aches in the Sinews and Goynts, running sores in the Legs, cold
swellings, tetters, ring^^^^^s, sp^ts, and foulness in the skin, and helps
Catharrs, and salt distillations from the head, is good in Tumors, and the
Kings Evil: and a dram of the powder being taken in Ale or wine, with the the
like qnantity of Tamarisk, is good for Tumors of the Spleen. Sarsa does purge
the body of humors by its dryness, and diaphoretical quality, and is a good
antidote against poisons; but is not proper to be given to such as have Agues,
or hot Livers.

Sassafras, or Ague-Tree.
THis plant was first discovered by the French about Florida, Place and Time.
where it grows; as also in most parts of the West Indies, and is green all
the year.

Nature and Virtues.] The wood is hot and dry in the second degree, and the
rind hot and dry in the third: it purges watery and phlegmatic humors, and
therefore is good in the Dropsy: the decoction thereof being drunk morning and
evening for certain days together, which decoction is thus made; take of
Sassafras four ounces, steep it four and twenty hours in a Gallon and a half of
fair water, then boil it to the consumption of half, and strain it: this
decoction does open obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and is good in cold
diseases and Rheumes which fall from the head upon the teeth, eyes, and Lungs,
and is available in Coughs, and cold diseases of the Lungs, Breast, and
Stomach, and procures a good appetite, and consumes windiness, and makes a
sweet breath; it is likewise commended to provoke Urine, and Women's Courses,
and to expel Gravel and the Stone out of the Kidneys: it dryes up overmuch
moisture of the Womb, and causes women to Conceive; it is good in Fevers, and
tertian and quotidian Agues, and also for the French Disease, and other
diseases coming of corrupt humors, to be used in diet drinks: it may be given
in powder from a scruple to two scruples.

See further of this in Culpeppers School of Physic.

Satyrion, or Orchis Testiculus Canis.
SAtyrion rises up with many large,

Names.] As there are many kinds of this Plant, so it has many names: It is
called Satyrion, and Orchis, Testiculus Canis, Testiculus Capri, Priests
Ballocks, Fools stones, Dogs stones, Cullians, Fox stones, Standard-grass, and
many other names, etc.

Place and Time.] They grow in Pastures, Meadows, and moist grounds, as in
Danmore Copse, and Danmore Mead at Holshot in Hampshire, and in Cobham Park in
Kent it grows so abundantly, that it may serve to pleasure Seamens wives in
Rochester, for there they may be sure to find it in great plenty from the
beginning of April to the latter end of August.

Nature and Virtues.] They are hot and moist, (the full roots I mean) the lank
ones are hot and dry, Venus claims all she can get of them: The full roots do
powerfully provoke to Venery, but the lank ones are said to mortisie Lust;
being boiled in milk, and eaten with white Pepper, they nourish such as are in
Consumptions, or have an Hectic fever: The flowers are likewise effectual to
merease and stir up nature: The Roots boiled in wine and drunk, stop the Flux;
and being applied green, they consume Tumors, and cleanse rotten Sores and
Ulcers, and the powder thereof stays the fretting and festring of devouring
Ulcers, being put therein: The same Root being bruised and applied, is good
against Inflammations and Swellings: and being boiled in wine with a little
honey, it helps Ulcers and Sores in the Mouth.

Savory, and the sorts. Thymbra.
I shall not need to say more in the Description, but only that the common
kinds are two, Winter and Summer Savory, which are both common in Gardens.

Names.] The Greeks call it (...) and (...), and it is also called Thymbra in
Latin, and by some Satureia.

Nature and Virtues.] Savory is hot and dry in the third degree, and opens
and makes thin, being subject to the influence of Mercury: It provokes Women's
Courses, and expells Wind, being boiled in wine or water, and drunk; and it is
commended for women with child to take it inwardly and smell often to it: it
helps rising of the Mother, provokes Urine, and expells Wind: It takes away
loathing of the Stomach, and procures a good appetite, it cuts tough Phlegm in
the Chest and Lungs, and is good to season stewed meat or broaths: The juice
being snuffed up into the nostrils, quickens the dull spirits in the Lethargy,
and being dropped into the eyes, it clears the sight which is dulled by thin
humors distilling from the brain. The juice heated with a little Oil of Roses,
helps deafness and noise in the ears, being dropped into them. It helps to
ease the Sciatica, and members that have the Palsy, being applied pultisswise
with Wheat Flour: It is good against the stingings of Wasps and Bees, and
being laid in Chambers it kills Fleas.

Savin. Savina.
IT is nursed up in Gardens, and abides green all the year, being so well known
it needs no further description.

Names.] It is called in Latin Sabina and Savina.

Nature and Virtues.] The leaves of Savin are hot and dry in the third degree,
and of subtle parts, under the Influence of Mars.

The decoction of Savin is powerful to provoke Women's Courses, and it also
expells the Birth and Afterbirth, and causes Abortion: It expels blood by
Urine, and is good for the Kings Evil; the powder thereof mixed with honey
cleanses filthy Ulcers and Fistula's, but is unapt to heal them; and being
mixed with Cream, and Childrens heads anointed therewith which have scabs or
running sores, it cleanses and heals them, and also St. Anthonies fire: a
dram of Savine in powder mixed with three ounces of Nitre, and two of Honey,
helps such as are short-winded, as says Mathiolus: It kill Worms in Children,
being applied to the Navel, or the belly anointed with the Oil thereof: The
powder of the leaves mixed with honey takes away spots and freckles in the
face, or body, and helps blisters of the Yard, (gotten by a Lady of Pleasure)
they being first bathed with the decoction of the leaves, and is good to heal
Scabs and Itch, Tetters, and Ringworms, and to break Carbunckles and
Plague-sores, being spread upon a piece of leather, and applied to the place:
The distilled Water cleanses the skin, and helps such as have the Worms.

Saxifrage. Saxifragia.
THere be accounted nine kinds of this Plant which grow in England, viz.
English Saxifrage, or Mead-Parsley, White Saxifrage, and Barnet Saxifrage.

English or Meadow Saxifrage (called Mead-Parsley) grows with many green
winged leaves like Fennel but thicker and broader, amongst which rise up diverse
crested stalks of a Cubit high, having thereupon diverse smaller stalks of
winged leaves also finely cut, but harsh to the seeling, bearing at the top
Umbels of white Flowers tending a little to yellow, after which come seed much
like Fennel-seed, but browner, and of a small taste: The Root is thick, black
without and white within, and of a good savor.

White Saxifrage has many round, faint, yellowish green leaves, but grayish
underneath, spread upon the ground, unevenly dented about the edges, and
somewhat hairy, every one upon a little foot-stalk, from whence rises up a
round, brownish, hairy green stalk, about a foot high, with a few leaves like
the former, but smaller, branched at the top, whereon stand pretty large white
flowers of five leaves apiece, with some yellow threads in the middle, standing
in a long crested brownish, green husk, after which arises sometimes a round
hard head, biforked at the top, wherein s contained blackish small seed: The
Root is composed of black strings or fibers, whereunto are fastened many reddish
grains about the bigness of Peppercorns, which are called by the Apothecaries
white Saxifrage seed.

Burnet Saxifrage springs up with diverse stalks, of winged leaves set one
against another, each being somewhat broad, and a little dented about the
edges, of a sad green color; at the tops of the stalks come Umbels of white
Flowers, and after them small blackish seed: The Root is long and whitish.

Names.] Saxifraga, and Saxifragia are the Latin Names.

Place and Time.] The first grows commonly in Meadows and Pastures, and
flowers from May till the end of August: The second grows in Fields and corners
of Meadows, and in grassie, sandy places; and the third grows in moist Meadows,
and flowers about July, and the seed is ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] They are all hot and dry in the third degree, and said to
be herbs of the Moon, but I can find no reason for it; the decoction of the
seeds or roots of Mead-Parsley made in white wine, helps the Strangury,
provokes the Courses, and expells the secondine or dead Child, and breaks the
Stone in the Bladder and Kidneys; half a dram or a dram of the root in powder
taken with sugar, warmeth and comsorteth the stomach, and eases griping pains
of the belly, and the Chollick, and expels Wind; and outwardly it is good
in somentations and bathes to provoke Urine, and ease pains of the belly which
proceed from Wind: The decoction of the seed or root of white Saxifrage, or
the powder thereof drunk in wine, is good against the Stone, Strangury, and
stoppings of the Kidneys and Bladder: The distilled water of the whole herb is
good for the same purposes, and to cleanse the Stomach and Lungs from tough and
thick Phlegm: The same water is given by Nurses to their Children for the frets
and stopping of Urine: The Burnet Saxifrage has the same properties as the
other in expelling Urine, Wind, and helping the Chollick, and to ease pains of
the Mother, to procure Women's Courses, to break the Stone in the Kidneys, and
to digest cold and tough Phlegm in the stomach, and is a good remedy against
venom: The dried roots are as hot as Pepper, and may be used for it, being
more wholesome, as says Tragus: The root and seeds in powder taken with Sugar,
purges the brain, restores lost speech, and is good for Convulsions, Cramps,
Apoplexies, and cold Fevers: The distilled Water when in Castore^^ has been
boiled is good for the same, and also for the Palsy and other cold griefs: The
same drunk with wine and vinegar is good in the Plague, and preserves from
infection and corrupted air, being chewed in the mouth: The distilled water
beautifieth the face, and cleanses it from spots and freckles, and causes a
good color, and is good for all the purposes aforesaid, being taken with
sugar; the juice of the leaves does the same, and being dropped into wounds in
the head or any other place, it dries up the moisture, and heals them quickly:
The seeds being made into Comfits like Carraway seeds, are good for all the
aforesaid purposes.

Scabious, and the kinds. Scabiosa.
THere are many kinds of this Plant mentioned by Authors, I shall only name
three, viz. Common Scabious, small common Scabious, Corn Scabious: The only
difference between the two first, is that the leaves of one are bigger then
those of the other; and the Corn Scabious is greater then the other, the
flowers more purple, and the root does not run deep into the ground as the
first does.

The common Field Scabious rises up with many hairy soft, whitish green
leaves, some whereof are not at all jagged, or very little, others are much
rent in the sides, and have films or small threads in them, which may be seen
in the breaking them; among which rise up many round hairy green stalks, two or
three foot high, with such like hairy green leaves on them, but more deeply and
finely divided, and branched forth a little; at the tops of the stalks stand
round heads of flowers, of a pale bluish color, many set together in a knop,
the outermost being largest, with many threads in the middle, and somewhat flat
at the top; and so is the head with seed: The Root is great, white, and thick,
and grows deep into the ground, abiding many years.

Names.] Scabiosa is the Latin Appellation hereof.

Place and Time.] The first grows in Woods, Meadows, and Pastures plentifully
almost every where; the other in dry Fields, Cornfieldsd, and Fallow-Grounds;
they flower in June and July, and so continue in some till the end of August,
the seed ripening in the mean time.

Nature and Virtues.] Scabious is hot and dry in the second degree, a Mercurial
plant, and is of an opening, cleansing, and digesting quality; it is effectual
for all Coughs and diseases of the breast and lungs; it ripens inward Ulcers,
Imposthumes, and the Plurisie, the decoction of the dry, or green herb made in
Wine, and drunk often: the clarified juice taken in the morning fasting, to the
quantity of four ounces, with a dram of Mithridate, or Venice Turpentine,
defends the heart from infection of the Pestilence, the party sweating two
hours after it in his bed; and after the first time taking it again if need
require: the same is good against the stinging of venomous Beasts. Mathiolus
says, that the decoction of the roots drunk forty days together, or a dram of
the powder thereof taken at a time in Whey, helps such as are troubled with
spreading Scabs, Tetters, or Ringworms, though they be effects of the French
Pox, and the juice or decoction helps Scabs, or Itch, and an ointment made of
the juice does the same: The same juice or decoction, cleanses and heals
inward Wounds. The green herb bruised, dissolves and breaks a Carbunckle or
Plague sore being applied thereto, in three hours space, and helps the stinging
of any venomous beast, being so applied. The decoction of the herb and roots
applied, helps cold tumors or swellings in any part of the body, and any sinew
or vein that is shrunk. The juice made up with the powder of Borax and
Camphire, cleanses the skin of Freckles, Pimples, Morphew, and the Lepry. The
Tents which are dipped in the juice or water thereof are good to heal green
Wounds, and old Sores and Ulcers: and the bruised herb being applied, does
loosen any Splinter, broken Bone, Arrow head, or such like thing lying in the
flesh, so that it may easily be drawn out: The decoction used either alone, or
with juice of Fennel, helps redness and spots in the Eyes; and the same
decoction cleanses the head from Dandriff, Scurff, Scabs, and Itch, the head
being washed with it warm: A syrrup made of the juice and sugar is effectual
for all the inward purposes aforesaid; and so is the distilled water of the
herb and flowers.

Scordium, or Water Germander.
IT shoots forth diverse weak, square, hairy branches from a small root full
of white strings, spreading and running about in the ground; the branches take
root in diverse places as they lie and spread, whereby it much increases: the
leaves grow two at a joint, not so large as garden Germander leaves, of a
darkish green color, having thereon a show of hairiness and hoariness,
somewhat soft, full of veins, and dented about the edges: The flowers are
small, red, and gaping, standing at the joints with the leaves toward the tops
of the branches. It is thought not to perfect its seed, but is propagated by
the branches.

Names] Scordium is the Latin name.

Place and Time.] It grows in wet grounds, and by waters sides in many places
of England, and flowers in June, July, and August: It is usually gathered to be
kept dry before it flowers.

Nature and Virtues.] Scordium in hot and dry, of a certain harsh, sharp, and
bitter taste; it is a Solar herb, a great resister of Venom and Infection, and
is the basis of that medicine called Diascordium; it is of excellent use to
strengthen the heart, and procure sleep in Fevers; it provokes the Terms,
hastens women's labor, helps their usual sickness, in lying in, and strengthens
the Stomach: ten grains or a seruple at a time may safely be given to weak
people, and a dram or more to them that are stronger: The decoction of the
green or dry herb in wine is good against venomous bitings, and other deadly
poisons, and griping pains of the stomach or sides, that come of cold, or
obstructions, and for the bloody Flux; it is good against an old Cough, and to
expectorate phlegm out of the Chest and Lungs, being made into an Electuary
with Cresses, Rozen, and Honey, and is good for such as are bursten or troubled
with the Cramp, it is a special Counter-poison in all pestilential Diseases,
and Infections, and is often used with good success before the fits of Agues,
to hinder the access, and drive them away: a little of the juice thereof, or
the powder in drink taken fasting, kills worms in the stomach or belly: The
decoction of the dried herb with two or three Tormentil roots, is available
against the bloody Flux. The juice or a syrrup made of the herb is profitable
for many of the forenamed griefs. The green herb bruised and applied, heals
any green Wound; and the dried herb used with Honey, cleanses foul Ulcers. A
pultis or cerate made of the dried herb, helps to discuss Wens, and
excrescences in the flesh; it eases also pains of the Gout, being applied with
vinegar or water.

Scurvy Grass. Cochlearia.
OF this I shall mention two kinds, seeds: the root is white, small, and
fibrous; the taste of it is somewhat bitterish.

Names.] The Latins call it Cochlearia, the leaf being like a spoon; in
English Scurvy Grass, and Spoon-wort.

Places and Time.] The Sea Scurvy Grass grows about the Sea Coasts, and both
on the Essex and Kentish shores in the River of Thames, so far as the salt
water comes: the other grows in the Marshes of Holland in Lincolnshire, as
well as in the Low Countries; and likewise prospers in Gardens where it is
sown: they flower in April, and give their seed about the latter end of May.

Nature and Virtues.] Scurvy Grass is hot and dry, much in quality like the
Garden Cresses; it is an herb of Jupiter: It is an excellent remedy for that
Disease called the Scurvy, which often afflicts Seamen, and many persons by
land besides. I have had it this Summer, after a Winters Ague; but by drinking
the juice of this herb every morning in Ale or white Wine have (by Cods
blessing) obtained a cure in a small time: it may likewise be taken in
decoction, or in diet drink; being tunned up with new Ale or Beer, and some
long Pepper, Grains, Anniseeds, and Liquorice added thereto, and at three days
old the drink will be fit for your use; it opens obstructions, and evacuates
cold, clammy, and phlegmatic humors from the Liver, seat of Blood, and the
Spleen, wasting the swelling, and hardness thereof, and reduces the body to a
lively color: the juice helps Ulcers and Sores in the mouth, it being gargled
with it, and outwardly used, it cleanses the skin from spot and scars: The
conserve works the same effects as the juice or herb, and is a fine delicate
medicine for weak stomachs.

Of Sebesten. Myxa.
THis is a certain Plum, brought hither out of Assyria, and is called by them
Sebestens; in Latin, Myxa, and Myxaria, from the Greek word (...), which is
their name for the Tree.

Nature and Virtues.] Sebestens are temperately cold and moist, of a thick
clammy substance, they cleanse the throat of hoarseness, and roughness, caused
by sharp humors, which descend from the head into the winde-pipe, and cause
difficulty of breathing: they also cause phlegm to be avoided, and help the
Cough; and Wheesings of the Lungs, and distillations upon them; they help the
sharpness of Urine, proceeding from Choler, or salt Phlegm, and help such as
are troubled with pains in their sides; they are good in hot Agues to cool the
intemperate heat of the Stomach and Liver, and to purge Choler.

Self-heal. Prunella.
IT is a low creeping herb, having many small, and somewhat round leaves, a
little pointed, of a sad green color, without any dents on the edges; the
stalks are square and hairy, about half a foot high, which sometimes are
divided into branches, with small leaves thereon to the top, whereon stand
brown spiked heads, consisting of many scaly leaves and flowers mingled
together, gaping and commonly of a blueish purple color, but sometimes of a
pale blue, of a sweet smell in some, but in a few places: the root is small and
threddy, and by taking hold of the ground by the fibers which grow out from its
branches it is much increased.

Names.] It is called generally in Latin Prunella, and of some Solidago minor,
Consolida minor, and Consolida minima; in English Self-heal, Hook-heal, and
Carpenters herb.

Place and Time.] It grows commonly in most Fields, and flowers in May,

Nature and Virtues.] Self-heal is moderately hot and dry, somewhat astringent,
an herb of Venus; an excellent Wound Herb either for inward or outward hurts,
ot be taken inwardly in syrrup or decoction, and outwardly to be applied in
Unguent or Plasters: of it self alone it will heal any green wound, being
bruised and wrought with the point of a knife upon a trencher, like unto a
Salve and applied, and it good to heal the sore Nipples of Nurses; it is good
for those that have received hurt by bruises or falls: a decoction being made
thereof with Sanicle, Bugle, and such other Wound Herbs, and is effectual to
inject into outward Ulcers; and the inward taking thereof will help the
sharpness of humors which follow any Sore, Ulcer, Inflammation, Swelling, or
the like: the juice hereof mixed with oil of Roses, is good to anoint the
Temples, and Forehead, for the Headache; and the same juice mixed with a
little honey of Roses, cleanses and heals Ulcers, and Sores of the Mouth and
Throat, and secret parts.

Sena. Colutea.
THe true Sena is said to grow in Arabia and Syria, and is transported from
Alexandria to us: there is a bastard Sena, which is kept in many Gardens with
us, commonly called Colutea which is its Latin name.

Nature and Virtues.] The leaves of Sena (which are only used) are hot near
the first degree, and dry in the third it is of a purging faculty, and leaves
a binding quality after the purging; it opens obstructions, and cleanses and
comfort the Stomach, being corrected with some Auniseed, Carrawayseed, or
Ginger; it purges Melancholy, choler, and Phlegm from the Head and Brain,
Lungs, Heart, Liver, and Spleen, cleansing those parts of evil humors, a dram
thereof taken in Wine, Ale, or Broth fasting; it strengthens the senses; and
procures mirth: it is also good in cronical Agues, whether Quartain, or
Quotidian; it cleanses and purifieth the blood, and causes a fresh and lively
habit of the body, and is a special ingredient in diet drinks, and to make
purging Ale, to be taken to clarify and cleanse the blood: The bastard Sena
purges vehemently both upwards and downwards, offending the Stomach and Bowels.

Shepherds purse. Bursa Pastoris.
IT has small long leaves,

Names.] The Latins call it Bursa pastoris, and Pastoria Bursa; in English
Shepherds purse, Poor man's Parmacity, Toywort, Pick-purse, and Caseweed.

Place and Time.] It grows frequently almost in every Field, and Hedges side,
and upon Banks about London: they flower and seed all the Summer, and some of
them twice a year.

Nature and Virtues.] Shepherds purse is cold, dry, and binding, a Saturnine
Plant; the decoction hereof stops the Lask, spitting of Blood, pissing
Blood, the Terms, and all other fluxes of Blood, howsoever it be taken, but
especially with red Wine, or Plantain Water: the juice helps mattering and
running Fars, being dropped therein. A good Salve may be made hereof for
Wounds, especially in the head. The bruised herb pultiswise applied, helps
Inflammations, St. Anthonies sire, and cures running Sores, Fistula's,
Swellings, hardness, new Wounds, Shingles, and rheumatick Sores. The juice
being drunk, helps straitness of the Breath, the Strangury, and stoppage of
Urine and stops Phlegm, and is very prevalent against venomous bitings,
being drunk with Wine, and prevents the fits of Agues, being taken an hour
before the fit.

Skirret. Sisarum.
THey grow not naturally in England, but as they are planted in Gardens.

Names.] It is called in Latin Sisarum, Siser, Chervillum, and Servilla; they
are mistaken who take Siser to be a Parsnip.

Nature and Virtues.] The roots of Skirrets, which are only in use, are
moderately hot and moist: the roots are but of indifferent nourishment, yet
they provoke Lust, being windy, and are easily concocted, whereby they yield a
reasonable good juice; they are dressed much after the manner of Potatoes,
either baked or boiled, and stewed wiht Pepper, Butter, and Salt, and so eaten:
they may be eaten also cold with Vinegar and Oil, being first boiled: the juice
of the roots drunk with Goats milk, stops the Lask, and being drunk in Wine,
it is said to help windiness in the Stomach, gripings in the Belly, and the
Hiccough; it does somewhat provoke Urine, and is a little effectual to consume
the Stone and Gravel in the Bladder and Kidneys.

Smallage. Paludapium.
IT is so well known I need not describe it.

Names.] It is called in Latin Paludapium, and Apium palustre, and in Shops
only Apium; in English Smallage, and Marsh-parsley.

Places and Time.] It is found in Gardens, and sometimes in wet and moorish
Grounds, whence it was first brought; it flourishes when the Garden Parsley
does: the stalks coming up the second year, and then the seed is ripe in August.

Nature and Virtues.] Smallage is hot and dry in the end of the second degree,
of a bitter taste, and opening quality, being an herb of Mercury; it opens
obstructions of the Liver and Sleen, rarifies thick phlegm, and cleanses the
Blood, being used in pottage amongst other herbs, as Watercresses, etc. It
drives down the Courses, and is good for the Green Sickness; it provokes Urine,
and is good against the yellow Jaundies: if a syrrup be made of the juice, it
is very useful in lasting Agues. The juice with honey of Roses, and Barley
Water, cures Ulcers of the Mouth, and the almonds of the Throat, being bathed,
or gargled therewith, and cleanses other foul Ulcers and Wounds; being mixed
with honey, and used, it preserves exulcerated Cancers from stinking, and
putrefaction, and helps to heal them: the leaves boiled in Hogs grease like a
pultis, helps Felons, and Whitloes on the fingers. The seed is good to break
Wind, kill Worms, and help a stinking breath. The herb and root do warm the
Stomach, and expel Wind, and help digestion. The root is to be sliced and
eaten with oil and Vinegar. The root is stronger in operation then the herb for
all the said purposes; but especially to open obstructions, and rid away an
Ague, the juice thereof being taken in wine, or a decoction thereof made in
Wine.

Sorrel. Acetosa.
THis is very well known plentifully to grow both in the Gardens and Fields,
and needs no further describing.

Names.] It is called in Latin Acetosa, and Acedula, from its sowreness.

Nature and Virtues.] Sorrel is cooling and drying in the second degree, and
cutteth tough phlegm, by reason of its sowreness; it is ascribed to the
dominion of Venus: it is a pleasant sauce to many meats, grateful to hot
Stomachs; it provokes appetite, tempers the heat of the Liver, and opens the
stopping, and prevents the wasting thereof; it cools inflammations and heat in
Agues and Fevers, and faintings arising from heat; it refreshes the spirits. A
Sorrel posset is excellent to quench the thirst: the leaves taken fasting
preserve from infection, but much more the Conserve, which is good for all the
forementioned purposes: The seeds bruised and drunk in wine or water, are good
against the fretting of the Guts, and the Chollick, and stops hot Fluxes of the
Terms, and of humors in the Bloody Flux, or flux of the Stomach: the leaves
wrapped in a Colewort leaf, and roasted under the Embers, and applied,
discusseth kernels in the Throat, and ripens and breaks any hard Imposthume,
Tumor, Boil, or Plague Sore; the juice used with Vinegar is good for Tetters,
Ring-worms, and the Itch. The distilled water kills worms, resists poison, and
is good for all the said purposes. The roots either in powder or decoction, are
good for many of the forementioned purposes, and helps the Jaundies, and
Gravel, and Stone in the Kidneys. A decoction of the flowers made in Wine and
drunk, helps the black Jaundies, and inward Ulcers.

Wood Sorrel. Alleluia.
IT grows low upon the ground without any stalk, a white flower at the top,
consisting of five small pointed leaves, star fashion, and in some desht over
with a small show of blush; after the flowers succeed small round heads, with
yellowish seeds in them: the root consists of small strings, fastened to the end
of a small long piece, of a yellowish color, abiding with some leaves thereon
all the Winter.

Names.] It is called in Latin Trifolium Acetosum, and in Shops Alleluia, and
Lujula; in English Wood Sorrel, and Scab-wort.

Place and Time.] It grows in moist Woods, and shadowy places, and upon the old
stems of Withyes, Alders, and such Trees as delight to grow in wet and shadowy
places: it flowers in April and May.

Nature and Virtues.] Wood Sorrel is of temperature as the other, and under the
Planetary Influence: This herb is singular good to defend the heart in all
pestilential Diseases; and to cool the faintings thereof caused by heat in
Agues, Fevers, and other diseases; it preserves the Blood from putrefaction,
quenches thirst, stays Vomiting, and procures a good stomach, a dram of the
Conserve being taken in a morning, or oftener if need require; it is good in any
contagious Disease: A syrrup made of the juice is effectual for all the said
distempers, and so is the distiled water: the juice is good to gargle the mouth
for any Canker or Ulcer: it is good in Wounds and Scabs, to stay the bleeding,
and to cleanse and heal the Wounds, and to stay hot defluctions and Catharrs
upon the Throat or Lungs. Spunges or linen clothes wet in the juice, and
applied to hot tumors and inflammations does cool and help them. A composition
made with Mithridate, Sugar, and Wood Sorrel, has been approved for those that
are entering into a Fever.

See further in The Art of Simpling: written by W. Coals.

Sow-Thistles. Sonchus.
THey need no description.

Names.] The Latins call them Sonchus, which is divided into Asperum and
Levem; and in English we call them prickly and smooth Sow-thistles, and
sometimes Hares Lettice; they are called likewise Lactula Leporina, Palatium
Leporis, and Leporum Cubile.

Place and Time.] They grow in Gardens, and manured Grounds, commonly against
the owners will, as also in Fields, upon old Walls, by Paths sides, and High
ways.

Nature and Virtues.] Sow-thistles are cold and binding, and consisting of a
watery and earthly substance, being under the influence of Venus: they are
familiarly eaten beyond the Seas, while they are young and tender, especially
the roots: the juice heated with a little Oil of bitter Almonds in a
Pomegranate Pill, and dropped into the Ears, helps noise therein, and deafness,
and other diseases of the Ears: the bruised herb or juice is good to apply to
Inflammations of the eyes, or elsewhere, and to help Wheals and Blisters in the
skin, and is good to help the heat and itchings of the Piles, and the heat and
sharpness of humors in the privy parts of man or woman: the herb is eaten by
some as a Sallet in the Spring to cool a hot stomach, and ease the gnawing
pains thereof. The decoction in Wine helps to stay the dissolutions of the
Stomach: and the milk that comes from the stalk is good for such to drink as
are short winded, and are troubled with Wheesing. Three spoonfuls of the juice
taken in some Wine warmed, and a little Oil with it, causes easy and speedy
delivery; it is said to avoid the Gravel and Stone by Urine: and the juice
taken in warm drink helps the Strangury. The decoction of the leaves given to
Nurses, causes abundance of Milk, and suffers it not to curdle in their
Breasts. The distilled water is effectual for all the diseases before named to
be taken with Sugar inwardly and outwardly, by applying clothes or spunges
wetted therein; and is good for women to wash their faces to clear the skin:
The bruised herb or juice applied to Warts is said to take them away.

Sow-bread. Panis Porcinus.
I Cannot find that it is growing any where naturally in England, but is
brought to us from France and Italy, so that I shall not describe it.

Names.] It is called in shops Cyclamen, Panis porcinus, and Artanita; in
English Sow or Swine-bread, because the Swine love to feed on it in those
Countries where it grows.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the beginning of the third degree,
and cutteth, cleanses, and digesteth; it is an herb of Mars: The distilled
Water of the roots snuffed up into the Nostrils, stays bleeding at nose says
Mathiolus: and that six ounces of the water being drunk with one ounce of fine
Sugar, it stays the blood that comes from the breast, stomach, or liver, or
a vein that is broken in them: It purges violently, and therefore is to be
corrected with Mastick, Nutmeg, or a scruple of Rubarb, and so it helps
hardness and swelling of the Spleen, and eases the Chollick: The juice opens
the Hemorrhoids and Piles, and strongly moves to stool: The fresh root put
into a cloth, and applied to the secret parts of a woman that is in long
travel, procures and easy and speedy delivery, but if women with child meddle
with it before their due time it causes Abortion. The juice of Plantain, and
the juice of Sowbread, of each a like quantity mixed together with Aloes,
Myrrh, and Olibanum, stops the bleeding of the Nose, being applied to the
nostrils and forehead: The juice mingled with vinegar helps the falling down
of the Fundament, it being somented therewith.

See further of this in Culpeppers School of Physic.

Southernwood. Abrotanum mas.
IT is generally known in Gardens, so that it needs no description.

Names.] The Latins call it Abrotanum, adding the Epithet (mas) to it, to
distinguish it from Abrotanum faemina, which some hold to be Lavender Cotton.

Place and time.] The Gardens (as I told you) nourish it, the time of its
flowering is in June and July, sometimes later.

Nature and Virtues.] It is a Plant of Mercury, having a rarifying discussing
quality, and is hot and dry in the end of the third degree: The tops of
Southernwood stamped and drunk raw in water, provokes the Courses, and is
profitable for such as cannot breath without holding their necks straight up,
and for the Cramp, shrinking of sinews, and the Sciatica, and for stopping of
Urine; which effects the seeds and flowers do most powerfully perform if they
can be had. It destroys worms, and is good against poison and venom, being
drunk in wine: The seed (if it can be had) digests and consumes cold humors
and tough Phlegm which stop the Spleen, Kidneys, and Bladder: The tops boiled
in wine or water, and a little honey or sugar added to it, helps difficulty of
breathing being drunk three or four times a day, and is good for the Cough,
Cardiack Passion, and other inward griefs. The ashes thereof mixed with Oil of
Palma Christi, or old Oil Olive, restores lost hair, and causth the beard to
come forth speedily if it be anointed therewith twice a day against the sun or
the fire: The tops stamped with a roasted Quince, and applied to the eyes,
helps the inflammations thereof. A Salve made of the leaves being boiled and
stamped with Barley-meal, and Barrows-grease, dissolveth cold humors and
swellings, being applied upon a piece of cloth or leather. It helps also
benumbed or bruised Limbs, being stamped with Oil and applied; and takes away
the shivering fits of Agues, the backbone being anointed with it before the
fit come. The bruised herb helps to draw forth splinters and thorns out of the
flesh being applied thereunto, the ashes dries up old sores and ulcers: The
Oil of Southernwood is good in those Ointments that are used for the French
Pox, and kills lice in the head: The distilled Water is said to help the Stone,
and diseases of the Spleen and Mother: It is held more offensive to the stomach
then Wormwood, being taken inwardly; but the dried herb being put in a linen
bag, and applied to the stomach next the skin, comfort a cold stomach: The
herb boiled with Barley meal helps to take away pimples, pushes, and wheals in
any part of the body.

Speedwell, vide Fluellin.

Spignell. Meum.
COmmon Spignell springs up with sundry long stalks of leaves,

Names,] The Greeks call it (...), and the Latins Meum, and in English it is
called of some Mew, Bald-money, or Bearwort.

Place and Time.] It grows in Yorkshire, Westmoreland, and other Northern
Countries, flowers in June and July, and yields seed in August.

Nature and Virtues.] The roots of Spignel are hot in the third degree, and dry
in the second, and said to be under the influence of Venus, an Electuary made
of the roots with honey consumes wind in the stomach and guts, and eases
gripings in the belly; and is good against Catharrs, Rheumes, and Aches of the
Joints, and phlegmatic humors that fall upon the Lungs: The decoction in wine
or water being drunk, opens stoppings in the Kidneys and Bladder, helps the
Strangury, provokes Urine, and stirs up Lust. It also provokes the Terms, and
helps griefs of the Mother; but too great a quantity thereof causes the
headache: The Roots which are only used in Physic are effectual against the
stinging or biting of any venomous creature, and is an Ingredient in those main
Antidotes, Venice Treacle and Mithridate.

Spikenard. Nardus Indica.
IT is naturally an Indian Plant, called Nardus Indica, therefore I shall
proceed to declare its Virtues, not troubling you at all with its description.

Nature and Virtues.] Spikenard is of a heating drying faculty, as says
Dioscorides; it is good to provoke urine, and eases pains of the stone in the
Reins and Kidneys, being drunk in cold water; it helps loathing, swelling or
knawing in the stomach, the yellow Jaundies, and such as are livergrown: It is
a good Ingredient in Mithridate and other Antidotes against poison; to women
with child it is sorbidden, but a decoction thereof may be a good bathe for
others to sit over that are troubled with Inflammations of the Mother: The Oil
of Spikenard is good to warm cold places, and to digest crude and raw humors:
It works powerfully on all cold griess of the Head and Brain, Stomach, Liver,
Spleen, Reins, Bladder, and of the Mother: It purges the brain of Rheum being
snuffed up into the nostrils; being infused certain days in wine, and then
distilled in a hot bathe, the Water is good inwardly and outwardly to be used
for any coldness of the members: It comforts the brain, and helps cold pains of
the head, and the shaking Palsy: Two or three spoonfuls thereof being taken
helps passions of the heart, swoonings, and the Chollick; being drunk with wine
it is good against venomous bitings; and being made into Trochis with wine, it
may be reserved for an Eye-medicine, which being aptly applied represseth
obnoxious humors thereof.

Spinach. Spinachia.
I Shall say but little of this, it being more used by the Cook then the
Physician; for it is seldom used in physic, and I believe not very substantial
food, (though some greedily eat it) some Latin Authors call it Spinachia, and
some say, that the broth thereof makes the belly solluble, eases pains of the
back, clears the breast, and strengthens the stomach.

Spleenwort, or Ceterach. Asplenium.
SPleenwort bears many leaves near a span long, jagged on both sides almost
to the middle rib, set in several orders not one against the other, but one
besides another, being slippery, and green on the upper side, and of a dark
yellowish roughness underneath, which is conceived to be the seeds; at its
first coming up it rowleth and foldeth it self as Fern does, with many hairs on
the outside: The Root is small, black, and rough, much platted or interlaced,
having neither stalk nor flower.

Names.] Caterach is the usual name of it in shops, yet it is called Asplenium
and Splenium; in English Spleenwort, and Milt-waste, Place and Time.] It
grows upon stone walls and rocks, and in moist and shadowy places, in the
West Country, on the Church of Beconsfield in Barkshire, and at Strowd in Kent
and other places: It continues green all the year.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the first degree, of thin subtle
parts, no way Saturnine, but rather Mercurial: It is profitable for all
diseases and infirmities of the Spleen, especially such as cause it to grow too
big, for it diminishes it; it is effectual for the yellow Jaundies, stoppings
of the Liver, and the Hiccough: It helps the Strangury and Stone in the
Bladder; it helps the Running of the Reins, a dram of the dust scraped from the
back side of the leaves, and taken with half a dram of Amber in powder in the
juice of Plantain or Purslain. The decoction helps Melancholy Diseases, and
such as arise from the French Pox; but if it be boiled over long, the strength
will be lost. The distilled water is good for the Stone, and the lie made of
the Ashes being drunk some time together, helps spleenatick persons, and so
does the herb being boiled a little and applied to the region of the Spleen.
The use of this plant hinders Conception, and therefore women that desires
Children must forbear it.

Squinant, Sweet Rush, or Camels Hay. Schaenanthos.
SChaenanthos, or Juncus Odoratus are the Latin names hereof: it is an Arabian
Plant.

Nature and Virtues.] The whole Plant has an astringent saculty; the roots do
bind most, and the flowers are more hot; it gently cutteth humors, and
digesteth them: The decoction of the flowers being drunk, stays spitting of
Blood, and is conducible to diseases of the Scomach, Lungs, Liver, and Reins:
The root is held effectual for the loathing of the Stomach, a dram thereof in
powder with the like quantity of Pepper being taken fasting certain mornings
together, and is a good remedy for the Dropsy, Convulsions, and Cramps; being
boiled in the broth of a chicken, it is effectual for pains of the Womb, and
pains after Childe-bearing. Dioscorides says it provokes Urine, and Women's
Courses, discusseth Swellings, and Wind, but troubles the head a little.

Starwort. Bubonium.
THere be many kinds of this Herb, England, is the Attick or yellow Starwort
which grows about a foot high, with three or more hairy stalks, with long,
rough, hairy, brownish, dark, green leaves on them, divided into two or three
branches; at the tops whereof stand a flat scaly head, compassed underneath
with five or six long brown, rough, geeen leaves, like a Star; the flower
standing in the middle consists of narrow, long, pale, yellow leaves, set with
brownish yellow thrums; which turning into down, are carried away with the
Wind: the root is fibrous, and of a binding sharp taste.

Names.] This kind is called Aster Atticus, and Bubonium in Latin.

Place and Time.] It is said to grow upon Hampsted Heath. One sort of Starwort
or other is in flower from June to October.

Nature and Virtues.] Starwort is said to be cooling and drying, and does
moderately waste and consume, an herb of Venus; the leaves and flowers boiled
in water, helps pains and sores in the Groin, and so does an oil made by
infusion thereof: the dried flowers being bound to the grieved place, takes
away Inflammations thereof; it helps the Quinzy, and Falling Sickness in
Children: An ointment made of the green Herb and Hogs Grease, is good to anoint
a hot Stomach and inflamed Eyes, to help falling down of the Fundament, and
such as are bitten by a mad Dog; it consumes swellings of the Throat; and the
herb being burnt, drives away Serpents.

Stone Crop, or Wall Pepper. Vermicularis.
THis Plant is much like unto the lesser Housleek, Gerrard and others ranked
amongst the number of the Sedums, or Prickmadams; but because of its far
different and contrary temperature, I have placed it alone: it is a low and
little herb, the stalks whereof are slender and short, about which the leaves
stand very thick, being small in growth, full bodied, sharp pointed, and full
of juice. The flowers stand at the top, and are of a yellow color, and of a
sharp biting taste; the root is nothing but strings.

Names] The Latin names are Vermicularis, and Illecebra, Minor Acris: The
tertium Semper vivum of Dioscorides, which he says the Grecians call (...),
and (...), and the Romans Illecebra.

Place and Time.] Stonecrop grows in stony and dry places, in chinks and
cranies of old Walls, and on the tops of tiled Houses; on the Church-house at
Heckfield in Hampshire uses to grow abundance of it: it flowers in the Summer
months, and is always green as the Sengreens are.

Nature and Virtues.] Stonecrop is of a very hot temperature, sharp and biting;
being outwardly applied it raises Blisters, as the Ranunculus, or Crow-foot
will do, and at length exulcerateth: therefore such as have any occasion to use
the cooling Prickmadams, ought to beware that they mistake not this for it.
Dioscorides says, that it wastes away hard kernels of the Kings Evil, if it
be applied unto them with Hogs Grease; and boiled in Oil of Roses, and the sore
Piles anointed therewith, it eases their pains: The juice (as Gerrard says)
being extracted and drawn forth, and taken with Vinegar or some other liquor,
procures Vomit, and brings up gross and phlegmatic humors, and also
chollerick, and does thereby oftentimes cure the quartain Ague, and other Agues
of long continuance: and being given in this manner, it is a remedy against
poisons inwardly taken, but it is dangerous to be used; and there being many
other safer medicines for the same purposes, I conceive it is better to be
forborne then experimented.

Strawberries. Fragraria.
THey need no description: The Plant is called in Latin Fragraria, and the
fruit Fraga. They grow both in Gardens, and wild in Fields and Woods.

Nature and Virtues.] Let Venus have these sweet Berries, lest she lose her
longing.

The leaves of Strawberries are cooling in the first degree, and the root more
drying and binding; the green berries are cold and dry, but when they are ripe
they are cold and moist: the distilled water of the berries is good against
faintings of the heart, and overflowing of the gall. The berries themselves
refresh and comfort fainting spirits, ocol the Liver, Blood, and Spleen, and
chollerick Stomachs, and quench thirst; they are good for other Inflammations,
but meddle not too much with them in Fevers, lest they putrify in the Stomach,
and increase the Fits. A decoction of the leaves and roots in wine and water
does abate the heat and sharpness of Urine, cools the Liver and Blood, and
asswages Inflammations in the Reins and Bladder, stays the bloody Flux, and
the Terms, and helps the swellings of the Spleen. The juice or the decoction
of the herb and root cleanses soul Ulcers, being washed therewith: the leaves
and roots hereof serve to make lotions and gargles for sores in the Mouth, or
privy Parts, and are good to fasten loose Teeth, and to heal foul Gums; it also
helps to stay Catharrs, or defluctions of Rheum into the Mouth, Throat, Teeth,
or Eyes. The juice or water is good for red and inflamed Eyes, and also to help
pushes and wheals in the face or other parts, and to make the skin clear and
smooth. The water of Strawberries distilled in a glass after they have stood
twelve or fourteen days in Horse dung, cures the Leprosy and Morphew, if it
be drunk.

Succory, Dandelion, or Pissabeds. Cicorea.
SUccory, Endive, and Dandelion differ not much in operation: the Garden
Succory, and wild Dandelion, or Pissabeds, are all very well known; so that I
shall not need to describe either.

Names.] Succory is called Cicorea in Latin, and the Dandelion Dens Leonis
from the jagged leaves resembling a Lions Tooth.

Nature and Virtues.] Succory and Endive are cold and dry in the second degree;
the wild sorts are dryer then the Garden kinds, and do cleanse and open most
by reason of their bitterness; it is an herb of Jupiter.

The leaves of the Garden kinds are used both for meat and medicine; they do
both cool the Liver, and open the obstructions thereof, strengthening the same;
and likewise helps burning Agues, lack of sleep, stopping of Urine, and the
Gall, the yellow Jaundies, and great heat of the Stomach. A draught of the
decoction of the herb or root in wine drunk fasting, helps the Dropsy, and
drives forth chollerick and phlegmatic Humors: the like decoction in wine is
good against lingering Agues, and a dram of the seed in powder taken in Wine
before the fit, is available in Agues, and for faintings and passions of the
heart: the herb outwardly applied is good to allay sharp humors in Ulcers,
Tumors, and pestilential Sores, and helps inflammations of the Eyes, and clears
the sight, and eases pains of the Gout. The distilled water is effectual for
the same purposes, and to drink morning and evening for (...) in the Breast,
and is good for women with Child, and the Headache in Children coming of
heat; which water oo the juice of the leaves is good for Nurses Breasts that
abound with milk, allayeth swellings, Inflammations, Pushes, Pimples, and St.
Anthonies fire, and is good to wash filthy Sores, being used with Vinegar.

Sun-flowers, i. e. Elecampane.

Tobacco, English and Indian. Nicotiana.
ENglish Tobacco rises up with a thick round stalk, about two foot high,
whereon grow thick fat green leaves, not so large as the Indian, round pointed,
and not dented about the edges; at the tops stand diverse flowers in green
husks, scarce standing above the brims of the husk, round pointed also, and of
a greenish yellow color: its seed is not very bright, but large, contained in
great heads. The roots perish every Winter, but rise generally of its own
sowing.

Names.] It is called in Latin Petum, and Nicotiana.

Place and Time.] English tobacco grows much about Winscomb in
Glocestershire, as delighting in a fruitful soil; the other which we smoke
grows best in Virginia, and is thence carried to some parts of Spain, and
there made up and then brought to us, and named Spanish Tobacco; under which
Title the Taverns and Ale drapers cheat the Smokers, who buy it greedily at
three Pipes for two pence, as a great bargain, when it does not stand the
seller in a halfpenny.

Nature and Virtues.] Tobacco is hot and dry in the second degree; it cleanses
and discusseth, and has also a stupifying quality, and a power to resist
poison.

English Tobacco is good to expectorate tough Phlegm, the juice made into a
syrrup, or the distilled water drunk with Sugar, or the smoke taken fasting in
a Pipe: it eases gripings in the Bowels, pains in the Head, and expells Worms,
and is profitable to provoke Urine, and expel the Stone and Gravel out of the
Kidneys, to expel windiness, which causes strangling of the Mother: the seed is
good to ease the Toothache, and the ashes of the Herb cleanses the Gums and
Teeth, and makes them white: the bruised herb is profitably applied to
swellings of the Kings Evil: four or five ounces of the juice taken fasting,
purges the body upwards and downwards, and is effectual for the Dropsy. The
distilled water taken with Sugar before the fit of an Ague lessens the fit. The
distilled faeces of the Herb having been bruised before the distillation, and
not distilled dry, but set fourteen days in hot dung, and then hung up in a
bag in a Wine Cellar, there will drop a liquor therefrom good for Cramps,
Aches, the Gout, and Sciatica, and to heal Itches, Scabs, Cankers, and foul
Sores: The juice is good to kill lice in Childrens Heads. The green herb
bruised and applied is good to cure any fresh wound; and the juice put into old
Sores, cleanses and heals them. There is an excellent Salve made of Tobacco,
good for Imposthumes, hard Tumors, swellings by blows and falls, old and new
Sores, and is to be had at the Apothecaries by the name of Unguentum
Nicotianum, or oynment of Tobacco.

Tamarinds. Tamarindus.
THis Tree grows in Arabia, and the Indies, and the fruit is brought hither
for Medicine, whose virtues follow.

Nature and Virtues.] Tamarinds are cold and dry in the second degree, or in
the beginning of the third, a plant of Venus: The pulp of Tamarinds open
obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and taken with Borrage water, it quickens
the spirits, and mitigates the fits of Frenzy and madness; it is good in acute
Fevers, it purges Choler and adust humors, stays vomiting, and cools
inflammations of the Liver, Stomach and Reins, and helps the running of the
Reins; it is good against the Scab, Itch, and Leprosy, and salt humors
breaking out in the skin; it is good in hot burning Agues, it quenches thirst,
and procures appetite, an ounce thereof being dissolved in fair water and taken
with a little Sugar; it stays bleedings at nose arising from Choler, and
women's Fluxes, and is good against the yellow Jaundies.

Tamarisk. Tamarix.
IT is well known in Gardens where it only grows, in England, so that a
description is needless.

Names.] Mytica, Tamarix, and Tamariscus are the Latin names; the Greeks call
it (...); i.e. infinitus, from its abundance of leaves.

Place and Time.] It grows about Mompelier and Narbone in France, and is
planted in Gardens with us: they flower about the end of May, or in June, and
the seed is ripe and blown away in September.

Nature and Virtues.] Tamarisk is drying and astringent, having also a cutting
and cleansing quality, a Saturnine Plant. The leaves or roots boiled in Wine
drives forth Melancholy, helps spitting of blood, and stays the overflowing
of the Terms, the bleeding of the Hemorrhoides, and other Fluxes, and is good
against the Jaundies, and other diseases which are caused by obstructions. The
roots sodden with Wine and drunk, cleanses the milt, and thereby it helps the
Lepry: the decoction of the root or young branches in Wine or Vinegar drunk,
and outwardly applied, helps hardness of the Spleen. The decoction of the bark
and leaves in Wine, helps the Toothache, the mouth and Teeth being gargled
therewith; it also helps redness and watring of the Eyes, and eases pains of
the ears being dropped therein, and is good to wash those that are subject to
Lice and Nits, and is good to stay gangrous and fretting Ulcers, being mixed
with honey: it is good for spleenatick persons to drink out of Cups or Cans
made of the Wood thereof. A good quantity of the leaves boiled in water is a
good bath for women to sit over whose Matrix is in danger of coming down, it
fastneth the same: and the ashes of the Wood applied to the place stops the
excessive flowing thereof. A Lie made of the Ashes is good for many of the said
Diseases, and to help blisters raised by burning or scalding. The Egyptians use
the Wood hereof to cure the French Disease, Leprosy, Scabs, Pushes, Ulcers,
and the like; it is likewise good to help the Dropsy proceeding from hardness
or stopping of the Spleen, and is available against Melancholy and the black
Jaundies, the Bark with the Barks of Ash and Ivy being infused in Beer or Ale;
some use Ling, or Heath (where Tamarisk is not to be had) instead thereof.

Garden Tansie. Tanacetum.
THis needs no description.

Names.] It is called both in Greek and Latin Athanasia, and also in Latin
Tanacetum; the French call it Tanaisie, and our English Tansie.

Place and Time.] It is nourished in Gardens, sends forth green leaves in
March and April, and flowers in June and July.

Nature and Virtues.] It is said to be hot in the second degree and dry in the
third, attributed to the particular influence of Venus: The decoction of
Tansie, or the juice thereof drunk in Wine or Beer, does dissolve and expel
Wind in the Stomach or Bowels: The eating of it in Spring time purges the
Body of moist and phlegmatic humors, engendered in the foregoing Winter, and by
eating Fish in Lent, before it became superstition to our gluttonous
Religion-pretenders, whose lustful guts cannot forbear the Fleshpots on
Frydayes: the decoction before mentioned provokes Urine, helps the Strangury,
expells Wind out of the Matrix, and procures women's Courses, and is good for
those that have weak Reins and Kidneys; it is profitable for such women as are
apt to miscarry, being bruised and often smelled unto, and applied to the lower
part of the Belly; it is used against the Stone in the Reins, especially to
men: being boiled in Oil it is good against the Cramp, and shrinking of Sinews,
if applied to the affected part; it avoideth Phlegm, dries the Sinews, and
therefore is good for the Palsy.

Wild Tansie, or Silver Weed. Argentina.
IT is much like unto the ordinary Garden Tansie a little also resembling the
leaves of Agrimony:

Names.] It is called in Latin Argentina, Agrimonia sylvestris, and Tanacetum
sylvestre; in English Wild Tansie, and Silver weed.

Place and Time.] It grows in moist grounds, near High Ways sides, at the
foot of Hills, and such like places: it flowers in June and July.

Nature and Virtues.] Wild Tansie, especially the root, is dry near the third
degree, without much manifest heat, having also an astringent quality, and said
to be a Plant of Venus: The decoction of the herb in Wine being drunk, eases
pains of the Bowels, and is good for the Sciatica and Joint Aches: The bruised
herb applied to the hand-wrists, and soles of the feet, cools the violent hot
fits of Agues. The distilled water dropped into the Eyes, or a Cloth wet
therein, and applied, takes away heat and Inflammations thereof: The said water
or the leaves steeped in Wine, Butter milk, or strong white Wine Vinegar,
cleanses the skin and face from Morphew, Sun-burning, Freckles, Pimples, and
the like. Wild Tansie boiled in Vinegar with Honey and Allome, and the mouth
gargled therewith, eases the Toothache, fastneth loose Teeth, helps sore
Gums, and reduces the pallat of the Mouth to its place when it is fallen down;
it also cleanses and heals Ulcers in the mouth, or secret parts, and is good
for inward Wounds, and to close the lips of green Wounds, and to heal old
running corrupt sores in the Legs, or elsewhere: being boiled in Wine and
drunk, it stops the Lask, bloody Flux, and all other fluxes of Blood; the green
herb only worn in the shoes, stops the Terms, and its possible the Whites;
but the powder of the herb will certainly do it, being taken in some of the
distilled water, with a little Corral and Ivory in powder added to it; it also
stays spitting or vomiting of Blood, and is good for Children that are
bursten, or have a Rupture, being boiled in water and salt, and applied.

Tarragon. Draco Herba.
THe Sallet Herb called Tarragon,

Names.] The Latins call it Draco herba, and Dracunculus Hortensis; and in
French Dragon: in English Tarragon.

Place, and Time.] It is cherished only in Gardens with us, and as I said is
increased by the young shoots.

Nature and Virtues.] Tarragon is hot and dry in the third degree, a good
Sallet Herb to be eaten with Lettice, Purslain, and other cool herbs, it is
grateful and comfortable to the Stomach, and tempers their coldness; but to be
eaten alone it is too hot: The root held between the Teeth draws down Rheum,
and eases the Toothache,

Thistles. Carduus.
THough there be many kinds they are all well known.

Names.] The general Latin name of a Thistle is Carduus.

Place and Time.] They grow frequently almost every where, and flower in July
and August, the seed ripening soon after.

Nature and Virtues.] Common Thistles are of Temperature hot, and of a drying
quality.

They are held good to provoke Urine, and remedy the stinking smell thereof,
and the rank smell of the Arme-pits, and whole body, being boiled in Wine and
drunk; and they are said to be good to help a stinking Breath, and to
strengthen the Stomach, though I believe it has been seldom proved: The juice
restores lost hair, the place being bathed therewith, as Pliny reports.

Our Ladies Thistle. Carduus Mariae.
LAdies Thistle has diverse large leaves lying on the ground, with sharp
prickles round about: the stalk is strong, round, and prickly, set full of like
leaves; at the top of every branch comes forth a prickly head with brigh
purple thrums in the middle; after which comes flattish brown shining seed
lying in the said heads in soft white Down. The root is great, spreading in the
ground with many fibers fastened thereunto: the whole plant is biter in taste.

Names.] It is called in Latin Carduus Lacteus, and Carduus Mariae; in
English, Striped milky Thistle, and Ladies Thistle.

Place and Time.] It is frequent upon Banks of be Fields about London; about
such places it delight to grow: they flower and seed in June till August, as
other Thistles do.

Nature and Virtues.] Our Ladies Thistle is hot and dry in the second degree,
and somewhat binding, especially the root; an herb of Jupiter: the decoction
thereof, or the herb taken in powder, is good for Stitches, and other diseases
in the Sides, for Agues, and to prevent infection; it opens obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen, and is good against the Jaundies; The tender leaves having
the prickles taken off, are a good Sallet in Spring to cleanse the Blood: the
young stalks dressed are also good meat, especially for Nurses to increase
their Milk: the root is good for the Lask and bloody Flux; it stays
Bleedings, wastes away cold swellings, and eases pain of the Teeth, if they
be washed with the decoction thereof. The decoction of the herb is good to
provoke Urine, and breaks and expels the Stone, and is good for the
Dropsy. The seed is as effectual, if not better for the same purposes, and
also for the Cramp, and so is the distilled water, which is also used inwardly
to drink, and outwardly to cool distempers of the Liver, Swoonings, and
passions of the Heart, being applied with Spung^s or wet clothes to the region
thereof.

Thorow-wax. Perfoliata.
THorow-wax rises up with one straight round stalk,

Names.] It is called in Latin Perfoliata; in English Thorow-wax, and
Thorow-leaf.

Place and Time.] It grows in Corn fields and Pastures in many places of this
Land, flowers about July, and the seed is ripe in August, or soon after.

Nature and Virtues.] Thorow-wax is hot and dry, somewhat bitter and
astringent, and I judge rather Martial then Saturnine: It is a good remedy
against Ruptures and Burstings in Children, especially before it grow too old;
the decoction of the Herb, or the herb in powder taken inwardly, and the green
leaves bruised and outwardly applied: It is a good remedy for Children that
have their Navels sticking out, being applied thereunto with a little Honey and
Wax; it draws up the Bowels, and keeps them in their natural place, and
helps them when they are too much windy or swollen: It is good for Bruises and
Wounds, old Sores and Ulcers either inward or outward. The decoction of the
Herb in Wine or Water being drunk, and the places washed therewith, or an
Ointment may be made of the Herb with Oil or Hogsgrease to keep all the year
for the same purposes: But an excellent Salve may be made of the green Herb
with Wax, Oil, Rozen, and Turpentine, to incarnate and bring up flesh in deep
Wounds, and to heal old Sores. The Herb and the distilled Water thereof is good
against St. Anthonies fire, and the Shingles.

Teasel, or Fullers Thistle. Carduus Fullonum.
THe Garden or mannured Teasel, being planted by Cloath-workers for their use,
and the wild Teasel are both so common, they need no description.

Names.] It is called in Latin Carduus Fullonum, Fullers Thistle, and Pecten
Veneris, Dipsacus Silvestris, and Virga Pastoris, Shepherds Rod is a Species
thereof.

Place and Time.] The Cloathworkers (as I said before) mannure one kind for
their use, the other is to be found by most Highways, Banks and Ditches
sides: They flower in June and July, and the seed is ripe in August. It
perishes annually, and rises again of its own sowing.

Nature and Virtues.] Teasel is drying in the second degree, according to
Gallen, having also a cleansing faculty, and reputed to be subject to the
influence of Venus. The roots being bruised in wine till they come to the
Consistence of a Salve, and then kept in a brazen or copper box, and afterward
applied plaisterwise to the Fundament, heals Chops, Cankers, and Fistula's
thereof, (says Dioscorides) and takes away Warts and Wens; so also is the
Water said to do which is contained in the hollowness of the leaves; and is
also commended against redness of the eyes, and spots of the face: The juice
dropped into the ears, kills worms in them; the leaves applied to the
Forehead and Temples, qualifieth frenzy fits: The distilled water takes away
redness of the eyes, and such mists as darken the sight, and helps creeping
Sores Shingles, and Pimples, preserves Beauty, taking away redness,
inflammations, and other discolorings; and is also said to be effectual to
cure the Scurvy: The roots stamped with Danewort, and boiled in wine and drunk
helps the Dropsy; and being boiled in red wine, and drunk morning and
evening for nine days together, it helps the Gout: The powder thereof drunk
in wine stops fluxes, and helps excoriations of the belly and other parts: The
same powder the quantity of two drams at a time drunk in Pease broth, stops the
overflowing of Women's Courses; and so does the Herb being bruised and boiled in
Vinegar, and applied under the Navel, and helps moist Wounds that are hard to
heal, and Cankers of the Yard.

See further in Adam in Eden: written by Will. Coals.

Three-leaved Grass, or Trefoil. Trifolium.
THere is near twenty kinds of this Plant, as Meadow Trefoil, Heart Trefoil,
Pearl Trefoil, white and red Honey-suckles, or three-leaved grass, cum multis
aliis, etc. Meadow Trefoil shoots up stalks a handful long or more, round and
somewhat hairy, and for the most part leaning toward the ground, having
thereon three leaves joined together, one standing a little from another,
having for the most part in the midst a white spot like a half moon, amongst
which rise up stalks of flowers somewhat longer then the leaves, bearing a tuft
of many deep purple crimson flowers, which turns into little cods with small
seed in them: The Root spreads much, and endures long.

Names.] Trifolium it is called in Latin, and of some Menyanthe and
Asphaltion; in English Trefoil, three-leaved Grass, and Honey-suckles.

Place and Time.] They are common in most Meadows and Pastures, they flower and
flourish from May till August.

Nature and Virtues.] Both Leaves and Flowers of Meadow Trefoil are cooling and
binding, of which temperature the other kinds do in some sort partake; they
are under the influence of Venus: The decoction of the whole Plant of Meadow
Trefoil is good to stay the Whites and overflowing of Women's Courses, and
having some Honey added thereto, and used for a Glister, it helps gripings and
frettings of the Guts: A Pultiss made of the leaves with Barrows-grease, helps
hot Swellings and Inflammations. The juice especially of the Pearl Trefoil
mixed with a little Honey and applied, is good to take away the pin and web of
the eyes, and to ease pains and inflammations of them: An Ointment made of the
herb with Hog's Grease is good for the biting of an Adder; and the decoction of
the Herb to wash the place, and the juice to drink: The Herb bruised and heated
between two tyles, and applied to the share, helps stopping of water; and is
likewise good for wounds and scars: The seed is good to cleanse the Liver, and
for Coughs and pains of the Breast. The Heart Trefoil is a great strengthner of
the heart and vital spirits, helps swoundings, and resists the Pestilence, and
defends the heart against the noisome vapors of the Spleen: The leaves of it
do perfectly resemble the heart of a man, and are of a flesh color like the
heart.

Garden Time, and wild Time, or Mother of Time. Thymus.
THese Plants both mannured and wild are commonly known, being like one
another.

Names.] Thymus and Thymum is both Greek and Latin Names for both, yet the
Mother of Time is called in Latin Serpillum, a serpendo, because of its
creeping upon the ground.

Place and Time.] One is nourished in Gardens, the other found in dry Pastures,
almost on every Hillock; they flower about July.

Nature and Virtues.] Time is hot and dry in the third degree, working the same
effects as Savory in women's diseases, and therefore is particularly ascribed to
Venus, which in part it may: The decoction thereof in water and honey provokes
the Terms, helps hard labor, and expells the Secondine and dead Child; it
strengthens the Lungs, helps the Cough and shortness of Breath, provokes
Urine, dissolves congealed Blood, and kills Worms: An Electuary made thereof
with honey, expectorates tough phlegm, quickens the sight, warms and comforts
the stomach, and so does the herb used in broths: It is good against the
Chollick, Illiack Passion, Melancholy and stoppings of the Matrix; four drams
of Time in powder taken fasting in syrrup of Vinegar purges Choler and sharp
humors, and eases the Gout: And one dram taken fasting in Mead dissolves hard
swellings of the Belly, and is profitable for pains in the Loins and Hips, and
swellings in the Sides: The decoction dissolves Tumors and Swellings, they
being bathed therewith: The juice used with vinegar takes away Warts, and being
applied with wine and meal, it helps the Sciatica and swollen Cods. Bathes made
thereof are good to expel Wind, and help the Joynt-Gout; the wild Time is
more powerful then the other for most of the said purposes, especially to
provoke the Terms, being decocted in wine and drunk: It aeseth the Strangury,
stays the Hiccough, and vomiting of Blood, helps gripings in the belly,
Cramps, the Lethargy, and Inflammations of the Liver, and is comfortable to the
head, stomach, and Reins, and helps to expel Wind being taken in decoction,
or in an Electuary with Honey, Liquorice, and Anniseeds.

Tormentil. Tormentilla.
IT springs up with many reddish, slender, weak branches from the root,
leaning or lying on the ground, having many short leaves that stand closer to
the stalks as Cinquefoil does, with the footstalks encompassing the branches in
several places; they which grow next the ground are set upon longer footstalks
much like Cinquefoil leaves, but longer and lesser, dented about the edges,
having five, six, or seven divisions and sometimes eight; at the tops of the
branches stand yellow flowers, consisting of five leaves like Cinquefoil, but
smaller: The Root is smaller then Bistort, somewhat tuberous, thick, and
knobby, blackish without and reddish within, sometimes a little crooked, having
many blackish fibers.

Names.] It is called in Latin Tormentilla, because it eases torments of the
Guts, and Heptaphyllum or Septifolium, and Stellaria; in English Tormentil,
Setfoil, or Seven-leaves.

Place and time.] Tormentil grows in Woods and shadowy places, and also in
Pastures and Closes; as in Pray Wood near St. Albans, in Cobham Park in Kent,
and in the Fields and Common near Horsham in Sussex, and many other places.

Nature and Virtues.] Tormentil roots are dry in the third degree, not very
hot, but of a binding quality, under the Solar Influence: It is effectual to
stay all fluxes of blood or humors in man or woman, either in wound or
elsewhere; it resists poison, provokes sweat, and is good to cure wounds: It is
good in the Pestilence, Small Pox, spotted Fevers, and other contagious
Diseases, especially if the Patient have a flux of the belly withal. It is a
special Ingredient in Antidotes and Counterpoisons, and excellent in
Dyet-drinks against the French Disease, and to dry up Rheums and Catarrhes: The
distilled Water taken fasting is good against Venom and Infection: Two or
three ounces thereof taken both morning and evening, cures inward Ulcers and
Fluxes of the belly, especially the Disentery or bloody Flux. The best way to
distill it, is to steep the herb all night in wine, and then distilled it in
Balneo Mariae, which water taken with some Venice Treacle, and the party
sweating after it, will expel any venomous poison, the Plague, and other
contagious Diseases: Cakes made with the powder of the dried root, and the
white of an Egg, and baked upon a hot tyle, stays Fluxes, restrains Chollerick
Belchings, Vomiting, and loathings in the Stomach: The leaves and roots bruised
and applied, dissolves knots and kernels of the Kings Evil, and hardness about
the Ears, Throat, and Jaws, and eases pains of the Sciatica: The juice of the
leaves and roots used with vinegar, is effectual for the Piles and Hemorrhoids,
Sores of the head or other parts, Scabs or Itch, being washed therewith, or
with the distilled Water of the herb or roots. A little prepared Tutia or white
Amber used with the distilled water hereof, is helpful to dry up sharp Rheums
that distill from the Head into the Eyes, causing redness, pain, waterings, or
itchings therein.

Turnsole. Heliotropium.
ITs natural Soil is in Italy, Spain, and France, yet may be found in England
in some curious Gardens, but more plentifully at the Druggists shops.

Names.] It is called Heliotropium in Latin, and herba Cancri, because it
flowers about the time when the Sun enters Cancer.

Nature and Virtues.] It is of temperature hot and dry, and of a binding
faculty, a Solar Herb: A handful thereof boiled in water and drunk, purges
Choler and Phlegm, as says Dioscorides; and the decoction thereof with
Commin, breaks the Stone in the Reins, Kidneys, or Bladder, provokes Urine and
the Terms, and causes speedy delivery in Childebearing: The seed and juice of
the leaves rubbed with salt upon Warts, Wens, and other hard kernels in the
face, eyelids, or other parts of the body, will take them away by often using
it: The bruised leaves eases pains of the Gout, or places that have been out
of joint, and are newly set, and are full of pain, being appled thereto.

Turpentine. Terebinthina.
THere is a Turpentine which drops out of the Fire Tree; Larix; from whence
also proceeds a tuberous excrescence called Agaricus, or Agarick, of which we
have treated of: The Turpentine in Latin is Terebinthina,

Place and Time.] It grows about Trent in Italy; and the Turpentine is to be
gathered in the hottest part of Summer.

Nature and Virtues.] Turpentine is moist, and without sharpness, of a
cleansing quality; an ounce thereof taken will gently open the Belly, provoke
Urine, and cleanses the Reins, Kidneys, and Bladder; being taken with Honey it
expectorates tough Phlegm, and is good for an old Cough, the Ptisick, and
Consumption of the Lungs; it is an excellent ingredient in Salves for Ulcers,
or green Wounds: The chemical oil of Turpentine is singular good in Wounds, and
to warm and ease cold pains in the Joints and Sinews: take Turpentine and wash
it in Plantain Water, and then make Pills thereof with the powder of white
Amber, red Corral, Mastick, and a little Camphire, they will purge and cleanse
the Reins, and stay their running.

Turmerick. Curcuma.
THis Plant grows in the East Indies, and is called by some Crocus Indicus,
but the common Latin Name is Curcuma.

Nature and Virtues.] Turmerick is hot and dry in the second or near the third
degree; it is excellent for the yellow Jaundies, and obstructions of the Gall,
and for the Dropsy, and Greeen Sickness, to open stoppings of the Stomach,
Womb, and Bladder, and to bring down Women's Courses; it is useful in old
Diseases, and the ill habit of the body; it is good likewise in Medicines for
the Itch, and Scabs, used with juice of Oranges. The Indians use it to color
meats and broths instead of Saffron, and we to color Wooden Dishes, and Cups.

Turnips. Rapum.
THese need no description; they are called in Latin Rapum, and Rapa.

Nature and Virtues.] Turnips are cold, moist, and windy, but being boiled,
they are hardly perceived to cool: The decoction of Turnips taken with Sugar,
is good to clear the Voice. A syrrup made of the juice when they are baked,
mixed with Honey, or honey of Roses, and a spoonful thereof taken at night,
helps a Cough, and Hoarseness, opens the Breast, and is good for those that
have a Vein broken. Oil of Roses boiled in a hollow Turnip, under hot Embers,
cures kibed Heels. The young Turnip tops boiled and eaten, are a good Sallet to
provoke Urine. The seed mixed with Treacle and drunk, is good against poison.
Turnips being baked engender less wind then when they are boiled; but
howsoever dressed they provoke Urine, increase seed, and milk in Women's Breast.

See further in The Art of Simpling: written by W. Coals.

Tutsan, or Park leaves. Siciliana.
TUtsan grows up with brownish,

Names.] The Latins call it Androsaemum, and some call it Dionysia, and
Siciliana; in English it is called Park-leaves, because it familiarly grows in
Woods and Parks; and Tutsan from the French word Toutsaine, it being a good
Wound Herb.

Place and Time.] It delights to grow in Woods, and woody Grounds, Parks, and
Forests; flowers in July and August, and the berries are ripe in September.

Nature and Virtues.] Tutsan is moderately hot and dry, yet abstersive, a
Saturnine Plant: The leaves and flowers of Tutsan abate lust, and venerial
motions, being taken in drink, or otherwise, and the seeds more powerfully
being toasted, and then eat or drunk. Castory boiled in the juice of Tutsan and
drunk helps the Gonorrhea. The Green herb bruised and applied, helps burnings
by fire, and the same, or the powder of the dry herb, stays bleeding of
Wounds; it is a sovereign Wound herb, for any Wound either inwardly or
outwardly; it may be used in drinks, lotions, balms, or ointments, for any
green Wound, or old Sores, or Ulcers. Two drams of the seed in powder taken in
the morning, or after supper, in Mead, Wine, or fair water, purges chollerick
Humors, and helps the Sciatica, or Hip-Gout.

Throat-wort. Trachelium.
THroat-wort grows with many large hairy leaves,

Names.] The Latins call it Trachelium, Cervicaria, and Vvularia; some
likewise call them, Campanula, the flowers being like Bells; in English
Throat-wort, Canterbury-bells, and Haskwort.

Place and Time.] It grows in Stow Wood by Oxford, and doubtless in many
other places in England, though Germany and Italy be their more natural places:
they flower in June and July, scarce perfecting their seed, but increase by the
root.

Nature and Virtues.] This Plant is cold and dry, and so are most Bell Flowers;
the roots are sweet, and therefore eaten in Sallets as Rampions are: they have
an astringent quality, and are effectual for all Ulcers in the Mouth and
Throat, and also for the Uvula, or Pallat of the Mouth, being swollen, or
fallen down, and also for all Sores in the privy parts of man or woman, or
elsewhere, to be used in a decoction with Honey, Wine, and Allome; and likewise
to close up the lips of Cuts and green Wounds.

Valerian. Phu majus.
VAlerian has a thick short grayish root,

Names.] The ordinary sort is called Phu majus, and Valeriana major hortensis,
and of some Herba Benedicta, and Theriacaria, it being an ingredient in Treacle.

Place and Time.] It is nourished and kept in our Gardens: it flowers in June
and July, and so continues till the Frosts destroy it.

Nature and Virtues.] Valerian has little heat while it is green, but the
dried roots are hot and dry near unto the second degree; it is a Mercurial
plant: The Garden Valerian is used in Antidotes; and being dried and taken in
drink, it helps pains in the Sides, provokes Urine, helps the Strangury,
procures women's Terms, helps chokings or stranglings in any part, caused by
pains in the Chest or Sides, and the decoction thereof does the same: the root
taken in wine is good against venomous bitings, the Plague, and expels
Wind. The decoction of the root with Liquorice, Raisins and Anniseeds, helps
such as are short winded, and have the Cough, opens the Breast, and
expectorates Phlegm. The green Herb is excellent to heal any inward Sore or
Wound, and to draw any Thorn or Splinter out of the Flesh. The green herb and
root bruised, takes away pains and prickings of the Head being applied
thereunto, and stays rheumes and distillations; and being boiled in white
Wine, and a drop thereof put into the Eye, takes away any Pin, Haw, or Web
therein, and helps dimness of the Sight. The decoction thereof in Wine is
profitable to assuage swelling of the Cods caused of cold or Wind. The
distilled water of the Herb and root made in May is singular good for all the
aforesaid purposes, and is good in time of the Plague; it kills Worms in the
Belly, and is good to wash green Wounds, or old Ulcers. The decoction of the
leares is good to gargle a sore mouth or Gums.

Vervain. Verbena.
COmmon Vervain has diverse leaves toward the bottom, of a middle size, deeply
gashed at the bottom, and the other part deeply dented about the edges, and
some only dented and cut all alike, somewhat like an Oak leaf, and of a dark
green color on the upper side, and grayish underneath: The stalk is square,
and branched into diverse parts, and rises abour half a yard high, having a
spike of flowers at the top, set on all sides thereof one above another, and
sometimes two or three together, being small, and gaping, of a whitish color,
intermixed with some blue and purple: The seed being small and round is
contained in somewhat long heads. The root is small and long, and of no use.

Names.] The Greeks call it (...), that is Herba Sacra, because they used it
about their Sacrifices to Jupiter. The common Latin name is Verbena; it is
called in English by some Holy Herb, Juno's Tears, and Pigeons Grass, because
it is supposed Pigeons eat thereof to clear their sight.

Place and Time.] It grows plentifully throughout the Land, by hedges and
ways sides; as in the way between Gravesend and Rochester: It flowers in July
and August.

Nature and Virtues.] Vervain is hot and dry, bitter and astringent; it opens
obstructions, cleanses and heals, and is said to be an Herb of Venus,
because it strengthens the Womb, and helps cold griefs thereof: The distilled
water cleanses and clears the sight, and strengthens the optic Nerves:
the herb stamped and applied with the white of an Egg, at night going to Bed,
will cure a blood-shotten Eye. The decoction of the herb helps infirmities of
the Reins and Lungs, the yellow Jaundies, Dropsy, Gout, and all inward pains
of the body, and is good against Tertian and Quartain Agues, Worms in the
Belly, the Plague, and biting of venomous Beasts; it strengthens the Liver and
Spleen, and corrects Diseases thereof, and also helps Diseases of the Stomach,
and Lungs, as Cough and shortness of Breath: and being drunk with some piony
seeds bruised is good for the Dropsy; it is effectual to cleanse the Reins and
bladder of those humors that engender the Stone; it heals Wounds both inward
and outward, and stays Bleedings; and being used with Honey, it heals old
Ulcers and Fistula's, and Ulcers in the Mouth; and used with Hogs Grease, it
helps swellings and pains in the secret parts; being applied to the Temples
with oil of Roses and Vinegar; it eases pains in the head, and is good for
those that are Frantic: the bruised leaves mixed with Vinegar, takes away
Morphew, Freckles, Fistula's, Inflammations, and other deformities of the skin,
and so does the distilled water, which is powerful in inward and outward
Discases, green Wounds, and corrdoing Sores: It is said to be used by Witches
to do mischief, and so may all other herbs if by wicked Astrologers used to
accomplish their wretched ends: But do not hereby think I count all Astrologers
wicked, though too many are.

Velvet Flower, or Flower Gentle. Amaranthus, sive Blitum majus.
FLower Gentle is a kind of Blite,

Names.] The Greeks call it (...), the Latins the same, because the red
Flowers thereof will endure a long time after they are gathered, without
decaying; its also called Flos Amoris, from its beautiful aspect, Fleur Amor,
Flower Gentle, flower Velure, and Velvet flower from its softness.

Places and Time.] It is a Garden flower altogether in England, having been
extracted both from the Eastern and Western Countries, and flourishes in
August and September.

Nature and Virtues.] Flower Gentle is cold and dry, of a binding faculty,
partaking of the friendly influence of Venus, and stops both the
extraordinary Flux of the Terms, and also of the Whites in women; the dried
flowers being beaten to powder and boiled in Wine, and Honey, and so drunk; and
being so used it is effectual in all Fluxes of Blood, continual pain in the
Belly, Scouring, spitting of Blood, and bleeding at the Nose: the same flower
boiled in Wine, and the decoction drunk, is profitable against venomous
bitings, the Stiatica Ruptures, and the distilling of Urine: the Fundament
being somented with the same decoction eases the pain of the Piles, restrains
their bleedings, and stays the often going to Stool, the herb being applied
to the place. The herb being boiled and applied helps any bruised place, and
being dried and laid amongst clothes, keeps them from Moths and Worms. The root
held in the Mouth, eases pains of the Teeth; and being stamped and make into
an Ointment with May Butter, it asswageth all Inflammations. The white kind
called Blitum majus, or white great Blites, stops the Whites in Women, and
the running of the Reins in Men; which faculties it speaks in its signature.

The Vine. Vitis.
OF Fines there are diverse kinds, which have also diverse properties: they are
manured in England, and well known both for their pleasant shade, and for their
fruit; yet many kinds seldom bring their fruit to perfection here.

Names.] The Vine Tree is called in Latin Vitis, the ripe Grapes dried in the
Sun, Vvae passae, and Passulae Solis; in English Raisins. The ripe juice
pressed out is called Vinum, Wine.

Nature and Virtues.] The Vine has differing properties, as I said before,
which may be caused by the Clymate where they grow, some are cold, some hot,
some sweet, some sour, some moist, others dry: the tender strings of the Vine
and the leaves do cool and bind; sour Grapes be cold and moist, and sweet
Grapes hot and moist; Raisins be hot in the first degree, and moist in the
second; being beaten with the stones they bind, but being stoned and eaten,
they open the Breast and Liver, and loosen the Belly. Vines, especially the
sweet ones are certainly under the Solar influence. A decoction made of
Raisins, with Liquorice, Maidenhair, and Coltsfoot, etc. helps Coughs, and
hoarseness of the Throat, opens the Liver, Spleen, and Bladder, and taken by
themselves they nourish much, concoct raw humors, and withstand putrefaction;
being mixed with Comminseed in powder and oil of white Lillies it asswages
swellings of the Cods. White Wine being drunk before meat, preserves the body,
and quickly pierces into the Bladder; but being drunk upon a full Stomach, it
causes stoppings, and drives down the meat undigested. Claret Wine does
nourish and warm the body, and is good for such as are phlegmatic. Red Wine
stops the Belly, and corrupts the Blood, and breeds the Stone; it is
useful only in Lasks, or the Bloody Flux. The juice of the green leaves and
tendrels of the Vine, or the tears called Vine Blood sweetened with Sugar and
drunk, is good for such as vomit and spit Blood, for the bloody Flux, and Women
with Child that vomit much, and to stay their unnatural Longings. Sack,
Muscadine, and such sweet Wines do comfort a cold weak Stomach; but all wines
taken immoderately, relaxeth the Sinews, causes the Palsy, Fevers, and
consumes the Liver and inward parts.

Violets. Viola.
BOth the Garden kinds and wild Violets are generally known.

Names.] Viola is the common Latin name for a Violet, and Herba Violaria:
There is also a kind called Viola tricolor, having three colors in the
flower; which in English is called Hartsease, Pansies, and three faces under a
hood. They begin to flower in March, and the beginning of April, and are then
in prime: The Pansies flower till the end of July.

Nature and Virtues.] Both Garden and wild kinds while they are fresh and
green are cold and moist, under the mild influence of Venus: the flowers are
accounted one of the chief cordial Flowers, and are much used in cooling
Cordials, and so is the syrrup; they are good to cool any heat, or distemper of
the body, either inward or outward, as inflammations of the Eyes, falling down
or pain of the Womb or Fundament, Imposthumes, and hot Swellings: To drink the
decoction of the leaves and flowers made in water and Wine, or to apply them
pultiswise to the grieved place; it also eases pains of the Head, which are
caused by want of sleep: The powder of the flowers drunk with water, is said to
help the Quinzy, and Falling Sickness in Children, if taken in the beginning of
the Disease. A dram of the dried flowers taken in Wine, or other drink, does
purge the Body of chollerick humors, and asswageth heat. The flowers of the
white Violets ripen and dissolve swellings. The seed resists poison of the
Scorpion. The green or dry herb and flowers are effectual to abate the heat and
sharpness of Urine, and hot Rheumes, to ease pains of the Back, Reins, and
Bladder, and to help the plurisie, and other diseases of the Lungs, and
hoarseness of the Throat. The syrrup is good for the Liver and Jaundies, and in
hot Agues to cool the heat, and quench thirst; being taken in some convenient
liquor, and a little juice or syrrup of Lemons added to it, or a few drops of
oil of Vitriol put therein, it does more powerfully cool the heat and quench
thirst: they are more cooling being made up with Sugar, and with Honey more
cleansing.

See further in Adam in Eden: written by Will. Coals.

Vipers Bugloss. Echium.
COmmon Vipers Bugloss has many long rough leaves lying upon the Ground,

Names.] It is called by most Authors in Latin Echium, and of some Buglossum
sylvestre Viperinum.

Place and Time.] It grows wild on Hills and dry Grounds almost every where;
that with white flowers about the Castle Walls at Jews in Sussex, and the
other about Rochester Castle, and elsewhere: they flower and seed in the Summer
Months.

Nature and Virtues.] Vipers Bugloss is cold and dry in temperature, a Solar
Herb: the roots and seeds are a good Cordial to comfort the Heart, and to
expel Sadness and Melancholy; it tempers the Blood, and mitigates hot sits of
Agues: The seed drunk in Wine procures Milk in Women's Breasts, eases pains in
the Loins, Back and Kidneys, and is a special remedy against the bitings of
Vipers, and venomous Beasts, and against poison and poisonous herbs,
Dioscorides says, that whosoever shall take of the herb or root before they be
bitten, shall not be hurt by the poison of any Serpent. There is a syrrup made
thereof after this manner: Take of the clarified juice of Vipers Bugloss four
pound, of the infusion of the flowers one pound, fine Sugar three pound, boil
it to a syrrup, which is effectual to comfort the Heart and expel sadness and
Melancholy. The distilled water made of the herb and flower when it is in its
full strength, is effectaul for all the griefs aforesaid inwardly or outwardly
applied.

Wall Flowers, or Winter Gillow-Flowers. Viola lutea.
BOth those which are planted in Gardens, and those which grow wild upon old
Walls are very well known.

Names.] They are called in Latin Viola lutea, in Spanish Violettas Amarillas,
and in French Violieres des murailles, from their growing on Walls.

Place and Time.] They grow wild, as I said, upon old stone Walls, mighty
plentiful upon the Castle Walls of Rochester, and the double kinds are planted
in Gardens: they flower very early in the Spring.

Nature and Virtues.] They are Lunar, and of temperature meanly hot, of thin
parts, and of a cleansing faculty: the yellow Wall Flowers, according to Galen,
are of most use in Physic; it cleanses the Blood, and opens obstructions of
the Liver and Reins, helps hardness and pains of the Mother and Spleen,
comforts and strengthens any part that is weak or out of joint, and stays
Inflammations and Swellings; it is a good remedy for the Gout, and Aches and
Pains in the Joints; it clears the Eyes from Films and Mistiness, and cleanses
Ulcers in the Mouth, or other parts, and provokes the Terms, and expells the
secondine, or dead Child; and a Conserve of the Flowers is good for the
Apoplexy and Palsy.

The Walnut Tree. Juglans.
THis Tree is very well known; the Greeks call it (...), Jovis glans; and the
Latins Juglans: they blossom early before the leaves shoot forth, and the
fruit is ripe in September.

Nature and Virtues.] It is a Solar Plant. Dodoneus says, the fresh Nuts are
cold and moist; but others say (and that is most likely) that they are drying
and heating; the Bark does dry and bind very much, and the leaves are much of
the same nature; the old Nuts are hot and dry in the second degree, and of
harder digestion then the fresh. The kernels of Walnuts do comfort the brain,
and resist poison; or being bruised with the quintissence of Wine, and applied
to the Crown of the Head, they comfort the Head and Brain. The peels being
taken off, they comfort the Stomach, and are said to kill broad Worms in the
Belly, being old they offend the Stomach, and increase Choler. King
Mithridates medicine against poison, was to take in the morning two dry
Walnuts, as many Figs, twenty leaves of Rue, and two or three corns of Salt
beaten and bruised together: the distilled water cools and resists the
Pestilence, two or three ounces of it being drunk. The water of the outer husks
being distilled in September is good against the Plague, to be used with a
little Vinegar. The juice thereof boiled with Honey is good for sore Mouths,
Heat, and Inflammations in the Mouth, Throat, and Stomach. The old kernels
mixed with Figs and Rue, cures old Ulcers of the Breast, and cold Imposthumes,
and are used to heal Wounds of the Sinews, Gangreens, and Carbuncles; and mixed
with Rue and Oil, they are good to be laid to the Quinzy. A piece of the green
husk put into a hollow tooth, eases the pain thereof: The leaves or green
husks used with Bores-grease, stays the hair from falling: The Oil of walnuts
made as Oil of Almonds is, makes the hands and face smooth, and takes away
scales, scurf, and black and blue marks that come of blows and bruises; and
being inwardly taken, it expells wind, and helps the Chollick: The young green
nuts before they be half ripe preserved whole in Sugar, do streng then weak
stomachs, and help defluxions thereon: The bark of the root (having the upper
skin scraped off) being made into powder, and tempered with vinegar, and then
strained two or three times till it be thin and clear, and drunk liberally,
cleanses the body very much, and cures the Ague: The kernels being burned and
taken in red wine, does stop Lasks and women's Courses: The Catkins taken before
they fall, and dried, and a dram thereof taken in powder in white wine, helps
those that are troubled with rising of the Mother.

Would, Weld, or Dyers Weed. Lutea.
IT grows with many long narrow bushing leaves,

Names.] It is called by Pliny, Lutea, and so by Virgil; of Mathiolus
Pseudostruthium; and of Tragus, Antirrhinum.

Place and Time.] It grows commonly by ways sides both in moist and dry
grounds, in corners of fields and by-lanes, and sometimes all over the fields:
It flowers about June.

Nature and Virtues.] The temperature of it is hot and dry in the third degree;
some people use to bruise the Herb, and lay it to Cuts and Wounds in the Hands
and Legs to heal them: It is commended against the bitings of venomous
Creatures, to be taken inwardly, and outwardly applied to the place: The Root (
as says Mathiolus) cuiteth and digesteth tough and raw Phlegm, rarifieth gross
humors, opens obstructions, and dissolveth hard tumors.

Wheat. Triticum.
THere are many kinds hereof, which are all well known for food, I shall
therefore set down the Medicinal Uses hereof.

Names.] It is called in Latin Triticum.

Nature and Virtues.] Wheat is hot in the first degree, and drying, as says
Pliny; but Gallen says it neither dries nor moisteneth evidently; Venus has
particular Influence over it, as says Culpeper: I rather believe it to be
Solar: Bread made of Wheat taken hot out of the oven, and applied to the
throat, helps kernels of the Kings Evil, and applied to the ear it is good to
draw out an Imposthume of the head; being stale and steeped in red Rosewater,
and applied to hot, red, inflamed, or blood-shot Eyes, it helps them: Wheat
flower mixed with the white of an Egg, Honey, and Turpentine, does draw,
cleanse and heal any Byle, Plaguesore, or foul Ulcers: The flower mixed with
the juice of Henbane, and applied to the Joints, stays the flux of humors
thereto: The Meal boiled in Vinegar helps shrinking of the Sinnews, and being
boiled with Vinegar and Honey, it helps Spots and Pimples in the Face: The
Corns of green Wheat being eaten hurt the stomach, and breed worms, but cures
the biting of a mad dog, being chewed and applied to it, (as says
Dioscorides.) The Bran of Wheat-meal being boiled in the decoction of a
Sheepshead, is good in Glisters to cleanse and open the body, and ease griping
pains of the Bowels: The decoction of the Bran is good to bathe such places as
are broken by a Rupture; and being boiled in Vinegar, and applied, it stays
Inflammations in swollen Breasts: It helps the bitings of venomous Creatures:
The said Bran steeped in Vinegar, and bound in a linen cloth, and rubbed on
the Morphew, Scurf, Scab, or Leprosy, will take them away, the body being also
well purged: Starch which is made of one kind of Wheat, moistened in Rosewater
and laid to the Cods, takes away their itching: Wafers made of the fine flower
being put into wate and drunk, stay the Lask and bloody Flux, and is good for
the Rupture in Children; and boiled with Roses, dry Figs and Jujubes, it makes
a good Lotion to wash sore mouths and throats: The same boiled in water unto a
thick Jelly, stays spitting of blood, being taken and boiled with Mynts, and
butter it, helps Hoarseness: Wheat-corns parched upon an iron pan, and eaten,
are good for those that are chilled with cold, (says Pliny.) The Oil pressed
from Wheat between two hot plates of iron or copper, and used warm, heals
Tetters and Ring-worms; and Mathiolus commends the same Oil to heal hollow
Ulcers and Chops in the Hands and Feet, and to make the skin smooth: The leaven
of Wheat-meal is very drawing, it rarifieth hard skin in the hands or feet,
warts and hard knots in the flesh, being applied with some salt.

Whitlow-Grass, or Nailwort. Paronychia.
THis is a very little Plant, after which come in their place small flat
pouches consisting of three films, which when they are ripe, the two outsides
fall away, the middle part remaining a long time after, which is like white
Satin, wherein is the seed, which is very small, and of a sharp taste: The
Root is only a few strings.

Names.] The Grecians call it (...), by the same name it is known in Latin; and
in English Nailwort, and Whitlow-grass.

Place and Time.] It grows upon brick and stone walls, and old tyled houses,
such as have good store of Moss upon them, and upon shadow and dry muddy
walls; flowers in January and February, and vanishes away at the approach of
hot weather.

Nature and Virtues,] No other properties have been found hereof, save only it
has been accounted very good for those Imposthumes in the Nails and Joints,
called Felons and Whitlows; from the essectual curing of which, it took its
Name.

The Willow Tree. Salix.
THe several kinds hereof are very well known, save only in their Physical
Uses.

Names.] Salix is the Latin Name; in English Sallow, Willow, Withy, and Osier.

Nature and Virtues.] The Plant is Lunar, of temperature cold and dry in the
second degree and astringent; both the leaves, bark and catkins are used to
stay bleeding of wounds, and at the mouth and nose, spitting of blood, and
other Fluxes, and to stay vomiting, and the desire thereunto, if the decoction
of them in wine be drunk: It also helps to stay thin, sharp, hot and salt
distillations from the head upon the Lungs, which cause a Consumption: The
leaves bruised with Pepper, and drunk in wine, do help the Wind Chollick: The
leaves or catkins (which we in Hampshire call Goss-chicken, I suppose because
they bud forth at such time when Geese have young) bruised and boiled in wine
and drunk often, does abate the heat of lust, and by much usage does extinguish
it either in man or woman: If you slit the bark of a Willow, so that you may
fit a vessel to it, to receive a water that will flow or issue from it, at the
time when it flowereth, the same water is good to clear the sight, and take
away redness of the Eyes, and Films that begin to grow over them, and to stay
Rheums that fall into them, to clear the face and skin from spots, and to
provoke Urine: The flowers boiled in white wine and drunk, dry up humors, and
so does the bark: the ashes of the bark mixed with Vinegar, takes away warts
and corns, and callous stesh in the hands and feet, or other parts: The
decoction of the bark and leares in wine is good to bathe the sinnews and
places pained with the Gout, to cleanse the head of scurf and dandriff: The
juice of the leaves and barks mingled with Rosewater, and heated in a
Pomegranate shell, is good to drop into the ears to help Deafness; a bathe made
of the decoction of the leaves and bark; does strengthen, restore, and nourish
withered and dead members.

Woad. Glastum.

IT grows up with many large long smooth,

Names,] Mannured Woad is called Glastum sativum, and wild Woad Glastum
silvestre, and Isatis, Glaslum Indicum, Indico, or Indian Woad.

Place and Time.] It is planted in Fields and Gardens for the benefit of it,
being used by Dsers; it yields three Crops a year, and a stinking scent after
it is gathered before it is made up for use: It flowers about June, if it be
suffered to run up to flower.

Nature and Virtues.] It is cold and dry, an astringent Saturnine Plant, so
drying and binding, that it is not fit to be used in any inward medicine; but
an Ointment made thereof stancheth bleeding, and a Plaster thereof takes away
hardness and swelling of the Spleen, being applied to the Region thereof: The
said Ointment is good to dry moist Ulcers, to take away fretting and corroding
humors, to cool Inflammations, St. Anthonies fire, and stay defluxions of
blood to any part of the body: It is affirmed to, be destructive to Bees, to
prevent which, if it grow near any Bees, the way is to set urine by them,
putting it in a vessel with slices of Cork therein, that thereon they may save
themselves from drowning.

Woodbynde, vide Honey-suckles.

Wormwood. Absynthium.
THere are three kinds usual with us, Common Wormwood, Sea Wormwood, and Roman
Wormwood.

Names.] Common Wormwood is called in Latin Absynthium, and the Sea Wormwood
Seryphium, and Santonicum.

Place and Time.] They are all well enough known; the Roman Wormwood is planted
in Gardens, the Sea Wormwood grows by the Seacoasts, and the common Wormwood
grows wild in all Countries in England, and generally near Smiths Forges:
They all flower about August.

Nature and Virtues.] Common Wormwood is hot in the second degree, and dry in
the third, of a cleansing, binding, and strengthening quality; it is subjected
to the Influence of Mars: It strengthens the Stomach like Aloes, drawing from
the Stomach and Intestines Choler and Phlegm, whether it be taken in powder or
decoction, or the juice by it self, or the infusion in wine or beer; but it
offends the head, causing drowsiness and sleepiness, and that drink called
Purle offends the head of some, causing it to ache. It is not good for hot
Stomachs, nor for those that are subject to the Consumption of the Lungs,
Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Lethargy, and continual Fevers: I have known many
receive much hurt by drinking Wormwood Beer and Ale, therefore it ought to be
used cautiously and moderately, and given to bodies fitting for it; and so
being discreetly used it purges Choler from the Reins and Bladder by Urine:
It is good in the Green Sickness, Jaundies, and Dropsy, helps Obstructions in
the Liver and Stomach, the Chollick and gripings of the Belly; it preserves the
Blood from putrefaction, resists Drunkenness, helps vomiting at Sea, and
kills Worms: It cleanses the Womb and Vterine parts, drives away the
Hiccough, procures a good appetite, expells Wind, helps Crudities, and
prevails in intermitting Agues and Obstructions of the Entrails: Vinegar
wherein Wormwood has been boiled helps a stinking breath proceeding from the
teeth or stomach, and provokes Women's Courses, and helps such as have hurt
themselves by eating Toadstools, being but steeped in vinegar and drunk;
Wormwoodwine is good for all the forementioned purposes, except for such as
have Fevers: Being outwardly applied it kills worms in the belly or stomach;
the juice with honey helps dim Eyes, and mixed with Nitre it helps the
Quinzie, being anointed therewith; and likewise mingled with Honey, and
anointed, it takes away black and blue spots in the skin: The decoction thereof
received by a Funnel, helps sore and running Ears, and the Toothache, and
the Temples bathed therewith it helps the Headache proceeding from a cold
cause; being bruised and applied with Rosewater to the stomach, it comforts
such as have been long sick: Being used with Figs, Vinegar, and Darnel-meal, it
helps hardness of the Spleen, and a hot sharp water running between the flesh
and the skin; if the skin be rubbed with the juice or oil of Wormwood, it
keeps away Fleas and Knats; and the Herb laid in Presses or Chests amongst
Clothes, preserves them from Moaths and Worms.

Xylo Aloe.
THis Indian Tree is called by the Grecians (...) and (...), in Latin also
Xylo aloes, and Lignum Aloes; In English, Wood of the Aloe-tree, Lign Ales, and
Wood Aloes: It grows in Malana and Sumatra, places in the East Indies very
dangerous, being match haunted by Tigers.

Temperature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the second, and according to
the judgment of some in the third degree, of subtle parts, a little astringent
and bitter: This wood is used as a main Ingredient in those Powders and
Electuries which are used to strengthen the heart and inward parts, to resist
saintings and cold diseases of the heart, and corroborate the spirits, for
which it is very essectual: It is also useful in the Apoplexy, Palsy,
Lethargy, and left Memory, by strengthening and drying the brain, and stopping
rheumatick defluxions which cause those Diseases: It helps faint Swetings,
Dysenteries, Lasks, and Pleurisies, expells Wind, dries up Crudities,
fortisies a weaks Stomach, and resists Putrefaction; for which it is used in
drivers Cordials and Antidotes: The Extract thereof it good for the
forementioned Diseases: It is used outwardly in sumigations to dry up Rheum,
and in Quilts for that purpose, it helps also cold diseases of the Womb: The
fumigation thereof is said also to provoke the Terms, it helps told diseases
of the Womb, and kills Worms by reason of its bitterness; as much of the
powder thereof as will lie upon a groat being taken three mornings together
either in broth or wine, is profitable in diseases of the Liver and Spleen,
opens their obstructions, and strengthens them.

Yarrow. Millefolium.
IT has many long leaves lying upon the ground, which are divided or finely
cut into many small parts, finer then Tansie, a little jagged about the edges,
amongst which rise up two stalks round and green, with such leaves, but smaller
and finer the nearer the tops, where stand many small white flowers upon a tuft
or umbel, each flower having five leaves, with a yellowish thrum in the middle,
somewhat strong in scent, but not unpleasant: The Root is deep and spreading,
consisting of many white fibers.

Names.] It is called in Latin Millefolium, and of some Supercilium Veneris;
in English Millefoil, Yarrow, Nosebleed, and thousand leaf.

Place and Time.] There are very few Pasture-grounds free from it: they flower
in July and August.

Nature and Virtues.] Yarrow is meanly cold and dry, and somewhat astringent,
an Herb of Venus, and is excellent good for Ulcers and Inflammations of the
Privities, and for inward Excoriations of the Yard, the juice being injected
with a Seringe. Mathiolus commends it against pissing of blood, an ounce of the
powder of the herb and flowers, with a dram of fine Bole-Armonick being taken
three days together fasting in a draught of milk: The same powder taken in
Comphrey or Plantain-water, is excellent to staqy inward bleadings; and stays
the bleeding of fresh wounds being strewed thereon, and being put into the
nostrils stays bleeding at rose: The juice put into the Eyes, clears them
of blood and redness; and the rox or green leaves chewed in the mouth, eases
the Tooth-aches The juice of the herb and flow, (...) taken in Goats milk, or
the distilled water, stays the running of the Reins in men, especially if
taken with a little powder of Corral, Amber, and Ivory: The decoction of Yarrow
in white wine being drunk, stops women's Courses, and the bloody Flux; and a
good quantity thereof boiled in water, and made into a bathe, and sat over,
performs the same: It is good to close up the stomachs of those in whom the
Retentive Faculty is so weak, that they disgorge or vomit up whatsoever they
eat: It is a good Medicine for an Ague, a draught thereof being drunk before
the fit come, and used for two or three fits together: An Ointment made of the
herb is good for green wounds, and also for Ulcers and Fistula's, especially
such as abound with moisture: The said Ointment or Oil is good to stay the
shedding of hair, the head bieng anointed therewith.

Yew Tree. Taxus.
THis Tree is well known for hard timber, and good to make strong Bows; the
Latin name thereof is Taxas: but it is not mentioned by me for any medicinal
Virtue that is in it, though the bark thereof is by some used instead of that
of Tamarisk, I say not how judiciously.

Nature and Virtues.] Yew is hot and dry in the third degree, and has such an
attractive quality, that if it be set in a place subject to poisonous vapors,
the very branches will draw and imbibe them: Hence it is conceived, that the
judicious in former times planted it in Churchyards on the West side, because
those places being fuller of putrefaction and gross oleaginous Vapors exhaled
out of the Graves by the setting Sun, and sometimes drawn into those Meteors
called Ignes fatui, diverse have been frighted, supposing some dead bodies to
walk; others have been blasted, etc. not that it is able to drive away Devils,
as some superstitious Monks have imagined; nor yet that it was ever used to
sprinkle Holy Water as some quarrel some Presbyters, altogether as ignorant of
natural Causes, as the signification of Emblems and useful Ornaments, have
fondly conceived. Wheresoever it grows, it is dangerous and deadly both to man
and beast, according to most Authors, how much more then if it be encompassed
with Graves, into which the lesser Roots will run and suck nourishment,
(poisonous man's flesh being the rankest poison that can be) yet a certain Vicar
unwilling to own the effects thereof upon his Cows would fain deny it to be so:
Other Creatures as Rabbits have been poisoned with it, and the very lying under
the shadow has been found hurtful: Yet the growing of it in a Churchyard is
useful, and therefore it ought not to be cut down upon what pitiful pretense
soever.

Zedoary. Zedoaria.
IT is a Root growing in the East Indies, called in Latin Zedoaria, growing
much like unto Ginger.

Nature and Virtues.] It is hot and dry in the second degree: It stops Lasks,
and is good against venomous bitings, stoppings and pains of the Stomach: It
stays vomiting, helps the Chollick, amends a stinking Breath, and is a very
good Antidote against the Plague, and other contagious Diseases.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table of all the Herbs and Plants contained in this Book, with
their several Latin Appellations, directed to their several Pages.
A.
ADders Tongue. Ophioglossum. Page 1 Adders-grass, idem. Page 1 Agrimony.
Eupatoria. Page 2 Water-Agrimony. Eupatorium. Page 3 Agarick. Agaricus, Larix.
Page 172 Ague tree. Sassafras. Page 295 Agnus castus, Chaste tree Page 4
Alecoast. Costus hortorum. Page 5 Alehoof. Hedera terrestris. Page 6 All-heal.
Panax Herculeum. Page 7 Alexanders. Hipposelinum. Page 8 Black Alder-tree.
Alnus nigra. Ibid. Alleluia. Page 311 Almond-tree. Amigdalum. Page 9 Alkekengi.
Page 10 Angelica. Page 11 Apple Tree. Pomus. Page 12 Apricock-tree. Malus
Armeniaca. Page 13 Archangel. Lamium. Ibid. Aron. Page 92 Arrach. Atriplex.
Page 14 Arsmart. Persicaria. Page 15 Alkanet. Fucus Herba. Page 16 Amara
dulcis. Page 41 Amaranthus. Page 346 Anemonies. Herba venti. Page 18
Artechokes. Cinara. Page 19 Assarabacca. Asarum. Page 20 Asparagus. Corruda.
Ibid. Ash-tree. Fraxinus. Page 21 Asp, or Poplar-tree. Populus. Page 22 Avens.
Garyophillata. Page 23 Assa foetida. Page 186
B.
BAlm. Melissa. Page 24 Barberry-tree. Oxyacantha. Page 25 Barley. Hordeum.
Page 26 Basil. Basilicum. Page 27 Bay Tree. Laurus. Page 28 Beans. Faba. Page
29 French Beans. Phaseolus. Page 30 Bears foot. Page 149, 150 Ladies Bedstraw.
Gallium. Page 31 Beets. Sicula. Page 33 Beech-tree. Fagus. Page 34
Water-Betony. Betonica Aquatica. Page 35 Wood-Betony. Betonica. Page 36
Bilberries. Vaccinia. Page 37 Bifoil. Bifolium. Page 38 Blue-bottle. Cyanus.
Page 39 Brank Vrsine. Acanthus. Ib. Bears breech, idem. Bindeweed. Campanella.
Page 40 Bitter-sweet. Amara dulcis. Page 41 Birch-tree. Betula, Page 43
Birth-wort. Aristolochia. Page 44 Bishops-weed. Ammi. Page 45 Bistort.
Bistorta. Page 46 Black-thorn. Spinus. Page 47 Blites. Blitus. Page 48
Bloodwort. Lapathum sanguineum. Page 102 Borrage. Borrago. Page 49
Bramble-bush. Rubus. Ibid. Bryony. Bryonia. Page 50 Brookelime. Becabunga. Page
51 Butchers-broom. Bruscus. Page 52 Broom, and Broomrape. Genista. Page 53
Becks. horn Plantain. Herba stella. Page 54 Bugle. Consolida media. Page 55
Bugloss. Buglossum. Page 56 Vipers Bugloss. Echium. Ibid. Burnet. Pimpinella.
Page 57 Burdock. Bardana. Ibid. Butter-burre. Petastites. Page 58 Baldmoney.
Gentiana. Page 128 Banck-cress. Exysimum. Page 147
C.
COst-mary. Page 5 Cabbage and Coleworts. Caulis. Page 58 Calamint. Calamintha.
Page 59 Calamus Aromaticus. Page 60 Camphire. Camphora. Ibid. Camock. Resta
bovis. Ibid. Cammomile. Cammomilla. Page 61 Cheese-runnet. Gallinus. Page 31
Capers. Caparis. Page 61 Cardamomes. Cardamomum. Page 62 Carrots. Pastinaca.
Ibid. Cassia Fistula. Page 63 Corn-flower. Cyanus. Page 39 Celandine.
Chelidonia. Ibid. Centory. Centaurium. Page 64 Ceterach. Asplenium. Page 318
Cherry-tree. Cerasus. Page 65 Chervil. Cerefolium. Ibid. Chesnut-tree.
Castanea. Page 66 Chickweed. Alsine. Page 67 Sweet Cicely. Myrrhis. Page 68
Cinquefoil. Pentaphyllum. Page 69 Cynamon. Cynamomum. Ib. Cyves. Porrum. Page
175 Clarey. Horminum. Page 70 Cleavers. Aparine. Ibid. Cloves. Caryophillus.
Page 71 Clove-Gilly-Flowers. Caryophilleus flos. Ibid. Clowns Woundwort.
Sideritis. Page 72 Columbines. Aqualina. Page 73 Coloquintida. Ibid.
Coltsfoot. Tussilago. Page 74 Comfrey. Consolida. Page 75 Caltrops. Tribulus
aquaticus. Page 76 Campions, wild Lychnis. Page 77 Carduus Benedictus. Page
155 Carawayes. Carui. Page 77 Earth Chest-nuts. Nucula terrestris. Page 78
Cich-pease, or Cicers. Cicer. Page 79 Cocks-head. Onobrychis. Page 80 Corral.
Corallium. Page 81 Coralwort. Dentaria. Page 104 Crabs claws. Sedum aquatile.
Page 83 Cucumbers. Cucumer. Page 84 Wild Cucumbers. Elaterium. Ibidem.
Saracens consound. Solidago. Page 85 Coriander. Coriandrum. Page 86 Cudweed.
Gnaphalium. Page 87 Cowslips. Arthriticae. Page 88 Cowslips of Jerusalem..
Pulmonalis. Ibid. Couch-grass. Gramen Caninum. Page 89 Watercresses.
Nasturtium aquaticum. Page 90 Sciatica Cresses. Iberis. Ib. Crosswort.
Cruciata. Page 91 Crowfoot. Ranunculus. Page 92 Cuckow-pintle. Arum. Ibid.
Cummin: Cuminum. Page 93 Curran-tree. Ribes. Page 94 Contra Yerva. Page 275
Cyress tree. Cupressis. Page 94 Cranes-bill. Geranium. Page 105
Canterbury-bells. Uvularia. Page 343 Cuckow-flowers. Cardamine. Page 184
D.
DAisies. Consolida minor Page 95 Dandelion ibid. Danewort. Ebulus. Page 98
Darnel. Lolium Page 96 Dates. Dactyli Page 96 Devils bit. Morsus Diaboli Page
97 Dead Nettles. Lamium Page 13 Dogwood. Alnus nigra Page 8 Dogs. Grass. Gramen
Caninum Page 89 Down or Cotton Thistle. Acanthium Page 98 Dwarf-Elder. Ebulus
ibid. Dill. Anethum. Page 100 Dittander. Lepidium. Page 101 Docks. Rumex. Page
102 Dodder. Epythimum. ibid. Dogtoothed violet Dentaria Page 104 Doves foot.
Geranium. Page 105 Ducks meat. Aquae lenticula Page 106 Dragons. Serpentaria
Page 106 Dropwort. Filipendula Page 107
E.
EArth nuts. Nucula terrestris. Page 78 Elder. Sambucus. Page 108 Elecampane
Enula Page 109 Elme-Tree. Ulnus Page 110 Endive. Endivia Page 111 Eringo.
Eringium ibid. Eyebright. Euphrasia Page 113
F.
FEarn. Filix Page 114 Feathersew. Parthenium ibid. Felwort. Gentiana. Page 128
Fennel. Feniculus Page 115 Fennel Giant. Ferulago Page 116 Sow Fennel.
Pencedanum Page 117 Flax. Linum Page 118 Fig Tree. Ficus ibid. Filberds. Nux
avellana Page 144 Fistich Nuts. Pistacia Page 119 Flea-wort. Psyllium Page 120
Flixweed. Thalictrum Page 121 Sweet Flag. Calamus aromaticus Page 60 Red
Fitchling. Onobrychis Page 80 Wall-fern. Osmunda Page 100 Figwort. Trachelium
Page 342 Fluellin. Veronica mas Page 122 Fox-gloves. Digitalis Page 124
Fumitory. Fumaria. Page 125 Furshush. Genista spinosa Page 126 Forget me not.
Thus terrae Page 134 Flower de Luce. Iris Page 237 Water-Flag. Iris palustris
lutea Page 238
G.
GAlanga Page 126 Garlic. Allium Page 127 Gentian. Gentiana Page 128
Germander. Chamaedris Page 129 Ginger. Zinziber Page 130 Golden rod. Aurea
virga ibid. Gooseberry-Bush. Grossularia Page 131 Gromel. Milium solis Page 132
Ground Ivy. Hedera terrestris Page 6 Gill-goe by ground ibid Goose-grass Page
70 Goss. Genista aculeata Page 126 Winter green. Pyrola Page 133 Ground Pine.
Chamepytis Page 134 Groundsel. Senecio Page 135 Guiacum Page 136 Stinking
Gladwin. Spatula foetida Page 137 Goutwort. Herba Gerrardi Page 138 Glasswort.
Salicornia Page 139 Goats Thorn, or Gum Dragon. Tragacantha Page 141
H.
HAyho. Hedera terrestris Page 6 Herb Gerrard Page 138 Harts-ease. Herba
trinitatis Page 142 Hart's-tongue. Scolopendria Page 143 Hazel Nut-Tree. Nux
tenuis Page 144 Hawk-weed. Hieracium Page 145 Haw-thorn. Spina Page 146
Hedge-mustard. Erisimum Page 147 Water-Hemp. Eupatorum Page 3 Herb William Page
45 Hellebore. Helleborus albus niger Page 148, 149 Hemlock. Cicuta Page 150
Hemp. Cannabis Page 151 Henbane. Jusquianus Page 152 Hogs fennel. Pencedanum
Page 117 Hagtaper. Thapsus Page 216 Hysop. Hysopus Page 153 Holly. Aquifolium
Page 154 Holy Thistle. Carduus Benedictus Page 155 Honey-suckles. Peryclymenum
Page 156 Hops. Lupulus Page 157 Hore-bound. Prassium Page 157 Horse-tail. Cauda
equina Page 158 Hounds-Tongue. Cynoglossum Page 159 Housleek. Barba Jovis Page
160 Hedge-Hysop. Gratiola Page 161 Herb-Robert. Geranium Robertianum Page 162
Herb True love. Herba paris Page 229
I.
ST. John's wort. Hypericum Page 163 Jack by the hedge Page 293 Ivy. Hedera.
Page 164 Juniper. Juniperus Page 165 Jujubes. Ziziphe Page 166 Jalop. Jalapium
Page 197 Jupiters staff. Candela Regia. Page 216
K.
KNeeholm. Bruscus Page 52 Kipper Nuts. Nuculus terrestris Page 79 Kidney
leaves. Phaseolus Page 30 Kidney wort, Cotyledon Page 167 Knot-grass, Poligonum
Page 168 Knapweed. Jacea nigra Page 169 St. Katharmes flower. Nigella Page 223
Kiss me twice before I rise. Idem. ibid.
L.
LAdies Mantle. Alchimilla Page 170 Larch Tree. Larix. Page 172 Lavender.
Lavendula ibid. Lavender Cotton. Chamaecyparissus Page 173 Spurge Laurel.
Laureola Page 174 Leeks. Porrum Page 175 Lettice. Lactuca ibid. Liquorice,
Liqueritia Page 176 Lemon Tree. Malus limonia Page 177 Lilly Convally. Lilium
convallium Page 178 Water Lilly. Nymphea Page 179 Liverwort. Lichen Page 180
Loosestrise. Lysimachia Page 181 Lovage. Levisticum Page 182 Lungwort.
Pulmonaria Page 183 Lupines. Lupinus ibid. Lady Smocks. Cardamine Page 184
White Lillies. Lillium Page 185 Laserwort. Laserpitium Page 186 Lignum Aloes.
V. Xylo aloe
M.
MAudlin. Costus hortorum Page 5 Maids hair. Gallium Page 31 White Maidenhair.
Ruta muraria Page 187 Dogs Mercury. Cynocrambe ibid. Madder. Rubia tinctorum
Page 188 Maidenhair. Capillus veneris Page 189 Mallows. Malva Page 192 Marsh
Mallows. Page 193 Maple Tree. Acer Page 193 Marjoram. Marjorana ib. Marigolds.
Calendula Page 194 Masterwort. Imperatoria Page 195 Mastick Tree. Lentiscus
Page 196 Mechoacan Page 197 Meadsweet. Regina prati Page 263 Medlar Tree.
Mespilus Page 197 Melilot. Corona regia Page 189 Mercury. Mercurialis Page 200,
201 Mill-Mountain. Linum sylvestre Page 202 Mynts. Mentha Page 203 Myrtles.
Myrtilli Page 205 Myrobalanes ibid. Misleto. Viscum Page 206 Money wort.
Nummularia Page 207 Moonwort. Lunaria Page 208 Moss. Muscus Page 209
Motherwort. Cardiaca Page 210 Mousear Page 212 Mugwort. Artemisia Page 213
Mulberries. Morus Page 215 Mulleyn. Candelaria Page 216 Mustard. Sinapis Page
218
N.
NEp or Catmint. Nepeta Page 219 Nettles. Urtica Page 220 Nigella Page 222
Nightshade. Solanum Page 223 Nutmegs. Nux moscata Page 225
O.
OPopanax Page ^7 Osmund royal. Osmanda Page 100 The Oak. Quercus Page 227
Oats. Avena Page 228 Olive Tree. Olea Sativa ib. One berry. Herba paris Page
229 Orchis, Vide Satyrion Onions, Cepa Page 231 Orange Tree. Aurantia Page 232
Orplue. Telephium Page 233 Oneblade. Unifolium Page 234 Orris. Irris alba Page
235
P.
PAnsies. Herba Trinitatis Page 142 Parsley. Apium hortense Page 239 Parsley
pert, or Break stone. Calculum frangens Page 240 Parsnip. Pastinaca Page 241
Cow-Parsnip. Spondylium ib. Pepperwort. Lepidium Page 101 Pignuts. Nucula
terrestris Page 78 Poplar Tree. Populus Page 22 Pockweed Page 136 Peach Tree.
Nux Persica Page 242 Pear Tree. Pyrus Page 243 Pease. Pisum Page 244 Pellitory
of Spain. Pyrethrum Page 245 Pellitory of the Wall. Herba muralis. ibid.
Pennyroyal. Palegium Regale Page 247 Piony. Pionia Page 248 Pepper. Piper Page
249 Periwinkle. Vinca pervinca. Page 250 St. Peter's wort. Page 251 Pimpernel.
Anagallis. Ibid. Pine tree. Pinus. Page 252 Plantain. Plantago. Page 253 Plum
tree. Prunus. Page 254 Poley-mountain. Polium montanum. Page 255 Polipody of
the oak. Polipodium. Ibid. Pome-citron tree. Malus Citria. Page 257 Pomegranate
tree. Malus granata. Page 258 Poplar, vide Aspen tree. Poppey. Papaver. Page
259 Purslain. Portulaca. Page 261 Potatoes. Battata. Page 262 Primrose.
Primulae veris. Page 263 Privet. Ligustrum. Ibid. Prickley bindeweed. Smilax
aspera. Page 294 Park leaves. Siciliana. Page 341
Q.
QVeen of the Meadows. Regina prati. Page 263 Quince tree. Malus Cydonia. Page
265
R.
RAdish. Raphanus. Page 266 Horseradish. Raphanus rusticus. Ibid. Ragwort.
Jacobea Senecio. Page 268 Rest-harrow, vide Camock. Red-rattle grass.
Pedicularis. Page 269 Rocket. Eruca. Page 270 Roses. Rosa. Page 271, 272, 273
Ros solis. Page 274 Root of Peru. Radix Peruviana. Page 275 Rosemary.
Rosmarinus. Ibid. Rhabarb. Rhabarbarum. Page 277 Meadow Rue. Ruta aquatica.
Page 279 Garden Rue. Ruta. Page 280 Rupturewort. Herniaria. Page 281 Rice.
Oriza. Page 283 Rye. Secale. Ibid.
S.
SAltwort. Salicornia. Page 139 Saffron. Crocus. Page 284 Sage. Salvia. Page
285 Wood-Sage. Salvia silvestris. Page 286 Burnet Saxifrage. Pimpinella
Saxifraga. Page 287 Sea-holly. Eringium. Page 111 Servingmens Joy. Ruta. Page
280 Service tree. Sorbus. Page 288 Solomon's Seal. Sigillum Solomonis. Ibid.
Sampire. Feniculum marinum Page 290 Saunders. Santalum Page 291 Sanicle.
Sanicula Page 292 Sauce alone. Alliaria Page 293 Savin. Savina Page 298
Saxifrage. Saxifragia ibid. Scabious. Scabiosa Page 301 Singreen. Barba Jovis
Page 160 Sloe-bush. Spinus Page 47 Snakeweed. Bistorta Page 46 Sarsaparilla
Page 294 Sassafras Page 295 Satyrion. Testiculus canis Page 296 Savory. Thymbra
Page 297 Scordium Page 303 Scurvy Grass. Cochlearia Page 304 Sebesten. Myxa
Page 305 Self-heal. Prunella Page 306 Sena Page 307 Shepherds purse. Bursa
Pastoris Page 308 Skirret. Sisarum Page 309 Smallage. Paludapium ibid. Sorrel.
Acetosa Page 310 Wood sorrel. Alleluia Page 311 Scabwort ibid. Sowthistles.
Sonchus Page 313 Sowbread. Cyclamen Page 314 Southernwood. Abrotanum mas Page
315 Speedwel. Vide Flu^llin Spignel. Meum Page 316 Spikenard. Nardus Indica
Page 317 Spinach. Spinachia Page 318 Spleenwort. Asplenium ib. Squinant.
Schaenanthos Page 319 Starwort. Bubonium Page 320 Stonecrop. Vermicularis Page
321 Strawberries. Fragraria Page 322 Succory. Cichorea Page 323 Sun-flower.
Vide Elecampane Sundew. Ros Solis Page 274 Silverweed. Argentina Page 328 Set
foil. Tormentilla Page 337
T.
TObacco. Nicotiana Page 324 Tamarinds. Tamarindus Page 325 Tamarisk. Tamarix
Page 326 Garden Tansie. Tanacetum Page 327 Wild Tansie. Argentina Page 328
Tarragon. Draco herba Page 329 Thistles. Carduus Page 330 Ladies Thistle.
Carduus Mariae Page 331 Twayblade. Bifolium Page 38 Thorowwax. Perfoliata Page
332 Teasel. Carduus fullonum Page 333 Tresoil. Trifolium Page 334 Time. Thymus
Page 325 Tormentil. Tormentilla Page 337 Turnsole. Heliotropium Page 338
Turpentine. Terebinthina Page 339 Turmerick. Curcuma Page 340 Turnips. Rapa
Page 340 Tutsan. Siciliana Page 341 Throatwort. Uvularia Page 342
V.
VEnus navelwort. Cotyledon Page 167 Valerian. Phu majus Page 343 Vervain.
Verbena Page 344 Velvet flower. Amaranthus Page 346 Vine. Vitis Page 347
Violets. Viola Page 348 Vipers Bugloss. Echium Page 350
W.
WAke Robin. Arum Page 92 Wall Rue. Ruta muraria Page 187 Water Germander.
Scordium Page 303 Wall Pepper. Vermicularis Page 321 Winter Gilliflowers. Viola
lutea Page 351 Walnut Tree. Juglans Page 352 Winter Cherries Page 10 Willow
herb. Lysimachia Page 181 Would, or Weld. Lutea Page 353 Wheat. Triticum Page
354 Whitlow-grass. Paronychia Page 355 Whynns. Genista spinosa Page 126 Whorts.
Vaccinia Page 37 Woodbinde. Peryclimenum Page 156 Wild Watercresses.
Cardamine Page 184 Wood sorrel. Lujula Page 312 Willow Tree. Salix Page 356
Woad. Glastum Page 357 Woodbinde. vide Honey-suckles Wormwood. Absynthium Page
358
X.
XYlo Aloe. Lignum Aloes Page 360
Y.
YArrow. Millefolium Page 361 Yew Tree. Taxus Page 362
Z.
ZEdoary. Zedoaria Page 363
A Table of Diseases, and the Plants appropriated to their Cures, directed to
the Pages wherein their Faculties are treated of.
A.
ABortion to hinder. Bistort 47 Medlars 198. Pome-Cieron seeds 257. Sage 285,
319 Abortion to cause. Dragons 107. Garlic 127, 129, 134. Gladwin 138, 140,
164, 189, 214, 236, 248, 298, 314 Adders, vide Venomous bitings. Afterbirth
Bay berries 28. Birth tree 43, 44, 51, 68, 70, 129, 134, 158, 185, 189, 195,
201, 214 Agues. Apples 12. Arch angel 14. Alkanet 18. Assarabacca. Barberries
26. Barley 26. Betony 37. Bilberries 38. Bitter sweet 43. Birthwort 44. Bucks
horn 37, 38, 43, 44 55, 56, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 67, 69, 71, 75, 82, 94, 97,
103, 111, 112, 125, 132, 148, 155, 162, 166, 167, 172, 180, 186, 206, 213, 218,
223, 250, 256, 265, 275, 295, 308, 310, 345, 350 Appetite. Barberries,
Bayberries 28, Capers 62, 131. Mustard 218, 242, 255, 261, 266, 326 Apostumes.
Pellitory 297 Apoplexy, Coloquintida 74. Lavender 173. Lilly Convally 178, 194,
199, 207, 245, 360 St Anthonies si^e. Crab claws 83. Fleawort 121, 132.
Hawkweed 146, 150, 160, 168, 169 Mirtles 205, 225, 247, 260, 262, 272, 298,
308, 324, 332, 333, 353 Almonds of the Throat, Vide Sore Throat. Astmah's.
Fennel Giant 116 Arteries. Groundsel 136 Aches. Bays 28 Camomil 61, 88, 137
hedge mustard 147, 192, 220 Spignel 317. Wild Tansie 328 Adust Choler.
Mirabolans 205, 206, 149, Schesten 306 Adust melancholy. Mirabolans 205, 206,
Tamarisk 327. Fumitory 125 Arm pits ill scent. Rocket 271 Thistles 330
Arteries. Burdock 58 Air corrupt. Marigolds 195. Oranges 232. Vide Infection
B.
BAlsome for Wounds. Adders Tongue 2 St. John's wort 163 Back to cool. Buckshorn
55 Back to strengthen 54. Comfrey 75. Knotgrass 169, 349, 350 Belly to loosen.
Bindeweed 41. Cherries 65, 214, 242, 244 Belly ache. Bay berries 28 Carrot
seeds 63, 137, 172, 182, 192, 194, 231, 347 Barrenness caused. Rue 280.
Ceterach 319 Barrenness helped. Potatoes 262 Rocket 271 Blood to stanch. Medlar
leaves 198. Money wort 208, 209. Services 288, 289, 345 Bladder. All heal 7.
Briony 51. Brocklime 52, 53, 54. Calamus 60, 104, 107, 118, 123, 126, 132, 146,
175, 187, 193, 197, 217, 226, 241, 253, 281, 285, 289. 300, 309, 315, 339 Blood
e^^^sed. Water Agrimony 3 Berrage 49 Brookelime 52 63. 67. 90 102. 113 116 167.
192. 214. 220 249 351. 359 Blood congealed. Bugle 55. Cranes bill 105. 126.
227. 336 Blood spitting to help. Avens 24 water Betony 36. 40. Cowslips of
Jerusalem 89. 95. 226. 227. 277. 348 Blisters. Beech leaves 34. Liverwort 131
Breast infirmities help^. Alccoast 5. Asparagus 21, Bay Berries 28. 36. 37. 44
65. 67. 68. 70. 74. 93. 109. 118. 141. 143. 153. 209. 218. 250. 262. 295. 334.
335. 344. 348 Women's Breasts swelled to help. 29. 67. 135. 136 148 150 162.
163. 170 171. 262 Bleedings inward. Ladics Bedstraw 23. Bistort 46. 131.
Mouscar 213. 345 Breath stinking. Balm 25. Myrtles 205. Oranges 232. Smallage
310. Zedoary 363 Breath short to help French beans 30 43 Calamint 59 Coltsfoot
74. 89. 93. 127. 129. 145. 166. 172. 197. 220. 223. 262. 275. 285. 308. 336
Belchings to help. Barberries 26. Burnet 57. Tormentil 338 Boyls Bean flower
29. Lovage 183 Brain strengthened. Dill 101 Eyebright 113. 130. 166. 178. 206.
285. 307 317 Swimmings of the Brain. Beets 34 43. 44 Bones out of joint.
Bittersweet 43 Botches. Carduus Benedictus 155. 157. 183. White Lillies 185.
Mullcyn 217 Bruises. Agrimony 3. Alkanet 18. Beans 29. Bittersweet 43. 45. 55.
Crosswort 91. 100. 114. 131. 163. 171. 186. Marshmallows 192. 218. 220. 240
332. 353 Burning. Ladies Bedstraw 32. Water Betony 35. 58. Marsh. Mallows 193.
Mulberry 215. 229. 231. 262 263 Bloody Fluxes, Bilberries 38. Sloes 47. 55. 57.
Flixweed 122. 123. 127. Madder 189. 227. 239. 264 270. 277. 348 Burstings.
Bifoil 39. Sage of Jerusalem 89. 91. 144. 174. 220. 234. 293. 332
C.
CAnker. Columbines 73. 273. 312. 333 Cancers Knotgrass 169. 209. 236. 239. 269
Catarrhe Dragons 107. Elder 109. 154. 201. 205. 317. 323. 338 Chollick. Avens
24 Bayberries 28. Bindeweed 40. 55. 60. 61. 63 64 70. 74. 78. 87. 93. 110. 114.
118. 127. 141. 146. 162. 164. 166. 174. 175. 176. 178. 204. 226 228. 230 236.
248. 250. 256. 264. 266. 267. 274. 280. 294. 300. 306. 307. 31^. 314 318. 326.
336. 253. 359 Choler to purge. Alocoast 5. Alehoof 6. Assarabacca 20.
Ariflolochia 44. Cassia 63. 64. 94. 95. 103. 108. 121. 125. 137. 157. 164. 167.
180. 183. 192. 193. 197. 204. 205. 258. 265. 273. 277 307. 322. 339. 359
Costiveness. Centory 64 Carbuncles. Savin 298. 350 Cods swelled to help. Agnus
Castus 4. Bean flower 29. 94. 95. 152. 168. 193. 205. 225. 230. 236. 336 344
Consumptions. Agrimony 3. Bayberries 28. 37. Bugloss 56. 68. 96. 120. 127. 166.
172. 176. 245. 253. 256. 258. 260 275. 276. 285. 296. 339. 356 Conception 63.
Spleenwort 319. 127. 295 Convulsions. Betony 37. 44 Centory 65. 88, 107, 129.
137. 143. 146. 150. 156. 166. 173. 174. 192. 211. 235. 238. 300. 320 Colds.
Betony 37. Nep. 220. 228 Chincough. Moneywort 208. 210 Coughs. Betony 37. 38.
Calamint 59, 65, 67, 69, 74, 75, 78, 89, 93, 94, 95, 96, 110, 117, 119, 123,
127, 130, 137, 141. 144, 145, 151, 154, 160, 166, 167, 176, 186, 187, 192, 197,
205, 212, 216, 217, 220, 228, 232, 236, 238, 240. 243, 245, 246, 250, 253, 256,
260, 266, 271, 275, 276, 280, 285, 294, 302, 304. 306, 315, 335, 339, 340, 344,
345, 348. Crude humors, Avens. 24 Chillblains. Kidneywort. 168 Cramps.
Bayberries. 28. Bearsbreech 40. Calamint 59, 60, 65. Corral 82, 88, 107, 109,
110, 117, 129, 134, 137, 142, 146. 150 156. 166. 173, 174. 192. 211. 214. 216,
217. 220. 235. 238. 248. 251. 277. 285. 300. 304. 315. 320. 325. 328. 331. 336.
Courses. vide Terms. Corns. Fennel giant. 116. Houseleek. 160
D.
DAndriff. Elm. 110. Mallows 193. Scabious 303. Willow 357. Deafness. Betony
36. 67, Hogfennel 117. 253. Sow-thistles 313. 357. Dead Birth. Alkanet. 17.
Briony 51. Brooklime 52. 68. Groundpine 134. 140, 164 184 196. 352 Delivery
easy. Basil 28. Bayberries 28. Betony 37. 44 82. 102. 123. 313. Digestion to
help. Avens, Balm 24, 25. Betony 37. 78. 130. 182 184. 196 204 262. 272 339.
Dreams terrible. Polipody 257. Drowsy evil. Mustard 218 Dropsy. Agnus Castus
4. Assarabacca 20. Ashc 22 Betony 37. Briony 51 Brooklime 52, 53, 54, 61.
Centory 65. 74 80. 85. 95 99. 105. 107, 108. 115 117 134, 137. 140. 146. 153.
162. 166. 168. 174. 185, 186. 189. 196. 206. 210 213 226. 226, 237 239. 248.
266 320. 323. 325. 327. 331. 359. Drunkenness. Wormwood 359. Mad Dogs. Balm 25.
Danewort. 99. 117. 129. 158, 159. 188, 193, 204 Dumb. Piony 249. Rosemary 276
Dugs greatness to abate. Hemlock 151.
E.
EArworms. Fennel 116. 151. Ears pained. Poplar 23. Beets 33. 112. 117. 121.
169. 201. 204 207. 225. 240. 272. 338. 359 Noise in the ears. Beets 33.
Marjoram 194. Eyes sight to help. Alehoof 6. Assarabacca 20 Wood Betony 37. 59.
63 70 83. 93. 107. 113. 116. 129. 130. 141 145. 182, 183. 195. 250 252, 253.
264. 269. 272 276. 278. 280. 292. 303. 318. 334, 335. 344. 351. 359. 361. Eyes
inflamed to cure. Anemonies 19. Borrage 49 55. 68 84. 109. 113. 141. 152. 169.
178. 193. 210. 262. 315. 323. 333. 338. 349. Eye lids. Barley 27, 113, 126.
142. 278. Eyes watery to help. Beans 30. Sloes 48, 92, 113, 122, 130, 136 160.
196. 201. 263. 323. 326. 338.
F.
FAce freckled. Agnus Castue 4. Avens 24. Bean-water 29 Briony 51, 54, 180,
183, 184, 185, 189, 228, 219, 223, 246, 247, 271, 287, 289, 302, 329, 345, 353.
Facered. Lillies 185, 246, 247, 333, 353. Ferons. Beans 29. Bittersweet 42
Fevers. Barley 26 Cassia 63, 227 194, 195, 272, 273, 284, 295, 300, 306, 312,
326, 337, 359. Fluxes helped. Agrimony 3. Avens 24. Sloes 48. Bramble 50. 67.
69. 82. 183. 209, 213, 216, 217 251, 258, 260, 261, 272, 276, 282, 283, 293,
296. Fever Hectic. Marigolds 194. Barley 26. Cassia 63. 227, 258, 296 Fever
old and putrid. Borage 49; Marigolds 194, 227, 276, 284. Fistula's. 225, 236,
221, 246, 247, 298, 308, 345, 362. Falling sickness. Asparagus 21. Poplar 23.
Betony 37. 51 61. 65. 69 82. 166. 193. 239. 196 207. 210. 218. 242. 245. 248.
249. 253. 261. 349. Feet surbated. Ladies bedstraw. 32 Frenzy. Agnus Castus 5.
Wood betony 37. Poppy 260, 261. Fleghm. Alecost 5. Anemonies 19. Bindeweed 41.
Birthwort 44. 61. Capers 61. 211. 221 261. 265. 277. 297. 306. 310. 328. 339
Fleas and Flies, vide Noisome creatures to drive away. Fundament. Beech 34.
206. 216. 217, 220 French Pox. Cassia 63. Dodder 103. 109 125. 136. 155. 197.
273. 286. 294. 295. 302. 303. 316. 338
G.
GAlls infirmities helped. Alehoof 6. Bittersweet 42. 59. 64. 86. 90. 103. 111.
116. 189. 249. 285. 323. 340 Gangreens, Darnel 96. Nettles 221. 352 Giddiness,
Woodbetony 37. 149. 173. 220 Gout, Alehoof 6. Balm 25. Burdock 58 76 99. 121.
134. 138. 148. 166. 173. 232 235. 196. 197 217. 219. 222. 248. 253. 260. 278.
281. 291. 294. 304. 324. 336. 351 Gonorihea. Artechokes 19. Barley 26. 59.
Purslain 261. 272. 277. 282. 341. 347 Green Sickness. Assarabacca 20. Broom 54.
277. 310. 340. 359. Gravel. Cherry Gum 65. 77. 102. 104. 105. 120 132. 136 157
226. 196. 204. 221. 241. 246. 282. 290. 311 Gripings in the Guts. Sloes 47.
141. 147 192. 229. 234. 236. 249. 317 Gums. Bugle 55, 76, 204, 229, 248, 255,
272
H.
HAir falling to hinder. Beets 34, 78. Laserwort 186, 247, 266, 362 Hair to
take away. Bindeweed 41 Hearing to help. Vide Deafness. Heads Scald. Ash 22.
Beets 34. Beech mast 35. 125. 127 Humors gross purged. Water Agrimony 3, 62
Hemorrhoides. Water Betony 36. Camock 61 Comfrey 75, 109, 121, 139, 160, 168.
205, 232, 238, 252, 314. Hiccough Fennel 116, 156, 210, 226, 277, 309, 319
Heart to comfort. Avens 24. Vipers Bugloss 56. Burnet 57 70, 71, 127, 177, 178,
180, 195 205, (...), 21^, 226, 232, 257, 272, 331 Headache. Basil 28 Beets 34.
Wood Betony 37, 48, 127, 153, 172, 176, 196, 197, 199, 210, 223, 235, 242, 252,
260, 276, 292, 307, 324, 325 Hip-gout, Vide Sciatica. Hypocondriack passions.
Dodder 103. Melilot 199 Hoarseness. Cabbage 59. Cherries 65, 69, 96, 109, 121,
141, 145, 147, 253
I.
JAundies Yellow. Alehoof 6. Alkanet 17. Assarabacca 20, Ash 22. Barberries 26
42, 59 61. Camomile 61, 64, 67, 69. 71, 80, 86, 102, 103, 107, 109, 112, 125,
130, 135, 157, 180, 201. 239, 249. 254, 255, 276, 282, 285, 310, 323, 326, 331,
359 Jaundies Black. Bittersweet 42. Broom 54, 67, 71, 112, 125 135, 144, 147,
173, 195, 213, 214, 226, 244, 255, 276, 285, 311, 326, 331. 359 Joints. Balm
25, 65. Dittander 102, 121, 129, 135, 136, 137, 173, 218, 267, 285, 294, 328,
336, 329 Itch. Alehoof 7. Becch 34. Water Betony 35. Celandine 64, 103, 110,
125, 126, 138, 148, 174, 221, 228, 248, 311 Inflammations. Poplar 23. Beets 34.
Coltsfoot 75, 83, 121, 146, 150, 152, 168, 169. 178, 179, 180, 199, 201, 210,
225, 230. 234, 247, 260. 297, 307, 311, 322, 347, 358 Imposthumes. Barley 27.
Diel 101, 112, 121, 185, 204, 20^, 228, 232, (...) 253, 302, 31^ 319, (...)
Illiack passions. Vide Chollick. Infections 165, 177, 223, 252, 257, 258, 279,
280, 284, 302, 334, 335, 344, 352, 360, 363
K.
KIdneys infirmities. Agrimony 3. Alecoast 5. Alkanet 18. 30. 54 Buckshorn 55,
56 63 77, 83 103. 131, 132, 133. 168. 174. 177. 187. 198. 204. 227 235 242,
249. 252. 277. 288, 293. 300, 309. 315. 350 Kernels. Eringo 112 136, 278 Kings
Evil. Barley, Briony 51. Broom 54 Cleavers 71. 77 81 109. 129. 144. 182. 197.
238. 250. 269, 278 298 Kibes. Beets 34. Burdock 58. Kidneywort 168, Onions 232.
Turnips 340. Knobs. Bludeweed 41. 81. 355 Knees pains. Broom 54. 59
L.
LAsk. Alkanet 18. Bilberries 38. Sloes 47. Hemp 151. 159 164. 208. 215, 216.
226. 273. 277. 283. 309 331. 348. 353 Lameness. Elder 109 Looseness. Sloes 47.
Cinnamon 70. 97. Dill 101. 264. 360 363 Lethargy. Agnus Castus 5. Anemonies 19.
Basil 28. 218 221. 241. 245. 248. 297. 336. 359. 360 Leprosy. Alkinet 18.
Anemonies 19 Ash 28. 51. 96. 103. 110, 126. 218. 221. 228. 248. 255. 302. 323.
355 Lice. Alecost 6. Meadow Rue 279. Henhane 153. Tobacco 324, 325 Leanness to
procure. Ash 22 Liver obstructed. Agrimony 3. Assarabacca 20 Beets 34.
Bittersweet 42. 59 62 64. 102. 116. 125 134 144. 193. 197. 214. 226 249 266.
278 282. 290. 293. 331. 348 Liver to strengthen. Agrimony 3. Alecost 5. 30
Betony 37. Calamus Aromat 60 94. 97. 102, 103 110. 112. 153, 157, 193, 197, 204
205, 234, 236, 246, 254 257, 258 267, 272, 276, 277, 305, 517, 319. 322, 349
Liver to cool Barberries 26. Cassia 63, 95, 102, Kidneywort 168, 178, 180, 192,
227, 261, 278, 291, 326, 331, 336 Liver-grown. Penntroyal 248 Legs swelled.
Cabbage 59, Woodsage 287 Loins. vide Back. Lungs ulcerated. Alehoof 6.
Billberries 38, Burdock 58, 68, 182, 205, 208, 234, 275, 306 Lungs infirmities.
Wood Betony 37, 65, 75, 89, 93, 105, 107, 109, 110, 119, 138, 141, 143, 153
156, 167, 176, 182, 183, 192, 193, 196, 201, 216, 221, 236, 248, 253 257, 268,
293, 295, 300, 302, 303 319, 336, 339, 345, 349, 359 Lust to stir up.
Ariechokes 19. Asparagus 21, French Beans 30, 63, 87, 101, 112, 175, 218, 252,
262, 271, 296, 309, 317 Lust to abate. Hawkweed 146 Hemlock 150, Hemp 151,
Lettice 176, Water Lilly 179, Rue 280,
M.
MAtrix 34. Beech 46 47. Burdock 58, 99, 151, 180, 185, 258, 328, 336 Megrim.
Wood Betony 37 Madness. Dodder 103. Elder 109, 148, 149, 253 Memory to help.
Assarabacca 20, 123, Sweet Marjoram 193, Melilot 199, 226, 284, 360 Members
benumbed. Agnus Castus 4 Measles. Alkanet 18, Bistort 47 109, Marigolds 194
Melancholy. Basil 28, Borage 49, 56, 62, 63, 82, 103, 109, 115 148, 149, 206,
211, 241, 256, 257 273, 285, 307, 319, 326, 327, 336 Milk to increase in
Nurses. Anemonies 19, Vipers Bugloss 56, 101, 223, 251, 313, 331 Milk to dry
up. Asp 23 Basil 27 Milt, vide Spleen Mother helped. Agnus Castus 4. Asparagus
21, 37, 51, 58, 78, 97, 108, 115, 157, 173, 186, 211, 214, 226, 241, 280, 284,
294, 297, 300, 317, 325, 353 Mouth sore. Birch tree 44. Bramble 50, 55, 109,
176, 177, 204, 215, 219, 227, 253, 258, 264, 269, 285, 288, 293, 297 307, 310,
323, 342, 352 Morphew. Briony 51, Celandine 64, 74, 84, 96, 102, 107, 110, 119,
123, 126, 127, 146, 189, 221, 289, 323, 345 Mumps 87 Murrain, Motherwort 202
Muscles to strengthen. Pepper 250
N.
NOse sore. 45 46. Snakeweed 93, Orris 235, 257. Nails sore. Pomegranate 258
Nose bleeding Water Betony 36. 37, 55, 221, 244, 288, 3^6, 361. Neck drawn
awry. Mustard 218 Crick in the neck. 262. Numness. Bears breech 40 Pine 253.
Nipples sore. Self-heal 307 Nerves. Birthwort 44. Elder 109. 250. 269. 285
Nightmare 249 Nodes. Medick-fitch 81. Woodsage 286 Navels of children sticking
out Thorow-wax 332 Noisome creatures to drive away Glasswort 140. Lavender
Cotton 174. Nigella 223. Poley mountain, Starwort 321. wormwood 359, 360
O.
OBstructions. Elder 109. 125. 127. Hops 157. Maple 193, 217. 221. 281, 282.
290. 295. 340. 359. 361
P.
Palsy. Cowslips 88. 95. 117 130 134 156 164. 166, 194, 206 219 253. 285. 287.
297. 300. 318 328. 348. 360 Pestilence, vide Plague and Infection. Poisons.
Avens 24. Balm 25. Bayberries 28. Vipers Bugloss 56 62, 63. 98. 119. 166. 172.
196. 229. 234. 255. 257. 280. 284. 325. 351. Pissing blood. Agrimony 3. Betony
37. 77. 79 Pissing a bed. Bistort 47, 48. 96 Plague, Alehoof 6. Avens 24. Balm
25. 47. 58 71. 92. 98. 107. 109 119, 120. 129. 155. 165 177 223. 252. 279. 285.
298. 323. 334 337 343. 344, 345. 352. 363 Pox small. Alkanet 18. Bistort 47.
109. 194, 271, 337 Privy parts inflamed helped. Agnus Castus 4. Yarrow 361. vide
Cods swelled Ulcerated privities. Alehoof 7. Bramble 50, Bugle 55. 95. 185.
293. 307. 223. 342. 361 Polipus. Birthwort 45. 93. 95. 107, 186. 221 Piles.
Water Betony 36 Restharrow 61. 68. 75, 108. 121, 160. 206. 215. 217. 220. 238.
347. Prisick. Bears breech 40. 68. 109 154. 172. 176 213, 245. 256 276 Pushes.
Poplar 23. 34, 35. Broom 54, 59. 68. 111. 316. 324. 334. 354 Purples. Snakewood
47 Pleurisy. Chervil 66. Cummin 94. 186. 193. 221 260 349 360 Priapisme. Water
Lilly 180
Q.
QUinzy, Columbins 73. cinquefoile 69. Figs 119. Hysop 153 Loose-strife 182.
Lovage 183 Violets 349. 352. 359 Qualms, vide. Heart and stomach
R.
RUnning of the Reins, Bistort 47. 55 58. Camphire 60. 169. 173 177. 179. 272.
277. 282. 291 293, 319. 326. 339. 341. 362. Reins pained to help, Asparagus 21.
50. 54, 56 Cassia 63 65. 77. 83. 90. 115. 119, 120 134. 176, 177. 192. 219.
246. 317. 319. 328. 336. 347. 349. 351 Rickets, Alecoast 6. Capers 62. Fern
114. Melilot 199 Reds to stop. Red Blites 48. 189. Ringworms. Alkanet 18.
Celandine 64. Horse-tail 159. 181. 201. 255. 281. 298 302. 311 355 Rheums,
Briony 51 Bucks-born 55 Camock 6^, 74 82 87 121 130 137 154 160 167 194 196 210
223 261 263 269 272 275 282 291 295 309 317 338 Ruptures. Avens 24 Bifoil 39
Bears breech 40 43. 44 59 61 73 89 91 95 105 106 110 118 159 166 171 187 192
213 282 329 333 355
S.
SCabs. Alehoof 7 Ash 22 74 Caraway 78 102 123 125, 126 137, 138 158 166 177
184 193 201 219 227 278 302 Scaldings. Danewort 99 Elm 110 Hounds-tongue 159
229 232 Sciatica. Alehoof 6 Water Betony 35. Broom 54 91 95 96 100 109 117 137,
138 168 186 189 235 267 269 277 280 297 342 347 Secondine, vide After birth
Seed to increase. Artechokes 19 Burdocks 58 79 112 Scowring, vide Flux and Lask
Spleen. Agnus Castus 4 Alecost 5 Alehoof 6 Alkanet 18 Assarabacca 20 Ash 22
Bayberries 28 34 44, 45 51 61, 62 64 82 90 97 103 110 112 114 116, 117 123 125
126 146 149 156 183 199 207 238 247, 248 255, 256 267 276 290 294 310 314, 315
317 323 325 331 335 351 358 Sides pained. Ash 22 Sloes 47 Calamus Aromaticus
60, 61, 62 66 Marsh Mallows 193 218 221 227 236 280 336 339 343 Spasme. 98 218
Scurvy. Brooklime 52, 53 Elder 109 Mechoacan 197 Horseradish 267 334 Splinters
to draw out, vide Thorns Shrew Mouse biting 127 271 Shingles. Shepherds parse
309 333, 334. Sinews, Balm 25. 58. Camomil 61 88 114 164 174 185 194 214 222
265 269 276 285 328 352 354 Smelling lost to restore, Beets 33. Nigella 223
Sneezing to procure, Bazil 28. Clary 70 Sleep to cause, Chervil 66. Dill 101,
Endive 111, 146, Water Lilly 179, 260, 261 Snakes stinging, Vide Venomous
bitings Scurffs, Elm 110 125 126 127 186 192 193 355 Stomach to heat. Cynomon
70. Marjoram 194. Masterwort 196, 218. Mace. 226. 232, 257. 267. 319. 330. 336.
345. 348 Stomach to cool. Barley 26. Bilberries 38. Cassia 63. Golden rod 131,
144. 146. 168, 169. 176. 306. 322. 326 Stomach to strengthen. Alecoast 6.
Artechokes 19, Avens 24 Balm 25. Betony 37, 60. Cardamomes 62. 66. 82. 102 109
111. 115. 116. 120. 122. 125. 127. 130. 144. 184 204. 205. 208. 244. 265. 272
291. 303. 317. 363 Stitches. Betony 37. Burdock 58. Commyn 94 118, 227, 228.
256. 286, 330 Strangury. Asparagus 21, Brooklime. 52 Butchers broom 53, 65. 82
95 107 134 178 204 244 267 282 288 300 309 313 319 336 343 Stone to expel,
Asparagus 21 Ash 22 29 30 32 44 50 55 61 65 66 77 82 88 90 109 112 116 131 132
146 187 196 198 221 243 247 274 290 294 309 311 317 330 339 Sunburning, Water
Betony 35, Celandine 64 84 88 107 156 329 Stones swelled, Cypress tree 95, 148
Surfeits, Barley 27 Poppy 260 261 Speech lost to restore, Lavender 173 Piony
249 276 300 Sores. Water Betony 35 36. Bugle 55 59 105 107 111 119 123 129 131
169 171 196 214 221 254 255 278 281 333 338 345 Staggers, Ragwort 269 Swoonings
to help, Balm 25. Borrage 49. Clove Gilliflowers 72 73 109 331 Sweat to
procure. Camomile 61. Centory 64 275 Sweating immoderate to restrain. Quinces
265 266 Swellings. Camomile 61. Clary 70 75 83 110 111 184 201 230 254 286 297
315 320 335 336 349
T.
TEeth. Aristolochia 44 61 64 69 82 105 109 110 119 131 150 164 173 186 195 216
217 228 230 245 252 259 260 272 326 329 330 331 347 359 361 Teeth loose to
fasten. Barberries 26 Terms to provoke. Alecoast 5. Alehoof 6. Anemonies 19.
Balm 25. Bafil 28 37 43 45 52 53 57 58 59 62 63 65 66 70 90 93 95 102 107 108
110 126 129 136 Terms to stop. Barberries 26 Beech leaves 34. Bistort 47 50 75
83 88 96 97 123 133 144 Tetters. Alkanet 18. Celandine 64. Caraway 76 Testicles
swelled. Hedge mustard 148. Vide Stones and Cods swelled. Sore Throats. Alehoof
7. Sloes 48 Bramble 50. 65. 97 112. 118. 131 Thorns to draw out. Chervil 66
Clary 112. 118, 147. 158 Tumors. Barley 27. Clary 70. 95 118. 150. 199. 216,
244 311. 312.
V.
VErtigo, Coloquintida 74, Galanga 127 Venom, Alehoof 6, Clovegilflowers 72
338 Venomous bitings 318 342 351 Venomous Beasts. Agnus Castus 4, Balm 25,
Bayberries 28, Beets 33 45 46 50 51 54 56 58 63 77 78 80 95 98 107 108 112
Venery to provoke, Artechokes 119, Clary 70 90 96 106 127 Venery to abate, Vide
Lust. Ulcers. Agrimony 3. Alehoof 7. Alkanet 18. Anemonies 19 34 44 45. Bugle
55. 60. 61 72, 75. 80, 84. 86. 88. 93 105, 106, 111. 114, 118, 120, 123, 129,
130, 131, 133, 140, Vomiting to stay. Alecoast 6. Ash 22. Bilberries 38.
Snakeweed 46. 90. 97. 161 171 183. 196. 204. 206. Vomiting to cause Assarabacca
20, Bindeweed 41. White Hellebore 148. 174. 261. 322 Urine to provoke. Agnus
Castus 4. Alecoast 5. Alehoof 6. Sparagus 21. Ash 22. Basil 28. Bayberries 28.
30. 33 40. 45. 51 52. 53. 54. 58. 59. 63. 66, 77 78 79 80. 82. 84 87 90. 102.
103. 110. 112. 114. Urine to cool. Barley 27 Lettice 176. Liquorice 177. 179.
306 322
W.
Watery humors. anemonies 19 Wasps Vide Noisome Creatures and venomous Beasts.
Warts. Poplar 23. Mercury 201 217. 314 333 339, Weariness. Ladies Bedstraw 32.
37. Gentian 210. 229 Wheesing Liquorice 177. Lungwort 183. 176. 177. 221. 247.
275 Whitlows. Nailwort 356 Wind. Ash 22. Bayberries 28 44 45. Cardamomes 62 63
101 103 107 112 116 132 146 151 197 214 220 221 223 226 228 230 232 236 240 246
276 280 286 295 310 320 327 336 337 342 356 359 360 Wheals. Poplar 23, Beets 34
35 59, fumitory 126, 142 177, 313, 317 Green Wounds, Adders tongue 2, Alkanet
18, Avens 24 43 71 72 88 106 114 118 123 129 133 134 163 168 171 181 208 209
227 234 236 282 287 288 293 304 308 312 332 337 339 341 344 345 354 362 Wounds
inward, Avens 24, Bugle 55 75 86 100 142 144. 208 213 302 332 341 Wounds
outward, Avens 24, Bugle 55 144 213, see green wounds Womb, birch tree 43.
galanga 127 Worms to kill, Alecoast 6, Barberries 26, Betony 37 41 51 64 87 90
109 122 129 130 151 175 177 216 258 261 267 274. 276 282 298 310 360 Whites,
Blitum alba 48, Burnet 57, Burdock 58, Camphire 60 69 75 158 171 173 179 208
209 213 264 272 276 289 291 326 335 Wens, Cleavers 71. Melilot 199 333 339
Y.
YArd, Water Lilly 180, Althea 192 199 258 334 361
FINIS.

