A New Martyrology: OR, THE Bloody Assizes: NOW Exactly Methodized in one
Volume.

Comprehending A Complete History of the Lives, Actions, Trials, Sufferings,
Dying Speeches, Letters, and Prayers of all those Eminent Protestants, Who fell
in the West of England, and elsewhere, From the Year 1678, to this present time.

With the Pictures of the most Eminent of them, in Copper Plates.

To this Treatise is added the Life and Death of George L. Geffreys.

The Fourth Edition. Containing several Speeches, Letters, Elegies, and New
Discoveries (sent out of the WEST) never Printed before; so that the whole Work
is now Complete.

With an Alphabetical Table annexed to it

Written by THOMAS PITTS Gent.

LONDON, Printed (according to the Original Copies) for John Danton at the
Raven in the Poultrey. 1693.

To the Memory of those Worthy Protestants who Suffered in the West and
elsewhere, from the Year 1678 to 1689.
SInce that free Agent who conducts the World,
His Wheels of Providence has backward whirled,
And by the Turn Men to their Senses brings,
To loath their Idol-Priests, and Idol-Kings,
(Finding a Popish Promise proves all one,
From an Ignatian Chair, and from a Throne,)
Since over-indulgent Heaven has been so kind,
To open our Eyes by Miracles, we find
All men admiring they have so long been blind;
Surpised they should so long their Friends oppose,
And with a credulous Trust caress their Foes.
Amidst the numerous Wonders of the time,
It Is no small Wonder (not to say a Crime)
We reverence no more their Memory,
Who for their Countrey's Welfare dared to die;
Whose quartered Limbs imbrued with Native Gore,
Still cry for Vengeance on the Western Shore.
Why should we with ignoble Triumph tread
Upon the silent Ashes of the dead?
And with insulting Feet their Dust profant,
Whose freeborn Souls sp^rn at a slavish Chain;
Souls (not so senseless, so supine as ours)
That early saw the drift of Romish Powers,
Early disdained those Yokes with generous Scorn,
Which our more servile Necks have tamely born;
That saw the hovering Storm approach from far,
Threatening a thousand mischiefs (worse than War)
And boldly rushed upon the impetuous Waves,
Rather to die like Men than live like Slaves;
To save their Native Country bravely tried
Failed in the attempt, and then as bravely died.
In vain would envious Clouds their Fame obscure,
Which to eternal Ages must endure.
^n vain do virulent Tongues attempt to slain
The Solid Glory noble Patriots gain.
If ill designs some to the Battle drew,
It Is I^pious to condemn all for a few:
If fawning Trayt^rs in their Councils sat,
It Is base (...), ^ather lament their Fate:
Tho God (or England's sins) r^fus'd to bless
Their b^ave d^signs with the des^'d success:
It Is an unequal b^utish Argument
Always to judge the Cause by the ^vent;
Thus the unthinking giddy Multitude
A suffering Jesus Crimin^l conclude.
Well it is enough Heaven now crowns with applause,
And gives p^otection to that righteous Cause;
Nay, did ordain that Spot to be the Scene
Where the Cause died sor't to revive again.
Great Nassau favored by the Powers above
(Their special c^re, an^ their peculiar love,)
An Atlas to our si^king State does prove:
Auspicious Stars on all his Councils smile.
That breath vast Blessings on our joyful Isle.
And now methinks their Manes, who of late
Fell worthy Martyrs of our bleeding State,
R^proach us with Ingratitude, and say,
'Is nothing due unto our murdered Clay?
'Vnto our murdered Names is nothing due,
'Who sacrificed both Lives and Names for you?
'Does no Tongue daign to move in the d^fence
'Of wounded Honor, and wronged Inno^ence?
'If the All-wise God (tho just) don't yet se^ good
'With swift revenge t'appeas^ our crying Blood,
'Save us at least from Envy's darker Grave,
'And let our Fame a Resu^rection have.
Great Souls, too great for our Inferior Pra^se!
You for your selves the Noblest Trophies raise;
Your Dying Words your Monoments become
More bright, more lasting than a Ma^ble Tomb;
To future Times your Fame shall fre^hly bloom,
And speak aloud t^ll it strike Envy D^m'^.
THE INTRODUCTION.
NOthing can be plainer to any man that is but moderately versed in History,
than that upon any Turn of Affairs, whoever has won or lost, or whatever Party
is uppermost, the great Enemy of Mankind has some way or other advanced his own
Interest, and got some plausible Argument for Atheism or Profaneness. And the
reason of it is evident, for those who are in the Highest Stations, by a
weakness incident to most, we might perhaps say, all of Mankind, are apt
immediately to conclude themselves the Beloved of Heaven, and that Providence
favors only them, as it did the Jews, to the neglect, if not detriment of the
rest of the World. But no sooner is the Wheel turned; and either by the
inscrutable Providence of God, or the Wickedness of Men, or their own
Maladministration of Affairs, those who are uppermost thrown out of the Helm,
to make room for the next set of Governors; when those who ascend, take the
same Notions with their Predecessors; while such as are gotten under, with all
whom Interest, or Guilt, or Prejudice more closely united to the former
Administration, grow discontented and uneasy; and if their Designs and
Expectations are more and more frustrated, morose and melancholy; The more
devout among 'em will be sure to call whoever Suffer in opposition to the
established Government, Heroes and Martyrs; and be ever prophesying of some
sudden turn, and visible appearance of Heaven to confound their Enemies. But
the profane or hypocritical Party, which we may without breach of Charity
suppose very large on all sides, very naturally run into the other extreme:
They Will fly out into frets and passions; and because God does not think fit to
govern the World according to their Minds, impotently pronounce, That there is
no God at all, That Religion's a mere Cheat, and Heaven and Hell but
Priestcraft and Fable.

But notwithstanding the difference in opinion, and all sides arrogating as
much as possible to themselves, there are yet hardly any Men to be found so
senslesly skeptical, as to deny the differences of Right and Wrong, Good and
Evil. That it hugely alters the Case to consider, whether opposition has been
made against a lawful, or unlawful Power; whether the means be legal or no, or
the Reasons sufficient to countervail all the mischiefs that may arise from
such undertakings: Whether such as do it have any right, or concern to warrant
their Actions; whether for or against, in defense or opposition to the Laws of
Nature and Nations: Whether those that suffer, meet with their misfortunes in
the discharge of their Duty, or opposing others in theirs. Or if the Quarrel be
Religion; Whether that Religion on which it is grounded, be a false or a true
one. And it is from the Examination of such particulars as these whence 'twill
appear, whether they are Patriots or Rebels, stubborn Enthusiasts, or holy
Martyrs.

Now as often as the iniquity of the Times encourages Vice, and depresses*
Virtue; Raises those who are consent to be Slaves themselves, so they may but
make others so, and trample on others, while they are kicked themselves; while
it industriously opposes the very sparks of Ingenuity and Liberty, and takes
off as fast as possible, either by Clandestine Plots, or open Cruelty, whoever
dare be any braver, or better, or honester than their Neighbo^rs; while
Providence all the while seems to nod, and sit an unconcerned Spectator of the
Ravage that is made in the World; then there is no little danger, lest even
those who are truly, though weakly religious and virtuous, should yet be
hurried away in the stream of sour and melancholy Thoughts; be tempted to think
with the Royal Prophet, that all things were carried caeco impetu, that they
have cleansed their Heart in vain; and be almost ready with him, to condemn the
Generation of the righteous.

It Is a question whether ever any Age in the World gave more advantage and
color for these kind of Thoughts than this last, wherein we have had the sad
experience of Debauchery and Villainy rampant and triumphant, and to all
appearance, most prosperous and happy; wherein 'twas much more dangerous either
to be distinguishingly virtuous, or to forsake Villainy, than to continue in
one, and laugh at the other; when so many of the Flower of our Nobility and
Gentry, either lost their Lives or Estates, or Liberties, or Country; whilst a
Crew of Parasites triumphed and fluttered in their Ruins. To see a Russel die
meanly and ignobly in the Flower of his Age; an Essex or a Godfrey sacrified to
the insatiable ambition and revenge of their Enemies, who yet not content with
their Lives, would like the Italian, stab on after Death; and though they could
not reach their Souls, endeavor to damn their Memories. These, and too many
other such melancholy Instances would be ready to make a short-sighted Man
exclaim with Hercules in the Tragoedian, That Virtue is but an empty Name, or
at least could only serve to make its Owners more sensibly unhappy.

But although such Examples might a little work on a weaker Virtue; that which is
more confirmed and solid can more easily resist it. It Is not impatient nor
uneasy, but still beli^ves that Heaven is awake, that the Iron Hands of
Justice will at length overtake the Offenders, and by their destruction
vindicate the Honor and Innocence of those whom they have ruined. It considers
any Riddles in Providence as a curious piece of Optics, which, if judged of
either before it is finished, or by pi^ce-meal, here an Eye, and there another
distorted Feature, appears not only unpleasing, but really dreadful; which yet
if viewed when it is complete, and taking all the Features together, makes a
Figure sufficiently regular and lovely.

Who almost could have imagined, without some such Reflections as these, that
those brave Men we have seen for some years past picked out, and cut off one
after another with as much Scandal and Obloquy as could be thrown upon 'em by
the ungenerous Malice of their Enemies; when the very attempt to clear their
Reputation has been made almost Capital, and involved those who had courage
enough to attempt it in little less mischief than what they themselves endured:
That over these Phoenixes should rise again, and flourish in their Ashes! That
so many great Pens should already have done some of 'em Justice, and the World
as much to all the rest! And with how much more Joy, if'twere possible, would
those Heroes have received their Crowns, could they have foreseen their Deaths
would have tended so far to work up the Nation to such a just resentment, as
would at last have so great an Influence, as we ^^d it had, on our late
glorious Deliverance.

But since we have yet no formed History of all those who have suffered under
the Cruelty and Injustice, not to use so harsh a word as Tyranny, of late
years; since such a design may be of no little use, both to show what our
former Discords have cost us, and to vindicate the memories of the Sufferers,
as well from the malice of their Enemies, as hasty kindn^ss of their Friends:
and besides, to leave Posterity so many great Examples of those who preferred
their Liberty and Religion before all else that was dear in the World; and
because they could not live Free, died so. For such Reasons as these this Work
is undertaken, which, if it deserves the acceptance of the Reader, no doubt
will find it; there being few good Books written which have not been favorably
received in the World.

If any be so weak to object, that the Subjects of this History are ill
matched, some of 'em being of one Communion, and some of another: It might be
enough to send 'em to Fox's Martyrology for an Answer (though some few years
since it is granted this Objection would have looked more dreadful) wh^re they
may find Hooper and Ridley differing in their Opinions, but yet agreeing at the
Stake, and accordingly ranged by that great Man in the same noble Army.

The Kindness and Gratitude of the Courts of England and Rome made no
distinction between 'em; nay, not so much as to eat either of them last, but as
occasion served, took one or the other. Fas est ab host -- and since they made
no difference in their Deaths, although they endeavored it as much as possible
in their Lives; since there is no doubt there is none betwixt 'em now, but they
all agree in Heaven: I see no Reason why any Party should envy the other that
Glory, which for suffering in the same Cause, they (...) deserve.

There has been formerly some Discourse about Town of a weak or malicious
Design a-foot, to publish an History of Persecutions, and charge it on one
particular Party of Protestants* But as such a thing would be most pernicious
to the Common Cause, so God knows, if it should go round, it would be endless.
This design is quite contrary, as 'its hoped its effects will be. It Is to lay
the Fault where it ought to be, and make those Friends, who have been too long
imposed upon, almost to each others Ruin.

Others may be offended with the Title of Martyrs and Martyrdom, which so often
occurs in the following Papers; both because some of those concerned were
accused for Plots against the Government, and others were in actual Arms. But
it is possible for a Person at the same time to be a Church and State Martyr.
Naboth's accusation was for speaking blasphemous Words against God and the
King. The Apostles of our Savior* and the Christians afterward, were accused
as those who turned the World* upside down, and Enemies of the Empire. These
Answers, it is owned, may be accommodated to any Party, being general things;
but in the Body of the Discourse we hope to fix 'em, and to prove in particular
of the Persons mentioned, that they deserved that great Name, both on account
of the Cause, and their dying so unjustly, many ways, from ^he Perjury of their
Accusers, or the Inequality of their Judges, or corruption of Juries; and that
really because they would not yield themselves, but made a vigorous opposition
against Popery and Slavery. For the VVestern Martyrs, we intend a distinct
account of 'em at the beginning of those Transactions.

One thing more ^^at may choke such as have a mind to quarrel, is the (...)
faults, and in some, or at least one Instance, vicious habits, and ill Life of
those whom we give that high Character. But if little Failures if Heats and
Weaknesses were any valuable Objection against the Worth or Honesty of a
Person, 'twould be impossible to make any tolerable defense even for many of
those great Men, who were the happy Instruments of our Reformation: Tho it may
seen an excuse dull and common, yet there is none who does not find it nec^ssary
on his own account; That allowances are to be made for the best of Men. Cranmer
and the rest of our Reformers, as the Learned Dr. Burnet observes in his Letter
to Mr. Thevenot: Though we piously believe 'em Saints and Martyrs, yet never
pretended to be infallible: They were Men, and so were these, though they
suffered for the same Causes, and almost in the same manner. For such as lived
ill, if there is more than one instance, this certainly will be sufficient,
that they died well, and gave all the tokens of a hearty repentance for their
not having lived up to so good a Profession.

Let us then do 'em Justice now they are dead, who so nobly defended the Cause
of our holy Religion while they were living, and at last so freely and joyfully
at their Death, sealed it with their dearest Blood. If in any accounts met with
here, some Persons should find some particular Words or Phrases not so usual
with 'em, let 'em not be so weak or unjust to condemn them as Cant or Nonsense.
What reason is there why every Man should not express himself in that way which
likes him best, and with which he has been more acquainted? And what matters
it, if I Am discoursed to in Yorkshire, or London Dialect, so I talk with an
honest Man, and our Sentiments agree, though our words may a little differ?
Especially, when as before was remarked, all of 'em suffered for the same
Caus^* and with this considerable Circumstance, that the first, and some of the
last Victims of Popish Cruelty, were entirely agreeable in their Judgments, as
to the manners and merits of their Death. Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, who begins
the Rubric, having notoriously declared, some days before his Death, That he
believed in his Conscience he should be the first Martyr: And some of those who
went last to Glory, as will appear below, mentioning this as one of their
greatest Comforts, that they should, in after Ages, be enrolled among the rest
of the Protestant Martyrs.

Advertisement.
To make the Book Pleasant as well as Profitable, there are inserted some Poems
and Elegies made by an ingenious Person, who was particularly acquainted with
many of those who are the Subjects of 'em.

An Emblem of our late Martyrs.
Sr. Ed: Bury Godfrey
portrait I. DUKE of Monmouth:
portrait The Earl of Argile
portrait Arth: Earl of Essex:
portrait Wm. Ld. Russell.
portrait Collonell Sydney.
portrait Alderman Cornish
portrait Mr. wm Hewling.
portrait Mr. Wm. Ienkins.
portrait The Lady Lisle:
portrait Mrs. Gaunt.
portrait Sr. Tho: Armstrong
portrait
These all dyed in Faith

Heb: 11.13 A NEW MARTYROLOGY: OR, THE Bloody Assizes, etc.
Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey.
HAD the Person who wrote that Scandalous Libel upon Sir E. B. G. which he
calls The Mystery of his Death, but always confined himself to as much Truth
and Reason as we meet with in the very first Lines of his Preface to it, he
might have gone both through the World, and out of it with more Reputation than
now he is like to do -- [ There will (says he) be a time when Truth shall be
believed, and the Witnesses of it justified.] But notwithstanding all his
boasted Sagacity in winding Alterations at such a distance, we may safely
affirm, that when he writ that Sentence, he little thought 'twould ever have
been applied in this manner -- That Truth would come to life again after all
the care he had taken to stifle it, and the highest Judicatures in the Nation
in one day remove all the black dirt which so many years he had been throwing
on its Witnesses, and in so Public and authentic a manner justify 'em again.
'Twas in the heat of those Mischiefs and Miseries which all thinking men could
long before easily foresee would be the Consequences of such Notions as he
broached, and were too greedily swallowed, that he published the book before
mentioned, at such at time when he knew 'twas in one sense unanswerable,
wherein he pretends both to confound all the Evidence given in before the
Parliament, and Public Courts of Justice for Sir Edmond's being murdered with
Papists; and over and above -- That he was a self-murtherer -- No better than a
second running him through with his own Sword after his Death. It Is some
plausible insinuations he has there heapt together which will make it necessary
to be a little larger on him than those who came after; especially since he led
the way both to the Sufferings of the Protestants, and Malice of their Enemies.

Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey was born of a good Family; his Relations are
sufficiently known, and as justly respected in the City of London: But it is not
the intention of this Piece to write the Lives, but the Deaths of those who are
the Subjects of it; at least no more of one than is requisite for describing
the other. -- The occasion of his Knighthood is reported to be the good Service
he did in giving Directions for quenching a Fire which happend some years past
at St. James's; which Honor the then Duke of York obtained for him, having
been under a great Consternation at the apprehension of the danger. This very
probably might be the beginning of his so great Intimacy with the Papists,
which Sir Roger so often hints in his History, and which afterward cost him so
dearly.

He was a Person of known Virtues -- For the Instances of his secret Charity
the World is obliged to that Reverend and Learned Person who preached his
Funeral Sermon. For his Piety and Integrity, even his worst Enemy here gives us
several Instances thereof; that particularly, when after those Prophetic
bodings of his approaching Martyrdom, he took care to settle all things, and
adjust Accounts exactly, and even in Parish Matters to right such as he thought
had formerly been injured. Lastly, how vigilant and careful he was in the
Execution of that Office the Law had entrusted him with, his Death, as well as
his Life may testify -- One thing cannot, without great Injury to his Memory,
be omitted -- It Is his extraordinary Conduct and Courage in the time of the
Plague in this City, whence he never stirred all the while it raged so
dreadfully; but relieved the Poor, and fed them daily with his own hands: Nor
did he neglect Justice while he was exercising Mercy, but to the amazement, and
almost terror of the Beholders, pursued a Malefactor, who had taken Sanctuary
in a Pesthouse, thinking none would be so desperate as to follow him, and with
his own hands fetched him thence, when the other Officers dared not venture
after him.

'Twas either his Acquaintance among the Papists, before intimated, and hence
his being consequently better known by those who were of that Party, or his
industry and indefatigable care in the Discharge of his Office, or both, to
which we may rationally attribute the addressing of the first Discovery of the
Popish Plot to him, rather than any other.

The clearest Method for the Description of his Martyrdom, will be first to
enquire into the Occasion of it and then the Manner, Circumstances, and
Authors; and lastly the several Endeavors have been used to clear the Papists
of that indelible Guilt which sticks upon 'em from so horrid a Villainy.

For the Occasion of his Martyrdom, what was said in the Summing up the
Evidence concerning him, but modestly and on supposition only, we may yet
venture to affirm positively -- This Protestant Magistrate was certainly
murdered -- because he was a Pro^estant.

But the particular and special Reasons were these following:

1. He had taken Examinations about the Popish Plot, and those not only (as the
Attorney General said in the Trial of the Assassines) perhaps, but undoubtedly
more than are now extant. Mr. Oats addressed himself to him with his
Depositions -- he had taken them, and enquired something closely into the
Design, as his manner was in any thing which belonged to his Office. This the
Papists very well knew, and therefore found it convenient to be rid of a
troublesome busy man, who now he was engaged in the business, was likely to
pierce to the bottom on it -- and he being once out of the way, the Evidence
might very easily have been disposed of to their satisfaction

But here those, whose Interest it is to get clear of such a Charge, object very
pertly -- What need, or what advantage in taking off a Justice, when the same
things were deposed in other places?

2. The second Reason or Occasion for this Murder will easily answer that
Objection. They not only bore him Malice for what he had already done in
Oates's case, and might probably be ignorant of those secret Passages
transacted before King and Council in relation to Oates's Depositions, -- but
were sensible of a deeper Reason than all this, and which brought them into
more danger than the other.

See it in the Lord Stafford's Trial, p. 22. and 24. Mr. Dugdale had received a
Letter the very night on which this Gentleman was martyred (of which more anon)
with these words in it -- [ This Night Sir E.B.G. is dispatched.] -- This came
from the Papists to Ewers a Popish Priest at my Lord Aston's, who after he had
read it communicated the good News to Mr. Dugdale, telling him One of their
Enemies was taken out of the way. -- He being desirous to know how things went,
asked what was the Reason they took away his Life? Ewers tells him -- There was
a Message sent to Mr. Coleman, when in Newgate, to desire him that he would not
reveal any thing of the Plot; which Message came from the Duke of York. -- To
which Coleman replied -- What was he the nearer -- for he had been so foolish
as to reveal all to Sir E.B.G. already? But upon the Examination of Oats
before Sir E.B.G. he was afraid he would come in as Evidence against him,
having shown himself eager in the business. -- To which the Duke of York sent
word again, -- If he would take care not to reveal, but conceal it, Sir E.B.G.
should not come in against him. -- And the next news was -- that he was
dispatched.

Now this effectually takes off the former Cavil; -- and this S^r Roger could
not but be sensible of; and concluding so unanswerably against wh^t he built so
much upon, e'ne lets it fairly drop. and mentions not a syllable of it in all
his Book -- Which Evidence of Mr. Dugdales is beyond contradiction confirmed by
several hints unluckily given in Sir Roger's own Depositions -- pa. 187. where
Mr. Wynnel deposes Sir E. told him -- Coleman would dye -- and mentioned
Consults about a Toleration -- Adding further -- That he was Master of a
dangerous secret that would be fatal to him. -- Hence nothing can be plainer to
any reasonable man, than that Sir Edmond was acquainted with Mr. Coleman as
well as Dr. Oats, and knew even the minute Circumstances in those Letters
which afterward were brought against him and stood in fear of his Life for
that very Reason, as for the same he afterward lost it.

For the Manner of his Death, those who were Accomplices therein should best
know it; and the Objections against their Evidence the Reader may find cleared,
if he will take the pains to look a little lower -- After the poor Gentleman had
several days been dogged by the Papists, as Dr. Oats, Mr. Prance, and Mr.
Bedlow unanimously swear, and which he as good as acknowledged to Mr. Robinson,
as appears on the Trial of his Murderers, they at last accomplished their
wicked design on Saturday, October. 12. 1678. and under a pretense of a Quarrel,
which they knew his Care for the public Peace would oblige him to prevent,
about Nine at night, as he was going home, got him into the Watergate at
Somerset House. When he was thus trapan'd in, and got out of hearing from the
Street, toward the lower end of the Yard, Green, one of the Assassines, threw a
twisted Handkerchief round his Neck, and drew him behind the Rails, -- which,
notwithstanding his age and weakness, are objected against its probability;
taking him thus at a surprise, and in the dark, 'twas easy for him to do,
especially three or four more of 'em immediately falling in to assist him,
there they throtled him; and lest that should not be enough, punch'd and kicked
him on the Breast, as sufficiently appeared when his Body was found, by the
marks upon it; and lest he should not be yet dead enough, another of 'em,
Girald, or, as I find him called in other places, Fitz-Girald, would have run
him through, but was hindered by the rest, lest the Blood should have
discovered 'em: But Green, to make sure work, wrung his Neck round, as 'twas
found afterward on the inspection of the Surgeons.

For the disposal of the Body, they all carried it up into a little Chamber of
Hills, another of the Murderers, who had been, or was Dr. Godwin's man, where
it lay till Monday night, when they removed it into another Room, and thence
back again 'till Wednesday, when they carried him out in a Sedan about Twelve a
clock, and afterward upon a Horse, with Hill behind him, to support him, till
they got to Primrose-Hill, or as some say it is called, Green-Bury-Hill, near a
Public House, called the White house, and there threw him into a Ditch, with
his Gloves and Cane on the Bank near him, and his own Sword run through him, on
purpose to persuade the world he had killed himself. Very politickly making
choice of a place to lay him where they might both think he would be sometime
concealed, and near where he had been seen walking the same day, if the
Affidavits to this purpose in Sir R's Book may be reposed upon.

All this Mr. Prance swe^rs upon the Trial of his Murderers, with whom he
acknowledges he had several Consults before at the Plow Alehouse, and other
places, concerning it. Whose Evidence is confirmed, not only by innumerable
other Circumstances, but Mr. Bedlow's Confession, who was to have been present
at the Action, had not Remorse of Conscience hindered him, having been engaged
by the Conspirators for a great Reward, and was afterward to have a
considerable part of it for carrying off the Body, which he swears he saw in
the very Room whither Prance says 'twas removed on the Monday night. -- But
even here too he failed 'em -- So 'twas done without his Assistance in the
manner before described.

And very sure, no doubt, the great Plotters thought they had now made their
Business: for we are not to fancy these little Villains attempted such an
Action of their own impulse; the great Spring we had before in Dugdales Story
of Coleman, from whence those large Sums must proceed which Bedlow mentions.
Now, I say, they thought the Business was as sure as the Jews had made the
Sepulcher -- having sealed all the mouths of the Parties concerned, with Oaths
and Sacraments, Solemnities commonly abused by their Party to the foulest
Villainies. -- But neither that, nor the darkness of the night, nor the distance
of places, could hinder the Divine Justice from looking through and discovering
the Villains concerned, and bringing 'em to Punishments worthy their Wickedness
-- The manner thus, -- His Body being found by some who accidentally walked
that way, and generally suspected from his former discourses, and many
probabilities; that he was murdered by the Papists, the King issued out a
Proclamation with a promise of Indemnity and 500 l. reward to any who would
discover it. On this Mr. Bedlow writ a Letter to the Secretary from the
Country, concerning his Knowledge of something considerable in that matter; and
being sent for up to Town, revealed whatever he knew of the Business. And a
little after, Prance being accidentally seized by a Constable, and then in the
House of Lords Lobby, was known by Mr. Bedlow, having seen his Face on that
Monday night, when at the same time they saw the Body; -- who on Examination
discovered also what his share was in the Murder: And though he afterward
denied it, for fear of losing his Trade, and such other Motives, as he himself
confessed, yet in a quarter of an hour he returned again to his first Evidence.

But the most difficult Task will be what yet remains -- the clearing those
Objections, and some of 'em plausible ones, and which have led away too many
well-meaning men, against the Truth of this recited Evidence; as well as some
Insinuations spread abroad, and made the most of to persuade the World this
worthy Gentleman was guilty of his own Death.

But here it cannot be expected that a private Person, who has not the
advantages of Sir Roger, to have Warrants from two K's and all Persons and
Papers before him relating to that Business, and who had Wit great, and Honesty
little enough to pick out, and leave in what was for his turn; that such an one
should be able to go through so many hundred pages as his Book consists of, and
answer every Particular therein. 'Twill be satisfaction enough to any rational
man, to touch some of the Plots and Fetches made use of from one time to
another to wash the Blackamoor white, and clear the Papists from this Villainy:
To answer the main Objections against the Evidence, and bring some
corroborating Circumstances for the truth on it. And lastly, To show Sir Edmond
could not murder himself in that place and manner as is pretended.

The first of the Methods they used to sham off this Murder, was by early
Reports they spread about, even before his Body was found, That he had killed
himself. Now this Sir Roger himself can scarce have Brow enough to affirm was
done by the Brothers to save the Estate; since 'twas a very odd way certainly
to do that, by letting the World openly know that he was a Self-murtherer. That
such Reports were spread we shall by and by prove, and that from Sir Roger's
own Book, without the trouble of consulting the Paper-Office, -- and who got
by it, who should do it, whose Interest was it to do it but the Papists, although the
particular Authors may be unknown?

Among the many Evidences of his Death being known at so many distant places
before 'twas public here, there are two come up exactly to the matter in hand.
The first -- which was recited by the Reverend Dean of Bangor, now Bishop of
St. Asaph, in his Funeral Sermon, and which it seems he had of one Mr. Angus --
who the same day Sir Edmond was found about Five a clock on Primrose-Hill,
being in Mr. Chiswell's Shop in St. Paul's Churchyard about One or Two, there
was a Person unknown to him past by, and clapping him on the shoulder, asked
him [ If he heard the News that Sir E.B.G. was found dead, with his own Sword
run through him.]

The second is of Mr. Goldsborough, Clerk of the House of Commons, who being in
a Barber's Shop on Tuesday morning, while he was missing, a person came in
open-mouthed [ That Sir E. B. G. was found;] and being asked where, replied, [
He had killed himself upon Primrose-Hill;] where, upon Thursday following in
the evening the Body was indeed discovered.

The second considerable Attempt made the same way, was by one Magrath an
Irishman, the famous Celiers, who foretold both the Prince of Wales, and a
great many more after him; the Jesuits in Newgate, and others, who pretended to
prove Sir E. B. G. hanged himself, and his Clerk Moor cut him down -- But being
examined at the Council Board, it proved only a malicious and false Contrivance.

'Twill be very well worth the while, to remark that Mrs. Mary Gibbons was one
of the persons deeply engaged in this design among so much other good Company;
and that Mrs. Mary Gibbons is one of the main Evidences Sir Roger makes use of
in his Book. -- Though this Sham was then so thin laid, and this person so well
known, that even Farewell and Pain were ashamed to make use of either in their
Letters to Prance on this Subject, but protest very solemnly, That none of
those, neither Celiers, the Newgate Priests, nor Mrs. Mary Gibbons, or other
Papists, or popishly affected, knew any thing of the matter, but were all
Strangers to it.

When this Contrivance was found out by all the World to be as very a Sham as
Celiers being with Child in Newgate, or some Body else in another place, yet
was not the indefatigable Zeal of that Party discouraged; but Mr. Farewell, a
person entrusted in managing the Estates and Lands of the Jesuits; and Pain,
Brother to the famous Pain who wrote St. Coleman's Elegy, set a new Project on
foot to the same purpose in some Letters sent to Prance, and printed by N.
Thomson; which indeed, if we look close into 'em, will appear to be Sir Roger
in little, there being the self same Expressions in one as the the other, and his
Mystery seeming to be hardly more than their Letters spread a little thinner.
-- The Blood gubling out of the Wound, -- Bedlow and Prances East and West
Contradictions, -- The Wax dropped on his Clothes after he was found, and several
other things the self same in both of 'em. And I remember, at that very time
'twas shrewdly suspected and rumored about Town* that the same person lay
behind the Curtain, and thrust their Cats-feet into the Fire, who has since
appeared publicly in prosecution of the same Cause.

Before their Trial they reckoned their Witnesses by the hundred, pretending to
make his Self-murder as clear as the Sun. When they came to it, and had all
the fair Play imaginable, Pain's heart failed him, and he pleaded Guilty. --
Farewell made so poor a Defense, and the Matter was so clearly proved against
'em, that Farewell and Thomson were both fined by the Court* and sentenced to
stand in the Pillory, with this Inscription over them, [ For Libelling the
Justice of the Nation, by makin^ the World believe that Sir E.B.G. murdered
himself.] Where how abundantly they were honored by the Spectators, all who
know any thing of the Story cannot but remember.

Thus it lay for some time, and no person was so hardy to make any farther
Attempts that way while there was any possibility of having Justice against
'em: But when the Sheriffs, Juries, nay King and all were changed; when that
past which poor Oats and all the World have cause to remember; when, if Prance
would not unconfess, he knew he must tread the same dolorous way that Oats had
gone before him, and had now done all that could be desired; Then Sir Roger
took up the Cudgels, and published his Book, called, [ The Mystery of Sir E.B.G
's Death unfolded;] Or, which would have been a fitter Title, [ The second
Edition with Additions of Farewell and Pain 's Letters.] The main of what he
advances there, will be answered in clearing, as was proposed, the Objections
against the Evidence relating to that matter.

If the ill Character of the persons who gave it, be urged to invalidate their
Testimony, as this does not reach all of 'em, so it has been often answered --
Who but such were fit for such Villainies? If their seeming Disagreement in some
part of their evidence, what greater Argument that 'twas no Combination? If
Prance retracted -- we are told by Sir Roger himself, That he was a
white-liver'd Man, and so might be frighted out of truth as well as into it.
And indeed, on that very reason 'twas long before suspected, that if he should
ever be bore hard upon, he would not be able to stand it.

[ But the Papists would never kill him, because he had obliged'em] -- As if
Gratitude were a Popish Virtue, or Charity, any more than Faith were to be kept
with Heretics: Those that think so, let 'em look back, and see if the last
Reign be enough to convince 'em.

It may be urged on, Here are several Testimonies in the Trial of the
Murderers, and since, that invalidate the Evidence there given, -- Warner and
his Wife and Maid about Green -- That he was at home all that Evening when he
was accused for committing it. -- 'Twou'd be enough to oppose to this their
Confession to Captain Richardson -- That they could do him no good. -- But
besides this, Mr. Justice Dolbin's Observation on the Trial clears it
effectually -- They swore to the Saturday fortnight after Michaelmas day, which
was, says the Justice, the 19 th of October. not the 12 th. on which the Murder
was committed.

-- If Broadstreet and others testify they were in the Room where the Body was
laid, and Hills Wife so rubs up her Memory, that after so many years she
remembers what she could not upon his Trial -- That she, and he, and their
Child lay in the Room all that very time when the Body was said to be there --
'Twou'd not be a shift, but an Answer -- That they were Papists that swore it,
who can swear any thing. But besides, Broadstreet acknowledged before the Duke
of Monmouth, That Hill was gone from his Lodgings before this time, as was
proved on the Trial. Mrs. Tilden says, There was but one Key to their Door.
Mrs. Broadstreet at the same time, with what she owned about Hill, That there
were six or seven -- Contradictions in others, we see, as well as the King's
Evidence; and these being much homer, and more irreconcilable than theirs,
must of necessity destroy the belief of what else they testify.

But the home thrust is -- [ The Sentinels saw no Sedan carried out -- ] This
the printed Trial easily sets right. The Sentinels were Trollop and Wright.
Trollop staid till Ten, and saw a Sedan go in, but none out again: Wright till
One, but saw none go out. It must be in Trollops time, being, as Prance says,
about Twelve. -- The Sentinels being then at Bury's Lodge, smoking and
drinking. Trollop says on the Trial, he was never at the Lodge, but so does not
Wright, as any one may see by consulting it, he being never asked the Question.

'Twill give a great Light into this Deed of Darkness in the next place, to
consider several Circumstantial Evidences, which would, of themselves, go very
far to prove that Sir E. B. G. was murdered by the Papists, and that in the
very place and manner which has been already described.

The first of these from Sir Edmond's own mouth, which has been already hinted,
but shall here be farther cleared.

'Twas indeed so notorious, that Sir E.G.B had boding thoughts, and a sort of a
Prophetical Intimation of his Death, and that by the Papists; and discoursed of
so publicly and generally, that Sir Roger could not deny all the Matter of
Fact, but endeavors to avoid the force on it; when he says, as is witnessed by
several -- [ On my Conscience I shall be the first Martyr -- ] This he
interprets -- [ I doubt I shall not live long.] -- Sure, though he says in one
place, The Man was no Fool; yet he must be supposed to be no better, any more
than all the Readers, if neither he nor they made any difference between being
hanged and martyred. But the very reason of this ^nterpretation was for what
Sir R. dearly loved -- that he might have opportunity for a Reflection on the
Parliament -- He feared, says he, that the Parliament would call him to
account, and that nothing would satisfy 'em but his Life for not discovering
it sooner. -- In opposition to this, any impartial man need but consider what
follows. Esquire Robinson, on the Trial of the Murderers, witnesses that he had
a Discourse with Sir Edmond a little while before his Death about the Plot then
newly talked on -- Says Robinson -- I wish the depth of the Matter be found out.
-- Sir E. answers, -- I Am afraid it is not. -- Upon any Conscience I believe I
shall be the first Martyr. -- He acknowledged he had taken several Examinations
about it, but thought he should have little Thanks for his pains. The Esquire
asked him -- Are you afraid? [No, said he, I do not fear 'em, if they come
fairly; and I shall not part with my Life tamely.] Well, Sir Roger, Is all this
the Parliament? Was he afraid the Parliament would send a Party to dog him, and
set upon him? and that he did not fear the Parliament, but if they came fairly,
would not part with his Life tamely? -- No; any Man that has but half an eye,
unless that too blinded with Prejudice, may see the meaning on it; and that he
apprehended danger only from the Papists, against whom he had taken several
Examinations.

The next is of John Wilson the Sadler, who Swears, Sir Edmond talking with one
Mr. Harris, then told this Informant, [ That he was in danger for what he acted
for the Discovering of the late Plot against his Majesty.] See how ingeniously
this is answered -- [ His apprehension was from the Parliament, not the
Papists; and for Concealing, not Discovering the Plot.] These very words Sir
Roger has in his Book, page 281. Now whether this is not a direct Statuimus, i.
e. Abrogamus, What Sir Edmond calls Discovering, for Sir R. who knows his Mind
better, now he is dead, than he himself did while alive, to tell us he means
Concealing, which is quite contrary -- and how fair a way of answer it is, let
any of his best Friends be Judges.

It Would be tedious to bring any more, when this does effectually as to his own
Judgment. Only it is remarkable, that these very things are Sworn upon the Trial
by Mr. Oats, -- that Sir E. B. G. had told him -- [ He had received Affronts
from great Persons for being so zealous in the Business -- That he had been
threatened -- That he went in fear of his Life from the Popish Party; and that
he had been dogged several days, -- but feared 'em not if they came fairly to
work.]

For other Evidences of his Murder by the Papists, that which indeed made the
greatest noise, was, his Death being heard of so far off, and in so many
different places, before 'twas known in London. This Sir Roger tells us, was on
purpose spread by the Brothers to throw it on the Papists: But here is this in
opposition: Dugdale, against whom he makes no objection, but allows his
Evidence; makes Oath in my Lord Stafford's Trial, and other places, That this
News was brought to one Ewers a Priest, in a Letter which he showed him, dated
the very night 'twas done, -- which had these words in it -- [ This very night
Sir E. B. G. is dispatched.] Now I Would fain ask -- Had these Brothers
Correspondence with the Priest? would they use such a word as that [
Dispatched? -- ] Did they write to Ewers too, and bid him tell Dugdale, That
this Sir E B.G. was a busy Man, and fit to be taken out of the way? -- as
Dugdale swears he did. -- Could Dugdale conspire with Oats so long before they
knew one another; and while he was himself a Prisoner in Staffordshire; and
were all those perjured who witness that Mr. Dugdale did report this before it
could be known by any but the very Conspirators?

That 'twas done in that very place, at Somerset House, Providence has left
strange Confirmation.

The first is -- Bury the Porter's refusing to admit any persons into the Gates
about that time, the 12 th, 13 th, 14 th of October. Nay, that he had denied
the Prince himself admittance, (Prince Rupert I suppose it must be) and
pretended Orders for so doing. But these Orders he never produced. -- And more
like a true Papist, denied matter of Fact when charged with it; and though he had
acknowledged to the Council he had never such Orders before, when Sir Thomas
Stringer came to witness it, positively denied it.

Two more very remarkable Affidavits there are, which give mighty strength to
all the former: One of Spence (Captain Spence he is called in some Copies) and
the other of John Okeley. Spence was a tall, black Man, much like Sir E. B. G.
as was witnessed by those who knew him; to all which Sir R. only answers -- He
has been told otherwise. This Spence passing by the same Watergate at
Somerset House about Seven at night, two days before Sir Edmond's Murder, was
dragged in thither, being seized by five or six Men -- but one of 'em, when they
had him in, cried out -- This is not he -- on which they immediately let him
go. -- Here Is a plain Evidence of their Intentions, and a Confirmation of what
Bedlow, Oats, and Prance swear of Sir E's being dogged so long before. -- All
that is answered to it is, -- That there was a Suit of Law depending between this
Spence and Mrs. Broadstreet -- and therefore forsooth, he must forswear
himself, and wilfully damn his Soul only for a Circumstantial Evidence and
Reflection on Hill himself three or four years after he was hanged, and so on
his Master Dr. Godden, and thence again on Mrs. Broadstreet; and all this when
it had no influence at all on the Suit of Law, or them who su'd him. -- But
enough of this -- Let Us now take notice of the next -- It Is one John Okeley,
who that very night, October. 12. going by Somerset House, at the Watergate
about Nine a Clock, saw there Sir E. B. G. whom he knew very well, living in
the same Lane with him -- he past close by him, pulled off his Hat to him, as
Sir E.B.G. did to him again; -- when past him, he turned about and looked on
him. And this he told to several persons, which witness the same. -- To this,
the main of what Sir R. objects is, -- 'Twas dark, and how should he know him?
Certainly, any one that knows London cannot be ignorant that we have Lights in
the Streets at Nine at night: and 'twas morally impossible that one who knew
him so well, who looked upon him, who put off his Hat to him, as he to him
again, and who after all this looked back upon him -- that such a one should be
mistaken in the Person.

The last thing to be proved is -- That Sir E.B.G. did not, and could not
murder himself in that place, as is pretended by his Enemies. He was first
missing on Saturday, and therefore according to their account, his Body must
have been in the place where 'twas found till that Thur^day night. But had it
been there on Tuesday or Wednesday, the Pack of Hounds which hunted there, both
of those days, must have found him. Sir Roger tells us. -- They might have been
on the other side of the Ditch, or beat the place carelessly without finding it.
But Mr. Faucet's Deposition is, -- That he beat that very place -- which sure
he was capable of knowing, having been himself there to see it after the Body
was found. He repeats it, and says twice, -- 'Twas in that very place. And
Harwood says as much, who hunted the day after. -- One Circumstance there is,
which makes this Evidence yet more conclusive. 'Twas deposed in the Trial of
Farewell, and several other places, that the Body stunk extremely when 'twas
found, which was but the next day after. Now I Would ask any unprejudiced man,
Whether was so much as possible that this very place should be beat two days
after one another, and the Hounds not Scent the Body, even though the Hunters
might perhaps over-see it?

But besides this, there was yet a narrower search made on another occasion in
that same Field. The Story is told in a Paper, called, An Account of the
Murder, published by Thompson himself, who, with another Printer, was present,
and avouch'd the Matter of Fact on their own Knowledge. It Is this -- That while
the Body lay at the White-house, and the Jury were about it, one of the
Jurymen themselves declared, -- That a servant of his Mother, a Butcher, and
two Boys, made a very strict and narrow search in all parts of the Ground for a
Calf that was lost there, and this both on Monday and Tuesday -- and at that
time there lay no dead Body, Belt, Gloves, or any thing else there. -- But were
all these too on the wrong side of the Hedge? or where did they look for this
Calf? in the middle of the Field, or in the Ditches and Hedges? where 'twas
impossible they could have mist of the Body, had it been there.

There Is one great Objection which Sir Roger makes very much of in this matter
-- though not quite so strong now as 'twas some years since; and that is -- There
was no Popish Plot at all, therefore no Popish Murder, -- which he expresses
in his own peculiar Merry-Andrew way -- They hang both upon the same string,
and whoever overthrows the one, trips up the heels of the other. Nor indeed is
he singular in his Opinion, as to a great part of it -- for my Lord Chief
Justice Pemberton says, on the Trial of Farewell I think 'twas, -- If they
could have made it out that he had killd himself, all of them would have cried
out, the Popish Plot was a Sham raised by the Protestants against the Papists,
and all the Plot must have gone for nothing. -- But now to retort the Objection
-- If there was a Popish Plot, it is a terrible Argument that there was too a
Popish Murder. But that there was one, we must be forced to believe, till we
find these things, among many others, answered.

1. Coleman's Letters -- and that Expression -- The Extirpation of this
Northern Heresy.

2. The Letter produced in Harcourt's Trial, wherein the very Consult of April
24. is mentioned, -- and A Design then on foot among 'em, which they were to
manage with all imaginable secrecy.

3. The positive Oaths of so many men. Some of 'em of a fair Character and
blameless Conversation; others no more able to invent such a Plot than their
Enemies to disprove it.

4. The Endeavors of the Papists to assassinate, disgrace, buy off, or any way
divert the Evidence against 'em; which they were not such Fools to do for
nothing.

5. The behavior of the Witnesses ever since. One of 'em testifying at his
death, after the Sacrament: Another by his life, their Malice reaching to his
barbarous Murder. A third with his Blood, and so much as would have perhaps
cost any two or three other men their Lives, to the Truth of their Depositions.

And lastly, What Transactions we have felt and seen since the late King came
to his Throne, till his departure, are no great Evidence that all that Plot was
a Forgery.

From these things it is plain there was a Popish Plot: from these, and what
went before, that this was a Popish Murder.

There needs no Exaggeration of the Fact, nor Tragical Exclamations. 'Twas as
foul as Hell could make it, and perhaps we have not yet seen the full Revenge
that Heaven intends for those who were concerned in it; though it is after so long
a time miraculously begun, and will in due time be accomplished.

Two Anagrams there were made on this brave Gentleman, which for the peculiar
luckiness of 'em, it may not be ungrateful to the Reader, to have 'em inserted.

Sir EDMVNDBVRY GODFREY.
Anag.
I FIND MURDERED BY ROGUES.
Another;
BY ROME'S RUDE FINGER DIE!
Having thus vindicated the Memory of this great Person* without any mean
expectation, either of Applause or Reward, who was the first Martyr for our
holy Protestant Religion; we shall address what has been written on this
subject, not only to Posterity, as Sir Roger very wisely does, where he shall
never hear his Fault, but to all the sober unprejudiced men of the present Age,
and so dismiss it, and go on to the rest for whom he only made way, after we
have presented you with one of the best pieces of Wit that the Age has yielded
on Sir Edmond's death. It Is a part of that ingenious Poem, called Bacchanalia,
or, The Drunken Club.

Well Primrose! may our Godfrey's name on thee
Like Hyacinth inscribed be!
On thee his Memory flourish still,
Sweet as thy Flower, and lasting as thy Hill.
Whilst blushing Somerset, to her
Eternal shame, shall this Inscription wear;
"The Devil's an Ass, for Jesuits on this spot
"Broke both the neck of Godfrey, and the Plot.
Mr. ARNOLD.
BUT though the Providence of God was pleased, no doubt for wise Reasons, to
suffer this last worthy Person to fall a Victim to the Malice and Cruelty of
our Popish Enemies; though there was perhaps a sort of a sad necessity -- that
this one man should die, to alarm a stupid Nation, and rouse 'em from that
careless believing temper which since that has gone so fair toward their
Ruin; and though 'twas to cost England more and nobler Blood, before its entire
deliverance; yet the Government of the World is not so absolutely given up to
the disposal of him who is called the Prince of it, as that in every Attempt,
Villainy should be triumphant, and Virtue miserable. However kindly 'twas meant,
the Stroke here was not home enough, and Mr. Arnold proved only a Confessor,
though they intended him a Martyr. One would have thought their ill Success in
taking off one Justice of Peace, should have cooled their Fury a little, and
hinder 'em from venturing upon another. -- But this it is when men list
themselves of a Religion where they must be given up to the Salleys and
Transports of a blind Zeal, and refuse the Conduct either of their Senses or
Reason.

Mr. Arnold had been a vigorous Prosecutor of the Priests and Jesuits which
sculkt about in his own County of Wales. This was a crime not to be forgiven,
nor any ways attoned by less than his Destruction. In order to which he was
assaulted by several Villains, fit for such a business, in a little dark Lane
near the Temple, as he was passing through it pretty late in the Evening; and
had no doubt dispatched him; and either found some way to make the World
believe he had done it himself, as they would have done in the former instance,
or started some other Sham to have removed the Odium from their own Party. But
the Gentleman, having had apprehension of some such Accident, made better use
of it than Sir Edmond before him; and having luckily a Suit of private Armor
on, received several Stabs the Villains gave him, upon that, and so saved his
life. But they finding their Attempts that way unsuccessful, were resolved to
take another course with him, and having got him down, with some desperate
weapon or other fit for the purpose, made several Trials to cut his Throat, and
gave him some dangerous wounds about that part; which while he was struggling
with them to preserve, a Boy providentially goes by with a Light, which their
Deeds of Darkness not being able to endure, they all ran away, and left Mr.
Arnold weltering in his Blood, who yet, by God's Providence, recover^d again,
and lived to see Justice done to one of the Villains that used him in that
barbarous manner: His name was Giles, and was discovered by a wound in his Leg,
which one of his Accomplices ran through in the scuffle, as he was making a
Stab at Mr. Arnold. He was tried for the Action, found Guilty of it, and
Sentenced to stand in the Pillory for the same, which was accordingly executed,
with a liberal Contribution over and above from the enraged Rabble, who
sufficiently made up for the Gentleness of his Sentence, though as Severe a one
as our mild Laws could inflict upon such Offenders.

Mr. COLLEGE.
NO Body can doubt but that 'twas now very much the Interest of the Papists to
get off, if possible, that foul Imputation of a Plot which stuck so deep upon
'em; which had been confirmed by Sir Edmond's Murder, Coleman's never to be
forgotten Letters, Arnold's Assassination, and a great deal of Collateral
Evidence, which fell in unexpectedly, many of those who gave it being utterly
unacquainted with the first Discoverers. After several unfortunate attempts
they had made to this purpose; after the Living had perjured themselves, and
the Dying done worse, to support their desperate Cause; after Attempts to blast
and ruin some of the Evidence, and buy off others of 'em, in both which,
public Justice took notice of, and punished 'em: being of a Religion that
sticks at no Villainy to serve an Interest, and certainly the most indefatigable
and firm People in the World when they set about any Design, especially where
Diana is concerned, not being yet discouraged, they resolved to venture upon
one Project more, which proved but too successful, to the loss of the bravest
and best Blood in the Kingdom; and that was to Brand all those who were the
steddiest Patriots, and so their greatest Enemies, of what Rank soever they
were, with the odious Character of Persons disaffected to the Government, or,
in the old Language, Enemies to Caesar: They pretended to persuade the World,
that after all this great noise of a Popish Plot, 'twas only a Presbyterian
one lay at the bottom: This they had endeavored in the Meal-tub Intrigue, the
Names of most of the worthy Persons in England being culled out to be sworn
into it: But this miscarrying (like the Mother on it, Mrs. Celiers Miscarriage
in Newgate) they had by this time taken breath, formed new Designs, and
procured new Witnesses which might do business more effectually, and, though they
could not write nor spell their Names, and so were not very well skilled in
Book-learning, yet at Buke-blawing they were admirable; by which Character you
may easily guess they were Irish-men. Nor did they want Fools to believe, any
more than Knaves to manage this Design; by their continued unwearied
Contrivances a great many easy, and some well-meaning People having by this
time been wrought upon to believe almost as implicitly as they themselves,
whatever the Priests would have 'em. One thing, whatever happened, they were
pretty sure of, That whether this Plot were believed, or no, they should carry
on their Intrigue by it: If 'twas, they had what they wished: If it should be
discovered, 'twou'd yet confound and amuse Peoples minds, and make 'em so sick
of Plot upon Plot, that it might make 'em almost stagger in their belief of the
other. They had besides all this, a strong Party at Court to favor their
Enterprises. The King was the Duke's, and the Duke -- all the World know who is*
It Was necessary to flesh their Bloodhounds by degrees, to bring People on by
little and little* to attempt some of inferior Rank for a beginning* and not
split the Cause for want of good management. And who so fit as poor College to
be the first Victim of their Perjury and Malice; by whose Death, besides being
rid of a troublesome Fellow, and breaking the Ice to make room for those to
follow; they might also expect this advantage, That the middle sort of People
would be discouraged in their just hatred of Popery and Papists, and
prosecution of the Laws against them.

'Twas by such Methods as these that Mr. College began to signalize himself in
the World. Being a Man of Courage, Industry, and Sharpness, he made it much of
his Business to serve his Country, as far as possible, in searching after
Priests and Jesuits, and hunting those Vermin out of their lurking Holes, in
which he was very serviceable and successful, and for which, no doubt, they did
not fail to remember him. The first time we meet with him in Public, is, I
think, in Stafford's Trial, where he is brought in for Mr. Dugdale, as a
Collateral Evidence. But by that time the VVind was a little upon turning, and
the Tide of Popular Aversion not quite so strong against Popery, being by the
cunning of our common Enemy diverted into little Streams, and private Factions;
and Arbitrary Power driving on, as the best way to prosecute the Designs of
Rome; to which the City of London in a particular manner made a vigorous
Resistance; which displeasing the grand Agitators, no wonder they endeavored,
as much as possible, to do it a mischief; their kindness to it having been
sufficiently experienced in 66. and even since, In order to which, the K. was
pleased, by the advice of his Ghostly Brother, to alter the common and almost
constant course of Parliaments, and call one at Oxford instead of London. Many
of the Members whereof, and especiall^ those of London were apprehensive of
some design upon 'em there, having formerly in the Gunpowder Treason, and ever
since, sufficiently found the Love of the Papists to Protestant Parliaments,
and knowing very well what they were to expect from their kindness, if they
should be attempted upon by 'em, and found defenseless. And more ground of
Suspicion they had, because, as College protests in his Speech, there had been
Affidavits judiciously made of a formed Design against 'em, being besides
removed away from the City of London, which had always so much of the English
Blood in it, as heartily to love Parliaments, and for that reason would have
ventured all for their defense. From these, and such like Reasons 'twas, that
several of the Parliament men went accompanied with some of their Friends, well
armed and accoutred, to Oxford, of which number this Mr. College was one, he
waiting on my Lord Clare, Paget, and Huntington to Oxford; where the
Parliament, foreseeing what has since happened, would have gone on where they
left off in former Sessions, which, causing great Heats, every body knows how
abruptly they were dissolved not long after their meeting. 'Twas now grown the
entertainment of every Coffee-House, and the Subject of every Buffoons Pamphlet
to expose and vilify Parliaments as much as possible, and the very name of it
was now grown as odious to some men, as that of Protestant. Mr. College had,
besides all his other forementioned Crimes, been, as he declares in his Speech,
a great Honourer of that august Assembly, and had been in former Sessions
engaged by ^^me of the honorable Members to search the places adjoining the
Parliament House, lest there should be a new Gun-powder-Treason hatching for
'em; from whence, as he says himself, he believes he got that Popular Name of
Protestant Joyner.

All these Reasons together were more than enough to get him taken out of the
way; and for the performance thereof, Heins, Macnamarra, and one or two of the
Apostate Evidence of the Popish Plot, informed against him. Nor is it a wonder
that after so many attempts, some of those men should be prevailed with to
prove false; but rather, that under so many temptations, any of 'em resisted*
or were not sooner Villains. These Persons swore such mad things against him,
of taking Whitehall, and pulling the King out of it, and such other odd wild
Stories, that partly from the improbability of the matter, and partly from the
ill Character of the Persons who witnessed it, the Jury here in London refused
to find the Bill, but returned it Ignoramus. On which, contrary to all Justice,
and President, and Law, and Common Reason, which forbids a man should be twice
in danger of his Life for the same Offense; the business was removed to Oxford,
where how little Civility or common Justice he met with in his Trial, was then
notorious to all the World: A Person being checked, for giving him but
assistance and notes in the way of his calling, to make his defense, when his
Life was engaged: Yet though even those Notes were denied him: None that heard
the Trial, or so much as read it, but must grant, that he made a very
extraordinary Defense, and much more than could have been expected from a man
of more Learning. But he might have spared all his Labor; the Business was no
doubt on it resolved upon before, and he was found Guilty, Sentenced and
Executed according to Order. To look back once more, and enquire a little
deeper into the very original of the matter: That there was a design laid to
bring in most of the worthy Patriots of England into a Sham-Plot under the
odious, scarecrow name of Presbyterians, not only the Meal-tub-attempt, and
several other of the same Batch, makes sufficiently appear; but the late Essay
of Fitz-harris above all the rest, was enough to satisfy the most prejudiced
Persons. He had conspired with some others to write a scandalous Libel against
the King, which was to be laid on such as they would call Presbyterians, and this
to be sent to their Houses, or conveyed into their Pockets, and there to be
seized, and the Persons prosecuted thereupon. This business the Oxford
Parliament had before 'em, and began to smell out who set it on foot; and being
resolved to find the bottom on it, lest he should be hanged up on the sudden to
prevent his Confession, (he now beginning to melt a little) as Hubert, who
fired London formerly was, they impeached him, to keep the examination of that
matter to themselves. It Is too long to run over the Proceedings against him,
and the Court-Parties subtle contrivance, to Hang, Draw, and Quarter him, and
so to hinder effectually his telling any more Tales. It Is sufficient to
observe, that this design was prosecuted for several years after, and poor
College was to bear the first brunt on it, as has been already declared.

If we reflect yet further on the manner of his Trial, and not look on to any
others, one would be apt to think 'twas impossible a man could be destroyed
with more injustice and barbarity than he was, or that twelve men who look like
Christians, could be found out, who would hang a Man upon such Evidence as was
given against him.

When a Criminal shall be kept a close Prisoner in the Tower, without having
sufficient means to make his Defense, till he come to his Trial: When, as has
been said, he shall be rifled of his Notes, by which he could only save his
Life, on which he depended, and that just before he came to his Trial; though
assisted therein by that very Council assigned by the Court for him: When he
shall in vain demand 'em again, and call Heaven and Earth to witness, that he is
merely cheated of his Life for want of 'em: When all his redress is such a
frivolous excuse, as not only a Judge, but any honest Man would be ashamed to
make use of -- Nay, such a sort of a one as is commonly made before the Judges,
but seldom by 'em -- That 'twas somebody else did it -- That the Court, the
Chief Justice, had 'em not, nor did take 'em from him; when the very Person
stood by who robbed him of 'em; and yet he could have no reparation: When the
Kings Council must whisper the Chief Justice on the Bench, and the Court must
be adjourned, on purpose to examine into those Minutes which the poor Man had
got together to save his Life, and even from them get an opportunity to take it
away, altering the manner of their Prosecution, strengthening and bolstering
their Evidence where they found it weak or contradictory: When all the Evidence
against him, were not only such as an honest London Jury would not believe,
though a Country one, directed by the Kings Council, could make a shift to do
it; but were every one of 'em who witnessed any thing material, confounded by
such home Evidence, as if any thing in the World could do it, did certainly
invalidate and annul their Testimonies: When one of them swears horridly, He
cared not what he swore, nor whom he swore against, for 'twas his Trade to get
Money by swearing. -- That the Parliament were a company of Rogues for not
giving the King Money, but he would help him to Money out of the Fanatics
Estates, which is explained by what Smith says, -- That if the Parliament would
not give the King Money, but stood on the Bill of Exclusion, 'twas pretense
enough to swear a design to seize the King at Oxford. When this same Heins very
pleasantly says, 'Twas a Judgment upon the King and the People, and the
Irish-men's swearing against 'em was justly fallen on 'em, for outing the Irish
of their Estates. When others of 'em swear, That since the Citizens deserted
'em, they would not starve; That they would have Colledge's Blood; That tho
they had gone against their Consciences, 'twas because they had been persuaded
to it, and could get no Money else; and when they had said before they believed
College had no more hand in any Conspiracy against his Majesty, than the Child
unborn; When they would have hired others to swear more into the same Plot;
when the Bench was so just and kind Counsel for the Prisoner, as to tell the
Jury, The Kings Witnesses were on their Oaths, the Prisoners not, and so one to
be credited before the other; in which case it is impossible for any man living
to make a defense against a perjured Villain. Lastly, When the Prisoner himself
very weightily objected -- that there was no proof of any Persons being
concerned with him in the design of seizing the King, and 'twas wisely
answered, -- That he might be so vain to design it alone -- A thousand times
more Romantic Improbability than an Army's lying concealed at Knightsbridge,
and of the same stamp with Draweansirs killing all on both sides. Taking all
these things together, hardly ever was a man at this rate banter'd out of his
Life before any Judicature in the World, in any place or Age that History has
left us.

Nor ought the great Service he did to the Nation in general to be ever
forgotten; since notwithstanding all the disadvantages he was under, the
public stream running so violently against him and his Witnesses, and the
surprise which such strange Treatment, when he was on his Life, might cast him
into, he yet made so strong a Defense, by showing what sort of Witnesses were
brought against him, hindering them ever after from being believed, and thereby
certainly saved many another Life, tho he could not his own.

Nor can the undaunted Courage, and firm Honesty of the man be hardly ever
enough admired. Since besides what he showed in his defense, after he was
condemned, as he himself said, as good as without a Trial, he boldly asked,
When he was to be executed? without any the least seeming concern. And tho he
had time considerable before his Execution to consider on it, refused to save
his Life so meanly, as to make other innocent men's the price of his own;
without which design they had hardly been so kind to have given him so long a
Reprieve.

As for his Behavior at his Execution: 'Twa^ such as convinced more than a few
of his greatest Enemies, and made 'em entertain a much better opinion of him
than before. From his last Speech we shall remark several Passages as another
argument for his Innocence. But before we proceed any further in 'em, 'twill be
needful to fix one assertion, which we may presume few modest unprejudiced
Persons, will deny, and which we shall have occasion to make further use of. --
It Is, -- That a Protestant, who believes an Heaven and Hell, and is not a Man
of no Principles, or debauched and atheistical, would go out of the World, into
the Presence of that God who must Judge him, with a Lie in his Mouth. -- This
none will deny, but those who have a very great kindness for the Papists; and
yet of all men in the world, such as these must not offer to do it, -- since
'twas the very argument they made use of for the Innocence of the Jesuits, and
other Traitors. Though on that side we know there are unanswerable Arguments not
to believe them; their Religion recommending Pe^jury, and all sorts of
Villainies to 'em as meritorious, when Holy Church is concerned. Their Church
besides allowing 'em Dispensations before, and Absolution after, and Purgatory
at the worst, whence a few Masses would fetch them out again. -- Things being
thus, what can any Man of Modesty say to Mr. Colleges Protestations over and
over, both in Prison, and at his Death, that he was perfectly innocent of what
he died for? [ I did deny it then, (says he, that is, before the Council) and
do deny it upon my Death: I never was in any manner of Plot in my days; nor if
I had had any such design as these have sworn against me, I take God to
witness, as I am a dying Man, and on the terms of my Salvation, I know not one
Man upon the face of the Earth which would have stood by me.] And lower, [ I
knew not of any part of what they swore against me, till I heard it sworn at
the Bar.] Again, [ All the Arms we had was for our Defense, in case the Papists
should have made any attempt by way of Massacre, etc. God is my witness this is
all I know.] And in his solemn Prayer, and some of his almost very last Words
-- [ It Is thee, O God, I trust in. -- I disown all Dispensations, and will not
go out of the World with a Lie in my Mouth.] -- And just after to the People, [
From the sincerity of my Heart, I declare again, That these are the very
Sentiments of my Soul, as God shall have mercy upon me.]

Now upon the whole I Would ask any sober man, what he would answer to this, and
how he can forbear, without the greatest Violation to all Principles of Good
Nature and Ingenuity to pronounce this Person innocent?

Thus died Mr. College, whose Blood as he himself desired it might,
sufficiently spoke the Justice o^ his Cause* who seemed in his Speech to have
some Prophetic Intimations, that his Blood would not be the last, as indeed it
was not, but rather a Praelude to that which followed, the Edge of the Laws
being now turned against all those who dared defend it.

He has one Daughter yet living, whose Gratitude and Generosity to those who
were kind to her under the Misfortunes of her Family, is at present the wonder
and entertainment of the Count of England, and whose brave Soul speaks her the
true Child of such a Father.

For his Character. How great and undaunted his Courage was, both his Trial and
Death testify. He was very vigorous and earnest, almost to a Fault, in his
undertakings. But certainly there are so few who err on that hand, that we may
without flattery account this his warm zeal for his Country, if it did a little
exceed, a happy as well as a very pardonable error. He was extraordinary
ingenious in his own Trade, and employed amongst great Persons for his
dexterity therein. He had an entire love for the City of L^ndo^, and stood up
for its honor and privileges as highly as any man living. He ha^ a Soul so
very great and generous, that many who knew him well, have said, considering
his Education, they wondered how he came by it. He was a man of very good sound
sense, considerably more than those of his Rank generally have, which he had
much improved in his latter time by conversation with Persons of Honor and
Quality. In fine, he lived sufficiently beloved by those who knew, and did not
fear him; and died lamented by his Friends, and admired and esteemed by his
very Enemies.

Some time after his Death his Picture was sold about Town, which as I remember
very much displeased the Observator. Under it were these Lines engraven, By
Irish Oaths, and wrested Laws I fell,
A Prey to Rome, a Sacrifice to Hell.
My guilty Blood for speedy Vengeance cries,
Hear, hear and help, for Earth my Suit denies.


Part of a Poem written by Mr. Stephen College, a while before he was sent to
Oxford, where he suffered Death, Aug. 31. 1681.
WHat if I am into a Prison cast,
By Hellish Combinations am betrayed?
My Soul is free, although my Body's fast:
Let them repent that have this evil laid,
And of Eternal Vengeance be afraid;
Though Racks and Gibbers can my Body kill,
My God is with me, and I fear no ill.
What boots the clamours of the giddy Throng?
What Antidote's against a poisonous Breath?
What Fence is there against a Lying Tongue,
Sharpened by Hell to wound a man to Death?
Snakes, Vipers, Adders do lurk underneath:
Say what you will, or never speak at all,
Our very Prayers such Wretches Treason call.
But Walls and Bars cannot a Prison make,
The Freeborn Soul enjoys its Liberty;
These clods of Earth it may incaptivate,
Whilst heavenly Minds are conversant on high,
Ranging the Fields of Blessed Eternity:
So let this Bird sing sweetly in my Breast,
My Conscience clear, a Rush for all the rest.
And sure of this the World's so well aware,
That here it is needless more for me to say,
I must conclude, no time have I to spare,
My winged hours do fly too fast away,
M^ (work) Repentance must I not delay,
I Will add my Prayers to God for England's good;
And if he please will Seal them with my Blood.
ARTHUR Earl of Essex.
THat Party, and those Persons who were engaged to manage the Designs
beforementioned, were now entered on the most compendious way of introducing
what they desired, as well as avoiding what their own Consciences, and all the
World knew they deserved. Having those in their own hands who had the Executive
part of the Government in theirs; and finding no doubt a sort of malicious
pleasure, as well as advantage, in destroying People by those Laws which were
made to preserve 'em; a Villainy to be compared with nothing but the Treason of
that Monster of a Priest, who gave the Emperor Poison in the Blessed
Sacrament: Having wrought up the Nation, and all Parties therein to a high
ferment, making one side mad for Slavery, as if they had all been at
Constantinople as well as their Sheriff, and learnt the Doctrine of the
Bow-string; some of 'em treated, others cajoled, others frightened, and some few
reasoned into the Belief of Absolute Authority in Kings, and Obedience Active
as well as what is called Passive, to be paid to all their Commands. Some
honest, several learned, more witty men joining in with all their power to
advance the Transactions at that time on the wheel. And on the other side,
exasperating that Party who were more tenacious of their Liberties, as much as
possible against the Constitution which they saw so horridly abused both in
Church and State, persuading 'em all the Clergy were for making 'em Slaves* and
themselves and the Court great to ride upon 'em; whereas really it was only a
Party, though too large, who made more noise, though they had neither more sense
nor number than those who differed from 'em; and by this means rendering many of
the trading part of the Nation especially, so dissatisfied with 'em, and eager
against 'em, that they began to think they had reason to fear as bad Effects
thereof as they had experienced in the last Age, and so sided more closely with
that Party whence they expected Protection. When things were in this posture,
and a great many Persons either taken off from their natural Love to a lawful
Liberty, which is so much of the very nature of an Englishman; the Managers of
the great Intrigue which was to accomplish our ruin, resolved after they had
begun with College, to rise higher, and fly at nobler Game, and take off all
those whom they could not win over, or against whom Interest or Revenge had
more keenly engaged 'em, and who were most likely to make the most vigorous
opposition against their Attempts. But finding the London Juries unmoveably
honest, and no way to accomplish their Designs on these Persons, while their
Witnesses would not be believed, and no way to get Juries fit for their turn,
but by having Sheriffs of the same stamp; and finding the Party they had
gotten, after all their tricks, which many of those who then knew, are now
ashamed of, visibly and fairly out-numbred by those who were not yet ripe for
Slavery, they bethought themselves of one way to rid themselves of that
Inconveniency -- which was by a Quo Warranto against the City of London, that
they might more effectually and with less noise have what Sheriffs they
pleased; or in effect, hang whomever they thought their Enemies, and not be
forced almost to blush at those visible and sensible Illegalities with which
they had forced those Officers upon the City.

This they had accomplished in the Year 1683. when Judgment was given against
the Charter of London, whose Liberties had been confirmed to 'em by William the
Conquer^r, and delivered down before from immemorial Ages, and this by two
Judges only in Westminster Hall, though the greatest Cause, one may venture to
say, that ever was legally tried therein.

Now by this time they had, after so many former fruitless endeavors, brought
something of a Plot to bear; and with this Advantage above all their former,
that there was really something in it, although, as Bays says in another Case,
That Truth, which was notoriously blended with Lies and Perjuries. The occasion
of it, we may best meet with in Holloway's most ingenuous Acknowledgment; [ By
Arbitrary and ^llegal ways, and force of Arms, they had got Sheriffs to their
mind, -- Witnesses they had before, but wanted Jurors to believe them* N^w they
have got Sheriffs who will find Jurors to believe any Evidence against a
Protestant, and so hang up all the King's Friends by degrees. -- None being
suffered to come near the King but those who have been declared Enemies to the
King and Kingdom, who to save themselves, do endeavor to keep all things from
the King's knowledge, and persuade him against Parliaments, etc.]

Thus much for the Occasion. The Design seems to be the same with what was
intended at first, by many of those great and eminent Persons, both Clergy and
Laity, in their late appearance in Arms; though by the Providence of God, for the
Security of the Nation, and Reason of State, it has since been carried farther
than theirs was ever to have been. [ Seeing fair means, says Holloway, would
not do, but all things on the Protestants side misrepresented to the King by
such great Criminals, and none more in favor than those, -- To take the King
from his Evil Council, and that (as the late wonderful Turn was transacted, and
as it is impossible to be otherwise in business of so large a Concern, by a
general Insurrection in several parts of England at ones.] All those who have
had any share in the present Transactions, which are upon the matter all the
Nation, have shown themselves plainly of the same mind with those who were
engaged in this, on which the Dispute runs, as to the Reason of the Thing, and
the Principles on which they proceeded -- And their only difference is about
Matter of Fact, Whether Things were then at that height as to need desperate
Remedies. If it be objected, That such Attempts are only glossy Pretenses,
vali'd under the specious name of the Public Good. -- The Answer is as ready
as the Objection, Is there any difference between Reason and no Reason, Truth
and Falsehood? There is a right, and a wrong, -- and if ever Liberties were
invaded, and the Ends of Government vacated and annulled, never were the
Foundations of such a Design plainer than on this Occasion -- So that 'twas
indeed, what was of it, a Counter-Plot, rather than a Plot against the
Government and Laws of England, and that when no other Remedy could without a
Miracle be expected.

That this was the height and utmost of the then Design, and that no brave
good man need to be ashamed on it, I think all, or most men are by this time
pretty well satisfied. But alas! this would not serve the turn of the Managers
-- Even this might not, nor perhaps could not be, as certainly 'twas not fairly
proved against several, who suffered for it. This was a thing so necessary and
defensible, that there was occasion of laying fouler colors upon it, to fright
and amuse the World, and let 'em stand by patiently, and see their best and
bravest Patriots sink, with much such Prudence and Wisdom as the Sheep in the
Fable suffered those bloody Mastiffs to be destroyed, who so often broke the
Peace between them and the harmless Wolves; and were afterward in their turns
handsomely worried, and justly eaten up for their Reward. 'Twas convenient to
make somewhat more of it -- There must be an Assassination grafted on this
Insurrection, or else all would not be worth -- an Halter: 'Twas the business
and interest of the Popish Party to render their Enemies odious as possible to
the people, of whom for their steady Zeal and Love to their Religion and
Liberties they had long been the Darlings. To accomplish this, 'twas very
necessary to get some Persons to insinuate into their Counsels, to inflame
things higher, to make black and odious Proposals of Assassinations, and
Murders, and such bloody Villainies as alarm the goodnature of an Englishman
with the very mentioning of 'em. -- Which yet some of the honester and wiser
looking upon as mad hot words only, or, if any more intended, having it in
their power to prevent such wickedness another way, would not yet turn
Informers, nor ruin those Persons, who in all probability were only Trapans to
ruin them. In all the Papers relating to this matter, we shall find all
Discourses of this nature centered in West and Rumsey. West was very much for
the Lopping business -- for killing 'em in their Calling -- and was full and
eager of it. Though Walcot, Holloway, and all whoever heard it proposed, received
it still with the greatest Detestation imaginable, as a most base and bloody
Action, which they never would have their own Hands imbrued in, nor their
Posterity stained with. That all the great Persons, of Birth and Honor, were
absolutely against any so foul an Action, and abhorred it from their Souls, we
may find, even without the forced Confession of their worst Enemies, by the
Lord Russel's concern when such a thing was muttered, and the Duke of
Monmouth's Answer, -- God so -- Kill the King, I will never suffer it. The
account we have of it, is from him who should best know, and that is West, who
in his Discourse with Holloway on this Occasion, tells him of the New Market
and Rye-house Design -- That the King and Duke were to be killed as they came
by, for which they had provided Arms for fifty Men -- and were promised
Rumbald's House, which lay in the Road. When asked, Who was to act it -- who
were to fire these Arms for fifty Men -- Pistols, Carbines, and Blunderbusses?
He could name but two Men, Rumbald and his Brother; who certainly must have
been very dexterous to have discharged all those dreadful Businesses themselves
without Assistance, and is much such a likely Story as Colleges being so vain
to attempt seizing the King by himself, without any Assistance.

But if even these two Brothers, who very likely were picked out by the Evidence
for the Kingkillers, merely for their hard Names, the very sound of which would
be as shrewd an Argument of their Guilt to Women and Children, and with as
much Justice, as some of the odd Names of the poor People in the West were
made, at least a strong Presumption against 'em, and almost as mortal as an
Innuendo. ^f even these two were innocent of this horrid Business, who were the
only Persons engaged therein, pray, What then becomes of the Assassination?
And will not Rumbald's Blunderbuss hear Laughing at full as well as ^ickering's
Carbine or Screw-Gun, and chaw'd Bul^ets. But if there be any thing solid in
that Observation in Colledge's Case, That a Christian, and a Protestant will not
forswear himself when he is just going out of the World; if this fair
Supposition may but be granted me, as I see not how it can be avoided, the
matter will be clear enough; Rumbald himself in his Speech at his Execution in
Scotland absolutely disclaiming and denying any hand in any such Design. See
his Speech* and Answer to his Indictment -- [ He desired all present to believe
the words of a dying Man -- as for having designed the King's death, he never
directly, nor indirectly, intended such a Villainy; That he abhorred the very
thoughts on it; and that he blessed God he had that Reputation in the World,
that he knew none had the Impudence to ask him the Question, and he detested
the Thoughts of the Action, and hoped all good people would believe him, which
was the only way he had to clear himself; and he was sure that this Truth
should one Day be manifest to all Men.] So at his Execution -- [ I think it
necessary to clear my self of some Aspersions laid on my Name; and first, That
I should have had so horrid an Intention of destroying the King and his
Brother.] Where he repeated what he had said to the Jury on the same Subject.

The Sum is, -- If any Assassination, it must have been by the Rumbalds: if not
by them, as has been proved, then not at all. If no assassination in this Plot,
then nothing is left of malignity in it, but a lawful and laudable opposition
to the breach and ruin of our good Laws and Government; and even that, as will
be proved, not proved against most of those that by the iniquity of the times,
suffered for the same.

We have been forced to give this fair and impartial Scheme or Idea of that
design which was at that time represented so formidable and dreadful, before we
could handsomely proceed to the Death of this Noble Lord, or those others that
followed him; and that as well from the order of the History, as for his
Vindication. And as has been remarked, 'Twas necessary for that Party who
managed our ruin, that the forementioned business of the Assassination should
be believed, and nothing like a real one actually performed, to gain Credit to
a feigned one only pretended: For what could be a greater Argument that there
was some black wickedness at the bottom, some sin of an extraordinary stain,
like the Murder of Princes, bearing too hard on his Conscience, could possibly
induce so great a Man to so unchristian an attempt on his own Person? Hence
they might, and no doubt did argue -- Hence the very rabble may easily reason
-- Certainly there was more in it than only just consultations, and necessary
measures taken for the Public Safety by the Peers of the Realm -- by the King
and Kingdoms best Friends, to deliver his Majesty from those Familiars that
haunted him. There was more than this, and this Lord was conscious of it, or
else certainly he had never acted what he has. Now this would effectually
excite that aversion which must necessarily follow from all honest Men to a
Party who could be guilty of such horrid designs. This must of necessity, as in
effect it did, sway much with those Juries who were to sit upon the Lives of
any accused or concerned in the same business, had there not been more weighty
reasons to be produced below toward the finding 'em guilty. Although it is
certain, by their own confession, the best excuse they could make for Innocent
Blood, particularly in Russel's Case, was that Confirmation they had to the
Evidence sworn against 'em' by Essex's Murder. Besides, There might be a
barbarous kind of a pleasure, in opening this Plot with a Scene so like that
which began the Popish one; and that in all probability, by the same Actors
whose hands were deep in the others.

There was a Gentleman killed, which contributed very much toward the credit
of that Plot, tho in another way. Here must be one to undergo the same Fate for
the same reason. And both of 'em too pretendedly to kill themselves -- Just one
as much as another.

These Preliminaries being cleared, 'twill be now time to come to the Person of
this Noble Lord, his Family, and former manner of Life.

Every one knows he was of the Illustrious Family of the Capels, whose Father
died for a Family, whence he deserved better Treatment for his sake, and had
received it, had he not fallen into the Hands of Popish Gratitude and Mercy;
which his Enemies knowing too well, and doubting the Sweetness of temper which
all the world ever acknowledged in King Charles the Second would not give him
over to their public Revenge, in all probability, resolved to take a shorter
course with him. He had been some years before in the highest place under the
King in Ireland, and there behaved himself with that Wisdom and Candor,
inseparable from all the actions of his Life -- and lived above Blame, though
not above Envy: Being recalled thence unexpectedly, and dealt with not very
handsomely; which yet he bore with a Spirit like a brave man, and a Christian.

My Lord of Essex was a Person, whom, 'twas no doubt the highest Interest of
the Popish Faction to have gotten out of the way, even though there had been no
such extraordinary Reason as has been mentioned. He had large Interest, a
plentiful Estate, a great deal of Courage, understood the World, and the
Principles and Practices of the Papists as well as any man, having been of
several Secret Committees in the Examination of the Plot, on which very reason
there was as much necessity for his dying as Sir E. B. Godfrey's. He was
besides all this, they very well knew, of Inflexible Honesty, and so true a
greatness of mind, they could no more expect to gain him, than Heaven it self
to be on their side

As for the immediate Subject of his Death, the manner and cir^u^stances
thereof -- It must first be granted and a very reasonable demand it is, that
for the present only supposing he was murdered by the Papists they would, we
may be sure, make it their business to render the manner of it as dark as the
Hell in which 'twas contrived. Murders, especially of that magnitude, don't use
to be committed in the face of all the world, and at Noonday. When Power is
engaged in any Villainy, when the same Power is still continued or increased,
and can be easily exercised in taking out of the way the Traitors, though it
loves the Treason; and when so many years have intervened since the Fact; it is
no wonder at all if things are more in the dark, than they would have been, had
at that very instant Liberty been given to have enquired into it, which was so
loudly and passionately demanded. But this we are yet certain of, though no more
be yet publicly known in this matter than what has formerly been Printed; and
though there may be several reasons, both of State and Decency, which may perhaps
make it convenient that things should always be as they are; yet there are
already such violent probabilities, both that he was murdered, and murdered
by Papists; And of the other side, such at least next to impossibilities, in
his acting it himself, that as long as the World stands, no modest man will be
able either to get by 'em or over 'em; nor the most impudent or cunning, to
outface, or give them an answer.

For the probability that he was murdered by Popish Contrivement, besides
those already named, Why they should do it; here are these following Arguments,
That they did it; Their Principles too openly known to be denied: Their
Practices in all Ages, and this present, -- Sir E.B.G. the very Prototype of
Essex, Arnold; all the pretended Legal Murders, all that has since happened --
But if it is said, some Papists are better and braver than others. Let Us come
nearer. Would those that formerly burnt London; those who have since broke all
the Obligations of Gratitude and Good Nature, nay, Public Faith, and the most
solemn Oaths which it is possible for a man to take -- Who, if the Testimonies
of such as have confirmed it with their dying Breaths, and last drop o^ Blood,
may be credited, who have encouraged, hired, paid men for attempts to be made
on the lives of their nearest, and too tender Relations; Would such as these
stick at a single murder, a small Venial Villainy to advance their Cause, and
merit Heaven into the Bargain; When pretense of Justice, necessity of Affairs,
Reason of State, and so many more such weights might be thrown into the Scales?
More than all this -- When such Persons as these were actually in the place
where this Murder was committed, at the very instant 'twas done? All these
together, with what is yet to follow, amount to as strong Arguments and
pregnant Circumstances as the nature of the thing will bear, and mark out the
Murderers as plainly and visibly, as if they had come out of his Chamber with
white Sleeves, and a long Knife in their Hands, bloody all over.

And indeed there seems need of little more than relating bare, simple,
indubitable matter of Fact, and such as hardly any body will deny, to satisfy
any cool rational man in the business.

The Earl of Essex's Throat was cut in the Tower the 13 th of July, about Eight
or Nine in the Morning, at which time the Duke of York, a bigoted Papist, his
known bitter Enemy, was there present. This was reported at Andover, sixty
miles from London, the 11 th of July, the first day of his Imprisonment, and as
common Towntalk in every bodies mouth, as Sir E.B.G's at the time of his
murder, and told a Person traveling on the Road near the same place, which
was witnessed before, even a Jeffreys, in a public Court of Judicature. A
Deputy-Coroner present at the Inquest instead of a Legal one; none of the
Relations to attend the Inquest. The Body removed from the place where 'twas
first laid, stripped, the Clothes taken away, the Body and Rooms washed from the
Blood, the Clothes denied the view of the Jury. The principal Witnesses
examined, only Bomeny his man, and Russel his Warder, who might be so justly
suspected of being privy to, if not Actors in it. That the Jury hastened and
hurried the Verdict when so great a man, a Peer of the Realm, and such a Peer
was concerned, who was the King's Prisoner. When Sir Thomas Overbury had been
before murdered in the Tower, and his Jury brought in an unrighteous Verdict;
when even Sir E. B. G's Jury, so much cried out against for their ill
management, adjourned their Verdict, and staid considerably before they brought
it in. This at a time when the Lord Russel was to be tried for a share in a
Plot in which the Earl was also accused of being concerned. One Branch of which
Conspiracy, and which 'twas so much the Papists Interest to have the belief
on it fixed, was a barbarous Murder of the Duke and King; when nothing could so
immediately, and critically tend to that noble Gentleman's ruin; when the News
was instantly, with so much diligence, conveyed from the Tower to the
Sessions House, Bench, Bar, and Jury, and harp'd upon by the Lord Howar^ just
then and by others in after Trials, as the more than a thousand Witnesses, and
the very finger of God. After this, the very Sentinel, who that Day stood near
the place, found dead in the Tower-Ditch, and Captain Hawley barbarously
murdered down at Rochester; and ill methods used to prevent the truth of all
from coming to light. Mr. Braddon harassed, prosecuted, jayl'd and fined for
stirring in it. On the fair and impartial Consideration but of these things,
hardly one of which but is notorious Matter of Fact, granted by all sides --
What can a man conclude from the whole, but whether he will or no -- That this
noble Lord was certainly murdered by the Popish Party?

But there is yet more Evidence, -- If he could not Murder himself in that
manner, who then should do it but those on whom the Guilt on it has been justly
charged? And this from the manner of it. His Throat was cut from one Jugular to
the other, and by the Aspera Arteria and Windpipe to the Vertebrae of the Neck,
both the Jugulars being thoroughly divided. How often has it been asked, and how
impossible it should ever receive an Answer, -- How could any Living Man, after
the prodigious flux of Blood which must necessarily follow on the dividing one
Jugular, as well as all those strong Muscles which lie in the way, how could he
ever have strength to go through, all round, and come to the other, without
fainting? One could as soon believe the Story of the Pirate, who after his Head
was cut off, ran the whole length of his Ship; or that of St. Dennis, which was
no doubt grafted on the other.

Nor is it rendered less impossible from the Instrument with which those who
did it would persuade the World 'twas performed by himself A little French
Razor. Had Bomeny held to the Penknife, it had been much more likely. But here
was nothing to rest or bear upon in the cutting, it having no Tongue to hold it
up in the Haft: And as it is observed in the Prints on that Subject, he must
therefore, supposing he had done it himself, have held his hand pretty far,
upon the very Blade, and so with about two inches and a half of it, whittle out
a wound of four inches deep and all round his Neck, as if he had intended to
have been his own Headsman as well as Executioner, out of Remorse of Conscience
for his Treason.

Lastly, His Character makes it morally impossible he should be guilty of so
mean and little an Action. It Is for Women, and Eunuch's, and Lovers, and
Romantic Hero's to kill themselves; not Men of known Virtue, Temper, Wisdom,
Piety and Gravity; who had formerly digested as great Affronts as could be put
upon a Man, with a candor and calmness so worthy a Man and a Christian, who had
been so far from defending so barbarous and unmanly a thing as Self-murder, as
is suggested, that he had rather express himself with Detestation concerning it.

And as he ought not, and could not be hurried into so fatal an Action by a
false mistaken Greatness of Mind; as no such thing, or so much as the least
Footsteps of it appeared in the whole course of his Life; so from all his
Actions in the Tower before his Death, we may fairly deduce the quite contrary
to what his Enemies have asserted; and by observing his Conduct there, discover
plainly that no such black Intention ever entered into his Mind. This appears
from his ordering his People to have his own Plate sent for out of the Country
to dress his Meat* as well as a considerable parcel of Wines bought and brought
into the Tower for his drinking, that he might not stand to the Courtesy of
his Enemies; and this sufficient to last him till he could be delivered by due
Course of Law.

I can foresee but one thing that can with the least plausibility be objected
to this considerable Passage; and it is, That this was when he was first
Committed, before he fell Melancholy, which he more eminently did when he heard
my Lord Russel was to be tried, as being grieved and desperate for having
brought so brave a Gentlemen into such unhappy Circumstances, as Bomeny
somewhere or other pretends to, on discoursing with him on that particular.

But there are two Answers which cut all the Sinews of this Objection: One,
That this was the very day before he was murdered, that he sent both for his
Wine and Silver Vessels. Now Bomeny lays the Foundation of his Melancholy, and
the Intention to be his own Destroyer on the very first day he came into the
Tower. For he says in his Deposition in Braddon's Trial, [ That he had ordered
his Servant two days before to provide a Penknife for him, on pretense of
cutting his Nails, but with an intent of committing that Fatal and Tragical
Act.] The Thirteenth of July was the day of his Martyrdom, two days before then
must be the Eleventh, the day of his Commitment: But 'twas the intervening day,
the Twelfth of that Month, on which he took such care to eat and drink safely:
whereas had there been any such design in his Head, he would never have taken
such Measures; and if he had had an intention to amuze his People, that no such
thing might have been suspected, he might have taken other ways, less
troublesome and chargeable.

But what yet clears all the remaining Scruple, is his ordering his Gentleman
to take Notes at my Lord Russel's Trial, appointing him how to manage himself
for the effecting it, so calmly and orderly, that he cannot be supposed, either
disturbed, or desperate on account of his own Guilt, or Russel's unhappiness;
or to have taken this Course with himself, as Jeffreys says in Braddon's Trial,
to prevent Justice, though others did it with him to prevent Mercy.

One great Argument more; That, which indeed when it happened, did much alarm
all thinking men, and make 'em shrewdly suspect foul play had been offer'd-was
the ill Treatment those met with who dared but pry into these Arcana Imperii,
and desire but in a legal way that the Business might be reviewed, and searched
to the bottom. This was granted in the Case of poor Sir Edmund, many years
after his Death, and Commission given to enquire into it to L'Estrange. -- But
it is confessed there was a great deal of Difference. One, as 'twas managed,
tending to root up all belief of a Popish Plot: The Other if it had been honestly
examined, might have done as much in reality to a Protestant One. The great
tenderness of some Persons, in this Case, and their huge aversion and
unwillingness to be touched thereabouts; made People more than suspect, that
there was some Sore or other in the Case which would not endure it. Mr. Braddon
had heard of a Boy, who being playing before Essex's window that Morning, saw a
bloody Razor thrown out of the window; he thought he should do the King Service
to make a Discovery if any Injury had been offered to one of his Subjects,
especially so great and good a Person. He brings the Boy with him to my L.
Sunderland, and for his Reward is himself brought before the Council, severely
Reprimanded, and forced to give 2000 l. Bail to Answer an Information for
Suborning the Boy to say what he did. Upon which, after a great many worse
vexations, which besides the charge and trouble* hindered also his Prosecution
of the Business while 'twas yet fresh and warm, he was at last tried: The very
words to the Indictment running, -- For his procuring and suborning false
Witnesses to prove that the Earl of Essex was not a Felon of himself. etc. Of
which, according to Jefferys Law, and the Conscience of the then Juries, he was
found Guilty, and fined for the same, though not the least syllable of Practice
or Subornation proved against him: though the Boy did himself acknowledge he had
said those things, as well as several Witnesses proved it: though 'twas terribly
suspicious that some Art had been afterward used with the Boy to make him deny
it; though Jefferys stormed and raved, after his usual manner, when Mr. Wallop
did put such a Question, and would by no means have it be answered.

But whatever this courageous honest Gentleman suffered from their Spite and
Malice, he bore all with handsome, and truly English Resolution. As he before
his Imprisonment, and since, was indefatigably diligent in getting up the
bottom of this soul Business; all Englishmen must own, he has deserved the
Love and Honor of his Country, who was not discouraged from acting even in the
worst of times, against a whole enraged Faction. where he had such firm and
pregnant Circumstances on which to ground his Attempt; though he could not but be
sensible he must undergo all the Censures of his Friends, as forward and
imprudent; as well as all the hate and malice of his own and his Countries
Enemies. He deserves a much fairer Commendation than here can be given him; but
however, this was a just a Debt due to his Courage and Honesty, when he alone
durst undertake what all the World else was afraid of: Durst still continue
firm to Honor, and Conscience, and his first Resolution, in spite of Fines and
Imprisonments, and has now outlived 'em all, to carry on his first
Undertakings; whose Design therein, is no doubt just and generous, whatever the
Event proves; And although so much Dust may have, since it happened, been
purposely thrown on the Action, that it may be now more difficult, and perhaps
unsuccessful to trace it, than 'twas before.

His Character.
IT must be confessed, it is a bold and dangerous thing to attempt the Character
of one of the greatest Men which our Age has produced especially for one who
had not the honor of any personal intimacy with him. All that is to be done is
from what has been already said and what other Memoirs are left of him, to
endeavor at something so like him, that any one who sees it, may say 'twas
meant for the Picture of the Great Essex, how infinitely soever it must of
necessity be short of its Original.

The first thing then remarkable in him, and which alone would sufficiently
distinguish him, is, That he was a Person of strict Morals, and severe Piety;
and that in the midst of a Court and Age not very famous for either. Nor did
this degenerate into Superstition or Weakness. He was a refined Politician,
without what some will say it is impossible to be so, and that is Dissimulation.
When Affronts were offered him, he did not, as others, dissemble 'em, but, like
himself only, scorn and conquer 'em; even though of the highest nature, and which
generally pierce deepest into Persons of his Figure and Character. He was, as
all the rest here commemorated, a firm Lover of his Country and Religion, the
true Character of a true Englishman; and engaged on their sides against the
then Duke of York, and other Ministers, not from any mean pique or little
discontented Humor, which he was very much above, but merely from the true
respect he had for 'em, and a sense of that imminent Danger they were in, which
his piercing Judgment and long Experience made him more sensible of, and his
Courage and Virtue more concerned at, than others; not only those who sat
unconcerned Spectators, or shared in their Ruins; but even then most of them
who were engaged with him in the same Common Cause of their Defense and
Preservation. Nothing of such an impatience, or eargerness, or black melancholy
could be discerned in his Temper or Conversation, as is always the Symptom or
Cause of such Tragical-Ends, as his Enemies would persuade us he came to.

Lastly, What may be said of most of the rest, does in a more especial and
eminent manner agree to the illustrious Essex; and than which nothing greater
can be said of Mortality, He lived an Hero, and died a Martyr.

Upon the Execrable Murder of the Right Honorable Arthur Earl of Essex.
MOrtality would be too frail to hear
How ESSEX fell, and not dissolve with fear;
Did not more generous Rage take off the blow,
And by his Blood, the steps to Vengeance show.
The Tower was for the Tragedy designed,
And to be slaughtered, he is first confined:
As fettered Victims to the Altar go.
But why must Noble ESSEX perish so?
Why with such fury dragged into his Tomb,
Murdered by slaves and sacrificed to Rome?
By stealth they kill, and with a secrect stroke
Silen^e that Voice which charmed when ever it spoke.
The bleeding Orifice o'reflow'd the Ground,
More like some mighty Deluge, than a Wound.
Through the large space his Blood and Vitals glide,
And his whole Body might have past beside.
The wreaking Crimson swelled into a Flood,
And streamed a second time in Capel's Blood.
He Is in his Son again to Death pursued,
An Instance o^ the highest Ingratitude.
They then malicious Stratagems Employ,
With Life, his dearer Honor to destroy,
And make his Fame extinguish with his Breath;
An Act beyond the Cruelties of Death.
Here Murder is in all its shapes complete,
As Lines united in their Center meet,
Formed by the blackest Politics of Hell;
Was Cain so devilish when his Brother fell?
He that contrives, or his own Fate desires,
Wants Courage, and for fear of Death expires;
But mighty ESSEX was in all things brave,
Neither to Hope, nor to Despair, a Slave.
He had a Soul too Innocent, and Great,
To fear, or to anticipate his Fate:
Yet their exalted Impudence and Guilt,
Charge on himself the precious Blood they spilt.
So were the Protestants some years ago
Destroyed in Ireland without a Foe.
By their own barbarous Hands the Madmen dye:
And Massacre themselves they know not why:
Whilst the kind Irish howl to see the Gore,
And pious Catholics their Fate deplore.
If you refuse to trust Erroneous Fame,
Royal Mac-Ninny will confirm the same.
We have lost more in injured Capel's heir,
Than the poor Bankrupt age can e're repair.
Nature indulged him so, that there we saw
All the choice strokes her steady hand could draw.
He the Old English Glory did revive,
In him we had Plantagenets alive.
Grandeur, and Fortune, and a vast Renown
Fit to support the luster of a Crown.
All these in him were potently conjoined,
But all was too ignoble for his Mind.
Wisdom and Virtue, Properties Divine,
Those, God-like ESSEX, were entirely thine.
In his great Name he is still preserved alive,
And will to all succeeding times survive.
With just Progression, as the constant Sun
Does move, and through its bright Ecliptic Run.
For whilst his Dust does undistinguished lie,
And his blessed Soul is soared above the Sky,
Fame shall below his parted Breath supply.
William Lord Russel.
THE next who fell under their Cruelty, and to whose Death Essex's was but the
Prologue, was my Lord Russel, without all Dispute the finest Gentleman one of
'em that ever England bred, and whose pious Life and Virtue was as much Treason
against the Court, by affronting 'em with what was so much hated there, as any
thing else that was sworn against him. His Family was ancient, though not raised
to the Honors it at present enjoys, till King Edward's time, when John Russel,
a Dorsetshire Gentlemen, who had done many Services, and received many favors
from the Crown, both in Henry the Seventh, and Henry the Eighth's time, being
by the latter made Lord High Admiral, and at his Death Lord High Steward of
England for the Solemnity of the Coronation; obtained such a Victory for his
young Master against his Rebels, as was rewarded with the Title of The Earl of
Be^dford. The Occasion of it thu -- Idolatry and Superstition being now rooting
out by the Public Authority, and Images every where pulling down, the Loyal
Papists mutined, and one of their Priests stabbed a Commander of the Kings, who
was obeying his Orders, and ten thousand of the deluded Rabble rise in the
Defense of that barbarous Action, and their old Mass and Holy Water. Against
whom this fortunate Lord was sent with an Army, who routed 'em all, relieved
Exeter which they had besieged, and took their Gods, Banners, Crucifixes, and
all the rest of their Trumpery, wherein the deluded Creatures trusted for
Victory. Thus the Family of the Russels were early Enemies to the Romish
Superstition, though this brave Gentleman only paid the Scores of all his
Ancestors. The Son and Heir of this John* was Francis, second Earl of Bedford,
who was as faithful to the Crown, as his Father, an Enemy and Terror to the
French, and a Friend to the Protestant Religion, as may appear by the Learned
Books of Wickliff, which he collected, and at his Death bequeathed to a great
Man, who he knew would make good use of 'em. His eldest Son William Lord
Russel, the present Earl of Bedford, is sufficiently known to every true
Englishman, and his Person and Memory will be honored by them as long as the
World lasts. But it is necessary good men should not be immortal -- if they
were, we should almost lose their Examples, it looking so like Flattery. But to
do 'em Justice while they are living, with more safety, and less censure, we
may discourse of that Noble Gentleman, his Son and Namesake William Lord
Russel, who made so great a Figure in our Courts and Parliaments, before he was
sacrificed to the Cruelty and Revenge of his Popish Enemies. If we'd find his
first Offense, which lay behind the Scene, and was indeed the Cause of his
Death, though other Colors were necessary to amuse the Public, we must look
some years backward, as he himself does in his last Speech, wherein he tells
the World, [He cannot but think his Earnestness in the matter of the Exclusion
had no small influence on his present Sufferings.] Being chosen Knight of the
Shire for Bedfordshire, where the evenness and sweetness of his Behavior; and
his virtuous Life made him so well-beloved, that he will never be forgotten. He
began sooner than most others to see into that danger we were in from Popery,
and all those fatal consequences which have since happened; and described them
as plainly as if he had more than the ordinary inspection of a prudent man into
Futurities. Thus in his first Speech, on the Discovery of the Popish Plot in
78. He has these words, [ I am of Opinion that the Life of our King, the Safety
of our Country, and the Protestant Religion, are in great danger from Popery;
and that either this Parliament must suppress the power and growth of Popery,
or else that Popery will soon destroy not only Parliaments, but all that is
near and dear to us.] And lower [ I humbly move, that we may resolve to take
into our consideration in the first place, how to suppress Popery, and prevent
a Popish Successor, without which all our endeavors about this matter will not
signify any thing.] And how much he was in the right as to all these Guesses,
which then no doubt were nicknamed Groundless and Factious Fears and
Jealousies, all the World is now satisfied. Nothing can be more handsome than
what he says on this Subject in his last Speech, which gives the reasons of his
acting at that time, and being so earnest for the Bill, in which indeed is as
fair a State of that great Question as we shall any where find in so little a
compass. [ I cannot (says he) but give some touch about the Bill of Exclusion,
and show the reasons of my appearing in that business, which in short is this:
That I thought the Nation was in such danger of Popery, and that the
expectation of a Popish Successor (as I have said in Parliament) put the Kings
Life also in such danger, that I saw no way so effectual to secure both, as
such a Bill. As to the Limitations which were proposed, if they were sincerely
offered, and had passed into a Law, the Duke then would have been excluded from
the Power of a King, and the Government quite altered, and little more than the
name of a King left: So I could not see either sin or fault in the one, when
all People were willing to admit of the other: But thought it better to have a
King with his Prerogative, and the Nation easy and safe under him, than a King
without it, which must have bred perpetual Jealousies, and continual struggle.]
Thus far that Noble Lord, with whom concurred at that time very many great and
good Men, as true Lovers of the Regulated Monarchy of England, as of the
Protestant Religion; and indeed all were at that time unanimous in the House of
Commons, and other places, except some honest Men, who despaired of obtaining
his Exclusion: Others who strained their Charity almost as far as Origin, who
hoped well even of the Devil, and they came not far short, believing a Papist
would be honest or grateful. Some who were indifferent -- Their private
Obligations to the Duke byassing their Judgments too much on his side. Others
fearful that the contrary Tide ran so strong, they could have no safety but
under his Protection -- and perhaps more than all these others, who fairly
bought and sold their Religion and Liberties -- the Blood and Souls of
themselves and honester men; whom it is not doubted but our Chronicles will mark
as long as our Nation has any in it that can but write themselves, or read what
others have written.

The Reader will pardon this little Digression, and go on with me to remark
some strange Expressions in another Speech of his. 'Twas on a Debate in the
House for Money to be given for the Relief of Tangier. [Doth not (says he) the
Dukes Interest endanger the Kings Life? and are not our Lives and Fortunes in
danger to be snatched up by his Power? -- and shall we yet make him stronger by
putting Money into his hands?] And a little lower, [ When his Majesty shall be
pleased to free us from the danger of a Popish Successor, and remove from his
Council, and Places of Trust all those who are for his Interest, because there
can be no distinction made between the Dukes Interest and the Popish -- Then I
shall conclude, that what Money we shall give, will be disposed of according to
his Majesty's own Royal Pleasure, and for the true Protestant Interest, and I
shall be ready to give, even all that I have in the World, if his Majesty shall
have occasion for it.] I have been the larger in this, to undeceive the World
as to that clamouring against those Parliaments for not giving the King Money,
the true reason of which we may here plainly perceive.

But there is one passage so very remarkable, and I know not how to call it
less than Prophetical, in the beginning of this same Speech, that it must by no
means be omitted; it is as follows. [ If ever there should happen in this Nation
any such Change, that I should not have Liberty to live a Protestant, I am
resolved to die one.] And I think he was as good as his Word -- For being
marked out, and among others, appointed for the Slaughter, he was taken up and
imprisoned for that end and purpose in the Tower, and brought to his Trial
above all days in the year, on Essex's day, the 13th of July, 1683. He was
brought to the Old Baily, arraigned, and the same morning tried for High
Treason. He earnestly desired he might have respite, and might not be tried
that day, since he had some Witnesses that could not be in Town till the Night;
nay, they were in such post-hast, and so hot a scent for his Blood, that on his
earnest desire, they would not stay so much as till the Afternoon, pretending
'twas against President, and they could not do it without the Attorney
General's Consent; tho it is notorious, that both Plunket, the titular Irish
Primate, and Fitz-Harris before spoken of, were both of them tried a whole Term
after they were arraigned; tho in both Cases the Attorney oppos^d it; and even
here in the case of Treason, at the Old Bailey too, Whitebread's Trial was put
off to another Sessions. If it is pleaded, The Case is different, and that there
was reason for the one, but not for the other: 'Twill be readily granted, --
Tho my Lords Evidence were not ready, theirs was -- They had concerted business
better, and just at that time News was brought hot into the House, That my Lord
of Essex had this Morning prevented Justice, as has been before remarked in the
Story of Essex; as also, That several of the Jury had said, They had never
found Russel Guilty, had it not been for that Accident. And indeed, were that
all in the Case, there would be still room for a great deal of Charity: For
though that was no proper Evidence against the Prisoner, yet very few Persons
in the World, perhaps, could have been found, whose Minds would have been so
firm, and Reason so clear, as not to be, whether they would or no, hing'd and
biased by such a sudden report as this brought in among 'em, when they had no
time to consider calmly of the matter; and this, no doubt, was very well known
by those who ordered things in the manner before-noted. But I say, 'twere to be
wished, for the Honor of the English Nation, that this had been all the foul
play in the case, and that there had not been so many Thousand Guinea's
employed in this and other Trials, as the great Agitators thereof have lately
confessed to have been. The Names of his Jury, as I find them in Print, are as
follow: John Martayn William Rouse Jervas Seaton William Fashion Thomas Short
George Toriano William Butler James Pickering Thomas Jeve Hugh Noden Robert
Brough Thomas Omeby.


When he found he must expect neither Favor nor Justice, as to the delaying of
his Trial, he excepted against the Foreman of the Jury, because not a
Freeholder; which for diverse and sundry Reasons, almost, if not all the Judges,
having the happiness to light on different ones, and scarce any two on the
some, was overruled; and given against him; though that same practice since
declared and acknowledged one of the great Grievances of the Nation. His
Indictment ran in these words, [ He did conspire and compass our Lord the King,
his Supreme Lord, not only of his Kingly State, Title, Power, and Government
of this his Kingdom of England to deprive and throw down; but also our said
Sovereign Lord the King to kill, and to Death to bring and put, and the ancient
Government of this Kingdom of England to change, alter, and wholly subvert, and
a miserable Slaughter among the Subjects of our said Lord the King, through his
whole Kingdom of England to cause and procure, and Insurrection and Rebellion
against our said Lord the King, to move, procure, and stir up within this
Kingdom of England.] And lower, [ He and diverse others did consult, agree, and
conclude Insurrection and Rebellion against our Sovereign Lord the King, to
move and stir up, and the Guards for the preservation of the Person of our said
Sovereign Lord the King, to seize and destroy.]

Now that all this was not intended as matter of Form only, we may see by the
Kings Councils opening the Evidence. The first says -- [He was indicted for no
less than conspiring the Death of the Kings Majesty; and that in order to the
same, he and others did meet and conspire together, to bring our Sovereign Lord
the King to Death, to raise War and Rebellion against him, and to Massacre his
Subjects -- And in order to compass these wicked Designs, being assembled, did
conspire to seize the Kings Guards, and his Majesty's Person: And this (he
tells the Jury) is the charge against him.

The Attorney General melts it a little lower, and tells 'em the meaning of all
these Tragical Words, were A Consult about a Rising -- about seizing the
Guards, and receiving Messages from E. of Shaftsbury concerning an Insurrection.

Nor yet does the proof against him come up so high even as this, though all
care was used for that purpose, and kind Questions put very frequently, to lead
and drive the Evidence; but one of them Witnessing to any one Point.

The first of whom was Col. Rumsey, who swears, That he was sent with a Message
from Shaftsbury, who lay concealed at Wapping, to meet Lord Russel, Ferguson,
etc. at Shepherds 's, to know of them what Resolution they were come to about
the Rising designed at Taunton -- That when he came thither, the Answer was
made, Mr. Trenchard had failed 'em, and no more would be done in that business
at that time. That Mr. Ferguson spoke the most part of that Answer; but my Lord
Russel was present, and that he did speak about the Rising of Taunton, and
consented to it. That the Company was discoursing also of viewing the Guards,
in order to surprise 'em, if the Rising had gone on; and that some undertook to
view 'em; and that the Lord Russel was by when this was undertaken.] But this
being the main Hinge of the business and this Witness not yet coming up to the
purpose, they thought it convenient to give him a Jog, to Refresh his Memory,
Asking him. [Whether he found my Lord Russel averse, or agreeing to it.] Who,
no doubt, answered, Agreeing. But being afterward in the Trial asked, Whether
he could Swear positively that my Lord Russel heard the Message, and gave any
Answer to it? All that he says is this, [That when he came in, they were at the
Fire side, but they all came from the Fireside, to hear what he said.]

All that Shepherd witnesses is, That my Lord Russel, etc. being at his house,
there was a Discourse of surprising the Kings Guards; and Sir Thomas Armstrong
having viewed them when he came thither another time, said, They were remiss,
and the thing was feizible, if there were Strength to do it, and that (upon his
being questioned too, as Rumsey before him) Whether my Lord Russel was there?
He says, He was, at that time they discoursed of seizing the Guards.

The next Witness was the florid Lord Howard, who very artificially begins low,
being, forsooth, so terribly surprised with my Lord of Essex's Death, that his
Voice failed him, till the Lord Chief Justice told him, the Jury could not hear
him; in which very moment his Voice returned again, and he told the reason why
he spoke no louder. After a long Harangue of Tropes and fine Words, and dismal
General Stories, by which, as my Lord complains, the Jury were prepossessed
against him, he at last makes his Evidence bear directly upon the point for
which he came thither -- And swears, [That after my Lord Shaftsbury went away]
their Party resolved still to carry on the design of the Insurrection without
him; for the better management whereof they erected a little Cabal among
themselves, which did consist of Six Persons, whereof my Lord Russel and
himself were two: That they met for this purpose at Mr. Hambden's house, and
there adjusted the place and manner of the intended Insurrection: That about
ten days after they had another meeting on the same business at my Lord
Russel's, where they resolved to send some Persons to engage Argyle and the
Scots in the design -- and (being asked too) that he was sure my Lord Russel
was there.] Being asked whether he said any thing, he answered, [That every one
knew him to be a Person of great Judgment, and not very lavish of Discourse.]
Being again goaded on by Jeffreys with a -- But did he consent? [We did (says
he) put it to the Vote, it went without contradiction, and I took it that all
there gave their consent.]

West swears, That Ferguson and Col. Rumsey told him, That my Lord Russel
intended to go down and take his Post in the West, when Mr. Trenchard had
failed 'em. Whose hear-say-Evidence being not encouraged, Jeffreys ends very
prettily, telling the Court, they would not use any thing of Garniture, but
leave it as it was.

As for Rumsey the first Witness: As to his Person -- My Lord Candish proved on
the Trial, that my Lord Russel had a very ill opinion of him, and therefore
'twas not likely he would entrust him with such a Secret.

As to his Evidence, squeezed out of him as it was, in both branches of the
Design, seizing the Guards, and the Rising of Taunton, he says in gross and
general, That he was agreeing to one, and spoke about and consented to the
other. For his agreeing to the seizing the Guards, he might think as the Lord
Howard does after, that Silence gives consent; for it appears not, nor does he
swear, that my Lord spoke one word about it. But he himself, in his last
Speech, which was not a Jesuit's, and which we have all the reason in the world
to believe exactly true, since, as he himself says in it, [ He always detested
Lying, though never so much for his advantage; and hoped none would be so unjust,
or uncharitable to think he would venture on it in thee his last words, for which
he was so soon going to give an account to the great God, the Searcher of
Hearts, and Judge of all things.] In this last Speech he protests, that this
time of which Rumsey swears, there was no undertaking of securing and seizing
the Guards, nor none appointed to view or examine them, only some discourse
there was of the feazibleness of it: He had heard it mentioned as a thing might
easily be done, but never consented to as a thing fit to be done. Now I Would ask
any man of Sense and Honor, who did but know my Lord Russel, let 'em be never
so much his Enemy (if there were any such) which of these two they really judge
most worthy to be believed? There is but one against one. Rumsey, who either
swore upon liking, for saving his Life, or was a Trapan, [That he was
consenting to the seizing the Guards] or my Lord Russel on his Death and
Salvation solemnly affirming, [That he was so far from consenting to any such
thing, that there was not so much as any such Undertaking mentioned in the
Company while he was with 'em.] Especially when it is observable, that Rumsey
never instances in the terms in which he gave his Consent. The same is to be
said of the other Branch of his Evidence as to the Message of the Insurrection,
which he says he brought into the Room, found the Lord Russel and the rest by
the Fire; whence they all came to him, and heard his Message, and the Lord
Russel discoursed of the subject on it, and consented to it. To all which let us
again oppose not only what he answered in his Trial, wherein he says, That he
would swear he never heard, or knew of that Message which Rumsey says he
brought to them; but also what he says in confirmation thereof in his Speech, [
I shall aver, that what I said of my not hearing Col. Rumsey deliver any
Message from my Lord Shaftsbury, was true.]

And a little before, [ When I came into the Room I saw Mr. Rumsey by the
Chimney, though he swears he came in after.]

One thing more is observable, That when West came to give in his
Garniture-Evidence, he runs in a Length further than Rumsey, and remembers
Rumsey had told him, what it seems he himself had forgot, That on Mr.
Trenchards failing 'em, my Lord Russel was to go in his place, and take up
Posts along in the West. And indeed had not West missed his Cue, and by
imitating my Lord Howard's Example, begun first with Hearsay, he had made as
stabbing an Evidence as e're a one of the other -- Or had they but let him run
to the end of his third, and take things methodically, as his Lordship did
before him.

For Shepherd, all must grant he says not a Syllable to the purpose, or any
thing which affects my Lord. He can hardly tell whether he was there when there
was the discourse of seizing the Guards, but speaks not a word of my Lord's
hearing, or in the leastwise consenting thereunto.

As for my Lord Howard's Evidence, we may, without Scandalum Magnatum, affirm
that every Lord is not fit to make a Privy-Co^nsellor; no, nor every witty Lord
neither, especially in a Business of such a Concern. He does very well to say,
the Council of six all chose themselves; for had not he given his own Vote for
himself, hardly any body else would have done it, since his Character is so
notoriously different from that which he himself gives of my Lord Russel,
[whom, he says, every one knew him to be a Person of great Judgment, and not
very lavish of Discourse.] For his Evidence, he too is so happy to have a
better Memory than Rumsey, as well as West had; and says, That the Duke of
Monmouth told him, Rumsey had conveyed my Lord Russel to Shaftsbury, on whose
persuasion the Insurrection was put off about a Fornight longer. Of this Rumsey
himself says not a Syllable.

He says further, That when they had inquired how Matters stood in the
Country, and the Duke of Monmouth had found Trenchard and the West-Country
failed them, on this 'twas put off again -- and this about the 17 th or 18 th
of October. Now this same Action Rumsey speaks of, but takes a larger Scope as
to the Time, the end of October, or beginning of November, far enough from the
17th or 18th of the Month before. Rumsey says, On this Disappointment of the
Taunton men and Trenchard, Shaftsbury resolved to be gone. Lord Howard, -- That
he was so far from it, that he and his Party resolved to do it without the
Lords, and had set one time and the other, and at last the 17 th of November. which
also not taking effect, then Shaftsbury went off. As to his Evidence, which was
closer -- the Story of the Council of Six, besides the former Improbability,
that he among all the men in England should be chosen one of 'em; it is
remarkable, that in their former greater Consults at Shepherds, which he and
Rumsey mention, the Lord Howard was never present, nor so much as touches on it
in his Evidence; though here, if any where, the grand Affair of seizing the
Guards, and the Answer to Shaftsbury about Taunton was concerted. All that
appears of truth in the Matter, seems to be what my Lord Russel acknowledges,
-- That those Persons named met very often -- that there was no formed Design,
but only loose talk about those Conce^ns. That there was no Debate of any such
thing as was sworn, nor putting any thing in a Method: but my Lord Howard being
a Man of a Voluble Tongue, and one who talked very well, they were all delighted
to hear him.

Nor indeed does my Lord Howard positively Swear, even supposing this formed
Consult to be true, that my Lord Russel actually consented to it, or discoursed
of it. Only -- That he was there -- and -- that he took it, and that he did
give his consent.

It Is a very ill Cause that needs either a Lie or a Cheat to defend it. My Lord
Russel himself being so ingenuous to acknowledge whatever of Truth, any that
knew him will believe to be in his part of the Design, 'twould be an Injury to
his Memory to do any otherwise. It appears then from his own acknowledgment,
that Howard, Armstrong, and such others, had sometimes discoursed of ill
Designs and Matters in his Company: And, as he says in his Speech, [ What the
Heats, Wickedness, Passions, and Vanities of other Men had occasioned, he ought
not to be answerable for, nor could be repress 'em.] Nay more, he did
sufficiently disapprove those things which he heard discoursed of with more
Heat than Judgment. But for himself, declares solemnly again and again. That he
was never in any design against the King's Life, or any Man's whatsoever, nor
ever in any Contrivance of altering the Government. If so, what then becomes of
all the Story of the Council of Six? and is it not to be thrown among the same
Lumber with the old famous Nagshead Tavern Business? 'Twill be still said he
was an Ill Man, in being Guilty by this very Confession, of Misprision of
Treason. -- Supposing this true -- That was not Death, and he died, as he says,
Innocent of the Crime he stood condemned for. And besides, every Lord has not
Brow hard enough, nor Tongue long enough, nor Soul little enough to make an
Informer against others to save his own Life? [ I hope, says he, no Body will
imagine that so mean a thought could enter into me, as to go about to save my
Life by accusing others. The part that some have acted lately of that kind, has
not been such as to invite me to love Life at such a rate.

But all this does not depend on his naked word, since the Evidence who swore
against him, being such as were neither credible, nor indeed so much as legal
Witnesses, the Accusation of it self must fall to the ground. If legal, they
were not credible, because, as my Lord Delamere observes in this Case, they had
no Pardons, but hunted as the Cormorant does, with strings about their Necks,
which West, in his Answer to Walcot's Letter, ingenuously acknowledges; and
says, [ It Is through God's and the King's Mercy he was not at the apparent
point of Death.] That is, in a fair construction, was not just turning over,
but was upon trial, to see whether he would do Business, and deserve to escape
hanging. Much such an honorable way of getting Pardon, as the Fellow who saved
his own neck by turning Hangman, and doing the good Office to his own Father.

Nor indeed was the great Witness, the honorable Lord, who cast this Noble
Person, so much as a legal, any more than a credible Witness. No Man alive has
any way to clear himself from the most perjured Villains Malice, if he swears
against him Point Blank, but either by Circumstance of Time, or invalidating
his very Evidence. Let any think of another way if they can. The first of these
was precluded. 'Twas that which had before been made use of to sham off a truer
Plot, and much more valid Evidence. But here Rumsey and the rest came to no
determinate Time, but only about such a time; about the end of October, or
beginning of November: and others cloud the precise time in so many words, that
it is impossible to find it. All then that could be done, was as to the Person.
Now what thing can be invented, which can more invalidate the Evidence any
person gives, than his solemn, repeated, voluntary Oath, indubitably proved
against him, that such a Person is innocent of that very Crime of which he
afterward accuses him? If this be the Case or no here, let any one read the
following Depositions* and make an indifferent Judgment. My Lord Anglesey
witnesses, He was at the Earl of Bedford 's, after his Son was imprisoned,
where came in my Lord Howard, and began to comfort him, saying, He was happy in
so wise a Son, and worthy a person; and who could never be in such a Plot as
that. That he knew nothing against him, or any body else, of such a barbarous
Design. But this was not upon Oath, and only related to the Assassination, as
he says for himself in his paring-distinction. Look then a little lower to Dr.
Burnet, whom the Lord Howard was with the night after the Plot broke out, and
then, as well as once before, with Hands and Eyes lifted up to Heaven, did say,
He knew nothing of ANY Plot, nor believed ANY. Here Is the most solemn Oath, as
he himself confesses voluntarily, nay unnecessarily, though perhaps in my Lord
Bedford's Case, Goodnature might work upon him. Here Is the paring of his Apple
broke all to pieces. No shadow, no room left for his Distinction between the
Insurrection and Assassination, but without any guard or mitigation at all, he
solemnly swears, he knew not of ANY Plot, nor believed ANY.

But 'twas no great matter, for the Jury were resolved to know and believe it,
whether he did or no.

There Is but one little Subterfuge more, and the Case is clear. All this
Perjury, all these solemn Asseverations he tells us were only to brazen out the
Plot, and to outface the Thing for himself and Party. This he fairly
acknowledges; and let all the World be the Jury, whether they would destroy one of
the bravest Men in it, on the Evidence of such a Person? But there is yet a
farther Answer. His Cousin, Mr. Howard, who was my Lord's intimate Friend, who
secured him in his House, to whom he might open his Soul, and to whom it seems
he did, he having made Application to Ministers of State in his Name, that he
was willing to serve the King, and give him Satisfaction; -- To him, I say,
with whom he had secret Negotiations, and that of such a Nature -- will any
believe that he would outface the Thing here too? That he would Perjure
himself for nothing, where no danger, no good came on it? No certainly, his
Lordship had more Wit, and Conscience, and Honor; he ought to be vindicated
from such an Imputation, even for the credit of his main Evidence; for my Lord
Gray, he tells us, was left out of their Councils for his Immoralities; and had
he himself been such a sort of a Man, those piercing Heads in the Council would
have certainly found him out before, and never admitted him among them. As for
the very Thing, Mr. Howard tells it as generously, and with as much honest
Indignation as possible, in spite of the Checks the Court gave him. [ He took
it, says he, upon his Honor, his Faith, and as much as if he had taken an Oath
before a Magi^^rate, that he knew nothing of any Man concerned in this Business
-- and particularly of the Lord Russel; of whom, he added, that he thought he
did unjustly suffer.] So that if he had the same Soul on Monday, that he had on
Sunday (the very day before) this could not be true that he Swore against the
Lord Russel. My Lord Russel's suffering, was Imprisonment, and that for the
same matter on which he was tried, the Insurrection, not the Assassination. If
my Lord Howard knew him Guilty of that for which he was committed, though not the
other, How could he then say, 'Twas unjustly done?

After all this, 'twoud be almost superfluous to go any further, or insert the
Evidence given by Dr. Tillotson, Burnet, Cox, and others, not only of his
virtuous and honorable Behavior, but especially of his Judgment about any
Stirs, or Popular Insurrections, -- That he was absolutely against 'em, -- that
'twas folly and madness till things came to be regulated in a Parliamentary
way, and that he thought 'twould ruin the best Cause in the World to take any
such ways to preserve it.

All this and more would not do, Dye he must, the Duke ordered it, the
Witnesses swore it, the Judges directed it, the Jury found it; and when the
Sentence came to be passed, the Judge asked, as is usual, What he had to say
why it should not be pronounced? He answered, That whereas he had been charged
in the Indictment which was then read to him, with Conspiring the Death of the
King, which he had not taken notice of before, he appealed to the Judge and
Court whether he were Guilty within the Statute on which he was tried, the
Witnesses having sworn an Intention of levying War, but not of Killing the
King, of which there was no proof by any one Witness. The Recorder told him,
That was an Exception proper, and as he thought, his Lordship did make it
before the Verdict. Whether the Evidence did amount to prove the Charge, was to
be observed by the Jury; for if the Evidence come short of the Indictment they
could not find it to be a true Charge; but when once they had found it, their
Verdict did pass for Truth, and the Court was bound by it as well as his
Lordship, and they were to go according to what the Jury had found, not their
Evidence. Now I Would fain know, what is the reason of the Prisoners being asked
that Question, What he has to say for himself? Is It only Formality, or Banter?
He makes an Exception, which the Judge himself confesses proper. But who was
Counsel for the Prisoner, Is not the Bench? or, does it not pretend to be so?
and why was not this observed by them in their Direction to the Jury? The
Recorder seems to grant it fairly, that the Evidence did not prove the Charge,
and says, the Court was to go, Not according to the Evidence. Well, Evidence,
or none, the Truth is, was not the Question; for being found ^uilty, Sentence
past upon him -- whence he was removed to Newgate. While he was there, the
Importunity of his Friends, as he says handsomely in his Speech, lest they
should think him sullen or stubborn, prevailed with him to sign Petitions, and
make an Address for his Life, though 'twas not without difficulty that he did any
thing that was begging to save it. But with how much Success, it may easily be
guessed by any who knew the Duke's temper; nor is it forgotten how barbarously
his Lady and Children were repulsed, and the King's good Nature not suffered to
save one of the best men in his Kingdom. Dr. Burnet and Dr. Tillotson were with
him much of the time between his Sentence and Death; where to the last, he
owned that Doctrine, which other good men who were then of another Judgment,
have since been forced into, namely, the lawfulness of Resistance against
unlawful Violence, from whomsoever it be.

After the fruitless Applications for his Pardon; after a Farewell and last
Adieu in this World, to one of the best of Women, who stood by him, and
assisted him in his Trial, and left him not till now, he at last on Saturday
the 21 st of October. went into his own Coach about Nine a Clock, with Dr.
Tillotson and Dr. Burnet; whence he was carried to Great Lincolns-Inn-Field to
the Scaffold prepared for him, where, among all the numerous Spectators, he was
one of the most unconcerned Persons there; and very few rejoiced at so doleful
a Spectacle but the Papists, who indeed had sufficient reason; my Lord Powis's
People expressing, as it is said, a great deal of Pleasure and Sati^faction.
There, after he had again solemnly protested his Innocence, and that he was far
from any Design against the King's Person, or of altering the Government: Nay,
That he did upon the words of a dying man, profess, that he knew of no Plot
against the Kings Life, or Government; And delivering one of the finest
Speeches in the World to the Sheriff, he prayed by himself, and with Dr.
Tillotson's assistance; and embracing him and Dr. Burnet, he submitted to the
fatal strokes, for the Executioner took no less than three before he could
fever his Head, which when 'twas held up, as usual, there was to far from being
any shout, that a considerable Groan was heard round the Scaffold. His Body was
given to his Friends, and conveyed to Cheneys in Buckinghamshire, where 'twas
buried among his Ancestors. There was a great Storm, and many loud Claps of
Thunder the day of his Martyrdom. An Elegy was made on him immediately after
his Death, which seems by what we have of it, to be writ with some Spirit, and
a great deal of Truth and Good Will; only this Fragment on it could be
retrieved, which yet may not be unwelcome to the Reader. It Is done -- he is
crowned, and one bright Martyr more,
Black Rome, is charged on thy too bulky score.
All like himself he moved, so calm, so free,
A general Whisper questioned -- Which is He?
Decked like a Lover, though pale Death's his Bride,
He came, and saw, and overcame, and died.
Earth wept, and all the vainly pitying Crowd:
But Heaven his Death in Thunder groaned aloud.
The rest are lost -- But he has better Justice done him by this honorable
Parliament; and if the World should possibly be so malicious and silly, in
after Ages, as some are in this, and ask, What have they done since their
Meeting? Had we not a Nation saved, Peace preserved, and many other almost
Miracles to answer 'em; yet this one thing would be sufficient, That in this
Sessions, they had Reversed the Judgment against this virtuous, pious, and
honorable Lord.

For his Character, if we'll believe the best men, and those who knew him best,
it is one of the most advantageous the Age, or indeed, our Nation has yielded.
Those are great words which Mr. Leviston Gower speaks of him on his Trial, but
yet not a Syllable too big for his Merit, though they are very expressive of it.
-- That he was one of the best Sons, the best Fathers, the best Husbands, the
best Masters, the best Friends, and the best Christians. By others, That he was
a most virtuous, prudent, and pious Gentleman. -- A man of that virtue, that
none who knew him could think him guilty of such a Conspiracy. -- A man of
great Honor, and too prudent to be concerned in so vile and desperate a
design. -- A Person of great Virtue and Integrity. -- One, whom those he had
long conversed with, never heard utter so much as a word of Indecency against
the King.] And others of the highest Quality, who had been often in his
Company, say, That they had never heard any thing from him, but what was
honorable, just and loyal.

His Person was tall and proper; his Temper even and agreeable, and such as
rendered his virtues even more lovely than they did him. His Piety and Devotion,
as unaffected, and yet as remarkable as his Love to the Church of England. The
true Church of England, as he himself calls it, not those Tumors and Wens that
grow upon it, and pretended to be not only part but all of it in our late bad
times; to whose Heighths and Extravagances he thinks it no shame in his Speech
to confess he could never rise. He was of a noble Courage, which he did not
express by Quarrels or Duelling, but serving his Country at Sea in the most
dangerous Wars, and at Land in the Parliament, in more dangerous Councils and
Debates. He was there a true Englishman -- still the same; you knew where he
would be, for he never moved. A strenuous Asserter and Defender of his
Country's Religion and Rights against all Opposers, and that in a Lawful and
Parliamentary Method. He spoke little there, but always very home, and much to
the purpose -- And that was as true a Character of him formerly recited, as if
it had come from a better man, That every one knew the Lord Russel to be a
person of great Judgment, and not very lavish of Discourse. Lastly, which will
give no small heightening to his Character, He had Mr. Johnson to his Chaplain.

An Abstract of the Late Noble Lord Russel's Speech to the Sheriffs; as also of
a Paper delivered by him to them at the place of his much lamented Execution on
July 21. 1683.
IN his Speech to the Sheriffs, he tells them, that for fear of not being well
heard, he had couched what he had to say upon that sad occasion in the Paper he
delivered them; only he protests his Innocence of any Designs against the
King's Person, or the then Government, and prays for the preservation of both,
and of the Protestant Religion; and in short, declares that he forgives all the
World, and wishes that all True Protestants may Love one another, and not make
way for Popery, by their Animosities.

In the Paper, He first declares himself Composed for Death, and weaned from
this World: Then he affectionately thanks God, as in general, so in particular,
for his advantageous Birth, and Religious Education, of which in that important
occasion, he found such happy and powerful Effects as kept him up against the
fear of Death, and all other Discomposures, and armed him with such assurances
in God's Love and Mercy, as made the most joyful of the visibly saddest Moments
of his Life.

He professes to die as he had lived, a sincere Protestant of the Church of
England, though he never could come up to the heighths of some; wishes more
Moderation both in Churchmen and Dissenters, and that the Common Danger of
Popery might move them to lay aside their Differences, and all Persecuting
Inclinations, as more unseasonable than at any other time.

He declares, he had a notion of Popery, as of an Idolatrous and Bloody
Religion, and thought himself bound to act in his station against it,
notwithstanding the Power of the Enemies he was sure to meet with on that
account, etc. But yet he professes he never thought of doing any thing against
it basely or inhumanely, against the Maxims of Christian Religion, or the Laws
and Liberties of this Kingdom, for his sincerity, in which, he appeals to God,
renouncing all Passion, By-End, or Ill Design, as also all Designs of changing
the Government, which was in his Opinion, the best in the World, and for which,
as well as his Country, which he valued above his Life, he was ever ready to
venture it: Disclaims all thoughts against the King's Life, denying even the
Lord Howard to have said any thing tending to prove it.

Prays Sincerely for the King and Nation, and wishes they may be mutually happy
in one another; that the King may be truly a Defender of the Faith; that the
Protestant Religion and Kingdom may flourish under Him, and He be happy in both
Worlds.

As to his share in the prosecution of the Popish Plot, he declares he acted
sincerely in it, as really believing, as he still did, the truth of such a
Conspiracy, and disclaims his knowledge of any practices with the Witnesses
which he protests against as abominable, and disowns Falsehood or Cruelty ever
to have been in his Nature.

He persists in his Opinion, that Popery was breaking in upon the Nation, and
grieves to see Protestants instrumental to it; declares his fears of the
sufferings the Protestant Religion was like to undergo, and bewails the public
and shameless Impiety that abounded, and modestly admonishes all persons, and
particularly his Friends, well-wishers to the Protestant Cause, that were
defective, to live up to its Principles. Then he declares his Submission to
God's pleasure, freely forgives his Enemies, and desires his Friends to seek no
Revenge for his Blood.

After which, he looks back, and gives some little touches concerning his past
behavior, and the manner of his Treatment at his Trial.

He confesses, he moved much for the Bill of Exclusion as the only effectual
Remedy to secure both the King's Life, the Protestant Religion, and the Frame
of the Government, He thinking none of them could be safe so long as there was
any hopes of a Popish Successor; and that the Limitations proposed to Bind the
Duke were effectual Remedies against those fears, because the Nation could
never be easy and safe under a King without a Prerogative: But yet imputes his
present Sufferings to the Revengeful Resentments some Persons retained for his
Earnestness in that matter.

Next as to his conspiring to seize the Guards, he disowns that ever he was
concerned in any such Design or ever heard talk of any such thing as designed,
but only once, as of a thing feazible, against which likewise he warmly
declared himself, and said, the consequence of it was so like to end in
Massacring the Guards in cold Blood, that he could not but abhor the thoughts
of it, as approaching too near the Popish Practice, at which the Duke of
Monmouth taking him by the hand, cried out affectionately, that he saw, they
were both of a temper; he adds on that occasion, that he always observed in
that Duke, an abhorrence to all base things.

He proceeds to show how he went to the Meeting at Mr. Shepherd's, at the Duke
of Monmouth's earnest request, chiefly to endeavor to prevent any such
disorderly proceedings as the Duke feared would be otherwise put on by some hot
men, whose rash courses he did accordingly most vigorously oppose, and yet was
condemned only for not discovering them, though he endeavored to reform them,
because he would not stoop to so mean a thought, as that of going about to save
his Life by accusing others for Crimes that they only talked of, and that, as we
may partly gather from his discourse, he had effectually dissuaded them from
too, so that his Intention was good, and his part in that Transaction, even in
the strictest sense of Law, but a Misprision of Treason, and therefore he
declares he cannot but think the Sentence of Death past against him to be very
hard, and he by a strange fetch, brought within the compass of the Statute of
Treason, of Edward the Third.

He moreover adds, that he had so convincing a sense of his own Innocence in
that Case, that he would not betray it by flight, though much pressed to it. He
next excuses his saying so little at his Trial, saying, he hoped it looked more
like Innocence than Guilt: Adding, that he was advised not to confess Matter of
Fact too plainly, because it would certainly have brought him within the guilt
of Misprision, and so he thought it better to say little, than by departing
from the Ingenuity he had always practiced, by using little Tricks and
Evasions, to make the last and solemnest part of his Life so notably different
from the preceding course of it, as such a Conduct would have made it. He
farther subjoyns, that he never pretended great Readiness in Speaking, and
advises those Gentlemen of the Law that have it, to use it more
conscientiously, and not to run men down, and impose on Easy and Willing
Juries by Strains and Fetches, etc. the Killing unjustly by Law, being the
worst of Murders. He then, as in several other places, repeating his wishes,
that the Rage and Revenge of some men, and the partiality of Juries, may be
stopped with his Blood, and so, after a small hint, how by the importunity of
his Dearest and most Virtuous Lady, and some other Dear Friends, he had been
prevailed upon against his Inclinations, to Address, though ineffectually for his
Life, he concludes with a fresh Protestation of his Innocence, and a Devout
Prayer to God, suitable to that sad occasion.

Captain WALCOT, etc.
CAptain Walcot and his Fellow Sufferers, in order of time, should have gone
first, he being convicted before my Lord Russel, and executed the Friday, as he
on Saturday. But my Lord Russel's Fate having so immediate a dependence on the
Earl of Essex's, and all the Plot hanging on him; especially they two making
the greatest Figure of any who suffered on this occasion; it looked more proper
and natural to begin with them, and reserve the other to this place. Captain
Walcot was a Gentleman of a considerable Estate in Ireland, but more remarkable
for the rare Happiness of having Eight Children all at once living, and most of
all, for his Love to his Country, which cost him his Life. We can have but
little dependence, as has been before hinted, on the public Papers relating to
these concerns; especially in his Case, where Cartwright was engaged. What
appears to us, and we may believe most reasonable, and what is agreed on of all
hands, is -- 'That West, Rumsey, and I think one more of 'em, had frequent
Discourses, at least, of killing the King and Duke -- so horrid and barbarous a
thing, and so like the Practice and Principles of those worst of men, the
Papists; that as every true Englishman, and good Christian must needs conceive
a detestation and horror at the very mention of it; so no doubt, it will be
very acceptable to such to find when the thing is enquired closely into, which
has partly been done before, and shall now be finished, to find no probability
of any thing real in the bottom, none engaged in it, but two or three Knaves,
and one Fool. No Person of Honor or Character, who had heard so much as any
Discourse of it, but what immediately disapproved, or detested it, as much as
every good Man ought to do: Though some of 'em, if there were more than Walcot,
might hear such mad Discourse, as my Lord Russel says, the Wickedness,
passions, and vanities of other men might have occasioned; and yet not
believing any thing in it more than words, nor think they were obliged to turn
Informers and Hangmen; which because they did not do, they suffered themselves.
And this any reasonable man will, I doubt not, upon a little free thinking,
acknowledge to be Walcot's Case, and no further. The pretended Crime for which
Walcot suffered, and which West and others witness against him, was --
Consulting the Death of the King, and charging the Guards, at his return from
New Market, while the dreadful Blunderbuss was to be fired into the Coach by
Rumbold, or some others. His Privacy to Discourses about the Kings Death was
but Misprision. For his acting in it, they could not have pitched on a more
unlikely man to command a Party in so desperate an Attempt as charging the
Guards, than one that was sick and Bedridden of the Gout, as about this time, and
often besides the Captain was. Nor seems West's pretense more likely -- That he
refused to be actual in the Assassination, because of the baseness of it, but
offered to charge the Guards, while others did it -- much as wisely and
tenderly, as if he had denied to cut a Man's Throat, but consented to hold his
hands while others did it. This he denies with indignation in his Speech, and
[Appeals to all that knew him, Whether they thought him such an Idiot, that he
should not understand 'twas the same thing to engage the Kings Guards, whilst
others killed him; or to kill him with his own hands?] Here then it is plain,
lies the pinch of the matter; West and Rumsey, etc. had been frequently
discoursing at that bloody villainous rate; West was most impatiently eager of
having it done -- He proposed the Lopping 'em at a Play, which he said would be
[ in their own calling.]

For some of those who are charged with this foul business, as Promoters, or so
much as Approvers thereof, were the innocent or guilty as to that particular; I
can assure the Reader I have the same thought of 'em, that Juvenal had of
Sejanus, and can say as he does, Nunquam si quid mihi credis, amavi. But
however one may add as he does, Sed quo accidit sub crimine? Quisnam Delator?
Quibus indiciis? Quo test? and almost resolve all these Questions to the same
way, with a -- Nil horum. Never was any Party without many ill men -- This no
doubt, had too many whose ill Lives both discredited, and in probability,
ruined the best Cause in the World, as my Lord Russel intimated in his Speech.
Some of these, not having the fear of God before their Eyes, might have such
traitorous Designs; nay, and by their own Confession, it appears they had so --
But let us not however be hurried away in a popular Stream, which generally runs
very muddy, to condemn those, who, whatever personal Faults they may have had,
how turbulent their Nature, or bad their Morals, or ill their Character, yet
seem to be no way concerned in so bloody and barbarous a Conspiracy, how home
soever it might be charged upon 'em. West and Rumsey were the main Pillars, and
almost only Witnesses on which the Credit of that Action depended, who appear
all through the great and almost sole Managers thereof, and who accuse others
for being concerned in it. What and how much their Credit weighs, we have
already hinted, but shall yet confront it with further Testimonies relating to
this matter, and that of dying men, who could expect no pardons in this World,
nor 'tother for a Falsehood. Besides, Rumbold's solemn Protestation; see
Walcot's Speech and Paper, wherein he as deeply affirms as a man can do, [ That
West bought Arms for this Villainous Design (which cannot be expressed with
Detestation enough) without any direction of his -- nay, without any Direction,
Knowledge, or Privity of his.] West says in his Answer to this, as well as in
his Evidence, [ That Walcot joined in the direction about the nature and size
of those Arms; that he was very Intimate and Familiar with this Rumbold, who
was to be the principal Actor in the Assassination.] But Rumbold's Death before
recited, clears himself, and Walcot, and shows us what West is. In another
place he affirms -- That Walcot told him Ferguson had the chief management of
the intended Assassination. Rumbold's hard-name, as has been said already,
Ferguson's ill Name, and the absence of 'em both, brought 'em in all
probability into the business; and Walcot's being past answering for himself or
them, made it very advisable to charge so much on him. So in the same nature
Ferguson was the Author of that Expression Walcot had from West, -- Ferguson
undertook for the Duke of Monmouth, -- Ferguson proposed to see for an
opportunity between Windsor and Hampton Court. -- The Men to commit the
Assassination were all provided by Ferguson, Rumbold, etc. And I remember
another of 'em, or he himself talks of fifty men engaged for the very Action.
Now as mere Good Nature, and the Love I have to my Countrymen will never
suffer me to believe there could be so many Englishmen found, and Protestants
too, who would consent to kill their King; never any one having acknowledged
such a design besides poor Hone, who was so stupid, he could not give one
sensible Answer to what Cartwright asked him at his Death: So plain Testimony,
and Dint of Fact and Reason, forces me to conclude these Persons here charged
were not guilty. See what Rouse says of it -- He was told, they did not intend
to spill so much as one drop of blood. But most particularly Holloway, [He
could not perceive Ferguson knew any thing of the New Market design, but Rumsey
and West were deep in it.] Again, [ Holloway asked West who was to act the
Assassination? To which he could give but a slender Answer, and could, or would
name but Two Men, Rumbold and his Brother.] Just such probable stuff as
Colleges seizing the King by himself at Oxford, [So that (he goes on) we found
they had but few Men, if more than two, and no Horses, only a parcel of Arms he
showed at a Gunsmith's.] And lower, at another time, [ West only named Rumsey
and Rich. Goodenough as concerned in the Assassination -- West again proposed
the Assassination, but none seconded him -- Rumsey was for the old Strain of
killing the King, to which not one consented -- He could never find above five
concerned in it -- He heard Walcot speak against it -- I knew Ferguson to be
against any such Design.

Upon the whole, the World is left to its Liberty to believe, at least Three
Dying Men's Asseverations, against those who so plainly swore others Necks into
the Halter, to get their own out, that West himself is not ashamed to own in
his forementioned Answer, That he was still in danger of Death, though not so
eminent as it had been; not, at the apparent point of Death. And at the close
of this Paper -- If it shall please the King to spare my Life for my
Confession, it is a great happiness, etc. Which part of his Evidence every body
will easily believe.

From all which, here lies a fair Supposition of the Innocence of this Captain,
and others, of what they were Accused, found Guilty, Sentenced, and Died for;
it being on West's Evidence, and such as his, that he and others were Arraigned
and Condemned; the Captains Defense being much the same with what he says in
his Speech. It Is well known, that the Witnesses against Captain Walcot swore
for their own lives with Halters about their Necks; and it is as true that most
of the Witnesses had talked at a mad rate, in the hearing of some of those whom
they destroyed; but see, what Captain Walcot in a most solemn manner declared
with his last breath.

An Abstract of Captain Walcots Speech.
Captain Walcot denied any design of killing the King, or of engaging the
Guards, whilst others killed him; And said, that the Witnesses invited him to
Meetings, where some things were discoursed of, in order to the asserting our
Liberties and Properties; which we looked upon to be violated and invaded: --
That They importuned and perpetually solicited him, and then delivered him up
to be hanged -- That They combined together to swear him out of his Life, to
save their own; and that they might do it effectually, They contrived an
Untruth. -- That he forgave them, though guilty of his Blood; But, withal,
earnestly begged, That they might be observed, that Remarks might be set upon
them, whether their end be peace; and he concluded (with what made Sir Roger
L'Estrange a great deal of Sport, but yet Heaven has made it good) That when
God has a Work to do, he will not want Instruments.

With him was tried Rouse, who was charged with such a parcel of mad Romance as
was scarce ever heard of; and one would wonder how Perjury and Malice, which
use to be sober sins, could even be so extravagant as to hit on it. He was to
seize the Tower, pay the Rabble, uncase the Aldermen, to be Play Master and
Flea-master General, and a great deal more to the same Tune. In his Defense, he
says, no great Matter, but yet what looks a thousand times more like Truth than
his Accusation; That the Tower Business was only discourse of the feasibleness
of the thing, (as Russel's about the Guards) but without the least in tent of
bringing it to action; That all he was concerned in any real Design, he had
from Lee, and was getting more out of him, with an intention to make a
Discovery. But it seems Lee got the whip-hand of him; they were both at a kind
of Halter-Combat; Rous's foot slipped, and Lea turned him over, and saved his own
Neck.

His Dying Words.
MR. Rouse declared, that he was told, that They did not intend to spill one
drop of Blood; and affirmed that Lee, the Witness against him, did (by his
Evidence) make him the Author of the very Words, that came out of his the said
Lee's own Mouth.

A Brief Extract of Captain Walcots Prayer.
O Lord, our God, Thou art a God of present help in time of Trouble, a God,
that have promised to be with thy People in the Fire and in the Water. O Lord,
we pray Thee, that thou will afford thy Presence to thy poor suffering Servants
at this time, O Lord, thy Servant that speaks does confess, that the
Iniquities at his Heels have justly overtaken him; O do thou bathe each of our
Souls in that Fountain set open for Sin and for Uncleanness. O do thou enable
every one of us, from the inward Evidence of thy Spirit, to say with thy
Servant Job, That we know and are assured that our Redeemer lives. O give us
some inward Tastes of those Heavenly Joys that we hope through the Mercy of
Jesus Christ, in a little time to have a more full Fruition of. O Lord, do thou
speak Peace to every one of our Consciences; though we lie under a Sentence of
Death from Man, we beg that we may have a Sentence of Life Eternal from our
God; and though we meet Thee, O Lord, in a Field of Blood, we beg that Thou will come to meet with us in a Field of Mercy. O Lord, though we have been
Prodigals, we desire to return unto our Fathers House where there is Bread
enough. O enable us to come unto Thee as Children to their Parents. Lord put to
thy helping Hand, Lord teach us truly to leave no Sin unrepented of in any one
of our Hearts. And O Lord, we beg that with us thou will give us leave to
recommend unto thy Care our Poor Wives and Children: Thou have promised to be
the Father of the Fatherless, and the Husband of the Widow; and thou have
commanded us to cast the Care of them upon Thee. O do thou make Provision for
them, and enable them to hear this severe stroke with Patience. O Lord, we also
beseech Thee in the behalf of these Poor Kingdoms wherein we are, that Thou will be merciful to them, prevent Divisions among them, heal all their
Breaches, compose their Differences, make all that are thine of one Heart and
Mind in the things of thee our God. Lord, favor us with thy Mercy, assure us
of thy Love, stand by us in the difficult Hour, take us into thine own Care,
cause thy Angels to attend us, to convey our Souls as soon as they are divided
from our Bodies, into Abraham 's Bosom. All which we beg for the sake of thy
Son Jesus Christ, in whom, O Lord, this little time do thou give us Hearts to
give thee all Glory, Honor, and Praise, now and for evermore, Amen. Sweet
Jesus, Amen.

Hone was accused, and owns himself Guilty of a Design to Kill the King and the
Duke of York, or one, or neither, for it is impossible to make any Sense of him.
When they came to suffer, Walcot read a Paper, in which was a good rational
Confession of his Faith; Then comes to the Occasion of his Death, for which, he
says, he neither blames the Judges, Jury, nor Council, but only some men, that
in reality were deeper concerned than he, who combined together to swear him
out of his Life to save their own, and that they might do it effectually,
contrived an untruth, etc. He forgives the World and the Witnesses: Gives his
Friends advice to be more prudent than he had been; prays that his may be the
last Blood spilt on that account; wishes the King would be merciful to others;
says he knew nothing of Ireland, and concludes, with praying God to have mercy
upon him. He had then some Discourse with Cartwright wherein he tells him, That
he was not for contriving the Death of the King, nor to have had a Hand in it;
and being urged with some Matters of Controversy, tells him, He did not come
thither to dispute about Religion, but to die Religiously.

But though dying be a serious Business, yet it is almost impossible to read his
Discourse with the Dean, without as violent temptations to laughter as
Compassion. Never was so exact an Imitation of the Scene of the Fisherman and
Kings in the Rehearsal, when he tells 'em Prince Pretty-man killed Prince
Pretty-man. One would think him very near in the same Case with Bateman, who
came after him. His Replies are so incongruous, that there is hardly either
Sense or English to be made out of 'em. But the poor Fellow talks of Snares and
Circumstances, and no body knows what, and says in one Line, He was to meet the
King and Duke of York, but he did not know when, where, nor for what: In the
next he was for killing the King, and saving the Duke; and when asked the
Reason, answers, the only sensible thing he said all through, That he knew no
Reason, that he did not know what to say to it. And when the Dean charges him
with the Murderous Design, -- That he knew as little of it, as any poor silly
man in the World.

Rouse comes next, gives an Account of his Faith, professing to die of the
Church of England, tells his former Employment and manner of Life, acknowledges
he heard of Clubs and Designs, but was never at 'em, and a perfect Stranger to
any thing of that Nature. Gives a Relation of what past between him and his
Majesty on his Apprehension. Talks somewhat of Sir Thomas Player, the Earl of
Shaftsbury, and accommodating the King's Son, as he calls it, though not while
the King reigned. Then falls upon Lee, and the Discourse they had together,
who, as he says, swore against him on the Trial those very words he himself had
used in pressing him to undertake the Design. Speaks of a Silvers Ball which he
proposed to be thrown up on Black Heath, and after some Discourse with the
Ordinary, gives the Spectators some good Counsel. Then they all three singly
prayed; and then the Sentence was Executed upon 'em.

Algernon Sidney, Esquire
THe next Victim to Popish Cruelty and Malice, was, Colonel Algernon Sidney, of
the ancient and noble Name and Family of the Sidneys, deservedly famous to the
utmost bounds of Europe; who, as the ingenious Mr. Hawles observes, was merely
talked to death, under the notion of a Commonwealths Man, and found Guilty by a
Jury who were not much more proper Judges of the Case, than they would have
been had he writ in Greek or Arabic. He was arraigned for a Branch of this
Plot at Westminster the 17 th of November. 1683. where, though it cannot be said
the Grand Jury knew not what they did, when they found the Bill against him,
since no doubt they were well instructed what to do; yet it must, that they
found it almost before they knew what 'twas. being so well resolved on the
Case, and agreed on their Verdict, that had he been Indicted for breaking up an
House, or robbing on the Highway, 'twas doomed to have been Billa vera, as
much as 'twas now. For though the Indictment was never presented to 'em before
they came into the Hall, yet they immediately found it: The Substance whereof
was, [ For a Conspiracy to Depose the King and stirring up Rebellion, and
writing a Libel for that purpose.] The most part of the Evidence brought
against him, was only Hearsay, as against my Lord Russel; nay, West whose
Evidence was then refused, now was admitted to tell a long Story of what he had
from one and the other. Rumsey's was much of the same Nature. In the Rear came
that never failing Evidence the Lord Howard, who witnesses he was one of the
Council of Six, and engaged one of the deepest in their Consults. And more than
that, exercises his own Faculty very handsomely, in an account of two Speeches
Mr. Hamden made on the Occasion, which indeed were such fine things, that some
might think it worth the while to swear against a man, only to have the
Reputation of reciting 'em; and whom they are most like, Mr. Hamden, or my
Lord's own witty self, let any man Judge.

The next Evidence was a Paper, said to be of the Prisoners writing, which was
found in his Study. The Substance of which was an Enquiry into the Forms of
Government and Reasons of their Decays: The Rights of the People, and Bounds of
Sovereignty, and Original of Power. In which were those heinous, treasonable
Expressions, [ The King is subject to the Law of God as ae Man, to the People
who made him such, as a King, etc.] And Examples of evil Kings and Tyrants,
whom sometimes a Popular Fury had destroyed; at others, the Ordines Regni
either reduced, or set them aside, when their Government was a Curse instead of
a Blessing to their People. Well, what Treason to be found in all this, and a
great deal more? Nothing but a Jesuits enchanted Telescope could have found any
in it. If there were any Mistakes, as he says in his Speech* they ought to have
been confuted by Law, Reason, and Scripture, not Scaffolds and Axes. First,
'Twas not proved to be his Writing, nor did he confess it; Treason and Life are
critical things: one ought to be as fairly proved, as the other to be cautiously
proceeded against. Though he might write it, he had the Liberty of an English
man, not to accuse himself: the very same thing which was afterward put in
practice by those Reverend Persons, who, later than he, and cheaper too,
defended their Countries Liberty with only the loss of their own. But owning he
Writ it, How very few, if any things therein are not now generally and almost
universally believed, and are the foundation of the practice, and satisfaction
of the Conscience of every Man, though then confuted with the single Brand of
Commonwealth Principles, being indeed such as all the World must, whether they
will or no, be forced into the belief of, as soon as Oppression and Tyranny
bears hard upon 'em, and becomes really unsupportable. But supposing they were
now as wicked Principles as they were (called) then; yet what was that to the
then present Governors? He answered Filmer for his own satisfaction, or rather
began to do it, many years before the Makers of this Plot dreamt of that, or
bringing him into it: Kept it private in his own Study, where it might have
lain till Doomsday, had not they fetched it out to make somewhat on it. 'Twas
suggested* and Innuendo'd, that this Book was written to scatter among the
people in order to dispose 'em to rebel, as it is in the Indictment. But how
ridiculous that is, any one will see who considers the Bulk of it, which was
such, that, as he says in his Speech, [ The fiftie^h part of the Book was not
produced; nor the Tenth of that read, though he desired it, and 'twas usual; and
yet after all, as it had never been shown to any man, so 'twas not finished,
nor could be in many years.] Now is this a business likely to be calculated for
a Rebellion; when it could neither be finished till several years after 'twas
over; and besides, if it had, the Bulk made if so improper to be dispersed for
that purpose for which 'twas pretendedly designed? No, those who are to poison
a Nation in that manner, know better things, and more likely ways. It Is to be
done in little Pamphlets, and Papers easily read over, understood, and
remembered, as the Declaration-Gentlemen the other day, very well knew. But still
here being not a Syllable, in these Papers of King Charles, any more than of
the King of Bantam, or the Great Mogul, against whom they might as well have
made it Treason; 'twas all supplied by a fine knack, called an Innuendo, that
is, in English, such Interpretation as they would please to affix on his words.
Thus when he writes Tarquin, or Pepin, or Nero, they say, he meant King
Charles; and so, scandalously of him, as well as wickedly of the Gentleman,
make a Monster and a Ravisher of their King, and then take away another Life
for doing it. There was a Minister I have somewhere read of, who was accused
for writing a Libel against Queen Elizabeth, and her Government; and the Fact
there, it is true, lay, as this does, upon Innuendo's, though much more plain
and pregnant. -- But all the Punishment inflicted on him, though that thought
severe enough, reached not his Head, the loss of his Hand being thought
sufficient* while with that which was left, he pulled off his Hat, and Prayed
God to bless the Queen. -- But this was under a mild Reign, and truly
Protestant Government.

As for my Lord Howard's Evidence, had the Jury been any but such as they were,
and Sidney describes them, they would not have hanged a Jesuit upon the credit
on it; he having, one would think, that read the Trials, taken a pride in
damning, himself deeper and deeper against every new appearance in public, on
purpose to try the skill and face of the Council in bringing him off again. --
To the Evidence brought against him in my Lord Russel's Case, he had taken care
that these following should be added.

The E of Clare witnesses, that he said, after Sidney's Imprisonment, if
questioned again, He would never plead -- (Had it not been a pleasant thing for
my Lord Howard to have been Pressed to death for not speaking?) and that he
thought Colonel Sidney as innocent as any Man breathing: Mr. Ducas says the
same, so does my Lord Paget, and Mr. Edward, and Philip Howards, and Tracy, and
Penwick, and Mr. Blake, that he said he had not his Pardon, and could not
ascribe it to any Reason, but that he must not have it till the Drudgery of
Swearing was over.

But though there was no reasonable Answer could be given to all this; tho
Sidney pleaded the Obligations my Lord Howard had to him and the great
Convenience he might think there might be in his being hanged, since he was
some Hundreds of Pounds in his Debt, which would be the readiest way of paying
him; and had besides, as it appeared, a great mind to have the Collonel's Plate
secured at his own House; tho never Man in the World certainly ever talked
stronger Sense, or better Reason, or more evidently battered the Judges, and
left 'em nothing but Railing. -- 'Twas all a case with him, as well as the
others; and the Petty Jury could as easily have found him Guilty, without
hearing his Trial, as the Grand Jury did as soon as e're they saw the Bill.
Never was any thing more base and barbarous, than the summing up the Evidence
and Directions to the Jury, who yet stood in no great need of 'em: Nor more
uncivil and saucy a Reflection on the Noble Family and Name of the Sidneys,
than the Judges saying -- That he was born a Traitor. Never any thing Braver,
or more Manly, than his Remonstrance to the King for Justice, and another
Trial: Nor lastly, more Roman, and yet truly Christian than his end. The brave
old Man came up on a Scaffold, as unconcerned as if he had been going to fight,
and as lively as if he had been a Russel. In his last Speech he gives almost
all the substance of all those Books which have been lately written in the
Defense of the late Transactions, and no disgrace to 'em neither; since Truth
and Reason are eternal, and one and the same from all Pens and Parties, and at
all times, however there may be some times so bad, that they will not bear some
Reason, any more than some Doctrine. -- He there says as much in a little as
ever Man did -- [ That Magistrates were set up for the Good of Nations, not e
contra] If that be Treason, K. Charles the First is guilty on it against
himself, who says the same thing.) That the Power of Magistrates is what the
Laws of the Country make it: That those Laws and Oaths have the force of a
Contract, and if one part is broken, the other ceases.] And other Maxims of the
same necessity and usefulness. -- He besides this, gave a full Account of the
Design of his Book, of his Trial, and the Injustice done him therein; of the
Jury's being packt, and important points of Law overruled; and ends with a
most Compendious Prayer, in which he desires God would forgive his Enemies, but
keep 'em from doing any more mischief -- And then he laid down his Head, and
went to Sleep.

TO THE KING'S Most Excellent MAJESTY The Humble Petition of Algernoon Sydney,
Esquire,
SHOWS, Habeas Corpus directed to the Lieutenant of the Tower, before any
Indictment had been exhibited against him: But while he was there detained, a
Bill was exhibited and found; whereupon he was immediately carried to the
King's Bench, and there Arraigned. In this surprise he desired a Copy of the
indictment, and leave to make his exceptions, or to put in a special Plea, and
Council to frame it; but all was denied him. He then offered a special Plea
ready engrossed, which also was rejected without reading: And being threatened,
that if he did not immediately plead Guilty or not Guilty, Judgment of High
Treason should be entered, he was forced contrary to Law (as he supposes) to
come to a general issue in pleading not Guilty.

November. 21. He was brought to his Trial, and the Indictment being perplexed
and confused, so as neither he nor any of his Friends that heard it, could
fully comprehend the scope of it, he was wholly unprovided of all the helps
that the Law allows to every man for his Defense. Whereupon he did again desire
a Copy, and produced an Authentic Copy of the Statute of 46 Ed. 3. whereby
it is enacted, That every Man shall have a Copy of any Record that touches him
in any manner, as well that which is for or against the King, as any other
person; but could neither obtain a Copy of his Indictment, nor that the Statute
should be read.

The Jury by which he was tried was not (as he is informed) summoned by the
Bailiffs of the several Hundreds, in the usual and legal manner, but names were
agreed upon by Mr. Graham, and the Undersheriff, and directions given to the
Bailiffs to summon them: And being all so chosen, a Copy of the Panel was of
no use to him. When they came to be called, he excepted against some for being
your Majesty's Servants, which he hoped should not have been returned, when he
was prosecuted at your Majesty's Suit; many more for not being Freeholders,
which exceptions he thinks were good in Law; and others were lewd and infamous
persons, not fit to be of any Jury: But all was overruled by the Lord Chief
Justice, and your Petitioner forced to challenge them peremptorily, whom he
found to be picked out as most suitable to the Intentions of those who sought
his Ruin; whereby he lost the Benefit allowed him by Law of making his
Exceptions, and was forced to admit of Mechanic Persons utterly unable to
judge of such a matter as was to be brought before them. This Jury being sworn
no Witness was produced, who fixed any thing beyond hearsay upon your
Petitioner, except the Lord Howard, and them that swore to some Papers said to
be found in his House, and offered as a second Witness, and written in an Hand
like to that of your Petitioner.

Your Petitioner produced ten Witnesses, most of them of eminent Quality, the
others of unblemished Fame, to show the Lord Howard's Testimony was
inconsistent with what he had declared before (at the Trial of the Lord Russel)
under the same Religious obligation of an Oath, as if it had been legally
administered.

Your Petitioner did further endeavor to show, That besides the Absurdity and
Incongrui-of his Testimony, he being guilty of many crimes which he did pretend
your Petitioner had any knowledge of, and having no other hope of Pardon, than
by the drudgery of swearing against him, he deserved not to be believed. And
similitude of Hands could be no evidence, as was declared by the Lord Chief
Justice Keiling, and the whole Court in the Lady Carr's case; so as that no
evidence at all remained against him.

That whosoever wrote those Papers, they were but a small part of a Polemical
Discourse in answer to a Book written about thirty years ago, upon general
Propositions, applied to no time, nor any particular case; That it was
impossible to judge of any part of it, unless the whole did appear, which did
not; That the sense of such parts of it as were produced, could not be
comprehended, unless the whole had been read, which was denied; That the Ink
and Paper shows them to be writ many years ago; That the Lord Howard not
knowing of them, they could have no concurrence with what your Petitioner is
said to have designed with him and others; That the confusion and errors in the
writing showed they had never been so much as reviewed, and being written in an
Hand that no man could well read, they were not fit for the Press, nor could be
in some years, though the writer of them had intended it, which did not appear.
But they being only the present crude and private thoughts of a man, for the
exercise of his own understanding in his studies, and never showed to any, or
applied to any particular case, could not fall under the Statute of 25 Ed. 3.
which takes cognizance of no such matter, and could not by construction be
brought under it; such matters being thereby reserved to the Parliament, as is
declared in the Proviso, which he desired might be read, but was refused.

Several important points of Law did hereupon emerge, upon which your
Petitioner, knowing his own weakness, did desire that Council might be heard,
or they might be referred to be found specially. But all was over ruled by the
violence of the Lord Chief Justice, and your Petitioner so frequently
interrupted, that the whole method of his Defense was broken, and he not
suffered to say the tenth part of what he could have alleged in his defense.
So the Jury was hurried into a Verdict they did not understand.

Now for as much as no man that is oppressed in England, can have relief,
unless it be from your Majesty, your Petitioner humbly prays, that the Premises
considered, your Majesty would be pleased to admit him into your presence; and
if he does not show, that it is for your Majesty's Interest and Honor to
preserve him from the said oppression, he will not complain though he be left to
be destroyed.

An Abstract of the Paper delivered to the Sheriffs on the Scaffold on
Tower Hill, December 7. 1683. by Algernoon Sidney Esquire before his Execution.
FIRST having excused his not speaking, as well because it was an Age that made
Truth pass for Treason, for the proof of which, he instances his Trial and
Condemnation, and that the Ears of some present were too tender to hear it, as
because of the Rigor of the Season, and his infirmities, etc. then after a
short reflection upon the little said against him by other Witnesses, and the
little value that was to be put on the Lord Howard's testimony, whom he charges
with an infamous life, and many palpable perjuries, and to have been biased
only by the promise of pardon, etc. and makes, even though he had been liable to
no exceptions, to have been but a single Witness: He proceeds to answer the
charge against him from the writings found in his Closet by the Kings Officers,
which were pretended, but not Lawfully evidenced to be his, and pretends to
prove, that had they been his, they contained no condemnable matter, but
principles, more safe both to Princes and People too, than the pretended
high-flown plea for Absolute Monarchy, composed by Filmer, against which, they
seemed to be levelled; and which, he says, all intelligent men thought were
founded on wicked Principles, and such as were destructive both to Magistrates,
and People too. Which he attempts to make out after this manner.

First says he, if Filmer might publish to the World, That Men were born under
a necessary indispensable subjection to an Absolute King, who could be
restrained by no Oath, etc. whether he came to it by Creation, Inheritance,
etc. nay, o^ even by Usurpation, why might he not publish his opinion to the
contrary, without the breach of any known Law? which opinion he professes,
consisted in the following particulars.

1. That God had left Nations at the liberty of Modelling their own Governments.

2. That Magistrates were instituted for Nations, and not Econtra.

3. That the Right and Power of Magistrates was fixed by the standing Laws of
each Country.

4. That those Laws sworn to on both sides, were the matter of a contract
between the Magistrate and People, and could not be broken without the danger
of dissolving the whole Government.

5. The Usurpation could give no Right; and that Kings had no greater Enemies
than those who asserted that, or were for stretching their Power beyond its
Limits.

6. That such Usurpations commonly effecting the slaughter of the Reigning
Person, etc. the worst of crimes was thereby most gloriously rewarded.

7. That such Doctrines are more proper to stir up men to destroy Princes than
all the passions that ever yet swayed the worst of them, and that no Prince
could be safe if his Murderers may hope such rewards, and that few men would be
so gentle, as to spare the best Kings, if by their destruction, a wild Usurper
could become Gods Anointed, whi^^ he says was the scope of that whole Treatise,
and asserts to be the Doctrine of the best Authors of all Nations, Times and
Religions, and of the Scripture, and so owned by the best and wisest Princes,
and particularly by Lewis 14 th of France, in his Declaration against Spain,
Anno 1667. and by King James of England, in his Speech to the Parliament 1603.
and adds that if the writer had been mistaken he should have been fairly
refuted, but that no man was ever otherwise punished for such matters, or any
such things referred to a Jury, etc. That the Book was never finished, etc. nor
ever seen by them whom he was charged to have endeavored by it to draw into a
Conspiracy: That nothing in it was particularly or maliciously appplied to
Time, Place, or Person, but distorted to such a sense by Innuendo's as the
Discourses of the expulsion of Tarquin, etc. and particularly of the
Translation made of the Crown of France from one Race to another, had been
applied by the then Lawyer's Innuendo's to the then King of England; never
considering adds he, that if such Acts of State be not allowed good, no Prince
in the World has any title to his Crown, and having by a short reflection,
shown the ridiculousness of deriving absolute Monarchy, from Patriarchal Power,
he appeals to all the World, whether it would not be more advantageous to all
Kings, to own the derivation of their Power to the consent of willing Nations,
than to have no better title than force, etc. which may be overpowered.

But notwithstanding the Innocence and Loyalty of that Doctrine, he says, He
was told he must die, or the Plot must die, and complains, that in order to the
destroying the best Protestants of England, the Bench was filled with such as
had been blemishes to the Bar; and instances how against La^, they had advised
with the King's Council about bringing him to Death, suffered a Jury to be
packed by the King's Sollicitors, and the Undersheriff, admitted Jurymen no
Freeholders, received Evidence not valid; refused him a Copy of his
Indictment, or to suffer the Act of the 46 th of Ed. 3. to be read, that allows
it had overruled the most important Points of Law, without hearing, and
assumed to themselves a Power to make Constructions of Treason, though against
Law, Sense and Reason, which the Stat. of the 25 th of Ed. 3. by which they
pretended to Try Him, was reserved only to the ^arliament, and so praying God,
to forgive them, and to avert the Evils that threatened the Nation, to sanctify
those Sufferings to him, and though he fell a Sacrifice to Idols, not to suffer
Idolatry to be established in this Land, etc. He concludes with a Thanksgiving,
that God had singled him out to be a Witness of his Truth, and for that Good
Old Cause in which from his Youth he had been engaged, etc.

His Epitaph.
ALgernon Sydney fills this Tomb,
An Atheist by declaiming Rome;
A Rebel bold by striving still
To keep the Laws above the Will,
And hindering those would pull them down,
To leave no Limits to a Crown.
Crimes damned by Church and Government,
Oh whither must his Soul be sent!
Of Heaven it must needs despair,
If that the Pope be Turn-key there;
And Hellcan never it entertain,
For there ^s all Tyrannick Reign,
And Purgatory's such a pretense,
As never deceived a man of sense,
Where goes it then? where't ought to go,
Where Pope and Devil have naught to do.
His Character.
There Is no need of any more than reading his Trial and Speech, to know him as
well as if he stood before us. That he was a Person of extraordinary Sense, and
very close thinking, which he had the happiness of being able to express in
words as manly and apposite as the Sense included under 'em. He was owner of as
much Virtue and Religion, as Sense and Reason; though his Piety lay as far from
Enthusiasm as any man's. He feared nothing but God, and loved nothing on Earth,
like his Country, and the just Liberties and Laws thereof, whose Constitutions
he had deeply and successfully inquired into. To sum up all, He had Piety
enough for a Saint, Courage enough for a General or a Martyr, Sense enough for
a Privy-Counsellor, and Soul enough for a King; and in a word, if ever any, he
was a perfect English man.

Mr. James Holloway.
MR. Holloway was by Trade a Merchant; but his greatest dealing lay in Linen
Manufacture, which, as appears from his Papers, he had brought to such a
height here in England, as, had it met with suitable encouragement, would, as
he made it appear, have employed 80000 poor People, and 40000 Acres of Land,
and be 200000 Pounds a year advantage to the Public Revenues of the Kingdom.
The Return of the Habeas Corpus Writ calls him, [ Late of London Merchant]
though he lived mostly at Bristol. He seems to be a Person of Sense, Courage,
and Vivacity of Spirit, and a Man of Business. -- All we can have of him is
from that public Print, called his Narrative, concerning which it must be
remembered, as before, that we have no very firm Authority to assure us all
therein contained was his own writing; and perhaps it might be thought
convenient he should die, for fear he might contradict some things published in
his Name. But on the other side, where he contradicts the other Witnesses his
Evidence is strong, since be sure that was not the Interest of the Managers to
invent of their own accords; though some Truth they might utter, though
displeasing, to gain credit to the rest. Taking things however as we find 'em,
'twill be convenient for method's sake to take notice first of the Proceedings
against him, then of some pretty plain footsteps of practice upon him, and
shuffling dealing in his Case; and lastly, of several things considerable in
his Narrative.

He was accused for the Plot, as one who was acquainted with West, Rumsey, and
the rest; and having been really present at their Meetings, and Discourses on
that Subject, absconded when the public News concerning the Discovery came
into the Country; though this, as he tells the King, more for fear that if he was
taken up, his Creditors would never let him come out of Gaol, than any thing
else. After some time he got to Sea in a little Vessel, went over to France,
and so to the West Indies, among the Caribbe-Islands, where much of his
Concerns lay: But writing to his Factor at Nevis, he was by him treacherously
betrayed, and seized by the Order of Sir William Stapleton, and thence brought
Prisoner to England, where after Examination, and a Confession of at least all
he knew, having been Outlawed in his Absence on an Indictment of Treason; he
was on the 21th of April, 1684. brought to the Kings Bench, to show cause why
Execution should not be awarded against him, as is usual in that case: He
opposed nothing against it, only saying, [ If an ingenuous Confession of Truth
could merit the King's Pardon, he hoped he had done it.] The Attorney being
called for, ordered the Indictment to be read, and gave him the offer of a
Trial, waving the Outlawry, which he refused, and threw himself on the King's
Mercy. On which Execution was awarded, though the Attorney who had not so much
Law even as Jeffreys, was for having Judgment first pass against him, which is
never done in such cases, according to which he was executed at Tyburn the 30th
of April.

It seemed strange to all men, that a Man of so much Spirit as Mr. Holloway
appeared to be, should so tamely die without making any manner of Defense, when
that Liberty was granted him: It seemed as strange, or yet stranger, that any
Protestant should have any thing that looked like Mercy or Favor from the
Persons then at the Helm, [That they should be so gracious to him, as it is
there called, to admit him to a Trial, which looked so generously, and was so
cried up -- the Attorney calling it [ A Mercy and a Grace] and the Lord Chief
Justice saying, He Would assure him 'twas a great Mercy, and that it was exceeding
well. Now all this Blind or Mystery will be easily unriddled, by two or three
Lines which Holloway speaks just after, [ My Lord, says he, I cannot undertake
to defend my self, for I have confessed before His Majesty, that I am guilty of
many things in that Indictment.] Which was immediately made use of as 'twas
designed -- Good Mr. Justice Withens crying out full mouthed, [ I hope every
body here will take notice of his open Confession, when he might try it if he
would -- Surely none but will believe this Conspiracy now, after what this man
has owned.] So there is an end of all the Mercy -- A Man who had before
confessed in order to be hanged, had gracious Liberty given him to confess it
again in Public, because they knew he had precluded all manner of Defense
before, and this public Action would both get 'em the repute of Clemency, and
confirm the belief of the Plot. Now that there had been practice used with him,
and promises of pardon if he would take this method, and own himself guilty without
Pleading, is more than probable, both from other practices of the same nature
used toward Greater Men, and from some Expressions of his which look exceeding
fair that way. Thus in his Paper left behind him, [ I had, he says, some other
Reasons why I did not plead, which at present I conceal, as also why I did not
speak what I intended.] Other Reasons, besides his Confession to His Majesty,
and Reasons to be concealed. Now what should those be, but Threatenings and
Promises, to induce him to silence, and public acknowledgment of all? Which
appears yet plainer from another passage, [ I am satisfied that all means which
could be thought on have been used, to get as much out of me as possible.] If
all means, then without straining, those before mentioned.

But if he made so fair and large an acknowledgment, here is more Mystery still;
Why wan't his Life spared? Let any read his Confession and Speech, or these
Passages observed out of them, and he will no longer wonder at it. He was a
little squeasie Conscienc'd, and would not strain so far as others in accusing
Men of those black Crimes whereof they were innocent; nay, as was before said,
vindicating them from those Aspersions cast upon them, and for which some of
them, particularly my Lord Russel, suffered Death. He says, [ The Assassination
was carried on but by three or four, and could never hear so much as the Names
of above Five for it -- That he and others had declared their abhorrence of any
such thing -- That Ferguson was not in it.] And besides, speaks some things
with the Liberty of an Englishman, shows the very Root of all those Heats which
had been raised -- Says what was true enough, [ That the Protestant Gentry had
a Notion of a Devilish Design of the Papists to cut off the Kings Friends, and
stirring men in both last Parliaments; That they had long had Witnesses to
swear them out of their Lives, but no Juries to believe 'em; That now the point
about the Sheriffs was gained, that difficulty was over; That the King had bad
Council about him, who kept all things from his Knowledge; That if things
continued thus, the Protestant Gentry resolved to get the King from his Evil
Council, and then he would immediately be of their side, and suffer all Popish
Offenders to be brought to Justice.] Hence 'twas plain, no Assassination, no
Plot against the King or Government intended; only Treason against the D. of
York and the Papists, who were themselves Traitors by Law. But ^et one bolder
stroke than all this, [ He prays the King's Eyes might be opened, to see his
Enemies from his Friends, whom he had cause to look for nearer home.] Was a Man
to expect pardon after this -- no certainly, which he soon himself grew
sensible of, and prepared for Death, [ the Council, as he says, taking it very
heinously, that he should presume to write such things.]

As for what Sheriff Daniel urges, That what he says about the King were but
Glossy Pretenses; He answers him very well, That 'twas far otherwise. Here was
plain matter of Fact: The Kingdom in eminent danger; the Fit just coming on,
which has since so near shaken to pieces all the frame of Church and State,
which has so many years been rising to this Compleatness: Ordinary ways and
usual Remedies could not prevail; these Protestants were forced to betake
themselves to extraordinary, in defense of the Government and Laws, and not
against 'em, any more than 'twould have been to have taken Arms and rescued the
King from a Troop of Banditti, who had got possession of his Person; the
Papists who had him, being as visibly and notoriously obnoxious to the
Government, and as dead Men in Law, most of 'em, as public Thieves and
Robbers. Thus much of Mr. Holloway, the Popish tender Mercy toward him, his
Confession and Execution.

Mr. Holloway declared, that Mr. West proposed the Assassination, but none
seconded him -- That he could not perceive that Mr. Ferguson knew any thing of
it; and Holloway said, It was our design to shed no Blood; He being
interrogated, by Mr. Ferguson's Friend, Mr. Sheriff Daniel, whether he knew
Ferguson; He answered, That he did know him, but knew him to be against any
design of killing the King.

Sir Thomas Armstrong.
BUt the next had not so fair play, because they knew he would make better use
on it. They had this Lion in the Toils, and did not intend to let him loose
again to make sport, lest the Hunters themselves should come off ill by it. He
had been all his Life a firm Servant and Friend to the Royal Family, in their
Exile and afterward: He had been in Prison for 'em under Cromwell, and in
danger both of Execution and Starving; for all which they now rewarded him. He
had a particular Honor and Devotion for the Duke of Monmouth, and pusht on his
Interest on all occasions, being a Man of as undaunted English Courage, as ever
our Country produced. He was with the Duke formerly in his Actions in Flanders,
and shared there in his Danger and Honor. His Accusation was, his being
concerned in the General Plot, and that too of Killing the King; but he was
indeed hanged for running away, and troubling 'em to send so far after him. The
particulars pretended against him, were what the Lord Howard witnessed in
Russels Trial, [ Of his going to kill the King when their first design failed.]
But this was there only a Supposal, though advanced into a formed Accusation,
and aggravated by the Attorney, as the Reason why he had a Trial denied him,
when Holloway had one offered, both of 'em being alike Outlawed On which
Outlawry Sir Thomas was Kidnapt in Holland, and brought over hither in Chains,
and robbed by the way into the bargain. Being brought up, and asked what he had
to say, that Sentence should not pass upon him, he pleaded the 6th of Edw. 6.
wherein it is provided, [ That if a Person outlawed render himself in a year
after the Outlawry pronounced, and traverse his Indictment, and shall be
acquitted on his Trial, he shall be discharged of the Outlawry.] On which he
accordingly then and there made a formal Surrender of himself to the Lord Chief
Justice, and asked the benefit of the Statute, and a fair Trial for his Life,
the Year not being yet expired. If ever any thing could appear plain to common
Sense, 'twas his Case. The Statute allows a years time, the year was not out,
he surrendered himself, demands the benefit of it; and all the Answer he could
get, or Reason to the contrary, was the positive Lord Chief Justice's, [ We
don't think so, and we are of another Opinion.] Nay, could not have so much
Justice as to have Counsel allowed to plead it, though the Point sufficiently
deserved it, and here was the Life of an old Servant of the King's concerned in
it. When he still pleaded. That a little while before, one, meaning Holloway,
had the benefit of a Trial offered him, if he would accept it, and that was all he
now desired.

The Lord Chief Justice answers. That was only the Grace and Mercy of the
King. The Attorney adds, The King did indulge Holloway so far as to offer him a
Trial, and his Majesty perhaps might have some Reason for it: The very
self-same some Reason, no doubt on it, which Holloway says he had for not
pleading. But Sir Thomas (the Attorney goes on) deserved no favor, because he
was one of the Persons that actually engaged to go, on the King's hasty coming
from Newmarket, and destroy him by the way as he came to Town; and that this
appeared upon as full and clear Evidence, and as positively testified as any
thing could be, and this in the Evidence given in of the late horrid
Conspiracy.] Now Id fain know who gives this clear and full Evidence in the
Discovery of the Conspiracy. Howard's is mere Supposition, and he is all who so
much as mentions a syllable on it that ever could be found on search of all the
Papers and Trials relating to that Affair. To this Sir Thomas answers in his
Speech, [ That had he come 'to his Trial, he could have proved my Lord Howard
's base Reflections on him to be a notorious falsehood, there being at least ten
Gentlemen, besides all the Servants in the House, could testify where he Dined
that very day.]

Still Sir Thomas demanded the Benefit of the Law, and no more: To which
Jeffreys answered, with one of his usual barbarous Insults over the Miserable,
[ That he should have it by the Grace of God; ordering, That Execution be done
on Friday next according to Law. And added, That he should have the full
Benefit of the Law:] repeating the Jest lest it should be lost, as good as
three times in one Sentence. Though had not his Lordship slipped out of the World
so slily, he had had as much benefit the same way, and much more justly than
this Gentleman.

Then the Chief Justice proceeds, and tells him, We are satisfied that
according to Law, we must Award Execution upon this Outlawry: Thereupon Mrs.
Matthews, Sir Thomas's Daughter, said, My Lord, I hope you will not Murder my
Father: For which, being Brow-beaten and Checked, She added, God Almighty's
Judgments Light upon YOU.

The Friday after he was brought to the place of Execution, Dr. Tennison being
with him, and on his desire, after he had given what he had to leave, in a
Paper, to the Sheriff, Prayed a little while with him. He then Prayed by
himself; and after having thanked the Doctor for his great Care and Pains with
him, submitted to the Sentence, and died more composedly, and full as
resolutely as he had lived. It Is observable, that more cruelty was exercised on
him than any who went before him, not only in the manner of his Death, but the
exposing his Limbs and Body: A fair warning what particular Gratitude a
Protestant is to expect for having obliged a true Papist.

Another thing worth remembering, in all other Cases as well as this tho
occasion is here taken to do it, is, That whereas in Holloway's Case,
Jeffreys's observed, [ That not one of all concerned in this Conspiracy had
dared to deny it; and lower, to deny the Truth of the fact absolutely.] It Is so
far from being true, that every one who suffered, did it as absolutely as
possible. They were Tried or Sentenced for [ Conspiring against the King and
Government] that was their Plot; but this they all deny, and absolutely too;
and safely might do it: for they consulted for it, not conspired against it,
resolving not to touch the King's Person; nay, if possible, not to shed one
drop of Blood of any other, as Holloway and others say. For the King's Life,
Sir Thomas says as the Lord Russel, [Never had any Man the impudence to propose
so base and barbarous a thing to him.] Russel, and almost all besides, say,
They had never any design against the Government. Sir Thomas here says the
same; [ As he never had any Design against the King's Life, nor the Life of any
Man, so he never had any Design to alter the Monarchy.]

As he lived, he says he died a sincere Protestant, and in the Communion of the
Church of England, though he heartily wished he had more strictly lived up to the
Religion he believed. And though he had but a short time, he found himself
prepared for Death; and indeed, as all his Life showed him a Man of Courage, so
his Death, and all the rest of his Behavior, did, a Penitent Man, a Man of
good Sense, and a good Christian.

At the place of Execution Sir Thomas Armstrong deported himself with Courage,
becoming a great Man, and with the Seriousness and Piety suitable to a very
good Christian.

Sheriff Daniel told him, that he had leave to say what he pleased, and should
not be interrupted, unless he upbraided the Government; Sir Thomas thereupon
told him, that he should not say any thing by way of Speech; but delivered him
a Paper, which he said contained his mind, he then called for Dr. Tennison who
prayed with him, and then he prayed himself.

In his Paper he thus expressed himself, That he thanked. Almighty God, he
found himself prepared for Death, his thoughts set upon another World, and
^eaned from this; yet he could not but give so much of his little time as to
answer some Calumnies, and particularly what Mr. Attorney accused him of at the
Bar.

That he prayed to be allowed a Trial for his Life according to the Laws of the
Land, and urged the Statute of Edward 6. which was expressly for it; but it
signified nothing, and he was with an extraordinary Roughness condemned and
made a precedent; though Holloway had it offered him, and he could not but think
all the world would conclude his case very different, else why refused to him?

That Mr. Attorney charged him for being one of those that was to kill the
King; He took God to witness, that he never had a thought to take away the King
's Life, and that no man ever had the Impudence to propose so barbarous and
base a thing to him; and that he never was in any design to alter the
Government.

That if he had been tried, he could have proved the Lord Howard's base
Reflections upon him, to be notoriously false -- He concluded, that he had
lived and now dyed of the Reformed Religion, a Protestant in the Communion of
the Church of England, and he heartily wished he had lived more strictly up to
the Religion he believed: That he had found the great comfort of the Love and
Mercy of God, in and through his blessed Redeemer, in whom he only trusted, and
verily hoped that he was going to partake of that fullness of Joy which is in
his presence, the hopes whereof infinitely pleased him. He thanked God he had
no repining, but cheerfully submitted to the punishment of his Sins; He freely
forgave all the World, even those concerned in taking away his Life, though he
could not but think his Sentence very hard, he being denied the Laws of the
Land.

On the Honorable Sir Thomas Armstrong, Executed June 20. 1684.
Had thou abroad found safety in thy flight,
The Immortal honor had not famed so bright.
Thou had been still a worthy Patriot thought;
But now thy Glory's to perfection brought.
In exile, and in death to England true:
What more could Brutus or just Cato do?
Alderman Cornish.
TO make an end of this Plot altogether, 'twill be necessary once more to
invert the Order in which things happened, and though Mr. Cornish suffered not
till after the Judges returned from the West, as well as Bateman after him, yet
we shall here treat of 'em both* and so conclude this Matter.

Mr. Cornish was seized in October. 1685. and the Monday after his Commitment,
which was on Tuesday or Friday, Arraigned for High Treason, having no Notice
given him till Saturday noon. His Charge was for Conspiring to Kill the King,
and promising to assist the Duke of Monmouth, etc. in their Treasonable
Enterprises. He desired his Trial might be deferred, because of his short time
for Preparation; and that he had a considerable Witness an hundred and forty
miles off, and that the King had left it to the Judges, whether it should be
put off or no. But 'twas denied him; the Att^rney telling him, He had not
deserved so well of the Government as to have his Trial delayed. That was in
English, because he had been a Protestant Sheriff, he should not have Justice.

The Evidences against him were Rumsey and Goodenough. Rumsey swears, [ That
when he was at the famous Meeting at Mr. Shepherds, Mr. Shepherd being called
down, brought up Mr. Cornish; and when he was come in, Ferguson opened his
Bosom, and under his Stomacher pull^d out a Paper in the Nature of a
Declaration of Grievances, which Ferguson read, and Shepherd held the Candle
while 'twas reading; that Mr. Cornish lik^d it, and what Interest he had, said,
would join with it; and that out of Compassion he had not accused Mr. Cornish
before.]

Goodenough swears, That he talked with Cornish of the Design of Seizing the
Tower. Mr. Cornish said, He would do what good he could, or to that purpose.

To Goodenough's Evidence was opposed by Mr. Gosprights, who testified Mr.
Cornish opposed his being* Undersheriff saying, That he was an ill Man,
obnoxious to the Government, and he would not trust an hair of his Head with him.
And is it then probable that he would have such Discourses with him as would
endanger Head and all? Mr. Love, Jekil, and Sir William Turner witness to the
same purpose.

As to Rumsey's Evidence, the Perjury lies so full and staring, that it is
impossible to look into the Trial with half an eye, without meeting it. Compare
what he says on Russel's Trial, and here, and this will be as visible as the
Sun. Being asked there Whether there was any Discourse about a Declaration, and
how long he staid; he says, [ He was there about a quarter of an hour, and that
he was not certain whether he heard something about a Declaration there, or
whether he had heard Ferguson report afterward that they had then debated it.]
Now turn to Cornish's Trial. He is there strangely recovered in his Memory, and
having had the advantage, either of Recollection, or better Instruction,
remembers that distinctly in October. 1685. which he could not in July 1683. [ He
had been the^e a quarter of an hour] the time he states in the Lord Russel's
Trial, but lengthens it out, and improves it now, to so long time as Mr.
Shepherds going down, bringing Cornish up, Ferguson's pulli^^ ^ut the
Declaration, and reading it, and that, as Shepherd said in Russel's Trial, a
long one too, as certainly it must be, if, as 'twas sworn, it contained all the
Grievances of the Nation, and yet all this still in a quarter of an hour; thus
contradicti^g himself both to Time and Matter.

But he is of such villainous Credit, that his Evidence is scarce fit to be
taken even against himself. Let Us see then how Shepherd does point blank
contradict, and absolutely overthrow it in every Particular, as expressly as
it is possible to ruin any Evidence. He says [ At one Meeting only Mr. Cornish
was at his House to speak with one of the Persons there; that then he himself
came up stairs, and went out again with Mr. Cornish. That there was not one
word read, nor any Paper seen while Mr. Cornish was there, and this he was
positive of, for Mr. Cornish was not one of their Company.]

Now who should know best, Rumsey what Shepherd did, or he what he did himself?
Could a man hold the Candle while a Declaration was read, as Rumsey swears
Shepherd did, and yet know nothing of it; nay, protest the quite contrary? What
sizes the Consciences of his Jury were, let any Christian, Turk, or Jew be
Judge; and Providence has already visibly done it on the Foreman of it, who
came to an untimely end, being beaten to pieces by the Fall of some Timber at a
Fire in Thames Street.

All that is pretended to bolster Rumsey's Evidence, and hinder Shepherd's from
saving the Prisoner, was, That Shepherd strengthened Rumsey, and proved Cornish
guilty of a lie. But if we enquire into the matter, we shall find one just as
true as the other.

Cornish on his Trial is said to have denied his being at the Meeting, and
discoursing with the D. of Monmouth: Which they would have us believe Shepherd
swears he was, though not a syllable of it appears. [ He had been there several
times, Shepherd says, but was not of their Consult, knew nothing of their
Business, nor can he be positive whether 'twas the Duke of Monmouth he came to
speak with that Evening.] But supposing in two or three years time, and on so
little Recollection. Cornish's Memory had slipped in that Circumstance, what is
that to Shepherd's Evidence against the very Root of Rumsey's which hanged the
prisoner?

In spite of all he was found Guilty, and Condemned, and even that Christian
serenity of Mind and Countenance wherewith it was visible he bore his Sentence,
turned to his Reproach by the Bench.

He continued in the same exc^llent Temper whilst in Newgate, and gave the
World a glaring Instance of the Happiness of such Persons as live a pious Life,
when they come to make an end on it, let the way thereof be never so violent.
His carriage and behavior at his leaving Newgate was as follows.

Some passages ^f Henry Cornish Esquire before his Sufferings.
COming into the Press-yard, and seeing the Ha^ter in the Officers hand, he
said, Is this for me? the Officer answered, Yes; he replied, Blessed be God,
and kissed it; and after said, O blessed be God for Newgate, I have enjoyed God
ever since I came within these Walls, and blessed be God who has made ^e fit
to die. I am now going to that God that will not be mocked, to that God that
will not be imposed upon, to that God that knows the Innocence of his poor
Creature. And a little after he said, Never did any poor Creature come unto God
with greater Confidence in his Mercy, and Assurance of Acceptance with him,
through Jesus Christ, than I do; but it is through Jesus Christ, for there is
no other way of coming to God but by him, to find Acceptance with him: There is
no other Name given under Heaven whereby we can be saved, but the Name of
Jesus. Then speaking to the Officers, he said, Labor everyone of you to be fit
to die, for I ^ell you, you are not fit to dye: I was not fit to dye my s^l^
'till I came in hither; but O blessed be God, he has made me fit to dye, and
has made me willing to dye! In a few moments I shall have the fruition of the
blessed Jesus, and that not for a day, but for ever. I am going to the Kingdom
of God, to the Kingdom of God where I shall enjoy the Presence of God the
Father, and of God the Son, and of God the Holy Spirit, and of all the holy
Angels; I am going to the gen^ral Ass^mbly of the firstborn, and of the Spirit
of Just men made perfect: O that God should ever do so much for me! O that God
should concern himself so much for poor Creatures, for their Salvation* blessed
be his name! for this was the Design of God from all Eternity, to give his only
Son to dye for poor miserable Sinners. Then the Offi^ers going to tie his
hands, he said, What, must I be tied then? well a brown Thread might have served
the turn; you need not tie me at all, I shall not stir from you, for I thank
God I am not afraid to dye. As he was going out, he said, Farewell Newgate,
Farewell all my Fellow prisoners here, the Lord comfort you, the Lord be with
you all.

Thus much for his Behavior in the way to his Martyrdom. The Place of it was
m^^t spitefully and ignominiously ordered, almost before his own door, and near
Guildhall, to scare any Good Citizen from appearing vigorously in the Disc^arge
of his Duty for his Countries Service, by his Example If any thing was wanting
in his Trial, from the haste of it, for the clearing his Innocence, he
sufficiently made it up in solemn Asseverations thereof on the Scaffold: [ God
is my Witness, says he, the Crimes laid to my Charge were falsely and
maliciously sworn against me by the Witnesses: for I never was at any Consult,
nor any Meeting where Matters against the Government were discoursed of.] He
adds, [ I never heard or read any Declaration tending that way.] Again, [ As to
the Crimes for which I suffer, Upon the words of a dying man, I Am altogether
Innocent. Lower he adds, [ He died as he had lived, in the Communion of the
Church of England in whose Ordinances he had been often a partaker, and now
felt the blessed effects thereof in these his Agonies.

He was observed by those who stood near the Sledge, to have solemnly, several
times, averred his absolute Innocence of any Design against the Government, and
particularly that which he died for.

There were some Persons, who are sufficiently known, who were present at, and
expressed a great deal of barbarous Joy at his Death: the open publication of
their Names is here spared, in hopes they have or will repent of so unmanly and
unchristian a Behavior; though some of them then were so confounded with his
Constancy and Cheerful Bravery, as wickedly to report, That he was Drunk or Mad
when he died. His Quarters were set up on Guildhall, in Terrorem, and for the
same Reason, no doubt, before mentioned, for which he was Executed so near it.
There was such a terrible Storm the day of his Death, as has scarce been known
in the memory of man; and will never be forgot by those who were in it; ten or
a dozen Ships being foundered, or stranded in one Road, and a vast many more in
other places. And as Heaven then did him Justice, and vindicated his Innocence,
so Earth also has done it, the Judgment against him being Reverst by that
honorable, ever memorable Parliament which under God and our King, has settled
the Happiness both of this Age and Posterity.

There wanted not a sort of men at this time who would have persuaded the
World, that Murder was a Royal Sport; for at this time was Printed a Ballad
called Advice to the ^ity, sung to the King at Windsor, wherein are these
entertaining Lines.

Then London be wise, and baffle their Power,
And let 'em play the old Game no more,
Hang, hang up the Sheriffs,
Those Baboons in Power,
Those Popular Thieves,
Those Rats of the Tower.
The Instruments of shedding this Blood may do well to reflect upon the Fate of
Clowdesly, one of the Iury-men, and upon some others since that were concerned
in that Bloody Tragedy.

His Character.
HE was a Person of as known Prudence as Integrity, a good Christian, a
comple^t Citizen, a worthy Magistrate, and a zealous Church of England man. He
was so cautious and wise, that he was noted for it all through those worst of
times, and often proposed as an Example to others of hotter and more imprudent
Tempers; nor could the least imputation be fixed on him of hearing, or
concealing any unlawful or dangerous Discourses, any other ways than by plain
force of Perjury, being known to have shunned some Persons, whom he, as well as
some other prudent men, suspected to have no good Designs, and to be indu'd
with no more honesty than discretion, as it afterward proved. But he was
designed to glorify God by such an End as all his care could not avoid, which
he submitted to, with bravery rarely to be met with, unless among those who
suffered for the same Cause in the same Age; or their Predecessors, Queen Marys
Martyrs. There was seen the same tenor of Prudence and Piety through all the
Actions of his Life, though most conspicuous in the last glorious Scene of it.
There was such a firmness in his Soul, such vigor, and almost extatick Joy,
and yet so well regulated, that it shined through his Face, almost with as
visible Rays as those in which we use to dress Saints* and Martyrs, with which
both at his Sentence and Execution, he refresht all his Friends, and at once
dazzled and confounded his most bitter Enemies.

Mr. Charles Bateman*
THE next and last was Mr. Bateman the Chy^u^geon, a Man of good Sense, good
Courage, and good Company, and a very large and generous* Temper, of
considerable Repute and Practice in his Calling: A great Lover and Vindicator
of the Liberties of the City and Kingdom, and of more interest than most of his
Station. He was swore against by Rouse's Lee, and Richard Goodenough, upon the
old Stories of seizing the Tower, City, and Savoy We had had a better Defense,
had he himself been able to have made it: But being kep^ close Prisoner in
Newgate, the Windows and Rooms all dark, and little or no Company, he being a
free jolly Man, and used formerly to Conversation and Diversion, soon grew
deeply melancholy; and when he came on his Trial, appeared little less than
perfectly distracted; on which the Court very kindly gave his Son liberty to
make his Defense -- The first Instance to be sure of that Nature; since he
himself might probably, had he been in his Senses, have remembered and pleaded
many things more, which would have invalidated their Evidence against him. But
had not the mistaken Piety of his Son undertook his Defense, certainly they
could never have been such Cannibals to have tried one in his Condition. -- Yet
could but what he brought for him, been allowed its Weight and Justice, he had
escaped well enough. For as for Lee, one Baker Witnessed, [He had been
practiced upon by him in the year 83. and would have had him insinuate into
Bateman 's Company, and discourse about State Affairs to trepan him, by which
means he should be made a Great Man] 'Twas urged besides, that there was three
Years between the Fact pretended, and Lee's Prosecution of him, which, though
they had but one Witness could have brought him to punishment, which would have
been judged sufficient by any, but those who would be content with nothing but
Blood. For Goodenough, he was but one Witness, and pardoned only so far, as to
qualify him to do mischief. However he was found Guilty; and just before his
Execution, very much recovered himself, dying as much like a Christian, and
with as great a presence of Mind as most of the others.

Dr. Oats, Mr. Johnson, and Mr. Dangerfield.
WE are now obliged, by the third of our History, to resume a Subject, which,
it is not doubted will be ungrateful enough to some Persons; and that is, -- the
Popish Plot; the belief of which, by the indefatigable Industry of that Party,
and the weekly pains of their Observator, and especially this last pretended
Plot against the Government, was now almost entirely obliterated out of the
minds of the less thinking part of the Nation. To accomplish which more fully,
'twas thought necessary by the Managers, either quite to take off, or expose to
Miseries and Disgraces worse than Death, all those few Persons who remained
honest and firm to their first Evidence; the generality of the World judging by
outward appearance, and thinking it impossible but that one who stood in the
Pillory, and was whipped at the Carts-Arse, must be a perjured Rogue without more
ado. Mr. Bedloe was dead, and his Testimony therefore would be easier
forgotten: though at his last Breath after the Sacrament, he Solemnly and
Juridically confirmed every word of it before one of the Judges, who was
happily in Bristol at the time of his Death. Most of the Under-Evidences in the
Plot were threatened, or promised, or brought off from what they had witnessed,
or forced to leave the Land for the securing their Persons. None remain now
besides Oats and Dangerfield, with whom all means possible, fair and foul, had
been used, to make 'em turn Villains, and deny their Evidence; but to their
eternal Praise, they still continued firm to their first Testimony, to the Rage
and Confusion of their Enemies. They therefore went first to work with the
Doctor; and 'twill be worth the while to consider the Reason of his first
Prosecution, by which men that are not very much prejudiced may see the Reason
and Justice of those which follow, and 'twas [ For scandalizing the Duke of
York with that notorious Truth -- That he was reconciled to the Church of Rome,
adding, What every one knows, that 'twas High Treason so to be.] Would but the
Doctor's greatest and most passionate Enemies reflect on this beginning of his
Sorrows; as well as calmly examine all that is to come, they must form a ju^ter
Judgment of his Person and Actions, than what seems too deeply fixed in 'em,
ever to be rooted out; for which he was adjudged to pay that reasonable little
Fine of a 100000 Pounds, which, till he paid, though there was no great haste for
his doing it, he was committed to ^he Bench.

Having him thus in Limbo, they resolved to strike at the root with him, and
therefore after new fruitless attempts to make him qu^t and revoke his
Evidence, they made the last Effort on his Constancy and Honesty; and indeed
Life it self, Indicting him on the 8 th and 9 th of May, 1685. for Perjury in
some branches of his Evidence, given in some of it, almost Seven Years before.
His first Accusation wa^, [ For-Swearing in Ireland 's Trial, he himself was
here in London, whereas it was pretended he was at that very time at St. Omers]
The Second, That Ireland was at that time in Town, when they would have it
believed he was in Staffordshire.

The Evidence for the first were all Lads of St. Omers, who, though they
blunder'd ill-favour'dly in former Attempts the same way, and were accordingly
told so by the Court in other Trials, were now grown expert in the Business,
being all of a Religion that makes Perjury meritorious; all Youths and Boys,
and under such a Discipline as oblige them to obey their Superiors, without any
reserve, or questioning the Reason or Justice of the thing; all, or most of 'em
afterward, rewarded with Places of Trust and Profit under King James, as no
doubt promised 'em before for their good Service. They all swore point blank,
That Oats was at St. Omers, when he swears he was here at the Consult. Not one
of these Witnesses who had not been bred at St. Omers, and but one who
pretended to be a Protestant. For the second Indictment -- Of Irelands not
being in Town in August, as Oats had sworn him: They brought several Witnesses
to prove it, and that he was at that time in Staffordshire; most, if not all of
which were great Papists.

In answer to which, let us first be persuaded fairly to consider what may be
said in his Defense, and most part of his Vindication is over: And first --
These were most, or all of 'em, the self-same Witnesses, who in the successive
Trials, Whitebreads, Harcourts, etc. and Mr. Langhorns, could not find Credit;
and who had several Witnesses who swore point blank contrary to what they
affirmed, some of whom were dead before this last Trial. Let Us then consider
what Defense Oats made for himself, which in spite of his own and Jeffreys
passions, seems strenuous and unanswerable.

He had in the former Trials produced no less than Eight Persons who swore
positively to his being in Town at that very time, when the Jesuits and their
Younkers would so fain had him been out of it, whose Names were Mr. Walker, an
ancient Minister of the Church of England, Sarah Ives, Mrs. Mayo, Sir Richard
Barker, Mr. Page, Mr. Butler, William Smith, and Mr. Clay, a Romish Priest,
four of which, Mayo, Butler, Page and Walker he now produced again at his
Trial; the two first of whom positively swore the same they did before; the
Minister was too old to remember, and the last too fearful positively to affirm
what they had before done.

As to the 2 d Indictment, a Crowd of Witnesses, such as they were, came to
testify Ireland was in Staffordshire when Oats swore him to be in London.

To this same Objection he had formerly answered, and proved by the Oaths of Mr.
Bedloe, Sarah ^ain, and afterward of Mr. Jennison, That Ireland was in Town,
when others witness he was in the Country. But now, at his Trial, Bedlo and
Pain being dead, and Jennison fled into Holland, he was absolutely
incapacitated of making any Defense that way; and so was found Guilty of both
Indictments.

The Judgment against him was just as merciful as could be expected from
Papists, acting by a Jeffreys, part of which was, [ To be whipped from Algate to
Newgate on Wednesday, and on the Friday following from Newgate to Tyburn, and
stand on the Pillory five times a year, and be Prisoner during Life.] Which he
bore with a great deal of Strength and Courage; tho had not Providence provided
him a Body and Soul, made, one would think, on purpose for it, 'twould have
killed him, if he would had the strength of twenty Men. He had in all above two
thousand Lashes, as some that were by reckoned em up -- Such a thing as was
never inflicted by any Jew, Turk, or Heathen, but Jeffreys; nay, the merciful
Jews thought one less than God Almighty had appointed sufficient, and never
gave but 39 at a time; all St. Paul's 3 times not coming near the third part of
the Doctors. Had they hanged him, they had been merciful; had they flead him
alive, it is a question whether it had been so much torture. How good and
merciful those Persons, who will vindicate this worse than barbarous and
inhumane Action, are, let the World and future Ages be Judges; in the mean
while we'll safely defy all History to show one Parallel of it either on man or
Dog, from the Creation of the World to the year 1685.

But there needs no more aggravation of it, or urging what is plain enough,
that the thus dealing with him, even supposing his Crime as great as they would
have it was yet the highest affront and indignity even to Humanity it self.
'Twill besides this be an unanswerable Observation, -- That it had been
impossible for a Man to have held out the Second Whipping after the first was
over, while the Wounds were fresh about him, and every new stroke more than a
double torment, either to have undergone this without Confession, or dropping
down Dead with extremity of pain, had he not both had truth on his side, and
also a more than common support and assistance from him who saw his Innocence.
This Whipping of his being the greatest Confirmation to his Evidence that was
possible to be given.

After his return, to Prison, after all this Usage, yet if possible, more
barbarous, tearing off the Plasters from his Wounds, crushing him with Irons,
thrusting him into Holes and Dungeons, and endeavoring to render him as
infamous to the Nation, and all the World, as Cain or Judas; he bore up against
a^l this, and more, with so strange and almost mir^culous a Patience, that
during his four y^a^s Imprisonment, he was never once heard to sigh, or
maniifest any impatience under his Condition. He refused all the Offers of the
Jesuits, who even after this had the Impudence to pro^ose to him his recanting
his Evidence. He had still a strong Belief that he should see better ^imes, and
get his freedom again* which he had in that General Jail-delivery, granted all
England by the then Prince of Orange's Heroic Undertaking. Since that he has
presented his Case and Petition to the Parliament; to the House of Commons, as
well as the House of Lords: And tho the Honorable House of Lords were offended
at what they judged a slight of their Jurisdiction, in his Addressing to the
House of Commons, while his Cause lay before them, and expressed their
resentments thereof accordingly; The Commons have since that taken his Case
into Consideration, and, as well as four succeeding Parliaments before 'em,
owned his Cause, and censured the Proceedings of Jeff^eys against him; and it is
not doubted but will appoint him Rewards suitable to his Sufferings and Merit.

His Character.
HIs Firmness and Courage, even perhaps to a Fault, have been visible through
these mentioned, and all his other Actions since he appeared on the public
Stage: His Passions are lively and warm and he is the worst made for a
Dissembler, an Hypocrite, or a secret Villain of any Man in the World: Nor have
all his Sufferings much sunk him, tho he be a little altered in this
particular. He Is open and frank, and speaks whatever he thinks of any Persons
or things in the World, and bearing himself justly enough, on his Services to
his Country, is not careful to keep that Guard which others do, on his Words
and Actions. He has Wit enough, a pleasant Humor and sufficiently divertive to
those he knows, and his Learning is far from contemptible. He has a good
Library, is no mean Critic in the Greek, and well acquainted with the
Schoolmen and Fathers. He Is owner of as much Generosity as any Man, and as much
tenderness to any in Misery, scorning to strike at those below him; an example
of which very remarkable there was in his inhumane Judges Fall, he being almost
the only Person who has been heard to pity him; though one would have thought he
should have been the last. In a word, as this present Age has now begun to do
him Justice, so it is not doubted will make an end on it, and those succeeding
join with it in making honorable mention of his Name and Services to the
Protestant Religion.

Mr. Johnson.
MUch about the same time, the pious, reverend, and learned Mr. Johnson met
with, much the same Usage. His great Crimes were, -- Being my Lord Russel 's
Chaplain, Writing the famous Julian the Apostate, and endeavoring to persuade
the Nation, not to let themselves be made Slaves and Papists, when so many
others were doing their parts to bring 'em to it. And it is a question whether
any Man in the World, besides his Friend the Reverend Dr. Burnet, did more
Service with his Pen, or more conduced to our great and happy Revolution, both
among the Army, and in other places. For some of these Good S^rvices he was
Accused, Imprisoned, Tried and Condemned to be divested of his Canonical Habit,
and be whipped as far as Oats was before him; which was performed, and which he
underwent, as he did, with Courage and Constancy above a Man, and like a
Christian and a Martyr. He remained ever since in the Kings Bench, till the
Prince's coming delivered him.

The following Paper was Published by Mr. Samuel Johnson, in the year 1686. For
which he was Sentenced by the Court of King's Bench, (Sir Edward Herbert being
Lord Chief Justice) to stand three times on the Pillory, and to be Whipped from
Newgate to Tyburn: which Barbarous Sentence was Executed.

An Humble and Hearty ADDRESS to all the English Protestants in this present
Army.
Gentlemen,
NExt to the Duty which we owe to God, which ought to be the Principal Care of
Men of your Profession especially (because you carry your Lives in your Hands,
and often look Death in the Face;)^ The Second Thing that deserves your
Consideration is, the Service of your Native Country, wherein you drew your
first Breath, and breathed a free English Air: Now I would desire you to
consider, how well you comply with these two Main Points, by engaging in this
present Service.

Is it in the Name of God, and for his Service, that you have joined your
selves with Papists; who will indeed fight for the Mass Book, but Burn the
Bible, and who seek to Extirpate the Protestant Religion with your Swords,
because they cannot do it with their own? And will you be Aiding and Assisting
to set up Mass-houses, to erect that Popish Kingdom of Darkness and Desolation
amongst us, and to train up all our Children in Popery? How can you do these
Things, and yet call your selves Protestants?

And then what Service can be done your Country, by being under the Command of
French and Irish Papists* and by bringing the Nation under a Foreign Yoke? Will
you help them to make forcible Entry into the Houses of your Countrymen, under
the Name of Quartering, contrary to Magna Charta and the Petition of Right?
Will you be Aiding and Assisting to all the Murders and Outrages which they
shall commit by their void Commissions? Which were declared Illegal, and
sufficiently blasted by both Houses of Parliament, (if there had been any need
of it) for it was very well known before, That a Papist cannot have a
Commission, but by the Law is utterly Disabled and Disarmed. Will you exchange
your Birthright of English-Laws and Liberties for Martial or Club-law, and
help to destroy all others, only to be eaten last your selves? If I know you
well, as you are Englishmen, you hate and scorn these things. And therefore be
not Unequally Yoaked with Idolatrous and Bloody Papists* Be Valiant for the
Truth, and show your selves Men.

The same Considerations are likewise humbly offered to all the English-Seamen,
who have been the Bulwark of this Nation against Popery and Slavery ever since
Eighty Eight.

His Character.
IF any Man does not know what he is, let him Read his Julian, and Defenses of
it; he will find there as much clear, close, fair Reason, Scripture, and Law, as
ever an ill Cause had brought against it, or a good one for it. Mr. Johnson is
a true Christian Stoic; and though he Writes warmly, thinks and acts as coldly
as any Man in Christendom. His Piety is as remarkable as his Constancy, and his
Universal Charity as both. -- But he is still alive; and it is better to say no
more of him, than either too much or too little.

Mr. Dangerfield.
HIs Father was a Gentleman, who lived in good fashion at Waltham-Abby, or
thereabouts -- had been a great Sufferer for K. Charles I. and charged this his
Son on his Deathbed, after his Discovery of the Plot, never to have any hand
in any thing against the Government; which he promised, and faithfully
observed. He was a Man of Business and Courage, and therefore employed by the
Papists, while among 'em, in their desperate and most dangerous Concerns. He
was then of a Religion that excused and encouraged the worst things he or any
other Man could be guilty of. The great thing which brought him on the Stage,
was Mrs. Celiers business, called the Meal-Tub-Plot. The Papists had designed
to kill two Birds with one Stone -- Divert the Laws and People from themselves,
and ruin their Enemies; for which end they had among 'em made a Plot to bring
in the best Men, and Patriots of the Kingdom into a pretended Design against
the K. and Government, by a kind of an Association, like that which afterward
took better effect. And for this Transaction, Mr. Dangerfield was made choice
of, a List of their Names, with the Design being by him, according to Order,
conveyed into one Colonel Mansel's Chamber -- But he was discovered and seized
in the Design, and acknowledg^d all the Intreagues, giving so clear an account
of it; that they had never to this very day, the Impudence to pretend any
Contradiction, or Trip in his Evidence, nor any other way but flat denial But
there was somewhat yet deeper in the Case which he afterward revealed in his
Depositions before the Parliament, That he was employed by the same Party to
kill the King, and encouraged and promised Impunity and Reward, and part of it
given him by a Great Person for that end.

When the Stream ran violently for Popery, he went over, for Security, into
Flanders, but continued not long there; and returning back he was some time
after seized, and carried before the Council, where, before the King himself,
persisting to a Tittle, in all his former Evidence, he was committed to
Newgate; and after having lain there some time, petitioned for a Trial, which
they could not do upon any account but Scandalum Magnatum and that in a Matter
which lay only before the Parliament, to whom he had revealed it. Yet for that
he was Tried, and found Guilty, as Wi. Williams the Speaker afterward for
Licensing his Narrative, by order of Parliament. He was to undergo the same
Whipping Oats and Johnson did. Before he went out he had strong bodings of his
Death, and chose a Text for his Funeral Sermon in the...of Job, There the
wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary are at rest. Saying, He was
confident they had such a particular Malice against him, he should never return
alive: Confirmed the truth of all his former Evidence, and took a last farewell
of his friends. After the Sentence was executed on him, in his return home, one
Francis stabbed him into the Eye with a sort of a Tuck in the end of his Cane,
which touching his Brain, h^ was hardly ever sensible after, but died of the
Wound in a few Hours, not without great suspicion of Poison, his Body being
swollen and black, and full of great Blains all over. The Murderer ^led, but was
pursued by the Rabble, who had torn him to pieces, had not the Officers rescued
him. He defended and justified the Fact while in Newgate, saying, He had the
greatest Men in the Kingdom to stand by him; to whom after his Trial, and being
found Guilty upon clear Evidence, great Applications were made, which had been
successful for his Pardon, had not Jeffreys himself gone to Whitehall, and told
the King He must die, for the Rabble were now thoroughly heated. Attempts were
made to bribe Mr. Dangerfield's Wife, that she might consent to the Pardon of
her Husbands Murderer; but she too well deserved to be related to him, to sell
his Blood; and had an Appeal ready against him, had he been Pardoned. So the
poor State-Martyr was hanged, as Coleman was before him. Mr. Dangerfield's Body
was conveyed to Waltham-Abby, with several Coaches attending it, and there
handsomely buried. He has left one Daughter behind him, who, if she lives, will
be the true Child of her Father.

His Character.
THE worst of his Enemies have owned he was a Man of Wit, Courage and Business;
all which he reconciled the best of any one; he had as much Address, as perfect
and great a Presence of Mind, in whatever Exigences, as can be met with. He was
the best Companion, the best Friend in the World, and as generous an Enemy. He
did nothing but what looked very handsome; and there was a Charm in the meanest,
and something most bewitchingly pleasant in the most indefensible of his
Actions. He could do almost every thing, and it is hard to say what he did with
the greatest Grace. In a word, all that knew him must say, That he wanted
nothing but an Estate to have made him as complete a Gentleman as most in
England.

An ELEGY upon Mr. Thomas. Dangerfield.
GO then mount on! wing through the midway Air,
And Godfreys hovering shade shall meet thee there,
A thousand Martyrs thou, a wound all over,
Thy mighty mind leaps out at every Pore,
My rising heart boils high, the ungrateful World shall see
Something Immortal, something worthy thee,
Larger within the Noble Image grows,
Free, like thy blood, the uncalled Satyr flows,
But not one Tear to affront thy pious Grave,
Russel and generous Essex died less brave;
Love, Pity, Friendship, all their Claims begin,
But Vengeance drowns 'em all, and roars aloud within,
And thou Hell 's Ehud by black Rome decreed,
Hallowed and blessed to do the glorious deed;
If his dear Name can ought of Passion move,
If there are any Stings in Blood or Love,
Even at Hell Gates I Will reach and stab thee there;
N^r can so just a Rage be too severe.
Though my wild Satyr means a nobler wound.
Others I strike, thee but at the rebound.
Like him we'll tell'em to their Teeth it is true,
Defy a stab, and give the Devil his due.
And if you bright exalted Names above,
Know any thing but how to Sing and Love,
Look down dear sharer of my Soul, and see
A Vengeance worthy of thy Friend and thee.
A Friend's Revenge may thy black Murderers feel,
Oh may my Pen dart Groves of poisoned Steel,
Till through their lustful Veins the Venom rolls,
And with a double Rot consumes their very Souls.
None, none! shall 'scape the just and deadly blow,
None that these Grand Intrigues of Murder know,
From Conclaves down to little Kings below,
Let Laureats belch a pocky Hero's Fame,
When Candied over with some cramp Hebrew name,
As their good fellow Catholic Jews before
Nickname a Calf Jehovah, and adore.
No well-wrote Story, no Romance can yield,
A greater, nobler Name than Dangerfield;
Nothing he wants, though Fate no Title brings,
That single Name's above an Earl's, a Duke's, a King's.
When Ease and Plenty their brisk Forces join,
Or the high Veins are swollen with lusty Wine:
When we on Honors lofty Turrets go,
And look with scorn ore little Crowds bel^w,
Even Fools and Cowards bold and witty grow.
When Jeffreys on the Bench, Ketch on the Gibbet sits,
Some take even them for Courages and Wits.
Nay nobler Souls than those, if Fortune frown,
Often broke and conquered meanly tumble down.
If Fate unjust Success to Tyrants give,
Even the Heroic Brutus dares not live.
But greater he is still what he was before,
Nay greater yet, is all himself and more.
Though Man ungrate he ever yet has known,
Though they forsake him, he is not yet alone.
For some too honest, and for some too brave,
How should he thrive when neither Fool nor Knave?
He Is not alone, another Spirit attends,
A nearer Comfort than a thousand Friends.
Heavens! see how bravely he maintains his ground!
Though with whole Hells of Devils baited round;
Charge on, charge thicker yet! he stands, he stands!
The blessed above look down, and clap their hands;
Envy the ungrateful World so great a Bliss,
And almost wish to change their place for his.
Unbrib'd he stands, with hopes of Victory,
Knowing his greatest Conquest was to die.
Thus the brave Lion, when base Hounds pursue,
And seize on every Pass and Avenue;
Though from within his mighty Genius call,
And knells of sudden Thunder bode his fall,
Walks careless on, walks on and looks about,
Terror and Death, through all the ignoble Rout,
And sells his Life so dear, though pleased to die,
It Is hardly worth the while for them to buy.
Nothing his equal Temper ere could move,
No, though a very Jeffreys sat above.
Had some good Heathnish Pilate been preferred,
To fill the place, he had at least been heard,
But he so fair a measure must not find,
For Justice now is grown deaf as well as blind.
Ju^^ice is deaf, but yet her mouth's so wide,
So loud she yells as deafens all beside.
If she is return^d from Heaven, as all must say,
Sure she called in at Billingsgate by the way,
Raving, her Collar from her neck she tore,
Knowing another would become it more.
Thus the gay Madman twists Straw-wreaths, and then
He knows not why, tears 'em to dust again.
Ah Mystic Fate! who can thy Methods know?
Jeffreys above, and Dangerfield below!
But since nor Friend nor Poet can invent,
Deeper Damnation for his punishment,
May he be Jeffreys still and never repent.
And now the fatal Day begins to dawn,
The Curtain of the last sad Scene is drawn;
Pale let it ever rise with doubtful Light,
Hardly distinguished from preceding Night.
May Birds obscene and ominous round it stray,
May troubled Ghosts keep dismal Holiday.
Curse on ea^h hour -- But hold, for he looks down,
And over his calm Face has drawn a frown.
Forgive bright Soul! the starts of a distracted mind;
The Poet now the Christian leaves behind.
Withdraw that Just, that now unusual frown.
Blessed be the happy Day that brought thy Crown:
Thy Radiant Crown of Martyrdom, which brings,
A thousand Joys more than the Crowns of Kings;
A thousand Joys without a thousand Stings.
Soon rose the Sun so great a Day to see,
Soon rose the Sun, but not so soon as he.
A brighter Sun's Assistance down he calls;
He draws all Heaven within his dusky Walls.
So laughed the Apostles at Hell's baffled Rage,
And sung in spite of Fetters and a Cage.
Around Heav'n^ Battlements bright Legions wait,
And crouding Seraphs open wide the Gate.
One who of Martyrs has peculiar care,
Is sent to whisper in his Soul, Prepare;
Or else his Guardian friend had made him know,
That long expected Message -- he must go,
For sure he knew the worst their Rage could do;
He knew, he saw it all, and scorned it too.
Pray on great Soul! and like thy Master be,
For those that now begin to murder thee;
Thy Master thus, thus thy Lord Jesus died;
He must be scourged before he is crucified.
Though milder Jews far more good Nature have;
They forty Stripes, Jeffreys four hundred gave.
Far more had he at first from Virtue fell;
Ten times a fitter Friend for Rome and Hell;
Ten times less ^han this Torment would alone,
For ten times worse, and ten times more atone:
Blood might ha'done* had not fair Tears done more,
And Penitence washed him whiter than before.
Nay were I Papist too --
I Would say those precious Showrs which from him fell,
Might rescue even a Jeffreys out of Hell.
But this is Mercy, t^nder Mercy all:
One Death is for a Dangerfield too small.
All Hell had doubly sworn he should not live,
and they will as soon repent a^ they will forgive.
High rampt great Lucifer above his Throne,
Where Monarch absolute he Reigns alone,
^haking the Scaly horror of his Tail,
He swore this last Plot could not, should not fail.
A Pursuivant was sent, nor far he sought,
But soon their Engine to the presence brought.
The milder Furies started when he came,
The Ghosts dived down through Seas of melted flame,
And heard and felt new Torments at his Name;
The Old Dragon only smiled, and thus began,
Dear part of me! dear something more than Man!
Let Parry, Clement, Ravilack combine,
And cram their Souls, great Murderer into thine.
I love a Man that is resolute, and brave,
Not silly Conscience:, or Customs Slave.
Safety you're sure of, that at least is due;
Nor must we (Sir) forsake such Friends as you.
Go then and prosper! thus I thee inspire
With Sparks of my own noble generous Fire!
Choose what you like! Rewards you need not fear!
Be Chancellor or Observator here.
Go on, and act a deed so worthy me,
That Hell may both admire and envy thee!
Away he comes a double Francis now,
Half Devil, half Papist ravell'd on his brow;
Two strings to's Bow, for fear one should not do,
Stelletto's sometimes fail, take Poison too.
Against such powerful Reasons who will presume
To speak? These, these, are the two Keys of Rome;
These to blessed Peter's Successors were given,
Opening Hell to themselves, to others Heaven.
Poison which over so many a Convert brings,
Poison the safest Pill for resty Kings.
Not all the Reasons in strong Box e're pent,
Can ch^llenge half so much of Argument.
Steel, that can sometimes work as great a Cure,
Where Patients th'Operation can endure.
Steel, which though so unlike it, poison Apes,
Dressed in as many neat, convenient shapes.
A Knife, when the French Harry is to die,
Anon a Sword, a Razor by and by.
But now, since holy Church requires it, 'twill
Turn Coward, and sneak into Canes to kill.
Close by the Hero now Hell's Viceroy stood,
And views him crusted over with Wounds and Blood
Who all unmoved, though all one Clod of Gore,
His Masters Characters undaunted wore;
Such marks he wore as Scythians never invent,
At which all but a Francis would relent.
He Hell and his great Master does invoke,
Then with a generous fury gives the stro^e.
Wretch, well thou aim'dst, too well thou'st struck his head,
Thou'st pierced his Eye, or else he would looked thee dead.
Though wounded all, though like great Sampson blind,
Ah could he too like him his Enemies find,
No Friend, no Devil should have reprieved at all,
He Would crushed thy poisonous Soul away, and killed thee with his fall,
Run Monster, for thy cursed Life, and see
If Vengeance cannot run as fast as thee.
The very Rabble's moved, the unthinking Crowd;
The unweildy Clock's wound up, and strikes a^oud.
Though Hag-rid now so long, yet it is not ^am'd:
Revenge they name, but ah it is only named
Ah had their Clacks but held, Heaven had locked dow^,
And with kind Thunder fired the ungrateful Town.
Pity the bloody stain was washed with blood,
It like a Noble Canker should have stood.
Consuming, rotting, poys'ning great and small
Cottage and Palace, Beams and Stones, and all.
It Is well at last he merits their esteem:
Now, now they love, yes now they pity him.
Revenge they with unknown good nature cry,
With unsuspected ingenuity!
But to please Fools 'twan't worth the while to dye.
Yes Brutes! at last no doubt you will think him brave,
O he is done well; his death will charges save.
Revenge, revenge runs through the opening Town,
Revenge they cry and hunt the murderer down.
The Beast was eathed indeed but 'twas in vain:
( Cain fled, but God had set a mark on Cain,)
Close, close they hunt and lug him out again.
May Conscience and the Rabble him attend,
While we our duty pay to such a Friend.
Some Tears e'ne by Religious leave are due,
Some Tears, and some well meaning Curses too.
Can Mothers weep when their soft Infants Bones
Kind Papists crush against the kinder Stones.
When the dear pledges from Chaste Nuptials Born,
Are for their milder Hounds in pieces torn:
Sleeping and smiling from their quivering Breast
Are broacht on Pikes, and sent to longer rest.
Can man himself restrain unmanly cries,
When his dear other self is rape't before his Eyes.
Nay can he groans, curses, tears themselves forbear,
To see his Babes hang in their Mothers Hair?
All this have the good Catholics done before:
All this they now prepare again, or more.
And he the handsel of their malice trys:
To see if yet their hand be in, he dies.
Tare off his useless Plasters you that can,
You that have more, or less than Hearts of Man,
Look there he floating lies, over flown, and drowned
In Tides of poisoned gore rolled from the weltring wound.
All over beside it dropped in gentle Rains,
But here burst down in Seas and Hurricanes
What dire convulsions shake that beauteous frame,
None of its self is lest besides the Name.
How ghastly horror rears its dismal Throne,
Where once sat charms that could be there alone.
Dreadful distortions rack that bloated face,
And gone are every Beauty, every Grace.
His gloomy Eye-ball rolls in mortal pain;
And feels for the departed light in vain.
Where are those Eyes that could so well inspire
Loves soft, fair, charming* harmless, lambent fire
Blood flows without as Poison flows within
And half bears up his black distended Skin.
Where manly friendship reigned and softer love,
Blood, blood is all below, and horror all above.
Pity be gone, and nobler rage succeed!
Others besides a Dangerfield shall bleed.
Bring forth the Prisoner, let him, let him live,
For I no more than Jeffreys can forgive.
O for an age of torment! might he lie
Like Titius racked, like the keen Vulture I^
Jove 's own Ambrosia, cannot be half so good
As his broy'ld flesh, nor Nectar as his Blood.
But what is one mouth? loose him, and cry it is he!
Lose him among the well-oteeth'd Mobile!
The'yl quarter him, not by the Arm, or Leg,
But into Atoms tare Hells Scanderbeg.
What a bare hanging! such a death were fit
For some well meaning harmless Jesuit,
One who poor Soul knows but their little things,
Burning proud Cities, poys'ning stabbing, Kings.
He has a deed well worth Damnation done,
And perfected those strokes they but begun
Hanging! Why they almost deserved that curse
Who dared but think that he deserved no worse.
The best, the bravest thing for which almost
I could be foolish and forgive his Ghost,
Is that he triumphs in the Blood he spilt,
And bravely stands and glory's in his guilt.
Hes hit me full and I Would no worse invent,
No, no, 'twas pity he should e're repent.
But ye who hallow with deserved applause,
A better Martyr for a better cause.
You who to fate, and fortune scorn to yield
Who still dare own you're friends to Dangerfield.
And you dear partner of his Joy and Grief,
The worthiest him, the best, the tenderest Wife,
Who most, who best adore his memory,
Who only I must grant loved more than me.
Bring his dear all which at your bottom lies,
His fair remains which I shall ever prize,
Whose fathers vigorous soul plays round her eyes
All, all in a full ring together come,
And Join your Prayers and Curses round his Tomb.
Cursed be the wretch who did him first ensnare,
Too mean to let his name have here a share.
A double curse for them that thought it good,
Such a Wife should sell such a Husband's Blood.
Still double, double, till I Am out of breath,
On all that had a hand, a finger in his Death,
My Curse, a Friends, a Wives, an Orphans too,
For all of this side damning is their due.
The little plagues of Egypt to begin:
Ashwe'nsdays curses for each lesser sin.
With whatever angry heaven since could find
To bait and lash impenitent mankind.
Gouts, Fevers, Frenzies, Claps, Consumptions, Cramps,
Whatever may put out their stinking Lamps:
May kind Abortions in some lucky hour,
The fruit and hope of their vain lust devour:
Or if they are born, may the unwholesome fry,
Creep only like young Toads abroad, and dye.
Heartily thus let us curse, and if vain pity move,
Straight think again on manly rage, and love.
Swear by his Blood, and better while we live,
This on our selves if we his blood forgive,
And may who e're his Murd'rers death deplore,
Feel all these curses and ten thousand more.
Dangerfield's Ghost to Jeffreys.
REvenge! Revenge! my injured shade begins
To haunt thy guilty Soul, and scourge thy sins:
For since to me thou ow'st the heaviest score,
Whose living words tormented thee before,
When dead, I Am come to plague thee yet once more.
Don't start away, and think thy Brass to hide,
But see the dismal shape in which I died!
My Body all deformed with putrid Gore,
Bleeding my Soul away at every Pore;
Pusht faster on by Francis, less unkind;
My Body swollen, and bloated as thy Mind.
This dangling Eye-ball rolls about in vain,
Never to find its proper seat again,
The hollow Cell usurpt by Blood and Brain:
The trembling Jury's Verdict ought to be
Murdered at once, by Francis, and by Thee.
The Groans of Orphans, and the ponderous guilt
Of all the Blood that thou have ever spilt;
Thy Countries Curse, the Rabbles spite, and all
Those Wishes sent thee since thy long wished Fall;
The Nobles just Revenge, so bravely bought,
For all the Ills thy Insolence has wrought:
May these and more, their utmost force combine,
Join all their wrongs, and mix their Cries with mine.
And see, if Terror has not struck thee blind;
See here a long, a ghastly Train behind!
Far, far, from utmost WEST they crowd away,
And hovering over, fright back the sickly Day.
Had the poor Wretches sinned as much as Thee,
Thou should not have forgot Humanity:
Who 'ere in Blood can so much pleasure take?
Though an ill Judge would a good Hangman make.
Each hollows in thy Ears, -- Prepare! Prepare
For what thou must, yet what thou can not bear!
Each, at thy Heart a bloody Dagger aims,
Upward to Gibbets point, downward to endless Flames.
Mr. NOISE.
AMong those who suffered innocently for Lea's Plot, this poor young Gentleman
was one, though omitted in due place, who though he lost not his Life immediately
by it, was yet put to such Extremities, as both injured his Reason, and ruined
his Fortunes. He was born of a good Family not far from Reading in Barkshire;
and being a younger Son, was bound Apprentice to a Linnen-Draper in London. In
which capacity he was a great Promoter of the Apprentices Address, intended to
be presented to the King for redress of Grievances, and further Prosecution of
the Popish Plot. A Crime, which those concerned, could never pardon, and which
was now looked on, both by himself, and all his Friends, as the Cause of these
his Troubles.

Lea swore against him that he was concerned in this Plot, which he absolutely
denying, though no other Witness came in against him, and he was never brought to
a Trial, he underwent a long and severe Imprisonment, loaded with Irons, and
kept from his Friends, so long till his Trade was ruined before he was set
free, and he himself then rendered so unfit for business, that he was forced
entirely to leave it off, and betake himself to Travel: where, never quite
recovering himself, he in a little time after fell sick and died.

And here 'twill not be improper to remind my Readers, that about this time
things running very high for Popery and Arbitrary Power, the consideration
thereof was very afflicting to Mr. Noise: Yet notwithstanding all this, he was
silent a long while, and minded only the proper business of his Calling,
resolving not to concern himself with State Affairs, as deeming them above his
Sphere and Condition; which Silence and Resolution he had still kept,
notwithstanding the great and ineffable Evils he saw impending over us (which
were much the more apparent upon the Prorogations and Dissolutions of so many
Parliaments, in so dangerous and so critical a Juncture;) but that casually
reading one of the Weekly Intelligences, he happened therein to meet with
something, Entitled, An Address from the Loyal Young Men Apprentices of the
City of London, To His Majesty: The Title (he thought) concerned him, as being
a Loyal Apprentice of the same City, and therefore he deliberately read it
over. At first it seemed to bear a fair aspect, as it was a Tender of Thanks to
His Majesty for His most Gracious Declaration; but considering that this
Declaration contained in it, several severe Reflections on the Proceedings of
the late Parliaments, terming them Arbitrary, Illegal and Unwarrantable; Mr.
Noise dreaded the consequence of such Reflections, as believing, that (...)
stood not with Modesty, for Apprentices to charge the Great Senate of the
Nation with Arbitrary, Illegal and Unwarrantable Proceedings; and resolved what
in him lay, to Vindicate himself and Fellow-Apprentices (which is thought to
have been the cause of all his Sufferings before-related) and to satisfy the
whole World, that the far greater part of the Apprentices of London, have too
great a Veneration for Parliaments (which under His Majesty are the Bulwarks of
our Lives, Liberties and Properties) for to be concerned in any thing tending
to Reproach, or Reflect upon them; he advis^d with several sober Persons about
it, who did not disapprove of his Design, but Advice therein they would not
give: Wherefore Mr. N^ise thinking to Petition the Lord Mayor would be the most
modest and proper way to demonstrate a dislike of, and detestation to all such
actions, he caused the following Petition to be drawn up and Presented, viz.

To the Right Honorable -- Lord Mayor of London, the humble Address of many
Thousand Loyal Apprentices of the same City, whose Names are hereunto
Subscribed.
In all Humility Shows,

But being fully satisfied, both by His Majesty's frequent Proclamations, the
Unanimous Votes of several Parliaments, and the notoriousness-of Fact, that for
diverse years past, th^re has been, and still is a Devilish Plot carried on by
the Papists against the Sacred Life of our Sovereign (whom God preserve) and to
Subvert the Protestant Religion, and the Government established: In which
horrid practices the Conspirators have always appeared most active and insolent
during the Intervals of Parliaments; and from thence, and the continuing hopes
of a Popish Successor, take occasion with greater confidence to push on their
Fatal Designs.

Observing likewise, that among the many late Addresses, there has been one
promoted in the names of some few of our condition in this Honorable City,
which now is represented as the Act and Sense of the Generality of Apprentices,
although the far greater part never joined therein, as fearing lest the same
might seem of a Tendency dishonorable to Parliaments, whose Constitution we
Reverence, and humbly apprehend their Counsels highly necessary in such a
Juncture.

Wherefore, though out of an awful Respect, we presume not to approach His
Sacred Majesty, yet we cannot but think it our duty, to declare to your
Lordship (the Chief Magistrate under Him of this Honorable City) and to all
the World, That we shall never be behind any of our Fellow-Apprentices in
demonstrations of Loyalty t^ His Sacred Majesty, even to the last drop of our
blood, whenever His Majesty's Service shall require it, against any Traitors or
Rebels whatsoever. And also to assure your Lordship, That as we do (and through
God's Grace ever shall) Abhor Popery, and all its Bloody Traitorous Practices.
So we do utterly disapprove and dislike any such proceedings from private
persons, as tend to reproach Parliaments; but do unanimously, with one heart,
and with one voice, express our satisfaction in, and thanks for, the humble
Petition and Address of your Lordship and the Common Council presented to His
Majesty in May last, and since approved of in Common Hall, for the Assembling
and Sitting of a Parliament.

That the God of Heaven may ever bless and preserve his Sacred Majesty, and
your Lordship, and this Great and Honorable City; and grant that your
Successors, in this weighty Trust, may imitate your Lordships piety and zeal
for the Protestant Religion, and His Majesty's Service, shall ever be the daily
prayers of us His Majesty's Humble, Faithful, Loyal, and Obedient Subjects.

Printed for Thomas Goodwill, An. 1681.
This Name is Composed of Fourteen Letters, taken out of the Names of the Chief
Managers.

This Address was Signed by about Thirty Thousand Hands; and when those Twenty
persons that presented it had Subscribed their Names to it, they sent Mr. Noise
and Mr. Dunton (two of the said Presenters) to Mr. S -- to know when they might
have leave to Present it to my Lord Mayor, which being granted in a few days,
the Twenty Presenters went in a Body together to Mr. S -- who introduced 'em to
my Lord. To whom Mr. B -- y made a brief speech as follows.

May it please your Lordship,
THE occasion of giving your Lordship this trouble, is humbly to lay at your
Lordships feet, an address to your Lordship, subscribed by many thousand Loyal
Apprentices of this City.

We do humbly acknowledge to your Lordship* that the presumption we may seem
guilty of in this matter (considering our present stations) requires a far
greater apology than we are able to make. But the principal reasons that
incited us, thus to address our selves to your Lordship are

To demonstrate our Loyalty to his Sacred Majesty;

Our Zeal for the Protestant Religion;

And the veneration and esteem we have, and ought to have for Parliaments.

Neither indeed, my Lord, could we think these sufficient motives to stir us up
to this public application (which better becomes graver heads than ours) had
not some few of our fellow Apprentices lately presented his Majesty with an
Address (which seemed to be a gratulation for the Dissolution of the two last
Parliaments) which they now report to have been the act of the majority of
Apprentices of this Honorable City; Although the far greater part (as may by
the subscriptions to this Address appear to your Lordship) were never concerned
therein. And although (by reason of our present condition) we think it an
unpardonable crime to approach his Sacred Majesty about matters relating to the
State; yet we deem it our bounden duty to declare to your Lordship and the
whole World, That we utterly disclaim any Proceedings (especially from Persons
in our own Condition) that may seem to reflect upon Parliaments, the greatest
Senate of the Nation. And that the generality of Apprentices of this City have
a venerable esteem for Parliaments; which may the better appear to your
Lordship upon reading the Address it self.

And I dare be bold to affirm to your Lordship, (by the Information I have had
from those who were employed to take subscriptions to this address) That there
is not one Subscriber to it, who is either Journey-man, Tapster, Hostler,
Water-man, or the like; but all Persons of our own rank and condition.

Which Address, in the name of all the Subscribers thereunto, I humbly offer to
your Lordship, and beg your Lordships favorable reception of it.

Then his Lordship commanded the Address to be read, which being read Mr. B --
y proceeded thus.

I have one thing more to say, my Lord, I understand that there is a common
notion about Town that this Address has been carried on by Faction, and that
none but Dissenters have been concerned in it. I can assure your Lordship of
the Contrary: for that I know many of the subscribers who are of the Church of
England; of which Church I boast my self an unworthy Member.

Then his Lordship was pleased to express himself to this effect.

Gentlemen,
THis is a surprise to me; and therefore I cannot tell what to say to it. But
for as ^uch as I have heard your Address read; and at first reading can find
nothing in it* but what becomes Loyal and Obedient subjects, I do accept of i^.
I only desire the names of you that are the Presenters.

Then we told him, that our names are those, which were next to the Address it
self ^t some distance from the rest of the subscribers. Then he ordered the^
all to be called over, and so we answered to our names. And then his Lordship
desired he might have an account of our abodes, which we also gave him. Then
his Lordship advised us to go home, and give evidence of our Loyalty by our
peaceable demeanor, and conformity to the laws of the Land; and to lay the
foundation of our future happiness, by being dutiful to our Masters, and
diligent in our business, that so in time we might become good Citizens.

So they returned again in five Coaches to Russells, and supped there
altogether, and so every one went home.

The twenty Presenters of this Address, were Mr. B -- y, Mr. A -- h, Mr. S --
ns, Mr. M -- d, Mr. B -- th, Mr. Evans, Mr. Batty, Mr. P -- le, Mr. D -- n, Mr.
Noise (one of the Persons who first set this design afoot) Mr. C -- ll, Mr. S
-- s, Mr. S -- y, Mr. H -- ing, Mr. B -- w, Mr. P -- tell, Mr. S -- th, Mr. B
-- n, Mr. Mal -- s, Mr. R -- ts.

A Letter sent August 19. 1681. thus subscribed. To the truly Loyal, and
Protestant Apprentices of London, that were the principal Managers of the late
address to my Lord Mayor.
GO on Heroic Souls, and faithful be
Unto your God, your King, your Liberty.
Let your unbyast actions give the lie
To such as scandalize your Loyalty.
To Caesar render what is to Caesar due:
Earth merits, Heaven expects no more from you.
Those rights defend, which your brave sires sent down
Inviolable as the Throne or Crown.
Tell supple Parasites, and treacherous Knaves,
You're humble subjects, not degenerate slaves.
Bow low, but scorn to creep (for that is as well)
Nor for a mess of Broth your Birthrights sell.
Pass by th'affronts that Hell and Rome can send;
Comfort yourselves, when it is at worst, 'twill mend
But when the Church is shook by Potent foes,
For her defense your bodies interpose.
Of Popish mercy never run the risque:
A Crowned Serpent grows a Basilisk.
Vindicate then the Gospel and the Laws;
The cause is Heaven's, Heaven will espouse the cause
Undauntedly prop up your Churches Walls,
And joy to fall beneath it, if it falls.
To perish thus, who would not be content,.
When mouldring Temples are his Monument?
THE INTRODUCTION TO THE Western Transactions, AND GENERAL OBSERVATIONS UPON
THEM.
I Am sensible it is a very invidious thing to defend any Action which has had
the Public Stream and cry long against it; with which even men of Sense, and
sometimes Religion too, though Pride or Shame perhaps seldom lets 'em own the
very truth on it, are commonly hurried away as well as others. But this is, it is
hoped, for the general, an Age of Confession and Ingenuity; and since so many
of the greatest men upon Earth have gone before, in acknowledging some Notions
too far strained, and others mistaken, 'twill be no real disgrace, but an
Honor to follow them, when so much in the right. And if once Principles and
Notions are changed, or limited, we shall necessarily have other thoughts of
Things and Persons than we had before; and that Action we called Rebellion, and
those Men we thought Rebels, while we had a wrong slavish Notion of Obedience;
when once that is regulated, and we believe with all the World, and all Ages and
Nations, That we are to obey only the lawful Commands of Superiors, and submit
only to such unjust ones as will not much damage the Commonwealth; but resist
and defend our selves, when all we have dear, our Religion, Liberty, and Lives
are visibly and undeniably attacked and invaded, either without all form of
Law, or what is worse, the wrested pretense of it. Then we think truly, that
such men are so far from being Rebels, that they are the worthy true Defenders
of their Faith and Country: and such an Action so far from Rebellion, that it is
highly meritorious, and praiseworthy. Most men being now satisfied in these
Points, unless those whom insuperable Interest or Prejudice have poisoned and
rooted incorrigibly in the contrary Belief. And the truth and reasonableness of
them having been undeniably proved by many worthy Persons from the Law of
Nations, the Ends of all Government, and the Constitution of our Kingdom, and
the Practice of former Ages, both Popish and Protestant: All the Question now
must be about Matter of Fact, Whether Things were then brought to that
Extremity that 'twould probably be too late to make any Defense for Religion
and Property, if 'twere not then made; and whether or no the Fundamental
Contract were then actually violated?

This is plain, that the Protestant Religion, and all our Liberties were then
most eminently in danger, public Leagues being long before made between his
Brittannick Majesty and the King of France for their Extirpation: That he who
had been voted in Parliament the main Head of the Popish Cause, was now grown
the Head of the Kingdom; or indeed the Popish Deputy here, as he is since the
King of France's in our Neighboring Island; That for being reconciled to Rome,
he was actually a Traitor; and besides, of a Religion whose Oaths could not be
depended upon, as we were then, and long before to be, and have since
sufficiently felt and experienced. That on this account, he hardly could keep
his Contract, as 'twas plain he actually did not, publicly and notoriously
violating those Laws he swore to maintain, both before and after he had done
it, by going to Mass himself, setting up Mass-houses, and encouraging Popery.
As for many Grievances and Oppressions, he was then as really Guilty of 'em as
ever after, though not in such large, and frequent, and various Instances; some
of 'em are those very same which the Parliament inserted among the Proofs and
Reasons of the Abdication, particularly the issuing out Quo Warranto's for
Cities and Corporations; the great Cause and Counselor of which no doubt he
was, even before he actually, I mean publicly, reigned.

In a word, the securing the Protestant Interest in all Europe, that, and their
own Liberties in England, was the main Cause why many, and most engaged in this
Design. If these were in no danger, and not violated, they were Rebels: If the
safety of 'em could be expected any other way but by the Sword, they were no
better. Whether things were in that Condition, or no, at that time, God and the
World must be Judges. If it were so, they were not Rebels: If the Case was not
so bad, and the Mystery of Iniquity not so far revealed, as it has been since,
yet preventive Physic is necessary, especially when Death is unavoidable
without it. If a prudent Man is to meet Mischief rushing upon him, and not stay
for it till it overwhelms him, and take the same Course against a certain
Consequence, as an actual Evil, why then, I think 'twill be very hard to hang
People in one World, and damn 'em in another, for having as little a Foresight,
and great a Faith as their Neighbors.

Others there were who embark't in that Action, because they really thought,
how much mistaken soever they might be, that the Duke of Monmouth was the
King's Legitimate Son; which such as had a personal Love for him might more
easily believe. Now, although many, who engaged on the former account only, did
not believe this, nor know any thing of his Intention of being proclaimed King,
nor approved of it when 'twas done; and though had he been able to make out his
Title, or let his Pretensions alone, he had not wanted in all likelihood, a
sufficient Assistance from the Nobility and Gentry, none of whom for those
Reasons coming in to him; yet on the other side, it is hardly doubted that these
men, who thought he had a right, were really obliged to follow the Dictates of
their Conscience, though mistaken, and do whatever lay in their power, to the
utmost Venture of their Lives, to fix him on his Father's Throne, to which they
verily believed he had a proper Right and Title. And these Men too, acting on
the same Reasons with the forementioned, for deliverance of their Country, as
well as defense of him whom they thought their King; The earnest Zeal, and
Concern and Love which most of 'em manifested for the Protestant Religion,
being besides so conspicuous in their Lives and Deaths, I know not how they
can, without impudence, be branded with the infamous Name of Rebels; nor think
'twill be any Arrogance to honor 'em with the just, and dear-bought Title of
Martyrs.

One thing there is very observable in most, if not all of those who laid down
their Lives in this Cause, both in England and Scotland, that, besides that
extraordinary Divine courage and cheerfulness with which they died, they had
Expressions plainly boding that great Deliverance which Providence has since
that miraculously accomplished for these Kingdoms. 'Twould be endless to give
almost all the innumerable Instances of it: Mr. Nelthrop says, [ God had in his
wonderful. Providence made him and others Instruments, not only in what was
already fallen out, but he believed, for hastening some other great Work, he
had yet to do in these Kingdoms.] Mrs. Gaunt says, [ God's cause shall revive,
and he would plead it at another rate than yet he had done, against all its
malicious Opposers.] And speaks yet more strangely of those then uppermost, and
likely to be so, [ That though they were seemingly fixed, and using their Power
and Violence against those they had now got under 'em, yet unless they could
secure Jesus Christ, and all his Holy Angels, they should never do their
Business, but Vengeance would be upon 'em 'ere they were aware.] Capt. Ansley,
whose Speech is as pretty a neat thing, as close, and Christian, and
courageous, as perhaps any that ever was made by Man in his Condition, after he
had said [ He did not repent what he had done, but if he had a thousand Lives,
would have engaged 'em all in the same Cause;] adds just after, [ Though it has
pleased the wise God, for Reasons best known to himself, now to blast our
Designs, yet he will deliver his People by ways we know not, nor think of.]
Rumbold said just the same. Mr. Hewling says, [ I question not, but in his own
time, God will raise up other Instruments to carry on the same Cause they died
for, for his own Glory.] Mr. Lark, [That he was confident God would Revenge
their Bloods.] Now it will be very harsh to say, all these, and several more,
to the same purpose, were nothing but Enthusiasm, since spoken by Persons of
all Sexes and Ages in twenty different places, in the most calm and serene
Tempers, and the Persons not wild or fanciful; and their Words miraculously
made good by the Event, which shows God honored 'em with being Prophets as
well as Martyrs.

To proceed to the Persons who suffered in this Cause here, and in the West,
and other places, chiefly under Jeffrey's Insulting Cruelty. His dealing with
'em is not to be paralleled by any thing but the new French Dragoons, or the
old Cutthroats and Lords Chief-Justices of the poor Albigenses or Waldenses at
Merindol and Cutrices. Had the Great Turk sent his Janisaries, or the Tartar
his Armies among 'em, they would escaped better. Humanity could not offend so far to
deserve such punishment as he inflicted. A certain Barbarous Joy and Pleasure
grinn'd from his Brutal Soul through his Bloody Eyes, whenever he was
Sentencing any of the Poor Souls to Death and Torment, so much worse than Nero,
as when that Monster wished he had never learnt to Write* because forced to set
his Name to Warrants for Execution of Malefactors. Jeffreys would have been
glad if every Letter he writ had been such a Warrant, and every Word a Sentence
of Death. He observed neither Humanity to the Dead, nor Civility to the Living.
He made all the West an Aceldama; some places quite depopulated, and nothing to
be seen in 'em but forsaken VValls, unlucky Gibbets, and Ghostly Carcases. The
Trees were laden, almost as thick with Quarters as Leaves. The Houses and
Steeples covered as close with Heads as at other times frequently in that
Country with Crows or Ravens. Nothing could be liker Hell than all those Parts,
nothing so like the Devil as he. Caldrons hizzing, Carkases boiling, Pitch and
Tar Sparkling and Glowing, Blood and Limbs boiling, and tearing, and mangling,
and he the great Director of all; and in a word, discharging his Place who sent
him, the best deserving to be the late King's Chief Justice there, and
Chancellor after, of any Man that breathed since Cain or Judas.

Some of the more Principal Persons who fell under his Barbarous Sentences,
it is thought worth the while to treat distinctly and partic^larly of, throwing
the re^t together after 'em, and only Reprinting the former Account, if any
are lest out, it being necessary to hasten, to prevent Shams. If the Book be
accepted, and come to another Edition, they shall be Inserted; and if any
Faults or Mistakes found, acknowledged and regulated. And the first whom we
shall make especial Remarks on, are

The Hewlings.
IF any one would see true Pure Popish Mercy, let 'em look on these two
Gentlemen, the only Sons of their virtuous and sorrowful surviving Parents;
the Comforts, Props, and Hopes of their Name and Family, carefully educated,
virtuously disposed both of them; after all repeated applications, if but for
one of their Lives, barbarously Executed. A particular Care was taken by their
Father in their Education, forming their Minds by his own Example, and constant
Instructions and Prayers, as well as other pains of Ingenuous Masters, to the
strictest Rules of Piety and Virtue. Nor was their pious and very tender Mother
less careful in that particular.

The Elder, Mr. Benjamin Hewling had Tutors in the Mathematics, and other
parts of Philosophy; a course of which he went through successfully enough, and
so as to render him as complete in his Mind, as Nature had formed his ^ody:
After which he went to Holland, as his Brother Mr. William Hewling, from whence
this last returned with the Duke: Both of 'em had Commands in the Army; the
Elder had a Troop of Horse, the younger was a Lieutenant of Foot, and
discharged their Places with much more Conduct and Bravery, than could be
expected from such young Soldiers, being entirely satisfied in the Cause they
fought for, since 'twas ^o less than the Interest of all that was dear to 'em
in this World or the other. The Eldest had particularly signalized himself in
several Skirmishes, and was sent with a Detachment of his own Troop, and two
more, to Myn-head in Somersetshire to bring Cannon to the Army, at the very
instant the Duke engaged the Kings Forces at fatal Sedgmore; and came not up
till after the Field was entirely lost; to whose absence, with so considerable
a Party of the Dukes Horse, and the most resolved Men of all he had, the loss
of the day was principally owing. Finding all things in Disorder, and the Rout
beyond recovering, he was forced to disperse his Troops, every one shifting as
they could for themselves. He and his Brother kept together, where, what befell
'em after, their Friends have given an exact Account, which is here following
inserted.

An Account of the Behavior of Mr. William and Benjamin He^lings before, and
at their Execution; with several Letters to diverse of their Relations.
THe Gracious dealings of God, manifested to some in Dying Hours, have been of
great advantage to those living that heard the same, giving them an occasion
thereby to reflect on their own State, and to look after the things of their
Peace, before they be hid from their Eyes; as also a great encouragement to
strengthen the Faith of those that have experienced the Grace of God to them.

To that end it is thought necessary, by Parents especially, to preserve to
their Children that remain, those blessed Experiences that such have had, which
God has taken to himself.

Here therefore is presented a true account of the admirable appearances of God
toward two young Men; Mr. Benjamin Hewling, who dyed when he was about 22
Years of Age, and Mr. William Hewling, who dyed before he arrived to 20 Years:
They Engaged with the Duke of Monmouth, as their own Words were, for the
English Liberties, and the Protestant Religion, and for which Mr. William
Hewling was Executed at Lyme the 12 th of September, 1685. and Mr. Ben. Hewling
at Taunton the 30 th of the same Month; and however severe Men were to them,
yet the blessed Dispensation of God toward them was such, as has made good
his Word, that out of the Mouths of Babes he has ordained Strength, that he
may still the Enemy and the Avenger. Then, Reader, would you see Earthly
Angels, Men that are a little too low for Heaven, and much too high for Earth)
would you see poor frail Creatures trampling this World under their Feet, and
with an holy, serene Smiling at the Threats of Tyrants, who are the Terrors of
the Mighty in the Land of the Living? Would you see shackled Prisoners behave
themselves like Judges, and Judges stand like Prisoners before them? Would you
see some of the rare Exploits of Faith in its highest Elevation, immediately
before it be swallowed up in the Beatifical Vision? To conclude, would you see
the Heavenly Jerusalem pourtrayed on Earth? Would you hear the melodious Voices
of ascending Saints in a ravishing Conso^t ready to join with the Heavenly
Chorus in their de^igh^ful Hallelujahs? Then draw near, come and see! If thou
be a Man of an Heavenly Spirit, here is pleasant and suitable entertainment for
thee; and after thou have conversed a while these Excellent Spirits, it may be
thou will Judge as I do, That dead Saints are sweeter Companions (in some
respects) for thee to converse with, than those that are living: And when thou
shall see the magnifice^^ Acts of their faith, their invincible Patience, their
flaming Love to Christ, their strange contempt and undervaluings of the World
their plainness and simplicity in the profession of the Gospel, their f^rvent
and brotherly love to each other, their ravishing Pr^spects, (as it were on the
top of Mount Pisgah) ^f the Heavenly Canaan, their Swan-like Songs and Dying
Speeches. And Reader, You know the first Lisping of little Children, and last
Farewels of Dying Saints are always most sweet and charming: Those Fore-tasts
of the Rivers of Pleasure, the transporting Glimpses they had of the Crown of
Glory; I say, when you see and read these Exemplary Truths, wonder not that the
Pious Hewlings longed so vehemently to be in a better World, though they were
to pass through a thousand Deaths, or the Fiery Trial to it. [But to come to
our intended matter.]

After the Dispersing of the Dukes Army, they fled and put to Sea, but were
driven back again, and with the hazard of their Lives got on shore, (over
dangerous Rocks) where they saw the Country filled with Soldiers; and they
being unwilling to fall into the hands of the Rabble, and no way of defense or
escape remaining to them, they surrendered themselves Prisoners to a Gentleman,
whose House was near the place they landed at, and were from thence sent to
Exeter Goal, the 12 th of July, where remaining some time, their behavior was
such, that (being visited by many caused great respect toward 'em, even of
those that were enemies to the Cause they engaged in; and being on the 27 th of
July put on board the Swan Frigate, in order to their bringing up to London;
their Carriage was such, as obtained great kindness from the Commander, and
all other Officers in the Ship, and being brought into the River, Captain
Richardson came and took them into his Custody, and carried them to Newgate,
putting great Irons upon them, and put them apart from each other, without
giving Liberty for the nearest Relation to see them, notwithstanding all
endeavors and entreaties used to obtain it, tho in the presence of a Keeper;
which though it did greatly increase the Grief of Relations, God, who wisely
orders all things for good to those he intends Grace and Mercy to, made this
very Restraint, and hard usage a blessed advantage to their Souls, as may
appear by their own Words, when after great importunity and charge, some of
their near Relations had leave to speak a few words to them before the Keeper,
to which they replied, They were c^ntented with the Will of God whatever it
should be. Having been in Newgate three Weeks, there was Order given to carry
them down into the West, in order to their Trial; which being told them they
answered, They were glad of it; and that Morning they went out of Newgate,
several that beheld them, seeing them so cheerful, said, Surely they had
received their Pardon, else they could never carry it with that Courage and
Cheerfulness. Although this must be observed, that from first to last, whatever
hopes they received from Friends, they still thought the contrary, never being
much affected with the hopes of it, nor cast down, nor the least discouraged at
the worst that man could do. In their Journey to Dorchester, the Keepers that
went with them have given this account of them, That their Carriage was so
grave, serious and christian, that made them admire to see, and hear what they
did from such Young Men.

A near Relation that went into the West to see the issue of things, and to
perform whatever should be necessary for them, gives the following account:

At Salisbury, the 30 th of August, I had the first opportunity of Converse
with them: I found them in a very excellent Composure of Mind, declaring their
experience of the Grace and Goodness of God to them in all their Sufferings, in
supporting. and strengthening, and providing for them, turning the Hearts of all
in whose hands they had been both at Exon, and on Shipboard, to show pity and
favor to them; although since they came to Newgate they were hardly used, and
now in their Journey loaded with heavy Irons, and more inhumanely dealt with.
They with great cheerfulness professed, That they were better, in a more happy
Condition than ever in their Lives, from the sense they had of the pardoning
Love of God in Jesus Christ to their Souls, wholly referring themselves to
their wise and gracious God to choose for them Life or Death; Expressing
themselves thus: Any thing what pleases God what he sees best so be it: We know
he is ab^e to deli^er, but if not, blessed be his Name, Death is not terrible
now, but desirable. Mr. Benjamin Hewling particularly added, As for the World,
there is nothing in it to make it worth while to live, except we may be
serviceable to God therein. And afterward said, Oh! God is a a strong Refuge,
I have found him so indeed.

The next Opportunity I had was at Dorchester, where they both were carried,
there remaining together four days: By reason of their strait Confinement our
Converse was much interrupted; but this appeared, that they had still the same
Presence and Support from God, no way discouraged at the approach of their
Trial, nor of the event of it, whatever it should be.

The 6 th of September Mr. Benjamin Hewling was ordered to Taunton to be tried
there: Taking my leave of him, he said, Oh! Blessed be God for Afflictions; I
have found such happy Effects, that I would not have been with out them for all
this World.

I remained still at Dorchester to wait the Issue of Mr. William Hewling, to
whom after Trial, I had free Access, whose Discourse was much filled with
Admirings of the Grace of God in Christ, that had been manifested toward him,
in calling him out of his natural State, He said, God by his Holy Spirit did
suddenly seize upon his Heart, when he thought not of it in his retired Abode
in Holland, as it were secretly whispering in his Heart, Seek ye my Face,
enabling him to answer his gracious Call, and to reflect upon his own Soul,
showing him the Evil of Sin, and necessity of Christ, from that time carrying
him on, to a sensible adherence to Christ for Justification and Eternal Life.
He said, Hence he found a Spring of Joy and Sweetness, beyond the Comforts of
the whole Earth. He further said, He could not but admire the wonderful
goodness of God, in so preparing him, for what he was bringing him to, which
then he thought not of giving him hope of Eternal Life before he called him to
look Death in the face, so that he did cheerfully resign his Life to God before
he came, having sought his Guidance in it; and that both then, and now the
Cause did appear to him very glorious, notwithstanding all he had suffered in
it, or what he further might. Although for our Sins God has withheld these
good things from us. But he said, God had carried on his blessed Work on his
Soul, in and by all his Sufferings; and whatever the Will of God were, Life or
Death, he knew it would be best for him.

After he had received his Sentence, when he returned to Prison, he said,
Methinks I find my Spiritual Comforts increasing, ever since my Sentence. There
is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, it is God that justifies,
who shall condemn?

When I came to him the next morning (when he had received News that he must
die the next day, and in order to it was to be carried to Lyme that day) I
found him in a more excellent raised spiritual Frame than before: He said, He
was satisfied God had chosen best for him; he knows what the Temptations of
Life might have been; I might have lived and forgotten God, but now I am going
where I shall sin no more. Oh! it is a blessed thing to be free from sin, and to
be with Christ. Oh! the Riches of the Love of God in Christ to Sinners* Oh! how
great were the Sufferings of Christ for me beyond all I can undergo? How great
is that Glory to which I am going? It will soon swallow up all our Sorrow here.

When he was at Dinner, just before his going to Lyme, he dropped many abrupt
Expressions of his inward Joy, such as these: Oh! the Grace of God, the Love of
Christ; Oh, that blessed Supper of the Lamb, to be for ever with the Lord! He
further said, when I went to Holland, you knew not what Snares, Sins and
Miseries I might fall into, or whether ever we should meet again: But now you
know whither I am going, and that we shall certainly have a most joyful meeting.

He said, Pray give my particular Recommendations to all my Friends, with
acknowledgements for all their kindness. I advise them all to make sure of an
Interest in Christ, for he is the only Comfort when we come to die.

One of the Prisoners seemed to be troubled at the manner of the Death they
were to die; to whom he replied, I bless God I am reconciled to it all.

Just as he was going to Lyme, he writ these few Lines to a Friend, being
hardly suffered to stay so long.

I am going to Launch into Eternity, I hope and trust into the Arm of my
Blessed Redeemer, to whom I commit you and all my dear Relations; my Duty to my
dear Mother, and Love to all my Sisters, and the rest of my Friends.

William Hewling.


As they passed through the Town of Dorchester to Lyme, multitudes of People
beheld them, with great Lamentations, admiring at his Deportment at his parting
with his Sister.

As they passed upon the Road between Lyme and Dorchester, his Discourse was
exceeding Spiritual, (as those declared who were present) taking occasion from
every thing to speak of the Glory they were going to. Looking out on the
Country as he passed, he said, This is a glorious Creation, but what then is
the Paradise of God to which we are going? it is but a few Hours, and we shall
be there, and for ever with the Lord.

At Lyme, just before they went to die, reading John 14.18. He said to one of
his Fellow Sufferers, Here is a sweet Promise for us. I will not leave you
comfortless, I will come unto you. Christ will be with us to the last. One
taking leave of him, he said, Farewell till we meet in Heaven; Pres^ntly I shall
be with Christ: Oh! I would not change conditions with any in this World; I
would not stay behind for ten thousand Worlds.

To another that asked him how he did now? he said, Very Well, he blessed God.
And farther asking him, if he could look Death in the face with Comfort now i^
approached so near? he said, Yes, I bless God I can with great Comfort; God
has made this a good Night to me, my Comforts are much increased since I left
Dorchester: Then taking leave of him, said, Farewell, I shall see you no more.
To which he replied, How! see me no more? yes, I hope to meet you in Glory. To
another that was by him to the last, he said, Pray remember my dear Love to my
Brother and Sister, and tell them, I desire they would comfort themselves that
I am gone to Christ, and we shall quickly meet in the Glorious Mount Sion above.

Afterward he prayed for about three quarters of an hour with the greatest
fervency, exceedingly blessing God for Jesus Christ, adoring the riches of his
Grace in him, in all the glorious fruits of it toward him, praying for the
Peace of the Church of God, and of these Nations in particular, all with such
eminent assistance of the Spirit of God, as convinced, astonished, and melted
into Pity the Hearts of all present, even the most malicious Adversaries,
forcing Tears and Expressions from them; some saying, They knew not what would
become of them after Death; but it was evident he was going to great happiness.

When he was just going out of the World, with a joyful Countenance, he said,
Oh! now my Joy and ^omfort is, that I have a Christ to go to, and so sweetly
resigned his Spirit to Christ, the 12 th of September, 1685.

An Officer who had showed so malicious a Spirit as to call the Prisoners
Devils, when he was guarding them down, was now so convinced, that he after
told a Person of Quality, That he was never so affected, as by his cheerful
Carriage and fervent Prayer, such as he believed was never heard, especially
from one so young; and said, I believe had the Lord Chief Justice been there,
he could not have let him die.

The Sheriff having given his Body to be buried, although it was brought from
the place of Execution without any notice given, yet very many of the Town, to
the number of about 200, came to accompany him; and several young Women of the
best of the Town, laid him in his Grave in Lyme Churchyard, the 13 th of
September. 1685.

After which his Sister Writ this following Letter to her Mother.
ALthough I have nothing to acquaint my Dear Mother withal, but what is most
afflictive to Sense, both as to the Determination of Gods Will, and as to my
present Apprehension concerning my Brother Benjamin, yet remaining; yet there
is such abundant Consolation mixed in both, that I only wanted an opportunity to
pay this Duty; God having wrought so glorious a Work on both their Souls,
revealing Christ in them, that Death is become their Friend. My Brother William
having already with the greatest Joy, declared to those that were with him to
the last, that he would not change Conditions with any that were to remain in
this world, and he desired that his Relations would comfort themselves, that he
is gone to Christ.

My Brother Benjamin expects not long to continue in this World, and is
exceeding willing to leave it when God shall call, being fully satisfied that
God will choose that which is best for him and us all; by these things God does
greatly support me; and I hope you also, my dear Mother, which was and is my
Brothers great desire; there is still room for Prayer for one; and God having
so answered though not in kind, we have encouragement still to wait on him.

Honored Mother, Your Dutiful Daughter. Hannah Hewling.


When I came to Taunton to Mr. Benjamin Hewling, he had received the News of
his Brothers being gone to die with so much comfort and joy, and afterward of
the continued goodness of God increasing it to the end. He expressed to this
effect, We have no cause to fear Death, if the Presence of God be with us;
there is no evil in it, the sting being taken away; it is nothing but our
Ignorance of the Glory that the Saints pass into by Death, which makes it
appear dark for our selves or Relations, if in Christ* what is this World, that
we should desire an abode in it? it is all vain and unsatisfying, full of sin
and misery: Intimating also his own cheerful expectations soon to follow,
discovering then, and all along great seriousness, and sense of spiritual and
eternal things, complaining of nothing in his present Circumstances, but want
of place of retirement to converse more uninterruptedly with God and his own
Soul, saying, That his lonely time in Newgate was the sweetest in his whole
Life. He said, God having some time before struck his Heart (when he thought of
the hazard of his Life) to some serious Sense of his past Life, and the great
consequences of Death and Eternity, showing him, that they were the only happy
Persons that had secured their eternal States: The folly and madness of the
ways of sin, and his own Thraldom therein, with his utter inability to deliver
himself; also the necessity of Christ for Salvation: He said it was not without
terror and amazement for some time, the fight of unpardoned sin, with eternity
before him. But God wonderfully opened to him the Riches of his Free Grace in
Christ Jesus for poor Sinners to flee to, enabling to look alone to a Crucified
Christ for Salvation: He said this blessed Work was in some measure carried on
upon his Soul, under all his business and hurries in the Army; but never sprung
forth so fully and sweetly till his close confinement in Newgate. There he saw
Christ and all spiritual Objects more clearly, and embraded them more strongly;
there he experienced the blessedness of a reconciled State, the Excellency of
the ways of Holiness, the delightfulness of Communion with God, which remained
with very deep and apparent impressions on his Soul, which he frequently
expressed with admiration of the Grace of God toward him.

He said, Perhaps my Friends may think this Summer the saddest time of my Life;
but I bless God it has been the sweetest and most happy of it all; nay, there
is nothing else worth the name of happiness. I have in vain sought satisfaction
from the things of this World, but I never found it; but now I have foundrest
for my Soul in God alone.

O how great is our blindness by Nature, till God open our Eyes, that we can
see no excellency in spiritual things, but spend our precious time in pursuing
Shadows, and are deaf to all the invitations of Grace and Glorious Offers of
the Gospel! How just is God in depriving us of that we so much slighted and
abused! Oh! his infinite patience and goodness, that after all, he should yet
sanctify any methods to bring a poor sinner to himself: Oh! Electing Love,
distinguishing Grace; what great cause have I to admire and adore it!

He said, What an amazing Consideration is the sufffering of Christ for sin, to
bring us to God; his suffering from wicked Men was exceeding great; but alas,
what was that to the Dolours of his Soul, under the infinite Wrath of God? This
Mystery of Grace and Love is enough to swallow up our thoughts to all Eternity.

As to his own Death, he would often say, He saw no reason to expect any other;
I know God is infinitely able to deliver, and I am sure will do it, if it be
for his Glory, and my Good; in which, I bless God, I am fully satisfied; it is
all my desire that he would choose for me, and then I am sure it will be best,
whatever it be; for truly, unless God have some work for me to do in the World
for his Service and Glory, I see nothing else to make Life desirable: In the
present state of Affairs, there is nothing to cast our Eyes upon but Sin,
Sorrow and Misery: And truly, were things never so much according to our
desires, it is but the World still, which will never be a resting place. Heaven
is the only state of Rest and Happiness; there we shall be perfectly free from
Sin and Temptation, and enjoy God without interruption for ever.

Speaking of the Disappointment of their expectations in the work they had
undertaken, he said with reference to the Glory of God, the Prosperity of the
Gospel, and the delivery of the People of God, We have great Cause to lament
it; but for that outward Prosperity that would have accompanied it, its but of
small moment in it self; as it could not satisfy, so neither could it be
abiding; for at longest, Death would have put an end to it all: Also adding,
nay perhaps, we might have been so foolish, as to have been taken with that
part of it, with the neglect of our eternal concerns; and then I am sure our
present circumstances are incomparably better.

He frequently expressed great concern for the Glory of God, and affection to
his People, saying, If my Death may advance Gods Glory, and hasten the
Deliverance of his People, it is enough; saying, It was a great comfort to him,
to think of so great a privilege as an interest in all their Prayers.

In his Converse particularly valuing and delighting in those Persons where he
saw most holiness shining; also great pity to the Souls of others, saying, That
the remembrance of our former Vanity may well cause Compassion to others in
that state. And in his Converse prompting others to Seriousness, telling them,
Death and Eternity are such weighty concerns, that they deserve the utmost
intention of our Minds; for the way to receive Death cheerfully, is to prepare
for it seriously; and if God should please to spare our Lives, surely we have
the same reason to be serious, and spend our remaining days in his Fear and
Service.

He also took great care that the Worship of God, which they were in a Capacity
of maintaining there, might be duly performed; as Reading, Praying, and Singing
of Psalms, in which he evidently took great delight.

For those three or four days before their deaths, when there was a general
Report that no more should die; he said, I don't know what God has done beyond
our expectations; if he does prolong my Life, I am sure it is all his own, and
by his Grace I will wholly devote it to him.

But the 29 th of September, about ten or eleven at Night, we found the
deceitfulness of this Report, they being then told they must die the next
Morning, which was very unexpected, as to the suddenness of it; but herein God
glorified his Power, Grace, and Faithfulness, in giving suitable Support and
Comfort by his blessed Presence, which appeared upon my coming to him at that
time, finding him greatly composed; He said, Though Men design to surprise, God
does and will perform his Word, to be a very present help in trouble.

The next Morning when I saw him again, his Cheerfulness and Comfort were much
increased, waiting for the Sheriff with the greatest-sweetness and serenity of
Mind; saying, Now the Will of God is determined, to whom I have referred it,
and he has chosen most certainly that which is best.

Afterward with a smiling Countenance, he discoursed of the Glory of Heaven,
remarking with much delight the third, fourth, and fifth Verses of the 22 th of
the Revelations, And there shall be no more Curse; But the Throne of God, and
of the Lamb, shall be in it, and his Servants shall serve him, and they shall
see his Face, and his Name shall be in their Foreheads, and there shall be no
Night there, and they shall need no Candle nor Light of the Sun, and they shall
reign for ever and ever. Then he said, Oh, what a happy State is this! shall we
be loath to go to enjoy this! Then he desired to be read to him, 2 Cor. 5. For
we know that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
Building of God, a House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens; to the
tenth or eleventh verses. In all, his Comforts still increasing, expressing his
sweet Hopes and good Assurance of his Interest in this glorious Inheritance,
and being now going to the possession of it, seeing so much of this happy
Change, that he said, Death was more desirable than Life; he had rather dye
than live any longer here. As to the manner of his Death, he said, When I have
considered others under these Circumstances, I have thought it very dreadful,
but now God has called me to it, I bless God I have quite other apprehensions
of it; I can now cheerfully embrace it as an easy passage to Glory: and though
Death s^parates from the Enjoyments of each other here, it will be but for a
very short time, and then we shall meet in such Enjoyments as now we cannot
conceive, and for ever rejoice in each others Happiness. Then reading the
Scriptures, and musing with himself, he intimated the great Comfort God
conveyed to his Soul in it; saying, O what an invaluable Treasure is this
blessed Word of God; in all Conditions here is a store of strong Consolation.
One desiring his Bible, he said, No, this shall be my Companion to the last
moment of my Life. Thus praying together, reading, meditating, and conversing
of Heavenly things, they waited for the Sheriff, who, when he came, void of all
Pity or Civility, hurried them away scarce suffering them to take leave of
their Friends. But notwithstanding this, and the doleful mourning of all about
them, the Joyfulness of his Countenance was increased. Thus he left his Prison,
and thus he appeared in the Sledge, where they sat about half an hour, before
the Officers could force the Horses to draw, at which they were greatly
enraged, there being no visible obstruction from weight or way. But at last the
Mayor and Sheriff hall'd them forwards themselves, Balaam-like driving the
Horses.

When they came to the place of Execution, which was surrounded with
Spectators, many that waited their Coming with great sorrow, said. That when
they saw him and them come with such cheerfulness and joy, and evidence of the
Presence of God with them, it made Death appear with another Aspect.

They first embraced each other with the greatest Affection; then two of the
elder Persons praying audibly, they joined with great seriousness. Then he
desired leave of the Sheriff to pray particularly, but he would not grant it,
only asked him if he would pray for the King: He answered, I pray for all men.
He then requested they might sing a Psalm; the Sheriff told him, It must be
with the Ropes about their Necks; which they cheerfully accepted, and sung with
such heavenly joy and sweetness, that many present said, It both broke and
rejoiced their hearts.

Thus in the experience of the delightfulness of praising God on Earth, he
willingly closed his Eyes on a vain World, to pas^ to that Eternal Employment,
Sept. 30. 1685.

All present of all sorts were exceedingly affected and amazed. Some Officers
that had before insultingly said, Surely these Persons have no thoughts of
death, but will find themselves surprised by it; after said, That they now saw
he and they had something extraodinary within that carried them through with
such joy. Others of them said, That they were so convinced of their Happin^ss,
that they would be glad to change Conditions with them. All the Soldiers in
general, and all others, lamenting exceedingly, saying, That it was so sad a
thing, to see them so cut off, they scarce knew how to bear it.

Some of the most malicious in the place, from whom nothing but railing was
expected, said, (as they were carried to their ^rave in Taunton Church,
voluntarily accompanied by most of the Town) That these Persons had left a
sufficient Evidence, that they were now glorified Saints in Heaven. A great
Officer in the King'^ Army has been often heard to say, That if you would learn
to die, go to the young Men of Taunton.

Much more was uttered by them, which showed the blessed and glorious frames of
their hearts (to the Glory of Divine Grace) but this is what occurs to memory.

Mr. Benjamin Hewling, about two hours before his death, writ this following
Letter, which showed the great composure of his Mind.

Mr. Hewlings last Letter a little before his Execution. Taunton, Sept. 30.
1685.
Honored Mother,
THat News which I know you have a great while feared, and we expected, I must
now acquaint you with; That notwithstanding the Hopes you gave in your two last
Letters, Warrants are come down f^r my Execution, and within these few hours I
expect it to be pe^formed. Blessed be the Almighty God that gives comfort and
support in such a day; how ought we to magnify his holy Name for all his
Mercies* that when we were running on in a course of sin, he should stop us in
our full career, and show us that Christ whom we had pierced, an^ out of hi^
^ree Grace enable us to look upon him with an E^e of Faith* believing him able
to save to the utmost all such as come to him. Oh admirable long suffering and
patience of God, that when we were dishono^ring hi^ Name, he did not take that
time to bring honor to himself by our destruction. But he delights not in
the death of a sinner, bu^ had rather he should turn to him and live: And he
has many ways of bringing his own to himself. Blessed be his Holy Name, that
through Affliction he has taught my heart in some measure to be comformable to
his Will, which works patience, and patience works experience, and
experience hope, which makes not ashamed. I bless God I am not ashamed of the
Cause for which I lay down my life; and as I have engaged in it, and fought for
it; so now I am going to s^al it with my Blood. The Lord still carry on the
same Cause which has been long on foot; and though we die in it, and for it, I
question not but in his own good time he will raise up other Instruments more
worthy to carry it on to the glory of his Name, and the advancement of his
Church and People.

Honored Mother, I know there has been nothing left undone by you, or my
Friends, for the saving of my Life, for which I return many hearty
acknowledgments to your self and them all; and it is my dying request to you and
them, to pardon all undutifulness and unkindness in every Relation. Pray give
my Duty to my Grandfather and Grandmother, Service to my Uncles and Aunts, and
my dear Love to all my Sisters; to every Relation and Friend a particular
Recommendation. Pray tell 'em all how precious an Interest in Christ is when we
come to die, and advise them never to rest in a Christless Estate. For if we
are his, it is no matter what the World do to us, they can but kill the Body,
and blessed be God the Soul is out of their reach, for I question not but their
malice wishes the damnation of that, as well as the destruction of the Body;
which has too evidently appeared by their deceitful flattering promises. I
commit you all to the care and protection of God, who has promised to be a
Father t^ the Fatherless, and a Husband to the Widow, and to supply the want
of every Relation. The Lord God of Heaven be your Comfort under these Sorrows,
and your Refuge from these Miseries we may easily foresee coming upon poor
England, and the poor distressed People of God in it. The Lord carry you
through this vale of Tears with a resigning submissive Spirit, and at last
bring you to himself in Glory; where I question not but you will meet your
dying Son

Ben Hewling.

Their Characters.
THey were both of very sweet and obliging Tempers, as h^s appeared in their
History, it being a very hard matter for their worst Enemies, when they once
knew 'em well, not to honor and love 'em. Mr. Benjamin, the elder, reconciled
the Lamb and the Lion exactly. In the Field he seemed made only for War, and
any where else, for nothing but Love. He, without flatterry, deserved to be
called a very fine man, of a lovely proportion, extremely well made, as handsome
a Mien, and good an Air, as perhaps few in England exceeded him: His Picture is
pretty like him.

The younger, Mr. William, somewhat taller, and more slender. His Face fresh
and lively, as his Spirit, being Master of an extraordinary vivacity and
briskness of Temper. Both of 'em virtuous, pious and courageous far above their
years, and indeed, seemed to be Men too soon, one of 'em not being Twenty, the
eldest but Two and twenty when they died; verifying that common Observation,
That whatever is perfect sooner than ordinary, has generally a shorter Period
prefixed it, than what is more base and ignoble.

Mr. Christopher Battiscomb.
HE was another Young Gentleman of a good Family, and very great hopes, and of
a fair Estate, which lay in Dorsetshire, somewhere between Dorchester and Lyme.
He had studied sometime at the Temple, and having Occasions in the Country
about the time of my Lord Russel's Business; he was there seized, on suspicion
of being concerned in it, and clapped into the County Goal at Dorchester, where he
behaved himself with that Prudence and winning Sweetness, and showed so much
Wit, and innocent pleasantry of Temper, as extremely obliged both all his
Keepers and Fellow Prisoners, and even Persons of the best Quality in that
Town. It Is indeed a genteel well-bred place, as almost any in England, at such
a Distance from London. The Streets are fair and large, and Buildings pretty
regular; two sweet plentiful Rivers running by it. It stands on a Chalky Hill,
but wants not store of good Water. The Market-house is a pleasant little Pile,
that very much sets off the Town. There are three Churches in it, and one in its
adjoining Parish. It Is endowed with several Almshouses, a good Grammar School
well enough provided, which has had the happiness of ingenious Masters, and by
their Care, produced no inconsiderable number of good Scholars. There are two
or three fine old Roman Fortifications near the Town, which Camden and Speed
take notice of. The People on it are generally Civil and Gallant enough, if not
a little on the extreme that way. They knew how to value such a Gentleman as
Mr. Battiscomb, and made him such frequent Visits in the Prison, till the place
it self was so far from being Scandalous, that there was generally all the
Conversation, and where you might be sure to meet the best Company in the Town
of both Sexes. Mr. Battiscomb had the happiness not to be displeasing to the
Fair Sex, who had as much Pity and Friendship for him as consisted with the
Rules of Decency and Virtue; and perhaps their Respect for him did not always
stop at Friendship, though it still preserved the other bounds inviolable. Pity
is generally but a little way from Love, especially when the Object of it is
any thing extraordinary. But after he had been there some time, and nothing
could be proved against him which could any ways affect him, he was at length,
almost unwillingly delivered from this sort of happy slavery. And when the Duke
landed, appeared with him, and served him with equal Faith and Valor, till the
Rout at Sedgmoor, when he fled with the rest, and got up as far as Devonshire,
where he was seized in a Disguise, and brought to his Old Palace, the Prison at
Dorchester.

He behaved himself there the second time in the same courteous obliging manner
as he did at the first, though now he seemed more thoughtful, and in earnest than
before, as knowing nothing was to be expected but speedy Death; Though his
Courage never droop't, but was still the same, if it did not increase with his
Danger. At his Trial, Jefferyes railed at him with so much eagerness and
barbarity, that he was observed almost to foam upon the Bench. He was very
angry with him, because he was a Lawyer, and could have been contented all such
as he should be hanged up without any Trial; and truly, 'twas no great matter
whether he or the rest had had that Formality or no. Mr. Battiscomb was as
undaunted at the Bar, as in the Field, or at Execution. How he demeaned himself
in Prison before his Death, take this following Account verbatim, as 'twas
written by his Friends. Though that which occurred most remarkable after his
Sentence, must not be omitted. Several Young Ladies in the Town, among whom
one, who is particularly mentioned in the Poem, went to Jeffreys to beg his
Life, who repulst 'em at such a brutish rate, as nothing with one Spark of
humanity would have been Guilty of, and in a manner even too uncivil to be
mentioned. The Particulars may be seen in the Petition of the Widows and
Orphans of that Country.

The Account given of him by his Relations.
HE was observed to be always serious and cheerful, ready to entertain
Spiritual Discourse, manifesting Affection to God's People and his Ordinances;
he seemed to be in a very calm indifference to Life or Death, referring himself
to God to determine it, expressing his great satisfaction as to some
Opportunities of Escape that were slipped, saying, That truly he sometimes
thought the Cause was too good to flee from suffering in it, though he would use
all lawful means for his Life; but the Pro^idence of God having prevented this,
he was sure it was best for him, for he said, be blessed God he could look into
Eternity with Comfort. He said, with respect to his Relations and Friends, to
whom his Death would be afflictive, that he was willing to live, if God saw
good; but for his own part, he thought Death much more desirable. He said, I
have enjoyed enough of this World, but I never found any thing but Vanity in
it, no rest or satisfaction. God, who is an Infinite Spiritual Being, is the
only suitable Object for the Soul of Man, which is spiritual in its Nature, and
too large to be made happy by all that this world can afford, which is all but
sensual. Therefore methinks, I see no reason why I should be unwilling to leave
it by Death, since our Happiness can never be perfected till then, till we
leave this Body, where we are so continually clogged with Sin and Vanity,
frivolous and foolish Trifles. Death in it self is indeed terrible, and Natural
Courage is too low to encounter it; nothing but an interest in Christ can be
our comfort in it, he said, which Comfort I hope I have; intimating much
advantage to his Soul by his former Imprisonment.

The day he went from Dorchester to Lyme, after he had received the News of his
Death the next day, he was in the same serious cheerfulness, declaring still
the same Apprehension of the desirableness of Death, and the great supports of
his Mind under the Thoughts of so sudden passing through it alone from the hope
of the Security of his Interest in Christ; taking leave of his Friends with
this Farewell, Though we part here we shall meet in Heaven. Passing by his Estate
going to Lyme, he said Farewell Temporal Inheritance, I am now going to my
heavenly, eternal one. At Lyme, the Morning that he died, it appeared that he
had the same supports from God, meeting Death with the same cheerfulness; and
after he had prayed a while to himself, without any appearance of Reluctance,
yielded up his Spirit, Sept. 2. 1865.

A Poem on a Lady that came to my Lord Chief Justice, to beg Mr. Battiscomb's
Life, Sister to one of the Sheriffs in the West, which he denied.
HArder than thine own Native Rocks!
To let the Charming Silvia kneel,
And not one spark of Pity feel:
Harder than senseless Stones and Stocks!
Ye Gods! what showers of Pearls she gave?
What precious Tears? enough to save
A Bleeding Monarch from the Grave.
By every hapless Virgin Cursed:
VVinter Blasts not more unkind;
Deaf as the rugged Northern VVind;
By some Welsh Wolf in Murders nursed.
Have thou Eyes? or have thou none?
Or are they worse than Marble grown?
Since Marbles weep at Silvia's moan.
Rebels stiff, and supple Slaves,
All the frantic World divide,
One must stoop, and to'ther ride;
Cringing Fools and Factious Knaves;
Though falling on the losers part,
Gently Death arrests my Heart,
And has in Honey dipped his Dart.
Life farewell, thou gaudy Dream,
Painted over with Griefs and Joys,
Which the next short hour destroys;
And drowns them all in Lethe's Stream:
What blessed Mortal would not die,
Might he with me Embalmed lie,
In pre^ious Tears from Silvia's Eye?
His Character.
ALL that knew or saw him, must own, Mr. Battiscomb was very much a Gentleman.
Not that thin sort of Animal that flutters from Tavern to Playhouse and back
again, all his Life made up of Wig and Crevat, without one dram of Thought in
his composition; but one who had solid worth, well dressed and set out to the
World. His Body made a very handsome and creditable Tenement for his Mind; and
't had been pity it should have lived in any other. He was pretty tall, well
made, I think inclining to Black; not altogether unlike Mr. Benjamin Hewling,
as He has bin thought to resemble the Duke of Monmouth. He was Witty, Brave,
exactly Honorable, Pious, and Virtuous: and if ever that Character belonged to
any Man, it did eminently to Mr. Battiscomb, That he lived universally beloved,
and died as generally lamented.

Mr. William Jenkyns.
HIS Father was sufficiently known, and his Circumstances hard enough, being
seized only for his Opinion, and clapped up close in Newgate; where the
inconvenience of the place, and want of the Exercise he formerly enjoyed,
quickly killed him, as he used to say before his Confinement, 'twould certainly
do if ever it happened. Thus was he requited by that very person for whom with
Mr. Love, he ventured his Life so deeply, and so hardly escaped with it. 'Twas
his inhuman Treatment which edged and animated his Son; and the revenge of his
Fathers Blood may be presumed to have gone very far in pushing him on to engage
his Life and Fortune in this undertaking, he having given Funeral Rings for his
Father with this Posie, William Jenkyns, murdered in Newgate. He was his
Fathers only Son, who had taken care to have him educated suitable to his
ingenuous Birth and Inclinations he improved ^^fficiently in all useful
Learning, and was now about one or two and twenty. He and several Young
Gentlemen rode down from London a little before the Duke landed, and were taken
on suspicion, and laid up in Ilchester Goal, till the Duke himself came and
relieved them. He continued in his Army till the Rout, when, if I mistake not,
he got to Sea and was forced back again with the H^wlings, or some others. He
was condemned at the Bloody Assizes in Dorchester.

A Friend discoursing to him at Dorchester about his Pardon, and telling him
the doubtfulness of obtaining it, he replied, Well, Death is the worst they can
do, and I bless God, that will not surprise me, for I hope my great work is
done. At Taunton being advised to govern the Airiness of his Temper, telling
him, it made People apt to censure him, as inconsiderate of his Condition; to
which he answered; Truly, this is so much my natural Temper, that I cannot tell
how to alter it; but I bless God I have, and do think seriously of my eternal
Conce^ns; I do not allow my self to be vain, but I find cause to ^e cheerful,
for my Peace is made with God, through Jesus Christ my Lord; this is my only
ground of Comfort and Cheerfulness, the security of my Interest in Christ; for
I expect nothing but Death, and without this I am sure Death would be most
dreadful; but having the good hope of thi^, I cannot be melancholy. When he
heard of the triumphant Death of those that suffered at Lyme, he said, This is
a good Encouragement to depend upon God. Then speaking about the mangling of
their Bodies, he said; Well, the Resurrection will restore all with great
advantage; the 15th. Chapter of the first of Corinthians is Comfort enough for
all Believers. Discoursing much of the certainty and felicity of the
resurrection at another time, he said, I will (as I think I ought) use all
lawful means for the saving of my Life, and then if God please to forgive my
sins, I hope I shall as cheerfully embrace Death. Upon the design of attempting
an escape, he said, We use this means for the preserving our Lives, but if God
is not with us, it will not effect it; it is our business first to to seek to
him for Direction and Success, if he sees good, with resigning our Lives to
him, and then his Will be done. After the Disappointments, when there was no
prospect of any other Opportunity, he spoke much of the admirableness of God's
Providence in those things that seem most against us, bringing the greatest
good out of them; for, said he, We can see but a little way, God is only wise
in all his Disposals of us; if we were left to choose for our selves, we should
choose our own Misery. Afterward discoursing of the Vanity and
unsatisfyingness of all things in this World, he said, It is so in the
enjoying, we never find our Expectations answered by any thing in it, and when
Death comes it puts an end to all things we have been pursuing here: Learning
and Knowledge (which are the best things in thi^ world) will then avail
nothing; nothing but an interest in Christ is then of any worth. One reading to
some of his Fellow Prisoners, Jer. 42.12. I will show mercy unto you, that he
may have mercy upon you, and cause you to return to your own Land; he said,
Yes, we shall, but not in this World, I am persuaded. September the 29 th. at
Night, after he heard he must die the next morning, he was exceedingly composed
and cheerful, expressing his Satisfaction in the will of God: The next morning
he was still more spiritual and cheerful, discovering a very sweet Serenity of
Mind in all that he said and did: Whilst he was waiting for the Sheriff,
reading the Scriptures, meditating and conversing with those about him of
Divine things, amongst other things, said he, I have heard much of the Glory of
Heaven, but I am now going to behold it, and understand what it is. Being
desired to disguise himself to attempt an escape, he said, No, I cannot tell
how to disturb my self about it, and methinks it is not my business, now I have
other things take up my thoughts; if God saw good to deliver me, he would open
some other Door; but seeing he has not, it is more for the honor of his Name
we should die, and so be it. One saying to him that most of the Apostles died a
violent Death, he replied, Nay, a greater than the Apostles our Lord himself
died, not only a shameful, but a painful Death: He further said, This manner of
Death has been the most terrible thing in the World to my thoughts, but I
bless God, now am I neither afraid nor ashamed to die. He said, The parting
with my Friends, and their grief for me, is my greatest difficulty; but it will
be but for a very short time, and we shall meet again in endless Joys, where my
dear Father is already entered, him shall I presently joyfully meet. Then
musing with himself a while, he with an extraordinary seriousness sung these
two Verses of one of Herbert's Poems:

Death is still working like a Mo^e,
Digging my Grave at each remove,
Let Grace work so on my Soul,
Drop from above.
Oh come! for thou do know the way,
Or if to me thou will not move,
Remove me where I need not say,
Drop from above.
He then read the 53 d of Isaiah, and said, He had heard many Blessed Sermons
from that Chapter, especially from the 16 th Verse, All we like Sheep have gone
astray, we have turned every one to his own way, but the Lord has laid on him
the Iniquities of us all; seeming to intimate some impress made on his Soul
from them, but was interrupted; then he said, Christ is all; When the Sheriff
came, he had the same cheerfulness and serenity of mind in taking leave of his
Friends, and in the Sledge, which seemed to increase to the last, (as those
present have affirmed) joining in Prayer, and in singing a Psalm with great
appearance of Comfort and Joy in his Countenance, insomuch that some of his
Enemies (that had before censured his cheerfulness for unthoughtfulness of his
Danger, and therefore expected to see him much surprised) now professed they
were greatly astonished, to see such a Young Man leave the World, and go
through Death as he did.

Mr. Jenkyn's Letter to Mrs. Scot on the 26 th of September, 1685.
Dear Sister,
THE News which came in my Brothers Letter of the 22 d Instant to Mr. Dewy did
not at all surprise me, for indeed I expected no other; and seeing all hopes of
saving my Life are blasted, I thought my self bound to write a Line or two to
so near a Relation as your self, wherein I might take my leave of you, and bid
you farewell, till we shall meet again in Glory, and never be separated more: As
for my own part, tho such a sort of Death as I am like to suffer, be that which
I always dreaded when at a distance, I have sometimes thought of it, yet I
^hank my God now it draws near, even but a few hours off, I find my self
supported under the thoughts of it, and hope by his strength, who will never
forsake his own, I shall be enabled cheerfully to undergo it with Glory to his
Name, and comfort to my own, and the Souls of others that are more nearly
concerned for me; and as I have made it my own endeavor to submit to the Will
of God in this sad Dispensation without murmuring or repining, I hope you have
been sensible of your Duty in the same respect, which is, Patiently to submit
to his Will, and eye his Hand in this severe stroke: And though God has been
pleased to deny success to your endeavors for the saving of my Life, yet I am
satisfied nothing has been wanting on your parts; and for all the trouble you
have been at on my account, tho I do not live to show my Gratitude, yet I
render you my dying thanks, and beg your Prayers for my support in the last
moments of my Life. If you receive this before my Death, the certain time of
which I have not notice of, pray remember my Love to My Brother, and Thanks for
all Kindnesses; and as for my young Relations, my Prayer for them shall be,
That they may see more happy days than I have done, and die a more peaceable, I
cannot say more happy Death. And now, Dear Sister, I take my leave of you, and
commi^ you to the protection of that God, who has made every thing beautiful
in his time, and will show you the meaning of this Providence which now we do
not understand, to whom, I trust I am now going, and into the enjoyment of
whose Presence I doubt not but ere long you will meet, Dear Sister,

Your affectionate Brother, WILLIAM JENKYN.

Mr. Jenkyn's Letter to his Mother on the 29 th of September, at 12 at Night,
Taunton.
Dear and Honored Mother,
I Have even now received the News of Execution to morrow, which, tho I have so
short notice of, yet I hope I am prepared for it, and by God's strength
enabling me, I shall joyfully be carried through it: The kindness you have been
pleased to show in your great Concern for me since I have been under this
trouble, as well as the Duty I owe to so near a Relation as your self, engages
me to acquaint you with my present condition for your satisfaction, which truly
is such, that I must beg you to accept this present Letter for my last Farewell:
And tho this sad Providence cannot but be grievous to so near and affectionate
a Relation as your self, yet I hope it already has, and still does; yield the
peaceable fruits of Righteousness to your self and me, who have been severely
exercised with it: As for my own part, I hope I can truly say, that God has by
this Providence weaned m^ from the World, and made me willing to leave, an^ to
be dissolved, that I may be with Christ, which i^ far better: And now I am come
to die; I hope I ca^ truly say, I have nothing else to do but to die; an^
having fought a good Fight, and finished my Cours^ I am now in expectation of
that Crown of Rewar^ which God the righteous Judge of the whole Earth, h^
promised to all those that love his appearing; and (...) it is my great work to
be now every moment fitting (...) self for my great and last change; so it is
the (...) which belongs to you, and the rest of my dear Relation^ to resign me
up into the hands of that God, whose (...) am, and to whom I am going, and not
repine at (...) righteous Will, which we ought quietly to submit (...) I bless
God I die with a clear Conscience, and thou^^ I have deserved much worse at the
hands of God (...) my past sins than I am like to undergo, yet I coun^^ with
respect to Man, I die a Martyr for the Prot^stant Religion, and merely for
doing my duty in opp^sing of that flood of Popery which seemed to be just
ove^whelming the Church and Interest of Christ in the^^ Nations; and I wish
that the Prudentialists of ou^ Age, that have withdrawn their helping hand from
so glorious a Design, do not within a few days (...) the smart they have
deserved by this their basenes^^ But being now just leaving the World, it is
grievous to look back on these things; wherefore dear and honored Mother, I
take leave of you also, hoping that I shall again meet with you in that place
of happiness, where all Tears shall be wiped away from our Eyes, and we shall
sorrow no more. I have nothing more to say, but to return you my dying Thanks
for all the Trouble and Care you have been at for the saving my Life, which
though God has not thought fit to make successful, yet my thankfulness is
equally due to you for your endeavors, as if he had; therefore I shall end
with the subscribing my self,

Dear and Honored Mother, Your thankful and dutiful Son, WILLIAM JENKYN.

Mr. Jenkyn's Letter to Mrs. Gourden on the 30 th of September, 1685. at 4
Morning, Taunton.
Dear Sister,
THO you are at a great distance from mine Eye, yet you are very near my Heart,
so that to leave the World before I have wrote a Line or two to bid you
farewell, and comfort you under this sad Providence, would be uncomfortable to
me: I hope you have by this time learnt how to welcome evil as well as good
tidings, and submit to the wise disposer of all things, who knows what is good
for us, better than we do for our selves: Tho I question not but the new^ of my
Death, especially in such a violent manner, a^ within a few hours I am to
suffer, it will be afflictive to you; yet I would beg you to consider the
Happiness which I am gone to, but a few years sooner taken out of a wicked and
troublesome World unto the quire of Triumphant Martyrs in Glory, which place of
Happiness, though I have not deserved by any thing of my own Merits, yet for
the Merits of my Mediator and Savior, who has purchased more for me, than can
enter into my Heart to conceive, I doubt not but I have a Mansion prepared for
me in that place, where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at
rest. And now, Dear Sister, I have nothing more to do in this World, but to be
preparing and fitting my self for this place of rest, which within a few hours
I am going to. I therefore leave you and yours to the protection and blessing
of God, who is able to keep and Support you under this and all other his
afflictive Providence, and bring a good issue out of them; and who will in his
own good time conduct you safe to that place of happiness, where you will meet
alone for Christ sake,

Dear, Dear Sister, Your loving and affectionate Brother, WILLIAM JENKYN.
Pray remember my Love and Respects to my Brother, and all that enquire after
me.



His Character.
HE was a very promising and ingenious young Gentleman; he had a great deal of
ready Wit, and an extraordinary briskness and gaity. He was a very good
Scholar, had run through a Course of Philosophy; but his p^rticular Inclination
was to the Mechanical part of it, wherein he had a very happy Genius, and
performed many pretty things. He wrote ^ery good clean Latin. He was
indifferent tall, ^retty thin, a fair Complexion, his Nose a ^ittle inclining
to one side, being hurt in his In^ancy. He led a sober, virtuous Life, and died
(...) happy Death at Taunton, September 30. 1685.

Lady Lisle.
HAD those Persons who suffered about Monmouth's business, fell only into the
hands of ^annibals, some of 'em, at least, had escaped bet^^r than they did from
Jeffreys. Those more ^^me and civil Creatures would have spared the (...) and
withered, though they had devoured the ^^ung and tender. But no Age, no Sex
made ^^y difference here; and as those who were just ^^me into the World,
Children and Girls of ten (...) a dozen years old were refused Pardon, so those
^ho were half out of it, would not be suffered (...) tumble into the Grave
entire, tho, as Juvenal ^^ys of Priam, they had scarce Blood enough lest to
singe the Knife of the Sacrifices. An Instance of this was my Lady Lisle, of
such an Age, that she almost slept on her very Trial, condemned for as small a
matter as has been known, by one of those dormant Laws, made only in terrorem,
but hardly ever executed only for corresponding with Nelthrop, an out-lawed
Person, and, as was pretended, giving him Shelter at her House, and Hicks, who
brought him thither. For Hicks, he was not then convicted, nor in any
Proclamation, and so it is a question whether she could even in rigor of Law,
deserve Death on his account. For Nelthrop, he himself says in his last Speech,
[That he was wholly a Stranger to that worthy Lady,; neither did she, as he
verily believes, know who he was, or his Name, till he was taken] For this she
was found Guilty, and lost her Head at Winchester. Her Case was thought so
hard, that the Honorable Court of Parliament have now reverst her Judgment. At
her Death she made the following Speech.

The last Speech of the Lady Alicia Lisle.
GEntlemen, Friends and Neighbors, it may be expected that I should say
something at my Death, and in order thereunto I shall acquaint you, that my
Birth and Education was (...) near this place, and that my Parents (...) me in
the fear of God, and I now die of (...) ^e^ormed Protestant Religion; that if
ever (...) should return into this Nation, it would be a very great and severe
Judgment; that I die in expectation of the pardon of all my sins, and of
acceptance with God the Father, by the imputed Righteousness of Jesus Christ,
he being the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes; I
thank God through Jesus Christ, that I do depart under the Blood of Sprinkling,
which speaks better things than that of Abel; God having made this
Chastisement an Ordinance to my Soul. I did once as little expect to come to
this place on this occasion, as any person in this place or Nation; therefore
let all learn not to be high-minded, but fear: The Lord is a Sovereign, and
will take what way he sees best to glorify himself in, and by his poor
Creatures; and I do humbly desire to submit to his Will, praying to him, That I
may possess my Soul in Patience. The Crime that was laid to my Charge, was for
entertaining a Nonconformist Minister and others in my House; the said Minister
being sworn to have been in the late Duke of Monmouth's Army; but I have been
told, That if I had denied them, it would not at all have affected me; I have
no excuse but surprise and fear, which I believe my Jury must make use of to
excuse their Verdict to the World. I have been also told, That the Court did
use to be of Counsel for the Prisoner; but instead of Advice, I had Evidence
against me from thence; which though it were only by hearsay, might possibly
affect my Jury; my defense being but such, as might be expected from a weak
Woman; but such as it was, I did not hear it Repeated again to the Jury; which,
as I have been informed, is usual in such Cases. However, I forgive all the
World; and therein all those that have done me wrong; and in particular, I
forgive Colonel Penruddock, although he told me, that he could have taken these
men before they came to my House. And I do likewise forgive him, who desired to
be taken away from the Grand Jury to the Petty-Jury, that he might be the more
nearly concerned in my death. As to what may be objected in reference to my
Conviction, that I gave it under my hand, that I had discoursed with Nelthrop;
that could be no Evidence against me, being after my Conviction and Sentence: I
do acknowledge his Majesty's Favor in Revoking my Sentence; I pray God to
preserve him, that he may long Reign in Mercy, as well as Justice; and that he
may Reign in Peace; and that the Protestant Religion may flourish under him. I
also return thanks to God and the Reverend Clergy, that assisted me in my
Imprisonment.

ALICIA LISLE.

Mr. Richard Nelthrop.
HIS Name is often enough met with in Wests and Rumseys Plot, and good reason
too, he being not near to answer for himself. As to what he was Accused,
Outlawed, and Executed for, his being concerned in a Design for the
Assassination of the King and Duke, he solemnly avers, as may be seen below in
his Speech, [ That he was always highly against it, and detested any such
thing, was never in the least concerned in it, neither in Purs^ or Person;
never knew of any Arms bought for that intent, nor did believe there was any
such Design.] Than which, what Words could be more full and satisfactory? He
went away in the Heat of Swearing, and returned with the Duke of Monmouth,
thinking it his Duty, as he says, to hazard his Life for the preservation of
the Protestant Religion and English Liberties; but as to the Duke of Monmouth's
being declared King, he was wholly passive in it. He was at first committed to
Salisbury Prison, where he had several Disputes with a learned and good Man,
whose Opinion then differed from his, concerning the lawfulness of Defending
our selves by Arms against illegal Violence, which was his firm Judgment.
Thence he was brought to London, and imprisoned in Newgate. He rejected there
with scorn some Offers made him of saving his own Life by taking away other
Men's; and though he was under inexpressible Trouble during his close Confinement
there, which at length arose to Distraction, and the impair of his Reason; yet
it is remarkable that he, as Bateman before him, before he came to die, after
Sentence was very calm and lively again, the entire Exercise of his Judgment
and Understanding returning, with more Joy and Comfort than he had before Pain
and Misery. He writ one Letter to his Parents, another to his Children, here
inserted, together with his last Speech at his Execution the 30 th. of October.
1685. at 2 in the Morning, he wrote the Letter to his Parents, etc.

Wherein he speaks much of his Brother, and Fellow-Sufferer Mr This Pious and
courageous Man, Mr. Ayloff suffered Martyrdom in London, about the same time
that Mr. Nelthrop did.
Ayloff, if I mistake not, whom he says, [ He could embrace with more Joy in
the Field of Suffering, than ever he could have done, had he met him in the
Field, crowned with Victory and Laurels.]

Mr. Richard Nelthrop's Letter to his Parents, Brothers and Sister.
Dearest Parents, and ever loving Brothers, and tender hearted and beloved
Sister,
THrough the infinite goodness of God, the nearer I approach my End, the more
Joy and Comfort I find in my suffering Estate, (that I may so call it:) I can
through mercy say, that I have found more true Delight and Content this Night,
than in all the Days and Nights of my whole Life; and I hope the Lord will
continue it, that his Name may be glorified by me the meanest and poorest of
all his Servants, but through Free Grace faithful unto the end: My Soul is
ravished, I can hardly write, and my Comforts are more unspeakable than my
Terrors were. I did this Evening see my dearest Brother and Companion; his Face
was to me as that of an Angel, and he gave me that Comfort, that I cannot but
say my Love to him is beyond what I ever had to my dearest Relations. When God
comes, every thing has a beauty and luster upon it, here is a^ Answer of
Prayers, and such an Answer, as dearest Relations, must engage you all to be
constant in the performance of that Duty, which like Jacob's Ladder, though it
stand upon the Earth, yet it reache^ up to Heaven: Here Is the Love of God made
ma^if^st to a poor Sinner at the last hour, like the Thief upon the Cross, he
that never knew before what the Love of God was to his Soul, finds it now
filled with it, and running over. Now ^less the Lord, O my Soul! yea, all that
is within me, Bless his holy Name for this Dispensation. ^ow Light appears out
of Darkness in the Face of Jesus; now all worldly Joy and Comforts seem to me
(as they are) things not hard to part with; Father, Mother, Brothers, Sister,
Wife, Children, House and Lands are (as my dear Savior says) to be parted
with for him, or we are not worthy of him: I bless his Name, I find no
reluctance to do it; he has brought me to his Foot stool, and I can say
heartily, the Will of the Lord be done in this matter. I never before but saw a
Beauty in worldly Comforts, but now those seem so faded by the greater Luster
and Beauty, that I see in God in Christ Jesus, that I am astonished where I
have been wandering all my days, spending my time and my money for that which is
not Bread. O strive to get a taste of this Love of God in Christ Jesus! and it
will perfectly wean you from this deceitful foolish World. What is worldly
Honor and Riches! O set not your hearts upon them, but get a Treasure in
Heaven, that your hearts may be there also. O lose no time! for if you ever
knew the sweetness of it, you would never be at rest till you found him whom
your Soul loved; it will be more, yea infinitely more than all worldly
Enjoyments can afford you, though in their greatest Perfection; it will make your
Life sweet, and your Death most comfortable: It is the Bread which this World
knows not of, and therefore makes little or no inquiry after it. Dearest
Relati^ns, whilst you and my other dear Friends are like Aaron and Hur, holding
up the Hands of Moses, I am through Grace, getting Victory over the Amalekites.
I can embrace my dear and beloved Brother and Companion with more Joy in the
Field of suffering, than ever I could have done, had I met him crowned with the
Laurels of Victory: Oh the mercy to die with such a ^riend, and such a valiant
Soldier of Jesus, who has kept his Garments clean. I now begin to pity you
that stay behind, who have many Temptations to conflict with; for a little, yea
a very little time, and my Warfare will be accomplished; and if God continue
his Love and Influence upon my Soul, it will be both short and sweet. I have
little of this World about me, I leave you all the Legacy of what was ever
dearest to me, the best of Wives, and five poor Children, who must pass through
an evil and sinful World; but I have committed them to God, who has commanded
to cast our Fatherless Children and Widows upon him. Dear Parents, Brothers,
Sister, all adieu, my time draws on, my Paper is finished, and your dying Child
and Brother recommends you all to him who is All-sufficient, to the God of
Peace that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of
the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, who will make you
perfect in every good work to do his Will, working in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and
ever, Amen.

RICHARD NELTHROPE.
From the Palace of Newgate, October. the 30 th. 1685. Two of the Clock in the
Morning.
Mr. Richard Nelthrope's Letter to his Children.
My Dear Children,
THE Providence of God has so ordered it, that your poor and ever-loving
Father is taken from you in such a manner as may cast both worldly Loss and
Reproach upon you; but I charge you let not this be a Stumbling Block to you in
the way of God, but that you remember your Creator in the days of your Youth:
That you never neglect a day without reading the Holy Scripture, wherein you will
find your Duty both to God and Man; there you will find the way to everlasting
Life; there you will find Christ Jesus instructing you, and dying for you. Seek
first the Kingdom of Heaven, and all other things will be added to you: After
your Duty to God Almighty, mighty, your Dying Father charges and conjures you,
as you will answer it at the great day of Appearance of our dearest Savior, that
you be dutiful and loving to the best of Mothers, as long as God shall continue
that great Mercy to you: Hearken to her Voice, and be obedient to the Words of
her Mouth, for she will be faithful to your Souls and Bodies; and remember that
Obedience to Parents has the promise of this Life, as well as of Eternal Life.
Pay a great Duty and Obedience to your Grandfather and Grandmother, Uncles and
Aunt, who all of them have not only testified the greatest Love to your Dying
Father, but from whom, if you carry your selves as becomes you, you may expect
both the good things of this World, and Advice and Counsel for what is beyond
all temporal Blessings. Diligence in your lawful Callings to which God shall in
his Providence appoint you is both commendable, and a Duty; but let not the
eager pursuit of the things of this World justle out the time allotted for
better things: Prayer will bless what you get in your Employments, and so at
once you obtain Gods Blessing upon worldly Mercies, and find God manifesting
himself to you in his dear Son, Christ Jesus, in pardon of your sins, and
receiving worldly things in the Covenant. Your tender Years in which I leave
you in this wicked and deceitful world, may render you subject to many
Temptations; but I commit you to the Father of the Fatherless, who is able to
preserve you both in Soul and Body; Your poor Father has no Legacy to leave
you, but the blessing of the great Jehovah, which he begs for you upon the
bended Knees of his Soul. The Lord God bless you with the Dew of Heaven, and if
he sees good, give you Jacob's Portion, Food and Raiment; and if the Lord bless
you with any temporal Goods, remember they are Talents, employ them well to the
Masters use: No Duty so acceptable to God as Charity, that is it which your
Savior exalts so far, that he says, Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom, for I was an hungry and ye fed me, naked and ye clothed me, sick and
in Prison, and ye visited me. I die and leave you, but if you keep close to God
and his ways, he will never leave you, nor forsake you. The Sum of the whole
is, Fear God and keep his commandments. Do that to all others, that you would
they should do to you, is the golden Rule of the Gospel, and will be a great
Preservative to you from offending either God or Man. Eternity calls me away,
and I have neither time nor opportunity to add more: Your Duties may be various
in the world, as Servants, as Masters, as Husbands, as Wives, as Parents: There
is no condition of Life but has its Comforts and its Troubles; the Lord fit
you for whatsoever condition he calls you to, whether Honor or Dishonor,
Riches or Poverty; But remember whatsoever it be, it is Gods Providence orders
and governs the World. Dear James, as thou art the eldest, strive to be the
best, and a good Example to the rest, a dutiful and a loving Son. Whatever thou
or the rest have lost by me, God can make up in this Life. My dear Babes, who
have been all Pledges of my Love, by the best and most affectionate Wife; I do
once more beg it of you, as my last Request, that you obey, love and honor
her, who has been the greatest worldly Blessing to your Father, and will never
think any thing too much to do for you. My dear Children, Farewell, I must now
take my leave both of you, and all worldly Comforts: I trust and hope I am
going to the Eternal Inheritance where sin and sorrow cease; and that I may
meet you at the right Hand of my blessed Savior, is the dying Prayer of,

Dear Children, Your Affectiona^e and loving Father, RICHARD NELTHROPE.
Newgate, 29. October. 1685.
Mr. Nelthrope's Last Speech.
THE great and inexpressible trouble and distraction I have been under since I
came into trouble, especially since my close Confinement in Newgate, has so
broken my Reason, that for many VVeeks last past, till the day my Sentence was
passed, I have not had any composure of Mind, and have been under the greatest
trouble imaginable: Since my dearest Wife has had the favor granted her of
coming to me, I am at present under great composedness of Mind, through the
infinite goodness of the Lord. As to what I stand Outlawed for, and am now
sentenced to die, I can with comfort appeal to the great God, before whose
Tribunal I am to appear, that what I did was in the s^^plicity of my heart,
without seeking any private Advantage to my self; but thinking it my Duty to
hazard my Life for the preservation of the Protestant Religion and English
Liberties, which I thought invaded, and both in great danger of being lost. As
to the design of assassinating the late King, or his present Majesty, it always
was a thing highly against my Judgment, and which I always detested; and I was
never in the least concerned in it, neither in Purse nor Person, nor never knew
of any Arms brought for that intent, nor did I believe there was any such
design, or ever heard of any disappointment in such an Affair, or Arms, or Time
or Place, save what after the Discovery of the General Design, Mr. West spoke
of, as to Arms bought by him: And as to my self, I was in the North when the
late King was at New Market, and the first News I had of the Fire, was at
Beverly in Yorkshire. As to my coming over with the late D. of Monmouth, it was
in prosecution of the same ends; but the Lord in his Holy and Wise Providence
has been pleased to blast all our undertakings; tho there seemed to be a very
unanimous and zealous Spirit in all those that came from beyond the Seas: And
as to the D. of Monmouth's being declared King, I was wholly passive in it, I
never having been present at any public Debate of that Affair, and should
never have advised it, but complained of it to Col. Holmes and Captain Patchet.
I believe the Lord Gray and Mr. F -- the chief Promoters of it. As to the
temptation of being an Evidence, and bringing either into trouble or danger the
meanest Person of his Life, upon the Account for which I suffer, I always
abhorred and detested the thoughts of it, both when in and out of danger, and
advised some very strongly against it; except when under my Distraction in
Prison, that amongst other temptations did violently assault me; but through
the goodness of my dearest God and Father, I was preserved from it, and indeed
was wholly incapable, and could never receive the least shadow of comfort from
it, but thought Death more eligible, and was some time asore, out of my
distracted and disquieted condition, wholly free from it; though not without
other Temptations far more Criminal in the sight of men. I bless the Father of
all Mercies, and God of all Consolations, that I find a great Resignedness of
my Will to his, finding infinitely more comfort in Death, than ever I could
place in Life, tho in a condition that might seem honorable, every hour seeing
the Will of God in ordering this Affair more and more cleared up to me. God
has given, God has taken, blessed be his holy Name, that has enabled me to
be willing to suffer, rather than to put forth my hand to Iniquity, or to say a
Confederacy with those that do so. I am heartily and sincerly troubled for what
has happened, many men's Lives being lost, and many poor distressed Families
ruined; the Lord pardon what of sin he has seen in it. He in his wonderful
Providence has made me and others concerned, Instruments, not only for what is
already fallen out, but I believe, for hastening some other great work he has
to do in these Kingdoms; whereby he will try and purge his People, and winnow
the chaff from the Wheat; the Lord keep those that are his, faithful unto the
end.

I die in Charity with all the World, and can readily and heartily forgive my
greatest Enemies, even those that have been Evidences against me; and I most
humbly beg the pardon of all that I have in the least any way injured; and in a
special manner humbly ask pardon of the Lady Lisle's Family and Relations, for
that my being succored there one Night with Mr. Hicks, brought that worthy
Lady to suffer Death: I was wholly a Stranger to her Ladyship, and came with
Mr. Hicks; neither did she (as I verily believe) know who I was or my Name,
till I was taken: And if any other have come toany loss or trouble, I humbly
beg their pardon; and were I in a condition, I would, as far as I was able,
make them a requital.

As to my Faith, I neither look nor hope for merey, but only in the Free Grace
of God, by the Application of the Blood of Jesus, my dearest and only Savior,
to my poor sinful Soul. My distresses have been exceeding great as to my
Eternal State, but through the infinite goodness of God, tho, I have many sins
to answer for, yet I hope and trust, as to my particular, that Christ came for
this very end and purpose, to relieve the Oppressed, and to be a Physician to
the Sick. I come unto thee, O blessed Jesus; refuse me not, but wash me in
thine own Blood, and then present me to thy Father as righteous! What though my
Sins be as Crimson, and of a Scarlet Dye? yet thou can make them as white as
Snow. I see nothing in my self but what must utterly ruin and condemn me, I
cannot answer for one action of my whole Life, but I cast my self wholly upon
thee, who art the Fountain of Mercy, in whom God is reconciling himself to the
World, the greatest of Sins and Sinners may find an All sufficiency in thy
Blood to cleanse 'em from all sin. O dearest Father of Mercy, look upon me as
righteous in and through the imputed Righteousness of thy Son; he has paid
the Debt by his own own Offering up himself for sin, and in that thy Justice is
satisfied, and thy Mercy is magnified. Grant me thy Love, O dearest Father,
assist me and stand by me in the needful hour of Death, give thy Angels charge
over my poor Soul, that the Evil One may not touch nor hurt it. Defend me from
his power, deliver me from his rage, and receive me into thine Eternal Kingdom,
in and through the alone Merits of my dearest Redeemer, for whom I praise thee:
To whom with thy self and holy Spirit be ascribed all Glory, Honor, Power,
Might and Dominion, for ever and for ever, Amen.

Dear Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit, Amen.

R. NELTHROPE.
Newgate, October. 29. 1685.
Mrs. Gaunt.
ONe of the great Reasons why Mrs. Gaunt was burnt, was it is very possible,
because she lived at Wapping; the honest Seamen and hearty Protestants
thereabouts, being such known Enemies to Popery and Arbitrary Government, that
the Friends of both gave all who oppose it the Name of Wappingers, as an odious
Brand and Title. She was a good honest charitable Woman, who made it her
business to relieve and help whoever suffered for the forementional Cause,
sparing no pains, refusing no office to get them assistance, in which she was
the most industrious and indefatigable woman living. Among others whom she had
thus relieved, who were obnoxious persons, was one Burton, whom with his Wife
and Family, she had kept from starving, for which (may the very name of 'em be
registered with Eternal Infamy) they swore against her, and took away her Life:
Tho, she says in her Speech, there was but one Witness against her as to any
money she was charged to give him, and that he himself, an Outlawed person, his
Outlawry not yet reversed, he not being outlawed when she was with him, and hid
him away. That which she writ in the Nature of a Speech, has a great deal of
Sense and Spirit, and some strange Expressions which were mentioned in the
Introduction to all these matters: which she concludes with these words addressed
to her Enemies, [ From her that find^ no Mercy from you.]

Were my Pen qualified to represent the due Character of this Excellent Woman,
it would be readily granted, That she stood most deservedly entitled to an
Eternal Monument of Honor in the hearts of all sincere Lovers of the Reformed
Religion. All true Christians (though in some things differing in persuasion with
her) found in her a Universal Charity and sincere Friendship, as is well known
to many here, and also to a multitude of the Scotch Nation, Ministers and
others, who for Conscience sake were formerly thrust into exile. These found
her a most refreshing Refuge. She dedicated her self with unwearied Industry to
provide for their Supply and Support, and therein (I do in^ine to think) she
out-stripped every individual person (if not the whole Body of Protestants in
this great City.) Hereby she became exposed to the implacable Fury of Bloody
Papists, and those blind Tools who co-operated to promote their accursed
Designs. And so there appeared little difficulty to procure a Jury (as there
were well-prepared Judges) to make her a Sacrifice as a Traitor to the State.
Her Judges the King's Council, the Solicitor General, the Common Sergeant; etc.
rackt their Invention^ to draw Burton and his Wife to charge Mrs. Gaunt, with
the knowledge of his being in a Plot, or in the Proclamation, but nothing of
that could be made out, nor is here any sort of proof that Mrs. Gaunt harbored
this ungrateful wretch, or that she gave him either Meat or Drink, as the
Indictment charges her; but notwithstanding that, her Jury brought her in
Guilty.

The Sentence was executed upon this excellent Woman upon Friday then
following, being the 23 d. October 1685. when she left her Murderers the
following Memorial.

Newgate, 22d. of October, 1685. Mrs. Gaunt's Speech, written the day before
her Sufferings.
NOt knowing whether I should be suffered or able, because of weaknesses that
are upon me through my hard and close Imprisonment, to speak at the place of
Execution; I writ these few Lines to signify, That I am well reconciled to the
way of my God toward me, though it be in ways I looked not for; and by
terrible things, yet in righteousness; having given me Life, he ought to have
the disposing of it, when and how he pleases to call for it; and I desire to
offer up my All to him, it being but my reasonable Service; and also the first
Terms that Jesus Christ offers, that he that will be his Disciple must forsake
all and follow him, and therefore let none think hard, or be discouraged at
what has happened unto me; for he does nothing without cause, in all he has
done to us, he being holy in all his ways, and righteous in all his works; and
it is but my lot in common with poor desolate Sion at this day. Neither do I
find in my heart the least regret for what I have done in the service of my
Lord and Master Jesus Christ, in succouring and securing any of his poor
Sufferers, that have showed favor to his righteous Cause: which Cause, though
now it be fallen and trampled upon as if it had not been anointed, yet it shall
revive, and God will plead it at another rate than ever he has done yet, and
reckon with all its opposer^ and malicious haters; and therefore let all that
love and fear him, not omit the least Duty that comes to hand or lies before
them, knowing that now it has need of them, and expects they shall serve him.
And I desire to bless his holy Name, that he has made me useful in my
generation to the comfort and relief of many desolate ones, and the blessing of
those that are ready to perish has come upon me, and being helped to make the
Heart of the Widow to sing. And I bless his holy Name, that in all this,
together with what I was charged with, I can approve my heart to him, that I
have done his will, though it does cross Man's will, and the Scriptures that
satisfy me are, Isaiah 16.4. Hide the Outcasts, bewray not him that wandereth.
And, Obad. 13.14. Thou should not have given up those of his that did escape
in the day of his Distress. But Man says, You shall give them up, or you shall
die for it. Now who to obey, Judge ye. So that I have cause to rejoice and be
exceeding glad, in that I suffer for righteousness sake, and that I am
accounted worthy to suffer for well-doing, and that God has accepted any
Service from me, which has been done in sincerity, though mixed with manifold
Infirmities, which he has been pleased for Christ's sake to cover and forgive.
And now as concerning my Fact, as it is called, alas it was but a little one,
and might well become a Prince to forgive; but he that shows no Mercy, shall
find none: And I may say of it in the Language of Jonathan, I did but taste a
little honey, and lo I must die for it. I did but relieve an unworthy, poor,
distressed Family, and so I must die for it. Well, I desire in the Lamb like
Gospel Spirit, to forgive all that are concerned, and to say, Lord, lay it not
to their Charge; but I fear he will not: Nay, I believe when he comes to make
inquisition for Blood, it will be found at the door of the furious Judge; who,
because I could not remember things through my dauntedness at Burton's Wife and
Daughters Vileness, and my ignorance, took advantage thereat, and would not
hear me, when I had called to mind that which I am sure would have invalidated
their Evidence; though he granted something of the same Nature to another, yet
denied it to me. My Blood will also be found at the door of the unrighteous
Jury, who found me Guilty upon the single Oath of an Out-lawed Man; for there
was none but his Oath about the Money, who is no legal Witness, though he be
pardoned, his Outlawry not being recalled; and also the Law requires two
Witnesses in point of Life: And then about my going with him to the place
mentioned, 'twas by his own Words, before he was Outlawed, for 'twas two
Month's after his absconding; and though in a Proclamation, yet not High
Treason, as I have heard; so that I am clearly murdered by you. And also Bloody
Mr. A. who has so insatiably hunted after my Life; and though it is no profit
to him, through the ill will he bore me, left no stone unturned, as I have
ground to believe, till he brought it to this; and showed favor to Burton, who
ought to have died for his own fault, and not bought his Life with mine; and
Capt. R. who is cruel and severe to all under my Circumstances, and did at that
time, without all mercy or pity, hasten my Sentence, and held up m^ hand, that
it might be given; all which together with the Great One of all, by whose Power
all these, and a multitude more of Cruelties are done, I do heartily and freely
forgive, as against me; but as it is done in an implacable mind against the
Lord Christ, and his righteous Cause and Followers, I leave it to him who is
the Avenger of all such Wrongs, who will tread upon Princes as upon Mortar, and
be terrible to the Kings of the Earth: And know this also, that though ye are
seemingly fixed, and because of the Power in your hand are writing out your
Violence, and dealing with a despiteful hand, because of the old and new
hatred; by impoverishing and every way distressing of those you have got under
you; yet unless you can secure Jesus Christ and all his holy Angels, you shall
never do your business, nor your hands accomplish your Enterprises; for he will
be upon you ere you are aware; and therefore, O that you would be wise,
instructed and learn, is the desire of her that finds no mercy from you,

ELISABETH GAVNT,

Postscript.
SVch as it is, you have it from her, who has done as she could, and is sorry
she can do no better; hopes you will pity and cover weakness, shortness, and
any thing that is wanting; and begs that none may be weakened or humbled, at the
lowness of my Spirit; for God's Design is to humble and abase us, that he alone
may be exalted in this day; and I hope he will appear in the needful time, and
it may be reserves the best Wine till last, as he has done for some before me;
none goes to Warfare at his own charge, and the Spirit blows, not only
where, but when it lists; and it becomes me, who have so often grieved,
quenched, and resisted it, to wait for and upon the motions of the Spirit, and
not to murmur; but I may mourn, because through want of it, I honor not my
God, nor his blessed Cause, which I have so long loved and delighted to love;
and repent of nothing about it, but that I served him and it no better.

A brief Account of Mr. Roswell's Trial and Acquittal.
ABout the same time, Mr. Roswell, a very worthy Divine was tried* ^or
Treasonable Words in his Pulpit, upon the Accusation of very vile and lewd
Informers; and a Surry Jury found him guilty of High Treason, upon the most
villainous an improbable Evidence that had been ever given, notwithstanding Sir
John Talbot (no countenancer of Dissenters,) had appeared with great generosity
and honor, and testified, That the most material Witness, was as scandalous
and infamous a Wretch a lived.

It was at that time given out by those who thirsted for Blood, that Mr.
Roswell and Mr. Hays should die together; and it was upon good ground believed,
that the happy deliverance of Mr. Hays, did much contribute to the preservation
of Mr. Roswell; though, it is very probable, that he had not escaped, had not Sir
John Talbot's worthy and most honorable detestation of that accursed Villainy,
prompted him to repair from the Court of King's Bench, to King Charles II. and
to make a faithful representation of the Case to him; whereby, when inhuman
bloody Jeffryes came a little after in a transport of Joy, to make his Report
of the Eminent Service he and the Surry Jury had done, in finding Mr. Roswell
guilty; the King (to his disappointment) appeared under some reluctance, and
declared, that Mr. Roswell should not die. And so he was most happily delivered.

The Earl of Argyle.
WE must now take a step over into Scotland that poor Country, which has been
harassed and tired for these many years to render them perfect Slaves, that
they might help to enslave England, to prevent which, and secure the Protestant
Religion, which 'twas grown impossible to do, but by Arms; this good Lord
embarked from Holland about the same time with the Duke, and arrived in
Scotland with what Forces he could make; to which were added some others who
joined him; which after several Marches and Counter-Marches, were at length led
into a Boggy sort of a place on pretense, or with intention to bring him off
from the other Army then upon the heels of 'em, where they all lost one
another, dispersed and shifted for themselves; the E. being taken by a
Countryman, and brought to Edinburgh, where he suffered for his former
unpardonable Crime -- requiring Care should be taken of the Protestant
Religion, and explaining his taking the Test conformable thereto; for the
Legality of which he had the hands of most of the eminent Lawyers about the
City. He suffered at Edinburgh the 30 th of June, 1685. His Speech has a great
deal of Piety and Religion, nor will it be any disgrace to say, 'twas more like
a Sermon. -- It Is as follows.

The Earl of Argyle's last Speech, June 30. 1685.
JOB tells us, Man that is born of a Woman, is of few days and full of trouble;
and I am a clear Instance of it. I shall not now say any thing of my Sentence,
or escape about three years and a half ago; nor of my return, lest I may
thereby give Offense, or be tedious: Only being to end my days in your
Presence, I shall, as some of my last Words, assert the truth of the matter of
Fact, and the Sincerity of my Intentions, and Professions that are published.

That which I intend mainly now to say, is, To express my humble, and (I thank
God) cheerful Submission to his Divine Will; and my willingness to forgive all
Men, even my Enemies, and I am heartily well satisfied there is no more Blood
spilt, and I shall wish the stream thereof may stop at me: And that (if it
please God) to say, as to Zerubbabel, Zech. 4.6. Not by might, nor by power,
but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts.

I know Afflictions spring not out of the dust: God did wonderfully deliver and
provide for me, and has now by his special Providence brought me to this place;
and I hope none will either insult, or stumble at it, seeing they ought not;
for God Almighty does all things well, for good and holy. Ends, tho we do not
always understand it. Love and hatred is not known by what is before us,
Eccles. 9.1. and 8.11, 12, 13.

Afflictions are not only foretold, but promised to Christians; and are not
only tolerable: but desirable.

We ought to have a deep Reverence and Fear of God's displeasure; but withal,
a firm hope and dependence on him for a blessed Issue, in compliance with his
Will; for God chastens his own, to re^ine them, and not to ruin them, whatever
the World may think, Heb. 12.3. to 12. Prove. 3.11, 12. 2 Timothy 1.8. 2 Timothy 2.11,
12. Math. 10.18. to 40. Matthew. 16.24. to 28.

We are to imitate our Savior in his Sufferings, as 1 Pet. 2.23. and 1 Pet.
4.16. to 20.

We are neither to despise our Afflictions, nor to faint under them; both are
extremes.

We are not to suffer our Spirits to be exasperated against the Instruments of
our trouble; for the same Affliction may be an effect of their Passion, and yet
sent by God to punish us for sin: Tho it is a comfort when we may say to them,
with David, Psalm. 59.3. Not for my transgession, nor for my sin, O Lord.

Nor are we, by fraudulent, pusillanimous Compliances in wicked Courses, to
bring sin upon our selves: Faint Hearts are ordinary false Hearts; choosing Sin
rather than Sufferings, and a short Life with eternal Death, before Temporal
Death and a Crown of Glory: Such seeking to save a little, loses all; and God
readily hardens them to proceed to their own destruction. How many, like
Haza^l, 2 King. 8.13. run to excesses they never thought they were capable of!
Let Rulers and others read seriously, and weigh Prove. 1.10. to 20. 2 Chr. 28.6.
to 17. Prove. 24.11, 12. and Prove. 2^* 10. and avoid what is bad, and follow
what is good

For me, I hope by Gods strength to join with Job, chap. 13.15. and the
Psalmist, Psalm. 22.4. and 167. and shall pray, as Psalm. 74.19. to 24. And Psalm.
122.6. to 9. And Luke 1.74, 75. and shall hope, as Psalm. 94.14, 15.

I do freely forgive all that directly or indirectly have b^^n ^he cause of my
being brought to this place, first or last; and I pray God forgive them. I pray
God send Truth and Peace in these Three Kingdoms; and continue and increase the
glorious Light of the Gospel, and restrain the Spirit of Prophanity, Atheism,
Superstition, Popery, and Persecution, and restore all that have back-slidden
from the Purity of their Life or Principles; and bless his whole People with
all Blessings, spiritual and temporal, and put an end to their present Trials.

And I entreat all People to forgive me wherein I have offended, and concur
with me to pray, That the great, good, and merciful God would sanctify my
present Lot, and for Jesus Christ his sake Pardon all my Sins, and receive me
to his Eternal Glory.

It is suggested to me, That I have said nothing of the Royal Family; and it
remembers me, that before the Justices at my Trial about the Test, I said, That
at my Death I would pray, That there should never want one of the Royal Family
to be a Defender of the True, Ancient, Apostolic, Catholic, Protestant Faith;
which I do now: And that GOD would enlighten and forgive all of them that are
either lukewarm, or have shrunk from the Profession of it. And in all Events,
I pray God may provide for the Security of his Church, that Antichrist, nor the
Gates of Hell may never prevail against it.

Colonel Rumbold.
AT the same place died Colonel Richard Rumbold, Jun. 26. 1685. most of what
occurred considerable in his Defense and Speech, you have had already in the
business of the Assassination. Two or three Passages more there are worth
Remarks in the same, as Arguments of his Sense and Courage. [For this Cause, he
says, were every hair of his Head and Beard a Life, he would joyfully sacrifice 'em
all.] That he was never Antimonarchical in his Principles, but for a King and
Free Parliament; the King having power enough to make him great, and the People
to make 'em happy.] That [he died in the Defense of the just Laws and Liberties
of the Nations] That [none was marked by God above another; for no Man came into
the World with a saddle on their backs, nor others booted and spurred to ride
upon it.] And being asked if he thought not his Sentence dreadful, answered, [He
wished he had a Limb for every Town in Christendom.]

The Last Speech of Col. Richard Rumbold, at the Market-Cross of Edinburgh,
with several things that passed at his Trial, 26 Jun. 1685.
AT the same place died Colonel Richard Rumbold, about Eleven of the Clock he
was brought from the Castle of Edinburgh, to the Justices Court, in a great
Chair, on Men's Shoulders; where at first he was asked some Questions, most of
which he answered with silence; at last said, He humbly conceived, it was not
necessary for him to add to his own Accusation, since he was not ignorant they
had enough already to do his Business; and therefore he did not design to fret
his Conscience at that time with Answering Questions. After which, his Libel
being read, the Court proceeded in usual manner; first asking him, If he had
any thing to say for himself before the Jury closed? His Answer was, He owned
it all, saving that part, of having Designed the King's Death; and desired all
present, to believe the words of ^ Dying Man; he never directly nor indirectly
intended such a Villainy; that he abhorred the very thoughts of it; and that he
blessed God, he had that Reputation in the World, that he knew none that had
the Impudence to ask him the Question; and he detested the thoughts of such an
Action; and he hoped all good People would believe him, which was the only way
he had to clear himself; and he was sure that this Truth should be one day made
manifest to all Men. He was again asked, If he had any exception against the
Jury? He answered No; but wished them to do as God and their Consciences
directed them. Then they withdrew, and returned their Verdict in half an hour,
and brought him in Guilty. The Sentence followed; For him to be taken from that
Place ^o the next Room, and from thence to be Drawn on a Hurdle, betwixt Two
and Four of the Clock, to the Cross of Edinburgh, the Place of Execution, and
there to be Hanged, Drawn and Quartered. He received his Sentence with an
undaunted Courage and Cheerfulness. Afterward he was delivered into the
Town-Magistrates Hands; they brought to him two of their Divines, and offered
him their Assistance upon the Scaffold; which he altogether refused, telling
them, That if they had any good Wishes for him, he desired they would spend
them in their own Closets, and leave him now to seek God in his own Way. He had
several Offers of the same kind by others, which he put off in like manner. He
was most serious and fervent in Prayers the few-hours he lived (as the
Sentinels observed, who were present all the while.) The Hour being come, he
was brought to the Place of Execution, where he saluted the People on all sides
of the Scaffold, and after having refre^hed himself with a Cordial out of his
Pocket, he was supported by two Men, while he spoke to the People in these
words:

Gentlemen and Brethren, I^ is for all Men that come into the World once to
Die, and after Death to Judgment; and since death is a Debt that all of us must
pay, it is but a matter of small moment what way it be done; and seeing the
Lord is pleased in thi^ manner to take me to himself, I confess, something hard
to Flesh and Blood, yet, blessed be his Name, who has made me not only
Willing, but Thankful for his honoring me to lay down the Life he gave, for
his Name; in which, were every Hair in this Head and Beard of min^ a Life, I
should joyfully sacrifice them for it, as I do this: And Providence having
brought me hither, I think it most necessary to clear my self of some
Aspersions laid on my Name; and first, That I should have had so horrid an
In^ention of Destroying the King and his Brother.

[Here he repeated what he had said before to the Justices on this Subject.]

It was also laid to my Charge, That I was Antimonarchical.

It was ever my Thoughts, That Kingly Government was the best of all, Justly
Executed: I mean, such as by our ancient Laws; that is, a King, and a Legal
Free Chosen Parliament. The King having, a^ I conceive, Power enough to make
him Great; the People also as much Property as to mak^ them Happy; they being
as it were contracted to one another. And who will deny me, that this was not
the Just constituted Government of our Nation? How absurd is it then for Men of
Sense to maintain, That though the one Party of this Contract breaks all
Conditions, the other should be obliged to perform their Part? No; this error
is contrary to the Law of God, the Law of Nations, and the Law of Reason. But
as pride has been the Bait the Devil has catched most by, ever since the
Creation, so it continues to this day with us. Pride caused our first Parents
to fall from the blessed Estate wherein they were created; they aiming to be
Higher and Wiser than God allowed, which brought an everlasting Curse on them
and their Posterity. It was Pride caused God to Drown the Old World. And it was
Nimrod 's Pride in building Babel, that caused that heavy Curse of Division of
Tongues to be spread among us, as it is at this day, One of the greatest
Afflictions the Church of God groaneth under, That there should be so many
Divisions during their Pilgrimage here; but this is their Comfort that the Day
draws near, whereas there is but One Shepherd, there shall be but One
Sheepfold. It was therefore in the Defense of this Party, in their Just Rights
and Liberties, against Popery and Slavery --

[At which words they Beat the Drums:] To which he said;

They need not trouble themselves, for he should say no more of his Mind on
that subject, since they were so disingenuous, as to interrupt a Dying Man,
only to assure the People, he adhered to the True Protestant Religion,
detesting the erroneous Opinions of many that called themselves so; and I Die
this day in the Defense of the ancient Laws and Liberties of these Nations: And
though God, for Reasons best known to himself, has not seen it fit to honor
Us, as to make Us the Instruments for the Deliverance of his People; yet as I
have Lived, so I Die in the Faith, that he will speedily arise for the
deliverance of his Church and People. And I desire all of you to prepar^ for
this with speed. I may say, This is a deluded Generation, veiled with
Ignorance, that though Popery and Slavery be riding in upon them, do not
perceive it; though I am sure th^re was no Man born marked of God above
another; for none comes into the world with a Saddle on his Back, neither any
Booted and Spurred to Ride him; not but that I am well satisfied, that God has
wisely ordered different Stations for Men in the World, as I have already said:
Kings having as much Power as to make them Great, and the People as much
Property as to make them Happy. And to conclude; I shall only add ^y Wishes for
the Salvation of all Men, who were created for that end.

After ending these words, he prayed most fervently near three quarters of an
hour, freely forgiving all Men, even his greatest Enemies, begging most
earnestly for the Deliverance of Sion from ^ll her Persecutors, particularly
praying for London, Edinburgh, and Dublin, from which the Streams run that Rule
God's People ^n these three Nations.

Being asked some hours before his Execution, ^f he thought not his Sentence
Dreadful? He answered, He wished he had a Limb for every Town in Christendom.

A Brief Account of the Last Speech of Mr. John King at the place of Execution
at Edinburgh, on the 14th. day of August. 1679.
Men and Brethren,
I Do not doubt but that many that are Spectators here, have some other end,
than to be edified by what they may see and hear in the last words of one going
to Eternity; but if any one of you have Ears to hear, (which I nothing doubt
but some of this great gathering have) I desir^ your Ears and Attention, if the
Lord shall help and permit me to speak, to a few things.

I bless the Lord, since infinite Wisdom and holy Providence has so carved out
my Lot to dye after the manner that I do, not unwillingly, neither by force:
It Is true, I could not do this of my self, Nature always having an Inclination
to put the Evil day far off, but through Grace I have been helped, and by this
Grace yet hope I shall: It Is true, through Policy I might have shunned such ^
hard S^ntence, if I had done some things; but though I could I durst not, God
knows, redeem my life with the los^ of my Integrity and Honesty. I bless the
Lord that since I have been apprehended and made a Prisoner, God has very
wonderfully upholden me; and made out that comfortable word, Fear not, be not
dismayed, I am with thee, I will strengthen thee, I will uphold thee by the
righ^ hand of my Righteousness, Isaiah 42.10. I than^ the Lord he never yet
gave me leave so much a^ to have a thought, much less to seek after an^ shift
that might be in the least sinful: I did always, and yet do judge it better to
suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season; therefore I am come hither to lay down my life; I bless the Lord
I dye not as a Fool dies, though I acknowledge I have nothing to boast of in
my self: Yea I acknowledge I am a sinner, and one of the chiefest that has
gone under the name of a Professor of Religion; yea amongst the unworthiest of
those that have preached the Gospel; my Sins and Corruptions have been many,
and have defiled me in all things; and even in following and doing of my Duty,
I have not wanted my own sinful Infirmities and Weaknesses, so that I may truly
say, I have no Righteousness of my own, all is evil and like filthy Rags; but
blessed be God that there is a Savior and an Advocate, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and I do believe that Jesus Christ is come into the World to save
Sinners, of whom I am the chief, and that through Faith and his Righteousness I
have obtained Mercy; and that through him, and him alone, I desire and hope to
have a happy and glorious Victory over sin, Satan, Hell, and Death; and that I
shall attain unto the Resurrection of the just, and be made Partaker of Eternal
Life. I know in whom I have believed, and that he is able to keep that which I
have committed unto him against that day. I have according to my poor Capacity,
preached Salvation in his Name; and as I have preached, so do I believe, and
with all my Soul have commended it, and still do commend to all of you the
riches of his Grace, and Faith in his Name, as the alone and only way whereby
to come to be saved.

It may be many may think (but I bless the Lord without any solid ground) that
I suffer as an Evil-Doer, and as a busy body in other men's matters; but I
reckon not much upon that, having the Testimony of my own Conscience for me. It
was the lot of our blessed Savior himself, and also the lot of many of his
eminent precious Servants and People to suffer by the World as Evildoers: Yea
I think I have so good ground not to be scared at such a Lot, that I count it
my non-such honor; and Oh what am I that I should be honored so, when so many
Worthies have panted after the like, and have not come at it: My Soul rejoices
in being brought into Conformity with my Blessed Lord, and Head, and so Blessed
a Company in this way and lot; and I desire to pray that I may be to none of
you this day upon this account a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of Offense; and
blessed is he that shall not be offended in Christ and his poor Followers and
Members, because of their being Condemned as Evildoers by the World.

As for these things for which Sentence of Death has past against me, I bless
the Lord my Conscience does not condemn me, I have not been Rebellious, nor do
I judge it Rebellion for me to have endeavored in my Capacity what possibly I
could for the born-down and ruined interest of my Lord and Master, and for the
Relief of my poor Brethren afflicted and persecuted, not only in their
Liberties, Privileges, and Persons, but also in their Lives; therefore it was
that I joined with that poor handful; the Lord knows, who is the searcher of
Hearts, that neither my design nor practice was against his Majesty's person
and just Government, but I always studied to be Loyal to lawful Authority in
the Lord, and I thank God my heart does not condemn me of any Disloyalty; I
have been Loyal, and I do recommend it to all to be Obedient to higher Powers
in the Lord.

I have been looked upon by some, and represented by others to be of a
divisive, and Factious Humor, and one that stirred up division in the Church,
but I am hopeful that they will all now give me their Charity, being within a
little to stand before my Judge, and I pray the Lord forgive them that did so
misrepresent me; but I thank the Lord whatever Men have said against me
concerning this, that on the contrary, I have often dissuaded from such way^
and practices, as contrary to the Word of God, and of our Covenanted and
Reformed Religion; and as I ever Abhorred division, and Faction in the Church,
as that which tends to its utter Ruin, if the Lord prevent it not. So I would
in the Bowels of my Lord ^^d Master, if such an one as I am may presume to
^erswade, and Exhort both Ministers and Professors; if there b^ any Consolation
in Christ, if any comfort of Love; if any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any
Bowels and Mercies that you be like minded, having the same Love, being of one
accord, of one mind in lowliness of mind; let each esteem others better than
themselves, Phil. 1.12. Harmoniousness and Honesty in the things of God, can
never enough be sought after, and things that tend to the prejudice and hurt of
Christ's interest, can never enough be fled from and avoided.

And as I am come hither willingly to lay down my Tabernacle, so also I die in
the Belief, and Faith of the Holy Scriptures, and in the Faith of the Apostles,
and Primitive Christians, and Protestant Reformed Churches, and particularly
the Church of Scotland, whereof I am a poor Member:

I shall but say a few words.

First, All you that are profane, I would seriously Exhort you that you return
to the Lord by serious Repentance; if you do, iniquity shall not be your Ruin;
if you do not, know that the day of the Lords Vengeance is near and hastneth
on! Oh know for your comfort, there is a door of mercy yet open, if you be not
despisers of the day of Salvation. And you that have been, and yet are,
Reproachers and persecutors of Godliness, and of such as live Godly; take heed,
Oh take heed, sad will be your day, when God arises to scatter his Enemies, if
you repent not for your ungodly deeds.

Secondly, All those who are taken up with their own private ^^terests, and if
that go well they Care the less ^or the interest of Christ, take heed and be
zealous, and repent, lest the Lord pass the Sentence, I will spew you out of my
mouth.

Thirdly, For the truly Godly, and such as are Lamenting after the Lord, and
are mourning for all the abominations of this City, and are taking pleasure in
the very Rubbish and Stones of Zion, be of good Courage, and Cast not away your
Confidence, I dare not say any thing to future things, but surely the Lord has
a handful that are precious to him, to whom he will be Gracious; to these is a
dark night at present, how long it will last the Lord knows! Oh let not the sad
disasters, that his poor people meet with, though very astonishing, Terrify
you, beware of snares that abound. Cleave fast to your Reformed Religion, do
not Shift the Cross of Christ, if you be called to it, it is better to suffer
than sin, accoun^ the reproaches of Christ greater Riches than all the
Treasures of the World.

In the last place, let not my Death be Grievous, to any of you, I hope it will
be more profitable both for you and me, and for the Church and interest of God,
than my life could have been. I bless the Lord, I can freely and Frankly
forgive all men, even as I desire to be forgiven of God, pray for them that
persecute you, bless them tha^ Curse you. As to the cause of Christ, I bless
the Lord I never had cause, to this day, to repent for any thing. I have
suffered, or can now suffer for his name. I thank the Lord who has showed mercy
to such a vile sinner as I am, and that ever he should advance me to so High a
dignity, as to be made a Minister of his blessed and everlasting Gospel; and
that ever I should have a Seal set to my Ministry, upon the hearts of some in
several places and Corners of this Land: the Lord visit Scotland with more and
more faithful Pastors, and send a Reviving day unto the people of God; in the
mean time be patient, be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord; and live in Love and peace one with another, and the Lord be with his
poor Afflicted Groaning people, that yet remain.

Now I bid farewell to all my Friends, and dear Relations; Farewell my poor Wife
and Children, whom I leave in the good hand of him who is better than seven
Husbands, and who will be a Father to the Fatherless. Farewell all Creature
Comforts, Welcome everlasting Life, everlasting Glory, Welcome everlasting
Love, everlasting Praise: Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me.

Sic Subscrib. JOHN KING.
August 14 th. 1679. Tolbooth, Circa horam Septimam.
A brief Account of the last Speech of Mr. John Kidd, at the place of Execution
at Edinburgh, on the 14th. day of August, 1679.
Right Worthy and well beloved Spectators and Auditors.
COnsidering what bodily Distempers I have been exercised with, since I came
out of the Torture, viz. Scarce two hours out of my naked bed in one day, it
cannot be expected, that I should be in a Case to say any thing to purpose at
this Juncture, especially seeing I am not as yet free of it; however I cannot
but Reverence the good hand of God upon me, and desire with all my Soul to
bless him for this my present Lot.

It may be there are a great many here that judge my Lot very sad and
deplorable. I must confess Death it self is very ^e^rible to Flesh and Blood,
but as it is an outlet to sin, and an inlet to Righteousness, it is the
Christians great and inexpressible Privilege, and give me leave to say this,
that there is something in a Christian Condition, that can never put him
without the reach of insufferableness, even shame, death, and the Cross b^ing
included.

And then if there be peace betwixt God and the Soul, nothing can damp peace
with Go^ through our Lord Jesus Christ, this is a most supporting ingredient in
the bitterest Cup, and under the sharpest, and firiest Trial he can be exposed
unto, thi^ is my mercy, that I have something of this to lay Claim unto, viz.
The intimations of Pardon, and Peace betwixt God and my Soul.

And as concerning that, for which I am condemned, I Magnify his grace, that I
never had the least challenge for it, but on the contrary, I Judge it my
Honor, that ever I was counted worthy to come upon the Stage upon such a
consideration; another thing that renders the most despicable Lot of the
Christian, and mine sufferable, is a felt and sensible presence from the Lord,
strengthening the Soul when most put to it, and if I could have this for my
Allowance this day, I could be bold to say; O death where is thy sting! and
could not but cry out Welcome to it, and all that follows upon it: I grant the
Lord from an act of Sovereignty may come, and go as he pleases, but yet he will
never forsake his people, and this is a Cordial to me in the Case I am now
exposed unto.

Thirdly, The exercising and putting forth his glorious Power, is able to
Transport the Soul of the Believer, and mine, above the reach of all sublunary
Difficulties, and therefore seeing I have hope to be kept up by this power, I
would not have you to look upon my Lot, or any other that is or may be in my
C^se, in the least deplorable, seeing we have ground to believe, that in more
or less he will perfect his Power and Strength in Weakness.

Fourthly, That I may come a little nearer to the purpose in hand, I declare
before you all, in the sight of God, Angels and Men, and in the sight of that
Son and all that he has Created, that I am a most miserable Sinner, in regard
of my Original and Actual Transgressions. I must confess they are more in
number than the Hairs of my Head. They are gone up above my Head, and are past
numbering; I cannot but say as Jacob said, I am less than the least of all God's
Mercies, yet I must declare to the exalting of his Free Grace, That to me who
am the least of all Saints is this Grace made known, and that by a strong hand,
and I dare not but say, he has loved me, and washed me in his own Blood from
all Iniquities, and well is it for me this day, That ever I heard or read that
faithful saying; that Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners, of whom
I am chief.

Fifthly, I must also declare in his sight, I am the most unworthiest that ever
opened his mouth to preach the unsearchable Riches of Christ in the Gospel.
Yea, the sense of this made me altogether unwilling to fall about so great a
Work, until by the importunity of some, whose Names are precious and savoury to
me and many others, I was prevailed with to fall about it, and yet I am
hopeful, not altogether without some fruit; and if I durst say it without
Vanity, I never found so much of the presence of God upon my Spirit, as I have
found in Exercises of that Nature, though I must still confess attended with
inexpressible Weakness, and this is the main thing for which I must lay down my
Tabernacle this day, viz. That I did preach Christ and the Gospel in several
places of this Nation; for which I bless him (as I can) That ever such a poor
obscure person as I am, have been thus privileged by him, for making mention
of his Grace as I was able.

In the next place, though to many I die desired, yet I know, to not a few my
Death is not desired, and it is the rejoicing of my heart, that I die in the
Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has loved me, and given himself for me, and
in the Faith of the Prophets and Apostles, and in this Faith of there is not a
Name under Heaven by which Men can be saved, but the Name of Jesus, and in the
Faith of the Doctrine and Worship of the Kirk of Scotland, as it is now
established according to the Word of God, Confession of Faith, Catechisms
larger and shorter, and likewise I join my Testimony against Popery, Perjury,
Profanity, Heresy, and everything contrary to found Doctrine.

In the Close, as a dying Person, and as one who has obtained mercy of the Lord
to be faithful, I would humbly leave it upon godly Ministers to be faithful for
their Lord and Master, and not to hold their peace in such a day, when so many
way^ are taken for injuring of him, his N^me, Way, Sanctuary, Ordinances, Crown
and Kingdom, I hope there will be found a party in this Land, that will
continue for him, and his Matters, in all Hazzards, and as faithfulnes^ ^s
called for in Ministers, so Professors would concern themselves that they
Countenance not, nor abet any thing inconsistent with former Principles and
Practices. Let the Land consider how Neutral and Indifferent we are grown in
the Matters of God, even like Ephrai^ long ago, a Cake not turned.

As concerning that which is the ground of my Death, viz. Preaching here and
there in some Corners; I bless my God. I have not the leas^ Challenge for it;
and though those that condemned me are pleased to call such Preachings
Rendezvouses of Rebellion, yet I must say this of them, they were so far from
being reputed such in my Eyes, that if ever Christ had a People, or Party,
wherein his Soul took pleasure, I am bold to say, these Meetings were a great
part of them; the Shining and Glory of God was eminently seen amongst these
Meetings, the convincing Power and Authority of our Lord went out with his
Servants in those blasphemously nick-nam'd Conventicles: This, I say, without
Reflection upon any; I have a word to say farther, that God is calling Persons
to Repentance, and to do their first Work: O that Scotland were a mourning
Land, and that Reformation were our Practice, according as we are sworn in the
Covenant.

Again, that Christians of Grace and Experience would study more streightness
and stability in this day, when so many are turning to the right hand, and many
to the left; he that endures to the end shall be saved; he has appointed the
Kingdom for such as continue with him in his Temptations.

Next, if ever you expect to h^ve the Form of the House showed you in all the
Laws thereof, goings out thereof, and comings in thereof; then think it no
shame to take shame to you for all that has been done, sitting down on this
side Jordan, is like to be our Bane. Oh! when shall we get up and run after
him, till he bring us into the promised Land, let us up and after him with all
our heart, and never rest till he return.

I recommend my Wife and young one to the care and faithfulness of the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; the God that has fed me to this day, and who is the
God of my Salvation, their God and my God, their Father and my Father, I am
also hopeful, that Christians, Friends and Relations, will not be unmindful of
them when I am gone.

Lastly, I do further bear my Testimony to the Cross of Christ, and bless him
that ever he counted me worthy to appear for him in such a lot as this: Glory
to him that ever I heard tell of him, and that ever he fell upon such a method
of dealing with me as this; and therefore let none that loves Christ and his
Righteous Cause be offended in me.

And as I have lived in the Faith of thi^, that the three Kingdoms are married
Lands, so I die in the Faith of it, that there will be a Resurrection of his
Name, Word, Cause, and of all his Interest therein, though I dare not determine
the time when, nor the manner how, but leave all these things to the infinitely
wise God, who has done, and will do all things well. Oh that he would return to
this Land again, to repair our Breaches, and take away our Backsliding, and
appear for his Work: Oh that he were pacified toward us: Oh that he would pass
by Scotland once again, and make our time a time of Love, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. Himself hasten it in his own time and way. The Lord is my light and
life, my joy, my song, and my salvation; the God of his chosen be my Mercy this
day, and the enriching comforts of the holy Ghost keep up and carry me fair
through, to the Glory of his Grace, the, Edification of his People, and my own
eternal Advantage. Amen.

Sic Subscrib. JOHN KID.
August 14 th. 1679. Tolbooth, Ante horam Septimam. Thus Reader, having given
thee a faithful Account of the Behavior and Dying Speeches of the most Eminent
Persons who suffered in Scotland, I shall return again for London, where the
last Person of Quality that suffered, was the Duke of Monmouth, whose
Expedition and sufferings, etc. you have in the following Pages.



JAMES Duke of Monmouth.
THe last Person with whom we shall conclude this mournful Tragedy, and the
greatest in it, is the late James D. of Monmouth; one indeed, who, if he had
been a little less, might have been at this time one of the greatest men both
in England and the World. By reason of some passages in his Life, not so
defensible; 'twas thought, at first, better to draw a veil before that
unfortunate Prince, and say nothing at all of him. But what allowances are made
for Custom and Education, God only knows. I remember a shrewd Answer given to
an Objection of this Nature, Where, said one, should he learn any better? But
however, where there has been any time to think soberly of past actions, or
none of that nature reiterated, Charity is obliged to judge favorably. And
besides, the good West-Country-men would be very angry if they should not find
their Master that they loved so well, and suffered so much for, among the rest
of these noble Hero's. None can deny but he was a great General, a Man of
Courage and Conduct, and great Personal Valor, having signalized himself both
at Mons and Maestricht; so as to gain an high and just reputation. He was all
along true and firm to the Protestant Interest in and out of Parliament, tho
abhorring any base way of promoting it, as well as his Friend my L. Russel.
This intended as a Character rather, or very short Compendium, than any History
of his Life. He was all along the Peoples Darling, whose hearts were entirely
his by his Courtesy and Affability, as other Persons lo^^ 'em by their
sourness and haughty pride. After Russel's death he went into Flanders, whence
had he prosecuted his D^sign, and gone as it is said he intended, into the
Emperor's Service, how many Laurels might he have won, and how many more would
now have been growing for him? But his Fate was otherwise -- he came over into
England, an exact account of whose Enterprise another place of this Book
presents you, as 'twas compiled by one present in all that action. After the
defeat of his Army at Sedgemoor, he fled with my L Gray, who was first taken,
and he himself a little after brought up to London, and on his Attainder, in
Parliament, beheaded on Tower Hill. It Is said, a certain brave old Officer, who
then came over with him, and since with the Prince, offered with a small of
party of Horse, to have ventured through all the Guards, and took him off the
Scaffold. But they could not be got together; his time was come. Providence had
designed other things, that our deliverance should be more just, an^ peaceable,
and wonderful, and that the glory thereof should be reserved for their Sacred
Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, Whom God grant long to Reign.

The thing I shall in the next place do, that I may leave out nothing material
relating to the Western Affair, is to insert the late Duke of Monmouth's
Declaration, as it was taken from a Copy printed in Holland the Year 1685.

The Declaration of James Duke of Monmouth, and the Noblemen, Gentlemen, and
others, now in Arms for the Defense and Vindication of the Protestant Religion,
and the Laws, Rights and Privileges of England.
AS Government was Originally instituted by God, and this or that Form of it
chosen and submitted to by Men, for the Peace, Happiness and Security of the
Governed, and not for the private Interest and personal Greatness of those that
Rule: So That Government has always been esteemed the best, where the Supreme
Magistrates have been invested with all the Power and Prerogatives, that might
capacitate them, not only to preserve the People from Violence and Oppression,
but to promote their Prosperity; And yet where nothing was to belong to them by
the Rules of the Constitution, that might enable them to injure and oppress
them. And it has been the Glory of England above most other Nations, that the
Prince had all entrusted with him that was necessary, either for the advancing
the Welfare of the People, or for his own Protection in the discharge of his
Office; And withal stood so limited and restrained by the Fundamental Terms of
the Constitution, that without a Violation of his own Oath, as well as the
rules and measures of the Government, he could do them no hurt, or exercise any
act of Authority, but through the administration of such hands as stood
obnoxious to be punished, in case they transgressed: So that according to the
Primitive Frame of the Government, the Prerogatives of the Crown, and the
Privileges of the Subject, are so far from justling one another, that the
Rights reserved unto the People, tended to render the King Honorable and
Great, and the Prerogatives settled on the Prince were in order to the Subjects
Protection and Safety. But all humane things being Subject to perversion as
well as decay, it has been the fate of the English Government to be often
changed* and wrested from what it was in the first settlement and institution.
And we are particularly compelled to say, that all the boundaries of the
Government have of late been broken, and nothing left unattempted for turning
our limited Monarchy into an absolute Tyranny. For such has been the
transaction of Affairs within this Nation for several years last past, that
though the Protestant Religion and Liberties of the People were fenced and
hedged about by as many Laws as the Wisdom of man could devise for their
Preservation against Popery and Arbitrary Power, our Religion has been all
along countermined by Popish Counsels, and our Privileges ravished from us by
Fraud and Violence. And more especially, the whole Course and Series of the
Life of the D. of Y. has been but been one continued Conspiracy against the
Reformed Religion and the Rights of the Nation. For whosoever considers his
contriving the Burning of London, his instigating a Confederacy with France,
and a War with Holland, his fomenting the Popish Plot, and encouraging the
Murder of Sir Ed. Godfrey to stifle it; his charging Treason against
Protestants, and suborning Witnesses to swear the Patriots of our Religion and
Liberties out of their Lives, his hireing execrable Villains to Assassinate the
late Earl of Essex, and causing those others to be clandestinely cut off, in
hopes to conceal it, his adviseing and procuring the Prorogation and
Dissolution of Parliaments, in order to prevent their looking into his Crimes,
and that he might escape the justice of the Nation; Such can imagine nothing so
black and horrid in it self, or so ruinous and destructive to Religion and the
Kingdom, which we may not expect from him.

The very Tyrannies which he has exercised since he snatched the Crown from
his Brothers head, do leave none under a possibility of flattering themselves
with hopes of safety, either in their Consciences, Persons, or Estates: For in
in defiance of all the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, made for the security of
the Reformed Protestant Religion, he not only began his Reign with a barefaced
avowing himself of the Romish Religion; but has called in multitudes of
Priests and Jesuits, for whom the Law makes it Treason to come into this
Kingdom; and has empowered them to exercise their Idolatries. And besides his
being daily present at the Worship of the Mass, has pubickly assisted at the
greatest fopperies of their Superstition. Neither has he been more tender in
trampling upon the Laws which concern our Properties, seeing in two
Proclamations, whereof the one requires the Collecting of the Customs, and the
other the continuing that part of the Excise which was to ^xpire with the late
Kings Death; he has violently, and against all the Law of the Land, broken in
upon our Estates. Neither is it any extenuation of his Tyranny, that he is
countenanced in it by an extrajudicial Opinion of seven or eight suborned and
forsworn Judges; but rather declaring the greatness and extent of the
Conspiracy against our Rights, and that there is no means feft for our relief
but by Force of Arms; For advancing those to the Bench that were the scandal of
the Bar, and Constituting those very Men to declare the Laws, who were Accused
and Branded in Parliament for Perverting them, we are precluded all hopes of
Justice in Westminster Hall: And through packing together by False Returns, new
Illegal Charters, and other corrupt means; he does at once deprive us of all
expectations of Succor where our Ancestors were wont to find it; and hopes to
render that which ought to be the Peoples Fence against Tyranny, and the
Conservator of their Liberties, the means of subverting all our Laws, and of
establishing of his Arbitrariness, and confirming our thraldom. So that unless
we could be contented to see the Reformed Protestant Religion, and such as
profess it, extirpated; Popish Superstition and Idolatry established, the Laws
of the Land trampled under foot; the Liberties and Rights of of the English
People Subverted; and all that is Sacred and Civil, or of regard (amongst men
of Virtue or Piety) Violated; and unless we could be willing to be Slaves as
well as Papists, and forget the example of our noble and generous Ancestors,
who conveyed our Privileges to us at the expense of their Blood and Treasure;
and withal be unmindful of our duty to God, our Country and Posterity; deaf to
the Cries and Groans of our oppressed Friends; and be satisfied, not only to
see them and our selves Imprisoned, Robbed, and Murdered, but the Protestant
Interest throughout the whole World betrayed to France and Rome; We are bound
as Men and Christians, and that in discharge of our duty to God and our
Country, and for the satisfaction of the Protestant Nations round about us, to
betake our selves to Arms. Which we take Heaven and Earth to witness, we should
not have done, had not the malice of our Enemies deprive^ us of all other means
of redress; and were not the Miseries that we already feel, and those which do
further threaten us, worse than the Calamities of War. And it is not for any
personal Injuries, or private Discontents, nor in pursuance of any corrupt
Interest, that we take our Swords into our hands; but for vindicating our
Religion, Laws and Rights, and rescuing our Country from Ruin and Destruction,
and for preserving our Selves, Wives and Children, from Bondage and Idolatry.
Wherefore before God, Angels and Men, we stand acquitted from, and do charge
upon our Enemies, all the Slaughter and Devastations that unavoidably accompany
an intestine War

Now therefore we do hereby solemnly declare and proclaim War against J. D. of
Y. as a Murderer, and an Assassinator of innocent Men, a Traitor to the
Nation, and Tyrant over the People. And we would have none that appear under
his Banner to flatter themselves with expectation of Forgiveness, it being our
firm resolution to prosecute him and his Adherents, without giving way to
Treaties or Accommodations, until we have brought him and them to undergo what
the Rules of the Constitution and the Statutes of the Realm, as well as the
Laws of Nature, Scripture and Nations, adjudge to be punishment due to the
Enemies of God, Mankind, their Country, and all things that are honorable,
virtuous and good.

And though we cannot avoid being sensible that too many have, from Cowardice,
Covetousness and Ambition, co-operated to the subverting our Religion, and the
enslaving their Country; yet we would have none from a despair of findin^
Mercy, perservere in their Crimes, nor continue the ruin of the Kingdom: For we
exclude none from the benefit of Repenance, that will join with us in
retreiving that they have been accessory to the loss of; nor do we design
revenge upon any, but the obstinate, and such as shall be found at this
juncture yielding aid and assistance to the said J. D. of Y.

And that we may both govern our selves in the pursuit of this glorious Cause,
wherein we are engaged, and give encouragement to all that shall assist us in
so righteous and necessary an undertaking; we do in the presence of the Lord,
who knows the Secrets of all hearts, and is the avenger of deceit and
falsehood, proclaim and publish what we aim at; and for the obtaining whereof,
we have both determined to venture, and are ready to lay down our Lives. And
though we are not come into the Field to introduce Anarchy and Confusion, or
for laying aside any part of the old English Government; yet our purposes and
resolutions are, to reduce things to that temperament and balance, that future
Rulers may remain able to do all the good that can be either desired or
expected from them, and it may not be in their power to invade the rights and
infringe the Liberties of the People.

And whereas our Religion, the most valuable thing we lay claim unto, has been
shaken by unjust Laws, undermined by Popish Counsels, and is now in danger to
be subverted; We are therefore resolved to spend our Blood for preserving it to
our Selves and Posterity; nor will we lay down our Arms, till we see it
established and secured beyond all probability of being supplanted and
overthrown, and until all the Penal Laws against Protestant Dissenters be
repealed, and legal Provision made against their being disturbed by reason of
their Consciences, and for their enjoying an equal liberty with other
Protestants.

And that the Meekness and Purity of our Principles, and the Moderation and
Righteousness of our End, may appear unto all Men: We do declare, That we will
not make War upon, or destroy any for their Religion, how false and erroneous
soever: So that the very Papists, provided they withdraw from the Tents of our
Enemies, and be not found guilty of conspiring our Destruction, or Abettors of
them, that seek it, have nothing to fear or apprehend from us, except what may
hinder their altering our Laws, and indangering our Persons in the Profession
of the Reformed Doctrine, and Exercise of our Christian Worship.

Our Resolution in the next place is, to maintain all the just Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, and to have Parliaments annually chosen and held,
and not prorogued, dissolved, or discontinued, within the Year, before
Petitions be first answered, and Grievances redressed.

And seeing many of the Miseries, under which the Nation does groan, arise from
displacing such out of the number of Judges, as would not, for promoting Popish
and Arbitrary Designs, wrest and misapply the Laws; and from constituting
corrupt and mercenary Men in their Rooms, on purpose to stretch the Laws beyond
the reason and intention of them, and to declare that for Law which is not: We
can neither with silence pass over the mentioning of them, nor should we have
peace in our selves, if we did not endeavor to prevent the like mischief in
time to come. For by reason of ill Men's being advanced to the Bench, and
holding their Places only durante been placito, many Persons have been
condemned in exorbitant Fines for no Crimes, or for very small ones: Many
Statutes made for the safety of the Subject, particularly the Habeas Corpus
Act, have been wickedly eluded to the oppression of the Innocent and Loyal Men.
The Popish Lords that were impeached in Parliament, for a most hellish
Conspiracy, have, to the subverting the Rights of the House of Commons, and
trampling on the Rights of the House of Lords, been discharged and se^ free.
The imposing a Mayor and Sheriff upon the City of London by Fraud and Violence,
have been justified, and those who in discharge of their Duty opposed it,
illegally prosecuted, and arbitrarily punished. London, and other Cities and
Corporations, have been robbed of their Charters, upon unrighteous Judgments of
pretended Forfeitures. Sir Thomas Armstrong executed without being allowed the
benefit of a Trial: Coll. Algernoon Sidney condemned to die, upon the
Deposition of one scandalous Witness: And that Loyal and Excellent Person, the
late William L. Russel Murdered for alleged Crimes; In reference to which, if
all had been true, which was sworn against him, yet there was nothing which
according to Law could have reached his Life. Upon the Considerations
aforesaid, we further declare, that we will have care taken for the future for
debarring ignorant, sca^dalous and mercenary Men from the Administration of
Justice, and that the Judges shall hold their Places by the ancient Tenure of
quamdiu se been gesserint; and do leave it to the wisdom of a Parliament to
settle some way and method for the approbation of such as shall be advanced to
the Degree and Dignity of Judges.

And for as much as the Invasion made on the Rights of Cities, Buroughs and
Towns Corporate, by the Seizure of their Charters, whether by Surrender or upon
pretense of Fo^feiture, have been wholly Arbitrary and Illegal; we likewise
therefore declare, We will, to our utmost, endeavor to see them repossessed in
what they formerly had and could legally lay claim to, and that we do esteem
all Judgments given against the^, and all Surrenders made by a corrupt and
perju^ed party amongst them, null and void in Law; and do hold and declare
their old Charters, notwithstanding the new ones lately granted, to be good and
valid; And accordingly we do invite and encourage all honest Burgesses and
Freemen to reassume the Rights and Priviledge^, which by virtue of the said Old
Charters belonged to their several and respective Corporations, and to deliver
themselves from those late Parasites and Instruments of Tyranny set up to
oppress them.

Moreover, for the restoring the Kingdom to its Primitive Condition of Freedom
and Safety, we will have the Corporation and Militia Acts repealed, and all
Outlawries of Treason against any person whatsoever, upon the late pretended
Protestant Plot, reversed; and also all other Outlawries, Banishments,
Warrants, Judgments, Imprisonments, and Injurious Proceedings, against any
other persons, upon any of the Penal Statutes made against Protestant
Dissenters, made null and void. And we will have new Laws enacted for placing
the Election of Sheriffs in the Freeholders of the several Counties, for
settling the Militia in the several Shires, and for preventing all Military
standing Forces, except what shall be raised and kept up by Authority and
Consent of Parliament.

And whereas several Gentlemen, and others, who have been worthy and zealous
Asserters of the Protestant Interest, and Laws of the Kingdom, are now in
custody in diverse places within the Realm, upon most unjust Accusations,
Pretenses, Proceedings, and Judgments; we do hereby further declare their said
Imprisonments to be Illegal, and that in case any violence shall be offered to
them, or any of them, we will revenge it to the utmost upon such of our Enemies
as shall fall into our hands.

And whereas the said J. D. of Y. in order to the expediting the Idolatrous and
bloody Designs of the Papists, the gratifying his own boundless Ambition after
a Crown, and to hinder inquiry into the Assassination of Arthur Earl of Essex;
has poisoned the late King, and thereby manifested his Ingratitude as well as
Cruelty to the World, in murdering a Brother who had almost ruined himself to
preserve and protect him from punishment: We do therefore further declare, That
for the aforesaid villainous and unnatural Crime, and other his Crimes before
mentioned, and in pursuance of the resolution of both Houses of Parliament, who
voted to revenge the Kings Death in case he came to an untimely end, we will
prosecute the said J. D. of Y. till we have brought him to suffer what the Law
adjudged to be the punishment of so execrable a Fact.

And in a more particular manner his Grace the Duke of Monmouth being sensible
of the barbarous and horrid Parricide committed upon his Father, does resolve
to pursue the said J. D. of Y. as a mortal and bloody Enemy, and will endeavor
a^ well with his own hand, as by the assistance of his Friends and the Law, to
have Justice executed upon him.

And the said James Duke of Monmouth, the now Head and Captain General of the
Protestant Forces of this Kingdom, assembled for the end aforesaid, from the
generousness of his own Nature, and the love he bears to these Nations, whose
welfare and settlement he infinitely preferrs to whatsoever may concern
himself, does not at present insist upon his ^itle; but leaves the
determination thereof to the Wisdom, Justice and Authority of a Parliament
legally chosen and acting with freedom: And in the mean time does profess and
declare by all that is sacred, that he will, in conjunction with the People of
England, employ all the Abilities bestowed upon him by God and Nature, for the
Reestablishment and Preservation of the Protestant Reformed Religion in these
Kingdoms, and for restoring the Subjects of the same to a free exercise
thereof, in opposition to Popery, and the consequences of it, Tyranny and
Slavery. To the obtaining of which end, he does hereby promise and oblige
himself to the People of England, to consent unto and promote the passing into
Laws all the methods aforesaid; that it may never more be in the power of any
single Person on the Throne, to deprive the Subjects of their Rights, or
subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Government designed for their Preservation.

And whereas, the Nobility, Gentry and Commons of Scotland are now in Arms upon
the like motives and inducements that we are, and in prosecution of Ends
agreeable with ours; We do therefore approve the justice of their Cause,
commend their Zeal and Courage, expecting their, and promising our assistance,
for carrying on that glorious Work we are jointly engaged in; Being obliged,
for avoiding tediousness, to omit the recounting many Oppressions under which
the Kingdom has groaned; and the giving a deduction of the several steps that
have been taken for introducing of Popery and Tyranny: We think fit therefore
to signify, both to our Countrymen and Foreigners, that we intend a larger
Testimony and Remonstrance of the Grievances, Persecutions, Cruelties and
Tyrannies we have of late lain under; and therein a more full and particular
Account of the unparalleled Crimes of the D. of Y. And we make our Appeal unto
God, and all Protestant Kings, Princes, States and Peoples, concerning the
Justice of our Cause, and the necessity we are reduced unto of having our
recourse to Arms. And as we do beseech, require and adjure all sincere
Protestants and true English men to be assisting to us against the Enemies of
the Gospel, Rights of the Nation, and Liberties of Mankind: So we are confident
of obtaining the utmost Aid and Succor which they can yield us, with their
Prayers, Persons and Estates, for the dethroning the said Tyrant, etc. Nor do
we doubt being justified, countenanced and assisted by all Protestant Kings,
Princes and Commonwealths who either regard the Gospel of Jesus Christ, or
their own Interest: And above all, our dependence and trust is upon the Lord of
Hosts, in whose name we go forth, and to whom we commit out Cause, and refer
the Decision betwixt us and our Enemies in the day of Battle. Now let us play
the Men for our People, and for the Cities of our God, and the Lord do that
which seems good unto him.

Thus Reader I have given you a Copy of the Duke of Monmouth's Declaration
(which was dispersed in the West of England in the year 1685.) But it not being
the part of an Historian, to make Remarks, I have satisfied my self, with
barely inserting it, leaving every Reader to make what Reflections on it he
thinks fit.

What follows concerning the late Lord Jefferys, should have been printed in
his Life, next to the word Bribed in page 19 but was there Omitted.
JEffreys prosecuted Mr. Baxter for his Paraphrase upon the New Testament, and
sent him to Prison; he coming out by an Habeas Corpus, was fain to abscond in
the Country (in constant pain) till the Term. Then his often Waitings at the Bar
(where he could not stand) and then to be ragingly treated by Jeffreys and
Withins, and called Rogue and Knave, and not suf^ered to speak one word of
Answer for himself, and his Counsel being reviled that offered to speak for
him, was far harder to him, than his Imprisonment. And then going from the Bar,
he only said, That his Predecessor thought otherwise of him. Jeffrys replied,
There was not an honest Man in England that took him not for a Knave, not
excepting the King that had given him another Testimony in Words.

In the next page follows An Abstract of Monmouth's true Speech.
A brief Abstract of his true Speech.
I Repent in general of all my Sins, and am more particularly concerned for
what blood has been spilt on my Account, and the rather seeing the Issue is
such as I fear will prove of fatal consequence to the Reformed Protestant
Religion.

Instead of being counted Factious and Rebellious, the very opposing of Popery
and Arbitrary Power, now arising and appearing plain enough, would sufficiently
have protected my Cause; besides, several other most heinous and notorious
Crimes (such as the unhappy Fate of the Earl of Essex, and my Father of ever
blessed Memory, and others now covered over with Jesuitical Policy) should have
been detected and avenged.

I have lived, and shall now die in the Faith of this that God will work a
Deliverance for his People, and then will be discovered the great and horrid
and scarcely to be paralleled Villainies our Enemies have been guilty of; but
now you see my case is desperate, yet know that I die a Martyr for the People,
and shall rather pity the State, that their false and covetous Minds have
brought themselves and me to; then discover who are the Persons concerned in my
overthrow, and I heartily forgive all that have wronged me, even those that
have been instrumental in my Fall, earnestly praying for their Souls.

And I hope King James will show himself to be of his Brothers Blood, and
extend his mercy to my Children, even as he was wont to his greatest Enemies,
they being not capable to act, and therefore not conscious of any Offense
against the Government.

His ELEGY.
COme Mortals, come, now set your selves to weep,
Is not your glorious M -- gone to sleep?
Send us some Tears, you Indians, from your Shore,
For it is our Grief that we can mourn no more.
We want some Mourners from the utmost Coast
Of all the Earth, that Grief may not be lost.
When Britain has set down and mourned her fill,
She ought to send for other Mourners still:
Created Things, come set your selves to mourn,
Since lovely M -- from the World is torn.
Should you not Mourn, and tell your Children so,
That Ages hence may mourn and sorrow too,
'Cause we have lost so great a good as this,
Who was our Flower and mourning Europe's Bliss?
The Sun did mourn the morning of that Day,
And with the Clouds of Darkness did array
His glorious Face, that Mortals might not see
His Royal Rays, while they did murder thee.
O Lovely Mon -- Glory of our Land,
Who for God's Word did like a Pillar stand.
All things, but Devils, seemed then to weep,
Nor could the Earth almost in silence keep?
Methought all Joy would vanish from the Earth,
And pleasantness would stop with Mon -- 's Breath.
Methought the Sun might now be angry grown,
And would no more on Earth be seen or known.
We feared the Heavens now disturbed were,
And for the Earth would take no further care.
All good Men grieved to see that fatal Blow,
Whilst Floods of Tears did from the Heavens flow.
But that black Blow, instead of proving three,
Like Russel's Fate, Five Bloody Strokes they see.
Ye Ages all, let this recorded be,
And let all Mankind M -- mourn for thee.
Could we but draw those blessed Looks of his,
As when we saw him walking hence to Bliss,
When from the Tower he did the Hill ascend,
Where Troops of Angels did his Soul attend:
One would have thought to see him in that throng,
That he to Bliss already did belong.
His Countenance all others did outshine,
And made his very Foes to Grief incline.
No sooner was his Soul arrived in Bliss,
Where he received a better Crown for this;
But Phoebus and the Earth began to shine,
And pleasant Looks toward us do incline.
The Clouds and Tears were wiped from Heavens face,
And glorious Brightness did again take place.
Now ^appy Soul we leave thee to thy rest,
To live, in Joys that cannot be expressed.
ARgile and the Duke of Monmouth being now both safe in their Graves, King
James was so pufft up with a petty Victory over a few Clubmen, and so wrapped up
with a Conceit, that he had now conquered the whole Nation (so that now
believing himself impregnable) he resolves to be revenged upon the Western
People for siding with his Capital Enemy Monmouth, and to that purpose, sends
down his Executioner in Ordinary Jeffryes, not to decimate according to the
Heathen way of Mercy, but with the B^som of his Cruelties, to sweep the Country
before him, and to depopulate instead of punishment, at what time Acquaintance
or Relation of any that fell in the Field, with a slender Circumstance tacked
to either, was a Crime sufficient for the Extirpation of the Family. And young
and old were hanged by Clusters, as if the Chief Justice had designed to raise
the Price of Halters; besides the great number of those that upon bare
suspicion were transported Beyond Sea, and there sold for Slaves; and the
purchase Mon^ given away to satisfy the Hunger of needy Papists. -- After Ages
will read with Astonishment the barbarous Usage of those poor People; of which
among many instances this one may seem sufficient, whereby to take the
Dimensions of all the rest: That when the Sister of the two Hewlings hung upon
the Chief Justices Coach, imploring Mercy on the behalf of her Brothers, the
merciless Judge to make her let go, caused his Coachman to cut her hands and
fingers with the Lash of his Whip. Nor would he allow the Respite of the
Execution but for two days, though the Sister with Tears in her Eyes offered a
hundred pound for so small a Favor. And whoever sheltered any of those forlorn
Creatures, were hurried to the Slaughterhouse with the same inexcrable
Outrage, without any consideration either of Age or Sex; witness the Execution
of the Lady Lisle at Winchester. As for Argil^ and the Duke, though they might
die pityed, yet in regard they had declared open Hostility, it was no more than
they were to expect upon ill Success.

We shall now, to complete our Western Martyrology, (and that we may not be too
tedious) proceed to give the particular Cases of those that were Condemned and
Executed in the West, with their Christian Behavior and Dying Speeches, as
their plain Country Friends have preserved 'em.

The Dying Speech and Behavior of Mr. Matthew. Bragg.
AND we being with Mr. Matthew Bragg, who was a Gentleman, and descended from
an ancient and good Family; he was bred an Attorney, in which he practiced the
Law: His Case being this, He happened to be upon the Road riding home to his
House, being come from a Gentleman's House for whom he kept Courts. He, as
before, being met with by a Party of Horse belonging to the Duke of Monmouth,
who were going to search the House of a Roman Catholic for Arms, who lived two
or three Miles from the place they met him, they required him to go with them,
and show them the way, he knowing the Country better than they did; he desired
to be excused, telling them, It was none of his business, and besides had no
Arms. But hi^ Excuses signified nothing, they forced him amongst them, where
they went; when being come, a Party entered the House and searched it: Mr. Bragg
never dismounted, they being then satisfied, took him along with them to Chard,
where then the Duke of Monmouth was. Being there, after having set up his Horse
where he used to do, often having occasion there, he was much tampered with to
engage in the Design, but he refused it, but the next morning made haste out of
Town, not seeing the Duke at all; calling for his Horse it was told him, That
it was seized for the Duke's Service. So then he took his Cane and Gloves, and
walked to his own House, which was about five or six Miles, and was no more
concerned in the Affair, than that after the Duke's Defeat at
Kings-Sedge-Moore, some busy person informs, and requires a Warrant from a
Justice of Peace for the said Mr. Bragg, who obliged himself to enter into a
Recognizance to appear at the next Assizes, the said Justice accounting the
matter in it self but trivial; and indeed all Men did judge him out of danger.
At Dorchester he appeared in Court to discharge his Bail, on which he was
presently Committed, and the next day being Arraigned, pleading Not guilty, put
himself on the Trial of God and his Country, which found him and 28 more of 30,
Guilty; the Lord Chief Justice often saying, If any Lawyer or Person came under
his Inspection, they should not escape; the Evidence against him was the Roman
Catholic, whose House was searched, and a woman of ill Fame, to whom the Lord
Chief Justice was wonderfully kind; but his Evidence which were more than
Twenty, to prove his Innocence, signified nothing; the Jury being well
instructed by my Lord Chief Justice. Being thus found Guilty, Sentence was
presently pronounced, and Execution awarded, notwithstanding all the Interest
that was made for him, as before recited.

Thus being Condemned on Saturday, and ordered to be Executed on Monday, he
spent the Residue of his little time very devoutly, and much becoming a good
Christian, and a true Protestant of the Church of England, all which availed
nothing with this Protestant Judge: he was frequently visited by a worthy
Divine of the Church of England, who spent much time with him, and received
great satisfaction from him. The said Divine told me, That his Deportment,
Behavior and Converse was so much like an extraordinary Christian, that he
could not in the least doubt but this violent passage would put him into the
fruition of happiness. He wished and desired a little longer time, out of no
other design, but thoroughly to repent him of his Sins, and make himself more
sensible of, and fit for to receive the Inheritance that is prepared for those
that continue in well-doing to the end. When he came to the place of Execution
with great Courage and Resolution, being, as he said, prepared for Death, He
behaved himself very gravely and devoutly. Being asked, when he was on the
Ladder, Whether he was not sorry for his being concerned in the Rebellion? He
replied, That he knew of none that he was Guilty of; and prayed them not to
trouble him; adding, He was not the first that was martyred; he was so much a
Christian as to forgive his Enemies. And after some private Devotions he
suddenly was Translated, as we have all hopes to believe, from Earth to Heaven.
The only Favor of this Protestant Judge, was to give his Body to his Friends,
in order to its Interment amongst his Ancestors.

The Behavior of Mr. Smith Constable of Chardstock.
ANother eminent Person that suffered with him at the same time and place, was
one Mr. Smith, who was Constable of Chardstock, who having some Moneys in his
hands that belonged to the Militia, which came to the knowledge of some of the
Dukes Friends, they obliged him to deliver it to them, which he was forced to
deliver; and for this was Indicted for High T^eason, in assisting the Duke of
Monmouth. To which he pleaded Not Guilty. The Evidence against him were the
same with those that had been against Mr. Bragg. The said Mr. Smith informed
the Court and the Jury, what little Credit ought to be given to the Evidence.
The Lord Chief Justice thundered at him, saying, Thou Villain, methinks I see
thee already with a Halter about thy Neck; thou impudent Rebel, to challenge
these Evidences that are for the King. To which the Prisoner replied very
boldly, My Lord, I now see which way I am going, and right or wrong I must die;
but this I comfort my self with, That your Lordship can only destroy my Body;
it is out of your Power to touch my Soul. God forgive your rashness; pray, my
Lord, know it is not a small matter you are about, the Blood of man is more
precious than the whole World. And then was stopped from saying any more. The
Evidences being heard, a strict Charge was given the Jury about him. To be
short, the Jury brought him in Guilty; so that he with the rest received the
Sentence of Death all together, and were Executed on Monday; but by particular
order from my Lord, he was ordered to be first Executed. The day being come for
Execution, being Monday, he with a Courage undaunted, was brought to the Place,
where with Christian Exhortations to his Brethren that suffered with him, he
was ordered to prepare, being the first to be executed, where he spoke as
follows: Christian Friends, I am now as you see lanching into Eternity; so
that it may be expected I should speak something, before I leave this miserable
World, and pass through those Sufferings, which are dreadful to Flesh and
Blood; which indeed shall be but little, because I long to be before a just
judge, where I must give an account, not only for the occasion of my Sufferings
now, but for Sins long unrepented of, which indeed has brought me to this
dismal place and shameful Death. And truly, dear Countrymen, having ransacked
my Soul, I cannot find my small concern with the Duke of Monmouth, does deserve
this heavy Judgment on me; but I know, as I said before, it is for Sins long
unrepented of; I die in Charity with all men; I desire all of you to bear me
witness, I die a true Professor of the Church of England; beseeching the Lord
still to stand up in the defense of it. God forgive my passionate Judges, and
cruel and hasty Jury; God forgive them, they know not what they have done. God
bless the King; and though his Judges had no mercy on me, I wish he may find
Mercy when he stands most in need of it: Make him, O Lord, a nursing Father
to the Church; let Mercy flow abundantly from him, if it be thy will, to those
poor Prisoners, to be hereafter tried; and Lord, if it be thy holy Will, stop
this issue of Christian Blood, and let my guiltless Blood be the last spilt on
this account. Gentlemen, all farewell, farewell all the things of the World: Then
singing some few Verses of a Psalm, and putting up some private Ejaculations to
himself, said, O Lord, into thy hands I commend my Spirit, and so submitted to
the Executioner, Sept. 7. 1685.

The Behavior and Dying Speech of Mr. Joseph Speed of Culliton.
AT the same time and place, as he came near the place of his Execution, he
spying his Countryman and Friend, called him, and said, I am glad to see you
here now, because I am not known in these parts; being answered by his Friend,
I am sorry to see you in this Condition: He replies, It is the best day I ever
saw; I thank God, I have not led my Life as Unchristian-like as many have done,
having since the years of 16 always had the Checks of Conscience on me, which
made me to avoid many gross and grievous Sins, my course of Life has been well
known to you, yet I cannot justify my self; all Men err. I have not been the
least of Sinners, therefore cannot excuse my self; but since my confinement, I
have received so great comfort, in some assurance of the Pardon of my Sins,
that I can now say, I am willing to die, to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, and say to Death, Where is thy Sting? and to Grave, Where is thy
Victory? Being asked by some rude Soldiers, Whether he was not sorry for the
Rebellion he was found guilty of? He courageously replied. If you call it a
Rebellion, I assure you I had no sinister ends in being concerned; for my whole
design in taking up Arms under the D. of M. was to Fight for the Protestant
Religion, which my own Conscience dictated me to, and which the said Duke
Declared for, and had, I think, a lawful Call and Warrant for so doing, and do
not question, that if I have committed any sin in it, but that it is pardoned:
Pray, Mr. Sheriff, let me be troubled no farther in answering of Questions, but
give me leave to prepare my self (those few minutes I have left) for another
World, and go to my Jesus, who is ready to receive me: Then calling to his
Friend, who stood very near him, said, My dear Friend, you know I have a dear
Wife and Children, who will find me wanting, being somewhat encumbered in the
World, let me desire you as a Dying Man to see that she be not abused; and as
for my poor Children, I hope the Father of Heaven will take care of them, and
give them Grace to be dutiful to their Distressed Mother; and so with my dying
Love to all my Friends, when you see them, I take leave of you, and them, and
all the World, desiring your Christian Prayers for me to the last moment; then
repeating some Sentences of Scripture, as, Colossians, chap. 3. v. 1, 2. If you
then, etc. and praying very fervently, said, I thank God I have satisfaction; I
am ready and willing to suffer shame for his Name: And so pouring forth some
private Ejaculations to himself, and lifting up his hands, the Executioner did
his Office: The Soldiers then present, said, They never before were so taken
with a Dying M^n's Speech; his Courage and Christian-like Resolution, caused
many violent Men against the Prisoners, to repent of their Tyranny toward
them; some of whom in a short time died full of horror: And thus fell this good
Man, a true Protestant, and one that held out to the end.

An account of those that suffered at Bridport and Lime.
AT Bridport one John Spark, who was a very good Man, and behaved himself with
a great deal of Christian-like Courage to the end: His Speech and his
Devotions, etc. must be omitted, not being possible to take them, by reason of
the rudeness, etc. and the shortness of the time allowed him by the Soldiers.

Next place was Lime, where many of Note died Particularly, Col. Holmes, who
was the first of those there executed, near the same place where they landed,
when they came ashore with the Duke of M. Being brought to the place after some
difficulty; for the Horses that were first put into the Sledge would not stir,
which oblige-those concerned to get others, which they did from the Coachman,
who had that morning brought them to Town; when they were put into the Sledge,
they broke it in pieces, which caused the Prisoners to go on foot to the place
of Execution; where being come, as I told you before, the Colonel began thus at
the foot of the Ladder; he sa^ down with an Aspect altogether void of Fear, but
on the contrary with a kind of smiling Countenance, so began to speak to the
spectators to this purpose, That he would give them an account of his first
undertaking in the design, which was long before in London; for there be agreed
to stand by and assist the D. of M. when opportunity offered; in order to which
he went to Holland with him, and there continued, until this Expedition, in
which God had thought fit to frustrate his and other good Men's Expectations: He
believed the Protestant Religion was bleeding, and in a step toward
Extirpation, and therefore he with these his Brethren, that were to suffer with
him, and Thousands more had adventured their Lives and their All to save it;
but God Almighty had not appointed 'em to be the Instruments in so glorious a
Work; yet notwithstanding he did verily believe, and doubted not, but that God
would make use of others, that should meet with better success, tho the way or
means was not yet visible, but of this he did not doubt: He also was satisfied
of the D's Title, so that matter did not afflict him on account of his engaging
on his Score: And going on further with a Discourse of this nature, he was
asked by a Person, Why he did not pray for the King? He with a smiling
Countenance answered, I am sorry you do not yet understand the difference
between Speaking and Praying: And having ended his Discourse, he then prepared
himself by Prayer for his Dissolution, which was very devout and pious for half
an hour; which was as follows.

Colonel Holme's Last Prayer.
MOst glorious, most great, and most merciful God, there is none in Heaven or
in Earth that is like unto thee; Heaven is thy Throne, and the Earth is thy
Footstool; who shall say unto thee, What do thou? Here we are poor
deplorable Creatures come to offer up our last Prayers, and Services unto thee;
we beseech thy favorable Ear to our Prayers, and the comfort of thy holy
Spirit, at this time; we praise and magnify thy name, for all the
Dispensations of thy Providence toward us, especially for this thy Providence,
in bringing us to this place and at this time to suffer shame for thy Name:
Help and assist all of us to submit to thy Will patiently. Pardon all our sins,
remove them out of thy presence as far as the East is from the West, and accept
of us in the merits of thy Son Jesus Christ; thou who art the Searcher of
Hearts, and Try^r of Reins, let there not at the moment of Death be the least
spark of sin indwelling in us, nor the strivings of Flesh and Blood, that may
hinder us from a joyful passage unto thee: Give us patience also under these
Sufferings, and a deliverance to all others from undergoing them, and in thy
good time work a deliverance for poor England, let thy Gospel yet flourish
among them, hasten the downfall of Antichrist, we trust the time is come;
Prevent, O Lord, this effusion of Christian Blood; and if it be thy will, let
this be the last; Lord, bless this Town, let them from the highest to the
lowest set the fear of God before their Eyes: Bless all sorts and conditions of
Men in all Ranks and Qualities, pardon all their sins, give them all true
Repentance, and the Grace of thy Holy Spirit; fit and prepare us for the
cheerful fulfilling of thy Holy Will; let the Comforter be still with us; be
merciful to all our Friends, and Relations, and Acquaintance; forgive our
Enemies, accept of our thankfulness for all the Mercies and Favors afforded
us, and hear and graciously answer us in these our Requests, and what else thou
know needful and expedient for us, and all for our Redeemer the Lord Jesus
Christ his sake; who died for us, that we might Reign with him for ever and
ever; to whom with thee and thy blessed Spirit of grace be ascribed, as is most
due, all honor, glory, and praise, both now and for ever.

After having ended his Prayer, he took occasion to speak to his suffering
Brethren, taking a solemn leave of them, encouraging them to hold out to the
end, and not to waver, observing that this being a glorious Sun-shining day, I
doubt not, though our Breakfast be sharp and bitter, it will prepare us, and
make us meet for a comfortable Supper, with our God and Savior, where all sin
and sorrow shall be wiped away; so embracing each of 'em, and kissing of them,
told the Sheriff, You see I am imperfect, only one Arm, I shall want assistance
to help me upon this Tragical Stage; which was presently done, and Execution
suddenly followed.

Now follows the Execution of Mr. Sam. Lark.
MR. Sampson Lark, who was a very eminent, pious man, and had lived in that
Town, but little before; many years he was there well acquainted, and all
People that knew him had a value for him, behaving himself with that Humility
and Circumspection, as no body could have any other occasion but to value him:
He designed to have spoken somewhat on a portion of Sc^ipture, and was
beginning, having mentioned the place he intended to speak upon, but was
interrupted and told the work of the day being great, they should want time, So
then he stopped and replied, He could make application where he should not meet
with interruption: And so applied himself to Prayer, which he performed with
great Devotion and Zeal for a quarter of an hour, to the great satisfaction of
the Auditors; and so taking leave of his suffering Brethren, he mounted the
Stage, which was to be the last Act he made in this World; being on the Ladder,
he saw some of his Friends and Neighbors, weeping and mourning for him, to
whom he spoke, Pray weep not for me, I am going to a place of Bliss and
Happiness, wherefore pray repair to your Houses, and 'ere you get thither, I
doubt not, but I shall be happy with my God and Savior, where all tears shall
be wiped away, and nothing shall remain but Hallelujahs to all Eternity.

There was also Mr. William Hewling of London, a young Gentleman under Twenty,
who came over with the Duke of M. he seemed to be in a calm, and composed frame
of Spirit, and with a great deal of Courage and Seriousness, he behaved
himself. There is already something said of his Converse and Discourse, which
amongst others is printed; therefore we shall say nothing more of him, but that
in all manner of appearance he di'd a good Christian, a true Protestant, and
doubtless now enjoys the benefit of it. There were several worthy men more
there executed, viz. Mr. Christ. Ba^tiscomb, Dr. Temple, Capt. Madders, Capt.
Marthews, Captain Kid, etc. in all Twelve, who all of them died with that
Courage and Resolution as became Christians, and such who eminently had
adventured their Lives and Fortunes, in defense of what was most dear to them;
and namely our Religion, which though God did not think fit to desend and
secure it, yet in his wisdom we hope it will be in some measure secured by
other Instruments, the Glory of the same being only due to him. So that now
leaving this Place, we proceed to other parts of the Country, where with the
like Butchery were only five executed, amongst whom was one Mr. Tailor of
Bristol, who had Command in the Dukes Army, where he behaved himself very
stoutly to the last; after the Army was dispersed, he among others was taken,
received Sentence of Death at Dorchester, and here brought for the completion
of the same, and from thence we hope was translated to Heaven; He spent his
time between the Sentence and Execution very devoutly, in confirming and
strengthening those that were to be his Fellow Sufferers; And made it his
business to bring them to a willingness to submit to, and a preparedness for
Death: The day being come, and he brought to the place of Execution, he thus
spoke, My Friends, You see I am now on the Brink of Eternity, and in a few
Minutes shall be but Clay; You expect I should say something, as is usual in
such Cases; as to the matter of Fact I die for, it does not much trouble me,
knowing to my self the ends for which I engaged with the Duke of M. were both
good and honorable. Here being stopped, and not suffered to proceed further,
he then comforted his Fellow Sufferers, desiring them to join with him in
singing an Hymn, which he himself composed for the occasion as follows.

A HYMN made by Mr. Joseph Tyler, a little before his Execution.
1.
O Lord, how Glorious is thy Grace,
And wondrous large thy Love;
At such a dreadful time and place,
To such as Faithful prove!
2.
If thou will have thy Glory hence,
Though a shameful Death we die,
We bless thee for this Providence,
To all Eternity.
3.
Let these Spectators see thy Grace
In thy poor Servants shine;
While we by Faith behold thy Face,
In that blessed Son of thine.
4.
Though Men our Bodies may abuse,
Christ took our Souls to rest;
Till he brings forth the joyful news,
Ye are my Fathers blessed.
5.
Appear for those that plead thy Cause,
Preserve them in the way,
Who own King Jesus, and his Laws,
And dare not but obey.
6.
O God confound our cruel Foes,
Let Babylon come down;
Let England's King be one of them,
Shall raze her to the ground.
7.
Through Christ we yield our Souls to thee,
Accept us on his Score;
That where he is, there we may be,
To praise thee ever more.
After the Hymn sung he prayed devoutly, for half an hour; after Prayer he gave
great satisfaction to all present of his Assurance of Heaven, had many weeping
Eyes for him, and was much lamented in the Town, though a stranger to the place;
so unbuttoning himself, said to the Executioner, I fear not what Man can do
unto me; I pray thee do thy work in mercy, for I forgive thee with all my
heart, and I also pray to God to forgive thee; don't mangle my Body too much;
and so lifting up his hands to Heaven, the Executioner did his Office. There
was also one William Cox that died with him, who also died very courageously,
despising the shame, in hopes and expectation of a future better Estate. He and
his two Sons were some of the first that came to the Duke of Monmouth, an^ all
taken, and all condemned together: The Father only suffered, the Sons by
Providence were preserved. When he was going to Execution he desired leave to
see his Sons, then in another Prison in the Town, to whom he gave his Blessing;
and though he was going to be Executed, yet had that satisfaction to hope that
God would preserve them, which was so.

Some further Passages relating to Mr. Sampson Lark with his Prayer at the
same time and Place when Executed.
IMme^iately after Colonel Holmes was Executed, this g^od Man was ordered to
prepare to follow; accordingly going to d^liver some few words to the People,
some whereof were formerly of his Congregation, but being told he could not
expec^ much time, because it was so late, and so many to be Executed afte^ him;
so he suddenly concluded and said, I will now speak a few Words to him, which I
am sure will hear me: And so began his Praye^ as follows:

Blessed Lord God, we thine unworthy Creatur^ now here before thee, cannot but
acknowledge from the bottom of our hearts our own unworthiness; we mu^^ confess
we have been grievous sinners, and have broug^^ forth the evil Fruit of it in
our Lives, to the gre^^ dishonor of thy Name, for which we have deserved thy
heavy wrath and indignation to be poured forth upon us, not only in this life,
but in that which is to come.

O let us bless God for our Sufferings and Afflictions; as for our Mercies, we
bless thee in particular for this; O sanctify it to us; let us be effectually
convinced of the vanity of the World, and of our own sinfulness by Nature and
Practice, and to see that to be sin which we never saw before; O Lord, make us
sensible of the absolute necessity of the Righteousness of Christ to justify
us, and let him be now made much more dear and precious to our Souls than ever,
that so we may be wrought into a more heavenly Frame, and raised to a higher
degree of Spirituality, and so made more meek and humble; and let us judge
charitably of others, that differ from us in Opinion and Judgment. And now, O
Lord, though by thy most righteous Judgment we most justly deserve these
Sufferings, and such an ignominious Death, for our Sins against thee, not for
Treasons against the Kingdom, let us be in a preparedness for it. Pardon all
our Sins, help us quietly to submit to thy holy Will; speak peace to all our
Souls. Look in mercy, O Lord, on this poor Nation, especially on this Town, and
every particular Person in it, let them all mind those things which concern
their peace, before they are hid from their eyes. Comfort my dear and
distressed Wife, be a Husband unto her, deliver her out of the Paw of the Lion,
and the Paws of the Bear. Look upon all thy poor afflicted ones, all Prisoners
and Captives, work deliverance for them if thou see it good; but thy Will be
done on Earth as it is in Heaven. And now Lord, with humble meekness and
submission I submit to thy Will, depending upon on the Merits of my Savior, to
whom with thy blessed Self and Spirit be ascribed all Honor and Praise both
now and for ever. Amen.

Then mounting the Ladder, he called to some of the Town who weeped for him,
but were at some distance, Go home to your own Houses, pray do not weep for me,
and before you get up yonder Hill, I shall be with my heavenly Father in
fullness of joy and pleasure for evermore. And so advising those before him to
leave off those cruel Sentiments they had taken of him, besides some heavenly
Discourses with some of his Friends, he was turned off, to the great grief of
the good People of the Town, especially those of his own Congregation. To give
him nothing but his due, he was a man mighty charitable, relieving and visiting
the poor and needy, Preached in season and out of season, and made it his
business to go about doing good, and to put poor Souls in a way for Eternal
Life; he was an old Christian, as well as aged in years; he was a general loss,
especially to his dear and tender Wife: But all our losses are nothing to be
compared to that Glory that he now enjoys.

Mr. Sampson Larke's Letter to a Friend just before his Execution.
MY dear Friend, I am ready to be offered, and the time of my Departure is at
hand; I have through Grace fought a good fight, have finished my course, have
kept the Faith, and am in hopes of the Crown of Righteousness prepared for me,
and all God's faithful Ones: The experiences I have had of the Promises, has
given me comfortable hopes that he will carry me to the full end of my Journey,
with his Name, and that Truth of his, which I have made Profession of. My great
Crime is for my being a Preach^r of the Gospel, and here I am to be made a
Sacrifice, where I have mostly preached Christ 's Gospel. I think my Judges
have devised this punishment for my hurt, but I trust God will turn it to my
good; the great trouble I have, is for those good Hearts that I must leave
behind me: But this is my comfort, knowing that all such as fear God, he will
be a Father to them. My dear Wife is greatly troubled, but through Mercy much
supported, and something quieted; if any of you have opportunity to give her
help, I hope you will do it. As for our confessing our selves Guilty, it was
expressly as to matter of Fact, and not of Form; and this I did with some
freedom, and the rather, because all my worthy Brethren that went before me
took that way, and the many ways having been used to have a further Discovery,
yet nothing of that kind by any but only by Captain Jones. Since our Sentence,
some wretched men have been with us to draw from us a Confession of our being
Rebels, that we might have their Absolution. I bless God, he has hitherto
helped me to be faithful, and I hope he will not leave me in ^he most needful
time. I must conclude, being ready to be called away; my dear Love to all my
Christian Friends, and especially those in the Goal. The Lord be with you all,
Amen. Your dying Friend, in hopes of Eternal Life, through Jesus Christ Amen.

SAMPSON LARK.
From the House of my blessed Bondage in Dorchester, Sept. 7. 1685.
An Account of those Executed at Sherborn.
AT Sherborn, in the same County, were Executed Twelve, who all died
Courageously, especially one Mr. Glisson of Yeovel, in the County of Somerset,
his extraordinary deportment and carriage at the place of Execution, was so
very considerable, as gave great satisfaction to his Friends, and amazement to
his Enemies. He declared to the World that he died a true Protestant, and had
not engaged with the Duke of Monmouth, but judged it high time to stand up for
the Defense of the same, though God Almighty had thought fit to frustrate his
Designs, and to bring him to that place to Seal the same with his Blood. Also
John Savage, and Richard Hall of Culliton, in the County of Devon, suffered at
the same time and place; in their particular Conversation, they valued those
most that they saw most of Piety in, and pitied others that they saw not so
well prepared; saying, that the remembrance of our vanity may cause compassion
toward such as were in such a Condition; exhorting all to be serious, and to
consider their latter end, which deserved the greatest attention of Mind; the
way to die comfortably, being to prepare for it seriously; and if God should
miraculously preserve us from this Death now before our eyes, it should be the
duty of us all to spend the remaining part of our time, in such a manner as
now, when we see Death just at the door. At the hour of Execution their
cheerfulness and comfort was much increased, saying, Now the Will of God will
be done, and be has most certainly chosen that for us which is best; with many
other such like Christian Expressions, too tedious here to be inserted, because
we design to keep to our first Intentions, and not to swell this T^eatise too
big. Upon the whole, after they had with much earnestness recommended their
Souls to the All-wise God by Prayer, they all with much content and
satisfaction, submitted themselves to the Executioner, not doubting of a happy
Translation, and accordingly were executed and quartered; before the rest of
the Executions in this County, as at Weymouth, Pool, Shafton, Wimborne, etc.
not being there, we shall pass over, and only give you particular touches,
which we saw to our perfect knowledge, and so we retu^n to Culliton in the
County of Devon, where John Sprague and William Clegg, both of that Town, were
condemned at Exon, and there brought to be Executed. Before they were brought
into the place, a Messenger came from the Prisoners with a Request to the Vicar
of the Parish, to desire his Company and Assistance in this their Extremity,
and to Administer those spiritual Helps that were suitable to Men in their
Circumstances. Accordingly the said Minister came very readily, and did demand
of them, What they had to desire of him? The dying Persons answered, They
desired his Prayers? Accordingly he prayed with them a considerable space of
time. And after that, he asked of them several Questions, for to give him and
the World satisfaction of the prepared Condition they were in, in order to
their lanching into Eternity, especially about the Doctrine of Non-Resistance.
John Sprague very soberly and moderately replied, but whether satisfactory or
not, we leave to the Reader; He believed that no Christian ought to resist a
lawful Power; but the Case being between Popery and Prostantism, altered the
matter; and the latter being in danger, he believed that it was lawful for him
to do what he did, though God in his Providence had thought fit to bring him to
this place of Execution. After reading a Chapter out of the Corinthians, and
singing a Psalm suitable to the occasion, he very vehemently and fervently
recommended his Soul to the All-wise God by Prayer, for near half an hour, to
the great satisfaction of all that heard him; then his Wife and Children coming
to him weeping bitterly, he embraced them in his Arms, saying, VVeep not for
me, but weep for your selves, and for your sins, for that he had that quiet
satisfaction, that he was only going to be translated into a state of Bliss and
Happiness, where we should sin and sorrow no more, but that all Tears should be
wiped away, wishing them to be diligent in the Service of God. Then
recommending his Wife and Children to the protection of the Almighty God, who
had promised to be a Husband to the VVidow, and a Father to the Fatherless, who
was faithful and able to make up their loss in him, in that which should be
bett^^ for them, than he could be; desiring God to be a Refuge for them to fly
to for security, and preservation from the Troubles that seemed to threaten
this poor Nation; the which if they did conscientiously perform, though Death
here made a separation, he doubted not of meeting them in Heaven at last. And
so the Executioner did his Office. During which time his Brother-sufferer,
William Clegg was all the time on his Knees, praying to himself with a seeming
Zeal; suddenly after which his turn being come to follow his Brother, he only
told the People, That his Fellow-sufferer has spoken what he thought was
necessary, and they were also his Sentiments. And so submitted to Execution.

An Account of those Executed at Axminster and Honiton.
AT Axminster one also was Executed, his Name Mr. Rose, he was a Gunner, that
landed with the Duke of Monmouth, he had a great Resolution, and not at all
started with the fear of Death. He said, That he defied death, and all them
that were the occasion of it. He was very courageous and died so. He spent some
time in private Prayer, and was not allowed time, because there was to be
Execution at Honiton; so that his Execution being over, we past on to Honiton,
where four were executed, one of which was a Chyrurgeon, his Name, if I do not
mistake, was Mr. Pott, who behaved himself with that extraordinary Christian
Courage, that all the Spectators were almost astonished, he being but young,
about Twenty, his Prayers being servent, his Expressions so pithy, and so
becoming a Christian of greater Age, that drew pity and compassion from all
present; a rude Fellow, just before he was to be executed, called for a Bottle
of Wine, and so began the Kings Health to one of the Guard; which he
perceiving, Poor Soul, said he, Your Cup seems to be sweet to you, and you
think mine is bitter; which indeed is so to Flesh and Blood; but yet I have
that assurance of the fruition of a future Estate, that I doubt not but this
bitter Potion will be sweetened with the Sugar of the loving kindness of my
dearest Savior, that I shall be translated into such a State, where is fullness
of Joy and Pleasure for evermore.

Before I conclude, one Mr. Evans a Minister ought not to be omitted, who did
all along in the time of his confinement in Prison, behave himself with that
Devotion and Strictness, that became a Christian of great Eminency, as indeed
he was; he spent much of his time in preaching and praying to his Fellow
Prisoners, exhorting them to hold out to the end; he at last by appointment
being Condemned, was executed by himself; at which time and place he behaved
himself with great Courage and Devotion, and with a great willingness and
cheerfulness, he submitted to Execution. There might have been much more said
of this worthy Man, but because we will keep to our design, shall be omitted.
Many others, who were also very Eminent, suffered in this County, for asserting
and endeavoring to secure the Protestant Religion.

The Case of Mr. Simon Hamling.
THus having finished what we have to say at present, shall only add the Case
of one Mr. Simon Hamling at Taunton, to show that sometimes Innocence will not
protect. Mr. Hamling was formerly an Inhabitant of the place, but of late years
had lived two or three Miles from thence; he was a very honest, worthy, good
Christian, but was a Dissenter, and indeed in the judgment of some fiery men,
that might be Crime enough, as did too sadly appear in diverse Cases. But to our
purpose: Mr. Hamling living in the Country, hearing of the Duke of Monmouth's
being in Town, he there came to speak with his Son, who lived in that place;
where being come, he gave him advice, which was, That as he expected his
Blessing, and Countenance, he should not at all concern himself in the matter,
but submit to the Will of God in all things. And having thus advised his Son,
he returns home; and two days after came again to Town on a Market day with his
Wife, to buy Provisions for his Family, and returned to his House again. And
this was all the times he was in Town, whiles the Duke was there. But after the
Business was over, he was brought in on Suspicion, being a Dissenter, that was
Crime enough, except Coin appeared to a Justice of that Town, who usually did
commit or dismiss as that appeared. This Man was arraigned at Taunton, pleaded
Not guilty. The Matter above is the truth of this Case; the Evidences were two
profligate Rascals, that had encouragement from the Justice, they ^sually doing
what he put them on. The Prisoner had many to prove this Fact, and his Honesty;
but this did not avail, the Jury found him Guilty, with two more, who were
presently Sentenced, and next morning executed for to be Examples to others. It
is said, that the Justice did make application to our famous Protestant Judge,
and hinted some Mistake concerning him. To which, as I have been informed, he
should Reply, You have brought him on, if he be innocent, his Blood be upon
you. Which was a very fine Reply from a merciful Judge; but nothing else could
be expected, as the whole Treatise evinceth: The tender Mercies of the wic^^d
being cruel. This Man behaved himself very worthily at the place of Execution,
and did at the last declare his Crime to be the same as is above mentioned, and
not otherwise. Thus fell this pious Christian; a Man, by all sober People that
knew him, beloved; and disrespected by none but loose Villains, which at last
took away his Life.

There was one Mr. Gatchett executed with him, his Crime, being a Constable of
the Hundred, he was surprised by a Party of the Dukes, and showed a Warrant to
bring in Provisions and other Necessaries for the use of the Army, which if he
had not obeyed, was threatened to have his House burnt, etc. so that he was
obliged to do what he did for his own preservation; but this was not
sufficient, for being found Guilty he was also executed at the same time and
place.

The Case of Mr. Thomas Lawrence.
MR. Thomas Lawrence at Dorchester, had also very hard measure. He had the
managing of an Estate belonging to a Person of Quality, who had a Barn in the
Parish of Lyme, where the Duke landed. The day after his landing, a Party came
and took away three Horses from off this Estate, which he having the trust and
care of, makes application to the Duke for them, adding, That he ought not to
suffer any of his Masters Goods to be wanting, but must endeavor to recover
them again. So moved hard to the Duke for the Horses, but all would not
prevail; but at last had one, and was forced to leave two. This was looked on
as an abetting, being judged to be by consent. After the Defeat was given, he
was had before a Justice of the Peace, who bound him over to the Assizes, where
appearing, he was Committed; Pleaded Not Guilty on his Trial, which he pleaded
to very honestly; yet was found Guilty, and sentenced to die. My Lord was
excellent at Improvement, 'twas thought he would, if possible, have brought in
the Gentleman that owned the Estate, who was very rich. This honest Mr.
Lawrence was to be sacrificed, and his Execution ordered to be at Warham; but
my Lord's Favorite got a Reprieve for him by the help of Four hundred pound.
Two hundred pound being actually paid, the other secured by Bond.

I promised before I conclude, to give some account of the barbarous and cruel
Whippings which were executed on many good, honest, and sufficient Persons,
both Men and Women, in the Counties of Dorset, Devon, and Somerset, by the
severe and cruel Sentence of the Lord Chief Justice; some for such small
Crimes, as an impartial Man may judge they deserved none at all: more
especially one Mr. Stayle of Thorncomb in Devonshire, his Sufferings were so
hard, that it caused many to pity him; he was a good liver, well beloved among
his Neighbors, and a true Protestant. Also one Mrs. Brown of Lyme, suffered
very dear in that nature; she only jokingly said unto the Officer of the
Excise, I will pay, my Excise to King Monmouth; which being sworn before this
severe Ju^ge, she was found Guilty of a Misdemeanor, was sentenced to be whipped
in several Market Towns, which accordingly was done. But this Cruelty was not
only extended to those of riper years, and able better to endure those painful
Sufferings, but even to Children. A poor Boy of Weymouth in the County of
Dorset, having got some Pamphlet relating somewhat to satisfy the People that
the Duke of Monmouth came to secure the Protestant Religion, had the hard
fortune to take his Trial before this harsh Judge; I think he was about ten or
twelve years of Age; he had the flesh of his Back so cut with the whipping,
that I heard he died with the same; but whether he is dead, or not, never was
such Cruelty in all this World, And now we may see how just the Lord is, he
that all that time had no mercy for any, but those that appeared loose
Villains, is pitied but by few.

Capt. Madders last Prayer at the same time and place.
CApt. Madders at the time of the Duke's landing was a Constable at Crewkern,
in the County of Somerset, and so diligent and active for the King in his
Office, that when two Gentlemen of Lyme came there, and brought the News of the
Duke's landing, and desired Horses to ride Post to acquaint his Majesty
therewith, he immediately secured Horses for them, the Town being generally
otherways bent, and assisted them so far as any called Loyal in those times
could do, which was represented to the Lord Chief Justice, in expectation
thereby to save his Life. But an Enquiry being made about his Religion, and
retu^ned by a very worthy Gentleman of those Parts That he was a good
Protestant, an honest Man, had a very good Character amongst his Neighbors: O
then, says he, I Will hold a wager with you he is a Presbyterian, I can smell
them forty miles. Though moderately I now say, they can smell him two hundred
miles West; then surely he must dye, because he was, and had the Character of
an honest man, a good Christian, and a brave tradesman. But to be short, I
could say a great deal more of him, being intimately acquainted, with him, and
was with him to the very last. Being brought to the Place of Execution, he was
the last Man except one executed, and he behaved himself, whilst the rest were
executing, with great Zeal; and lifting up his hands and eyes, would often say,
Lord, make me so willing and ready to the last. And God did hear his Prayers;
for though he seemed to the Spectators to be somewhat unwilling to dye, yet at
the last he dyed with as much Assurance and Christian Resolution as any; for
after his public Prayer, he came once down the Ladder, and prayed again
privately, then mounted the Ladder again; the Sheriff saying, Mr. Madders, if
you please you may have more liberty; he answered, No, I thank you, Mr.
Sheriff, now I am ready, I am, willing, and desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ. Oh! you cannot imagine what Comfort and Refreshment I have
received in a few minutes; my Comforts are so great that I cannot contain my
self. So blessing and praising of God, he was translated, as I hope (we have no
grounds to imagine the contrary) from Earth to Heaven, repeating Rev. 20.6.
Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection, on such the
second Death has no power. His public Prayer was as follows.

O Eternal and ever blessed Lord God, look down upon me a miserable Sinner with
an eye of pity and compassion, in and through my dear Redeemer the Lord Jesus
Christ. O Lord, I acknowledge my self a great and grievous Sinner; I have
sinned against the clearest light and the dearest love; I have deserved to have
been spurned from thy Presence, and from the glory of thy Power, and that thou
should now say unto me, I will have no more to do with such an unworthy
wretch, such a polluted filthy Creature as thou art, and have been: But, O
Lord, there is mercy with thee that thou may be feared; and thou have
promised, that if a Sinner turn from his wickedness, thou will have mercy on
him; and though his sins were as scarlet, thou would make them white as wool:
Fulfill, O Lord, thy gracious promise unto me, a poor supplicant, in this my
last hour of my life; purge and cleanse me from all sin and filthiness, give me
true Repentance; and if there lies any sin not yet repented of, O Lord bring it
to my Conscience, Mind and Memory: But I hope, O Lord, thou have heard ^y
prayers, my sighs and groans; I hope and trust thou have pardoned all my sins,
and wilt immediately receive my soul. Look down in Mercy on my dear Wife and
Family, be thou a Comfort, and all in all unto them. Now, Lord, I am coming to
thee, assist me to last moment; Comfort my distressed Soul; do more for me than
I am able to ask for, or think of; but what thou know to be needful and
necessary for me, in and through the Merits of my dear Redeemer, the Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom with thee and thy blessed Spirit of Grace be ascribed the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Dying Words of Captain Kidd, Executed at the same time and place.
THis Gentleman was the last ^xe^^^ed at that time; as soon as Captain Madders
was ^urned off, he began to prepare to follow, and calle^ to his Guards and
those present, Do you see this? ( pointing up to Eleven that were dead before
him) do you think this is not dreadful to me, that eleven of twelve of us, that
but a few hours since came down together, are dead and in Eternity? and I am
just going to follow them, and shall immediately be in the same condition. Says
one to him, It must be dreadful to Flesh and Blood. Says he, Well Gentlemen, I
will assure you, I am so far concerned, that methinks I bethink their
Happiness, that they should be so long before me in bliss and happiness: but
I Will make haste to follow; I am satisfied this is the best day that ever I saw:
The day of a Man's Death is said to be better than the day of his Birth: and
truly so I find it as to my Flesh, for I shall be presently free from sin and
sorrow; I am satisfied God has done his best for me: I might have lived and
have forgotten God, but now I am going where I shall sin no more: It Is a
blessed thing to be free from sin, and to be with Christ: O how great were the
suff^rings of Christ for us, beyond all that I can undergo! how great is that
Glory to which I am going! Th^n taking his leave of the People then present, he
prayed some small time very devoutly, and with seeming great Joy and Comfort,
the Executioner did his Office.

There was Executed also at the same time diverse others, as Mr. William
Hewling, Dr. Temple, Mr. Matthews, with some others.

The ^as^ Sp^ech of Dr. Temple of Nottingham, at the place of Execution.
DOctor Temple was one of them that Landed with the Duke, and was his Chief
Physician and Chyrurgeon; he lived in Nottingham, but minding to see other
parts of the World, (as I have heard) goe^ for Holland, where he came
acquainted with the Duke of Monmouth, concerning which he thus spoke, just as
he was going off the Ladder.

Christian Friends, and dear Countrymen,
I Have somewhat to say, and not very much, before I depart from you, and shall
be seen no more. And,

First, As to my Engagment with the Duke of Monmouth.

Secondly, How far I was concerned: And, Thirdly, I shall leave all of you to
be Judges in matt^r of Fact: And so for the

First, As a Dying Man I now declare, that when I entered my self with the Duke
of Monmouth, to be his Chyrurgeon, it was on no other account but to serve him
in the West Indies; where I kn^w no other design whatsoever, but to possess
himself of some of those Islands, until I had been at S^a two days, wherein one
privately told me, We are absolut^ly bound for England, and I should take it
from him it was true: It much surprised me, but knowing no way to avoid it, or
to get on shore, though it was at that time contrary to my Inclinations, if I
could have avoided it; I would not let others see that I had that
dissatisfaction within me. After our Landing at Lyme, I knew it was never the
nearer to attempt my escape, the Country being so beset; on the other hand, if
the Duke of Monmouth did win the day, I might have raised my Fortunes as high
as I could expect: These were the Arguments that Flesh and Blood did create in
my Breast for self-preservation. While I was with the said Duke, I did him as
much Service as I could, and faithfully: After it pleased God to disperse that
Army under his Command, I endeavored to secure my self, but by Providence was
taken at Honiton, from thence committed to Exon, and after removed to
Dorchester, where I received my Sentence, and am now as you see, just going to
Execution: the Lord prevent all of you from such ignominious Deaths; and I
advise you all, that you never take any great thing in hand, but what you have
a Warrant for from the Lord: I assure you I had no satisfaction in this; but
this I am sure, that if I have done any thing amiss in it, it is pardoned: I
bless God I have that satisfaction, I di^ a Professor of the Church of England,
I desire Pardon of all those I have any ways wronged or abused, as I freely
forgive all those that have wronged or abused me; I am in Charity with all men.
Lord have mercy upon me, give me strength to go through these pains, and give
me full assurance now at this last moment: Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Also one Samuel Robbins of Charmouth in the County of Dorset, that was
Executed, or rather murdered, at Warham, in the said County: I cannot pass him
by in silence, his Case being so ex^raordinary hard, that to speak moderately
betwixt the King and his Case, I do say this, that I verily believe nev^r man
suffered innocenter; as I hope you will be satisfied in after you have heard
his Crime, and on what small grounds he was Guilty, or so supposed by my Lord
Chief Justice.

He used generally in the Summer to use the Craft of Fishing, to get a
competent maintenance for his Family, and happened to be out at Sea a-Fishing
before Lyme, that day the Duke came in to Land; and was commanded on board one
of the Duke's Ships, he not knowing who they were, and they bought his Fish of
him; after which they told him that was the Duke of Monmouth, pointing at him,
and that he was just going to Land: He desired to go on shore, which was
refused, and told, that as soon as the Duke was landed he should have his
Liberty; so accordingly he came on shore, and was never after with him, or ever
took up Arms under him: I leave the Reader to judge whether this was High
Treason or no. This was all he was guilty of, except that he was a good honest
Men, a zealous Christian a man of a very good Life and Conversation, as I think
his Neighbors will attest it, in most Towns and Parishes where he lived: But
alas he had a good Book in his House when taken, called, The Solemn League and
Covenant: This was the High Treason he must be guily of, which was aggravated
to the Lord Chief Justice, by one or two hot Spirits his Neighbors. But to be
short, he received his Sentence of Death with great ^ourage, and not at all
dismayed, saying very often in Prison before, If it pleased God to call him now
(to glorify his Name by this Providence of his) to Death, he should be ready;
but (said he) I am as innocent of any thing I have done against any man that
may deserve this punishment, as the Child now unborn. When he came to the place
of Execution, he very cheerfully declared his Innocence to the Spectators, as
before, and so praying very devoutly for some time, he was Executed: His Prayer
I have no exact Copy of.

Also one Mr. Charles Speak of London, a Gentleman of good Extraction, being
Son to the Worshipful George Speak Esquire near Illminster in the County of
Somerset, where he was Executed: His Case also was extraordinary hard; but
there may be two great Reasons given why he was Executed; The first was,
Because he came from that good Pious Family, which always have been Opposers to
Popery, and suffered deeply for their Courage that way. Secondly, The said Mr.
Charles Speak had purchased some great place in the Kings Bench-or
Common Pleas, which was very profitable to him; so that by his Fall there being
a Forfeiture, much money may be made of it; all intercession could not avail
with the L. C. J. for his Life. He h^ppened to be at Illminster at the time of
the Dukes being there, which was the greatest Crime he was guilty of; the
Validity of his Evidence I leave to those in the West, which know how far it
was carried that way. He was a fine Courteous loving Gentleman; and
notwithstanding his Youth, he acted the part of an old Christian Soldier at his
Death, preparing himself to undergo those pains, saying very often, They were
nothing to his Deserts from God Almighty; but as for what I am accused of, and
Sentenced for, I hope you will believe I am not so guilty, as my Judge and
Accusers have endeavored to make me: If it had pleased God, I should have been
willing to have lived some time longer, but God's time being come, I am
willing, I will be contented to drink this bitter Cup off. Being at the place
of Execution, the crowd was so great, that I suppose he was shorter than
otherwise he would have been; but alas! how could it be? for on every side of
him, as well as up and down the Town, the Inhabitants were weeping and
bewailing him: Oh' it is the worst day that ever we saw in this Town! Must this
good Gentleman die here? Oh! yet save his Life, I am ready to die for him, and
the like. He prayed very heartily for near an hour, and sung a Psalm, and so we
hope was translated to Heaven, there to sing everlasting Praises and
Hallelujahs. His Father and Mother you may easily judge were not a little
concerned about him; but their Adversaries malice ended not here, but Father
and Mother must be brought in, and how many thousands of Pounds it cost them, I
think is too well known in London; and most Parts of the Kingdom have heard in
the Public Letters their names mentioned. Some may think they were concerned
with the Duke, but I never heard there was so much made appear against them, as
could have made them been brought in guilty of High Misdemeanors: had not the
Good Gentleman and his Lady been virtuous People, abho^ring the Debaucheries of
the times, and of such a competent Estate, able to spare ten or twelve thousand
pounds; the hard usage this honest brave Gentleman and his virtuous Lady had,
and their sufferings, to relate them, would be to large; and besides, it is so
well known in most places, in the West, that I shall, without saying any more,
proceed.

And next for Mr. Parret, who was executed at Taunton; if I mistake not, he
said he was a Londoner, and a Brewer. When he came to the place of Execution,
he seemed a Man almost unconcerned at Death. After some time, he began to
deliver himself somewhat low in voice to the People, and after rising by
degrees, he seemed more like a Minister in a Pulpit preaching devoutly, than a
prisoner just going to Execution; but I being then not well, could not tarry to
see his End. But the Character I had, was, That he desired all not to be
faint-hearted because of their fall, and to think that there was no hopes
remaining. He said, He verily believed God would yet work out deliverence for
them, and at the time they were in the greatest Extremity, that would be God's
Opportunity. Put your whole trust and confidence, and dependence on the Lord,
and he will never leave you nor forsake you: and much more; but having no more
exact Copy, I shall not enlarge, but come to some other.

A further Account of the Behavior of Mr. Christopher Battiscomb, of his l^st
Speech and Prayer, immediately before he suff^red at Lyme, 12 th. September.
1685. which Account should have been inserted after the Figures 1685. in p. 373.
HE was a true Protestant to the last, well beloved among the Gentry of that
Country: But it was his fortune to be concerned with the Duke of Monmouth, and
was very faithful to him to the last, during the time of the Bloody Assizes at
Dorchester, where he received his Sentence of Death; he was diverse times sent
for to the Chamber of the then L. C. J. and promoted with offers of Life to
betray some Gentlemen, which he always refused, saying, he scorned to purchase
his Life by such indirect means; and he accordingly chose Death rather than
Life; seeing it could not be purchased, but by such unworthy means. The day
being come, he prepared himself, and received the Holy Sacrament, walking down
to the place of Execution, with much cheerfulness and Christian Courage, when
he was mounting the Ladder, smiled, and said, I am not afraid of this, I am
going to a better place, from a poor and miserable World, to a Celestial
Paradise, a Heavenly Jerusalem; I might have chosen, whether I would have
undergone this Death, if I had hearkened to the L. C. J. but it was upon such
unworthy terms, that should I have accepted of my Pardon, it would have been
troublesome to me; I die a true Protestant; I am in Charity with all Men: God
preserve this Nation from Popery; the Lord bless you all: So taking his leave
of them he knew, after Prayer, he launched into Eternity.

A further Account of Mr. John Sprage of Lyme, which should have been inserted
after the word Soldiers, in page 444. but was there omitted through the
Printers mistake.
WIth Mr. John Sprage there were Executed Twelve in the County of Dorset; Mr.
John Sprage of Lyme, a Man more fit to die than he that Condemned him was fit
to live: He was a zealous Christian, and a Man that in a manner lived in Heaven
while on Earth; he was but of an ordinary Estate in this World: But to be
short, his Praise, his Worth, his Fame, will never die in those places where
known; he went about doing good, even in his worldly Employments, as I have
been credibly informed; hardly any thing coming that way, but what his
Spiritual Meditations were upon. He was apprehended near Salisbury, brought to
Dorchester, where I saw him several times, and was conversant with him before
his Trial; he carried himself very moderately to all; some of diverse Principles
in matters of Religion, he continually prayed with them, advising and
instructing them to those holy Duties which were necessary to Salvation: Being
asked, how he could endure those hardships he had undergone, since his being
taken? Says he, If this be all, it is not so much; but my Friend, if you were to
take a Journey in those ways you were not acquainted with, you would (I hope)
desire Advice from those that had formerly used those ways, or lived near by
them: Yes, says he: Then said he, The ways of Affliction which I have lately
traveled in, I had Advice many a time from a Minister, who has often told his
Congregation of the troublesomness of the Road, and of the difficulty of
getting through; and has given me, and hundreds of others to understand the
pitts and stones in the way, and how to avoid them; he has been a Man used to
those Roads many years; I have taken his Advice; I am got thus far on
comfortably, and I trust shall do so to the end; I am not afraid to fight a
Duel with Death, if so it must be: Now I thank God I can truly say, O Death
where is thy Sting? and O Grave, where is thy Victory? Two or three days after
their Sentence, they were drawn to Execution, but were very rudely and
opprobriously dealt with, to the shame of those that then had the charge over
them, their Rigor unto them was more like Turks than Christians. But to
conclude, being come to the place of Executition, he prayed very devoutly with
them all, but by the rudeness of the Guards, there could be no Copy taken to be
said to be true: All of them dyed very Courageous, especially this stout
Christian Champion, who spoke to them in these words, (looking on the
Soldiers) saying, Little do you think that this very Body of mine, which you
are now come to see cut in pieces, will one day rise up in judgment against
you, and be your Accuser, for your delight in spilling of Christian Blood; the
Heathens have far more Mercy: O it is sad, when England must outstrip Infidels
and Pagans! but pray take notice, don't think that I am not in Charity with
you; I am so far, that I forgive you and all the World; and do desire the God
of Mercies to forgive you, and open your hearts, and turn you from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to the Lord Jesus Christ; and so Farewell. I
am going out of the power of you all; I have no dependence but upon my blessed
Redeemer, to whom I commit my dear Wife and Children, and all the World.

A further Account of the Behavior of Colonel Holms in Lyme, and at the place
of his Execution, which should have been inserted after had followed, in page
447.
HE with Eleven more were brought from Dorchester to Lyme, six in a Coach, and
six in a Cart, as he was drawn through the Town, he cheerfully beholding the
People, advised them not to be discouraged at their severe Deaths; for that
though it was their hard fortunes to lose the day, in so good a Cause, yet he
questioned not, but it would be revived again, and by such means as he nor they
could not imagine; God I hope and trust will never let this Nation to fall into
Popery, being brought to the Inn where they stopped, near two hours, until the
Butchers had prepared every thing for the Slaughter, they were visited by a
very worthy Divine, and Vicar of that Town, who offered them those spiritual
Helps, usually in those Occasions, which some of them embraced, and others not;
their Principles being Different from the Church of England: The Jailer
speaking to Coll. Holmes to knock off his Irons, he said, Great Men of State
wear Chains, and it is accoun^ed for their Honor, but though there is a vast
difference, betwixt those Golden ones and mine, yet I take mine to be more
honorable, as that good Apostle said, he accounted it an honor to suffer
shame for his Masters Name; the Sledge being in readiness they prepared to
enter it; but Alas! who should draw such Men to Execution though Men were so
bloody? The very Beasts refused to draw them; and instead of going forward they
went backwards, and could by no means make them do it, which so enraged some
Persons, that they took the Coach Horses out of the Coach, and placed them to
the Sledge; but presently the Sledge broke in pieces; then spoke this worthy
good Man: Pray Gentltmen you see all your strivings will not do, to draw us to
Execution, I verily believe there is more in it than you are aware of; pray
read about the Prophet, that went out of Gods way, his Beast saw that he could
not.

Give us leave, and we will walk to the place; being there come, the Colonel
prepared first to mount that Tragical Stage, the heads of his Speech you have
before; embracing his Fellow sufferers, and kissing them, and giving them some
ghostly Comforts; he desired help of the Sheriff to go up the Ladder, having
but one Arm, and the Gallows higher than ordinary, which was granted: And in a
short time after the Executioner did his Office.

Colonel Holmes in his Prayer not mentioning the King, he was charged as
before; to which he replied, he prayed for him in general, praying for all
Mankind. Thus fell the valiant and good Christian Coll. Holmes; his dying Words
we have now found come to pass, he was much lamented by all that saw him,
except by some, that it is feared, are delivered up to a seared Conscience.

The last Speech of Henry Boddy Executed at Bath.
WHile he was in Prison, especially after Sentence, he behaved himself mighty
humble, meek, and was much in Meditation, which was observed by several
Divines, especially one who attended him to his Last, his name Mr. Simpson. His
poor Wife coming to see him at Wells, and to make her Interest with some
Friends, if possible to save his Life; but finding it lost labor, and that she
could by no means prevail, she died there for grief, before her Husband was
Executed, to his great grief. When he came to the place of Execution, he
delivered himself to the People in these Words:

Good People, I am come here to pay a Debt due to Nature, which every one, one
time or another, must pay, though not in this manner, or nature. I am condemned
as a Traitor and Rebel against my King, which were things I always hated and
abhorred; and therefore give me so much time as to deliver my self to you; and
what I say, I hope you will believe me at this time, being just going to give
an account, not only for every idle word, but for all things I have done since
I have had a being.

I was born in Lyme Regis in the County of Dorset, and bred up a Seaman from my
Infancy; I have had the Honor to serve his Majesty King Charles the Second, in
his Wars with the Dutch and French, diverse times. I always thought it to be the
Duty of every true English man to stand up in his Countries quarrel with
Foreigners, to maintain our ancient Privileges and Honor of ou^ Nation. I
served him faithfully: And as for any undertaking now with the late Duke of
Monmouth, for which I am now come to suffer death; As for my Designs, I am sure
they were good, for I did believe him to be my Sovereign's Son and Heir; but if
otherwise, I have done amiss, and am sorry, and hope the Lord has pardoned it.
While I was in Arms, I am sure there is none can say I have personally wronged
them. I desire all your Prayers for me to the last. I am no Orator, therefore
if you please (speaking to the Minister) do these last Spiritual Services for
me, as for to pray with me, and for me. The Minister being much taken with him,
desired leave of the Sheriff to ask him some Questions, which being granted;
the Minister said unto him, I must make bold with you, but not to hold you too
long before I pray, but to satisfy my self and the People on what ground you
stand; I mean, as concerning your ^v^rlasti^g state. Now pray resolve me a few
things: First, Whether you d^ own tha^ Doctrine of Non-resistanc^, own^d by the
Church, Tha^ it is not lawful on any account wha^soever, to take up Arms
against the King? O Sir! as to that I answer, Could I have been satisfied he
had been my law^u^ Prince, I should not have done it. But, said the Minister,
he is, and you are not to be judge; exc^pt you own those things, some People
will hardly have Charity for you after you are dead. What matters that? said
he, would you have me, now you put me so close to it, to lie? No, I will not. I
say, if he was my lawful King, I was misled in my Judgment, and have com^^tted
a great Error; but Lord, I hope thou have washed away all my sins, in and
through the Blood of my dear Redeemer, in whose alone Merits I hope for Mercy.
I desire ^o be asked no more Questions. Then the Minister prayed very devoutly
near half an hour; after which, lifting up his hands and eyes to Heaven, he
quietly submitted to Death.

Mr. John Hicks's last Speech, 1685.
I Suppose the Spectators here present may expect I should speak something
before I leave this sanguinary Stage and Passage through my bloody Sufferings,
by which my immortal Spirit will be speedily transported into an invisible and
eternal World, and I conclude that they have different Resentments hereof. Some
resent them ^ith much joy, high exultation and triumph, others with equal grief
and sorrow; that to the one I am a most pleasant Spectacle, that they behold me
with high complacency and delight; but to the other I am a mournful and
unpleasant one, and they behold me with no less pity and compassion. Concerning
the first, I can say, I freely and heartily forgive them, and heartily pray
that God would most mercifully and graciously prevent their mourning through
Misery, not only here, but eternally hereafter. Concerning the other, I will
say, Weep for your own sins, and for the sins of the Nation, for the highest
Rebellions that ever were committed against the great and eternal God; lament
bitterly for those sins that have been the meritorious Cause of the late
terrible Judgment, that which I fear will cause God to break in upon this
Nation with an overflowing Deluge of Judgments, which are far more tremendous
and dreadful. As for sympathizing with me, in drinking this bitter Cup
appointed for me, I return you most humble and hearty thanks, earnestly
desiring God to come unto you, and fill your Soul^ with all Celestial Comforts
and Spiritual Consolations. Something I must say to purge and clear my self
from a false Accusation laid to my Charge; as that I was engaged with Col.
Blood in rescuing Col. Mason near Boston, when he was sent down with a Guard
from London to York, to be Tried for High Treason; and that I was the Man that
killed the Barber of that City; and that also I was with him when he stole the
Crown. Now as I am a dying Man, and upon the very brink of a very stupendous
Eternity, (the ^^uth and reality whereof I fi^mly believe) without any
reservation or the least equivocation, I do declare in the Presence of the
All-seeing God, that impartial Judge, before whom in a very little time I must
appear, I never saw nor conversed with Mr. Thomas Blood, from 1656, till after
he stole the Crown, which was in 71, or 72. nor was ever engaged with him in
any of his Treasonable Plots or Practices. It Is true, I being involved in great
trouble of another Nature, (of which I have given to the World a Narrative, and
which is notoriously known in the Country where I then lived, by some that were
Enemies to me for my preaching) I was persuaded to apply my self to Mr. Blood,
to procure by his Intercession his late Majesty's gracious Favor: accordingly
he brought me into his Royal Presence; while I was there, his Majesty carried
it with great Clemency, without expressing one word of that which I am now
charged with. Mr. Blood continued with his Majesty a little longer than I did;
then he told me that he had granted me a Pardon, which I did thankfully accept
of, knowing it would free me from all Penalties and Troubles that I was
obnoxious to; and were occasioned to me by my Nonconformity. Then engaging him
to take out my Pardon; he told me, That he got it out with several others that
had been engaged with him in several Treasonable Designs and Actions; at which
I was troubled, supposing it might be imputed to me thereby; yet, God knows, I
have often since reflected upon it with great regret and dissatifa^tion. If Mr.
Blood did inform the late King to make himself the more considerable, and to
bring as many of his Party as he could to accept of their Pardons, that h^
might be rendered utterly incapable of Plotting any further Mischief against
his Government, or any other ways that I was engaged with him in any of his
Treasonable Attempts; I now appeal to God, as a dying Man, concern^ng it, that
he has done me an irreparable w^ong. I also in the same manner do declare,
That I was never engaged with any Party in Plotting or Designing, or Contriving
any Treason or Rebellion against the late King; and particularly, that I was
altogether unco^cerned in, and unacquainted with that for which my Lord Russel
and others suffered, and as much a stranger to any against the present King.
And whereas it is reported of me, That at Taunton I persuaded the late Duke of
Monmouth to assume the Title of King, I do once more solemnly declare, That I
saw not the said Duke, nor had any Converse with him 'till he came to
Shipton-Mallet, which was thirteen days after he landed, and several days after
he had been at Taunton. And it is as false, that I rid to and fro in the West to
stir up and persuade Men to go into his Army, and rebel against his present
Majesty; for I was i^ the East Country when the Duke landed, and from thence I
went directly to him, when he was at Shipton Mall^t, not one Man accompanying
me from thence. But hitherto as I lived, so now I die, owning and professing
the true Reformed Christian (commonly called the Protestant) Religion, which is
founded on the pure written Word of God only, and which I acknowledge likewise
to be comprehended in the Article of the Doctrine of the Church. This Religion
I have made a reasonable and free choice of, and have heartily embraced, not
only as it protests against all Pagan and Mohammedan Religion, but against the
Corruption of the Christian; and I humbly and earnestly pray to God that by his
Infinite Wisdom and Almighty Power, he will prevent not only the utter
extirpation but diminution thereof, by the height and influence of what is
contrary thereto; and for that end the Lord make the Professors of it to live
up more to its Principles and Rules, and bring their Hearts and Conversations
more under the Government and Power of ^he same. I die also owning my Ministry,
Nonconformity, for which I have suffered so much, and which does now obstruct
the King's Grace and Mercy to be manifested and extended to me: For as I chose
it not constrainedly, so I appeal to God as a dying Man, not moved from
sullenness or humor, or factious temper, or erroneous Principles of Education,
or from secular interests, or worldly advantages, but clearly from the Dictates
of my own Conscience, and as I judged it to be the Cause of Go^, and to have
more of Divine Truth in it than that which is contrary thereto; so now I see no
Cause to repent of it, nor to recede from it; not questioning but God will own
it at the last Judgment-day. If no more had been required after the late King's
Restoration to qualify Ministers for public Preaching, than was after the
first Restoration from the time of Charles the First, probably I might have
satisfied my self therewith, and not scrupled Conformity thereto; but the Terms
and Conditions thereof by a particular Law made in 1662. being not only new,
but so strict and severe that I could never have satisfaction in my own
Conscience, after all Endeavors used for a Compliance therewith, and a
Conformity thereto: To say nothing of the Covenant, which I never took, but the
giving my Assent and Consent, have been too difficult and hard for me to comply
with. And I very well remember, that about fourteen years ago, entering into a
Discourse with Mr. Patrick Heldore, an Irishman, who was contemporary with me
in Dublin, concerning Conformity, which he much endeavored to persuade me to;
I urged the severity of the forementioned Conditions against it, and after some
Debates and Reasons with him, I told him I did believe they were contrived and
designed on purpose to prevent our Public Preaching, and to keep us out of the
Church: To which he ingenuously replied, He judged it was so: For, said he, a
Bishop in Ireland ( whose Name I have forgot) told me the very same.

But though I could not wade through and conquer this Difficulty, yet I censure
not those that did it; and I believe after all the hottest Disputes, and most
vehement Debates, and violent Contests between Conformist and Nonconformist,
there are of both Parties will be glorified in Heaven hereafter. According to
the 29th. Article of the Church of England, a visible Church is a Congregation
of Faithful Men, in the which the pure Word of God is preached, the Sacraments
of the Lord duly administered, according to Christ's Ordinance, and all those
things that of neccessity are requisite and necessary to Salvation; so with
such a Church have I held the most intimate Communion, and with such (did I
live) could hold it: I would not therefore be so incorporated with any Church,
as to exclude me from, and render me incapable of holding Communion with other
Churches; I was never strongly bound up to any form of Ecclesiastical
Government, but that under which a pure and undefiled Religion does flourish,
and that which contains and really practices Holiness, and advances the Kingdom
of God in the World, that can I approve of, and willingly live under, were I to
live.

I did approve of the ancient and present form of Civil Government, English
Monarchy I am fully satisfied with, and do also declare, that it is not
warrantable for any Subject to take up Arms against, and resist their lawful
Sovereigns and rightful Princes: and therefore had I not been convinced by
several things that I have read and heard, to believe that the late D. of
Monmouth was the Legitimate Son of his Father Charles the Second, I had never
gone into his Army, judging that without this, I could not be freed from the
guilt of Rebellion, which I always resolved to keep my self clear from: And
though his Father denied he was married to his Mother, I thought it might be
answered with this; That Kings and Princes, for State reasons, often cannot be
fathomed by their Subjects, affirming and denying things which otherwise they
would not do, and make even their natural Affections to truckle and stoop
thereto. I exhort all to abhor all Treasonable Plots, and pretenses of all
Rebellion, with the highest Detestation, and to take the plain Text of Sacred
Scripture to walk by, in honoring and obeying, and living in subjection to
rightful Kings, and not readily to receive, or suddenly to be impressed with
evil Reports and Defamations of them, also not ra^hly to be Propagators of the
same.

I desire God to forgive all mine Enemies, and to give me an heart to forgive
them, which are many, some mighty, an^ all most malicious: Particularly Barter
of Lisnel, who bet^ayed me, and proved such a Tr^ytor to James D. of Monmouth
his old and in^ima^e Friend. I am grievously affl^cted that I should prove the
occasion of the great Sufferings of so many Persons and Families: But this h^th
fallen under the Just and Wise orde^ing of Divine Providence, as David's going
to Abime^ech, when he proved the occasion of the Death of a^l the Persons, Men,
Women, and Children in the City: But who shall say unto God, What do thou?
The care of my most dear Wife and a great many Children, I cast upon God, who I
hope will be better than the best of Husbands unto her, and the best of Fathers
unto them: God knows how just and legal Right my Wife has unto her Estate; to
him therefore I commit her, to defend her from the violence and oppression of
men, particularly from a most inhumane and unnatural Broth^r: But no wonder if
he will lay violent h^nd^ upon his Sisters Estate, that has so often laid them
on his own Father. I die a deeply humbled, self-judging and self-condemning
Sinner, loathing and abhorring my many an^ great Iniquities, and my self for
them, earnestly desiring full Redemption from the bonds of Corruption, under
which I have groaned so many years, longing for a most perfect Conformity to
the most holy and glorious God, the only infinite pure Being; thirsting for a
permit diffusion of his Grace through all the Powers and Faculties of my Soul,
panting after pe^f^ct spiritual Life and Liberty, and a consummate Love to my
dearest Jesus, who is an All comprehensive Good, and to be satisfied with his
Love for ever: A Vigorous and vehement Zeal for the Protestant Religion, with a
Belief I had of the Dukes Legitimacy, has involved me in this ignominious
Death; yet blessed be God, that by sincere Repentance and true Faith in the
Blood of Jesus, there is p^ssage from it to a glorious eternal Life, and from
these bitter ^orrows to the fulnes^ of sweetest Joys that are in his Presence,
and from these sharp bodily pains to those most pure pleasures, that are at his
Right hand for evermore: And blessed be God, that such a death as this cannot
prevent and hinder Christ's changing of my vile Body, and fashioning it like
his Glorious Body, in the general Resurrection day.

I am now going into that World, where many dark things shall be made perfectly
manifest and clear, and many doubtful things fully resolved, and a plenary
satisfaction given concerning them; all Disputes and mistakes concerning
Treason, Rebellion, and Schism, shall be at an end and cease for ever: many
things that are innoc^nt, lawful and laudable, which have foul Marks and b^ack
Characters stamped and fixed upon 'em here, they shall be perfectly purified and
fully cleansed from there; where at one view, more shall be known of them, than
by all wrangling Debates, and eager Disputes, or by reading all Polemical Books
concerning them here. I greatly deplore and bewail the greedy Appetite, and
insatiable Thirst, that Professing Protestants have after the Blood of their
Brethren, and the high pleasure they take in the effusion thereon* But what
will not Men do, when they are either Judicially blinded, or their secular
worldly Interest insensibly insinuates and winds it self into their Religion,
is so twisted and incorporated with it, that it animates and acts it, is the
Life and Soul, the vital Form and Power, and made wholly subservient thereunto?

I bless God for all my Sufferings, and particularly for this last; for the
benefit and fruit of it, by God's sanctifying of them to me, have been great;
hereby I have been effectually convinced of the Vanity of the World, and my own
sinfulness by nature and practice, and to see that to be sin which I never saw
before; and to be more thoroughly humbled for what I know to be sin, not only of
Commission, but of Omission also: Hereby I have been brought to a more
thorough, deep, inward sense and feeling of the absolute necessity of the
righteousness of Christ to justify me, and he has been made much more dear
and precious to my Soul, than ever he was before. Hereby my Soul has been more
refined from the Drofs of sensuality, wrought into a more Heavenly Frame,
raised up to a higher pitch of Spirituality; hereby I am made more meek and
humble, and so judge more charitably of others that differ from me in Opinion
and Judgment: so though by Gods most righteous Judgment I have been
apprehended, and most justly and deservedly undergo this Suffering for my Sins,
yet I hope they have wrought for me a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory, fitting and preparing me, making me a better qualified Subject for, and
far more meet to be a Partaker of the same. ^y the Grace and Strength of God, I
will not purchase my Life by the Death and Blood of my Protestant Brethren, but
choose to die rather than be a Betrayer of them; the impetuous and violent
assault of this, I dreaded more than Death it self. Blessed be God I was not
exposed unto it, and conquered by it, as some have been: having such full
bo^ily vigor and strength, being in such perfect He^lth, notwithstan^ing my
Age, predominating in me, it has made it more difficult to die, than if I had
been clogged and encumbered with infirmities, made to bow and stoop under them
by p^evailing Diseases and Distempers, gradually worn out therewith, which many
times makes men weary of Life, and to desire to die; and this in Conjunction
with many things (which I forb^ar to mention) highly gratifying and pleasing to
sense, which I must leave for ever, strengthens and heightens the Difficulty,
and begets a g^eater Regret and Reluctance in my Will, to have the Earthly
Tabernacle of my Body dissolved, and my Soul to dislodge and quit the same. But
now when the black and gloomy Shades of Death do overspread me, I can say to
the glory of Gods most Free and Powerful Grace, True Faith in some measure has
changed the difficulty into a Facility, and easiness of dying: It has very
much subdued the reluctance of my Will against it; for it makes Future things
present, and invisible things visible, and does realize and substantiate the
same to me; and as by it I penetrate and pierce into Eternity, and behold
invisible and immortal things, so hereby, blessed be God, I have obtained a
greater Victory over Sense: The World, is crucified to me, and I to the World,
and all the most pleasant and delightful Objects therein, all finite, fa^^ing
Creatures, Comforts and Enjoyments, are become minute and small, despicable and
contemptible to me, in comparison thereof, being infinitely c^ntained and
comprehended therein: Shall my Soul clasp and cling about these mortal and
perishing things? Shall it cleave and be glued to them? Shall it be confined
and captivated into what is kept in the narrow boun^s of Time, and in this
lower World? shall it earn^stly desire and thirst for muddy Streams, yea Rivers
of Flesh-pleasing good; when by an Eye of Faith I can look into the
Indeficient, Inexhaustible purest Fountain; the Immense, Immensurate Ocean of
Divine Good; hoping to drink thereof, to swim and bathe my Soul therein for
ever and ever? And when I consider how long my Ears have been bound up, and
tied to their innumerable and horrid Oaths, and cursed Blasphemies, and mine
eyes to see the Profanation of the Day of God; and when I beheld such an
overflowing Flood of most prodigious Impiety, such an inundation of most
monstrous Iniquity, and so much Hell upon Earth, and that there is so much
decay of holy Zeal, and true Piety, and Christian Religion among the Professors
of it, such seeming incurable Breaches and Divisions, such expiring Love and
Charity and partings among 'em; it has powerful influence on my Soul to
reconcile it more to Death, and makes it electively, and from choice to leave
this present World, and to take up my abode in that which is unseen and future,
where there shall be nothing but perfect love and holiness; a sinless state,
and serving God with all unweariedness, and perfection, with the highest
complacency and delight that immortal Souls can be capable of: there is perfect
peace and concord, the innumerable Company of Angels, and the Spirits of Just
Men made perfect, all fastened together with indissolvible and uninterrupted
Chains of most pure Love, and all continually wrapped up in, and transported with
the highest Admiration of God's Love, his infinite and incomprehensible
excellencies and perfections, singing Halelujahs to him without ceasing, and
triumphing in his praise for ever and ever. The Consideration also, that I know
so little of these sublime, profound, and Divine Mysteries; of the most
glorious Mystery of Salvation by Jesus Christ; that I am so incapable to fathom
the depth of the Providence of God, whose ways are in the Sea, and whose paths
are in the deep Waters, and whose footsteps are not known, and particula^ly in
the late stupendous and amazing one; and that I am so ignorant of the Nature of
Angels and Spirits, with their Offices and Operations, and of their high and
glorious ex^ellencies; and that I am so little acquainted with the Nature of my
own Soul, as at present dwelling in, and united to my Body, and as disunited
and separated from it; how without Corporeal Organs, it shall most vivaciously
and vigorously pe^form all its proper Functions and Offices, and more than ever
strongly and indefatigably serve the Lord Jesus, most fervently and abundantly
love him, and delight in him, every way, much more obtain the supreme and
highest end of its Creation and Being; and this makes me much more willing to
die, that I may have the knowledge thereof, with innumerahle other things, that
I am now either ignorant of, or do but imperfectly know, and so be made happy
by a plenitude of fullness of enjoying intellectual Pleasures, which are of all
other most suitable, sweet and satisfactory to immortal Souls. And also I see
that he that departs from iniquity makes himself a Prey; and so many plunging
themselves into the ways of Iniquity, lest they should be accounted odious and
vile, which makes them so much degenerate not only from Christianity, but from
Humanity it self, as if they were scarce the Excrement of either; contemning
even that most Noble, Generous, Heroic Spirit that dwelt in many Heathens, who
accounted it most honorable and glorious to contend for their Rights and
Liberties, yea, to suffer Death, and the worst of Deaths, in Defense of the
same; and judge them accursed and most execrable in the World that do so; and
not only so, but, for their own profit and advantage, have many of them
inslaved their Posterity by it, and are most industrious and laborious, most
fierce and furious to destroy them, whereby they are become as unnatural as
Children that seek the ruin of their Parents that begot them, and brought them
forth; or them that lay violent hands upon themselves, dashing out their own
Brains, cutting their own Throats, hanging and drawing themselves, ripping up
their own Bellies, tearing out their own Bowels, they being in different senses
Children and Members of that Body Politic they design and attempt the
Destruction of; and when I know not how long the Duration and Continuance of
these things shall be, or a Conclusion or End by God shall be put thereto, who
by Divine and Unerring Wisdom governs the World; why shall my Soul be unwilling
to take its flight into the unseen and eternal World? Where no sullied, sordid
or impious thing, most incongruous and unbecoming Nature, shall be seen and
found, and where I shall behold no narrow conclusive contracted Soul there,
habitually preferring their private before a public good, but all most
unanimously and equally center in one common universal good and where the
sighs, and groans, and cries of the afflicted and persecuted, shall be heard no
more for ever.

I earnestly exhort all most highly to prize and value Time, and diligently
improve it for Eternity; to be wise, seriously and seasonably to consider of
their latter End: for by the irrepealable and irreversible Law of Heaven we
must all die, yet we know not how, where, or when. Live with your Souls full of
solicitude and care, with a most deep concernedness, and most diligent
industriousness, whilst you have time and opportunity, and the means of Grace,
Health, and Strength, make sure of these two great things, viz.

1. What merits for you a Right and Title to Eternal Life and Glory, and the
future unchangeable Blessedness, as the Redeemers most precious Blood and
Righteousness; that thereby a real Application and Imputation may be unto you
by sincere Believing. (2.) That that which makes you qualified Subjects for it,
is the great work of Regeneration, wrought in your Souls, being renewed in the
Spirit of your Minds, the Divine Nature being impressed upon them, repairing of
the depraved Image of God in you; that being transformed into his own likeness,
thereby in the World you may mind an^ savor more the things of the Spirit than
the things of the Flesh, Celestial and Heavenly more than Terrestrial and
Earthly, Superior more than inferior things: And therewith have a holy Life
and Conversation conjoined, that results and springs from the same, as Fruit
from the Root, and Acts from the Habits. Let all, in order thereto, seriously
consider these few Texts of sacred Scripture, let them predominately possess
you; let them be deeply and indelibly Transcribed upon your Souls; let them be
assimilated thereunto, and made the written Epistles, the lively Pictures
thereof, Matthew. 5.8, 20. Blessed be the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
Verse. 20. For I say unto you except your Righteousness exceed the Righ^eousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. John 3.3. Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto
thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6.9,
10, 11. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God,
etc. Gal. 5.19, 20, to 23. Now the works of the Flesh are manifest, which are
these, Adultery, etc. James 1.18. Of his own Will begat he us with the Word of
Truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his Creatures. 1 Pet. 1.3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant Mercy, has begotten us again to a lively hope by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ. Verse. 13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your Minds, etc. Colos.
3.1, 2. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above: Set
your affections on things above, not, etc. Gal. 5.24. And they that are Christ's
have crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts, etc. Ephesians. 2.1. And you
has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins, Rev. 20.6. Blessed and
holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection, on such the second Death
has no power. Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no Condemnation, etc. 1 Pet.
1.15. But as he that has called you is holy, so be ye, etc. Verse. 23. Being
born again, not of corruptible Seed, etc. Psalm. 4.3. But know that the Lord
has set apart him that is godly for himself, etc. I shall mention now no more,
the whole Bible abounds with these Texts, with what a Renovation and Change of
our Carnal and Corrupt Hearts and Natures, there must be, with Holiness of Life
and Conversation, before we can be capable of a future and blessed Immortality,
and of inheriting the Kingdom of God for ever and ever. Amen.

A Letter written by Mr. John Hicks, October. 5. the day before his Death.
My Dear Nephew,
I Am yet in the Land of the Living, though in the Mouth of Death; I have been
concerned for you, next to my own Children; before I die, I thought fit (...)
write two or three Lines to you, a^ a Manifestation of my great Love to you: I
earnestly desire the welfar of you here, and to Eternity hereafter; next to my
own Wife and Children, you will want me when I am gone; but I hope the Lord
will take care of you; make it your business to walk with him, to serve him
faithfully; flee youthful Lusts, and Remember your Creator in the days of your
Youth; be deeply concerned to have your Heart* and Nature changed, and an
interest in Christ secured unto you. Death comes suddenly, you know not when,
where, nor how you shall die: Let time therefore be most precious to you; fill
it up with Work and Duty; Live by faith more than by sense; and this will stand
by you when you come to ^ie: Seek the things which are above, and set your
Affections upon them; have your Conversation in Heaven, whilst you are upon
Earth* When you see your Parents, give my dear Love to them and their Children;
the Lord grant that we may meet in his everlasting Kingdom: When you see any of
your Cousins, give my dear Love to them, and be not ashamed of my Sufferings. I
wrote last Saturday was a Seven-night to my Brother George, but whether he is
at London or Worcester, I know not; I wrote to him, to desire him to Petition
the King, that some Favor and Mercy might be showed me, if he thought fit.
Things that are made to aggravate my Crime, I am clear from; as that I
persuaded the Duke of Monmouth to assume the Title of King at Taunton, when I
was not there with him, or in Thirteen days after he came into England; and
that I rode to and fro in the West, to persuade People to go in to his Army,
when I was in the East, and ca^^ from thence to hi^ in the West; but my
Nonconformity cuts me, and obstructs the King's Mercy from being extended t^
me, as I am told; but the Will of the Lord be done; the Life to come is
infinitely better than this: Many more things are laid to my Charge, which I am
no more guitly of than your self. If your Uncle be in Town, go speedily to him,
and give him my dear Love. I pray for you, who am,

Your most Affectionate Uncle, J. H.
October. 5. 1685.
A Letter to his Wife, Sept. 23. 1685.
My Dearest Love,
I Hope you received a few Lines from me, by the way of London; once more I
write to you, by your faithful and trusty Friend W. D. who has been at Exon.
If there be need for it, he knows many of my dear and faithful Friends there,
who wish you would come and live among them; and if your Estate fail, I think
i^ very advisable so to do; I hope God will stand by you, and defend you: My
dear, se^ me in God, as I must you. I must now bid adieu to all Earthly and
Worldly Comforts, and all the pleasant and delightful Objects of Sense. I bless
God for all present Mercies and Comforts hitherto I have had; what will be
after this day, I know not, but the Will of the Lord be done.

My Dear, Be very cautious not to speak one Word, lest it be wrested to a wrong
Sense, which may ruin^ you; I have not writ what I would of this Nature, take
the Advice of Friends, and of what I send by our Friend. O let not the
Everlasting Arms of God be withdrawn from you one Moment; and let him
strengthen you with all Might, according to his glorious Power, and to all
Patience and Long-suffering, with Joyfulness! Pray hard for Victory over
Passion, and be much in private Closet Prayer with God; and often read the Holy
Bible, and other good Books; the Lord continually guide, direct and counsel
you. My Dear, I return you a thousand thanks for all the Love you have showed
me and my Children, and particularly for the high and great Demo^stration you
have given hereof in this day of my distress. I hope my Daughters will be as
dutiful to you, and be as much concerned for your comfort and welfare, as if
you had traveled with them, and brought them into the world; God bless my dear
little Ones and them together, I shall die their most affectionate and praying
Father; God I hope, will uphold, support, and comfort me at the last hour, and
enable me to overcome the Temptations I shall violently be assaulted with
before I die. God by his infinite and freest Mercies in Jesus Christ, pardon
all the neglect of Relative Duties, (which I have bitterly lamented and
bewailed before God, with all the Sins I am guilty of) for the sake of our
dearest Lord and Redeemer. The Lord make you grow in all Grace more than ever,
and make this great Affliction so humbly purifying and spiritualizing to you as
w^ll as me, that it may work for us both a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory. Let him take your Soul into his most dearest Embraces, and
lodge it in the bosom of his Love here, and make us to meet in the full and
everlasting Fruition and Enjoyment of him hereafter. Though it be dangerous for
you to vindicate that I die for, yet be not too much cast down for it: I will
say no more as to that. My hearty and affectionate Respects to all my dear
Friends; I need not name them; I hope to meet them, with your self, to inherit
Eternal Life, through the Merits of Christ's Death. Farewell, my Dear, farewell
in the Lord, until we meet to be married to him for ever. My heart is as full
of Love to thee, as it was the first day I married thee; and if God spared my
Life, it should have been as fully manifested until death: Therefore I rest,

Your most Affectionate and Endeared Husband, J. H.
Sept. 23. 1685.
Another Letter.
My Dearest Love,
I Received your Letter by Mr. Skinner; I bless God that you and my Babes are
well; the Lord continue their Lives to be a Blessing and Comfort to you, and
enable you to see them well Educated in the fear of God; and when God takes me
away, let him be a Husband to guide, direct, succor, comfort and support you,
and to lodge your Soul in the Bosom of his Love; and let him be a Father to
them, and their Portion for ever. Monday last my Brother went to London to try
what could be done for me; what the success will be, I know not: I desire the
Lord every day to prepare me for Death, and carry me above the Fear of it, by
the discoveries of his everlasting Love unto my Soul, and clearing up my Right
and Title to everlasting Life; and by Sealing up to me the Pardon of all my
Sins, through the most precious Blood of Jesus Christ. Let u^ pray hard and
much for each other: When I leave this world, it shall be with Prayer for ^hee;
if God give me life how shall I study to be a comfort to thee, and to live up
to my Marriage as well as Baptismal ^ovenant! to all my Friends Tend^r my
affectionate Respects: I hope their Prayers will one way or other be heard for
me; let the Almighty be your Pro^^ctor, Supporter and Comforter. There be two
Books I do recommend to you to read when you are retired, as well as in your
Family: Pierce's Preparation for Death, and Fox's Red^mption of Time. Now let
our Soul^ meet together in one most Blessed God, in our dearest Jesus, and
sweetest Savior; let them clasp and cling about him, and be sick for the love
of him; and that we may meet to enjoy him fully to Et^rnity, and be satisfied
with his Love for ever. A thousand Loves, if I had them, I would send to thee,
next to my dearest Lord Jesus, and the things that are heavenly, spiritual and
immortal: I love thee: what I can spare for thee, is conveyed to thee and my
dear Children, from

Thy most Affectionate and Faithful Husband, and their most loving Father, J. H.

Another Letter.
My most dear Love,
I Hope you have received my last; once more, as a dead and living Man (through
difficulty) I write to you, though I yet do not know when or where I shall die,
but expect Death every day; when that Message is brought to me, I hope, through
the Grace and Streng^h of Christ, it will be no surprise to me; that neither my
Lips, Flesh, nor Heart will tremble when I hear it; I know the cause for which
I suffer; God has and has singled me out from many of my Brethren (which I
never have been without some apprehensions of for above these twenty years) to
lay down my Life; how far it is for his Cause, will be judged at the last day:
I bless God, who has kept me from all Temptations to Conformity; though it has
brought me to ruin and destruction in this world, it will be no fit Season for
you to Vindicate that for which I am called to supper, be silent, and leave it
to God; I advise you to all Prudence in this case: have your own reserved
thoughts, and let them concerning me, support and comfort you; if there never
happen a time for you to Glory in my Sufferings, it will be hereafter; do you
but walk with God (though through Prudence you must hold your Tongue) and be
not ashamed you had such a Husband; I thank God that gave it me, whose Courage
and Public Spirit for the Protestant Religion, the Civil Liberties of his
Country, even true English Liberties, has in this ignominious way, brought me
to the Conclusion and End of my time. Mourn not, my Dear, as one without Hope,
let the World know you have something from me, something from your self as a
Christian, but ten thousand times more from God to comfort and support you; see
Christ by an eye of Faith, infinitely more lovely and beautiful than my self;
let him be married to your Soul; let him be the chiefest of ten thousand, and
more dear and precious to you; it is not long we shall be separated, before we
shall see one another in a Spiritual Enjoyment, separated from all Fleshly
Pleasures and Delights, yet i^finitely m^re sweet and satisfying to Immortal
Spirits, as you and I used to see S^re^ms from the Fountain and the largest
Streams in the Ocean; so let us see one another in God, the ever-flowing and
overflowing Fountain of all Good, the fathomless and boundless Ocean of Good.
Se^k much the things which are above; live with your Affections set upon them;
and have your Conversation in Heaven whilst you are upon Earth. I continue yet
to pray for you, as for my se^f, and shall con^inue to do it until I die; in my
last Prayers you shall be interested with my dear Babes, whom I hope God will
take into Covenant with him, and number them among his Adopted Ones, and of
that incorrup^ible Inheritance which is in Heaven: I hope God will spare your
Life to see them Educated, and guide and assist you therein, and theirs to be a
blessing and comfort to you: Consider your Condition is not single and alone,
this Country affords a multitude of the like sad and deplorable Instances; let
this make you more to possess your Soul with Patience and Humility, calmly and
quietly to submit to the good Will of God. I have left a Paper behind me for
you to read, and our Friend can tell with what difficulty I write it, therefore
must have many Defects and Imperfections, which must be over-looked and mended;
preserve ^he two Bibles for my dear James and Betty: What shall I say more, my
Dearest? I must break off with my Heart full of Love to thee; and subscribe my
self,

Thy most dear and Affectionate Husband till Death, J. H.
October. 3. 1685.
Captain Abraham Ansley's Last Speech.
I Am come to pay a Debt to Nature; it is a Debt that all must pay, though some
after one manner, and some after another: The way that I pay it, may be thought
by some few ignominious but not so by me; having long since, as a true
Engli^hman, ^hou^ht it my Duty to venture my ^ife in defense of the Protestant
Religion against Popery and Arbitrary Power: For this same purpose I came from
my House to the D. of M's Army: At first I was a Lieutenant, and then a
Captain, and I was in all the Action the F^ot was engaged in, which I do not
repent: For had I a thousand Lives, they should all have been engaged in the
same Cause, although it has pleased the wise God (for reasons best known to
himself to blast our Designs; but he will deliver his People by ways we know
nor think not of: I might have saved my Life, if I would have done as some
narrow-soul'd Persons have done, by impeaching others; but I abhor such ways of
Deliverance, choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God than
to enjoy Life with Sin. As to my Religion, I own the way and Practice of the
Independent Church, and in that Faith I die, depending on the merits of our
Savior Jesus Christ, for my Eternal Salvation: His Blessing be with you all.
Farewell to thee, poor England, Farewell.

Abraham Ansley.

Mr. Annesley's Last Letter.
SIR,
I now send you my last Farewell, being going to lay down my Life with joy, and
assurance of Life eternal; for which, blessed be the Holy one of Israel, who
never leaves nor forsakes those that put their trust in him, and give you many
thanks for your kindness to me, the Lord make it up to you; by pouring upon you
a daily Portion of his most Holy Spirit, and deliver you from your Bonds. My
Enemies have done what they could to afflict this Body; but blessed be the most
High, who has given me Strength, Patience, and Courage to endure all they can
lay upon me. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the Fellowship of his Holy
Spirit ^ttend you; which is the Prayer of your dying Friend, but living Brother
in Christ Jesus,

ABRAHAM ANSLEY.
From Taunton Castle, Sept. 21. 1685.
Mr. Josias Askew's Letter to his Father.
Honored Father,
I not having an opportunity to make my Gratitude known to you for all your
Endeavors for the saving a poor, vain, perishing, and troublesome Life: and
seeing it is all in vain, I would desire you both to acquiesce in the Will of
God, and rejoice with me for this happy day of my departure from this State of
Pilgrimage, home to the Possession of those Heavenly Mansions, which my God and
Father has provided for me, in and through my Lord Jesus Christ: It is ^n him
alone I put my Trust and Confidence, and therefore can boldly s^y, Who is he
that condemns? It is Christ that dy^d, yea rather, that is risen again, and
is set down at the right hand of God, making intercession for all those that
have a well grounded Confidence in him. My time is but short, and by reason of
Company I am disturbed; therefore I conclude with my last Breath, begging of
God, that he would keep you constant in his Fear, in this day of great
temptation, and at last receive you to his Glory, where we shall once more
unite, in praising, without interruption or distraction, World without end,
Amen: Until which time, the Grace of God the Father, the Love of God the Son,
the comfortable Refreshings of God the Holy Ghost, be with you, all you^s, and
the whole Israel of God, both now and for ever: Which i^ the hearty Prayer of
your Son,

JOSIAS ASKEW
Pray remember me to all with Joy.



Another Letter to his Friend.
MADAM,
YOU have been a Partaker with me in my trouble^ I would also make you partaker
with me in my Joys; se^ing my Wedding day is come, the day of the Bridgroom is
at hand, and I am this day to be stripped of my Rags of Corruption, to be
clothed upon with the white Robe of his Righteousness and Purity, and to be
married to my Husband, and to be given to the Embraces of my Lord Jesus Christ,
for ever and ever.

Learn not to repine at the Holy Determination of an infinite wise God, but
rest satisfied in his Will, knowing that he does all things for the best to
them that fear him: Weep not for me, who am only changing this World of
Temptation, of Troubles and Affliction: It has pleased God to call me a little
before you, but you must soon follow after; keep therefore the Fear of God
before your Eyes, and then you will have cause to rejoice, and not to mourn;
when at the time of departure, you may have cause to say with me, I have run my
Race, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith, henceforth is laid up
for me a Crown of Glory which fades not away; which that you may be able to
say, is the Hearty Prayer of

Your Friend and Servant, Josias Askew.

The Account his Friend gives of him.
TO prevent your further trouble in suing for a pardon, I think it convenient
^o let you know, I do not question, but my dear Cousin has had his Pardon
Sealed by the King of Kings, and is in everlasting Blessedness, singing
Hallelujahs, Salvation, Glory and Honor to him that sits upon the Throne, and
to the Lamb for ever and ever: For God did so carry him through to drink that
bitter Cup with so much Courage and Cheerfulness to the last, as was to the
Admiration of all Spectators, notwithstanding the terrible Sight he s^w at the
Place of Suffering, and so vehemently, as he was tried by the Adversary, yet it
did not in the least discompose him, or alter his Countenance; for he continued
with a smiling Countenance to the last, and was transported above measure: I
want words to express it, he was like one wrapped up in Heaven, with his Heart
there, and his Eyes fixed thereon. I could wish you had been there, it would
have driven away all cause of Sorrow from your Heart, to see his Deportment,
and hear the Gracious Words that proceeded out of his mouth: He remembers his
Duty to you both, and left P^ul's Blessing with you, Grace, Mercy and Peace;
his Love to his dear Sister; he desires her not to be troubled for him, for he
has made his Peace with God, and was assured he should go to eternal
Happiness; he would have written more to you and to his Sister, but that he had
so short a time after Sentence that he wanted Opportunity; when he went out of
Prison, he said, Gentlemen, Now I am going, and it is the time I much longed
for; I would not change with him that passes Sentence upon me, for a World. I
was with him to the last, and seeing his Courage, did very much encourage me,
though I never saw such a sight with my Eyes.

The behavior of John Holway before, and at the place of his Execution at
Warham, in the County of Dorset.
HE lived in Lime where the Duke Landed, and Appeared in Arms at that time,
until his Captain left him; then took up Arms under the Duke of Monmouth, and
went with him, until the Kings Proclamation came forth, That all that would lay
down their Arms before some Justice of the Peace, in four days after, and take
a Certificate for their so doing, they should be acquitted, and have his
Majesty's pardon, which this Person did, though one day too late; which Blot my
Lord Chief Justice hit, being very good at it, and passed the Sentence of Death
on him. Before his Trial he was not much concerned at his Case, and thought
himself almost out of danger: But to be short, he received his Sentence with
much Courage and Resolution, and by the means of one Mr. Tiller, who was to
suffer with him, was brought to that settled frame of Spirit, as is fit for one
in that Condition: As he was riding in the Cart, toward the place of Execution,
the Troopers, being just behind the Cart, he told them, They showed like brave
Fellows, but, said he, If I were to have my Life for fighting the best five of
you, I would not question it. At the place of Execution he said not much, But
that he thought his and other men's Blood would be revenged on time or another,
and said, Forgive me, have Mercy on my poor Soul, pardon all my Sins, and the
like, and so the Executioner did his Office.

The Last Speech and Prayer of Mr. Matthews at the place of Execution.
HE was much concerned the Morning before he died, to see his Wife weep, and to
be in such a passion for him, which drew Tears from his Eyes; and taking her in
his Arms, said, My Dear, Prithee do not disturb me at this time, but endeavor
to submit to the Will of God; and although thy Husband is going from thee, yet
I trust God will be all in all unto thee; sure my Dear, you will make my
passage into Eternity more troublesome than otherwise, if you thus lament and
take on for me; I am very sensible of thy tender love toward me, but would
have you consider, that this Separation will be so much for my Advantage, as
your Loss cannot parallel. I thank God I am willing to die, and to be with my
Jesus; be satisfied, the Will of God must be done: thy Will be done, O God, in
Earth as it is in Heaven; So embracing her, took his last farewell of her, and
prepared to go to the place of Execution, where being come, he with a very
modest, sober, composed Frame of Spirit stood while he saw several Executed
before him; his turn being come, he thus spoke:

Dear Countrymen, I suppose We are all of one Kingdom and Nation, and I hope
Protestants; O I wonder we should be so cruel and Blood-thirsty one toward
another; I have heard it said heretofore, that England could never be ruined
but by her self, which now I fear if a doing. Lord have Mercy on poor England;
turn the Hearts of the I^habi^^nts thereof, cause them to love one another, and
to for^et one another Infirmities. Have me^cy, O Lord, on me; Give me strength
and patience to fulfill thy Will; Comfort my dear and sorrowful Wife, be a
Hu^b^nd unto her, stand by her in the great^st trouble and affliction; Let her
depend upon thy P^ovidence^; be merciful to all men; preserve this Nation from
Popery; find out yet a way for its deliverance, if it be thy good Will, and
give all Men Hearts to be truly than^ful; Comfort my fellow sufferers that are
immediately to follow; Give them strength and comfort unto the end: I forgive
all the World, even all those that have been the immediate Hastners of my
Death: I am in charity with all Men. And now, blessed Lord Jesus, into thy
Hands I commend my Spirit. Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy
name; Thy Kingdom come; Thy Will be done in E^rth as it is in Heaven; Give us
this day our daily Bread; Forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that
trespass against us; And lead us not into Temptation; But deliver us from Evil;
for thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

After which going up the Ladder, he desired the Executioner not to be hard to
him, who answered, No, and said, I pray Master forgive me: To which he said, I
do wi^h my whole Heart, and I pray God forgive thee; but I advise thee to leave
off this bloody Trade. The Executioner said, I am forced to do what I do, it is
against my mind. So lifting up his hands to Heaven, the Executioner did his
Office.

The Behavior and Dying Words of Mr. Roger Satchel, who was executed at
Weymouth in the County of Dorset.
THis Gentleman, at the time of the Dukes landing at Lyme, lived at Culliton,
about five Miles West of that Town, and was supposed to be concerned in the
design with the Duke. He always was a great Admirer of him, which got him many
Enemies among the Gentry of that County: He always hated the name of a Papist;
and as it fell out, he did foresee Popery advancing, as his Words to diverse of
his Neighbors can testify. As for his Disposition, he was of a very generous
and Heroic Spirit. But to proceed, No sooner had he the news of the Dukes
being landed, but he sets himself to work to serve him, desiring all he knew to
join with him, and was one of the first that went to him to Lyme, and was with
him to the end: But after the Rout, traveling to and fro, to secure himself,
was at last taken at Chard by three Moss Troopers, under no Discipline, who
made it their business to ruin their Neighbors in those parts; they are so
well known, I need not say any more: He was from thence carried to Ilchester,
and so secured in Ilchester Goal; and at the Bloody Assizes at Dorchester, took
his Trial, and received his Sentence with the rest: Great application was made
for him; but my L. C. Justice Jeffreys Ears were deaf, and so was ordered to be
executed at Weymouth. After Sentence, two of his Friends came to him, and told
him, There was no hope. He answered, My hope is in the Lord. After which he
spent most of his time, before Execution, in Prayer and Meditation, and
conferring with many good Persons. The morning being come, he prepared himself,
and all the way drawing to Execution was very devout. Being come to the place,
there was a Minister, I think, of that place, who sung a Psalm, and prayed with
them, and would have some Discourse with this Person, which he avoided as much
as possible; but he asked him, What were his Grounds for joining in that
Rebellion? who answered, Had you, Sir, been there, and a Protestant, I believe
you would have joined too; but do not speak to me about that, I am come to die
for my sins, not for my Treason against the King, as you call it. So pointing
to the Wood that was to burn his Bowels, he said, I do not care for that; what
matters it what becomes of my Body, so my Soul be at rest. So praying to
himself near half an hour, and advising some he knew never to yield to Popery,
he was turned off the Ladder. He was a courageous bold spirited Man, and one of
great Reason, Just and punctual in all his business, and one that did much good
amongst his Neighbors.

There was at the same time and place one Mr. Lancaster executed, whose Courage
and Deportment was such, that he out-braved Death, and in a manner challenged
it to hurt him, saying, I die for a good Cause, and am going to a gracious God.
I desire all your Christian Prayers; it is good to go to Heaven with Company.
And much more he spoke concerning the Duke of Monmouth, whom he supposed at
that time to be living; and so praying privately for some small time, he was
turned, or rather leaped over the Ladder.

If I mistake not, he said he was born or lived in Bridport.

The last Speech of Mr. Benjamin Sandford at the place of Execution at Bridport.
HE with Nine more were brought from Dorchester to Bridport to be Executed.
Coming to the place of Execution, he held up his Hands to Heaven, and turning
himself to the People, said, I am an Old Man you see, and I little thought to
have ended my days at such a shameful place, and by such an ignominious Death;
and indeed it is dreadful to Flesh and Blood, as well as a Reproach to
Relations, but it would have been a great deal more, if I had suffered for some
Felonious Account. Says one to him, Is not this worse do you think than Felony?
He answered, I know not any thing that I have done so bad as Felony, that this
heavy Judgment should fall upon me, except it be for my sins against my God,
whom I have highly provoked, and must acknowledge have deserved ten thousand
times more; Lord! I trust thou have pardoned them; Seal my pardon in the Blood
of my Savior; Lord look upon, and be with me to the last Moment.

There was also Executed at the same time one John Bennet, a poor Man, but
pious and of good Report with his Neighbors in Lyme where he lived. I have
heard, that when he was on Trial, a certain Person informed his Lordship that
the Prisoner, then at the Bar, had Alms of the Parish: And that his Lordship
should reply, Do not trouble your selves, I will ease the Parish of that
trouble. In Prison, and at the place of Execution, he behaved himself so to
all, that many of his Enemies pitied him, and would, if it had lain in their
power, (as they said) have saved him. His Son being then present, offered to
have died for him, Here was a glorious Instance of Filial Affection.
and was going up the Ladder, if it might have been suffered. He prayed some
short time, and so was translated, as we have hopes to think, from this
troublesome World into Celestial Joy and Happiness.

Next follows many Excellent Hymns made by several Worthy Persons that were
Prisoners for the sake of Christ.
Triumphing Songs with glorious Tongues,
Let Us offer unto him;
That loved so to undergo
The product of our Sin.
Leaving his Throne from Heaven came down,
Sinners for to Redeem
From Hell and Wrath and second death,
Christ underwent great pain.
His side was gored, his hands were bored,
His feet were nailed down,
And all was for the Redemption
Of sinful wicked Man.
O how straightened, pressed and pained
Was Christ to be Baptized,
And in Affliction to be plunged,
His Body Sacrificed.
Let God be blessed for Jesus Christ
Who is our splendid King,
Hallelujahs sweet with spirit meet,
High praises to him sing.
For Blood, for Wounds, for Love, whose bounds
Extended unto all:
For scoff^ and smites, for jeers, for flouts
Which upon Christ did fall.
Now Christ, haste unto us again,
Thy Scepter for to sway,
Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done.
Come Jesus, come away.
With glorious bands and shi^ing trance
Of Angels in the Sky,
Which forth shall sing Triumphing Songs
With sweet Hallelujah.
Set up thy standerd, and prepare
War against Babylon:
For her destruction draws near.
As here we read her doom.
Lord, blow the Trumpet, and awake,
The Nations round about,
^tir up the spirit of the Medes,
Which did old Babel rout.
For Babel must drink of that Cup
Which Sion deep did wound,
Jerusalem did first begin,
And so the Cup goes round.
But Babel must drink up the dregs
Of Wrath which do remain,
With which no mixture she shall have
To mitigate her pain.
For it is the vengeance of our God,
And of his Temple too,
The vials that fill up his Wrath,
The three last Trumpets woe.
When Jacob as a battle Ax
In great Jehovah's hand,
Shall break down all, those Mountains tall,
That in his way do stand.
O then let us Rejoice, because
The time appointed is,
That Babel shall be seen to fall,
And Sion shine in Bliss.
Our Lord draws near, as does appear
By Signs by him foretold;
Then Virgins come, meet your Bridegroom,
His Wondrous Works behold.
The Night grows dark' be still and hark
What is the Brid^grooms Voice;
That when the (...) comes swiftly by,
It may your (...) ^ejoyce.
Your light grows dim, arise and trim
Your Lamps from all their Soil;
And see your Light shines clear and bright,
Supplied with Gospel-Oyl.
Some Virgins now do Sleepy grow;
And don't their Vessels fill;
Nor fear a want, when Oil grows scant,
And none be found to sell.
And at Midnight, all in a Fright,
Oyl-shops they cannot find;
And none will spare, out of his share,
And so they are left behind.
Thus Foolish sleep, in dangers deep,
And think their Lord delays;
But his own Bride ^ath surely spi'de
Some of his Glorious Rays;
And will not sleep, unless she keep
Her Watch-light^ burning still,
With Oil in store, laid up therefore,
Let him come when he will.
And though her Garments had some rents,
And spots not perfect white;
Yet they will be cleans'd, or quickly changed
For Rayments of Delight.
With her Bridegroom, she (...) find room
In Chambers of his Love;
When the Unwise, he will de^pise,
And them from him remove.
The behavior and dying words of Mr. Gatchill Executed at Taunton.
THE said Mr. Gatchill was a Constable of the Hundred; he was surprised by a
Party of the Dukes, and showed a Warrant to bring in Provisions and other
Necessaries for the use of the Army, which if he had not obeyed, was threatened
to have his House burnt; so that he was obliged to do what he did for his own
Preservation. But this was not sufficient, for being found Guilty, he was
Executed. As he was drawn to Execution, he looked on the People, and said, A
Populous Town, God bless it. Just before he was Executed, he spoke, That the
Crime he was Accused of, and Condemned for, was High Treason; but he did not
know himself to be Guilty of it; and that what he did he was forced to do. And
further said, I am so well known to you, that I do verily believe you have
Charity to think that what I speak is true. As for the Niceties of the Law, I
do not well understand them. And much more to the same effect he spoke. And so
after Prayer with his suffering Brother, Mr. Simon Hambling, he was Executed.

There was also Executed at Taunton Mr. John Hucker, a very worthy Gentlman of
that Town. He had some ill Friends in the Duke's Army, that cast Aspersions on
him, as though he was the Person that was a Traitor to the Duke, by firing a
Pistol in Sedgmoor; but I have strictly examined many on that Point, and can
find it to be nothing but the worst of an Enemies Malice, to wound him after
his Death in his Reputation, which he always valued highly when living. To be
short, he has left the Character amongst his Neighbors, of an honest Man, a
good Christian, and one that was true to the Interest of the Duke, and Sealed
it with his Blood.

The following Letter my Bookseller received from Mr. Robert Hucker now living
in Taunton, which I thought proper to print word for word, than so my Reader
may see what care I have taken to have all the Accounts I give concerning Mr.
Hucker well attested.
Mr. Dunton, Taunton, Feb. 24 th. 1691/2.
LOoking over the Advertisements to the Athenian Mercury, I found your
intention of making some Additions to the Book, called the Bloody Assizes; and
finding others that suffered with my Father, their Relations have printed their
Last Letters; I have here sent you a Letter written by my Father but some hours
before he was Executed; the main reason why I consented to have it Printed,
was, That persons mouths may be stopped from their false and lying Accusations;
he carried himself like a Christian under Confinement; but when he came to look
Death in the Face, it was with so much Courage, that it was to the Astonishment
of the Beholders; for there was many a weeping Eye amongst both Officers and
Soldiers for him, and those his Fellow Sufferers. I crave a Line from you of
the Receipt of this, with which you will oblige, Sir,

Your unknown Friend and Servant, ROBERT HUCKER.
Direct to me in Taunton.



Mr. John Huckers Letter to his Friend a little before his Execution.
I Was in hopes to have had liberty to speak a few words at the place of
Execution, till a few minutes since; but now am persuaded the contrary:
Therefore excuse these abrupt-Lines.

I bless God, I am now reconciled to this contemptible Death; it was long ere I
could; but now God has done it for me, and I thankfully submit to it from the
hands of the wise God, whom I have offended: And therefore desire to accept my
punishment, knowing he does all things well without any wrong to his Creatures.

I had lately some Discourse with two Persons, whereof one was of Quality
concerning the things laid to my charge; I was told, that it was three things;
One was, That I was an enemy to, or against the Protestant Religion; that I was
troublesome, and had acted vigorously in Elections of Members for Parliament;
and upheld the Meetings.

I own my self a Protestant, and die an Asserter of that Religion, and I pray
God I do not prove a better Friend to it than those that have so industriously
endeavored the taking away my Life, and that they see it not when it is too
late.

As to the Meetings, I bless God I ever was at any of them, and that I was any
way instrumental to the upholding of them, and am troubled that I have, I fear,
sinfully deprived my self of them, and do believe, if ever the Ordinances of
God were rightly administered, and the Gospel effectually preached, it was in
those Meetings that were held in Taunton; the Lord bless the Seed that was
there sown.

As to Elections of Members for Parliament, I judge it my Birthright; and
therefore was industrious in it; but I hope never did (I am sur^ never
intended) troublesomness to any in it, but especially to my Superiors: I had
ever a venerable and due esteem of Magistrates, as the Ministers of God, and
they Administering an Ordinance of God.

I also lie under a Reproach of being unfaithful to an Interest that I owned,
which I utterly deny and disown.

I pray God bless and forgive my violent Enemies that have industriously sought
the taking away my Life. It Is the hearty Prayer of*

JOHN HVCKER.
From Taunton-Castle a little before he suffered, Sept. 30th. 1685.
An Impartial Account of K -- s Cruelties, with other Barbarities in the West:
Never printed before. Sent to the Compiler of this History, by one that was an
Eye and Ear Witness to all the matter of Fact.
WHen K -- k came first into Taunton, he came with two Cart-loads of Men
Bloody, and their Wounds not dressed, just as they were hauled into Bridgwater
Prison, they were guarded with Granadeers with naked Swords and Bagonets. He
also brought with him into Taunton, a great drove of Foot, chained two and two
together. He hanged nineteen on the Cornhill immediately, not suffering either
their Wives or Children to speak to 'em, or to take their leave of 'em.

As they were executing, he K -- caused the Pipes to Play, Drums an^ Trumpets
to sound, that the Spectators might not hear the Cries and Groans of the Dying
Men, nor the Cries of their Friends. He caused their Bowels to be burnt, and
their Quarters to be boiled in Pitch, and hanged all about the Town.

K -- hanged one on the White Heart Sign-Post three times, to try if he would
own he had done amiss; but he affirmed (to this effect) That if it was to do
again, he would engage in the same cause; so K -- would have him hanged in
Chains; and so he was, till King William came, to the Deliverance of this
Nation from Popery and Slavery.

When Jenkins, Hewlings, etc. were to die, before they came out of the B -- l,
there was a great Fire made on the Cornhill, that so they might see the Fire
that was to burn their Bowels.

Some that K -- caused to be hanged, he caused also their Bodies to be stripped,
and their Breasts to be cleav'd asunder, in the place where he caused the
Executions to be done; you might have gone up to the Ankles in Blood; he also
caused the Hearts of the poor Executed Men to be thrown into the Fire with a
great Shout, saying, Here is the Heart of a Traitor.

A Captain of VV -- was hanged, and the Rope broke, wh^reby he hoped to have
saved his life; but they took from a Market-horse a Ring-Rope, and hanged him
again.

At the Assizes when the Prisoners were brought before the Bar, Jeffreys said,
if any Man pleaded Not guilty, he should die.

One not concerned in Monmouth's Business, when asked, said, Not Guilty my
Lord: Jeffreys said, take him Jailer, and let him be Executed another time.

An Honest Man was hanged for sparing for Monmouth's Horse three pennyworth of
Hay.

A Constable also was hanged for executing of Monmouth's Warrant.

And many Hundreds were put in the Castle-Hall, by which it was feared they
would infect the Town. Frances Burges was taken upon Maidendown, by the
persuasion of Sir -- was hanged by fastening a Rope to a Chamber-Window, and set
upon a Hoget, and so hanged. The Executioner was one S -- of St. Thomas Parish,
Exon.

There was, by good Report, several Scores died in Ilchester by Infectious
Diseases, and in their Irons, and Hand-bolt; for if they were not hard-hearted,
and used the extremest Rigor imaginable, the Keepers were not counted good
Subjects: One of VVelinton that was to be hanged them, was saved, supposed by
Order of Sir -- and one of Crookern hanged in his stead; this is true, and so
it was at other places: But 'twere endless to record all the Cruelties
exercised by K -- and Jeffreys, after Monmouth's Defeat.

Now that which remains, is to give an Account of Hundreds that had fled and
hid themselves up and down in Holes and Rocks, whose Friends make all
Application to some great Person or other to procure their Pardons; some to
this, some to others, that they thought Favorites with the King; but the
Rewards must be ascertained before any Application could be made, (for Pardons
were just as they were in Rome) according to the ability of the Person, from
half a Crown to sixteen thousand Guinea's; Any Tooth good Barber. Diverse Lists
being sent up, and the Rewards ascertained, which amongst many of them put
together, did amount to considerable Sums. So that it was now, who could find a
Friend to relieve his distressed Relations, which were forced to wander up and
down in Caves and Deserts, for fear of being taken. But this Misfortune
attended the Agents, that unless my Lord Chancellor were used by his Creatures
that were allowed by him so to do, other Applications commonly met with
Disapointments.

To conclude, The solemn, serious, dying Declarations, and Christian Courage of
the VVestern Sufferers, have always, out-weighed with me, the Evidence of those
flagitious Witnesses, who swore these Persons out of their Lives. And I did and
do most steadfastly believe, that the only Plot in that day, was the same, which
the Almighty has at length owned, and most signally prospered, in the hand of
our gracious August and Rightful Sovereign King William; I mean the rescuing
the Protestant Religion and the Laws and Liberties of England, from a most
impetuous Torrent of Popery and Tyranny; wherewith they were very dangerously
threatened. And methinks it should even convert a Tory (unless his Brains were
picked out of his Skull, by him who picked the Guineas out of his Pocket) when
he cast his Eye upon that apposite and Emphatical Expression in the Observator,
vol. 2 Number 125. To deal freely with the TRIMMER, I have more Faith, in the
Words of one dying Traitor, under the stroke of Justice, than of twenty Living.

Thus have we given you an Account of what happened in the West (in the Year
85.) being in every Point truth; we shall next give a short touch of the
Civilities the poor Sufferers received from the City of Exon, which deserves an
everlasting Remembrance: Most sorts of Provisions, as hot Broth, boiled Meat,
roast Meat, diverse sorts of Pies, were daily sent into the Prison; the Persons
that sent them unknown to them. Also if any Person was sick, there should be a
Nurse to attend him: Also a Physician and Chyrurgion to attend, when occasion
was. It Is said, He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord; the Lord
return them an hundred fold.

Thus Reader, by the help of God, we are come to an end of our long Journey,
from the yea^ 1678. to 1685. The way all along has been full of dirt and blood,
and therefore no wonder if the Wheels have driven somewhat heavily. 'Twill be
worth thy while as well as mine, to look back on the d^fferent Stages we have
taken, which is one of the g^eatest pleasures of a Traveller, who finds delight
in reflecting even on that which formerly gave him pain and trouble. He who
first broke the way was Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, according to his own Prophecy,
That he should be the first Martyr. Mr. Arnold was like to follow him, but that
intended stroke not coming home enough, they resolved to lay the Foundation
firmer, and so struck lower, and began with Stephen College at Oxford, who
before his death, said, That it would not stop there, nor his death satisfy
those who thirsted after Blood, as appeared plain enough when they had got a
Plot and Plotters to their minds, who made it their business, as Walcot tells
Cartwright, to invite men to their Meetings, to importune 'em to their
Meetings, as it appears, to talk madly and treasonably at those Meetings, and
because they were a little too brave to do the same by them, after ^ll to
deliver them up to be hanged for coming thither. By which design many of the
boldest Patrons of their Country and Religion were destroyed, Essex went first,
to whose Death an infamy was added greater than that of those who publicly
suffered. Russel followed but too closely after him, who says in his Speech, He
wishes the rage of hot Men, and particular Juries, might be stopped with his
Blood, which he would offer up with much the more joy, if he thought he should
be the last were to suffer in such a way.] About the same time dyed Walcot, and
some others. Col. Sidney came after, one of the first that ever lost his Head
by Innuendo's, and who died as he was told, because else the Plot must have
died. Holloway came next, brought from ^other World to be hanged in this; whose
ingenuous Confession no doubt did his business, there being too many bold
Truths in it, which some men could not bear, for him ever to expect a Pardon.
But how many Lies beside there might be in his Confession, or others, it is
impossible to know, unless we knew, not only whose Hands they came through, but
how they were there used. And as he from another World, so Armstrong was
brought from another Country, to be paid for all his Service to the Royal
Family, in their Exile and afterward. And though he was not hanged first, and
tried afterward, yet what is much the same, was hanged without ever being tried
at all. Next to this we took a view of the Design of that unfortunate Gentleman
who landed in the West, and of those who embarkt in it, and how far they were
justifiable; where follows a particular account of some of the most eminent
amongst 'em, and a more general one of the rest: which though it might have
perhaps been more accurate, yet 'twas thought better to keep near those loose
Papers already published on that matter, of which this Book is a sort of a
second Edition; and to give that account in the same inartificial Dress which
'twas delivered in by some honest Country Men, who were personally present at
most of the Actions and Sufferings there mentioned. And among all these,
nothing is more remarkable than what we have taken particular notice of, The
strong Persuasion and Belief in which almost all of 'em died, That God would
accomplish the great Work of delivering their Country and Religion some other
way, though he was not pleased to accept of their Endeavors. At the return from
the Western Circuit, that London might have a little sprinkling of their Mercy,
the pious and prudent Mr. Cornish was sacrificed; all whose time of preparation
for that which must be called his Trial, was from Saturday to Monday, whose
courage and constancy at his death, and that dreadful Storm which spoke the
displeasure of Heaven in such loud Language after 'twas over, were as much the
wonder of England, as the next and last merited their pity, Poor Bateman, who
had entirely lost his Reason by his Imprisonment, and the Accidents thereof.
But besides all these, and some others, there were some who had Trials of cruel
Mockings and Scourgings, were exposed in the Pillory, and worse than whipped to
death, though sometimes even that not thought sufficient, without actual
Assassination.

Upon the entire review of all this dreadful Scene of Blood and Horror,
especially that relating to the Western Affairs, what can be a more natural and
useful Reflection, than for us hence to learn, by wound^ of our own, yet green
and bleeding, the true undissembled kindness of prevailing Popery, and Popish
Councils, and what all Protestants, of what character or denomination soever,
must expect thence, when rampant and powerful? How can we choose but see,
unless we have winkt our selves quite blind, that the Hand of the same Joab has
been in all this? That 'twas the famous D. of Y. who was at first as deep in
Godfrey's Murder, as in the Fire of London; the same who was at Helm all along
after, and as good as managed the Executioners Axes and Halters for so many
years. 'Twas he who was so near at Essex's Murder, and who hindered so
carefully my L. Russel from his Pardon; who was the Staff, the Hop^, the Moses,
the Gideon of the Popish Plot and Party, and the eager and inveterate Enemy to
the very Name of a true Protestant. He who showed so much Mercy to the poor*
West-Country Men, Women and Children, destroying so many hundreds in cold
Blood, and hardly sparing one man that could write and rea^, by his L.
Chief-Hangman Jeffreys Lastly, He who was falling upon his own best Friends,
who are now sensible they loved him to a Fault, and carried their Loyalty to
such a height for his Service, ^s is now better forgotten; since no Party can
entir^ly clear themselves even of that Imputation. He who f^ll upon them, and
our Religion and Laws, and whatever was dear to us, with the greatest and most
open violence; and because he could not have his Will, and be a French King in
England, resolved to leave us to the mercy of his own unkennel'd Irish, and go
to France to be there as absolute a Slave as he here would have made us. And
yet this is the self-same Person whom some are yet so zealous for, and they
have not yet had enough of him.

But whilst these haters of themselves, as well as their Religion and Country,
must be left to Man's Justice and God's Vengeance, let us address the Conclusion
of these Papers to all true honest men, of good Principles, and firm to the
Protestant Religion, and persuade them to pray heartily for K. William and Q.
Mary, and fight for 'em as heartily too, as all these Martyrs no doubt would
gladly have done: If some of them should not be entirely satisfied with
whatever has happened in this great Change, yet to remember at the lowest the
Duty of Subjects; to think all the Nation may see more than they; to pay
Allegiance where they find Protection; to reflect on our almost too happy
Condition, compared with that of Germany and Ireland, and wherever the French
and Popish Arm's and Counsels prevail; to honor the Memory of these Martyrs
who suffered for their vigorous appearance against them; and lastly, to thank
God sincerely and in good earnest, that we may now, if occasion be, defend our
Religion and Liberties with our Swords, which they could only do by laying down
their Lives.

FINIS.
An Impartial HISTORY OF THE LIFE AND DEATH OF GEORGE Lord JEFFREYS. LATE Lord
Chancellor OF ENGLAND

The Fourth Edition with large Additions.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry, 1693.

TO GEORGE Lord JEFFREYS. LATE Lord Chancellor of ENGLAND.
My Lord,
I Know not to whom I could more properly Dedicate a Treatise of this Nature,
than to your Lordship, who lately was Lord Chief Justice of England, and have
set such remarkable Copies to inferior Magistrates. What is here offered may
serve as a Mirror, in which future Administrators of Public Justice would do
well to look; for you may remember, my Lord (if your Lordships present
Afflictions have not made you forget as much Law as you ever learnt) Common Law
^uns much upon Presidents: And if a Man happen to have none of the best
Physiognomies, there is no reason why he should straight grow angry, and fling
stones, to break all the Looking-Glasses he meets with, only because they
represent the true Figure of the Object.

My Lord, The following Treatise is a true Account of your Lordships Life and
Actions (most of which are ready to be attested upon Oath) of your unheard of
Cruelties and barbarous Proceedings in your whole Western Circuit: In which all
may see at what dear rates our Western Martyrs puchased their Religion, and how
that it cost those glorious Sufferers tha^ so lately went off the Stage (under
your Lordships Sentence) both Whippings and cruel Impriso^ments, and the most
exquisite Tortures which none could invent or inflict but your Lordship (whose
good nature is sufficiently experienced) nor any endure but they whose gallant
and noble Souls were born up with heavenly Cordials, and a Power from on high.
But, my Lord, rest assured, that their Bl^od still cries for Vengeance, and
will be a lasting Monument of your Lordships C^uelties, whilst History can
speak or transmit to incredulous Posterity the Remarkables of elapsed Ages; for
Hang, Draw and Quarter, and Try Men afterward, (Witness Sir Thomas Armstrong's
death, etc.) has been your peculiar Talent. But you Lordship will now ^t last
do well to remember that King Alfred caused forty four Judges in one year to
be hang^d as murderers, for their false Judgments.

I hope your Lordship will pardon this present Address, seeing it is a
privilege we modern Authors hold by Prescription, to put any great Body's Name
in the Front of our Book: Princes have not been able to exempt themselves or
their Families from the Persecution of Dedications; nor ever was there (I
humbly conceive) any Rule made in your Lordships Court to forbid them.

Suffer then, I beseech your Lordship, this Address to remain a Monument to
Posterity, of the sentiments this Age has of your Lordships Conduct and Merits;
and Witness to all the World how much its Author is,

Your Lordship's Most humble Servant, JAMES BENT.

A POEM To the MEMORY of GEORGE Lord JEFFREYS.
I Cannot hold, hot struggling Rage aspires,
And crowds my freeborn breast wit^ nobl^ fires;
Whilst prudent fools squeak Treason through the Nose,
And whine a quivering Vote in sneaking Prose,
My Muse soars out of reach, and dares despise
What e're below atte^pts to Tyrannize.
Tho I by some base Nero should be clad
In such a Gown as the old Christians had,
In Clouds of Satyr up to Heaven I Would roll,
For he could burn my shell, but not my Soul.
Tho Nature her auspicious aid refuse,
Revenge and Anger shall inspire my Muse:
Nature has given me a complaining part,
And murdered Protestants a resenting Heart.
Then room for bloody Jeffreys, or he will swear
By all the Aps from St. Cadwalladar;
Prutus hur creat Cranfather, if hur enquire,
And Adam's Cranfather was Prutus sire;
Famous ap Sh^nkin was hur elder Brother,
Some Caledonian Sycorax hur Mother:
Or some she De'il more damned than all the rest,
At their bla^k Feast hur lustful Sir^ comprest:
Thence do I th^nk this C^codemon rose,
Whose wrathful Ey^s his inward baseness shows;
His shape is all inhum^n and uncouth,
But yet he is chiefly Dev^l about the MOUTH;
With care this Brat was nursed, for fear it should
Grow tame, and so degenerate into good:
With City charte^s he was wrapped about,
And Acts of Parliament for swadling-clout:
As he grew up, he won a noble Fame,
For which Squire Ketch has sworn him public shame.
And will not it be a pretty sight to see it,
The Hang man, Rope, and bloody Jeffreys meet?
Jeffreys who cherisht spite, as all can tell;
Jeffreys who was the darling Brat of Hell.
Often with success this migh^y Blast did bawl,
Where loudest Lungs* and biggest Words win all;
And still his clenched Arguments did end
With that home-thrust, He is not Caesar's Friend.
Sometimes that jaded Ears he might release,
Good Man! he has been fee'd to hold his Peace.
Hear him, but never see him, and you would swear
He was the Cry^r, not the Counselor:
He roars, as if he only chanced to find
Justice was now grown deaf as well as blind,
This D^my fi^nd, this Hurricane of Man
Was sent to butcher all in the West he can:
'Twas him the Popish Party wisely chose
To splutter Law, and the dinn'd Rabble pose:
They have a thousand Tongues, yet he can roar
Far louder, tho they had a thousand more,
Unto long winded Cook he scorns to go,
But Pleads, His Majesty will have it so.
He Is for all Mischief set, by Nature bred;
He rails at all before him, and is fed
Hyaena like, by tearing up the Dead.
Th'unluckiest Satyrist alive, that still
Writes his own Character in all that is ill.
Of all the World most fit a Vice to expose,
That all its Cause, Effects and Motions knows,
Stranger to none can no advantage lose.
Big with conceit the empty shape looks great.
His own dear self obligingly does treat:
Rewards his Soul in any garb will lap,
His ductile Soul will put on any shape:
Vice has his Patronage, and there is no fear
But Hell in time may his Protection share,
The rather'cause the God of Gold is there.
He courts loud rumor, but l^ts truth alone,
Conscious of guilt, he shuns being justly known,
And by's often changing flies a definition.
Learned, but in ill; Ingenious, but in spite;
Virtuous by accident, by chance a Wit;
Modest, when beat; in suffering valiant;
Honest, when forced; and moderate when in want;
True, but for interest; Civil, but for dread;
Devout for Alms; and Loyal but for bread.
Thy mushroom Greatness I dare now arraign,
For all thy Hectoring now will be in vain.
Here, take this Pass, ere we for ever part;
Then run, and then Farewell with all my heart.
The Lawyers yelling in their feigned debate.
And the fleeced Client's Wisdom, all too late;
The keeping Cully's Jealousy and Care,
The slighted Lover's Maggots and Despair;
A Woman's Body every day to dress,
A fickle Soul, little as theirs, or less;
The Courtiers business, the Impudence of the Stage,
And the defeated Father Peter's Rage;
A Clock ^ork Spouse with loud eternal Clack,
A Shop in the Change still tied to What do you lack:
Worse than these last, if any Curses more
Ovid e're knew, or fiercer Oldham's store;
'Till not one part in Body or Soul be free,
May all their barbed Vengeance shower on thee:
Pres^'d with their weight, long may thou raving lie,
En^ying an Halter, but not dare to dye:
And when Condemned thou do thy Clergy plead,
Some frightful Fiend deny thee Power to read;
Madness, Despair, Confusion, Rage and Shame
Attend you to the Place from whence you came:
To Tyburn thee let carrion Horses draw,
In jolting Cart, without so much as straw;
Jaded, may they lie down in the road, and tired,
And (worse than one fair hanging, twice bemir'd)
May thou be mauled with Pulchers Sexton 's Sermon
'Till thou roar out Hemp-sake, Drive on Car-man.
Pelted and Cursed in the road by every one,
E'ne to be h^ng'd may thou the Gauntlet run.
Not one good Woman who in Conscience can
Cry out, -- It Is pity, -- Troth, a proper Man.
Stupid and dull, may thou rub off like Hone,
Without an open, or a smothered groan:
May the Knot miss the place, and fitted be
To plague and torture, not deliver thee;
Be half a day a Dying thus, and then
Revive like Savage, to be Hanged again.
In pi^y now thou shall no longer Live,
For when thus sati^fi'd, I can forgive.
John Carter.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF GEORGE Lord JEFFREYS.
REader, Think it not strange if I present you with the memorable Life and
Actions of a Person, so well known in this great Kingdom: And peradventure Fame
has not been silent in other Countries, especially since he has been advanced
to be a Chief Minister of State, and sat as it were steering at the Helm of
Government. Various indeed are the Changes of Worldly Affairs, and the Actions
of Human Life, which have been more particularly exemplified in the Rise and
Fall of the Person, the Subject of this Discourse; who from almost a mean
obscurity, soared to the losty Pyramid of Honor; where for a while, like an
unfixed Star he appeared to the Eyes of the wondering Nation, giving an
imperfect luster; till by the sudden turn and change of unsteady Fortune, he
dropped headlong from his Sphere, and lost at once his Grandeur and his Power. To
let Mankind see how little trust there is to be given to the smiles of
flattering Greatness, especially when attained by violent and pressing motions:
I now proceed to trace this unfortunate Favorite in the sundry Capacities and
Stations that have hitherto made up the Series of his Life.

He was born at Acton near Wrexam in Denbighshire, in Wales, about the Year
1648. his Fathers name was -- Jeffreys, being reputed a Gentleman in that
Country, though of no large Fortune or Estate; however he lived very
comfortably on what he had, improving his yearly Income by his Industry; and
gained by his plain and honest Endeavors a good repute amongst the Gentry of
those Parts; Insomuch that it was not long before he, upon the recommendation
of some Person of Interest and Ability, gained a Wife of a good House; and they
lived very comfortably together in their rural Habitation, being far from
Ambition, or striving for Court-favour; but contented with what God had blessed
them with, and the fruits of their own Industry, they found a solid Happiness
in that Contentment. Nor had they lived together any considerable time, but
amongst other Children, the fruits of Wedlock, God was pleased to bestow on
them the Person who is intended the Subject of this Discourse, who was in due
time Baptized by the Christian Name of George; whether he had Godfathers, etc.
it does not occur; however, he under the care and diligence of his industrious
Parents grew up, and appeared to all that studied him, of a very prompt and
ready Wit, active, and striving for Preeminence, even among his Compeers in his
tender Age, which lively demonstrated that an Air of Ambition was inherent to
his Person.

As soon as he was capable to receive Learning, he was put to a Country School,
where he was furnished with such Education as that afforded, which was not
extraordinary; yet his Natural Parts set it off to the best Advantage; and
growing to years of somewhat a ripe Understanding, and not very tractable, his
Father by the Advice of some of his Confidents, caused him to be brought to
London, and finding him not inclinable to any Trade, but rather addicted to
Study, he entered him, or by his procurement he was entered into the Free School
of Westminster, where he profited much; so that he was, by the care of the
worthy Master thereof, soon enabled to understand the Languages, or at least so
many of them as were convenient for the study of the Law, which above other
things he aimed at; though his Father seemed not very pliable to his desires; for
perceiving in his Soul a more than ordinary Spark of Ambition, fearing it might
kindle into a flame, and prove one day his ruin, he labored to hinder the
ways he conceived most likely to bring it upon him; and is reported to say,
(when he found he could not dissuade him from what he purposed, gently clapping
him on the back,) Ah George, George, I f^ar thou will die with thy Shoes and
Stockings on: What he meant by that Expression, I determine not, but leave the
Reader to interpret.

Upon the Coming in of King Charles the Second, and the restoring the Face of
Affairs in the Kingdom, the Law revived again, and began to flourish; the
Practitioners lived in much Credit and Reputation, and many of them, purchased
large Estates, which served to wing the desire of this Person with impatience;
and some say he was the rather incited to it by a Dream he had whilst a Scholar
at Westminster School* viz. That he should be the chief Scholar in that School,
and afterward should enrich himself by Study and Industry, and that he should
come to be the second Man in the Kingdom; but in conclusion, should fall into
great disgrace and misery. This is confidently reported; and some say himself
told it to sundry Persons since, when he found the second part of it was
fulfilled, by acquiring the Chancellourship, and standing high in the Favor of
his Prince.

However, We find the latter part did not deter him from his purpose; for
having entered himself in the Inner Temple House, one of the Chief Inns of
Court, after his performing such things as are conformable to the Customs of
the House, we find him called to the Bar, by the Interest he made with the
Benchers and Heads of that Learned Society, earlier than had been usual,
leaping over the Heads of elder Graduates.

This happening about the Twentieth year of the Reign of King Charles the
Second, and the City of London beginning to raise her self out of her Ashes,
more stately and magnificent than before she sunk in Flames, a Sacrifice to the
Revenge and Malice of the Papists, as by the late Inscription on the Monument,
and upon Record it appears: This great City, I say, regaining her Trade, her
Privileges and Customs were kept up with great exactness, so that in the
Courts at Guild Hall there was much Business; which being considered by this
Person as more beneficial than that at Westminster, by reason of its frequency,
and being carried on briefer, and with less difficulty; which induced him to
give his Attendance, as also at Hixes-Hall, and other inferior Courts and
Places; insomuch, that he being of a bold Presence, and having naturally a
fluent Tongue, an audible Voice, and good Utterance, he had not pleaded often
before he was very much taken Notice of; and gained so much Credit with the
People, that they preferred him before any of the younger sort of Barristers; by
which means he found his Stars begin to smile upon him; so that he was in a
manner Courted to take Fees, and had Breviates thrust into his Hand frequently
in the middle of a Cause by Persons, when they perceived it went ill on their
sides, and was like to go against them.

Thus flushed with success, he now thought of nothing more than how he might
climb; nor did he want an Opportunity; for the next Station we find him in, is
that of Common Sergeant, to the great and honorable City of London; and so
much Fortune favored him at this time, that Alderman Jeffreys the great
Smoaker, having often observed his Discourse and Actions, took such a liking to
him, that being of the same Name, though not in the least any Relation, he backed
him with his Purse and Interest, which was not inconsiderable; and thereby not
only enabled him to carry on his Grandeur, but to purchase as he found a
convenience or advantage, in order to his keeping it up in the World.

These, I say, being the Degrees by which he was climbing the slippery Stair of
Honor, to contract a firmer Alliance, he Addressed himself to a brisk young
Widow, Daughter to Sir Thomas Bludworth, then one of the Aldermen of the City,
and who in the time of the dre^dful Conflagration had the Chair, as being then
Lord Mayor; and so far pr^vail'd upon the Lady and her Father, that he gained
both their Consents, and the Contract was made, the Nuptials solemnized, And
soon after he had the pleasure to behold the Fruits of her Labor. Sir John
Howel the Recorder of London giving place, the Recordership became vacant,
which made this Person lay hold of that Opportunity, to use his own and the
Interest of his Friends, to acquire that Place of Trust and Honor: nor did his
Measures fail him, for by the powerful influence he had by this time gained
over sundry Persons, who were best able to promote him to what he so earnestly
labored to arrive at, he was chosen and confirmed Recorder of the Honorable
City; taking upon him the Charge and Care of the Writings, Papers, etc. that
belong to so great a Charge and Trust, as that of a Recorder of the City of
London.

By this means being become (as himself declared) The Mouth of the City, and as
we may term him, Capital Judge in the Guild Hall, in Controversies at the
Sessions held there, etc. and the Power of breathing forth. Sentences of
Punishment, being put into his hands, he found his Ambition enlarged, aiming at
nothing more than to become a Court-Favourite: Nor was it long before an
Opportunity offered it self, to make him to be taken notice of: For so it
happened, that some Persons had imprinted a Psalter, and Entitled it (the
beter to shadow the Injury they had done to the Company of Stationers, by
invading their Property) The King's Psalter, which occasioning a Disput^, it
was referred to a Hearing before the Council at Whitehall, the King being
present, and the Company the better to make out their Title and Claim, carried
with them this Person as their Counsel, who in the opening of the Case, and
making the Complaint of the apparent Injury done to the Company, in printing
what was really their Propriety, he had this Expression, viz. They h^ve teemed
with a spurious Brat, which being clandestinely midwiv'd into the World, the
better to cover the Imposture, they lay it at your Majesty's door, etc. This,
though the King might have taken it (for sundry Reasons) as a Reflection upon
his Royal Person, yet he was so far from resenting it that way, that he only
turned to one of the Lords that s^t next him, and said, This is a bold Fellow
I Will warrant him. And indeed the Stationers had the Matter declared by the
Honorable Board in their Favor.

About this time the Popish Plot being discovered by Dr. Oats and others, the
Nation was for a while in a Ferment, and matters run extremely high in Disputes
and Controversies, and he sailed with the Current, declaring with much heat and
violence against the Priests, Jesuits, and others of the Conspirators and
Romish Faction; as appeared not only by his vehement expressions in pleading
against 'em, but the alacrity and little concern that was visible in his
Countenance, when at any time, as Recorder of London, he past sentence of Death
upon any of them; which he frequently did with more or less reproach, and
became in a manner the terror of that Party. But no sooner he perceiving the
Wind tacking at Court, and that there was some misunderstanding between King
Charles the Second and his Parliament, but he began to fall off, and grow cold
in prosecuting the ends of the Government, being frequently at Court, and
laboring as much as in him lay, to draw the Magistracy of the City after him;
as appears more especially by one passage, viz. The King being recovered of an
Indisposition, that had for some time put the Kingdoms in a fear and doubt of
his Life, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen went to congratulate him upon his going
abroad; after which, and a favorable reception, it was proposed by this
Person, that they should in like manner wait upon his Royal Highness, then Duke
of York, who was not long before returned from Flanders; but perceiving no
forwardness to be seconded, he only with his Father-in-Law stayed behind to
gain that Access. These and other Proceedings created in the City a Jealousy,
that he had espoused an Interest to their prejudice, which wrought so strongly
in their Conceits, that it was concluded in the Council Chamger at Guild Hall,
that he should resign his Recordership; and accordingly they sent to him to
deliver back the Papers and Writings they had entrusted him with, which
accordingly was done, and Sir George Treby constituted Recorder in his stead.

This so netled him, that he now openly declared himself to be what before was
only suspected, indulging his thoughts in nothing more, than how he might
revenge it upon the Dissenters to whose influence on the Court of Aldermen he
attributed his dismission from the Recordership, and used his Endeavors to
blacken them as much as he could: Yet all his Honor was not sunk: for he had
prevailed for the Removal of Sir Job Charleton from the Chief Justiceship of
the County Palatine of Chester, and by the importunity and interest of his
Party at Court, gained it for himself; and took the first Possession of that
Charge in much splendor, paying at that time his Father a Visit with a
numerous Train, which, as it is reported, put the old Gentleman into such a
fret, for the drinking up his Cider, and devouring his Provisions, that he
charged him with the undertaking to ruin him, by bringing a whole Country at
his heels, commanding him never to attempt the like Prodigality again with
hopes of success.

Many Petitions being put up upon the dissolving the Parliament in 1682. by
most of the Counties, and Buroughs, and Corporations of England, for the
speedy calling another, to redress the Grievances of the Nation; and the King
showing some dislike of that manner of proceeding, this Person further to
endear himself to the interest of the Court, declared in his station as
vehemently against them, by saying, He abhorred that Petitioning, etc. from
which, and the discountenancing the Petitioners as much as in him lay, he
gained the Name and Epithet of an Abhorrer; and upon the burning the Pope in
Effigies at Temple Bar, upon the Birthday of Queen Elizabeth, amongst other
Figures, the Arch-waggs had set one on Horseback with his Face to the Tail, and
a Paper on his back, viz. I am an abhorrer.

During these Transactions, the Parliament being called, met at Westminster,
and amongst others, this Person was called before them, for attempting to
entrench upon the Rights and Privileges of the People, etc. and obliged at the
Bar of the Commons House, (after having been heard what he could say in defense
of his Proceedings by his Council) to make his acknowledgment upon his Knees,
and receive the Reprimand of the Speaker; whereupon, with some sharp Rebukes,
as the Censure of the House; he was discharged.

To comfort him in this affliction, that was not by a man of his haughty Spirit
a little stomacked, this Parliament being dissolved, and a call of Sergeants
had at the Kings-Bench-Bar, Westminster, he was the first in the Roll, and
consequently the King Sergeant; and as it is usual to present the King with a
Ring on that occasion, the Motto he agreed to was, A Deo Rex, a Rege Lex, viz.
The King from God, and the Law from the King. And now the Popish Party playing
their Cards with more security, Edward Fitz-Harris, who had been Impeached by
the Commons, and stood charged by them of High Treason; being nevertheless,
upon the Dissolution, tried at the Kings-Bench-Bar, this Person was the
principal Stickler against him, and by his Rhetorical and florid expressions,
wrought so powerfully with the Jury, who were somewhat in doubt what they
should do in this Case, that they found him Guilty, and the Impeachment in
Parliament set aside, he was executed as a Traitor at Tyburn: And soon after
this, the Dissenters losing of their Esteem in the eyes of the Court-Party, and
some Justices of Peace of Middlesex being sharp upon them, this Person was
chosen Chairman at the Sessions at Hick's Hall, where he had an opportunity to
make them as he found his time, see the Resentments of his Anger; but this
place being held too low for a Spirit winged with so large an ambition, he
aimed at higher things, resolving like Icarus to be near the Sun, tho at the
hazard of melting his waxen Wings, dropping headlong into the Sea of inevitable
ruin: Whereupon perceiving some hot Contests in the City of London, about the
Election of Magistrates and Officers, he turned the Edge of his Fury that way,
insomuch that a Quo Warranto came down against the Charter of the Honorable
City of London, and in fine, after much pleading and arguments, pro and contra,
the Charter was surrendered, at least in consent, by those that were in Power,
and the King suspending the Execution of the Judgment obtained, caused such
Orders to be observed as he thought most convenient, which being so well known
to the Citizens of London, it would appear a presumption in me to enter upon
particulars; yet the chiefest Cavil against the City was, taking the Toll of
Markets, collecting Money to build Cheapside Conduit, etc. Nor was it long after
this, and the Trial of several Persons for Rioters, who attended the Election
of Sheriffs and Mayor, and the Fines passing upon many worthy Citizens, as
Rioters on that occasion; in promoting which, this Person as a Counselor by
his florid Rhetoric was mainly instrumental, by giving the Court an account of
their respective abilities, the better to settle the Fines: but the Lord Chief
Justice Saunders dying, he succeeded him as Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench; in which station he was scarcely settled, but he admitted the
Popish Lords to Bail, that lay under an Impeachment in Parliament, and whose
bailing had been refused by the Judges his Predecessors; and now it was that he
began more particularly to remember former affronts, an example of which take
in the Case of Elias Best a Hop-Merchant in Thames Street, viz.

It so happened when this Person was Recorder of London, that a Jury, of which
Best was one having contrary to his mind, acquitted a Party indicted at the
Sessions of Peace in Guild Hall, for Printing and Publishing a Pamphlet, he in
much heat declared, that they had gone contrary to their Consciences, and stuck
not to upbraid them with Perjury; for which, as an high affront put upon the
Juries of London, they prayed the Court at the Old Bailey, that they might
prefer an Indictment against him; and herein Mr. Best was the most active: but
the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs then upon the Bench, after it had been a long
time argued and debated, told them, that the Sessions being almost at an end,
it could not be tried, and therefore he would desire them to refer it to the
next Sessions, for the Recorder being a Person of Quality, he could not suffer
him to lie under the imputation of an Indictment so long; but in the interim,
he resigning his Recordership, the business fell, and came to nothing; but soon
after, it seems, Mr. Best had drank an Health to the pious Memory of Stephen
College departed, meaning the Joyne^ that was executed at Oxford, for which he
was indicted upon an Information, and found Guilty; yet he being at large,
thought fit to withdraw himself to avoid the rigor of the Fine, etc. when so
it fell out, that this Person going the Circuit as Lord Chief Justice,
accompanied with a great many on Horseback, Mr. Best came by, and asked one of
the Company what Judge that was, who replied, the Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys,
and he unadvisedly told that Party his name was Best, and desired him to
remember his Service to his Lordship; upon notice of which, he immediately
caused him to be fetched back, and committed him to York Goal, from whence he
was brought by Habeas Corpus to the Kings Bench, and Imprisoned for a Fine of
500 l. etc. And other instances of the greatness of his Stomach, though in
another nature, is that which so remarkably happened at Kingstone upon Thames,
at the Midsummer Assizes held there for the County of Surrey, 1679.

At this Assize being Counsel in a Case upon Nisi prius, before Sir Richard
Weston, one of the Baron^ of the Exchequer, and desiring to ingross all the
Questions, without suffering those on the other side to ask the Witness what
was convenient in carrying on, and managing the Cause; he was desired by the
Judges to hold his Tongue, etc. upon which some words passing, this Person told
him, He did not use him like a Counselor, curbing him in the managing his
Breviate, etc. to which the Judge fiercely replied, Ha! since the King has
thrown his favors upon you, in making you Chief Justice of Chester, you think
to run down every body; if you find your self aggrieved, make your complaint^
here is no body cares for it. And this Person replying, That he had not been
used to make complaints, but rather stopped those that were made: when being
again commanded to hold his Tongue, he sat down and wept for anger, etc. And
here by the way it will not be amiss to let the Reader have a taste of some
passages that happened on the public Stage of business, in the Jocular part of
this great Man's Life, and the Repartees he met with, of which I shall instance
a few:

Once it happened upon a Trial, that a plain Country Fellow giving Evidence in
the Court, and pressing it home, moved this Person, who was Counsel on the
other side, to pick a quarrel with the poor man's Leather Doublet, and amongst
other Interrogations, bawled out, You Follow in the Leather Doublet, pray what
have you for swearing? The man upon this, looking steadily on him, replye^,
Truly Sir, if you have no more for Lying than I have for Swearing; you might
wear a Leather Doublet as well as I. This bluntly retorted, moved at that time
much laughter, and filled the Town with the Discourse of it.

Another time it so fell out, that some Musicianers brought an Action against a
person, at whose Wedding they had played, for the money they were promised or
expected, when in the midst of the Evidence, this Person called to one of them,
viz. You Fiddler, etc. at which the man seeming to be disgusted, he again, upon
the Parties alleging himself to be a Musicianer, demanded What difference
there was between a Musicianer and a Fiddler. As much, Sir, said he, as there is
between a pair of Bagpipes and a Recorder. And he then being Recorder of
London, it was taken as a suitable Rep^rtee.

A Country Gentleman having Married a City Orphan, comes and demands her
Fortune, which was about 1100 l. but by all Friends that he could make, could
not procure it till he goes to Jeffreys then Recorder, and gave him 10 Guineas
to be his Friend to get out his Wifes Fortune, upon which Jeffreys told him,
that the Court of Aldermen would sit such a day; the Gentleman appearing, was
called in, Jeffryes being present, who asked him, Sirrah, what is your business?
Upon which the Gentleman told him, That he had married a City Orphan, and
desired he might have her Portion out of the Chamber; upon which J^ffreys asked
him, If he had asked the consent of the Court of Aldermen? He told him, No: Upon
which, he called him Rogue, Rascal, Sirrah, you should have ask't leave from
the Court for such a Marriage. He told him, he understood not the custom of the
City, and begged their pardon, being a Country Gentleman. Upon this Jeffreys
abused him again; but afterward, gives him a Note for his Money; his Public
Railing upon him, being only to blind the Court, that they might not suspect
him Bribed.

Being at a Country Assize as Judge, an Old Man with a great Beard, came to
give Evidence before him, and not doing it to his mind, he began to cavil with
his Beard, and amongst other Expressions told him, That if his Conscience was
as large as his Beard, he might well swear any thing. This so netled the Old
Blade, that without any respect to his Greatness, he briskly replied, My Lord,
If you go about to measure Consciences by Beards, you Lordship has none. Many
more of this kind might be mentioned, but not being greatly to the purpose,
they are willingly omitted. Which the Reader will be apt to believe, if he
examines his Dealings with Mr. Moses Pit Bookseller, which that I may set in
their true light, As I find 'em in his Treatise, entitled, They cry of the
Oppressed, p. 105.
I shall give 'em in Mr. Pitts own words, which are as follows.

Among several Houses I built both in Kingstreet, and Duke-street, Westminster,
I built a great House in Duke-street, just against the Bird Cages in St.
James's Park, which just as I was a finishing I Let to the Lord Chancellor
Jeffreys, with Stables and Coach-houses to it, for 300 l. per Annum. After
which, when he the said Chancellor came to see the House (Alderman Duncomb, the
great Banker being with him) and looking about him, saw between the House and
St. James's Park an idle piece of Ground, he told me, He would have a
Cause-Room built on it. I told him, that the Ground was the Kings. He told me,
that he knew it was; but he would Beg the Ground of the King, and give it me:
He also bid me make my own Demands, and give it him in Writing, the which I
did; and unto which he did agree, and commanded me immediately to pull down the
Park-Wall, and to build as fast as I could, for he much wanted the said
Cause-Room. My Agreement with him was, That he should beg of King James all the
Ground without the Park-Wall, between Webbs and Storeys inclusive; which said
Ground is Twenty Five Foot in breadth, and near Seven Hundred Foot in length
(to the best of my Memory) for Ninety Nine Years, at a Pepper-Corn per Annum,
which he the said Lord Chancellor was to make over the said King's Grant to me
for the said number of Years, without any Alt^rations, with liberty to pull
down, or Build on the King's Wall, and to make a Way and Lights into the King's
Park, according as I pleased. In consideration of my Building on the said
Ground of the Kings, and the said Lord Chancellor's Enjoyment of it, during his
Occupation of the said House. All which the Lord Chancellor Agreed to. For that
purpose, sent for Sir Christopher Wren, Their Majesty's Surveyor, and my self,
and Ordered Sir Christopher to take care to have the said Ground measured, and
a Platform taken of it, and that Writings and Deeds be prepared for to pas^
the Great Seal. Sir Christopher asked the said Lord Chancellor, in whose Name
the Grant was to pass, whether in his Lordships, or Mr. Pitts? The Chancellor
Replied, That the King had Granted him the Ground for Ninety Nine Years, at a
Pepper-Corn per Annum, and that he was to make over the said Grant to his
Landlord Pitt's, for the same Term of Years, without any Alteration, in
consideration of his said Landlord Pit Building him a Cause-Room, etc. and his
the said Lord Chancellor's Enjoying the same, during his living in the said
Pitt's House; and withal urged him the said Pit immediately to take down the
King's Park-wall, and to Build with all Expedition; for he much wanted the
Cause-Room, and that I should not doubt him; for he would certainly be as good
as his Agreement with me. My Witnesses are Sir Christopher Wren, Their
Majesty's Surveyor, Mr. Fisher de^eas^d, who belonged to Sir C. Harbord, Their
Majesty's Land Surveyor, Mr. Joseph Avis my Builder, Mr. Thomas Bludworth, Mr.
John Arnold, both Gentlemen belonging to the said Lord Chancellor, and several
others; upon which I had a Warrant from Mr. Cook, out of the Secretary of
State's Office, in the Lord Chancellor's Name, with King James's Hand and Seal,
to pluck down the King's Wall, and make a Door and Steps, Lights, etc. into
the Park, at Discretion; which said Warrant cost me 6 l. 5 s. Upon which, in
about Three or Four Months time I Built the Two Wings of that Great House which
is opposite to the Bird-Cages, with the Stairs, and Tarrass, etc. which said
Building cost me about Four Thousand Pounds, with all the inside-work: My
Workmen being employed by the said Lord Chancellor to sit up the said House,
and also Offices, and Cause-Room, for his Use; for all which he never paid me
one Farthing.

When I had finished the said Building, I demanded of him several times my
Grant of the said Ground from the King; he often promised me, that I should
certainly have it; but I being very uneasy for want of my said Grant, I wrote
several times to him, and often waited to speak with him, to have it done; but
at last I found I could have no Access to him, and that I spent much time in
waiting to speak with him, although I lived just against his door; and also I
considered, that he could not be long Lord Chancellor of England, King William
being just come, I got into the Parlour where he was, many Tradesmen being with
him that he had sent for, I told him, that I did not so earnestly demand my
Rent of him, which was near half a year due, but I demanded of him my Grant
from King James of the Ground we h^d agreed for, in consideration of my
Building. He told me, That he would leave my House, and that he should not
^arry away the Ground and Building with him; which was all the Answer I could
have from him. And the very next day he went into White^all, and had the
Jesuit Peter's Lodging, where he ^ay till that Tuesday Morning King James
first Abdicated, and went away with Sir Edward Hales, the said Lord Chancellor
should have gone with them, but they dropped him, so that Morning finding them to
be gone, he was fain to shift for himself, and to fly with a Servant, or at
most Two, with him, and soon after taken and sent to the Tower, where he since
Died.

But to return to the third of this Discourse; passing by his vehement and
pressing Discourse to the Jury against William Lord Russel, on his Trial at the
Old Bailey, which some say greatly influenced them to find him Guilty; and add,
that he did it out of a pique, in remembrance he was one of the Members of the
Parliament before whom he was brought on his Knees. We find him by this time
Trying of Dr. Titus Oats upon two Informations, upon the Account of his
Swearing to the White-Horse Consult, and Ireland's being in Town; and after a
long Debate, wherein many sharp Repar^ees passed, the Jury made a shift to find
him Guilty; as to the Circumstances, I refer you to the Trial; but the Sentence
was severe, and of its effects few are ignorant; wherefore I shall pass it
over, as also that of Mr. Tho. Dangerfield, another of the Evidences in
discovering the Contrivance^, and carrying on of the Popish Plot, which the
Papists by these manner of Proceedings accounted to be effectually stifled. And
now before any thing remarkable happened, the Kingdom was alarmed by the
Landing of the late Duke of Monmouth at Lyme in Dorsetshire, and the Earl of
Argyle in Scotland; but however these two unfortunate Gentlemen miscarrying,
and losing their Lives, left a great many of their miserable Followers to feel
the severity of Punishment; and as for the gleaning the bloody Fields in
England, they came to the sifting of this Person, who with others, going down
with a Commission to Try them, all the Indignities the Dissenters had put upon
him, came fresh into his remembrance, so that he made them find the Laws more
cruel than the Sword, and wish they had fallen in the Field, rather than have
come to his handling; for he breathed Death like a destroying Angel, and
sanguined his very Ermin^ in Blood: A large Account of which you shall have in
its proper place.

But by the way, for the sake of the West-Country Reader, I shall here add a
true and impartial Narrative of the late Duke of Monmouth's whole Expedition
while in the West, seeing that was the Prologue to that bloody Scene that
you will hear by and by, was acted by George Lord Jeffreys, (the ^^bject of our
present Discourse.)

To begin then, May 24. Old Style, We left Amsterdam about two of the Clock,
being Sunday Morning, and in a Lighter sailed for the Tex^l, our Vessels being
sent before us thither; but meeting with extreme cross Winds all the way, we
arrived not till Saturday Night, and then went all on Board. Here our Man of
War with about 32 Guns (where the Dukes Person was) was under an Arrest by
order of the States of Amsterdam, on the Complaint of our Envoy, they presuming
we had been clear, but we broke through our Arrest, and Sunday Morning at break
of Day, set Sail for England. We had in all three Ships; that of 32 Guns
carried most of our Men, the other two were for our Ammunition. We met with
exceeding cross Winds, most part of the time we spent on the Seas, and Arrived
not at Lyme till Thursday, June 11. so that from Amsterdam to Lyme, we wanted
but two days of three Weeks.

We Landed without any the least Opposition, and were received with all
expressions of Joy imaginable; the Duke, as soon as he jumped out of his Boat
on Land, called for silence, and then desired we would join with him in
returning God Thanks for that wonderful preservation we had met with at Sea,
and accordingly fell on his Knees on the Sand, and was the mouth of us all in a
short Ejaculation, and then immediately well Armed, as many as we were, entered
the Town.

Friday, the whole day was spent in Listing of Men, which flocked to us so
fast, that we could scarce tend them with Arms.

The like on Saturday also; and then about ten of the Clock at night, 300 of
our Men were sent to Bridport, about six English Miles off, to Storm that Town
betimes in the Morning, which we did accordingly, taking many Prisoners out of
their Lodgings; and had not our Soldiers been a little too eager of Plunder, we
had made a good day^ work on it; but there lying about a Wood some of the Kings
Forces, we were forced to retreat, losing three or four Men, and killing
several of theirs, and taking Eight Prisoners; this was the first Action which
he had.

Sunday also was spent in Listing, and Monday Morning; but in the Afternoon we
marched out of Lime for Axminster, a little Town four Miles off; our Party was
near 2000 Foot, and 300 Horse, though we Landed not full an hundred Men, and
all these in the space of four days: About two Miles from Lime we espied the
Duke of Albermarle, with about 4000 Men, designing that Night to quart^r in the
same Town, which we had news of in the way; yet we marched on in good order,
and came into the Town, lined all Hedges, Planted our Fieldpieces, and
expected nothing more than that we should give 'em battle, they being not an
English Mile from the Town; they made toward us as soon as they heard that we
were there; but the Duke of Albermarle finding his Men to be all Militia-Men of
the County of Devonshire, and that they had no stomach to fight against
Monmouth, Retreated, when he came within a quarter of an English Mile of the
Town. He came from Exon with these Forces, intending to lay a siege against
Lime, presuming we could not be ready in so short a time; but finding us so
well prepared to receive him, he wisely retired, his Men being in great
disorde^ and confusion, supposing we had pursued them, which was Debated; but
the Du^e said, it was not his business to fight yet, till his Men had been a
little Disciplined, but rather to make up into the Country as fast as possible,
to meet his Friends, not questioning, but there would have been in several
parts of the Kingdom some Action, on the News of his Success: But this in the
end proved fatal to us; for had we but followed them, we had had all their
Arms, several more men, and might have marched in two days with little or no
opposition, to the very Gates of Exon, the County-Troops resolving not to fight
us; and several came to us that Night with their Arms. But missing this
opportunity, we marched on for Taunton, Lodging at several small Towns by the
way, which still-received us as kindly as possible, and all the way met with
the loud Acclamations of the Country, praying God to succeed our Arms.

Thursday we came to Taunton, about twenty Mile from Lime. To give a particular
Account of our Reception here, would be too tedious; the Streets thronged with
People we could scarce enter, all endeavoring to manifest their Joy at his
coming, and their Houses, Doors, and Streets garnished with green Boughs, Herbs
and Flowers, all the Emblems of Prosperity.

The next day, Twenty six young Gentlewoman, Virgins, with Colors ready made
at the charge of the Townsmen, presented them to his Grace; the Captain of them
went before with a Naked Sword in one hand, and a small curious Bible in the
other, which she presented also, making a short Speech, at which the Duke was
ex^remely satisfied, and assured her, He came now in the Field, with a design
to defend the Truths contained therein, and to Seal it with his Blood, if there
should be any occasion for it. Nothing now could content the Country, but he
must be proclaimed King, which he seemed exceeding averse to; and really I am
of Opinion, from his very heart.

They said, The Reason why the Gentry of England ^oved not, was because he came
on a Common-wealth-Principle; This being the Cry of all the Army, he was forced
to yield to it, and accordingly, Saturday Morning he was Proclaimed: In the
Afternoon came out three PROCLAMATIONS, one setting a Sum of Money on the Kings
Head, as he had done before by the other. The Second, Declaring the Parliament
of England, A Seditious Assembly; and if they did not separate before the end
of June, to give Power and Authority to any that would attempt to lay hold of
them as Rebels and Traitors. The Third, To declare the Duke of Albermarle a
Traitor, (who now lay within six Miles of us, having had time to Rally his
Men,) if he laid not down his Arms; forthwith a Message also was sent to
command him, but he sent word, That he was a Subject to JAMES the Second, the
late Kings Brother, and that he knew no other Lord.

We tarried here till Sunday Morning, and then marched fot Bridgewater, seven
Miles from thence: We were now between four and five thousand Men, and had we
not wanted Arms, could have made above ten thousand. We were received here as
in other places, but did little more than Read our Declaration, which we did
also in all other Towns, the Magistrates standing by in their Gowns; and
likewise our Proclamation, and so marched forward for Glassenbury; from
Glassenbury designed for Bristol, three days March from that Place, designing
to Attaque it: Accordingly, we arrived at Canshum Bridge, a little Town three
Miles English from Bristol, intending to enter next morning, the Duke of
Beauford being there with a Garrison of about Four Thousand Men, being he^e
lodged in the Town, we were on a sudden Alarmed with the noise of the Approach
of the Enemy, being in no small Confusion on this unsuspected News: The Duke
sent one up the Tower to see whether he could discover them marching; as soon
as he came up, he saw them at the very entrance into the Town fighting with our
Men. Here we had a small Skirmish, our Men being in the Fields adjoining to the
Town refreshing themselves; but it lasted not long, for before he could bring
word, they were fled, being not above sixty Horsemen? They did us mischief,
killed and wounded above Twenty Men, whereas we killed none of theirs, only
took four Prisoners, and their Horses, and wounded my Lord Newburg, that it was
thought mortal; they came thither, thinking it had been their own Forces; and
had not our undisciplined Fellows been a little too eager, and suffered 'em to
come a little farther on, they would have entered the Town, and we must have
had every man of them; their Infantry was following, but on their Return came
not forward. These Forces being so near, and Bristol, being so well manned
also, the Duke was loath to pass the Bridge for Bristol, though some Gentlemen
that came over with us, and were prescribed upon the account of the former
Plot, being Bristol men, and knew the hearts of the Townsmen, begged him
heartily to proceed toward it, offering themselves to go in the Head of them
into the Town, by some private ways which they knew, assuring him, They Would
make no Resistance, but could not persuade him; which had we been Possessors
of, we could not have wanted Money nor Arms, the only things needful for us in
that Juncture; for had we but had Arms, I am persuaded we had by this time had
at the least twenty thousand Men; and it would not then have been difficult for
us to have marched to London, with the Recuit of Bristol, the King not being
able to make 7000 Men for the gaining of so many Kingdoms. But God saw it not
fit for us, and overruled our Consultations to our own ruin; for this was in
the top of our prosperity; and yet all the while, not a Gentleman more than
went over with us came to our assistance.

So we marched on to Bath, we lay before it in the Afternoon, and sent in our
Trumpeter to demand the Town, but they refused to give us Entrance, having a
strong Garrison, it being a stout People and a strong place. Having no mind to
spend time in laying Sieges, we marched on that day to a little Town called
Phillips-Norton, and there lay that night, being now Sunday the 26 th of June
Old-Style; Saturday Morning preparing for From, We were drawing out our
Baggage for our March, and on a sudden were alarmed with the appearance of the
Enemy, who had entered the Town, and had lined all the Hedges, and began to fire
on us: Here he began the briskest Rencounter we yet had, and for an hour or
more we had a brisk Skirmish; but at last we beat them back, killing about
thirty which lay in the place, and we lost about ten in all, and a few wounded:
They retreating with their whole Army, pitched within a mile of the Town; and
we went out also and pitched near them, but out of Musketshot, playing Cannon
one on another for some hours; they killed us but one man all the while, but
with ours we did great execution, having the advantage of the ground; so at
last they retreated, and I have been told lost some hundreds of men in the
Bat^el, both killed and wounded: So we marched on for From, a Town where we
were as beloved as at Taunton, where we wanted for nothing but Arms, which were
by a Stratagem taken from them a few days before our entrance. Here came the
unexpected News of Argyle's being defeated, and likewise of the advance of the
Kings Forces from London with considerable Baggage, and thirty Fieldpieces. On
this News, together with our want of Money and Arms, (not seeing which way to
avoid these Forces) we were at a stand, and not a little non-plus'd. 'Twas at
last agreed on, that we that came with the Duke should get good Horses that
Night, and so for Pool, a little Seaport Town not far off, where we were to
seize a Sip, and set forth for Holland again, leaving our Infantry to the mercy
of the Country.

This was much like that Resolution of the Hollanders in the time of the Civil
War with Spain, being as we then were, in despair of making better Terms, and
not daring to enter Salisbury Plain, because their Horse being so much better
than ours, their Men being all Disciplined, ours not, we could not face them in
so plain and open a Country, so that we retreated backward, in the mean time
resolving to see what London would do, having a good opportunity offered them:
The Soldiers being called forth, and not two thousand Men to be had for their
defense if they had but attempted any thing; this disheartened our Men, and
several of them coming home to their own Country, having felt by experience the
hardships of War, withdrew from us.

We came well back again to Bridgewater, and were received with wonted Love; we
arrived here on Friday the 3 d of July, and resolved here to fortify, so as to
hold our ground till we heard from London. Saturday in the Afternoon news was
brought of the Approach of the Kings Forces within a Mile and a half of the
Town where they had encamped, the Duke went up into the Tower and there took a
view of them, and seeing them so careless, and their Horse at some distance
from the Army, in a little Town, the Infantry being in Sedge Moore. He called a
Council on it, and it was concluded on, that we should fall on them in the dead
of the Night, accordingly having a Guide to conduct us on in a private way, we
marched out at about 11 of the Clock in the night, and about one fell on them
in their Tents. There was a Ditch between us, and the Guide promised to conduct
'em over an easy fordable place, but our Men seeing the Enemy just before
them, ran furiously on and lost the Guide, so that while they endeavored to
recover over that place the Enemy got on their Legs, and put themselves in
Order, and now began as fierce a Battle as perhaps ever was fought in England
in so short a time; our Foot fought as well as ever Foot fought, but not a
Horse came up; had our Horse but assisted, we must have beaten them out of the
Field. But our Horses would not stand at the noise of Drums and Guns, so that
we soon lost two of our Pi^ces of Ordnance, and we had but four in all, and
then but one more in the Field; our Foot flung most of their Shot over, so that
the Men for the most part were killed in the Rear, and that run, but the Front
stood still; and had we done as much execution in the Front as we did in the
Rear, the day had been our own; but God would not have it, their time was not
yet come: By this time their Horses came up, and having six or eight hundred
good disciplined Men, well mounted and well armed, ours neither; our Foot
having shot away all their Ammunition, and our Baggage being not then in the
Field, they were forced to retreat, being all in confusion.

Having no Money left, and our Party thus unexpactedly repulsed, the Duke seeing
he could not hold it any longer, fled with my Lord Gray.

The Duke's Party was said to be about three thousand Foot, and a thousand
Horse; we had more, at least five thousand Men and Horse, but not well Armed,
yet in the Field. It Is said we lost not above three hundred, and they Foot: but
after when we were routed in our retreat lost a vast many more; though they
pursued not in some hours after.

The most remarkable Persons that were taken in this total Rout, were Colonel
Holmes, Major Perrot, the Constable of Crookborn, and Mr. Williams, Servant to
the late Duke of Monmouth.

After the Field was clear of the Dukes Men, the Earl of Feversham marched with
five hundred Foot and a Party of Horse and Dragoons to Bridgwater, where he
found the Dukes Forces that were left there, fled and dispersed into several
Places: When his Lordship having left these Men in the Town, under the Command
of Colonel Kirk, and hearing the late Duke of Monmouth was fled with about
Fifty Horse, the greatest number of the Dukes Men that were left together, he
sent out diverse Parties in pursuit of him and others that fled the Field. When
on the 7th of July, about five in the Morning, some of the Lord Lumly's Men
seized the Lord Gray and another Person near Holt-Lodge in Dorsetshire, four
Miles from the West of Ringwood; and the said Lord Lumly making further enquiry
among the Cotts, was informed by one Anna Ferrant that two men went over a
Hedge, proving to be the Out-bounds of many Enclosures, some of which were
overgrown with Fern, others with Pease and Oats; but Guards being set upon the
Avenues, after diverse attempts to escape, the Brandenburgh, one of the Parties
observed to enter the Ground, was taken on the 8th of July, about five in the
morning, who confessing he departed from the late Duke of Monmouth about One of
the Clock that morning in the Out-bounds, diligent search was made; when about
Eleven of the Clock the same morning he was found, by one Henry Parking, hid in
a Ditch, covered with Fern, who calling others to assist him, the said late
Duke was in the end taken, and together with the Lord Gray, and the
Brandenburgh, with a strong Guard brought by easy Journies to Whitehall, where
they arrived on the 13th of July, and after some examination were committed to
the Tower, when on Wednesday the 15th of July, the late Duke of Monmouth,
pursuant to a Warrant signed for his Execution, upon his Attaindure of High
Treason, was delivered to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, about Ten in
the Morning, and conducted to a Scaffold erected on Tower Hill, where after
about half an hours continuance, he laying down his head, had it stricken off
by the Executioner, the which, together with his Body, being put into a Coffin
covered with Velvet, were carried away in a Velvet-covered Hearse, in order to
his Interment.

After the Duke was beheaded, many Prisoners taken, and those that fled by
Parcels up and down, secured in diverse Goals, in order to their Prosecution, as
was said, according to Law; which was the occasion of this great Man's showing
his parts at that degree as he did, no one else fit to be made a Tool for such
a Bloody Tragedy as he acted.

He went not only Judge, but had a breviate under King James his hand, to
command what Troops he pleased to attend his Commands from place to place. And
was Lieutenant General, as well as Judge, and he gave daily the Word and Orders
for going the Rounds, etc. and Ordered what party of Troops he pleased to
attend him. When Major C -- d who commanded the first Regiment of Guards, the
Dragoons, who were as his Lifeguard, when at the head of the Troop following
Jeffreys from Somersetshire to Wiltshire, in order for London after the
Assizes, the Major asked Jeff^eys, If there would be any favor shown to one
Mr. Speak, who was not the Speak intended; Jeffreys said, No, his Family owed
a Life, he should die for his Namesake, because one of the Family and Name was
guilty of being in the Action, but was escaped, and therefore this being his
Brother, should die. Jeffreys demanded of the Major, how many he thought there
was killed by the Soldiers? He replied 1000. Quoth Jeffreys, I believe I have
condemned at many as that my self. -- It Is to be remembered, that the Fellow
called Tory Tom; at Wells for his dirty Sauciness was sent to the Guard by this
Major; when presently this Tory Tom Petitioned some Persons to intercede with
the Major, and sent the Major a Letter, desiring his Liberty; for that if he or
any one should give Tory Tom an ill word to Judge Jeffreys, the Judge would
hang him right or wrong with the rest of the Pr^soners, or condemn him at
least; so upon his submission the Major discharged him, and did not leave him
to the mercy of his own Tory Judge.

The Trials in the West were deferred (for some time after the Fatal Blow given
to the D. of Monmouth on Tower Hill, which was the 15 th. of July following)
because of my Lords being at Tunbridg; but the latter end of August, he with a
special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, assisted with four other Judges, set
forward with a Party of Horse, he being made by special Commission their
General. The first place he came at was Winchester, where were diverse Prisoners
on suspicion; but here began the Tragedy; for the Lady Lisle was there
Arraigned for High Treason, in harboring Mr. Hicks and Mr. Nelthrope, that had
been concerned with the Duke; the Lady being on her Trial, the Jury were
dissatisfied once and again; but my Lords Threats and other Managery, so
disposed the Jury, that at last they brought the Lady in Guilty; on which he
pronounced the Sentence of Death on her, as usual in such Cases; but she had
the favor of being Beheaded; their other Prisoners were carried to Salisbury;
and this was the most remarkable thing at that Assizes.

From thence they set forward for Salisbury, where were many Prisoners that had
been picked up and down the Country, then in the Goal, the which, with those
that were brought from Winton, were ordered to be carried to Dorchester, there
not being Evidence enough to accomplish what was then designed by my Lord; so
that little of moment passed there, but to pursue the matter, proceeds from
thence to Dorchester, where he with his Assistants, Gown-men, and Swordmen,
arrived on the 3 d. of September, on which day being Thursday, the Commission
was read. Friday morning was an excellent Sermon Preached before their
Lordships, by a worthy Divine, Chaplain to a worthy Person of that Country,
much tending to Mercy: It was observed, that while my Lord Chief Justice was at
Church in Prayers, as well as at Sermon, he was seen to laugh, which was so
unbecoming a Person in his Character, that ought in so weighty an Affair as he
was then entering upon, to have been more serious, and have craved the help and
assistance of God Almighty.

The Sermon being over, their Lordships repaired to the Court, which by order
of the Lord Chief Justice was hung with Red Cloth, a Color suitable to such a
succeeding bloody Tragedy, being accompanied by a numerous Company of the
Gentry of that County, as well as the Flower of the Neighboring Counties of
Somerset and Devonshire, and then proceeded to give his Charge; in which
Charge, by reason of the Severity of his Sentiments, and Positions laid down to
make discoveries of all such as were Abettors, Aidors or Assisters to the late
Duke of Monmouth, on pain of High Treason, which was a great Surprise to all
the Auditors, and so vehemently urged, and so passionately expressed, as seemed
rather the Language of a Romish Inquisitor, than a Protestant Judge; and then
Adjourned until Eight of the Clock next Morning, when was a Bill found against
Thirty Persons, charged for High Treason, for Aiding and Assisting the late
Duke of Monmouth; who put themselves on their Trials, notwithst^nding my Lord's
Threatening, That in Case any did put themselves on Trial, and the Country found
them Guilty, they should have but a little time to live. And at the same time
insinuated, That it were better to plead Guilty, if they expected any favor.

These Thirty being on Trial, the Evidences being sworn and examined before the
Jury: Upon the whole, by the violent Deportment of the Lord Chief Justice, and
sharpness of the Jury, they found ^wenty nine Guilty, though some of them were
very hardly dealt with, and not so Criminal as my Lord and the Country
imagined. Particularly amongst the Twenty nine, were Mr. Matthew Bragg of
Thor^comb, and Joseph Speed of Culliton, in the County of Devonshire, and Mr.
Smith, Constable of Chardstock, in the said County, and George Steward of
Culliton aforesaid. The Circumstances of each of these, and the severity of
their being found Guilty, etc. shall be showed in its proper place, before we
take leave of this Town, and proceed on in this Western Expedition.

The said Twenty-nine being found (as before) Guilty, my Lord immediately
pronounced Sentence of Death on them all, as usual in Cases of High Treason,
and did the same Night give a Warrant to the Sheriff, for the Execution of
Thirteen of the Twenty-nine on Monday following; which accordingly was done,
notwithstanding great Application was made to the Lord Chief Justice by
Gentlemen of the best Quality, in this and the Neighboring Counties for a
Reprieve of Mr. Bragg, to all which he was Deaf, and not to be prevailed upon;
though he was assured of his Honesty, and true Conformity to the Church of
England, yet it availed nothing. At last, it was only requested for Ten days
Respite, yet that had no better effect; but on Monday, he with Twelve more of
that number, were accordingly Executed at Dorchester.

In the mean time, this Proceeding was designed to shorten Business, and to
wheedle the rest that were to follow to a Confession, which without it, the
tenth part of them could not be Proved Guilty. A Method was also taken without
President, to entrap many poor ignorant people, by a couple of Officers that
were sent into the Goal, to call over, and to take the Names of the Prisoners;
on promise, if they confessed, they might expect Mercy, otherwise not; which many
did. And this was written so, that had they pleaded Not Guilty, these two were
designed to have been Evidences against them from their own Confessions, which
so disposed the remaining great Numbers, that all except a very few, Pleaded
Guilty, which put an end to any further Trial.

The only thing remaining, was the pronouncing of Sentence on them, which were
in Number 292. who received Sentence of Death all at once. One Mr. Lawrence put
himself on Trial, but by the Jury found Guilty, whose Case was hard, his
Circumstances being so small to be condemned to die; and had actually suffered,
had not Application been made to my Lord's Favorites, and with the payment and
securing of 400 l. preserved him from Execution.

This Matter being adjusted, and Execution awarded to about Eighty, which were
Executed, and their Quarters sent up and down the Country to the dread of their
Spectators, as well as the Annoyance of the Travelers; his extraordinary
Whippings, though unmerciful, are not to be taken notice of; so we leave this
place, and proceed toward the City of Exon: In their way thither, lying at an
Honorable Gentleman's House, diverse of the Neighboring Parishes made their
Petitions to the Lord Chief Justice in the behalf of some Relations concerned.
It happened, that through some disorder amongst his Servants, some Pistols were
fired in the Night, which gave him a Suspicion, or at least he took it, of some
design upon him; on which at parting, he said, Not a man of all those Parishes
that were of that Vicinitude, if found Guilty, should escape. And so we proceed
and arrive at Exon, where to the number of 243 Prisoners being in Custody for
assisting the said Duke of Monmouth, one amongst the rest, Mr. Four Acers
pleading not Guilty, he being found by the Jury, the said Lord Chief Justice
immediately pronounced the Sentence upon him, and immediate Execution, which
was done to terrify the rest, who all Pleaded Guilty; so that these
unfortunate People had not time to have the fairness of Trials allowed them,
which is a right due by the Laws of God and Man. The remaining number he all
condemned; and here was a little sparing; not so many ordered Execution as was
in the other County, but those that were executed, were hung up and down in
most Town^ of the County, and their Quarters and Heads scattered up and down
the Highways and Public places. An extraordinary Sentence of severe Whipping
was pronounced against Mr. Samuel Staple of Thorncomb in the said County; but
these are Trifles, and we shall endeavor to pursue our Design, and make as
quick dispatch as we can, that time may not be lost, the King served, and this
Miscreants thirst quenched with Protestant Blood, which is always well-pleasing
to Inquisitors, and so proceed to the Town of Taunton. At which place being
arrived, it was thought fit by the Lord Chief Justice to be as expeditious as
might be; so that late in the Afternoon the Court sat, where the Commission
being read, he proceeded to give the Charge, which was so very keen and full of
sharp Invectives, as if the Country it self had not been able to make Expiation
to his Lordship, to quench his Thirst in the Blood of those that ventured their
All in Defense of the Protestant Religion; and here we enter upon the bloodiest
part of the Tragedy In this Town, and at Wells in the said County; were more
than 500 Prisoners.

To begin at Taunton: The next Morning after the Charge given, the Assizes
began, where some few put themselves on Trial, who were found Guilty, and
immediately ordered to be Executed; of which number one Mr. Simon Hamlin was
one, who was a zealous worthy good Man, and his Case no way dangerous, but on
the contrary, had he had to do with a Judge of another Stamp. To proceed to the
rest: This first Cruelty caused the rest to plead guilty in hopes of favor,
which was only a few days to live, which those that pleaded had not. Amongst
these, at Taunton were diverse eminent Persons that had been taken in the West,
and carried to London, and brought down there to complete the bloody Tragedy in
those parts: Mr. Parrot, Mr. Hewling, the Elder, Mr. Lisle, Mr. Jenkins, Mr.
Hucker, and diverse others were very eminent. To take notice of every particular
in this Matter, will alter our Design and swell the Book to too great a Bulk,
being only designed for a Pocket Companion, and useful it may be to see the
Cruelty of Men when in their Power, and how the Devil stirs up his
Instruments, to pursue those that adventure for the Cause of God and Religion.
Here were in this County Executed 239. the rest that were Condemned were
Transported, except such as were able to furnish Coin, and that not a little;
for an account was taken of Men's abilities, according to which, the purchase
for Life must be managed by two of his Favorites, who had a small share, the
rest went into his Lordships Pocket; according to the Actions of Rome, where
Sins of any kind may be pardoned for money. This indeed was a glorious Design in
the Eye of Mother Church, to root out Heresy by Executions and
Transportations, to make room for a pack; here Expedition must be made to
conclude at Wells, for that a great Man being fallen, our great Judge designing
his Chair, which in short, he had as the Reward of so eminent and extraordinary
a piece of Service as he did for the Advancement of the Roman Catholics
Interest, which is cruel always where it prevails.

Thus we leave the Town of Taunton, after awarding Execution to many there, and
their Quarters to be scattered up and down the County, and so we proceed to
Wells, where diverse Prisoners that had been carried from Goal to Goal, in
expectation of Evidence against them, were in Carts removed to Wells; in which
place, to finish this Expedition, the same Method as was at the former Assizes,
was also taken here by a severe Charge, affronting the Gentlemen of this
County, as he had done in all the Counties before, terrifying the Juries (when
any pleaded) to make them to bring in the persons Guilty; some of which being
overawed, and it is doubted, contrary to their Judgments, which if so, the Lord
forgive them.

Here were many eminent and worthy persons that received the Sentence of Death,
but the Executions of the County being put together, as you, have before seen,
we make no particular Division of the Number here, and the Number at Taunton,
the whole being recited before: We shall therefore endeavor to be as brief as
we can, to give you what we think material, and truly matter of Fact; my Lord
now being come to conclude this extraordinary Commission, and in haste to be
elevated, makes all manner of dispatch to repair to the King then at Windsor,
to give an Account of his Transactions, and to receive the Reward of his
meritorious service in this Butchering of Protestants, which is so acceptable
to his Holiness, and his bigoted Disciples, as nothing can be more; and
indeed, if you will believe them, a Work that merits Heaven at last, besides
what Temporal Preferments are thought fit in this World. If this cruel Judge
were a true Protestant, his Case is much the worse, being made use of as a Tool
to destroy, and carry on Popish Designs. Thus the Affairs being ended, the
Country filled with Heads and Quarters of those that were Executed, the rest
that had not wherewith to purchase their Lives, left in Custody in order to
Transportation.

I shall next add the Charge given by the Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys, at the
City of Bristol, Monday, September 21. 1685. In his Return from his Western
Campaigne.
Gentlemen,
I Am, by the Mercy of God, come to this great and populous City, a City that
boasts both of its Riches and Trade, and may justly indeed claim the next place
to the great and populous Metropolis of this Kingdom. Gentlemen, I find here
are a great many Auditors, who are very intent, as if they expected some formal
or prepared Speech, but assure your selves, we come not to make neither set
Speeches, nor formal Declamations, nor to follow a couple of puffing
Trumpeters; for, Lord, we have seen those things Twenty times before: No, we
come to do the King's business; a King who is so Gracious as to use all the
means possible to discover the Disorders of the Nation, and to search out those
who, indeed, are the very Pest of the Kingdom: To this end, and for this
purpose are we come to this City. But I find a special Commission is an unusual
thing here, and relishes very ill; nay, the very Women storm at it, for fear we
should take the upper hand of them too; for by the by, Gentlemen, I hear it is
much in fashion in this City for the Woman to govern and bear sway. But,
Gentlemen, I will not stay you with such needless Stories, I will only mention
some few things that fall within my knowledge; for Points or Matters of Law I
shall not trouble you, but only mind you of some things that lately has
happened, and particularly in this City (for I have the Calendar of this City
in my Pocket); and if I do not express my self in so formal or set a
Declamation (for as I told you, I came not to make Declamations) or in so
smooth Language as you may expect, you must attribute it partly to the pain of
the Stone, under which I labor, and partly to the unevenness of this days
journey.

Gentlemen, I may say, that even some of the youngest amongst us may remember
the late horrid Rebellion, how men, under color of Law, and pretext of
Justice, after they had divested a most Gracious and most Merciful Prince of
all his Royal Power, by the Power of the Sword; they, I say, under color of
Law, and pretext of Justice, (which added the more to the Crime, that it was
done under color of such pretended Justice) brought the most Mild and Meekest
Prince (next to our ever Blessed Savior Jesus Christ, if we may but compare
him to a Man) to die a Martyr, the first blessed Martyr, (pardon the
expression; besides our most blessed Jesu, who suffered for us on the Cross, I
say, besides that Blessed Son of God) this, I say, was the first Royal Martyr;
not suffering him to speak for himself, or make his defense; a Liberty which is
given to the vilest Traitor; and this was done (not to descant on the number)
by Forty one. The Rebels not resting here, for Rebellion is like the sin of
Witchcraft, Divested the Lineal, Legal, and Rightful Heir of the Crown of all
his Power and Prerogative, till the Mighty God of Heaven and Earth, God
Almighty, restored him to his Just Right: And he, as if begot in Mercy, not
only forgave all Offenses, and pardoned voluntarily, even all that had been in
actual Arms against him (excepting those accursed Regicides) but also made it a
Crime for any one that should but remember, or upbraid any of their past Crimes
and Rebellions. Good God! O Jesu! that we should live in such an Age, in which
such a Prince cannot be safe from the seditious contrivances of Pardoned
Rebels! Had we not the Rye Conspiracy, wherein they not only designed to have
Murdered that Most Blessed (for so now we may conclude him to be with God
Almighty) and Gracious King, but also his Most ever Dear and Victorious
Brother? Had we not the Bill of Exclusion, which our most Gracious King told
us, he could not, without a manifest Infringement of the Royal Prerogatives of
the Crown (which are too sacred for us to touch) consent to? Had we not the
Cursed Counsel of Achitophel? Kings are God's Vicegerents on Earth, and are
indeed Gods on Earth, and we Represent them. Now when God Almighty had of his
Infinite Goodness, called this Blessed Prince unto himself, he sends a Prince,
who assures us he will imitate his Royal Brother and Renowned Predecessor in
all things, especially in that of his Clemency and Mercy, and that too upon the
word of a King. A King, I will assure you, that will not be worse than his
Word. Nay (Pardon the Expression) that dare not be worse than his Word. Which
of you all, that had a Father Murdered by another, (and that deliberately too,
under color of Justice, which added to the Crime; and your Brother, nay your
selves thrust out from your Inheritanc^, and banished from your Country; nay,
that sought your blood likewise) would not when it was in your power revenge
such Injuries, and ruin such Persecutors. But here our most blessed Prince,
whom God long preserve, has not only forgiven, but will venture his Life for
the Defense of such his Enemies? Has he not ventured his Life already, as far
as any man; for the Honor of these Kingdoms? Nay, I Challenge this City to
show me any one man of it, that perchance may not be worth a Groat, that has
ventured his Life so far for the safety of these Kingdoms, as this Royal Prince
has done. Good God! what an Age do we live in! shall not such a Prince be
secure from the Sedition, Rebellion, and Plots of Men? He is scarce seated on
his Royal Throne (where God Almighty grant he may long Reign) but on the one
hand he is invaded by a Condemned Rebel, and Arch-Traytor, who has received
the just reward of his Rebellion. On the other hand up starts a Poppet Prince
who seduces the Mobile into Rebellion, into which they are easily bewitched;
for I say, Rebellion is like the sin of Witchcraft; this man who had as little
Title to the Crown as the least of you (for I hope all you are Legitimate)
being overtaken by Justice, and by the goodness of his Prince brought to the
Scaffold, he has the confidence (good God! that men should be so impudent) to
say, That God Almighty did know with what joyfulness he did die (a Traitor);
having for these two years last past, lived in all Incontinency and Rebellion,
notwithstanding goodness of an Indulgent Prince so often to pardon him; but it
is just like him. Rebellion (as I told you) is like the sin of Witchcraft. For
there was another which I shall not name, because I will not trample on the
dust of the Dead, but you may remember him by the words of his Speech; he tells
you, That he thanks his God that he falls by the Ax, and not by the Fiery
Trial. He had rather (he had as good have said) die a Traitor than a Blessed
Martyr.

Great God of Heaven and Earth! what reason have men to Rebel! But as I told
you, Rebellion is like the sin of Witchcraft; Fear God and Honor the King, is
rejected by People for no other reason, as I can find, but that it is written
in St. Peter. Gentlemen, I must tell you, I am afraid that this City has too
many of these People in it. And it is your Duty to search them out: For this
City added much to that Ships Loading; there was your Tyly's, vour Roe's, and
your Wa^es, men starred up like Mushrooms, Scoundrel Fellows, mere Sons of
Dunghills: These men must forsooth set up for Liberty and Property. A Fellow
that carries the Sword before Mr. Major must be very careful of his Property,
and turn Politician, as if he had as much Property as the Person before whom he
bears the Sword; though perchance not worth a Groat. Gentlemen, I must tell
you, you have still here the Tyly's, the Roe's, and the Wades: I have brought a
Brush in my Pocket, and I shall be sure to Rub the Dirt where ever it is, or on
whomsoever it sticks. Gentlemen, I shall not stand Complementing with you, I
shall talk with some of you before you and I part: I tell you, I tell you, I
have brought a Besome, and I will sweep every man's door, whether great or
small. Must I mention Particulars? I hope you will save me that trouble; yet I
will hint a few things to you, that perchance I have heard of. This is a great
City, and the Magistrates wonderful Loyal, and very forward to assist the King
with Men, Money and Provisions, when the Rebels were just at your Gates: I do
believe it would have went very hard with some of you if the Enemy had entered
the City, notwithstanding the Endeavors that was used to accomplish it.
Certainly they had and must have great encouragement from a Party within, or
else why should their design be on this City. Nay, when the Enemy was within a
Mile of you, that a Ship should be set on fire in the midst of you, as a Signal
to the Rebels, and to amuse those within; when if God Almighty had not been
more gracious unto you than you was to your selves (so that Wind and Tide was
for you) for what I know, the greatest part of this City had perished; and yet
you are willing to believe it was an Accident. Certainly, here is a great many
of those men which they call Trimmers. A Whig is but a mere Fool to these; for
a Whig is some sort of a subject in comparison of these; for a Trimmer is but a
cowardly and base-spirited VVhig; for the VVhig is but the
Journey-man-Prentice, that is hired, and set on in the Rebellion, whilst the
Trimmer is afraid to appear in the Cause; he stands at a doubt, and says to
himself, I will not assist the King until I see who has the best of it; And
refuses to entertain the King's Friends for fear the Rebels should get the
better of it. These men stink worse than the worst dirt you have in your City;
these men have so little Religion, that they forget that he that is not for us
is against us. Gentlemen, I tell you, I have the Calendar of this City here in
my hand. I have heard of those that have searched into the very sink of a
Conventicle to find out some sneaking Rascal to hide their Money by night. Come,
come, Gentlemen, to be plain with you, I find the dirt of the Ditch is in your
Nostrils. Good God! where am I, in Bristol! This City it seems claims the
Privilege of Hanging and Drawing amongst themselves: I find you have more need
of a Commission once a Month at least. The very Magistrates which should be the
Ministers of Justice, fall out one with another to that degree, they will
scarce Dine with each other, whilst it is the business of some cunning men that
lie behind the Curtain to raise Divisions amongst them, and set them together
by the Ears, and knock their Logger-heads together; yet I find they can agree
for their interest. Or if there be but a Kid in the case: For I hear the Trade
of Kid-napping is of much Request in this City, they can discharge a Felon, or
a Traitor, provided they will go to Mr. Alderman's Plantation at the
West Indies. Come, come, I find you stink for want of Rubbing. Gentlemen, what
need I mind you of these things? I hope you will search into them, and inform
me. It seems the Dissenters and Phanaticks fare well amongst you, by reason of
the favor of the Magistrates; for example, is a Dissenter, who is a Notorious
and Obstinate Offender, comes before them to be fined, one Alderman or other
stands up, and says, He is a good Man (though three parts a Rebel) well then,
for the sake of Mr. Alderman, he shall be fined but 5 s. Then comes another,
and up stands another Goodman Alderman, and says, I know him to be an honest
Man (though rather worse than the former); Well, for Mr. Alderman's sake, he
shall be Fined but half a Crown; so Manus manum fricat; You play the Knave for
me now, and I will play the Knave for you by and by. I am ashamed of these
things: And I must not forget to tell you, that I hear of some Differences
amongst the Clergy, those that ought to preach Peace and Unity to others:
Gentlemen, these things must be looked into. I shall not now trouble you any
further, there are several other things, but I expect to hear of them from you.
And if you do not tell me of some of these things, I shall remind you of them.
And I find by the number of your Constables, this is a very large City, and it
is impossible for one or two to search into all the corners of it: Therefore
mind the Constables of their Duties, and call on them for their Presentiments;
for I expect every Constable to bring in his Presentment, or that you Present
him. So Adjourn, etc.

Upon Affidavits read, and other Evidence against Sir VV -- the Mayor, Alderman
L -- and others, for Kid-napping, there being Bills privately preferred to the
Grand Jury by J. -- R. -- and being found, he made the Mayor, and the Aldermen,
concerned to go from the Bench to the Bar, to plead to the Informations; using
many Expressions, saying of the Mayor: See how the Kidd-napping Rogue looks,
etc.

MY Lord after he had left Bristol, being come to the King to give an Account
of his Affairs in the West, the Great Seal being to be disposed of by the Death
of the late Keeper, he kissed the King's Hand for it, and was made Lord
Chancellor, which was only an e^rnest of his Des^rt for so eminent and
extraordinary a piece of Service; so now that which remains, is to give an
Account of diverse that had fled, and hid themselves up and down in Holes and
Privacies, whose Friends made all Application to some great Men or other to
procure their Pardons; some to this, and others to such as they thought
Fovourites of the King; but the Rewards must be ascertained before any
Application could be made: Diverse Lists being sent up, and the Rewards
ascertained, which amongst many of them put together, did amount to
considerable, so that it was now who could find a Friend to relieve his
distressed Relations, which were forced to wander up and down in Caves and
Deserts, for fear of being taken: But this Misfor^une attended the Agents, that
unless my Lord Chancellor were used, by his Creatures, that were allowed by
him so to do; other Applications commonly met with Disappointments, which
caused an Emulation among the great Men; one supposing to have deserved the
King's Ear as well as the other, which caused other Measures to be taken,
though some were wheedled out of their money. At last came out a General Pardon,
with Exceptions, very few, if any of those that were solicited for, not being
excepted, were of course pardoned; but however, diverse sums of Money having been
paid, no Restitution to be had, for from Hell is no Redemption. A worthy
Western Gentleman's purchase came to fifteen or sixteen hundred Guinea's, which
my Lord Chancellor had. Amongst the Exceptions were a parcel of Taunton Girls,
some of which were Children of Eight or Ten years old, however something was to
be made of them, if these Ladies were judged Guilty of Treason for presenting
the Duke of Monmouth with Colors, etc. and for to preserve these from Trial,
they were given to Maids of Honor to make up their Christmas Box; so that an
Agent of theirs was sent down into the Country to compound with their Parents,
to preserve them from what might after follow, if taken; so, that some
according to Ability, gave 100 l. others 50 l. all which however did not answer
the Ladies first Expectations; yet it did satisfy, and they were accordingly
pardoned. Thus we have given you an Account of what has happened on this
Occasion, being in every Point truth: We might have farther Enlarged, but that
would have spoiled the Design, and swollen our Pocket Companion to a Volume too
big.

We shall therefore next proceed to give you a true and exact List of all them
that were condemned, and suffered in the West, in the year 1685. under the
Sentence of my Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys. With the Names of the Towns where
every Man was executed.

Bath 6.
WAlter Baker Henry Body Gerrard Bryant Thomas Clotworthy Thomas Collins John
Carter.
Philipsnorton 12.
Robert Cook Edward Creaves John Caswell Thomas Hayward John Hellier Edward
Beer Henry Portridge George Pether Thomas Pierce John Richards John Staple
John Smith.
Froome 12.
Francis Smith Samuel Vill alias Vile Thomas Star Philip Usher Robert Beamant
William Clement John Humphrey George Hasty Robert Man Thomas Pearl Lawrence
Lot Thoma^ Lot.
Bruton 3.
James Feildsen Humphrey Braden Richard Bole.
Wincanton 6.
John Howel Richard Harvey John Tucker William Holland Hugh Holland Thomas
Bowden.
Shepton-Mallet 13.
Stephen Mallet Joseph Smith John Gilham, Jun. Giles Bramble Richard Chinn
William Cruise George Pavier John Hildworth John Ashwood Thomas Smith John
Dorchester Senior John Comb John Groves.
Pensford 12.
Roger Cornelius John Starr Humphry Edwards William Pierce Arther Sullway
George Adams. Henry Russel George Knight Robert Wine William Clerk alias Chick
Preston Bevis Richard Finier.
Wrington 3.
Alexander Key David Boyss Joshua French.
Wells 8^
William Mead Thomas Coade Robert Doleman Thomas Durston John Sheperd Abraham
Bend William Durston William Plumley.
Uivelscomb 3
William Ruscomb Thomas Pierce Robert Comb.
Tuton upon Mendip 2.
Peter Pran^e William Watkins.
Chard 12.
Edward Foot John Knight Williams Williams John Gervis Humphrey Hitchcook
William Godfrey Abraham Pill William Davy Henry Easterbrook James Dennett
Edward Warren Simo^ Cross.
Crookern ^0.
John Spore Roger Burn^ll William P^ther James Evory Robert Hill Nicholas Adams
Richard Stephens Rober^ Halswell John Bushel William L^shly.
Somerton 7.
William Gillet Thomas Lissant William Pocock Christopher Stephens George
Cantick Robert Allen Joseph Kelloway.
Yeovil 8.
Francis Foxwell George Pitcher Bernard Devereax Bernard Thatcher for
concealing Bovet, William Johnson Thomas Hurford Edward Gillard Oliver Powel.
Netherstoe 3.
Humphrey Mitchel Richard Cullverell Merrick Thomas.
Dunster 3.
Henry Lackwell John Geanes William Sully.
Dulverton 3.
John Basely John Lloyd Henry Thompson.
Bridgewater 12.
Robert Fraunces Nicholas St^dgell
George Lord Jeffreys.
Joshua B^llamy William Moggeridge John Hurman Robert Roper Richard Harris
Richard Engram John Trott Roger Guppey Roger Hoar Isaiah Davis.
Ratcliffe-Hill at Bristol 6.
Richard Evans John Tinckwell Christopher Clerk Edward Tippo^ Philip Cumbridge
John Tucker alias Glover.
Illminster 12.
Nicholas Collins Sen. Stephen Newman Robert Luckis William Kitch Thomas
Burnard William Wellen John Parsons Thomas Trocke Robert Fawn Western Hillary
John Burgen Charles Speak.
Stogersey 2.
Hugh Ashley John Herring.
Wellington 3.
Francis Priest Philip Bovet Robert Reed.
South-petherton 3.
Cornelius Furfurd John Parsons Thomas Davis.
Porlock 2.
James Gale Henry Edny.
Glasenbury 6.
John Hicks Richard Pearce Israel Briant William Mead James Pyes John Bro^me
Taunton 19.
Robert Perret Abraham Ansley Benjamin Hewling Pierce Murren John Freake John
Savage Abraham Matthews William Jenkins Henry Lisle John Dryer. John Hucker
Jonathan England John Sharp William Deverson John Williams John Patrum James
Whittom William Satchel John Trickey.
Langport 3.
Humphrey Pierce Nicholas Venton John Shellwood.
Arbridg 6.
Isaac Tripp Thomas Burnell Thomas Hillary John Gill, Senior Thomas Monday John
Butcher.
Cutherston 2.
Richard Bovet Thomas Blackmo^e.
Minehead 6.
John Jones alias Evens Hugh Stark Francis Barlet Peter Warren Samuel Hawkins
Richard Sweet.
Evilchester 12.
Hugh Goodenough Samuel Cox William Somerton John Masters John Walrand David
Langwell Osmond Barr^t Matthew Cross Edward Burford John Mortimer John Stevens
Robert Townsden.
Stogummer 3.
George Hillard John Lockstone Arthur Williams,
Castlecary 3
Richard Ash Samuel Garnish Robert Hind.
Milton-port 2.
Archibald Johnson James Maxwel.
Keinsham 11.
Charles Chepman Richard Bowden Thomas Trock Lewis Harris Edward Halswell Howel
Thomas George Badol Richard Evans John Winter Andrew Rownsden John Phillelrey.
Suffered in all 239
Besides those Hanged and Destroyed in C^ld Blood.

This Bloody Tragedy in the West being over, our Protestant Judge returns for
London; soon after which Alderman Cornish felt the anger of some body behind
the Curtain; for it is to be Noted, that he was Sheriff when Best prayed an
Indictment might be preferred, and was, as well as Sheriff Bethel, earnest in
promoting it; in alleging, that it was no ways reasonable that the Juries of
London should lie under such a reproach, etc. But passing this over, we now
find this Person Arrived at the Pinnacle of Honor; the Purse and Mace were
reserved for him, vacant by the Death of the Lord Keeper North, and he advanced
to the Lord Chancellourship of England: raised by this means, as one might
think, above the Envy of the Crowd; and it might be wished, in so dangerous a
height he had looked better to his Footsteps; for now being created Baron of
Wem, we find him in a High Commission, or Ecclesiastical Court, Suspending the
Honorable Lord Bishop of London from performing the Episcopal Office and
Function of that See, and for no other default, than not readily complying with
the Kings Letter in Suspending Dr. Sharp, Dean of Norwich, for Preaching a
Sermon in the Parish Church of St* Giles in the Fields, at the request of the
Parishioners, showing the Errors and Fallacies of the Romish Religion; the
better to confirm them in the Faith and Doctrine of the Church of England. Nor
was it this good Bishop alone that was aimed at; for Magdalen College in
Oxford was next attempted, and in that very Mother of Learning, and Chief
Seminary of our Church, such alterations made, as startled the Kingdom; by
whose Counsel I undertake not to determine; but in the midst of Liberty of
Conscience, as twice declared. The Church of England had a Test put upon her
Sons, which seemed such a Paradox that has been rarely heard of, viz. To Read
the Kings Declaration for Liberty of Conscience in the Churches, during the
time of Divine Service, and a Mark, and Penalties threatened to the Refusers;
which was evidently demonstrated, by the Imprisonment of those pious Patriots
of their Country, and Pillars of the Church: His Grace the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Bishop of Bathe and Wells, Ely, Peterborough, Chichester,
St. Asaph, and Bristol; who for showing their Reasons, why they could not
comply with this Command, by way of Humble Petition, were sent to the Tower,
and afterward Tried upon Information of High Misdemeanour, at the Court of
King's Bench; where their Innocence appearing in a large manner, they were
acquitted, to the scandal of their Accusers: yet Orders were sent into all
parts of England, to return and account to the Lord Chancellor, of those that
refused to Read the Declaration, that they might be proceeded against, for a
Contempt of what their Consciences would not permit them to do, and for a time
they were extremely hot upon it. Much about this time there was a considerable
Suit depending before him in Chancery, between a great Heiress and others,
which was sufficiently talked of in the World; not without loud and deep
reflections on his Honesty and Honor: for having given the Cause for the young
Lady, he very speedily afterward married her to his Son; with this remarkable
Circumstance, She being a Papist, to make sure Work, he married them both ways;
both by a Priest of the Church of Rome, and a Divine of the Church of England.
And here I think we may place the Height and Acme of his Honor and Happiness,
where he is not like to tarry long; for on the News of the great Preparations in
Holland, and that the Prince of Orange was certainly designed for England, the
determined Councils cooled, and then quite ceased, so that the Church of
England men, whose Cause the Prince had espoused, were restored again to the
Commissions and Trusts they had (by what Justice I know not) been lately
deprived of; and amongst other Charters that were on this occasion restored,
was that of the City of London; and that which makes it more memorable, was,
that it was brought to Guild Hall by this Person, tho he was not attended with
the Shouts and Acclamations he expected, nor seemed so florid or frolicksom as
heretofore, which some looked upon as a bad Omen; and it is reported, soon after
he being asked by a Courtier, What the Heads of the Princes Declaration were?
he should answer, He wa^ sure his was one, whatever the r^st were.

When the late King James was secured at Feversham, he desired to see his
Landlord, and demanded his Name, who proved a Person who had turned himself
over to the Kings Bench for a Fine, which fell upon him (and Captain Stanbrooke
in Westminster,) by the Lord Chancellours means at the Board, which King James
calling for a Pen and Ink, bid the Gentlemen write the Discharge as effectually
as he would; which he signed: Adding that he was now sensible my Lord
Chancellor had been a very ill Man, and done very ill things. If he was thus
censured by his Master for his former Services, he had a bad Opinion of him.
Without Prophecy any man might predict his Service and Interest was ceased; and
his Life would have been like the Escape Goat, he must have born all their
Crimes, and been beheaded for his own, for no less indignation than Death was
couched in the Words. Thus may be seen what would have been his end.

The Court by this time beginning to scatter, and the Prince of Orange
approaching, the King thought fit to withdraw himself, upon notice of which,
the Lord Chancellor betook him self to Wapping, disguised like a Seaman, in
order to his escape to Hamborough, in a Collier; but being And behold thou art
taken in thy mischief, because thou art a bloody Man, 2 Samuel 16. ^. 8.
discovered, he was brought before Sir J. Chapman, Lord Mayor of the City
London, in a strange disguise, very different from the Habit in which he
formerly appeared: And by reason of the Lord Mayors Indisposition, he not being
able to Commit him, he offered to go to the Tower, to be out of the hands of
Rabble, who there in great numbers with clubs and staves, threatened him with
present destruction: But having a Guard of the Train'd-bands to conduct him, he
got thither safe, and soon after was charged in custody by a Warrant of
Commitment from the Lords at White Hall, where he continued under much
affliction and indisposition; having since moved for his Habeas Corpus to be
bailed, but was not able to attain it. He had not been in the Tower, many days,
but as it is said (whether true or no, I cannot affirm) he had a Barrel of
Oysters sent him, upon sight of which; he said to the bearer, Well then, I see
I have some Friends left still; but upon opening the Barrel, he he found them
to be only Friends that were impatient till they gave him a prospect of his
future destiny, for verily the mighty Present was nothing but a good able
Halter. Now, as I s^id before, whether this passage be true or no. I cannot
say, but this I am sure, (if we consider his Lordships Life and Cruelties) the
Moral of it is very good.

The Humble Petition of the Widows, and Fatherless Children in the West of
England.
WE, to the number of a Thousand and more, Widows and Fatherless Children, of
the Counties of Dorset, Somerset, and Devon, our dear Husbands and tender
Fathers, having been so Tyrannously Butchered, and some Transported, our
Estates sold from us, and our Inheritance cut off by the severe and harsh
Sentence of George Lord Jeffreys, now we understand in the Tower of London a
Prisoner, who has lately, we hear, endeavored to excuse himself from those
Tyrannical and Illegal Sentences, by laying it on Information by some
Gentlemen, who are known to us to be good Christians, true Protestants and
Englishmen. We your poor Petitioners, many hundreds of us, on our Knees have
begged Mercy for our dear Husbands and tender Parents, from his cruel hands,
but his thirst for Blood was so great, and his Barbarism so cruel, that instead
of granting mercy for some, which were made appear to be Innocent, and
Petitioned for by the flower of the Gentry of the said Counties, he immediately
executed; and so barbarously, that a very good Gentlewoman at Dorchester,
begging on her Knees the Life of a worthy Gentleman, to Marry him, and make him
her Husband; this vile Wretch having not common Civility with him, and laying
aside that Honor and Respect due to a Person of her worth, told her, come, I
know your meaning, some part of your Petition I will grant, which shall be,
that after he is Hanged and Quartered, you shall have tha^ Member you best like
when living, and so I will give Orders to the Sheriff. These, with many hundred
more Tyrannical Acts are ready to be made appear in the said Counties, by
honest and credible Persons, and therefore your Petitioners desire, that the
said George J^ffreys, late Lord Chancellor, the vilest of men, may be brought
down to the Counties aforesaid, where we the good Women in the West shall be
glad to see him; and give him another manner of Welcome than he had there three
Years since.

And your Petitioners shall ^ver Pray, etc.

Thus he continued for some months in the Tower, his Chronical Indispositions,
the Stone, etc. increasing very fast upon him.

The ingenious Dr. Lower was his Physician: But Nature being now tired out by a
tedious Combat with his Disease, and the Guilt of his former bloody Life, we
hope it touched his Conscience. He having besides, by his intemperate Life,
notoriously known, contracted an ill habit of Body, he at last very happily for
himself, if not his Relations too, died in the Tower -- the -- Morning, about
Nine of the Clock, An. Dom. 1689. -- Thus, Reader, you have seen the Rise and
Fall of this Unfortunate, Great, Ill Man; And so, at present after we have
endeavored at his Character, we take our Farewell.

Jeffreys's Character.
HE was of Stature rather above a middle sort than below it; his Complexion
inclining to Fair; his Face well enough, full of a certain briskness, though mixed
with an Air a little malicious and unpleasant. He was a man of tolerable sense,
and had, as of necessity he must by so long practice, and going through such
Public Places, got some Law, though as little as 'twas, more than he had
occasion to make use of; since the Dispensing Power having as good as seated
all Law in the Kings Breast; he by that found out a more compendious method of
attaining it, than was formerly known. He had a pretty large stock of Ill
Nature, and Wit, in which lay his greatest Excellency, though a very unenvied
one. But in fine, His Brow and his Tongue were absolutely the two best
Accomplishments he was master of. -- By the help of which, and that before
mentioned, by his brisk, sudden, and sharp Interrogatories, he sometimes put
falsehood, and perhaps oftener, the truth it self out of countenance. But that
ill-favored Wit which he had, lay all of the wrong side; much like that of
those unlucky Animals, all whose Wit lies in tricks and mischief. He spoke many
pleasant things, but very few handsome ones, disgracing all with intolerable
Railing, mean passions, and perfect Billings-gate, and would commonly even upon
the Bench it self, fall into Heats both as to words and actions, not only
unworthy of a Judge, but even of any prudent man. He seemed, without wronging
him, to have a great deal of baseness, and cruelty in his Nature, having a
particular delight and relish in Cruelty and Blood, and such things as give
horror and aversion to all the rest of mankind. He was in this case worse than
even Nero; for whereas that monster had once so much good Nature, or at least
pretended it, that when he was to sign a Warrant for the execution of a
Malefactor, he is said to have wished, He had never learned to write: Jeffreys
on the other side, then only seemed in his Element, when in the midst of
Destruction and Murder. For his Religion -- What a sort of one 'twas, his Life
past sufficiently tells us; tho he and his good Brother Commissioner, the
Balswagger of Chester, maliciously persuade the world, that they were of the
Church of England; that after they could do it no more mischief with their
Live^, they might disgrace it by their Deaths, pretending both to die in that
Communion. -- But it is mean to follow 'em any further, unless with a wish
somewhat like that handsome one History leaves us, That all K. William and Q.
Mary's Enemies were as honorable buried, -- Or, in the inspired words of a
great Person, -- So, O Lord, let all thine Enemies perish.

A Letter to the Lord Chancellor, exposing to him the Sentiments of the People,
with some pertinent Advice in the conclusion.
My Lord,
I Would praise your Lordship, but you have had your share
Of that before, if not too much by far,
And now a nobler Field for curses are:
Yet I Will not curse, but leave you to the crowd,
Who never baulk their Rage, but speak aloud:
In all the Labrynth's of your crimes, they will track ye,
Worse than ten thousand Furies they will attack ye.
We talk not here of Penal Laws or Test,
Nor how you King of Terrors in the West,
With more than human Cruelty, oppressed
Those whose Shades now stab through your Anxious Breast.
To these I leave you, each with brandished Dart;
Thoroughly revenge his Quarrel at your Heart.
For me, I Will only let your Lordship see
How they resent your changed Felicity.
Now may you hear the People as they scour
Along, not fear to Damn the Chancellor:
The Women too, and all the tender Crew,
That used to pity all, now laugh at you.
The very Boys, how do they grin and prate,
And giggle at the Bills upon your Gate!
Nay, rather than be frustrate of their hope,
The Women will contribute for a Rope:
And those fine Locks that no blessed Spark might touch,
On this account Ketch may, they love my Lord so much.
Oh for Dispensing now! ah! now is the time!
Your Eloqu^nce will hardly blanch the crime;
And all the turnings of your Proteus-wit,
With all your little tricks, will not help a bit:
Even that fine Tongue, in which your Lordships trust is,
Now will not, although sometimes it baffled Justice:
No Ignoramus Juries shall perplex ye,
But with their Billa vera's now they will vex ye.
From their dire claws, no hiding hole you will find,
They speak their own now, not a Parties mind:
Not now as heretofore, when on the Bench
Flattery, and daubing had such Influence,
And Jeffreys for a Gift would with the Laws dispense.
But granting all our Laws be out of joint,
Why, yet they do not fear to gain the point:
A High commission may the Cause decide,
Your Lordship by a Butcher may be tried,
When by commission he is dignified.
His Power you must not doubt, if he be satisfied.
This it is they mean, it is this they would have done,
But I would chouse 'em 'ery Mothers Son,
Troth I Would 'en hang my self, 'en quickly done.
If you have no Halter, never make a pother,
Take but a Greater, one's as good as to'ther:
For Lord! should such a Man as you submit
To be the public Laughter of each grinning Cit!
Else my Lord, take a Razor, never fear,
And cut your Lordships Throat from Ear to Ear.
It Is feasible enough, you know who did it,
Cut both the Jug'lar Veins through if you can,
Else you will say Essex was the stouter man.
I am your Lordships, in any thing of this Nature.
From the little House over against Tyburn, where the People are almost dead
with expectation of you.
Jeffreys ELEGY.
I Very well remember on a Night,
Or rather in the peep of Morning Light,
When sweet Aurora with a smiling Eye,
Called up the Birds to wonted Melody.
Dull Morpheus with his weight upon me leant,
Half waking, and yet sleeping thus I Dreamt.
Methoughts I saw a Lawyer at his Book,
Studying Pecunia, but never Cook;
He scorned Littleton and Plowden too,
With Moldy Authors he would have naught to do.
Next Stage I saw him on, was Hicks's Hall,
And heard him mightily to roar and bawl,
Never did City crier louder yaul.
The People star'd at such a noise uncouth,
Who is it, cries one, why, it is the cities Mouth.
Then straight I saw him placed, the more's the pity,
To be the Speaking Trumpet of the City
Knight and Recorder he was made together,
This Man thought I, will live in any Weather;
Money came in, he then grew mighty rich,
And to climb higher had a deadly Itch.
Then presently a Popish Priest came to him,
That Square Cap Curr thought I will sure undo him.
Will thou now be preferred, come hither come,
And be but reconciled unto Rome,
And for Advancement thou may rest upon her,
None of her Sons e're wanted Wealth or Honor.
Do but declare against the Whiggs and say,
Thou hates the Ill-contriv'd Fanatic way.
With that methoughts I saw him tack about,
And straight he Courted the Cursed Romish rout,
Esteemed it happiness enough to go,
And kiss his Holinesses stinking Toe.
Next place I saw him in, was Justice Chair,
Who fled away because she saw him there.
He with Commission rid the Land about,
But still he aimed to keep fair Justice out,
With angry Look he Brow-beat Rightful Cause,
And his bold hand did Sacrifice the Laws,
Tore 'um or Trampled on 'um with his Paws.
Poor Justice being frighted fled from Earth,
To Heaven, whence she did derive her Birth,
To the Eternal Justice she did go,
And made report what Monsters sat below.
Inquisitor like Spain in England sat,
And at their pleasure steered the Helm of Fate,
He rid the Western Circuit all around,
But where he came no justice to be found;
He improved his Talents Martyrs to Condemn,
Hang draw and Qua^ter was his daily Theme.
He bid 'um to Confess, if e're they hope
To be Reprieved from the fatal Rope,
This seemed a favor, but he would none forgive,
The favor was, a day or two to live;
Which those had not that troubled him with Trial,
His Business Blood, and would have no denial;
His Entrails Brass, his very Heart was steel,
Poor Souls he made his Judges Courage feel,
How valiant to Condemn, when in his Power,
Two hundred he could sentence in an Hour,
Guilty or not, to him was all a case,
On Martyrs Bodies did his honor raise,
And to destroy by Retail, thought it base.
The Blood of Protestants for vengeance cry,
And will I fear to all Eternity.
Although kind Death has made him escape man's Doom,
And quietly has hurled him in his Tomb.
Then next methought I saw him placed higher,
O whither will this Canibal aspire?
The Purse, the Mace, and all the Honor that
Belongs to Lord Chancellor of State,
Made fat with Treason, he did daily thrive,
Till to his highest pitch he did arrive.
The Church of England saw a Traitor Lurch,
Who went about to undermine their Church,
Witness else Maudlin College and the rest,
He was the stoutest Stickler for the Test,
But could not help it, 'cause he was so high.
He soa^'d above the sight of humble Eye,
Abhorred Petitioners as heretofore,
Such Varlets still was banished from his Door:
Now being on the top of Fortune's Wheel,
The Giddy Goddess did begin to reel.
A warning it is to all depending on her,
Of Ice is made the Pinnacle of Honor,
Or Glassie substance, brittle shining hew,
That afar off does make a Golden Show,
Those that are Low, admire it, and would Climb,
Although they break their Necks the very time,
And now methoughts he hearing preparations,
That were a forming in the Neighbor Nations,
Prepares for his own safety now in time,
Thinking the Thunder would on him incline,
Therefore being asked what were the Princes Heads
Of's Declaration, feelingly he said,
His Head was one, aimed at amongst many others,
Knowing in Villainy he would many Brothers,
With that betook him to his heels and run,
Thinking by Bribes he could not ruin shun;
He took a Colli^rs Coat to Sea to go;
Was ever chancellor arrayed so!
But like to like, he would needs Anticipate
Devil Incarnate, or Colier of State.
He dealt in deeds of darkness, black as night,
Such a bl^ck habit needs must fit him right.
Brave sight to see him in a Colliers Skin,
Come pence a piece, my Masters enter in.
My Lord Mayor sounded, and was stricken dumb,
To see his Metamorphos'd Lordship come.
A Countrym^n he flouted once I hear,
Asked what he had for Swearing, It Was too dear,
You Bumpkin in the Leather Jacket there;
To whom the Hobnail quickly did reply,
Had thou no more for lying, than poor I
Have here for Swearing, thou might quickly wear
A Lether one, inste^d of Plush Th^ed-bare.
Now had he seen my Lord in Colliers Buss,
Bumpkin had past for Prophet sure enough.
The Mobile and Rout with Clubs and Staves,
Swore that his Carcass never should lie in Graves.
They Would ^at him up alive within an hour,
Their Teeth should tear his flesh and him devour;
Limb him they would as Boys on Shrovetide do,
Some cried I ^m for a Wing an Aro^, for what are you,
I am for his H^ad, says one, for his Brains says the other,
And I am for his Sowse, his E^rs another,
Oh, cries a thi^d, I am for his ^u^tocks brave,
Nine pound of ^takes from them I mean to have;
I know the Rogu^ is fle^hy, says a sourth,
The Sweet br^^d^, Lu^gs and Heart, then nothing worth;
Yes, quoth anoth^r, out no^ good to Eat,
A Heart of St^el will n^'re prove tender meat.
But we ^ust them dispose another way,
A good rich Lawy^r will a round sum pay,
For such a set of Loud and bellowing Lungs,
Enough to serve a h^ndred Stentors Tongues.
We'll s^ll his Heart to the Pope to make a show,
A Relic on it an^ he will get money too.
But whilst they were dividin^ him in thought,
The Lord Mayor ordered Soldiers to be brought
Who resceud hi^ from out the Rabbles power,
And straight away they took him to the Tower,
With much ado ^e there ^as brought at Last,
To think on all his wicked actions past.
FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table of the Chief Matters contained in thi^ Book.
A.
ANsl^ys (Abraham) last Speech, -- His last Letter, p. 506.
p. 505. Argile (Earl) his Sufferings, -- His last Speech, p. 409.
p. 408. Armstrong, his Sufferings and dying words, -- His Elegy, p. 132.
p. 126. Arnold, a brief account of his Sufferings, p. 25. Askews Letter to his
Father, -- Another Letter to his Friend, p. 508. -- The Account his Friend
gives of him, p. 509.
p. 506. Author's Sentiments concerning the Western Sufferers, p. 527.
Axminster and Honiton, an account of those executed there, p. 459.
B.
BAtemans Sufferings, p. 141. Battiscomb, his Life and Sufferings, -- He was
executed at Lime, in company of eleven Persons, p. 449. -- His last words, p.
373.
p. 369. Battiscomb, a further account of his Behavior, -- A Poem on a Lady
that came to J^ffreys to beg Mr. Battiscomb's Life, p. 373. -- His Character,
p. 374.
p. 474. Boddys last Speech, p. 479. Bragg, his dying Speech and Behavior, p.
437. Bridport and Lime, an acco^nt of those that s^ffered there, p. 444.
C.
CIvilities of the Citizens of Exon to the Western Sufferers, p. 528. College,
his L^fe, Trial, and last Words, -- The Verses upon his Picture, p. 39. -- Poem
w^itten by himself, Ibid.
p. 27. Cornishes, Sufferings, -- A hint at the occasion of his Martyrdom, --
Passages before his Death, p. 136. -- An account of a Poem made in his time, p.
139. -- His Character, Ibid.
p. 132. Cox Sufferings and Triumphant Death, p. 451.
D.
DAngerfield, his Life and Sufferings, -- His Character, p. 156. -- His Elegy,
Ib^d. -- His Ghost to Jeffreys, p. 166.
p. 153.
E.
ESsex (Earl) his Life and Martyrdom, -- His Character, p. 60. -- His Elegy, p.
61.
p. 40.
G.
GAunts Sufferings, -- Her dying Speech, p. 4^2. -- Her Postscript to the said
Speech, p. 406.
p. 400. Gatchets Sufferings, p. 462. Ga^chils Behavior and dying Words, p.
520. Godfrey (Sir Edmondbury) his Life and Martyrdom, -- Anagram upon his Name,
p. 23. -- Poem on his Death, p. 24.
p. 1.
H.
HAmlings Case, p. 460. Hewlings (both Benjamin and William) an account of
their behavior both before and at their Execution, with several Letters to
diverse of their Relations, -- The Character of the two Hewlings, p. 368. -- A
further account of Mr. W. Hewling, p. 448. -- He is executed with Dr. Temple,
Mr. Mathers, and some others, p. 468.
p. 184. Hicks (John) last Speech, -- His Letter to his Nephew the day before
his Death, p. 497. -- His Letter to his Wife, p. 499. -- Another Letter to his
Wife, p. 501. -- Another Letter to his Wife, p. 502.
p. 481. Hymns made by several Sufferers, p. 516. Holloway, his Life,
Sufferings and dying Words, p. 120. Holway of Lime, his Behavior before and at
the place of Execution, -- His last Words, p. 511.
p. 510. Holmes, his Sufferings, -- His dying Words, p. 445. -- His last
Prayer, p. 446.
p. 444. Holmes, (Coll.) a further account of his Behavior, p. 477. Hones
Accusation, -- His dying Words, Ibid.
p. 102. Huckers Letter to the Bookseller concerning his Father, -- His Letter
to his Friend, p. 522.
p. 521.
I.
JEffreys (Late Lord Chancellor) his Life and Death following, -- Dedication of
his Life to himself, following the Title Page, -- Poem to the Memory of the
Lord Jeffreys, following the Dedication, -- His Birth and Parentage, p. 6. --
His Behavior at School, p. 7. -- His Father Prophecies, that he will die with
his Shoes and Stockins on, Ibid. -- His Dream, p. 9. -- His entering himself in
the Inner Temple, p. 8. -- His Marriage and early Son, p. 10. -- He is made
Recorder of London, Ibid. -- Hi^ Abhorrence of Petitioning, p. 13. -- His b^ing
on his Knees before the House of Commons, p. 14. -- His ill Practices whilst
Recorder, p. 16. -- His Vehement discourse to the Jury against the Lord Russel,
p. 25. -- His sordid Treat. of M^. Baxter, D d 2 p. 431. -- A Narrative of
Monmouths whole Expedition, while in the W^st, which was the Prologue to
Jeffreys cruelties there, p. 24. -- His secret Villainies, p. 35. -- His Bloody
Practices in the West, p. 36. -- The Charge given by the Lord Jeffreys at
Bristol in his return from his W^stern Campaign, p. 44. -- He calls the Mayor
of Bristol Kidnapping Rogue, p. 52. -- He is made Lord Chancellor for his
Cruelties in the West, Ibid. -- How he raised Money by procuring Pardons, p.
53. -- He is made Baron of Wem, p. 59. -- What followed thereupon, Ibid. -- The
P. of O^ange, approaching he flies to Wapping in a Disguise, p. 62. -- He is
taken and brought before the Lord Mayor, Ibid. -- Is committed to the Tower, p.
63. -- The Western Widows Petition against him, while in the Tower, Ibid. -- He
dies in the Tower, p. 64. -- His Character, p. 65. -- A Letter sent to him
there, p. 66. -- His Elegy, p. 67.
p. 533. Jenkins (William) his Behavior both before and at, his Execution with
several Letters to diverse of his Relations, -- His Character, p. 385.
p. 375. Introduction to the New Martyrology, showing the Reasons, why this
work is Undertaken, Johnson, the Accusation against him, -- His Address to all
English Protestants in the Army, p. 151. -- His Character, p. 152.
p. 149.
K.
K -- S Cruelties related by an Eye and Ear witness, who also gives an account
of other Western Barbarities, p. 524. King (John) an account of his last Speech
at the place of Execution at Edinburgh, p. 418. Kidd (John) his last Speech at
the place of Execution at Edinburgh, p. 424. Kidd (Capt.) his dying Speech in
the West of England, p. 467.
L.
Lark (Sampson) his Sufferings, -- His last Words p. 448. -- Some further
Passages relating to Mr. Sampson Lark with his Prayer when executed, p. 452.
-- His Letter to his Friend, just before his Execution, p. 452.
p. 447. Laurence (Thomas) his Case and Sufferings, p. 462. Lisle (Lady) her
Sufferings, -- Her last Speech, p. 386.
p. 385. List of all them that were condemned and suffered in the West in the
Year, 1685. Jeff. Life, p. 54.
M.
MAdders Sufferings, -- His last Words upon the Ladder, p. 465. -- His last
Prayer, p. 466.
p. 464. Matthews last Spe^ch and Prayer at the place of Execution, p. 511.
Monmouth (^uke) his Sufferings and Death, -- His Declaration in the West, D d 2
p. 117. -- A brief Abstract of his true Speech, p. 433. -- His Elegy, p. 434.
p. 431. Monmouth and Argile being both defeated, what followed thereupon, p.
435.
N.
NElthrope (Richard) his Sufferings, -- His Letter to his Parents, Brothers and
Sisters, p. 390. -- His Letter to his Children, p. 393. -- His last Speech, p.
396.
p. 388. Noises Sufferings, -- He engages in the Prentices Petition to the Lord
Mayor, p. 170. -- A Copy of the said Petition, Ibid. -- An account of 30000
Prentices that signed it, p. 172. -- The Speech that was made at presenting
this Petition, p. 173. -- The Lord Mayors answer to the Prentices Speech, p.
175. -- The Names of the 20 Presenters of this Petition, Ibid. -- A Poem
dedicated to 'em, p. 176.
p. 168.
O.
Oats, an account of his Life, and Sufferings, -- His Character, p. 148.
p. 142.
P.
PArrots Sufferings, -- His Behavior at the place of Execution, Ibid. -- His
last Speech, Ibid.
p. 473. Poem to the memory of those who suffered in the West, next the Title
page Potts sufferings, courage and dying Words, p. 459.
R.
REview of what has been written in this New Mar^yrology, p. 529. Robins of
Charmouth his Sufferings, -- His last Sayings, p. 471.
p. 470. Roses Suff^^ings and Courage, p. 459. Rosw^lls Trial and Acquittal, p.
407. Rouses Trial and Accusation, -- His dying Words, p. 100.
p. 99. Rumbold a brief (...) of his Sufferings, -- A larger account of
Rumbolds Sufferings with his last Speech, and several things that past at his
Trial, p. 413.
p. 412. Russel (Lord) his Life, Trial and Martyrdom, -- His Elegy, p. 85. --
His Character, p. 86. -- An Account of his last Speech, p. 88.
p. 64.
S.
SAndfords last Speech at the place of Execution, p. 515. Sa^chels Behavior
and dying Words, p. 513. Sherborn an account of those executed there, with
their dying Words, p. 456. Sidney (Algernoon) his Sufferings, Trial and
Martyrdom, -- His Petition to his Majesty, p. 111. -- An account of the Paper
he delivered to the Sheriffs on Tower Hill, p. 115. -- His Epitaph, p. 119. --
His Character, Ibid.
p. 104. Smith of Char^stock, his Behavior and dying Speech, p. 440. Speak
(Charles) his Sufferings and last words, p. 472. Speed of Culliton, his
Behavior and dying Speech, p. 442. Sp^ague and Cleg executed at Culliton, with
their dying words, p. 457. Sprague (John) a further account of him, p. 475.
T.
TEmple, his last Speech, p. 468. Tylers Suff^rings, -- He is executed with
some other Persons, p. 449. -- His l^st Speech, Ibid. -- A Hymn made by him a
little before his Execution, p. 450.
p. 449.
W.
WAlcot his Life, Trial and Martyrdom, -- An account of his Speech, p. 99. --
His last Prayer, p. 100.
p. 93. Western Transactions the Introduction to 'em, with general Observations
upon 'em, -- The Lives and dying Speeches of those that suffered in the West,
p. 437.
p. 177. VVhippings in the West, -- Mr. Hale whipped, Ibid. -- Mrs. Brown whipped,
Ibid. -- A poor Boy of Weymouth of 12 years of Ag^, was whipped till he had the
Flesh of his back so cut with whipping that he died. p. 464.
p. 463.
FINIS.

