CANTICUM MORIENTIS CYGNI, OR, The last Dying NOTE of STEPHEN the first
Gospel-Martyr.

Opened and Improved in a SERMON PREACHED At ALHALLOWS BARKING London, 17.
September. 1658.

At the Funeral of Mr. ANDREW BASSANO, Gentleman; and since in some particulars
enlarged.

By WILLIAM TUTTY, M. A. Minister of Totteridge in the County of HERTFORD.

LONDON, Printed for J. Rothwel, at the Fountain in Goldsmiths-Row, in
Cheapside, 1659.

TO THE Truly Religious Gentlewoman, AND His much endeared FRIEND, Mistress ANNE
BASSANO.
Much Honored in Christ,
I Humbly here present you with the firstborn of my Meditations, which were
ever yet published to the eye of the World. I durst never till now, adventure
any thing out abroad; and therefore this first piece cannot but go from me,
with a kind of Virgin blush. I never yet judged any of my weak labors worthy
of a curious eye to look upon: Sensible I am, that my parts are as low as my
person; and therefore hitherto it has been mine only ambition, to do good
among mine own people in mine own sphere. But truly, the love, and respects in
my Ministerial work, which I always met with from your dear yoke fellow, now
with Christ, while he sojourned with us here below in this valley of tears,
forces me to this thankful retaliation, and makes me willing that the World
should know how much I was indebted to him. As I have lost a very loving
Neighbor; so have you a most dear and, tender Husband. But it is not my
desire, or design to renew or aggravate your sorrow under this sad stroke, but
rather contrarily, to present you with something (that through the strength of
Christ) might lighten your burden. I know you are like Hannah, a Woman of a
troubled Spirit, at all times, but much more now, that you have more than
ordinary to do and suffer; and your adversary is most busy, now he finds you at
the weakest: And therefore, the good Lord forbid, that by this Sermon I should
add to your Affliction, in which already your cup runs over: I only beg of
you, that you would seriously read, and remember this Sermon, but strive to
forget the sad occasion of it. Oh do not with Rachel refuse to be comforted;
Confident I am you are dear to Chist though too too cruel to your self; and
that your Spirit is clean, though very cloudy; and that you are a child of
light though you so often sit in darkness. The dead never complain as you do (I
fear too much) and darkness could never reveal so much darkness as you daily
mourn under. Black thoughts which we continually resist, and pray against, are
but the smoke of the bottomless Pit; they flow from Satan's envy against us,
not our enmity against God. We must with thankfulness take comfort in the grace
of Christ in us, as well as allways be poring on our own wants and weaknesses:
Our Father expects we should walk thankfully, as well as humbly, and that we
should melt under his goodness, as well as our own unworthiness. Our dear
Savior a little before his death, begins his last Sermon to his Disciples,
John 14.1. with this, not only Counsel, but Command, Let not your hearts be
troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me: intimating, that we may be
guilty of Gospel-disobedience and unbelief, by being too much troubled, as well
as by being too much defective herein. Our infinitely gracious God has made
large and strong provision in his Word, as well for the consolation of his
servants here, as for their salvation hereafter: he has given us not only his
Word, but his Oath, That by too immutable things, in which it is impossible for
God to lie, we might have a (...).
, strong consolation, Heb. 6.18. even a formidable, giant-like consolation as
the word signifies; and indeed strong food calls for strong labor; as we
should be strong in the Lord in point of duty, so in point of comfort, seeing
he has given us such strong encouragement, even the highest security in the
World, his own Word, and Oath to feed upon. Oh when shall I see you come up to
a full assurance of faith; unto which all believers should give all diligence:
I know you dare not allow your self in any one sin willingly; do not do it in
this, in Fathering a spiritual untruth upon your self, that you are an
Hypocrite. How angry was God with Jobs friends for this untrue, and
uncharitable censure concerning him? nothing but a sacrifice from Job himself
for them would appease him: and it is worth the minding, the nature of Gods
enditement against them, Job 42.7. Ye have not spoken of Me, the thing that is
right, why, their Doctrine was true, though not Application; the Premises they
laid down were sound, though the Conclusion were rotten, concerning Jobs
rottenness. Now God interprets this as false doctrine, as speaking an untruth
concerning himself, Paul, while Saul; persecuted Christ the head, in the
members; so do we when we persecute our own graces (the best part of Christ in
us) and father spiritual untruths upon our selves, to gratify the Father of
lies. Stephens prayer immediately after the Text, for his enemies, shall be
mine, though in a different sense for you; The Lord lay not this sin to your
charge, that you even stone to death your own graces, not giving God the glory
of them; but sin against him, by sinning against your own grace and peace. I
now leave this weak piece with you, and leave you in the arms of Jesus Christ,
who loves you, and has dyed for you; And in him remain,

Your unworthy Pastor W. Tutty.
From my study in Totteridge the 4th. day of October 1658.
ACTS 7.59: And they stoned Stephen calling upon God, and saying; Lord Jesus
receive my spirit.


THe whole chapter contains the Tragical history of Stephen a primitive Deacon;
wherein we have 1. his large sermon, 2. The Jews ill resentment of it, 3.
Their cruelty to the Preacher, instead of love and honor.

1. For the Sermon, it consists of Doctrine, and Application. The Doctrinal
part ends at the 50th. verse, and all this while the Auditors are still and
quiet, no noise at all.

The Application begins at the 51 verse, and this enrages them, and drives them
into the worst kind of madness.

In the Applicative part, 1. The holy Preacher upbraids them in general, with
the stoutness, stubbornness, and stiff-neckedness of their hearts, verse 51. 2.
Charges upon them their resisting the Holy Ghost, and this too modo, and more
patrum, after the manner of their Predecessors; so lashing them, and their
Ancestors with the same whip, in the same 51. verse.

3. He charges upon their Forefathers their horrid cruelty to the prophets, ye
their cruelty to the very death, against them which were the Propheciers of
Christ, his (...) and (...) the forerunners of him; thus were they the stock of
bloody parents.

4. He charges upon them (the cruel seed of cruel Butchers spiritually) that
they were worse than their parents; for of the Messiah himself that holy and
just one, they themselves had but lately been the betrayers, and murderers 52
verse.

Last, He lays at their doors the guilt of high treason against the Law of
Moses, in every part and parcel of it, though they seemd so much to cry it up,
and wore broad Phylactories of it upon their Garments in their daily Garb; and
he circumstantiates this guilt, by their breaking of the Law, Theophilact and
Occumenius
though received by the disposition of Angels; Some refer this to Moses and
Aron; Lorinus Calvin and alii.
Some to the Angel that appeared to Moses in the burning bush; Lorinus Calvin
and alii.
Some to many Angels which were testes and internuncii, Witnesses and
Messengers betwixt God and Moses in giving the Law.

2. For the Jews ill resentment of this close application, it is expressed by
diverse cross and cursed gestures, 1. they were cut to the heart, not savingly
pricked, but maliciously pierced and galled, verse 54, 2. They gnashed. on him
with their teeth, this stridor dentium the action of damned Friends, enraged
against the Lord. 3. made a great outcry 57 verse, with an unanimous,
tumultuous rage 4. They stopped their ears to hear no more, either of his
Counsel or complaints. 5. They ran upon him with one accord, in the same verse,
united in malice. 6. They cast him out of the City; not only out of the
Synagogue; but they look upon him as such an Anathema not fit for humane
society.

3. For their cruelty against the Preacher, that is fully expressed in the 58,
59 verses, they stone him to death, Augustine.
ad dures duriores; being more hard with cruelty than the Stones they cast at
him; a sad course they took, and made most vile Application, casting stones at
the Preacher, instead of casting the first stone at their own hard and stony
hearts.

Thus their rage brings Stephen to his Martyrdom; his name in Greek signifies
a (...)
Crown, from hence Lorinus
one alluding, tells us, that he was at this time Crowned with precious stones,
lapidibus' preciosis coronatns est, and Arator
another, that he was joined closer to Christ the corner stone. Et per tot
lapides petrae conjungitur uni.

But see now the sweet, and gracious deportment of this blessed Deacon, Saint,
and Martyr; as before he had faithfully preached to them, so now he as
servently prays before them and for them: as he imitated the death of Christ,
so Christ in his death, Calvia in locum.
turning himself to God: and truly it was now high time, satis verborum apud
homines perdiderat, merito ad Deum convertit, he had lost too much time in
speaking to malicious man, he therefore now directs himself to the merciful
God by prayer.

And in his dying supplications he imitates his dying Savior; those 2
petitions which he put up to his Father on the Cross, he sends up to God now,
only inverting Christ's Order, Luke 23.34.46. Christ prayed first for his
enemies, then for himself but Stephen first for his own Soul, and then for his
enemies; And surely there may be good reasons given for it, 1. The Servant must
be below the Master; Christ's love to enemies was the Copy, his the transcript,
Mat. 5.44, 48. In loving enemies, and praying for them, we must strive to be
perfect, as our heavenly Father; it is honor enough for us to follow. 2.
Christ and Stephen (so other Christians too) in this walk by distinct rules; we
must love our Neighbors (so our Enemies) as our selves, Christ loved them
better than himself, in this commended his love to us to imitate, not equalize,
Romans 5.8. 3. Christ needed no prayer for himself, but Stephen did, and so do we
as Calvin
one observes Christ prayed but for example sake, as to himself, but upon a
real need for his crucifiers; now needful works should allwaies be done
first, and therefore Christ observed this method, but not Stephen, for it was
more needful for him to secure his own Soul first by prayer, and then to
intercede for his Enemies.

These 2 prayers of his, proclaimed him a right Christian in his death, the
first discovers fidei constantiam, the constancy of his Faith in his petition
for himself, the second contains summam charitatis, the substance of his love
and charity, even to enemies, which 2 graces and duties contain the marrow of
Christian Religion, for which and in which he dyed.

The Text is Stephens first Prayer for himself, in which we have part of the
last words of the first Martyr after Christ; and the holy gracious
farewell-breathings of a dying Saint; the words may be called morientis cygni
cantilena, the last sweet note of a milk-white innocent dying Swan; his
petition is short, but sweet, when totum pro vulnere Corpus, the whole body was
but one wound, little leisure he has to speak much, and therefore he speaks
fully and fervently, much in a little, as Homers Ileads in a nutshel.

There are two parts of the Text, 1. parts of Text.
The great person or Prince petitioned, the Lord Jesus.

2. The sum and substance of his petition. Receive my Spirit, Calvin.
De corpore minime sollicitus animam in Christimanus deponit; he minded not his
Body, his whole care was for his Soul.

I shall handle the words two ways.

1. In sensu divise, every word by it self, for there is a weight in every
single word.

2. In sensu composito, taking the substance of the whole prayer together:

1. In a divided sense; here are 5 words in the prayer, every one is praegnant
with holy matter.

Lord; in death he turns himself to the Lord; hence observe, Good men should
shut up their lives with prayer; we should begin and end with it at all times
and in all employments; this duty should bring up the front, -- lead up the
rear in all the actions of our life, which is a warfare; he who is the Alpha
and Omega, in himself, should be the beginning, and the end of all our
services, but chiefly when we begin to draw to an end of our time, and work, we
should be sure to clasp up the book with most serious calling upon God; As the
Arabian Phoenix makes her self a nest of spices, and is burnt to death in it,
so should we die in in the spyced bed of prayer: an Emperor should dystanding
(in the Court of Judicature) so Vespatian; a Minister should die Preaching in
the pulpit, so Doctor Jewel; and a Christian should dye praying, so holy
Stephen in the Text; and thus our dear Mediator.

Herbert has an excellent poem to this purpose. Much less in death should we
pay this tribute due only unto God, to them; for as they are the great Lords
menial servants, and must not share in their Lords Rents, so they are in many
offices the Saints Servants too, both in life, so 1 Heb. last, ministering
spirits to the heirs of Salvation, and in death, the bearers of the Saints
souls into Abraham's Bosom, Luke 16.22. poor Lazarus being dead, had these
honorable bearers.

Lord Jesus; Stephen directs his dying prayer to the Lord Jesus, rather than to
the Lord Jehovah; Christ is coaequal with his Father in glory; not only (...)
but (...), not only in glory the nearest to him, but one with him; Stephen
asserts this clearly in his death, not only dying in Christ and for Christ, but
praying to Christ in his death, acknowledging hereby his divinity by giving him
divine worship. And to avoid this clear demonstration we read of on Franciscus
David an Arrian heretic, who reads this word (...) in the Text in the
genitive case, instead of the Vocative; and so would fain give us this sense,
Lord of Jesus, instead of Lord Jesus; but this blasphemous shift is
sufficiently confuted by the Ancients, as Lorinus
a Learned man, though a Jesuit, upon this place discovers,

All power is given to Christ in Heaven and Earth, Math, 28.18. and holy
Stephen dying, virtually in this last prayer acknowleges it.

John 14.13. These 2 glorious persons in the blessed Trinity have not 2
distinct interests, but one, and the same, the glory of the one is the glory of
the other, yea now the glory of the Father is chiefly deposited in the hands of
Christ: at first God was only known by his name of Almighty, afterward by his
name Jehovah, Exodus 6.3. but now by his name Jesus, (...) in not at the name.
In whose name every knee under the Gospel must bow, to the Glory of God the
Father, 2 Phil. 10.11. Augustine tells us, how much he did delighted in the
works of Tully for the elegancy of the Latin, before his conversion; but not a
whit after, because he could not read the name of Jesus there. Paul desired to
know nothing else but Christ crucified, 2 Cor. 2.2. and he discovers God the
Father to be only in him the Father of Mercies, and God of all Consolations, 1
Cor. 1.3. to the Judge of all flesh then, by an Advocate, we must now run at
all times.

Revelation 1.18. he alone is the door, and the gate of Heaven, John 10.9. He
is via, vita, and veritas, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, John 14.6. He is
our journeys end the Life, and he is the way to it, and the truth to guide us
in the way, and no man can come to the Father but by him: he also is the great
reconciler of God and Man, Col. 20. he only can make us (...)
more than conquerors over all the forerunners of death, and over death it
self, Romans 8.36, 37, 38, 39. He only can pull out the sting of death, and
destroy this last Enemy, as the Apostle fully shows, 1 Cor. 15. To whom should
we go both in life and death, but to him who has the words of eternal life?
John 6.68.

3. Lord Jesus Receive; (...) It is a relative word; Relations (as the Logician
tells us) are double, either relata secundum dici, or secundum esse, in name, or
in nature; this is a relative word in name, now omne relatum implicat suum
correlatum, every relative must have some word or thing to answer it: receiving
has 2 usual correlates, it implies either giving something, or paying, it
implies both here in the Text. Observe.

de jure it should be so, it is our sin and shame if de facto it be not so,
Romans 14.7, 9. For Christ dyed, (as the Apostle shows there) that he might be
the Lord, and master, both of the dead, and of the living. When we come to die
then we do nothing else but pay debts; we do but pay then 5 debts, 1. A debt to
nature; the corruptible part must put on corruption, and worms must feed upon
us, (...)
as we feed upon other Creatures. 2. A debt to sin; for the wages of sin is
death, or the breakfast and food of it, Rom 8.23. 3. A debt to posterity, for
one generation must pass away, that another may come in its stead, Eccless.
1.4. the generat on of one, must be the corruption of another, that the Earth
may not be pestered and crowded too much with inhabitants. 4. A debt to divine
Justice: for the same Soul that sins must dym point of equity. 5. To Christ,
and our own Souls; when we die for Christ, it is but lex talionis, for he dyed
for us: when we die naturally by the appointment of Christ, we pay a debt to our
own Souls, which cannot be refined, and calcined but by fire, by melting down
the whole mass of the Body. Every righteous man will be willing to pay his
debts, so should we be to die: our lives are lent to us by God but for a time,
and must be restored to the lender or owner; the Spirit shall return to God
that gave it, so Solomen Eccles. 12.7. the anima, and animus, the natural life,
and spiritual Soul, of due right belong to God.

Augustine paraphrases on these words; Tibi vixi, tibi morior, etc. accipe
spiritum meum, e manu eorum qui oderunt tuum: he represents Stephen in this
prayer thus speaking to his dear Savior; Lord Jesus to thee I have lived, and
to thee I now die, receive my Spirit from the hands of cruel Enemies, who have
hated thy spirit. Our acquaintance with Christ, must not be to begin when we
are just at our end. To such as have been friends, Christ will say, Come in my
friends, I will receive you, I will give you house, and harbor, but to others
he will say, Depart from me, I know you not now, because I never knew you
before, Mat. 7.23. a very solemn profession he makes of it. How many of us
would fain live to our selves, yet fain dye in Christ, as that dissolute young
man, who was present at the death of Ambrose cried out to his companions,
Libenter vobis cum viverens, modo cum illo moriar. I would willingly live with
you, so I might die with him? but Jesus Christ very seldom drives such late
bargains with any Soul.

4. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. The pronouncing has a great emphasis in it,
worth the marking, and from hence we may observe 2 things.

Ahab did, (who though he was a Prince, yet was of the basest mechanic Spirit,
a hellish huckster as to his own Soul) neither has he morgaged it, as Ephraim
did hers to Idolatry, being a silly dove without heart, Hos. 7.11. other Doves
as the Naturalists tell us, are without gall, but she was a Monster in nature,
without heart, because she had pawned it to her wicked paramours, and so
consequently had, though jus ad rem, not jus inre, no possession of it. Neither
has he exchanged his Soul for any part of the World, or the whole bulk and
body of it, as Christ himself uses the expression, Math. 16.26.

Cor 6.17. And married to Jesus Christ by faith, the Husbands interest is the
Wives, or glued, the word (...) comes from (...) gluten.
and the Wives her Husbands, what Christ has he has, and what he has Christ
has; true grace frees the Soul from all base Masters and Lordly Tyrants: and a
believer in death it self may say to Christ, Lord Jesus receive my Soul, which
since conversion, never knew any bonds but thine own service, which is perfect
freedom: that never was under any yoke, or burden but thine, which is most
easy and light, Math. 11.30. which was no willing Servant to sin and lust, but
upon pure force, and highest compulsion: receive then dear husband, now my
Virgin Spirit, not abused, not deflowred, since thou have entered into a
conjugal league with me

Happy Soul that can thus argue, flying from the Body, with an all-searching
knowing Master.

5. Lord Jesus Receive my Spirit. By (...) Spirit here he does not mean his
natural breath; for as the body is dust, and returns to dust, so the breath is
air, and in death the air sucks it up, we do then expirate, not respirate,
breath it out into its element, not suck it in any more: but he means his
Spiritual, not natural breath, which was a divine infusion; as he breaths out
the one, he breaths up the other into its proper center, the bosom of Jesus
Christ.

Noah's Ark, when the storms of death drown his body; But of this more by and
by, when the words are handled in their second sense, unto which I now hasten.

2. to handle the words in a compounded, united sense, and so to bind up the
single flowers in a bundle together; and the Lord make them a fragrant posy to
your spiritual sense.

For expedition sake, I shall join Doctrine and Application both in one, and so
infer 4. particulars from the whole prayer.


1. Matter of Information; this shall be double.

1. It may inform us, that the rage of man cannot drive a gracious Soul from
Christ; Stephen here in this whole prayer goes to Jesus Christ, though many
stones not only lay in his way, but as a massy weight upon him, and not only
lay upon him, but broke and bruised his body; when his enemies eyes sparkled
fire at him by reason of rage, and malice, when they gnashed on him with their
teeth, when they stopped their ears at all his complaints, and were desperately
united together in their thoughts and Actions of blood and mischief; when they
cast a shower of stones upon his body, and shot a whole volley of cruelty at
his naked breast, yet all could not stop his mouth; nor that heap of stones dam
up his passage to heaven, but in a moment he flies thither by prayer to God his
Rock, his Ammunition of Rocks, to Christ his precious corner stone. Thus may
all the Saints do, when their adversaries are set upon the fire of hell, they
may yet run to the gates of heaven; as all the gates of Hell (in Hell) cannot
prevail against their persons, so all the gates of Hell (on Earth) cannot
obstruct their petitions; they may see their Father, their Savior, through the
thickest cloud of humane rage, and fly to him as with the wings of a Dove by
faith, and prayer.

2. It may inform us that Souls do not sleep in the grave; they are received so
soon as we die, either by Christ, as Stephens here, or else by Satan; they do
not fortuito vagare, wander uncertainly, as some sick-braind Philosophers did
dream; nor pass from one body to another by a (...), as Pythagoras, and his
foolish Scholars thought, much less sleep in the grave with the Body, till they
are awakened by the found of the great Trumpet, at the day of judgment, as some
now among us have sinfully held forth to their Auditors; This very prayer, to
say no more at present, abundantly confutes this fond opinion. Our Souls are no
sooner out of the vessel, and ship of the body, but presently they are landed,
and set on shore in Heaven or in Hell: An Heathen could say of death, Seneca
profectio est, quam putas mortem, it is but a passage from one Town to
another, or a removal from one house to another. This total Soul-sleeping is a
worse opinion than Popish purgatory, or limbus patrum, and their dream of
Abraham's bosom in the for Old Testament Disciples, until the coming of Christ
in the flesh, is not so absurd as this, of lodging in the bosom of the grave
for New Testament discpiles till the second coming of Christ And truly it seems
to be a great encouragement to profaness, and discouragement to godliness: for
an ancient Ambrose
Father tells us: Angustae mentes irritantur promissis, excitantur speratis
mercedibus; our narrow hearts are much quickened to duty by hopes of reward; and
so consequently frighted from sin by fears, of punishment: both which, hopes
and fears if of things at a great distance have slender impression upon the
heart: you shall not discourage your child from any untoward action, by
threatening to whip him for it a year hence, or quicken him to obedience in
doing any good, by promising him a new Coat, or a fayring seven years hence.
Hope deferred makes the heart sick, and the hand lame; no wonder if men be hold
in sin if confident their sin shall not find them out till the day of
Judgment. God threatens sudden destruction to awaken us out of sin, and tells
us, that he that comes shall come quickly, and bring his reward along with him,
Rev. 22.12. to awaken us unto increase in holiness: The first Martyr after
Christ, though he dyed not for, yet he dyed in this truth, That Spirits
speedily are received by Christ in death, if they die well.

2. Matter of consolation; this prayer affords comfort to all holy ones in such
an hour when they need it most, even in an hour of death: all that die in
Christ, and for Christ, have a free and speedy passage by death to Christ, who
is really to them pater spirituum, and custos animarum, the Father of Spirits,
and the keeper of their Souls. This comfort is double, both as to themselves,
and to their Christian Relations when they die.

1. As to themselves; they need not fear death, but look upon it with an eye of
comfort; this prayer of Stephens was oration fidei, a prayer of Faith; we read
Chap. 6.8. that he was full of faith and power; and at this time he had a
strong exercise of it, as we may see verse, 55, 56. he looked up steadfastly
into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at his right hand;
this believing vision was when his tragedy was beginning; and certainly as the
rage of his enemies grew stronger, his faith incresed; and in this last prayer
for himself he acted, and spoke undoubtedly with full assurance of faith,
fervently believing that the Lord Jesus would receive his Spirit, as now he
begd that he would; from hence, Calvin
one observes; even from this faith of Stephens; haec fiducia instituere nos
debet ad placidam mortis tolerantiam, this confidence should instruct, and
strengthen us, which calmness and comfort to bear the stroke of death. Calvin
Seneca
An Heathen could say, si quid incommodi, morientis vitium est, non mortis; if
death do us any hurt or prejudice, the fault is in the person dying, not in
death; it cannot then hurt a godly man: Christ tells the Good Thief, this day
thou shall be with me in Paradise, though it were then about the ninth hour of
it; and Lazarus his Soul was carried by Angels into Heaven, surely as for
honor, so for expedition.

2. As to their Christian relations, here is matter of great comfort in their
death; the Lord Jesus takes care of their Souls; when an Husband or dear
Relation dies in Christ, the Jewel we loved is but taken away from us, and
locked up in a surer Cabinet; we are content to part with our Children, and send
them sometimes far from us, when we marry them, for their preferment sake;
Death marries our dear Christian Relations to Christ, (as faith in life
contracts them) and so carries them home to their Bridegroom; Ambrose Cyprian
the dead in Christ do but abire, not obire, are but praemissi, non amissi,
they do but depart from us, not die, they do but go before, not go quite away;
they are not lost, we shall meet them again the next style: what we lose,
Christ receives; and is this a loss? we do but hide our Talent in Christ's
Napkin; and should we too much bewail such a breach? Luges Corpus a quo
recessit anima? Augustine.
luge animam, a qua recessit Deus; Do thou bewail a Body, from whence the
Soul is departed? rather bewail the Soul, from which God is departed; hinc
illae lachrymae, this is matter of sorrow indeed, to see Abner dying as a fool,
to hear of a dear Absalom took off in the height of his sins, and of his
Rebellion against God and Man; this is a Soul-rending heartbreaking spectacle;
but to see a Stephen dying, the Church may make great lamentation for her own
loss, but the matter is not worth a tear as to such a Martyr, though he should
ascend to Heaven in a fiery Chariot. Heaven is perfect happiness after the
sharpest manner of dying. In such cases then let us rather save our tears for
our own sins, than to weep, as persons without hope, for the dead in Christ.

3. Matter of examination; Whether we have given up our Souls to Christ in
life, that he may receive them in death? Christ takes his Spouse by contract,
not by rape; they willingly give up themselves to him in life, or else he will
not (as old Elies Sons) take away their Spirit by force, when they come to die.
As our bodies must be offered up to God as a reasonable Service while we live,
Romans 12.1. so much more our Souls, or else it will be an unreasonable petiton
to beg that Christ would receive them in death, when we can keep them no
longer. As our dying Savior cried out, Father into thy hands I commend my
Spirit, and dying Stephen here prayed, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit; so living
David (in his health and strength) cries, into thine hands, I commit my Spirit,
for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth, Psalm. 31.5. take thine own Lord
both by Creation, and by Redemption. And truly, if we lock God out now out of
our own heart, which should be his possession continually while we live, no
marvel if he lock out Spirits out of Heaven, which is our hope, when we dye.
Calvin therefore from this place infers, quotidie spiritum in Dei manus
commendemus, quia mill mertibus obsessi sumus, let us continually be
commending our spirits into the hands of God, because we are dying daily, as to
weakness, and distempers in our bodies: There are two ways, whereby we should
commend our Souls to God daily, as the Apostle shows us, 1 Pet. 4.19. 1. Mala
patiendo, by suffering the will of God, this is passive obedience. 2. Bona
agendo, we must commit the keeping of our Souls to God in well doing, as unto a
faithful creator, this is active obedience; and without commending them thus
to God daily, we shall commend them with little success to Christ when we walk
in the dark valley of Death.

The old Poets feigned Pluto to be the God of wealth, as well as the God of
Hell, to show us, that we may go to Hell when we die, for all Wealth. Let us
therefore faithfully examine whether we have given up our hearts and lives to
God now; Christ in the second birth takes and redeems morgag'd Souls, but
seldom or never in the hour of death; it is then too late usually to treat
about so rich and high a piece of merchandice; Christ always loves and likes a
broken heart in life, but he cares not for an heart that is a breaking, and yet
not broken, by a dying pang: when men are Spiritless, Faithless, Prayerless,
till they come to be even speechless, and then think per miserere mei, tollitur
ira Dei, by crying Lord have mercy on them, all shall be forgiven, no wonder if
mercy be then deaf, to persons who have been so long dumb. Christ seldom sets
up bankrupts who break upon such terms; or receivs such Souls that never had
any acquaintance with him before; that only which we freely and frequently give
up in life, will he cheerfully and willingly accept of in death.

4. Matter of exhortation; to stir us up to 4. duties; 3 I shall but briefly
touch; the last a little more enlarge, because it is the principal intended in
the Text.

1. It may exhort us to be much in prayer while we live, that we may prevail
about the main, our Souls, when we come to die, as certainly Stephen did here
upon a former acquaintance with Christ in this duty, though not expressed in
the Text, yet necessarily employed. Prayer is indeed a miraculous producer, it
brings forth often times before it is conceived as, Dr. Featly
a late learned Divine shows: but yet it must be understood with this Salvo,
if it come not when it is too late. God often answers before we call, cries
here I am before we cry, when holy begging is our constant trade, and we are
skillful by practice in this gainful mystery. Yet we read too of foolish
Virgins, that cried out earnestly, Lord, Lord, open to us, Math. 25.11. Yet in
this case the true God, was as deaf, and dumb to them, as Baal the false God,
to his petitioners; late petitioners are welcome at the 11th. hour, that have
been trained to the work at the 7th. hour, and Christ best knows the voice of
them dying, that have watched unto prayer living. Let us then pray continually,
and chiefly for our better part, or else we run a very sad hazard of praying
unsuccesfully in the hour when prayer shall have an end; at least as to our own
Souls.

2. It may exhort us to exercise faith much while we live, that our faith may
be warmest, with Stephens here, when we come to die. The faith of this blessed
Saint, and Martyr, in this prayer, has a tincture of the Imperative Mood, more
than of the Optative; as Christ comes with authority to his Father (more like
an Advocate, or Lawyer, that pleads for Law, and Right, than a beggar that
pleads for an Alms, upon charity) in his last prayer John 17.24. Father I will
that they whom thou have given me, be with me, to see my glory; so Stephen in
part here speaks with some holy boldness, and believing authority, to Christ,
Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Prayer joined with faith as a Prince prevails
with God continually, especially in its last petitions and actings. Let us be
much in the faith of assent to the truth of God and his word, in the faith of
adhesion to the goodness, in the faith of application to the virtue of both,
frequently in life: and this is the way to be much in the faith of assurance,
when we die, that Christ is really ours, that nothing shall separate us from his
love, not death it self, and that then he will certainly receive our Souls.
Paul's continual life, was a life of faith in the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. and how
warm was his faith of assurance, when he speaks of dying, and laying down his
Earthly house? 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that we have a building in readiness,
eternal in the heavens; and from this, life was as a burden to him, he groans
more under it, than many do under the pangs of death, 4th. verse. Generally the
believers faith is at the highest when natural life is at the lowest, with
Stephen here he sees Heaven open when he sees the graves mouth open; Act faith
much while you live, and Christ has prayed, that it shall not fail at any
time, much less when your bodies begin to fall; his hand then will be most
under you; let it but carry you thorough the Earth while you live, and it will
carry you through the fire, when you come to die.

3. Let it exhort us to fear nothing for Christ's sake. Stephen here says
Christologus
one, obtulit seipsum Christo, adhuc calente sanguine, Christi gratia diffuso;
he offered himself up to Christ, while his blood was yet warm, shed for Christ's
sake; and did the Earth swallow up such blood? It did naturally the Earthy
heavy parts of it, but the spirits of it quickly went in unto Christ. Who would
not bleed for such a Master even to prodigality, that has sweet drops of blood
(or buttons to deck a garment of a Christians righteousness) on the behalf of
his, (...)
and will certainly receive such Souls, that make more than ordinary haste, by
Martyrdom to fly into his bosom? Who would not pledge Christ in this bitter
cup, and be baptized with his Baptism of blood, that has confidence so soon as
he is dead, to sit at the right hand of Christ? How many Soldiers of fortune
have we that will venture their blood in hope of plunder, to reserve, and
secure some thing against a rainy day? should not Christians much more be
venturous for Christ, who will certainly secure their Souls, and has provided
goods for them which will last for many years, even longer than the whole World
shall last.

4. The main exhortation is, to stir us up to mind nothing in life, and death,
in comparason of our Souls; this was Stephens case, and care here, he begs not
for any ease as to his body, though now sadly broken, and bruised, nor any
mitigation of the rage of his persecutors; he is totally silent as to his
burial; although the less care he took for this the more good took, Act. 8.2.
devout men were his bearers of whom the world was not worthy, and many of the
best mourners attended him to the grave, that he minded not at all; as care, at
his prayer in the first place was for his Soul; holy David was of the same
temper and persuasion, Psalm. 141.7, 8. Though his bones lay scattered at the
graves mouth, as when one cutteth or cleaves wood, he looks upon them as
contemptible chips, yet still his eyes are upon the Lord, etc. and he begs that
he would not leave his Soul destitute, or in a naked uncovered condition.

Let men cark and care as much as they can for the Body, Hebrew.
they can but have (...), a little to feed them when they live, and to bury
them when they dye; they can carry away nothing else; a living Mole can do more
than a dead Alexander, for he can stir the ground, when the other cannot: but
the Soul must live for ever, we had need lay up in store for that; we had need
have whole treasures in readiness for that, laid up in the highest Heavens.

But a little to enlarge this use by answering two or three questions, because
it seems to be the main, and chiefest scope of the whole prayers.

1. What the Body is in comparison of the Soul? 2. What the Soul is positively
in it self? 3. Wherein we should discover greater care, both in life, and death
for the Soul, than the Body?
1. What the Body is in comparison of the Soul? Let me briefly open this by a
few emblems.

1. the Body it is but the shell of the Soul, it is but as the husk to the
Corn, as the skin to the Apple, as the nutshell to the kernel; the husk is
neglected, the skin or paring of the Apple thrown away, and the nutshel cast
into the fire, that we may enjoy the Corn, the Apple, the Kernel: so should the
Body be despised in competition with the Soul. Dr. Pressed.
A late reverend Divine tells us, that the Body is but the Souls shell, and as
the shell breaks, and becoms altogether useless, when the Chicken is hatched,
and coms to maturity, so must our Bodies, when the Soul has done its work on
Earth, and is ripened for Heaven: so the Egg is not meat for the Eater, till
the shell be cracked, nor the Soul fit for Christ till the Body be broken to
pieces by death.

2. The Body it is but the sheath, or Scabberd of the Soul, what is the sheath
in comparison of the knife, or the scabberd in comparison of the sword? so
worthless and useless is the Body in comparison of the Soul.

3. The Body is but the house of the Soul, animi domicilium, a poor
contemptible cottage it is, the Soul is the Tenant, as Christ is the Landlord
of both; and indeed the Body is but a very weak slender house, a poor mud wall;
as the Apostle 2 Cor. 5.1. compares it with Heaven, so may I with our Heavenly
part the Soul; he calls the one an house, the other a building; the first is a
place we make a shift to sleep in, the other a rare Fabric, a curious
structure indeed; and he likewise alters the Epithites, he calls the one an
(...)
Earthly house, nothing but clay, and mud, the other an (...)
eternal house, which all the storms cannot beat down, no nor the waves of
death of it self, but Caput inter nubila condit, it is above the reach of any
terrene or humane casualties; passions may batter it, but nothing can break it
down.

4. The body is but the vessel of the Soul, take it for a floting vessel on the
Water, the Soul is the merchandice, the Body but the Ship to vvaft it up and
down: or take it for a standing vessel in the house, the Body is but animi
tecta, the cask of the Soul; the inward part that is the precious Liquor. When
Anaxarchus a poor Heathen, was sadly tormented by a Tyrant, he cried out,
tundis vasculum Anaxarchi, non anaxarchum, you do but knock and break the Cask
and vessel of Anaxarchus, you cannot reach or hurt him: as the veins in the
Body are the vessels of the blood which contains the vital spirits, and is the
life outwardly; so the whole is but the vein, or vessel of the Soul, which is
the highest life of Man.

5. The body it is but the casket, or chest of the Soul, the Spirit is the
jewel, the treasure which lies within it. In a fire that takes an house, no
great matter if the Chest be burnt, so the Writings, Evidences be safe; when
thieves break in, if they steal away the Casket, but the Jewels are safe; in
neither, the loss is not undoing: so if the soul be saved though as by fire,
our darling preserved from sin and Satan, two cruel thieves, no great matter is
it though the body be burut to ashes, and robbed of all its outward strength and
beauty, by the hand of death.

6. The Body it is but the prison of the Soul, the Spirit is animus in
carceratus; but like Jeremiah in the Dungeon, while it is in the flesh; the
Bird in a Cage is a fit emblem of the Soul in the Body: The Turks after great
preservations among other of their Charities, go into the market and buy Birds
in Cages, and so release them, which they judge a charitable work; when God
releases the Soul of a good man from the Body, we may and must look upon it as
a piece of divine charity, and holy love. Fleshly fetters, do envolve our
hampered hearts, says one; the Soul has ^^clog upon his foot, our clods of
clay, are but clogs of clay upon our feet: as the foot is the meanest part of
the Body, so the whole Body is but the meanest part of a man; and truly,
comforts for the Body are but (...).
sandals or shoes for the Feet, Soul-refreshments are as (...)
Crowns about out head.

Lastly, The Body it is often, but the tempter, and tormentor of the Soul, it
Acts Satan's part; the eyes and the ears are but the backdoors to let in
Thieves, and Murderers, Hellish lustings which rob, and wound the Soul: the
Senses by tempting to sin, bring in many torments, sicknesses, diseases,
distempers to the Body, and these raise up many tempests, and storms, and
violent passions in the mind, such as fears, and grief, and anger, etc. which
hurt, and hurry the Soul up and down, that it can have no rest, nor ease, by
reason of its inward maladies and mutinies. Thus is it often instead of being a
great help, a sad hindrance to the Soul, as Eve was to Adam, who was but newly
taken as a rib out off his side, (...), as Basil.
an ancient expresses it; the rib newly taken near his heart, was shot back
again by Satan as a dart into his heart: so too often the Body is to the Soul.
Why then should we so much mind our bodies, to take inordinate care for them,
both alive, and dead; since of themselves they are positively vile bodies,
Phil. 3.21. but in comparison of our Souls much more vile?

2. Consider in the next place, what the Soul is positively in it self; this is
a large Orchard for the Fruit of spiritual discourse, but I shall only pluck
down 2 or 3 Apples.

1. Remember its curious composition, the rare Art put forth in the making of
it, so choice a watch should be very warily kept, and minded, so noble a vine
planted in us, calls for much serious attendance, so choice a silver lamp calls
for much trimming. In minimis aliquid magnum, there is something of grandeur
and greatness in the least things, much more in the greatest. The Body of man,
as it came out of the hands of the holy, great, and wise Artist, is a choice
piece: David falls a wondering (not from pride, or vanity, but spiritual
thankfulness, and observation of Gods works) at the curious structure of his
Body, Psalm. 139.14.15. considering how exactly it was wrought in the lowest
parts of the Earth, he means the womb, in which this rare workmanship was
carried on invisibly, in a very dark shop, or sellar; how much more wonderful
is the Soul? nihil in mnndo admirabile praeter hominem, uihil in homine praeter
animam, says one The spirit of God significantly express its rarity in the
Creation of it, it is called Imago Dei, Gods own Image, Genesis 1.27. and the
expression is double, that it might be the better minded; and it is added, Male
and Female were thus created; contrary to that fond opinion of Theophilact, and
that Mahumetan dream of the Turks, who suppose that the Souls of Women are of a
lower and baser Metal, than the Souls of Men; God made no difference. Augustine
discourses largly of this Image of God in the Soul of Man in 10. or 11.
particulars, which I cannot now name: it is enough for me to assert, and
affirm, that the representation, and effigies of the highest glory must needs
be full of glory, A sad thing then it is to change this glory into the Image of
a Beast by any bestial courses; pejus est comparari jumento, quam esse
jumentum; it is worse to be compared to a Beast morally, than to be a Beast
naturally. Let the rare composition of thy Soul after the image of God, cause
thee to mind and prize it above all things, next to thy God.

2. Consider the price and value of it, both as to Christ, and as it should be
also to our selves.

1. To Christ; it cost no less than the blood of the Son of God; the whole
World at first was created, verbo pronuntiato, by bare speaking of a word, here
was only (...), but the Soul could not be new created but only verbo incarnato,
by the word made flesh, here must be (...) (if I may so allude to our Logical
distinction) in the first God only did much, in the second he did and suffered
much. Silver and Gold which the World so much adore, are as corruptible, so
contemptible things, and could never make a purchase this way, Psalm. 49.8. The
redemption of the Soul is too precious, and it cease for ever, had there been
no beter, or richer commodity to have bought out the morgage. David's water of
Bethlehem which was the price of blood, of the blood of the choicest Heroes,
and worthies in Israel, is but a dark shadow of the Soul of Man.

2. As to our selves; the Soul should be of more worth to us than the sublumary
World; our Savior (who best knew the worth of them, as he was a co-worker in
the making of them, and a Master builder in the repairing and re-edifying of
them) he himself tells us, Math. 16.26. That to make an exchange for the soul,
by taking the whole World in the room of it, is to drive a most foolish, sad,
losing bargain; he that thus sells his commodity shall certainly die a beggar;
as idleness, says Solomon, shall cloth a man with rags, so more certainly
will such a kind of trading and trafficking.

And yet generally such is the madness of the most of men, that they will
exchange their Souls for a little of the World; for a very remnant, for the
very coarse list of it, to cover their nakedness; they will transgress for a
morsel of bread, for a pair of shoes, as if they look upon their Souls as upon
a sorry stained commodity, which they long to be rid of upon any terms, 3.
Consider the infinite use of it as to the Body, as it is much above the Body.
In other things, those are not always the most useful, that are most
precious; (jewels do not cloth, and keep us warm, though they are very rich)
but the Soul is very eminent for both. By viewing the natural and animal Soul
as to its use and reference to the Body, we may by a Climax, see the greater
use of the more refined and spiritual part: the natural Soul in us common with
plants, and beasts, it is the salt of the Body to keep it from stinking, from
rottenness and corruption; Lazarus dead but 4 days noisomness followed; the
natural Soul is the guide of the Body; as the light of the Body is the eye, so
the light of the eye is the life, and natural Soul of it: besides it is the
strength, and beauty of the Body, and what not? let but the Spirit naturally
depart, and the strength ceases, the beautiful flower is cropped and withered,
and looks so ghastly, that we cry out, as Abraham of Sarah, bury my dead out of
my sight; surely then much more is our spiritual part, which is but a little
lower than Angels, the very salt of the Body eminently, the guide of it, the
strength, the beauty, the all of it, and in it, next and immediately under God,
who is the all in all.

3. I come briefly to answer the third question, and so to finish this
discourse. What we must do to discover greater care, (with holy Stephen in the
Text) over our Souls, than over our Bodies.

1. Begin betimes to trade for your Souls, before you begin to trade for your
bodies. Aristotle
The Pr^nce of Philosophers tells us, that man first lives the life of a Plant,
then the life of a Beast, then the life of a Man; the first in the Womb by
nourishment and growth, the second in Infancy by operation of common senses,
the third afterward by the exercise of reason, and undestanding, and this too
rises up by degrees; we are not fit for any considerable business, till we come
to be of some considerable Age. Our most considerable business, is this of our
Souls, and therefore we should begin with it, and teach our children this trade
first, how to lay up provision for them.

I read of one Bensyra a Jewish child, that desired of his Parents to be
instructed in the Law of Moses; they replied to him, it was yet a little too
soon for him; but he returns them this answer, that he had been at play in the
Churchyard, and there he saw little childrens graves as well as the graves of
Elder persons; and he urged this, I may die so soon, and sad it will be with me,
if I have not the knowledge of God. Oh let us therefore labor to know, and to
serve the God of our Fathers betimes, to mind the good of our Souls early in
the morning of our age, seeing they are our better part.

2. Let us most carefully watch over our Souls; though the Lord has appointed
us peculiar watchmen for this purpose, Heb. 13.17. yet this must not make us
the less industrious. Every one of us have a special command, and warning
given, by the best Preacher that ever was in the world, except Jesus Christ, I
mean by Solomon, Prove. 4.23. That we should keep our hearts with all diligence,
because out of them are the issues of Life; and it is one of the sore
complaints of the Church, Cant. 1.6, that she was so tied up, and tired with
keeping the Vineyards abroad, that she had no leisure to keep her own. Oh what
ever you omit, find time to look to, to watch over your own Spirits; the
greatest Merchant in the World, or highest wholesale Shopkeeper, is but an
errand Peddler, if he engages so deep in other businesses, that he neglects
this. A sleepy Sentinel that undoes a whole Garrison through his slothfullness;
yet this man does a meritorious Act, in comparison of him, who ruins his own
single Soul, or the Sonl of any relation, for want of watchfulness; a short nap
in security now may break thy rest, and sleep in Hell to the days of Eternity.

3. Let us be often qustioning our Souls about their welfare; they are more to
be minded than the Body; As you cast up your shopbooksonce a year, so you
should examine your Souls once a day: If the Body be feavorish, or distempered,
you lay your finger upon your pulse to see how it beats; but oh how silent
generally is Conscience, the pulse of the Soul? and we are very willing to give
it a writ of ease. Questions which engender strife have been much started of
late, it were better to be exercised at home in the heart, about questions
which concern our own eternal peace. Our Souls are then sick at Heart, when we
never fear, nor question them about any sickness. David was communing with his
own heart often about its spiritual temper, and by it gained this blessed
encomium from the Father of Spirits, that he was a man after his own heart.
Timidi matter non flet, the Mother of a fearful Child seldom weeps, is
proverbial among the Latins, and truly a trembling Soul and a self-questioning
creature, very rarely lies down in everlasting sorrow.

4. Let us still fear the worst as to the condition of our Souls. Generally
doubtings, and fears may be compared to nettles, which though they sting, and
trouble us, proclaim a fat and good soil where they grow; a naughty heart is
but seldom troubled with them. Fear of badness is usually a sign of some
goodness. As the Man is blessed that fears God always, and this is the
beginning of wisdom, Prove. 1.7. yea a very full and choice treasure, Esa.
33.6. so the Man is very near blessedness that fears his own state spiritually,
and this is an introduction to holy wisdom, yea, that man has some treasure
in his house, and heart, that is suspiciouas of his house and heart: the empty
traveller will sing and whistie before the Thief, when the person loaded with
money is laden likewise with fear if it grow but a little dark; thus is it
usually with a suspicious complaining Christian. Faith charges it self often
with much unbelief, and the perfect love casts out fear, imperfect does not;
because it is sensible it is imperfect. Where despair ruins one, presumption
destroys a thousand. Better to go doubting to Heaven, than cheerfully and
securely to Hell. Highest expectation brings greatest disapointment, and that
poor Soul is double damned when he falls into Hell, that never suspected such a
fall; even Stephens full assurance of Faith in his death, was undoubtedly the
Child of much holy fear in his life, and usually those Christians die most
courageously, that have walked most tremblingly.

5. Provide for thy Soul more carefully than for thy Body. True it is, that
without food and raiment for the flesh, we cannot well be contented, (it were
well, if we could be contented with it, when it is competent and convenient)
but with all we must remember, that the Soul must be fed and clothed as well,
nay before the Body; but alimentum sit simile nutrito, the nourishment must be
like the thing nourished: Different kinds must have different food, and
different persons in the same species have a different diet, the Soul may fast,
when the Body feasts, and the Spirit be naked, and hunger-starved as Dives was,
though the outward carcass be clothed with purple, and fine Linnea, and fare
sumptuously every day; the Soul of Dives wanted a drop of water at last, though
undoubtedly he solaced his natural appetite with the richest wine contiuually.
Christ had meat to eat which his disciples knew not of, and so the Soul must
have meat to eat which the Body knows not of. Our Savior commands and
commends idleness comparatively (though positively in it self, it be a great
sin) even in comparison of Soul transactions, the body must live a very
sedentary life as to its own affairs; the meat which perishes must not be
labored for, in competition with, much less opposition, against the meat which
endures to everlasting life, John 6.27. even the food, which only Christ
himself can give to the Soul, who is sealed by the Father for this end. Every
day and hour is prodigally wasted, in which we do not lay up something for our
Soul (which is our glory) in order to eternity. Natura paucis cententa naturc
is satisfied with a little, glutted, oppressed with too much; but the desires
of the Soul are endless, it is continually hungring, and craving, only Christ,
and spiritual objects can satisfy it, and yet even in them it has not
satiety, though it have satisfaction; thou may as well then quench the
Leviathans thirst, (and the Behemoths, which sucketh up the River of Jordan)
with a cockel shell full of water, as think to feed thy Soul to contentment,
which Gold and Silver, and delicious banquets, and pleasures in the World;
where the appetite is infinite, the aliment and food must not be finite. Yet
one thing will satisfy it, though many things cannot, even he who is the giver
of all things; Let but thy Soul feed continually by faith and love on him, and
then it will return to its rest, Psalm. 116.7. as the sucking Infant when its
belly is full.

6. Keep thy Soul pure, and clean, thus mind it more than thy Body. It is Gods
advice to Jerusalem, Jerem. 4.14. Wash thine heart from wickedness; in this we
should be most punctual, and exact Careful we are most of us to keep our
Bodies sweet and clean, to wash our feet, and face, and hands, to shift and
change our linen, that our Bodies may be sweet; careful we are about our
houses to wash, and sweep evety Room: but in the mean time we little consider
that cleanliness of the heart is the best huswifery; truly God is good to
Israel to them that are of a clean heart, Psalm. 73.1. Paul enjoins Timothy to
keep himself pure, to wit the whole man, 1 Timothy 5.22. the Body in
subordination, and in order to the Soul, the earthly cask, and vessel, in order
to the holy liquor, and the heavenly treasure. Eating with washed hands
naturally was but an humane, vain, Pharisaical tradition, but to wash the hands
morally with spiritual innocence before we compass Gods Altar, or engage the
Soul in any serious duty, this is very necessary. It was Paul's design and care
for to present the Corinthians a chaste Virgin to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. so should
it be our care. The Virgin Mary was the Mother of a blessed Son, yet still a
Virgin: so may thine heart be the mother of some one cursed sin, and yet a
Virgin in Christ's esteem, if so soon as ever thou have blackt and daubed thy
self in ink, thou wash thy self in water, milk, and blood; the water of godly
sorrow, the milk of free grace in the promise, and the blood of Jesus Christ.
Next to not falling is speedy rising, and next to keeping thy garments white,
is washing as soon as thou have defiled them; Thus be careful to keep thy Soul
pure continually, by washing it often while it has a tang of the cask, thine
outward flesh, In this mind thy Soul most too.

Lastly, Be willing for the welfare of thy Soul to suffer in thy Body; and this
double, both in life, and death.

1. In life, by keeping thy Body under, that thy Soul may be Master. Our life
is a continual striving for mastery in this: the wicked man strives that his
Body may be Master, and therefore he darkens his understanding, sensualizes his
affections, sears his conscience, etc. that the flesh may be Lord paramount.
The godly man he makes a covenant with his eyes, as Job, keeps a watch before
the door of his lips, as David, keeps under his body, and brings it into
subjection, as Paul, 1 Cor. 9.27. and all in order to this, that the Soul may
be master over the body, and Jesus Christ over both; and this is that mastery
which we should all earnestly contend for. Old Hilarion compares his Body to an
Ass, which if it be too much pampered endeavors to throw his rider; and
therefore says he to his Body, faciam a sine ut non calcitres, O Ass I will so
look to thee, and keep thee down, that thou shall not spurn against thy Master.
The way to do this, is to cross our selves most in those things wherein the
flesh most pleases it self; whatever may make thy Soul proud, or wanton, do not
give way to it for a moment. Some pride themselves in the excrements of nature,
as long hair, some in the garments which cover nature (though indeed they are
but poor borrowed coverlids from other creatures) and so glory in the hidings
of their shame, and nakedness; some pride themselves in the ornaments of
nature, tallness, strength, beauty, etc. O labor to deny thy self most in
these things, which puff and swell thee up: so whatever makes thy Soul wanton,
as wine, or fullness of bread, or any thing else, set a knife to thy throat,
Prove. 23.2, 3. be not desirous of such dainties, for they are deceitful meat,
they may make rich thy ribs, but bankrupt thy Soul. The popish penance is
ridiculous, and contemptible, to lash the body one day in a year, or to go
barefoot to such a shrine, and wear a cord about the waste, etc. but Christ's
penitence is very necessary, If thy right eye offend pluck it out, or thy right
hand cut it off, Matthew. 29.30. cross thy flesh in many lawful comforts; if the
Son of the bondwoman, rebel against the Son of the free woman, better in this
sense to go with Jacob, lame and halting to heaven, than to go dancing to hell,
as too many thousands do by troops together.

2. In death; be willing for the good of thy Soul to suffer in thy Body, be
contented that thy Body should be withered, that thy Soul may be the more fresh
and green, that the old house should be pulled down to the ground, that the Soul
may take possession of a new building. As Christ's sorrow, and shame, was our
way to happiness and glory, so the suffering and breaking of the pitcher of the
Body is the only way for the Soul to be made a vessel of honor. The cloth must
be cut to pieces, before it can be made up into a rich robe, or ornamental
garment, the timber hewed or sawn into several quarters before the beautiful
structure can be erected, as in regeneration we must exuere, before we can
induere, put off, the old man before we can put on the new, Ephesians. 5.22, 23. so
in glorification too the old Adam must die, flesh must perish, before we can be
a new lump. The new corn in the fields in the spring, rose from the dying of
the old in the Winter. Better bear an inconvenience than a mischief; death to
the good man is but an inconvenience, the mischief would be worse; should
thou not die, thou would but live to sin, to be separated from thy Husband, to
be absent from the Lord; be not troubled then O gracious Soul, at thy bitter
journey, at the narrow bridge thou must pass over; say with the Martyr, it is
but winking, and thou art at home; think often on thy journeys end.

To conclude all, let us labor to live the life of Stephen, a life of faith,
and holiness, and to die with this prayer of Stephens in its full strength and
latitude, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

FINIS.

