THE SPEECH OF Sr. Edw. Turnor, Knight. SPEAKER of the Honorable House of COMMONS,
TO THE KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY.

Delivered on Friday the Eighth Day of February 1666. Upon the Prorogation of
the PARLIAMENT.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, for Robert Pawlet, at the sign of the Bible
in Chancery Lane. 1666.

THE SPEECH OF Sr EDW. TURNOR, Knight Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons,
TO THE KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY.
Delivered on Friday the Eighth day of February 1666. Upon the Prorogation of
the Parliament.
May it please Your Most Excellent Majesty,
NOthing conduces more to the happiness of a Nation, than a Right
Understanding between the Prince and the People: and nothing more advances
this Correspondence, than frequent Meetings in Common Council. By the wisdom
of our Forefathers the Security of our Lives, our Liberties, and our
Properties, is lodged in our English Parliaments; and so Gracious have Your
Majesty's Predecessors been, that for the Satisfaction of their People, they
have made several Laws, some for Triennial, some for Annual Parliaments. Your
Majesty by their Example, upon the humble Suit of Your Lords and Commons, has
in a former Session of this Parliament passed an Act for Triennial meetings in
Parliament: but in this Your Majesty has exceeded all Your Predecessors, That
as Your Happy Restoration was in a Convention of Parliament, so of your own
accord, for the Public Good, and as a Demonstration of your extraordinary Love
to Parliaments, You have vouchsafed ever since your Return to converse with
your People in Parliament; this being the sixth Year, and the sixth Session of
this present Parliament.

The last time Your Majesty was pleased to speak to us, You commanded us to
make ready all things that you were to dispatch this Session: In obedience
thereunto, we have with all industry imaginable endeavored, so to prepare
those Matters that were before us, that Your Majesty, and the whole Nation may
receive Satisfaction in our Dispatches.

First it concerned Us to keep our Words with your Majesty, in finishing that
Supply which We promised You for the Carrying on the War. In order whereunto
I do here present unto Your Majesty this Bill of Eleven Months Assessment
upon our Lands, to take place in a Post Charge after the additional Royal Aid
now current is expired: This Act, together with the Poll Bill lately passed, we
conceive will fully make good the 1800000 l. we promised to Your Majesty.

We must for ever with humility acknowledge the Justice of God in punishing
this whole Nation by the late dreadful Conflagration of London; We know They
were not the greatest Sinners on whom the Tower of Syloe fell; and doubtless
all Our Sins did contribute to the filling up that measure, which being full,
drew down the Wrath of God upon that City; But it very much reviveth us to
behold the miraculous blessing of God upon Your Majesty's Endeavors for the
Preservation of that part of the City which is left: Et fas est resurgere
Moenia Trojae! We hope God will direct Your Royal Heart, and Fortunate Hand, in
a few days to lay a Foundation Stone in the re-building that Royal City: the
Beauty and Praise whereof shall fill the whole Earth.

For the encouragement of this Noble Work we have prepared several Bills: One,
for the establishing a Judicatory for the speedy determining all Actions and
Causes of Action, that have or may arise between Landlords and Tenants upon
this sad accident; though I persuade my self no English Man would be exempted
from making some Offering to carry on this pious Undertaking; yet the exemplary
Charity of your Majesty's 12 Reverend Judges is fit with Honor to be mentioned
before your Majesty, They are willing to spend all their Sand that does not run
out in your Majesty's immediate Service, of dispensing Justice in their several
Courts to your People, in hearing and determining those Controversies that may
arise upon Old Agreements, and making New Rules between Owners and Tenants, for
their mutual Encouragement in this Glorious Action.

We have likewise prepared a Bill for the Regularity of the New Buildings, that
they may be raised with more Convenience, Beauty, and Security, than they had
before: Some Streets we have ordered to be opened and enlarged, and many
Obstructions to be removed; but all with your Majesty's approbation: This we
conceive cannot be done with Justice, unless a Compensation be given to Those
that shall be Losers; We have therefore laid an Imposition of 12 d. upon every
Chalder, and 12 d. upon every Tun of Coals that shall be brought into the Port
of London for Ten years, the better to enable the Lord Mayor and Aldermen to
recompense those Persons whose Grounds shall be taken from them.

Rome was not built in a Day. Nor can we in the close of this Session finish
the Rules for the dividing of Parishes, re-building of the Churches, and the
Ornamental Parts of the City that we intended; these Things must rest till
another Session: But we know your Majesty in the mean time will take them into
your Princely Consideration, and make it your Care, that the Houses of God, and
your own Royal Chamber, be decently and conveniently restored.

And now, Great Sir, having thus happily finished the Business of this Session,
we beg your Majesty's leave that we may return to our own Homes, there to put
in Execution the Good Laws which You have made, and to defend our several
Countries against all Designs to disturb the Peace of the Nation. And we
beseech Almighty God, who has hitherto wonderfully preserved your Majesty's
Person, and made You Glorious in all your Achievements, still to prosper your
Forces both at Sea and Land, till He has made your Majesty an Asylum for all
your Friends, and a Terror to your Enemies both at Home and Abroad.

FINIS.
I Do appoint Robert Pawlet to print this Speech, and that no other presume to
print the same.

Edw. Turnor.


