GRAMMATICA REFORMATA, OR A General Examination OF THE ART of GRAMMAR, As it
has been successively delivered

By Franciscus Sanctius in Spain, Gaspar Scioppius in France, Gerardus Joannes
Vossius in the Lower Germany;


AND Methodiz'd by the Oxford Grammarian in his Observations upon Lilie.

Designed for initiating the Lower Forms in the Free School at Newark upon
Trent.

By JOHN TWELLS, Schoolmaster.

Multa dies variusque labor mutabilis aevi
Rettulit in melius. --
Virg. Aeneid. I.XI. LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft, for Robert Clavell at the
Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1683.

REVERENDO, PIETATIS ERGA DEUM ET FIDELITATIS ERGA REGEM VIRO, DNO HENRICO
SMITHO, ECCLESIAE NOVARCENSIS VICARIO DIGNISSIMO, etc.

GRAMMATICAM HANC REFORMATAM, Tenuem quidem obscurumque Laborem, Perpetuae
tamen Observantiae Monumentum, DICAT, CONSECRAT JOANNES TWELLS, SCHOLAE
PUBLICAE, QUAE NOVARCAE EST MODERATOR.

A PREFACE CONCERNING The Old and New Grammarians.
ABout the Year of the World Three thousand Seven hundred and Eighty, Five
hundred eighty three years after the building of Rome, before the Birth of
CHRIST One hundred Sixty eight; betwixt the second and third Punick War, and
near the time of Ennius's death, Crates Mallotes, Contemporary with
Aristarchus, was sent Ambassador to the Roman Senate by Attalus the Second,
King of Pergamus, for his great Wealth mentioned by Hor. Od. 1.
Horace and Prop. l. 2. El. 32. l. 3. E. 18. l. 4. E. 5.
Propertius, This Lieger having one day had the misfortune, by a fall he got
through the hole of a little House, erected for Natures ease within the
Liberties of the Palatium, to break his Leg, spent the remainder of the time
allotted him for discharging his Negotiation and recovering his Health, in the
study of Grammar. Plurimas (says Lib. de illustribus Grammaticis, cap. 2.
Suetonius) acroases subinde fecit, assidueque disseruit, ac nostris exemplo
fuit ad imitandum. He read Grammar Lectures frequently, held Disputations
daily, and set himself as a Copy for us to imitate. Whereupon a very Learned
man takes an occasion to call that Art, (such as at that time, and for many
succeeding Ages, obtained both at Rome and in other places) Cloacina, because
(says he) ex cloacae soramine una cum claudo Magistro emerserit; and therefore
tells us, it is no wonder to see it in some places almost over head and ears in
filth and nastiness, in others very lame and imperfect: But I know not, whether
for his own diversion, or in abuse to Crates; for we are little beholden to the
Jakes for the Grammar, that had like to have choked the Grammarian. We are
rather obliged to Greece, where Two hundred and twenty Years before, Plato had
studied it, and an hundred Years before, Epicurus first taught it the Greeks;
or to Asia, from whence Crates first brought it into Italy. As for what was
afterward dully and foolishly delivered by the Latins, it ought not to be
imputed to one that was a Greek; except perhaps some few things belonging to
Grammar, so far forth as it was common both to the Greek and Roman Tongues: But
indeed it is to be ascribed to their Sottishness, who That Tully himself did
not, see proved by Scioppius, in his Paradoxa Literaria, in his Auctarium, Arg.
10. in his 53. Animadversion upon Vossius.
either did not well understand their own Language, or else wholly neglected
the use of Grammatical Disputations. Hence proceed so many foolish Definitions,
Divisions, and so great Confusion in the Method.

Nor was the Stupidity of the first Discoverers so great as that of their
Successors; which would have appeared but too plainly, had not the injury of
Time bereaved us of all the most antique and most excellent of those Monuments,
which were recorded by Technical or Methodical Grammarians. For we have now not
only lost the two Books of Ennius the Younger, which he wrote about Letters,
Syllables, and Verse, cited by Lib. de Grammat. 3.
Suetonius out of Lucius Cotta, and Julius Caesar concerning Analogy (whereof
mention is made in his Life by Suetonius in these words, Reliquit and de
Analogia libros duos, and by Charisius, lib. 1.) which he dedicated to Cicero;
but also the methodical Works of Nigidius Figulus, the most Learned of the
Romans, after M. T. Varro. Cornelius Nepos, Aruntius Comminianus, who wrote
about See Putschius's Epist. Dedicat. before Palaemon's Ars Grammatica.
Letters, as also of the Noun and Verb. Plinius Secundus Ibid.
, famous for his Treatise of ambiguous Speeches. Valgius and many more, quoted
by Sosipater, Charisius, and others.

Among those Grammarians, of whom there are some Analects yet extant, Marcus
Terentius Varro is Chief, of whose Studies in this kind of Learning, his three
Books de Analogia handed down to this present Age, are a sufficient Testimony;
He was born at Narbon in France, and lived before Christ 71 Years.

With these ought to be reckoned for some surviving Relics of greater Works,
Q. Remnius or rather Remmius (for so is Palaemon called in an Old Monument, if
Aldus say true) Grammatica art celebris, says Pliny Li 6.14. cap. 4.
, commended upon the score of his Learning by Juvenal, Satyr. 7.

Quis gremio Enceladi, doctique Palaemonis adfert,
Quantum Grammaticus meruit labor? --
Who to Enceladus, or to the Learned
Palaemon tenders justly, what is earned
By a Grammarian's Pains?
He also calls Grammar periphrastically
Palaemonis Artem, Sat. 6.
-- Odi
Hanc ego, quae repetit, volvitque Palaemonis Artem,
Servata semper lege and ratione loquendi.
I hate her, that Palaemons Art revives,
That to discourse by Rule and Method strives.
He was Tutor to M. Fab. Quintilian, and Aulus Persius; He was born at
Vincentia or Vicentia, now called Vicenza, a City of Lumbardy, between Verona
and Padua, and lived (says Eusebius) under Claudius Caesar, An. Dom. 49.

From the voracious jaws of Time are rescued also the valuable Remains of M.
Valerius Probus, the last in Tranquillus's Catalogue of Illustrious
Grammarians, whom Eusebius styles Grammaticorum eruditissimus, and says, he was
born at Berytus, and that he lived in the time of Nero. But the Castor and
Pollux of Technological Studies are (if Voffius does not misguide us) Flavius
Sosipater Charisius and Diomedes, of whose Ages no certain account can be
given; the former writes himself Ur. Urbanus.
Magister, and makes a present of his Grammatical Institutions to his Son. The
later dedicates his Book to Athanasius. A third place, to complete the
Triumvirate, is justly challenged by Priscian the Caesarean, who flourisht
under the Reigns of Justinus Senior and Justinianus, if you dare believe
Cassiodorus in his Book of Orthography; Vossius takes his word, which I very
much wonder at, since he dedicates his Eighteen Books of Grammar to Julian the
Consul and Roman Patrician, which was according to Helvicus's computation in
the Year of the World 4332, of Christ 365. As to the place also of his Birth
diverse have been strangely mistaken, in affirming he was born at Caesarea (a
mean Town of Palestine built by Herod, at this day called Balbee or Belmae,)
though several credible Authors, and among the rest Baptista Gnazinus of
Verona, do testify that he was born at Rome. That which caused the mistake,
was (I presume) because Priscian intitles himself of Caesarea, choosing rather
to be called by the Name of the Place, where he had perfected most of his
Studies, than by that of his Native Country. And it is but reason be should be
allowed room among the highest rank of Grammarians, who in the great Opinion of
after-Ages, has gained such a Prerogative above the rest, that all the Faults
committed against Syntax (which we call Solecisms) are imputed as so many
Injuries done to Priscian The meaning of breaking Priscians's Head.
, as if the property of True-speaking did of right belong solely to him. But of
all Nicodemus Frischlinus is most in the wrong, when in his Paralipomena he
writes, that of all the Technical Grammarians now in being, Priscian is the
most ancient: which Error needs no other than Priscian's own Confutation: for
he in more places than one mentions Charisius, to whom in his Ninth Book he
joins Probus, Diomedes, and not long after Caper. And perhaps amongst the
Methodical Writers, who by raising themselves above the common level, have laid
upon us any higher obligation than the rest, Theodosius Macrobius (as Vossius
calls him) would not have been of lest account, if his Book De differentiis and
societatibus Graeci Latinique Verbi had been extant. We have now but some
cullings, adjusted by John I know not who: For at the end of his Treatise, I
find these words: Explicit desloratio de libro Ambrosii, Macrobii, Theodosii,
quam Johannes carpserat ad discendas Graecorum Verborum regulas. P. Pythaeus
guessed him to be John Erigena alias Scotus, that translated Dionysius the
Areopagite into Latin, and was favored for his Learning by Alfred King of
England and Charles the Bald of France, as may be seen in Matthew of
Westminster upon the Year 838 Eodem Anno venit in Angliam Magister Johannes,
Natione Scotus, Vir perspicacis ingenii, and facundiae singularis. Hic dudum
relicta patria, ad parts Gallicanas transiens, Carolum Calvum adiit, atque in
magna ab eo dignatione susceptus, individuus comes ei fuerat and mensae and
cubiculi. Hujus autem ingenii and scientiae magnitudo ac leporis exempla usque
hodie manent. Assederat namque ad mensam ante Regem ex opposito die quadam, ubi
consumtis ferculis, poculisque discurrentibus, Carolus frmte hilarior est
effectus. Rex denique cum Magistrum Johannem vidisset quiddam egisse, quod
comitatem Gallicanam offendere videretur, increpavit eum satis urbane, dicens:
Johannes, Quid distat inter Scotum and Sctum? Ille respondit, and dixit Regi,
Mensa tantum. -- Nec vero Rex verbis ejus commotus est, sed potius ipsum, cum
assessoribus suis, commovit ad cachinnum.
, (which most choice Piece of Antiquity I owe to the kindness of that Learned
Patron of Learning, Edward Lee of Norwell, Esquire.) William of Malmsbury Lib.
2. de gestis Regum Anglorum, cap. 4.
, Cambden's Remains Among the Epitaphs.
, and Others.

As for Macrobius himself, he flourisht in the Age of Theodosius the Elder, and
his Sons; Nay, Isacius Pontanus In his Notes upon Macrobius's Book. 1. Sat.
cap. 1.
certifies, that he was Master of the Sacred Bedchamber under Honorius and
Theodosius the Younger. There are also extant upon the Are of Grammar, the
smaller Commentaries of Asper the Younger, Phocas, Aelius Donatus, Servius
Marius Honoratus, Sergius, Maximus, Victorinus, Cledonius a Roman Senator, and
a Grammarian of Constantinople, St. Augustine Bishop of Hippo, P. Consentius,
Flaccus Alcuinus of York, Beda's Scholar, afterward Tutor to Charles the
Great, and Eutyches, who wrote two Books about distinguishing the Conjugations.
Besides these there are some that treat particularly of Orthographia, viz.
Velius Longus, Flavius Caper, a very ancient Grammarian, Terentianus Scaurus,
Agroetius, Venerable Beda, Marius Victorinus, and (who is in my judgment instar
omnium) Cassiodorus, who to compose his little Tract concerning Orthography,
extracted the Essence of no less than Twelve Grammarians. Others have more
closely confined themselves to Prosodia and Verse, such are Terentianus Maurus,
Marius Victorinus, Marius Plotius, Caesius Bassius, etc. These are they that
later Ages have denominated Grammarians of the Elder House.

For about the beginning of the Eighth Century, that Line (whereof Alcuinus was
the last) was quite extinct. After which time for the space of Four hundred
Years, I find not one Technical Grammarian. Ab hoc tempore (as Mr. Richardson
speaks in another De Stylo formando, cap. 4.
sense) offusa est Reip. Literariae nox longa, per quatuor scilicet secula,
eaque adeo tenebricosa, ut Latinitas fere nusquam, ejus umbra quaedam in
Monachorum claustris and Scholis, esset. But about the Year 1200, after the
Latin Tongue had been for many Ages most miserably torn in pieces, and brought
almost to its Funeral Pile by the Goths and other Barbarians; One Alexander a
Frenchman first retrieved it from approaching annihilation, by publishing his
Doctrinale; which Work nevertheless was afterward thought by all Learned Men
unfit for Boys, as being too obscure, unprofitably tedious, and mostly
barbarous, insufficient and false. Wherefore to expel Alexander out of all
Schools, many Men of great Learning and Wisdom in most places of Christendom
set themselves to write a more Latin and truer Grammar: In Italy, Nicolaus
Perottus, Joannes Sulpitius, Antonius Mancinellus, and Aldus Manutius. In
France, Gulielmus Tardivus, Robertus Guaguinus, Jodocus Badius de Lingua Latina
optime meritus, says Despauterius. In Spain, Antonius Nebrissensis, by
Despauter styled Hispanorum Doctissimus, who dedicated his Grammar to Queen
Isabel. In Germany, Henricus Bebelius, Jacobus Henrichmannus, Gerardus
Cannifius One of Despauter's Schoolmasters.
B. D. and Chief Master in the School of Bois le duc in Brabant, and many
Others, whose Names are worthy to be inscribed on Corinthian Brass, nor should
they be here passed over in silence, would they not swell this Proem beyond its
intended bulk. Tho others there were, who endeavored (but without success) to
keep Alexander on his legs, by explaining the Obscurities, rectifying the
Mistakes, supplying the Defects, and retrenching the Superfluities in his
Doctrinale; of whom the chief were Hermannus Torrentinus a Hollander, and
Johannes Custos Another of Despauter's Masters.
Brechtanus, Schoolmaster of Antwerp.

As for our English Grammarians of this younger Family, they date their
Original from the happy contexture of the white and red Roses: For since the
time of Henry the Seventh, it has been the singular care of worthy Learned men
to lay a solid foundation for all kind of Learning by producing a right
Grammatical Institution. For though before his time a great part of our
Countrymen The case was the same with the Germans, says Erasmue, Epist. p.
989.
had little leisure, and less care of liberal Arts; yet when the Houses of York
and Lancaster were united by the precious Advice of John Morton Bishop of Ely,
and Times grew more Halcion; John Holt, about the Year of Christ 1497. printed
a short Grammar called Lac Puerorum, and dedicated it to the same John Morton,
then for his great Merits installed Archbishop of Canterbury. About the Yoar
1505. John Stanbridge, and his Scholar Robert Whittington, and Others, put
forth diverse Treatises of Grammar. But in a more especial manner Dr. Colet, the
Reverend and Learned Dean, and liberal Founder of the School of St. Paul's,
compiled the Introduction of the Eight Parts of Speech in the Year 1509; And
Mr. Lilie, first Schoolmaster of Paul's, an English Syntax; And three of four
Years after Johannes Despauterius, in the Netherlands, wrote his Grammatical
Commentaries, To Mr. Lilie's Construction of the Eight parts of Speech,
Cardinal Wolsey afterward, in the Year 1528. prefixed an Epistle, and
Directions for teaching the eight Classes of Forms in Ipswich-School. Erasmus
See his Preface.
also entreated by Dr. Colet See his Colloq. Pietas Puerilis.
, his intimate Friend, to revise Mr. Lilie's Syntax, made a new Latin one, in
the Year 1513, upon which in 1539, Henry, Prime Schoolmaster of the Monastery,
and in 1540, Leonard Cox of Carleon in Wales Teacher of the Languages in
Poland, Hungary, and Germany.
, Commented. Also about the Year 1522, at Queen Katherines Request, Thomas
Linacer, Physician to King Henry the Eighth, and Ludovicus Vives wrote
Rudimenta Grammatices for Queen Mary's use. And Dr. Linacer his Book De
emendata Structura, which has ever since been the Cynosura for many of our
best Grammarians. Mr. Lilie wrote also Propria quae maribus and As in
praesenti; which Mr. Ritwise one of his Successors published, in the Year 1535,
if not before, Cum vocabulorum interpretatione. In 1532 Thomas Robertson a
Schoolmaster in Oxford, printed a Comment on the Rules which Lilie wrote in
Verse, added Quae genus, and the versifying Rules, which he dedicated to John
Longland Bishop of Lincoln, with reference to Henly-School.

From this variety of pains in Grammar sprung a great diversity in the course
of Teaching, to which King Henry the Eighth (in whose Reign Philology had in a
manner the whole Vogue of Reputation) intending to obviate See the Preface to
the Common Grammar.
, and upon great Advice to prescribe a public uniform way of Institution,
caused sundry Learned Men (among whom it is said, was Dr. Richard Cox Sometime
Schoolmaster of Eaton, and afterward Dean of Westminster and Bishop of Ely.
, Tutor to King Edward the Sixth) to reduce the former Attempts in this kind
into one Body of Grammar, They jointly produced the Grammar, now in Use, in the
Year 1545.

But since those Times the Art of Grammar, having received larger advantages by
the labors of Learned men both at home and abroad, in the foregoing and
present Age, it has come to pass, that the Methods, which were generally
received, have fallen into contempt. Nay, even in the Year 1540, Julius Caesar
Scaliger, alias Burdo, wrote Thirteen Books De Causis Linguae Latinae. And six
Years after Bartholomew Grave, a Bookseller of Lovain, procured a Grant from
Charles the Fifth, that bears date the 27th Year of his Empire, for printing
John Rivius's Grammar, which he set forth in Seven Books the same Year. In
1562. Martinus Crusius of Tubingen, an University of Wirtenberg, wrote his
Grammatica Latina cum Graeca congruens. In 1575 Ludolfus Lithocomus,
Schoolmaster of Dusseldorp, a City in the Duchy of Berg, published a Grammar
for the use of his School, which in 1626 Gerardus Joannes Vossius, by Order
from the States of Holland and Westfrizeland, revised and added very useful
Observations by way of Comment. In this List also are Saturnius, Coelius,
Emanuel Alvarez, Nicodemus Frischlinus, Rhenius, Ramus, Richerius, the Author
of the Gryphiswald Grammar, Cornelius Valerius of Utrech, and diverse Others.

Nor have we in England at all come short of our neighboring Nations in this
profitable study: for in King Edward the Sixth's time, Mr. John Fox, in 1551,
set forth Tables of Grammar, subscribed in print by Eight Lords of the
Privy Council; but these Tables were quickly laid aside, as being far more too
short, than King Henry's Grammar was too long. And tho after him there were not
any further Essays made in Technology, for above Fourscore years; but all men
acquiesced in the Common Grammar, during the Times of Queen Mary, Queen
Elizabeth, and King James; yet in the Reign of King Charles the first, about
the Year 1636, John Danes of Maldon made a considerable improvement in this
Art, by hanging out a Light to Lilie, upon which, in 1638, he published his
elaborate Scholia. Much about this Time also Thomas Hayne (one of the Masters
in Christ's Hospital, after that in Merchant Tailors School) wrote a Grammar,
entitled Grammatices Latinae Compendium. In the Year 1640 Thomas Farnabie, the
Glory of our English Critics, set forth his Systema Grammaticum. And since
then New Grammars have been ever and anon coming forth ('it is to be concluded
somewhat is amiss in the Old, why else should the Learned Authors of them spend
their pains in compositions of New?) For not to insist on every trifling
Grammaticaster. Anthony Huish, James Shirley, Charles Hool, John Milton, Paul
P. Jaz-Berenyi, Mr. Burles, Mr. Bird A Schoolmaster of Glecester.
, Mr. Harris, Mr. Lewis of Tottenham, Mr. Christopher Wase, Dr. Busbey the
Rudiment Writer, Mr. William Baxter, Mr. Clement Ellis The Ingenious Author of
The Gentile Sinner.
, have all given us New Models of Grammar; Whilst Others thinking it a safer
way to repair the Old Fabric than to erect a New one, set themselves to amend
Lilie. To this end, in the Year 1664, Mr. Edward Leeds, (my Worthy, tho not
immediate Predecessor in this School) put forth his Vossius in Supplementum
vulgaris Grammatices contractus. And in 1669, the Industrious, and in
Didacticks acutely Judicious Mr. Walker, published his Explanations of the
Royal Grammar, Opus doctum (Jupiter!) and laboriosum! These indeed are late
Writers, if compared to those of the former Class; yet since they are of the
Sect of Crates, and in their Principles do closely adhere to the Triumviri, tho
they widely differ from them, and no less from each other in their method (for
that has in all Times been diversely pursued,) I say, since they give Priscian's
Coat, I shall take the liberty to give them his Title, and style them Old
Grammarians. Strange Fate! That a Grammar, which all men, that wear their
Senses, acknowledge to be tedious So tedious, that the Muses Darling, Mr.
Cowley, tells us, his Masters could never prevail on him, by any persuasions or
encouragements, to learn without Book the Common Rules therein. See his
Discourse upon himself, page 143.
and impracticable. A Grammar, which interferes with all the Principles of true
Didacticks, should deceive the World for the space of One Thousand eight
Hundred and Fifty Years! A thing, you will say, that exceeds all belief, as much
as it does wonder, that the Romans should patiently suffer themselves, and
through them all Posterity, to be imposed upon by a Grammar, which they must
necessarily own to be notoriously false. Why, do but suspend your incredulity a
while, and perhaps Scioppius may give you satisfaction. Neque vero (says he)
In the Preface to his Philosophical Grammar.
admirabile duxi Cloacinam istam Grammaticam inde ab eo, quo Romae primum
exorta est, tempore, ad hanc usque diem per ipsos MDCCXCVI annos inconcussam
perstitisse, and omnium non Tironum modo, sed and ipsorum eloquentiae Latinae
principum ingenia excarnificare potuisse. Jus quippe gentium violare sibi
Romani videbantur, si hanc invectam a Regio Legato artem parem comiter
habuissent, cum praesertim Regi Attalo tantum se devinctos agnoscerent, quippe
qui regnum suum testamento ipsis legasset, aditumque eo pacto ad Asiae totius
Imperium mox armis vindicandum patefecisset.

Ojbect. This (I grant) must needs be a great Remora to the Romans; but what
could impede these two last Ages, Ages of Projects and Experiments, from
exploding the old Hypothesis, and founding a New Grammar on truer Principles?
For it is very obvious, that since Printing and Navigation have given a general
Converse to Mankind; all Arts and Sciences have been exceedingly improved.

Answ. They have so; Only the Education of Youth here in England stands at a
stay, and is the same it was almost Two hundred Years since, when Lilie's
Grammar was first compiled; as if in the very Twilight, when Reformed Learning
first peeped into the World, things were brought to that state, that nothing
might be further suggested without a Crime.

Now the Reasons of this Epidemical Supineness appear to me to be these two.

First, King Henry's Mandate (enjoining all Schools to teach only Lilie's
Grammar, which in its time was well enough) had set a Non Ultra to all
Undertakings in that Nature for the succeeding Generation: This it was that
gave occasion to Mr. Danes of that hearty Complaint he makes in the Epistle
Dedicatory, before his Paralipomena. Dolebam sane and indignabar, a tempore
disertissimi nostri Linacri, cujus Emendata Structura ad barbariem expellendam
non parum contulit, ad hunc usque diem extitisse Neminem e nostratibus, cui Res
Grammatica curae. And indeed it would be very unfortunate, if, because One
General Method is by Law imposed, and for the common benefit to be admitted; We
should therefore be obliged for ever to forfcit the Advantages, to be reaped
from the improvements of succeeding times.

Secondly, As to the present Age, Our Misery is, there has been, and still is
in it a sort of Road-wirted Persons, whom obstinately corrupt Custom will not
permit to take up the New Sumpsimus, and lay down the Old Mumpsimus: These
(like the Irish, that dragged their Ploughs by their Horses Tails) plead
Prescription, and will by no means have it otherwise; but rail like bawling
Currs at all Men, that would make a surer and plainer Road, and go faster than
the Ordinary Pace.

So that we had long e're this utterly despaired of ever seeing a perfect
System of the Latin Grammar, had not that Vere adeptus, as well in Philosophy
as Philology, Franciscus Sanctius Brocensis a Spaniard, our Proto-Reformer, (in
his Minerva, sive de Causis Linguae Latinae Commentarius, printed at Madrid
about the Year 1560) first detected some Thousands of Erroneous and Heterodox
Tenets in the Old, and after that drawn a new Scheme according to those true
Idea's, he had formed in his Mind by a diligent search into the mysterious and
before unfathomed depths of that Language. This is that Grammatica Sanctiana,
which Gaspar Scioppius a Frenchman, Earl of Claravalle, and of the Council to
the Emperor Ferdinand the Second, and Philip the Fourth, King of Spain,
glories that he carried from Salamanca to Rome. Upon which foundation of his
Master Sanctius (as Jasper calls him) the same Paschasius Grosippus raised an
excellent Superstructure; For he, tho a man of most prodigious knowledge in
both the Critical and Technical part, being loath to rely on his own Judgment,
communicated his design with Scipio Paschalius Bishop of Casal, Virginius
Caesarinus of Rome, William Seton a Scotch Nobleman, Baldunus de monte
Simencelli, and Antonius Salmatia of Mantua, Ludovicus Septalius of Milan, and
Josephus Paulus Meronus; all of them Men studious to advance Learning; and upon
their Encouragements in 1628 published his Grammatica Philosophica: To which in
the Year following Mariangelus a Fano Benedicti, a Patrician of Milan, added
his Auctarium: In quo (says he in his Epistle Dedicatory to Hieronymus de
Sagarraga) non quicquam invenies, quin id vel ex libris Grosippi, qua scriptis,
qua editis, mutuatus sim; vel ex viva voce, mecum and cum aliis hominibus
doctis, officii causa subinde eum visere solitis, disserentis arripuerim.

Nevertheless this Grammar, tho founded on such infallible unerring Principles,
promoted and carried on by such curious Observations, wanted yet many degrees
of Perfection, till the incomparable Gerard John Vossius of Heydelberg, of
whose Learning take this account from his Adversary Scioppius: Ingens huic
nostro decus est Salmasius aevo,
Nec minus aetatem hanc ornat sapientia VOSSI,
His fasces, quicunque sapit, submisseret ultro.
Quod sacio ipse lubens, seclique haec lumina adoro,
Contentus didicisse, magis quae scire necesse est,
Quaeque meo possunt lectori adferre falutem,
Quae nescivisse and Reges, and perdidit urbes.
I say, till this wise Architect had finished the beautiful Structure, and in
1635 set up the Cupulo, his Aristarchus, I mean, wherein it is not a little
strange to see how harmoniously he accords with Sanctius and Scioppius: The
former of which never came to his hands, nor the later till this great Work of
his was in the Press. Witness himself De Construct. cap. 49. De Art Grammat.
lib. 2. cap. 3.
, Sane ne nunc quidem Minerva Sanctiana in manus meas pervenit. Grosippiana,
non nisi dum hoc opere praelum serveret. Jucundissimum autem fuit videre non
pauca me cum iis communia habere; partem multo ante, quam Scioppiana prodirent,
a nobis monita in libellis Grammaticis jussu Procerum in Scholarum Hollandiae
and Westfrisiae usum divulgatis, partim tradita nobis in hisce commentariis,
quos maxima ex part ante Annos XXX, and amplius scripsimus, cumque juventute
and amicorum mult is communicavimus,

These Three are they, which that Learned Gentleman of Oxford, the Commentator
upon Lilie, has analyzed; and I could heartily wish that ingenious Person (who,
because the Rules of Lilie's Propria quae maribus, and As in praesenti, are so
maimed and imperfect, that they cannot easily be mended with Annotations, has
proposed others more easy, and infinitely more complete) would, considering
the grand Inconveniences of the Quae genus and Syntax, speedily apply both his
Head and Hand to an alteration (where I am sure there is greater Reason for it)
there also; That so at last it may receive all the degrees of Perfection, and
be made to serve the uses of the Public.

A General Examination OF The OXFORD Grammar.
A. WHat is Grammar?


B. It is the Art of speaking purely.


A. How many are the Parts of Grammar?


B. Four.


A. Which are they?


B. First, Orthographia, or Orthoepia. Secondly, Prosodia. Thirdly, Etymologia
or Analogia. Fourthly, Syntaxis.


A. What is Orthographia, or Orthoepia?


B. It is the first Part of Grammar, which teaches the Nature, Affections, or
Accidents of Letters.


A. How many Latin Letters are there?


B. Nineteen, viz. Five Vowels, a, e, i, o, u. Fourteen Consonants, b, c, d, f,
g, jod, l, m, n, p, r, s, t, van.


A. What is Prosodia?


B. It Is the second Part of Grammar, which teaches the differences of Syllables.


A. What is Etymologia or Analogia?


B. It Is the third Part of Grammar, which shows the properties of each part of
Speech.


A. What is Syntaxis?


B. It Is the fourth Part of Grammar, which teaches the due joining of words in
Construction.


A. What therefore is the Object of Orthoepia, or the Subject which
Orthographia handles?


B. Letters.


A. What is the Object of Prosodia?


B. Syllables.


A. What is the Object of Analogia?


B. Single Words.


A. What is the Object of Syntaxis?


B. A Sentence.


A. How are these four Parts generally divided?


B. Each Part is generally divided into Simple or Regular, Figurative or
Irregular.


A. How many Parts of the Regular Etymologia are there?


B. Eight, which take their Names from the Eight parts of Speech, which it
treats of distjnctly.


A. How many therefore are the Heads or Parts of Speech or Language?


B. All Words may be reduced to one of these Eight heads, sc. Noun, Pronoun,
Verb, Participle, Adverb, Conjunction, Preposition, Interjection.


A. How do you define a Noun?


B. A Noun is a Word, which signifies a Thing or its Quality, primarily and by
its own Nature.


A. Define a Pronoun.


B. A Pronoun is a word, that primarily respects the Noun, for which it is used,
and secondarily signifies a Thing.


A. Define a Verb.


B. A Verb is a word, that besides its primary and natural signification, has
an additional one of Time; but no Cases.


A. Define a Participle.


B. A Participle is a word, which is varied by Cases, having an additional
signification of Time.


A. How do you define an Adverb?


B. An Adverb is a word, that is added to a Noun, Verb, or Participle, etc. to
denote some circumstance or quality.


A. How do you define a Preposition?


B. A Preposition is a word, that signifying Place, Time or Cause, either
positively or privatively, tacks on the Noun to the Verb, or to another word
governing it.


A. Define a Conjunction.


B. A Conjunction is a word, which tacks on one Sentence to another.


A. Define an Interjection.


B. An Interjection is a virtual Sentence, where the Noun and the Verb are
contracted into an undigested word, which word betokens some motion or
affection of the mind.


A. What learn you in that part of Nomen, commonly called Qua mas exprimitur?


B. In that part of Nomen commonly called, Qua mas exprimitur, I learn Rules
for the Genders of Nouns.


A. What is Gender?


B. Gender in a strict sense is nothing else, but the distinction of Sex;
therefore in Nature there can be but two Genders, the Masculine and the
Feminine; and the ancient Oriental Tongues, viz. The Hebrew, Caldee, Samaritan,
Syriac, Punic, Arabic, Persian, Aethiopic, Armenian, Coptic or Egyptian; as
also the modern Occidental, scil. The French, Italian, Spanish, and many others
acknowledge no more.


B. How came in the Neuter Gender?


B. It was introduced by the Greeks and Latins with very good reason, both for
variety and better distinction of words.


A. Is the Neuter then a new Gender?


B. No: It is not properly a new Gender, but a negation of the other two.


A. To what words does the Neuter Gender naturally agree?


B. By nature it agrees to all words, whose signification includes not a
distinction of Sex.


A. Why then are not Mensa, Liber, Lapis, Manus, Dies, etc. Neuters?


B. The Greeks (and, in imitation of them, the Latins) attending to the
Termination rather than the Signification, reserved to themselves a liberty of
using many words, that were really Neuters, that is of no Sex, after the manner
of Masculines and Feminines, and others after the manner of both.


A. What therefore is Gender in a larger acceptance of the word?


B. Gender, taken Grammatically, not Physically, is the difference of a Noun
according to the mark of Sex: Thus Masculines have hic, Feminines haec, Neuters
hoc, Commons hic and haec for their marks.


A. Why, how many Grammatical Genders are there?


B. In Grammar there are four Genders, Masculine, Feminine, Neuter, (i.e.
neither Masculine nor Feminine,) Common, i. e. either Masculine or Feminine. As
for the Common of Three, the Doubtful and the Epicene, they have been
introduced without necessity.


A. What Reasons have you, whereupon to ground your Opinion?


B. My Reasons are these;

1. Adjectives, which are said to be of the Common of Three, are properly of no
Gender, only they have a power of being joined in Construction with
Substantives of all Genders.

2. That which is called Doubtful is especially of the Common Gender, as being
used indifferently in the Masculine or Feminine, though accidentally
distinguished from that which is usually called Common, and, is not used
indifferently in both Genders, but with respect to the signification.

3. That which is called the Epicene Gender, is either Masculine or Feminine
according to its Termination, and is to be looked upon by the Grammarians as
having no Sex.


A. Is the Epicene Gender always declined with one Article only?


B. No: There are two sorts of Epicenes; some have but one note of Gender: as,
haec Turtur. Others have two: as, hic vel haec Limax.


A. How are those, which have two Articles, distinguished from Commons?


B. The Epicenes under each Article signify both kinds; so do not the Commons:
as, hic Limax signifies both Male and Female, and so haec Limax; but neither
hic Parens nor haec Parens does signify both Father and Mother.


A. How are the Genders of Nouns known?


B. By their signification, or by the termination of the Nominative Case.


A. Which of these Rules teach you the Genders of Nouns by their signification?


B. The general Rules.


A. Which of these Rules teach you the Genders of Nouns by the termination of
the Nominative Case?


B. The special Rules.


A. How many are the general Rules?


B. The seven First, beside the supernumerary.


A. How many are the special Rules?


B. The Seventeen next; as for the last Rule, it concerns both kinds of words
of the Epicene Gender, excepted from the Rules of Termination.


A. What learn you in that irregular part of Nomen called Anomalia?


B. In that irregular part of Nomen called Anomalia, I learn Rules for
Defectives either in Case or in Number.


A. How many sorts of Defectives in Case are there?


B. There are three sorts of Defectives in Case.


A Which be they?


B. 1 Some are defective in their Cases of Termination: as, Cornu, Gummi, Nee,
etc.

2. Others are defective in their Cases of Signification: as, Exspes, Spontis,
Opis, Ditionis, Vis, etc.

3. A third sort are defective in Cases both of Termination and Signification:
as Fas, Nefac, Astu [the City,] Instar, Tempe, etc.


A. How are Defectives in Number divided?


B. There are two sorts of Defectives in Number.

1. Some Nouns want the Singular: as, Cancelli, Tenebrae, Scruta.

2. Others want the Plural: as, Roma, Meridies, Pituita, Nitrum.


A. Why do you not with Robinson here insert Variants and Redundants, as being
Anomalous Nouns?


B. I choose rather herein to follow Sanctius Minervae, lib. 1. cap. 9.
;

1. Denying that there are any such Nouns, as Heteroclits (properly and
peculiarly so called) and Heterogeneous in Nominum natura.

2. Affirming, that (the advantages to be reaped from the knowledge of
Redundants being very inconsiderable; and the risque that Boys run for want of
a right understanding thereof, either in reading or writing Latin, being none
at all) tender Wits ought not to be retarded in their Voyage to Latium by such
insignificant Tarriers, as are the later; nor Fresh-water-Souldiers affrighted
from the conquest of that pleasant Land, by hearing of such monstrous
Inhabitants, Centaurs and Hermaphrodites, as are the former.


A. What learn you in that part of Verbum, commonly called Verba primae
Conjugationis?


B. In that part of Verbum commonly called Verba prima Conjugationis, I learn
to form the Preterperfect Tenses and Supines of Verbs Regular and Irregular, of
Verbs in O and Verbs in Or, of Verbs Simple and Verbs Compound, in the order of
the four Conjugations.

In the Close I learn to Conjugate,

1. Some Verbs, whose Present Tenses are the same, and yet in diverse
significations are of diverse Conjugations: such are Aggero, appello, colligo,
affero, mando, obsero, volo, etc.

2. Others, that differ in signification and quantity, and accordingly are of
diverse Conjugations: as, Di^co to Dedicate, Di^co to Speak, Le^go to send
Ambassador, Le^go to Read, etc.

3. Some again that are of the same signification, and yet differ in
Conjugation: as, Lavo to Wash, Morior to Die, Sono to Sound, etc.

4. Verbs, that have the same Preterperfect Tenses: as, Consto and Consisto,
Aceo and acuo, Cresco and cerno, Fulgeo and fulcio, etc.

5. Verbs, that have the same Supines: as, Maneo and mando, Teneo and tendo,
Pando and Patior, etc.

And thus much of Etymologia or Analogia, proceed we now to the simple and
regular Syntax.


A. What mean you by simple and regular Syntax?


B. I mean that Construction, which follows the usual way of speaking, and is
conformable to the Rules of Grammar.


A. How is the regular Syntax divided?


B. It is divided into two parts; Concord or Agreement, Regimen or Government.


A. How many Concords are there?


B. The Proper Concords are but two: The Improper, three.


A. Which is the first Proper Concord?


B. The Nominative Case agrees with its Verb in Number only; but has a
capacity of being accommodated to the Person of its Verb: as, Labor omnia
vincit. Virg. 1. Georg.


A. Which is the second Proper Concord?


B. The Adjective, whether Absolute or Relative, agrees with its Substantive
in Number, Case, and termination of Gender: as, Rara avis in terris, nigroque
simillima Cygno. Juven. Sat. 6.

Vltra eum locum, quo in loco Germani consederant. Caes.
Neglectis urenda filix innascitur agris.
Hor. l. 1.3. Sat.
A. Which is the first Improper Concord?


B. The first Improper Concord is, when Prepositions so agree with other
Prepositions, Adverbs, Conjunctions, Verbs, and Nouns, that they become one
entire word: as, Desuper, Inante, Circumsecus. Abhinc, Deinde, Desubite.
Postquam, Praeterquam, Praequam. Adamo, Pronuntio, Intono. Impius, Vesanus,
Seditio.


A. Which is the second Improper Concord?


B. The second Improper Concord is, when the Adverb agrees with, or is joined
to, a Verb of such or such a Mood.


A. Which are the Adverbs, that are joined to an Indicative Mood?

B. Dum, so long as, whilst. Donec, so long as. Vt, after that. So are Quasi,
ceu, tanquam, perinde, acsi, haud-secus-acsi, when they signify [Even as.]


A. What Adverbs agree with the Subjunctive Mood?

B. Dum, so that. Quasi, ceu, tanquam, perinde-acsi, haud-secus-acsi,
signifying [as if, as though.]


A. What Adverbs are joined to both these Moods?

B. Vbi, where. Postquam, Posteaquant, after that. Cum, when. Donec, until, or
till that. Quoad, how long, or as long as. Simulac, simulatque, and simulut, as
soon as. Quemadmodum, even as. Vt, as. Vtcunque, however. Sicut, as. Simul for
simulac, as soon as. Antequam, Priusquam, before that. Jamdudum, long ago.
Jampridem, some while since. Jamolim, formerly. (But if the action does yet
continue, these three last more usually agree with the Present Tense of the
Indicative Mood,) Dum, until. Quam for Postquam, after that. Pridie, postridie,
postero die, etc.


A. Does any Adverb agree with an Imperative Mood?

B. Ne, not an Adverb of forbidding agrees only with an Imperative Mood, or a
Subjunctive Future Tense: as, Ne nega. Tune cede malis. Istuc ne dixeris; for
Non dixeris, is a Solecism. And yet, Non, an Adverb of forbidding or dissuading
agrees only with the Future Tense Indicative: as, Non negabis, non dices; for
Non nega, non dic are Solecisms.


A. Toth any Adverb agree with an Indicative and Imperative?


B. Yes. Quin, an Adverb of Commanding or Exhorting: as, Quin dic, quid est.
Ter. And. act. 2. sc. 6. Quin huc ad vos venire propero? Cic. in somn. Scipion.


A. What Adverbs agree with the Optative and Potential Moods?


B. There are no Optative or Potential Moods, in Latin, distinct from the
Subjunctive.


A. What then mean the terms? And upon what occasion were they inserted in our
Grammar?


B. As for the Optative, I need say no more, than what our Master has
frequently observed to us: viz. Opto is Latin for I wish; but because Opto is
wont to be omitted before the Conjunctions Vt, uti and utinam (which are all
one.) And because that (the English of Vtinam) is wont to be omitted after I
wish, hence it comes to pass, that Vtinam has gained the English of Opto, and
the Subjunctive Mood, (wherewith it is always joined) the name of Optative.

The Potential Mood is so called from Potentia, Power; for when the Conjunction
is understood, and some other Verb that signifies Power, will, or duty, (which
make the Verbs be the Subjunctive Mood, as if they were expressed) it is then
(instead of Subjunctive) called the Potential Mood: as, Exspectes, yon may
expect, i. e. Licet ut exspectes eadem, etc.


A. Which is the third improper Concord?


B. The third improper Concord is, when a Conjunction is joined to, or agrees
with a Verb of such or such a Mood.


A. What Conjunctions agree with an Indicative Mood?

B. Tametsi; although in the front of a Sentence. Quod So do all efficient or
impulsive Causals.
whereas, as to what, as concerning that. Quippe, surely, for as much as.
Quando, quandoquidem, for as much as. Cum for quod. Vt, as, such, since that.


A. Which are the Conjunctions, that are joined to a Subjunctive Mood?

B. Tametsi; though in the body of a Sentence. Vt, although. The final Causals,
ut, qui, to the end or intent that. Vt with ne, for non following it. Licet,
though, (which the Lawyers Ulpian. L. Cum hi. 8.. ult. D. De tranfact. Modest.
L. 20. D. De accusat. Julianus L. Si ei. 11.. 11. De jur. codicill.
join to an Indicative) the Perfectives, ut, uti, utinam, that. Ne, least. Qui
for quia. Quin for ut, non, But or nay. Quo, dummodo. Vt for ne, non, after
Verbs importing Fear. Si, although. Vtpote cum, Quippe cum. Vt for utpote.


A. Which Conjunctions do agree with both an Indicative and Subjunctive?

B. Sin, siquidem, nisi, si, if (which three last are joined to a Subjunctive
in the former part of a Sentence, as often as a Subjunctive follows in the
latter. Quod, that, because, wherefore. Quia. Quoniam. Quippe qui, ut qui,
utpote qui.


A. Are not some Conjunctions more often joined to one of these Moods, than
they are to the other?


B. Yes. Quanquam and ersi, although, do frequently agree with an Indicative,
and sometimes with a Subjunctive: Quamvis etiamsi, though. Cum for quandoquidem
or quoniam, are usually joined to a Subjunctive, though now and then to an
Indicative.


A. Do any Conjunctions agree with an Infinitive Mood?

B. Vt the Causal, in imitation of the Greeks, agrees with an Infinitive Mood:
as, Neu Babylonios tentaris numeros, ut melius quicquid erit pati. Hor. l. 1.
Od. 11. (...). So scilicet and videlicet, as amounting to scire or scias licet,
videre or videas licet: as, Videlicet illum fuisse parcum senem. Plaut. Sticho.
Act. iv. sc. 1. Esse videlicet in terris primordia rerum. Lucret. lib. 1.
Scilicet esse globosa, tamen cum squalida constent. Lib. 2. Consult Scioppius's
Verisimilia. lib. 1. cap. 16.


A. Is this agreement, with the Moods of Verbs, the peculiar Privilege of
Adverbs and Conjunctions? For I have observed in Terence and Plautus, etc. that
there is, not only in these Particles, but in some Adjectives, a kind of
propensity or natural inclination to one Mood more than to another.


B. Interrogative Particles, be they Adnouns, Adverbs, or Conjunctions, keep
close to an Indicative Mood: such are, Quis, quantus, quantopere, qualis, uter,
quam, quemadmodum, cur, quare, quamobrem, number, numquid, quorsum, ubi, quo,
unde, ne, an, utrum, ut? etc.


A. What Mood does these and such like Particles agree with, when they are used
indefinitely?


B. When they are not Interrogatives, but in the natural order immediately
follow some Verb, or at least a Verb and Noun used periphrastically for a Verb,
then they love a Subjunctive Mood. So does Qui, quae, quod, who, what, not
being a Relative: as, Qui sis, considera. Vide, quod nobis impendeat periculum.


A. Is this Rule of Indefinites so universally true, that it admits of no
Exceptions?


B. It is not: for sometimes it is otherwise,

1. In Quis, Quid.

When Quis is taken for Aliquis, for then it is joined to both Moods: as, Si
quis quid reddit, magna habenda est gratia. Ter. At vero gravitate membrorum
and cruciatu dolorum, si quis quem levet, Magnam ineat gratiam. Cic. de fin. l.
9.

Nay, even in its genuine signification, it is joined to an Indicative by two
of the best Authors in the Latin Tongue, Plautus and Cicero. Plaut. Bacch. act.
1. fc. 1. Scio quid ago. P. and pol ego scio quid metuo. Aulularia act. 2. sc.
1. Verba ne facias, soror. Scio quid dictura es, hanc esse pauperem; hac pauper
placet. Aulul. act. 1. sc. 2. Nimis hercle invitus abeo, sed quid agam scio.
Mil. act. 1. sc. 1. Scio jam quid vis dicere. Cic. lib. 9. ad Attic. epist.
xii. Quaeso scribas, quid nobis faciendum, aut non faciendum, putas. Lib. xiii.
epist. cxviii. Vides, propinquitas quid habet. Lib. xiv. epist. xiii. Quid
nobis faciendum est ignoro. By Terence, Phorm. act. 2. sc. 3. Quia egens
relicta est misera, ignoratur parens, negligitur ipsa. Avaritia vide quid
facit. And Lucan. Quis justius induit arma, scire nefas. Lib. 1.

2. In Quantus, -- ta, -- tum.

When tantus or tantum goes before: as, Videor mihi videre tantam dimicationem,
quanta nunquam fuit. So although tantum be ellipted: as, Quantum est situm in
nobis. Cic. pro Arch.

3. In Vbi.

As in that of Plautus's Aulularia, act 1. sc. 1. Neu persentiscat, aurum ubi
est absconditum. Also when it is not immediately used after a Verb, but referred
to some Noun or Verb preceding: as, Porticus haec ipsa, ubi ambulamus.

4. In Quo.

When eo or ubi goes before: as, Venio nunc eo, quo me non cupiditas ducit, sed
fides.

5. In Vnde.

When it is not used just after a Verb, but relates to some one gone before:
as, Omni huic sermoni propositum est, non ut ingenium and eloquentiam meam
perspicias, unde long absum, sed ut laborem and industriam.

6. In Number.

As, Vide, number quispiam consequitur prope nos. Plaut. Rudent. act. 4. sc. 3.

7. In Vt.

As, Eloquere, ut haec res obtigit de filia. Rud act. 4. sc. 6.

8. In Quam.

As, Vides, quam turpe est. Cic. ad Attic. Lib. x. epist. x.

9. In Qui, quae, quod.

When qui is put for talis: as, Spero, quae tua est prudentia and temperantia,
te ut volumus valere.


A. But hold. You have, I doubt, (ere you was aware) run your self into a
ridiculous absurdity: For in making these Particles of (...) with such and such
Moods (...) from the Doctrine of the Grammarians, who allow Verbs no Moods at
all; nay, (...),

Qui sin^^ (...), in^doque carebans.

B. Sanctius indeed, and after him Scioppius, have laid aside all Moods of
Verbs; and have made other distinctions of Tenses (equivalent in this respect
to those of Moods) dividing them into Prima and Secunda: For instance, They
call Amo, praesens primum, and amem, praesens secundum; amabam, imperfectum
primum, and amarem, imperfectum secundum, etc. And for the Future Tense, they
make it threefold, for the Imperative passes for a third Future. And this they
do not without some reason, because the Tenses of the Subjunctive and the
Indicative are used indifferently the one for the other, and that by the purest
Authors, as may appear by the following Examples: Si est bellum civil, quid
nobis faciendum sit, ignoro. Cic. for si fie. Athoritas tanta plane movebat,
nisi tu opposuisses non minorem tuam. Cic. for moveret. Abi atque illa si jam
laverit, mihi renuntia. Ter. for lavit. Quem enim receptum in gratiam summo
studio defenderim, hunc afflictum violare non debeo. Cic. for defendi. Qui
fuisset egentissimus in re sua, and insolens in aliena, Idem, for fuerat. Te
rogo, ut advoles, respiraro, si te videro. Id. for respirabo. Scaevola quotidie
simulatque luceret, faciebat omnibus suis conveniendi potestatem. Id. for
lucebat. Number P. Decius, cumse devoveret, and, equo amisso, in mediam aciem
irruebat, aliquid de voluptate cogitabat. Id. for eruerit, etc. But since this
way is not more expedite than the other, it is better not to depart from the
received Method.


A. How many Governments are there?


B. The proper Governments are three, the Improper two.


A. Which Cases are properly governed?


B. The Genitive, Accusative, and Ablative.


A. Which Cases are improperly governed?


B. The Nominative and Dative.


A. How many of the Eight parts of Speech do really and properly govern Cases?


B. But four. Viz. Noun Substantive, Adjective, Verb, Participle, Preposition.


A. How many Cases does the Noun Substantive govern?


B. The Genitive only.


A. How many the Adjective or Adnoun?


B. The Dative only.


A. How many Cases does the Verb govern?


B. Three; the Nominative, the Dative, the Accusative. So does the Participle.


A. How many the Preposition?


B. Two: Twenty eight Prepositions serve to an Accusative, Fourteen to an
Ablative, and Five to both.

A. Cicero said, Traditio alteri. Caesar, Domum reditionis spe sublata. May,
Plautus dotes on such expressions; as, Hanc additio, and notio and tactio nos.
We read also in Authors, who wrote in the Manhood of the Golden Age, i.e.
Betwixt the end of the second Punic War and the declining of Augustus 's Reign,
I say, we read in such Classick Writers; Populabundus agros, vitabundus castra
hostium, etc. How then say you, that Nouns govern only the Genitive, and
Adnouns the Dative Case?


B. To this I answer, By distinguishing between such Nouns or Adnouns as
descend from Verbs, and such as do not: the former are styled Verbals, and they
sometimes require the Case of their Verbs, of which they are descended; the
rest do strictly observe the Rules.


A. Upon what depends the Nominative Case?


B. The Nominative Case always either comes before a Verb, or else belongs to
another Nominative Case, that does: as, Ira furor brevis est. Hor. 1. Ep. 2.
Cato scribit invitus.


A. Upon what depends the Genitive Case?


B. The Genitive is always (in a Latin Construction) the later of two
Substantives: as, Gloria est umbra Virtutis. Sen. Ep. 80. Dos est magna
parentium virtus. Hor. lib. 3. Od. 24.


A. Upon what depends the Dative Case?


B. The Dative Case is always put acquisitively, to, or for, the Use, benefit,
or damage of some Person or Thing: as, Nec pecori opportuna seges nec commoda
Baccho. Virg. 4. Georg. Non omnibus dormio. Cic. 7. Ep. 25. ad sam. Mihi
peccat, siquid peccat. Adel. act. 1. sc. 2. Et lac subducitur agnis. Virg.
Traditio alteri. Cic. Nec cernitur ulli. Virg. 1. Aen. Quam proxime potest
hostium castris castra communit. Caes.


A. Upon what depends the Accusative Case?


B. The Accusative Case either follows a Verb, Verbal, or is governed of a
Preposition, that serves to that Case, unless it come before an Infinitive
Mood: as, Amat bonus otia Daphnis. Ecl. 5. Populabundus agros, Vitabundus
castra hostium. Hanc additio. Et notio and tactio nos. Plaut. Et quae tanta
fuit Romam tibi causa videndi? Virg. 1. Ecl. Pacem Trojano ab rege petendum.
Virg. Legatos ad Caesarem mittunt rogatum auxilium. Caes. Nutricem accersitum
iit. Terent. Duplices tendens ad sydera palmas, talia voce refert. Virg.

Impiger extremos, currit Mercator ad Indos,
Per mare pauperiem fugiens, per saxa, per ignes. Hor.
Cum lucubrando juxta ancillas lanam faceres. Ter.
Me penes est unum vasti custodia mundi. Ovid.
Formosam resonare doces Amarylida Sylvas. Virg. Eccl. 1.
Suum se negotium agere dicunt. Cic. 1. Offic.
Scripsit se audivisse eum missum factum esse a Consule. Cic. ib.

A. Upon what depends the Vocative Case?


B. The Vocative Case is always put Absolute, i. e. properly governed of
nothing, though it be commonly joined with an Interjection: as, Credo vos
mirari, Judices. Cic. pro Rosc. Age, dic Latinum Barbite carmen. Hor. Lectule
deliciis fact beat meis. Propert. Amnis arundinibus limosas obsite ripas,
Siste parumper aquas. Ovid. 3. Amor. O dolor atque decus magnum rediture
parenti. Virg. 10. Aen. O Meliboee, Deus nobis haec otia fecit. Ecl. 1. Huc
ades, O Galatea. Ecl. 9.


A. Upon what depends the Ablative Case?


B. The Ablative Case is always governed of some Preposition, that serves to
the Ablative Case: as, Prae amore hunc exclusit for as. Ter. Sole sub ardenti
resonant arbusta cicadis. Virg. Vir cum magna fide. Plaut. A Brundusio nulla
adhuc fama venerat. Cic. Ab Epheso profectum. Id. A Bibone discessimus. Id.

And so much for the Regular Construction.


A. Very good. I now begin to take heart again; For I was almost discouraged at
our Common-Grammar-Syntax, wherein to my great grief, I reckoned no less than
Eightscore Rules; nay, if we divide them into their branches, they rise to
Fifteenscore, a Regiment big enough to affright an old Soldier: A Fresh-man (I
am sure) dares not come near it.


B. No wonder; How many of our briskest English Youth, within this two hundred
years, being terrified at their tedious, toilsom, and unprofitable Tantam
canonum exceptionumque molem, qua pueritiae ingenia hodie obtundunt, neutiquam
necessariam, imo noxiam magnopere, esse sentio. Vossii, de Construct. lib. 7.
heap of Rules and Exceptions, have in despair thrown away their Book; though
perhaps alas (to the great loss of both Public and Private) they have (like
Illiterate Criminals) perished for not reading in it, lived Fools and died
Brutes. And whereas it is scarce possible to conquer that mighty Host in a whole
Year: it is feasible to make your self Master of this small handful in one Day.

Tho, I say, every one of these Cases are sometimes put alone, without that
other word, which governs them, or on which they do depend. The Dative: as, Hei
mihi, quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbis. Ovid. Supply adest thus, Hei,
i.e. magnum malum adest mihi, etc. Vae tibi, that is, vae or magnum malum sit
tibi. Vigilandum est ei, qui cupit vincere: i. e. Vigilandum est necessarium
ei, etc. Nec tu eras solvendo. Cic. 2. Philip. Aptus or idoneus ellipted,
complete thus, Nec tu solvendo aeri alieno sufficiens eras. Ferrum non est
tundendo. Plin. supp. accommodatum. Radix ejus vescendo non est. Id. understand
apta. Of the other elliptically used, you will find many Examples in their
proper place, viz. in the Figurative or Irregular Syntax.


A. What is the Figurative or Irregular Syntax?


B. It is that Construction, that recedes from both the usual way of Speaking,
and the Rules of Grammar; and if compared with the Regular, has in it
something Deficient, Redundant, or otherwise changed by Permutation or
Transposition: but withal is more elegant, as having been studied by the best
Authors.


A. How many Figures therefore naturally arise from this Irregularity?


B. Four: viz. Ellipsis, Pleonasmus, Syllepsis, Hyperbaton; to which some add
Hellenismus.


A. What is Ellipsis?


B. It is a Defect in a Sentence.


A. How manifold is this Defect?


B. This Defect is twofold.


A. Which is the first of these Defects?


B. The first of these Defects is the want of One or more words, which was or
were never before expressed in the Sentence.

1. Of a Noun.

(1.) Substantive: as, Juvenal Satyr. 5. Quando vocatus adest calidae
gelidaeque minister; supple aquae: for Cicero said entirely, Si aquam gelidam
biberent. 1. Catil. and Apuleius, aqua calida injecta. 2. Metamorph.

(2.) Adjective: as, Homo frugi, homines frugi; subaudi bonae: Cicero expresses
it, lib. 4. ad Attic. Permodestus ac bonae frugi homo. So does Plautus capt.
Fui ego lepidus, neque bonis vir unquam, neque frugi bonae: where frugi stands
for frugis, the Genitive of frux, as Cicero says Mehercle does for Mehercules,
the S being worn off Antiqui dicebant bonae frugis, postea bonae frugi, deinde
frugi tantum, Fr. Sanctii Minervae, page 288.
.

(3.) Both: as, Tenere memoria praetextatum te decoxisse, supp. rem familiarem.
Cic. 2. Philipp.

2. Of a Pronoun: as, Non possum credere, for me credere. Non veretur mentiri,
for se mentiri. Paulus creditur fecisse, for illum fecisse. Lucretius says
completely, Quippe etenim quam multae tibi me fingere possum. Salust. Qui se
student praestare caeteris. Plautus Curcull. Aesculapius mihi visus est eum ad
me non adire, neque me magni pendere.

3. Of a Verb: as, Ego illud sedulo negare factum; Ter. supple coepi. Facile
omnes perferre and pati; Id. puta solebat. Quod epistolam mea^ ad Brutum
poscis, non habeo ejus exemplum. Cic. ad Attic supp. respondeo. Sed si
confessionem culpae meae exigitis, ego fui pater durus, and patrimonii tenax
custos. Quintil. subaudi confiteor. Disce puer virtutem ex me, verumque
labore^, Fortunam ex aliis. Virg. where Fortunam is governed of Opta, Pete, or
some such like Verb understood, and not of Disce, because Fortuna non discitur.
So, Sacra manu, victosque Deos, parvumq, nepote^, Ipse trahit. Idem: where
trahit respects only nepotem, and sacra and Deos are governed of portat or the
like suppressed. Likewise, in that Saying of the same Author, Ne tenues
pluviae, rapidive potentia Solis Acrior aut Boreae penetrabile frigus aduret:
where noceant is to be supplied, for tenues fluviae to agree with. So in that
of Cicero, Fortuna, qua illi florentissima, nos duriori conflictati videmur:
where conflictati has a respect only to the second Clause, and Vsi is ellipted
in the former.

4. Of a Participle: as, Anna soror. Virg. supple existens. Divitiacus
complexus obsecrare coepit, nequid gravius in frasrem statueret; scire se illa
esse vera. Caes. for dicens se scire.

5. Of an Adverb: as, Ita ut non modo, generare homines, sed ne advenas quidem
recipere, ac tueri possent. Justin. Hist. lib. 2. for non modo non, etc.
Gravidam illam reliqui, quam abeo; for priusquam. Tacita semper est bona
mulier, quam loquens; i. e. magis bona. Plaut. Si quisquam est, qui placere
cupiat bonis, quam plurimis. Ter. Nempe bonis potius quam plurimis.

6. Of a Conjunction: as, Tu quoque magnam partem opere in tanto, sineret
dolor, Icare haberes. Virg. for si sineret. Itaque simul exsurrecti sumus, visa
illa contemnimus. Cic. for simul ac. Nimium me creed colori; alba ligustra
cadunt. Virg. for nam alba, etc. Cave cadas, cave faxis, for ne cadas, ne faxis
or facias. That of Tully is perfect, Nonne caveam ne scelus faciam. Laeva, sive
dextera vocaret aura: for sive laeva. Tollere, sen ponere vult freta. Hor. lib.
1. Od. 3. for scis tollere.

7. Of a Preposition: as, Lavinaque venit littora. Virg. sc. ad. Pridie
Calendas. Multos abhinc annos; supp. ante. Opus est mihi libris; puta in.
Eruiturque oculos. Ovid. Metam. 12. Tristior and lacrymis oculos suffusa
nitentes. Virg. subandi quod ad. Crine ruber, niger ere, brevis pede, lumine
laesus, Rem magnam praestas, Zoile, si bonus es; Martial. 12. l. 54. Epigr.
supp. in. Fossam sex cubitis altam, duodecim latam cum duxisset. Live. bell.
Mac. 7. for a sex cubitit.

8. Of an Interjection: as, Salve primus omnium parens patriae, appellate;
primus in toga triumphum, linguaeque lauream merit. Plin. lib. 7. c. 30. for
appellate O merit. Jam nimium Messala mei studiose quiescas. Non tempestivae
saepe propinque viae. Tibull. lib. 4. for O Messala. Me miserum. Ter. supp. Ah;
O. Ovid spoke fully, 2. Trist. O Princeps parce viribus use. So did Virgil; O
fortunatos nimium bona si sua norint agricolas!


A. What is the second of these Defects?


B. The second is the want of One or more Words, which is or are expressed in
the Sentence either before or after.


A. How manifold is this second sort of Ellipsis?


B. It is triple or threefold.


A. Which is the first of these three kinds of the second sort of Ellipsis?


B. The first is, when a Noun or a Verb is to be repeated after the self-same
manner (that is, without any the least alteration either of Gender, Case,
Number, Person, or signification, etc.) that it is expressed: as, Trojugena
interpres Divum, qui numina Phoebi,
Qui tripodas, Clarii radios, qui Sydera sentis,
Et volucrum linguas, and praepetis omnia pennae.
Where the Verb sentis, being once expressed, is five times in the same manner
understood.


A. Which is the second?


B. The second is, when the word expressed cannot be repeated without some
alteration, either

1. Of Gender: as, Et genus and virtus, nisi cum re vilior alga est. Hor.
Vtinam aut hic surdus, aut haec muta facta sit. Ter.

2. Of Case: as, Quid ille fecerit, quem neque puder quicquam, nec metuit
quenquam, nec legem putat tenere se ullam. Ter. for qu^ nec metuit, etc.

3. Of Number: as, Sociis and rege recepto. Ving. Hic illius arma, hic currus
fuit. Idem.

4. Of Person: as, Ille timore, ego risu corrui. Cic. Quamvis ille niger,
quamvis tu candidus esses. Ving.

This second kind was formerly called Zeugma Connectio or Adjunctio.

Or of Signification: as, Nero sustulit matrem, Aeneas Patrem. Provolutae
deinde genibus Alexandri, non mortem sed ut Darii corpus sepeliant, dilationem
mortis deprecantur. Justin. Egregius adolescens and coedem patris, and necem
fratris, and se ab insidiis Artabani vindicavit. Idem.


A. Which is the third?


B. The third is, when any word signifying the Whole is set down, which
presently after in the parts is not expressed, but understood: as, Aquilae
volarunt, haec ab Orient, illa ab Occidente. Cic. Consules profecti; Valerius
in Campaniam, Cornelius in Samnium. Live. And this is the old Grammarians
Prolepsis.


A. What is Pleonasmus?

B. Pleonasmus is, when a Word, in a Sentence, more than is necessary redounds:
as, Verum qui dederit, magis majores nugas egerit, Plaut. Poenul. Apis, si
saevit, maxim pessima est. Columella; where magis and maxim are superfluous.
Se ab omnibus desertos potius, quam abs te defensos esse malunt. Cic. where
potius is overplus by virtue of the Verb Malo.

In like manner when a Noun, and its Vicar or Representative a Pronoun, are
placed in the same Sentence, then the Deputy is Pleonastic: as, Sed urbana
plebs, ea vero praeceps erat multis de causis. Sall. Posthumous autem, de quo
Senatus decrevit, ut statim in Ciciliam iret, is negat se iturum sine Catone.
Cic. in the later Period is, in the former ea is redundant.

So when two equipollent Particles occur, the one is supervacaneous: as,
Oportuit praescisse me ante. Ter. Olim fuit isti generi quondam quaestus apud
seclum prius. Id. Eun. act. 2. sc. 2. Dic me orare, ut aliquis intus prodeat
propere ocius. Plaut. Cistel. act. 3. sc. 1. Et tandem denique devorato pudore
ad Milonem aio. Appuleius lib. 2. Met. En ecce, prolatam coram exhibeo; videat
and suum sigillum recognoscat. Id. lib. x. Nunc primum fac istaec ut lavet:
post deinde quod jussi ei dare bibere, and quantum imperavi, date. Ter. Andr.
act. 3. sc. 2. Sed nequicquam frustra timorem illum satis inanem perfuncti
long pejores inhaesimus laqueos. Apulcius 8. Met.


A. What is Syllepsis?

B. Syllepsis is a Construction, congruous in the sense, but not in the words.


A. How manifold is Syllepsis?


B. Twofold: Absolute and Relative.


A. What is Absolute Syllepsis?


B. The Syllepsis is Absolute, when the words in the Construction disagree,
either

1. In Gender only: as, Samnitium duo milliacaesi. Live. Here an eye is had to
homines. Or

2. In Number only: as, Turba ruunt; by reason that turba is a Noun of
multitude, i. e. such a word as in the Singular Number signifies many Persons
or Things, collected into one; as a heap, etc. Propterea quod, for propter id
quod. Or

3. In both: as, Pars in carcerem acti, pars bestiis objecti: Sall. Here not so
much the Collective Pars, as the Persons signified by that word, is regarded.


A. What is the Relative Syllepsis?


B. The Syllepsis is Relative, when the Relative has a relation to an
Antecedent, which is not expressed, but conceived by the sense of the whole
Period: as, Inter alia prodigia etiam carne pluit, quem imbrem aves feruntur
rapuisse. Live. where imber to which quem has a respect, is not expressly set
down, but virtually comprehended in the Verb of Nature or exempt action (as
Grammarians term it) Pluit, as if it were imber carnis pluit. So, Per literas
me consolatus sum, quem librum ad te2 mittam1. Cic. Here literas is taken for
compiling a Book, which Work he promises to send him. De Praetiana haereditate,
quae quidem mihi magno dolori est, (valde enim illum amavi) hoc velim cures.
Cic. Here illum respects his Friend Praetius, which was not before expressed, but
closely couched in Praetiana haereditate. Sed antea conjuravere pauci contra
rempublicam, in quibus Catilina fuit, de qua, quam brevissime potero, dicam.
Sall. that is, de qua conjuratione; for the Relative qua looks back upon the
formal or cognate Accusative Conjurationem Omne Verbum accidentale (id est,
quod non sit Substantivum) aut Activum est, aut Passivum; quorum illud semper
Accusativum expressum, aut suppressum regit.

Hujus ratio est, quia inter agere and pati nihil est medium, omnisque motus
aut actio est aut passio. Neutra ergo verba nihil sunt, nisi indoctorum
Grammaticorum commenta, qui non animadverterunt Verborum Activorum alia varios
habere Accusativos materiales; ut, facere verba, fidem, finem, insidias: alia
non nisi unicum eumque formalem and cognatum; ui, vivere vitam, mori mortem,
furere furorem, egere egestatem, currere cursum, sedere sessionem, ambulare
ambulationem, servire servitutem, certare certamen.

Illis, quae plures Accusativos regunt, necesse est certum semper Accusativum
adjungere, quoniam aliter, quid agant, incertum erit. Sed his, quae unum tantum
regunt, inane, otiosum, ac supervacuum fuerit Accusativum adjungi quoniam
nemini de eo, tanquam essentiali seu formali, dubium esse potest. Scioppii
Instit. Grammat. Lat. p. 147, 148.

See also the Oxford Commentator on the Common Grammar, De Verbo.


supposed to follow its Verb Conjuravere. Omnes omnia bona dicere, and laudare
fortunas meas, qui gnatum haberem tali ingenio praeditum. Ter. where the
antecedent to qui is mei the primitive involved in the possessive meas. Deinde
Philenorum arae, quem locum habuere Carthaginenses. Sall. where locus is
conceived, as if it were arae locus, quem locum, etc.

Sometimes a Syllepsis meets in Conjunction with a Zeugma: as, when an
Adjective or Relative is not referred to the Gender of the nearest Substantive;
but of another more remote: as, Amor tuus, ac judicium de me, utrum mihi plus
dignitatis in perpetuum, an voluptatis quotidie fit allaturus, non facile
dixerim. Planc. Ciceroni; where allaturus relates only to amor tuus, and
allaturum must be supplied for judicium to agree with. Gens est, cui natura
corpora, animosque magis magna, quam firma dedit. Live. lib. 5.

Sometimes with a pure Ellipsis: as, when the Adjective agrees with some word
no where expressed: Timidi damae. Virg. Talpae oculis capti. Virg. here mares or
masculi must be understood. In Eunuchum suam, supply fabulam. Ter.

Sometimes again we find the Syllepsis inverted; as, when the structure is
congruous in the words, but absurd in the sense: as, Ovid. Metam. lib. 1. In
nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas, corpora; for, Animus fert dicere
corpora mutata in novas formas. Virg. Dare classibus Austros; for, Dare classes
Austris. So, Et gladium vagina vacuum in urbe non vidimus; for, vaginam gladio
vacuam. This Schematologers use to call an Hypallage.


A. What is Hyperbaton?

B. Hyperbaton is a confused and disordered order of Words.


A. How many are the species or sorts of Hyperbaton?


B. Of Hyperbaton or Hyperbasis there are four kinds.


A. Which is the first?


B. The first is Anastrophe.


A. What is Anastrophe?

B. Anastrophe is a Figure, whereby words which should have been precedent, are
postpon'd, but within the same Clause: as, Mecum for cum me, Quamobrem for ob
quam rem. His accensa super. Nam quis te juvenum confidentissime nostras Jussit
adire domos? Virg. for Quisnam.


A. Which is the second?


B. The second is Tmesis.


A. What is Tmesis?


B. It is a Figure, whereby the parts of a compounded word are divided by some
other word or words coming betwixt the parts: as, Rem vero publicam amisimus.
Cic. Septem subjecta Trioni. Me certe in omnibus rebus satis nostraeque
conjunctioni amorique facturum. Cic.


A. Which is the third?


B. The third is Parenthesis.


A. What is Parenthesis?


B. It is a Figure, which incloses within one Sentence another Sentence, which
is not part of it: as, Tityre dum redeo (brevis est via) pasce capellas. Virg.


A. Which is the fourth?


B. The fourth is Synchysis.


A. What is Synchysis?


B. It is a consused intermixture of words belonging to one Clause, with words
that belong to another, which either alters the sense, or renders the Sentence
extremely difficult: as, Saxa vocant Itali mediis quae in fluctibus, aras.
Virg. for
Itali vocant Saxa, quae in mediis fluctibus, aras. So Hor. L. 2. Sat. 1.
Si mala condiderit in quem quis carmina; Jus est
Judiciumque. Esto, si quis mala: sed bona siquis
Judice condiderit laudatur Caesare: for Si quis bona carmina condiderit,
laudatur judice Caesare.



A. How comes it to pass, that you divide this Figure, but into Four, whereas
the Oxford Grammar, distiuguishes it into five Branches?


B. The Oxford Grammarian (I confess) in compliance with Sanctius and
Scioppius, makes Anacoluthon a species of Hyperbaton: But in this I ask that
Ingenious Gentleman's pardon, if I take new measures unwarranted by his
Standard; since in the Examples alleged either by him or Scioppius, or
Sanctius, I can perceive no confusion or disorder in the Transposition.


A. What is Anacoluthon?


B. It is an incoherent Construction; wherein there is no alliance betwixt the
former and later part of the Sentence: as for instance, Nam omnes nos, quibus
est alicunde aliquis objectus labos, omne quod est interea tempus, priusquam ad
rescitum est, lucro est. Ter. Hecyr. act. 3. sc. 1. for, Nam omnibus nobis,
quibus est alicunde aliquis objectus labos, omne quod est interea tempus,
prissquam id rescitum est, lucro est. Praetor interea, ne pulchrum se ac beatum
putaret, atque aliquis ipse sua sponte loqueretur, ei quoque carmen compositum
est. Cicero pro Mur. for, Praetori quoque interea ne pulchrum is se ac beatum
putaret, atque aliquid ipse sua sponte loqueretur, carmen compositum est.
Etenim si orationes, quas non multitudinis judicio probari volebamus (popularis
enim est illa facultas, and effectus eloquentiae est audientium appr2obatio1)
sed si reperiebantur nonnulli, qui nihil laudarent, nisi quod se imitari posse
confiderent. Cic.

A notable Example of this you may read in Mr. Tho. Tomkins's Imprimatur,
prefixed to that excellent practical Treatise, The Causes of the Decay of
Christian Piety.

Imprimatur
HIc Liber vere Christianus; qui, si Primaevam spectes pietatem, Summam
Eloquentiam, Rationum pondus, nihil in eo deest, quo minus possit nos omnes,
quales tam accurate describit, vere Christianos efficere. Puriori aevo sane
dignissimus est, nisi quod tam potens sit, qui vel nostrum saeculum
transformaret in melius. Benedicat Deus Operi and Authori: For, Imprimatur, hic
Liber vere Christianus; in quo (si Primaevam spectes pietatem, Summam
Eloquentiam, Rationum pondus) nihil deest, quo minus is possit nos omnes,
quales tam accurate describit, vere Christianos efficere, etc.

Such as these in Classic Authors we call (...), Solecophane; but in the
Vulgar, Solecisms.


A. You say some add Hellenismus; What is Hellenismus?


B. It Is a Latin imitation of the Greek Construction.


A. Is therefore every Latin imitation of the Greek Construction a Hellenism?


B. No: for then the whole Latin Tongue would be little other than one
continued Hellenism. But a Hellenism, properly so called, is, when the Romans
departing from their own Native way of speaking, do follow the Greek or
Transmarine Custom. And every such Latin imitation of the Greek Construction is
a Hellenism.


A. How many kinds of Hellenism are there?


B. Of Hellenism there are diverse sorts (in which whoever desires to be
critically curious, let him make frequent addresses to Dr. Linacer's Sixth
Book, De emendata structura From page the 409. to the end.
; to Vossius's De constructione Cap. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38.
; to Farnaby'; Systema Grammaticum; to Posselius's Syntaxis Graeca, and to M.
Jo. Rhenius's Graeca Grammatica Major.) But the principal are Graecisms in
Cases, in Numbers, and in Genders.


A. Give an Example or two of this Imitation.


B. Before I exemplify, I must distinguish betwixt Attraction and Government:
For the Greeks of two Cases (if they have a mutual respect one to the other)
govern but one, they join the other to it, and so the one is, as it were, drawn
by the other: as for Example, (...), Johan. cap. 2. ver. 22. for (...). So the
Latins. Quum scribas and aliquid agas quorum consuevisti. Lucejus ad Ciceronem
lib. 5. Epist. for quae consuevisti. Sed istum quem quaeris ego fum. Plaut.
Curc. Occurrunt animae, quales neque candidiores terra tulit, for qualibus.
Hor. 1. Sermon.

It is also a Hellenism, when a Case, set betwixt two Verbs, is drawn by the
former, on which in strictness it ought to have no dependence: as, Illum ut
vivat, optant. Ter. Adelph. Haec me, ut confidam, faciunt. Cic. Qu. Frat. Atque
istud, quicquid est, fac me, ut sciam. Ter. Heaut.

Such Hellenistical Expressions as these, are familiar to Plautus, Terence, and
Lucilius; but in Plautus's Poenulus there is one (I think) without parallel:
viz. Patrem atque matrem viverent vellem tibi. Act. 5. sc. 2. Here the
Accusatives seem to stand instead of Nominatives.


A. Are Numbers and Genders ever drawn Hellenistically?


B. They are,

1. Numbers: for as in the precedent Examples a Case set between two Verbs is
attracted by the former: so by the same Figure it falls out sometimes that a
Verb, being placed betwixt two Cases, is drawn by the latter: as, (...). Phil.
So in Latin, Amantiumirae amoris redintegratio est. Ter. Pectus robora fiunt.
Ovid. Omnia pontus erat. Id. In which Examples the Verbs are so attracted by
the later and nearer Nominative Cases, that they change their Numbers.

2. Genders: as, Saxum antiquum, ingens, campo qui forte jacebat, Limus agro
positus. Virg. where campo by attraction causes the Relative qui, which
regularly should be quod, to take a Masculine termination.

So when a Relative Adjective standing betwixt two Substantives of different
Genders, agrees with the later: as, (...). Lucian. Homines tuentur illum
globum, quae terra dicitur; where terra attracts the Gender of quae, which
according to the Roman custom would be qui, as rehearsing its antecedent globum.


A. Give an Example wherein the Latins, leaving their own vernaculous way of
Speaking, imitate the Greeks in Government.


B. 1. The Greeks (and in specie the Atticks) omit the Preposition (...) or
(...), just so the Latins conceal quod ad, or secundum: as, (...) Aristoph
(...). Psalm. 146. (...). Soph. Antig. supply (...). Expleri mentem nequit.
Virg. 4. Aeneid. Qui purgar bilem. Hor. de Art. Habeo multa alia, quae nunc
condonabitur. Ter. Eunuch. i.e. quod ad quae, etc. Sane caeterapaterfamilias,
and prudens and attentus, una in re minus, consideratus. Cic. pro Quinctio.

Omnia Mercurio similis vocemque coloremque,
Et flavos crines, and membra decora juventae. Virg. Aeneid. 4. supp. Quod ad,
or secundum.
So we say, Primum, tertium, tantum, quantum, nimium, principium, as the
Greeks, (...).

2. The Preposition (...), which serves to the Genitive Case, is so generally
ellipted, that the Greek Grammarians have thence been deluded into a belief,
that some Verbs do govern a Genitive Case. And yet Lucian expresses this
Particle: as, (...). So does Isocrates: as, (...). But it is mostly conceived:
as, (...), Plato in Phaedone. (...). Aristoph. Nubes. (...). Isoc. Helen.
(...). Actor. c. 3. v. 7. (...). Matthew. c. 16. v. 28. (...). Act. c. 22. v. 7.
Hence the Latins: Abstineto irarum, calidaeque rixae. Hor. l. 3. Od. 27. Desine
mollium querelarum. Id. l. 2. Od. 9. Regnavit populorum. Lib. 3. Od. 30. So,
Imperti me divitiarum. Arripiunt illum pedis. Gustavit mellis. Audivit musicae,
etc. Hereupon in Vitruvius the Latin Preposition Ex is found governing a
Genitive Case: as, Descriptio ex duodecim signorum coelestium. L. 8. cap. ult.
Si ex imbrium aquae vis occupaverit. L. 3. c. 2. Piscium naturae plurimum ex
aeris and terreni sunt compositae. L. 1. c. 4. etc. which nevertheless is not
to be imitated.

3. There is also a Grecism in these and the like Instances: viz. Quibus
Hector, ab oris, Exspectate venis? Virg. 2. Aeneid. for exspectatus. Censoremve
tunm vel quod trabeate salutas. Pers. Sat. 3. for trabeatus. Adsis laetitiae
Bacchus dator. Virg. 1. Aeneid. for Bacche. Vos o patricius sanguis. Pers. 1.
Sat. for patr^^ie: For in the Attic Dialect (the Nominative and Vocative ending
both alike) they commonly use the Vocative in lieu of the Nominative, and vice
versa; insomuch that even Deus in the Vocative (says Art of Teaching, Chapt. 1.
But I incline more to Sanctius, who in the Sixth Chapter of his Minerva, proves
the clear contrary, and concludes thus: Dicimus itaque recte; Defend me amici
mi, and defend me amicus meus; sed diverso sensu and Syntaxi: Nam in hoc
posteriore sunt veluti duae Orationes, and deus Ens, vel qui es. Unde
falluntur, qui in Sacris literis putant nomen Deus facere Vocativum Deus. Quum
legunt; Deus, Deus, respice in me; quum rectius sit, and legamus apud
Prudentium, Dee, in Vocativo.
Mr. Walker) is an Atticism, as (...) in Greek is used for (...). So (...).
Homer. for (...). Id. for (...).

4. When the Romans place a Nominative Case before an Infinitive Mood, it is
done by an Hellenism: as, Cupio esse clemens. Vxor invicti Jovis esse nescis.
Hor. 3. Lib. Od. 27.

But no Author ever expressed this Greek Phrase, better than Ovid. Fast. lib. 6.
v. 433. Seu genus Adrasti, seu furtis aptus Achilles,
Seu pius Aeneas eripuisse ferunt:
For had the Poet here spoken according to his own-Country-fashion, he would
have said, aptum Ulyssem, pium Aeneam.

And so much for the general Examination of the True Latin Grammar.


A. To conclude, tell me, How many those Fundamentals or Maxims of Syntax are,
which our Master has so often inculcated to us, that we might be able to
distinguish betwixt true Rules and false; as also to understand the Reasons of
the truth or falsehood thereof.


B. The fundamentals of Syntax are comprised in Twelve Canons.


A. Which is the first Canon?


B. Every Sentence consists of a Noun and a Verb; wherefore if the Verb be not
expressed, it must needs be understood: as, Dii meliora; supple faciant. Sed
vos qui tandem; supp. Estis. Been Ennius; Prudenter Cicero. Subaudi dixit, vel
fecit.


A. Which is the second Canon?


B. Every Verb of a finite Mood has before it a Nominative Case, expressed or
suppressed: as, Amavi te, quo die cognovi. Cic. supp. Ego. Quid facis? supp. tu.
Aiunt, ferunt, etc. supp. homines. Vivitur, nempe vita. Peccatur sc. Peccatum.


A. Which is the third Canon?


B. Every Verb of an Active The Genus of Verbs is like that of the Noun, either
Real and Physical, or Grammatical; and therefore their division ought to be
made either from their signification or termination.

If you distribute them the former way, there are Three kinds, Active, Passive,
and Neuter or Substantive.

So all are Actives, that signify actively: as, Amo, Curro, Sequor, Aio, Velo:
All are Passives, that signify passively: as, Amor, Vapulo: All Neuters, that
signify only a bare existence, being, or ceasing to be: as, Sum, fio, morior,
intereo.

If you divide them according to their termination, they end all (except some
few) either in o or or. If in c, they either can or cannot admit r; if they
can, they are called Actives, because for the most part they note action; if
they cannot, they are called Neuters. If they end in or, either they can cast r
away, and they are called Passives, or they cannot, and then they are called
Deponents or Commons.


signification has after it an Accusative Case, expressed or suppressed: as,
Facilius reperias (supple homines) qui Romam proficiscantur, quam ego, qui
Athenas. Vivit, supple vitam. Mortuus est, supp. mortem. Furit, sc. furorem.
Eget, nempe egestatem. Currit, sc. cursum. Sedet, supple Sessionem, etc.


A. Which is the fourth Canon?


B. As often as an Infinitive Mood comes by it self in a Sentence, the Verb, on
which it depends, must be understood, Coepit, suppose, or solebat, or some such
like: as, Ego illud sedulo negare factum. Ter. supple coepi. Facile omnes
perferre ac pati. Id. puta solebat, Divitiacus complexus obsecrare coepit,
nequid gravius in fratrem statueret, scire se illa esse vera, etc. Caesar. for
dicens se scire.


A. Which is the fifth Canon?


B. Every Adjective has its Substantive expressed or understood: as, Mortalis,
supple homo. Martius, supp. mensis. Oriens, sc. Sol. Praegnans, supple Mulier.
Regina, sc. uxor. Patria, nempe terra. Triste lupus stabulis, supp. negotium.
Altum, sc. mare. Suburbanum, supp. Rus vel praedium.


A. Which is the sixth Canon?


B. Every Relative Adjective rehearses after it its Antecedent Substantive,
with which rehearsed Substantive it agrees in Number, Case, and Termination of
Gender: Wherefore an Ellipsis is to be supposed as often as the Substantive,
which ought to go before the Relative, and to follow it, either only goes
before it, or only follows it: And a double Ellipsis, where it is expressed,
neither before it, nor after it: as, Vir sapit, qui pauca loquitur; for qui
vir. Populo ut placerent, quas fecisset fabulas. Ter. And. Prol. for, Populo ut
fabulae placerent, quas fabulas fecisset. Sunt, quos curriculo pulverem
Olympicum collegisse juvat. Hor. for Sunt homines, quos homines, etc.


A. Which is the seventh Canon?


B. As often as the Genitive Case is set with an Adjective, a virtual
Correlative, a local Preposition, or a Verb; either it is a Grecism and depends
on a Preposition, or some general Noun is understood: as, Vltimum dimicationis.
Live. puta tempus. Amaracurarum. Hor. nempe negotia. Sophia Septimiae. Cic. lib.
9. Ep. 10. nempe filia. Hectoris Andromache. Virg. Aen. 3. supple uxor. Ad
Castoris. Cic. pro Mill. In Veneris. Plaut. 1. act. sc. 2. Poen. nempe aedem.
Per Varronis, supp. fundum. Ex Apollodori. Cic. puta Chronicis. Est Regis, puta
Officium. Accusas furti, supp. crimine. So, Cum ille se custodiae diceret in
castris remansisse. Cic. 2. De Oratore. Rem omnem aperit, cujus mittebarur.
Sall. Catil. puta causa.


A. Which is the eight Canon?


B. Every Verb of the Infinitive Mood, has instead of a Nominative an
Accusative Case before it, expressed or understood in a Latin Construction: But
in a Greek Construction frequently a Nominative, the mostly an Accusative, and
sometimes both together: as, Volo me facere. Possum me fingere. Studet se
placere. Elliptically, Volo facere. Possum fingere. Studet placere. Phaselus
ait fuisse navium celerrimus.
Catull. Sensit medios delapsus in hosts.
Virg. For the Greeks say, (...), Marc. cap. 10. v. 49. (...), 2 Cor. c. 10. v.
2. (...). Thucyd.


A. Which is the ninth Canon?


B. Every Noun of the Comparative Degree has its Positive, to which it is
compared, expressed, or understood: as, Visus est mihi tristior; supply the
Positive, aequo, justo, or solito, as if it were, Tristior prae illo tristi,
qui ex aequo, justo, aut solito tristis est. Ocyus incubuere omnes. Virg.
subaudi dicto. For the Poet says in another place, Sic ait, and dicto citius
tumida aequora placat; nempe, Dictum ejus non tam citum est, quam cita est
aequoris placatio.


A. Which is the tenth Canon? [Assigned to several significations.]


B. Besides the Noun and the Verb, there are certain Particles, by which those
two and other less parts of Speech are tied together as it were with Sinews,
which when they are expressed, the Syntax is regular; when suppressed, it is
figurative: as, Gladio percussus; supp. cum, ab. Devenere locos laetos. Virg.
sc. ad, in. Hac non successit, alia aggrediemur via. Tersupple ergo, itaque,
igitur, Hoc vero, ex quo suspicio nota est, me quaesivisse aliquid in quo te
offenderem, translatitium est. Cic. that is, Nempe me quaesivisse.


A. Which is the eleventh Canon?


B. Every Accusative Case is governed either of a Verb of an Active
signification, or of a Verbal, or of a Preposition (unless it comes before an
Infinitive Mood,) wherefore when the Verb, etc. is understood, the Ellipsis
ought to be supplied: as, En quatuor aras. Virg. supple Vide, Aspice. Bona
verba quaeso; supp. Dic. Proh Deum atque hominum fidem; puta Implore. Pridie
Calendas; sc. Ante. Eo spectatum ludos; pro ad spectatum.


A. Which is the twelfth Canon?


B. Every Ablative Case is governed of a Preposition expressed or understood:
as, Aegypto remeans, puta ab. Degit Carthagini, supple in. Rediit host
superato, nempe ab. Plenus vino, sc. de. Doctior caeteris, subaudi prae.


A. A word more, and I have done. You have (I find to my great satisfaction)
added to the Nine Canons inserted in the Oxford Grammar, Three others of no
less importance; Therefore for my better confirmation in those necessary
Maxims, as also for a Supplement to that excellent figurative Syntax, I desire
to hear these Three additional Canons in Latin.


B. Canon VIII. Omne Verbum Infinitum habet pro supposito Accusativum,
expressum aut suppressum in Latina constructione; In Graeca vero, saepe
Nominativum, plerumque autem Accusativum, aliquando utrumque.

Canon IX. Omne Nomen Comparatum habet suum Nomen Positivum, cum quo
comparetur.

Canon X. Praeter Nomen and Verbum sunt certae particulae, quibus and illis
duae, and aliae minores Orationis, parts velut nervis colligantur, variis
significationibus assignatae, quae cum exprimuntur, Regularis; cum
supprimuntur, figurata est Syntaxis.


Explicit Grammatica Reformata.

