Twelve weighty QUERIES OF GREAT CONCERNMENT, SHOWING In what Cases the
difference of men's Judgments, and OPinions in matters of Religion, is not to
be restrained but tolerated by the Civil power.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at
his shop in Pope's Head Alley. 1646.

TWELVE WEIGHTY QUERIES OF Great Concernment, Showing in what cases the
difference of men's Judgments, and opinions in matters of Religion is not to be
restrained, but tolerated by the Civil power.
IN what Cases the difference of men's Judgments, and opinions in matters of
Religion is not to be restrained, but tolerated by the Civil power. Declared
in certain Queries; unto which, that satisfaction may be given in away, of
clear reason and demonstration, in stead of prohibition and punishment, is the
earnest desire of all ingenuous men and particularly of those, who in a
confident expectation hereof, have with all faithfulness adhered to the
Parliament, and stood up for their defense in time of their greatest danger and
extremity to the almost, if not altogether ruining, of themselves, their
Estates and Families, and who can never be discouraged or with-drawne from
their former activitie, or ready affections to the Parliament, by any thing so
much as to be required with an unnatural, and unthankful oppression in their
Consciences.

Some things premised that are plain in themselves, and necessary in the
first place to be stated, in order to the better clearing the ensuing Queries.

1. That the knowledge which any man has of God, or capacity rightly to judge
and understand his will; is the free gift of God, is that which man is the
receiver of from God, and not the Author of in himself, Romans 11. Who has
known the mind of the Lord at any time? Who has given unto him etc.

2. That the way, by which God gives, and conveighes this knowledge of
himself, and of his will unto man, is by planting within man, two fundamental
principles of light and illumination: by the one of which he becomes a natural
man, and bears the image of the earthly man, the first Adam, who was made a
living soul: and by the other of these he becomes a spiritual man, and bears
the Image of the heavenly man, the second Adam who was made a quickening Spirit,
1 Cor. 15.

3. These two fundamental principles, planted in man, are given him by God for
the Law, and rule to teach, and guide him in the knowledge of God, and to
enable him, rightly to judge and discern the will, and mind of God, in that
which man is to think, speak, or do: these two Laws in this sense, are
mentioned in Romans 7. and 8. chap. the one is the Law of nature or of works;
the other the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.3. and what the
one could not do in man, or to man, in that it was weak through the flesh;
that the other did, and does accomplish in man, and for man, through the
quickening power of the eternal Spirit.

4. These two Laws, or inward principles planted in man, are in themselves
holy, righteous, spiritual good, and perfect; and did evidently manifest
themselves so to be, by their operations in the persons of the first and of the
second Adam; and the weakness and deficiencie of the first was not in it
self, but only in relation to the subject wherein it wrought; It was weak
through the flesh, the state in which man was created and subjected to this Law
was frail, and subject to change, but the Law it self was without exception
under it, and by it was man made perfect in himself, but they have sought out
many inventions, Ecclesiastes 7.29.

V. These two Laws, are still the two fundamental principles, which are given,
and continued by God in the hearts of men for their rule to guide, and teach
them, in the knowledge of himself and of his will, Romans 2.13, 14, 15.25 26, 29.
so, Gal. 4.21, 22, 23, 24. according to the renewed operations of both, or
either of which, in man since the fall, he has a capacity or power begotten in
him, more or less clearly to know God, and rightly to judge and discern of
his will, and to make use of the Scriptures, and all means conducing
thereunto; and otherwise then by this, man since his fall, is in himself, unto
all knowledge of God and to every good work, reprobate, Tit. 1.16.

These things thus premised,

First Quaere, Whether, when it pleases God to renew the working and
illuminations of both, or either of these principles, in any man, it be not
most reasonable, lawful, and necessary, that he should submit unto the same,
and follow the dictates, and light thereof, according to the measure, and
manner, which God is pleased to dispense them unto him; and whether it be not
unreasonable, unlawful, and notoriously sinful in any man to act contrary to,
or differing from the clear evidence, full persuasion, and light of both, or
either of these principles within him, upon any command whatsoever from man, or
any outward pretense whatsoever, Romans 14.22, 23.

Second Quaere, Whilst men do carefully observe the inward Teachings,
Dictates, and Operations, of both or either of these principles, whether may
they not be said to hold fundamentalls of the knowledge of God, and whether for
the measures of illumination, (which for the present they have received) though
in the smallest and weakest degree, waiting, and earnestly inquiring after
more. Are they to be judged, upbraided, censured, blamed, or much less
punished, or put to death by others, who take themselves to be much more
learned, and to have received in far more abundance then they, 1 Cor. 4.7.
for who makes thee to differ from another, or what have thou that thou have
not received? Now if thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if thou
had not received it?

Third Quaere, Whether those measures of illumination and knowledge of God, and
of his will, which are communicated to men, only by the light of nature, which
for the present they have, and whilst they know no better, may not be professed
in word, and practiced in actions, so far as they ure suitable, and agreeable
to the law of Nature? and this though Nature do teach and disperse several
degrees of this knowledge, and in different ways of expression, unto some
more, unto some less, as in daily experience we see is done.

Fourth Quaere, Whether such men, faithfully obeying this inward principle, of
the light of Nature, in the clear illuminations and operations thereof, and
diligently improving all means, which they meet with for the increase of their
knowledge; but yet for the present remaining altogether ignorant, and
unacquainted with the supernatural principle, the Law of the spirit of life in
Christ (which by the strength of nature is not attaineable, but only by the
free gift and almighty power of God) whether may not such men freely confess
their want of this knowledge, and the difficulties they find in themselves to
submit to it? and whether they may not by argument, debate, and dispute,
endeavor to receive satisfaction, from any that is probable to give it them,
and if this liberty be not permitted, is not the most proper and ingenuous
means of their own conviction, and of finding out the truth denied unto them?

Fifth Quaere, Whether those measures of illumination and knowledge of God, and
of his will, communicated unto men by the quickening Spirit of Christ, or by a
supernatural light, which for the present they have received, and yet in much
diversity, and whilst they know no more, may not be professed, in such
expressions or words, and practiced in such outward forms or actions, as are
agreeable to the Scriptures, and which no express Text of Scripture
contradicts; and whether they may not be freely argued, debated, disputed
amongst others differing from them; in order to find out the full truth? and
whether, if this be not permitted and tolerated, are not men restrained from
that confession, and testimony, which God requires of their outward man, to
bear unto the truth? and are they not denied a proper means appointed by God
for growing in the grace and knowledge of Jesus Christ, even the mutual
imparting of their several gifts one unto another?

Sixth Quaere, Whether difference of opinion and judgment, in the things of
God, and matters of Religion, do not necessarily arise and spring up in men,
from those diversity of gifts, or different measures of illuminations, from
those various administrations, which one and the self-same spirit divides to
every one, as pleases him, for the profit of the whole body, 1 Cor. 12. and
whether it will not from hence inevitably follow, that it is impossible to
suppress the differences of judgments, and opinions amongst men, in matters
of Religion, but by suppressing the Spirit of God himself, and limitting the
holy One of Israel, in his wise dispensations, and free operations? and are we
stronger then He? 1 Cor. 10.22.

Seventh Quaere, Whether the body of Christ, does not consist of many members,
and those variously differing, in judgment and opinion, according to the
diversity of gifts, and measures of knowledge they have received, some having
the place of the eye, others of the hand, others of the feet, and others which
seem to be more feeble? 1 Cor. 12. and whether there be not a law which knits
and binds these many members in unity of spirit, notwithstanding their bodily
or appearing difference, even the royal Law of love, spoken of in James, and
described in the 1 Cor. 13. a spirit in them, in the midst of the difference
among them; which suffers long, which is kind, which envies not, which vaunts
not it self, which is not puffed up, which behaves not it self unseemly, which
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, which rejoices
not in iniquity, but in the truth, which bears all things, which believes
all things, hops all things, indureth all things, This is my Commandment
that you love one another as I have loved you, Joh. 15.

Eight Quaere, whether the contrary spirit to this, in those that profess
themselves to be Christians, and members of Christ's body, be not that
murtherous spirit of Caine; forbidden by the 6 Commandment, according to
Christ's exposition thereupon Match. 5. under the expression, of being angry
with our brother without a cause; the instance whereof is there given, in
judging and upbraiping one another, for the wants and defects either of
natural or supernatural light; saying to our brother Racha, or thou fool,
and whether it be not, that hatred against our brother, so much condemned in
these, and the like places of Scripture. Let every one be swift to hear, slow
to speak, and slow to wrath: for the wrath of man works not the
righteousness of God, James 1.19, 20. he that says, he is in the light, and
hates his brother, is in darkness even until now, 1 John 2.9. In this the
children of God, are made manifest from the children of the Devil. Whosoever
does not righteousness, is not of God; nor he that hates his brother, 1 John
2.10. If a man say I love God, and hate his brother, he is a liar; for he that
loves not his brother, whom he has seen; how can he love God, whom he has
not seen? John 4. but why do thou judge thy brother? or why do thou set at
naught thy brother? we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.

Ninth Quaere, whether difference of judgment or opinion, either in natural,
or in spiritual men; professed and practiced according to the abovesaid
limitations, be not the just and lawful liberty, which is due to every
spiritual man, as he is a Christian; and to every natural man, as he is a
reasonable man. And whether this ought to be forbidden or restrained by the
power of man, or can be without manifest tyranny and oppression and fighting
against God: whether such a tolleration as this, be not according to the will
of Christ, and for the profit of the whole body of Christ; and more justifiable
by the word of God, then that unity of judgment and uniformity of practice in
matters of Religion, which is submitted unto upon grounds of fear, or implicit
faith; and practiced only or chiefly in conformity to that power of man, that
commands and injoynes the same.

Tenth Quaere, whether such a tolleration, practiced in a spirit of love, and
meekness, one toward another, with inquisitive minds after truth, and
faithful hearts to that Government; under whose protection, men may be
permitted to live in all godliness and honesty, according to the principles of
nature, and of grace, may not consist with the unity, peace, safety, and
prosperity of any state, or nation, under what form of civil Government
soever? and whether it be not the most likely means to preserve that
Government whatsoever it be, from change or hazard. The Interest of consciences
amongst all being hereby gratified, which is of nearest concernment to honest
and virtuous men; and the self interest of the Clergy weakened and defeated;
who, what Church forms soever they set up, will be ever imposing their private
opinions, in matters of Religion, for infallible truths, and incensing Prince
against people, and people against Prince; and one sort of men against another,
making their followers to espouse, and maintain their unjust quarrels, till
they become insensibly slaves to their ambition, and boundless power, instead
of attayning to any solid, real, or truly Christian reformation.

Eleventh Quaere, whether that wisdom and power of the Clergy, which has
taken upon it in all ages, to suppress Heresy and Schism by humane Laws, and
penalties, have not been a perverting, and interrupting of that Law of love
amongst the members of Christ's body, which he commands. And whether they under
the pretense of composing differences, and settling a Government over the body
of Christ; by endeavoring to reduce all the members of the body, to unity of
judgment, and uniformity of practice, in matters of Religion; upon grounds of
outward compulsion, have not discovered in themselves, that true spirit of
Schism described, 1 Cor. 12. (which they would seem to extirpate) which
despises all below it, and envies all above it, as unnecessary members, and fit
to be cut off from the body; so defacing and dividing the body of Christ, by
laboring to make the whole body, but one member; and where then is the body?

Twelfe Quaere, whether the two principles before mentioned, of supernatural
and natural light, did not both meet together in their perfection in the
person of Christ; and when her as they are found in him, and do shine forth in
the glory of his face, are they not the Kingdom of God within us, Luke 17.12.
which consists not in word only, but in power, 1 Cor. 4.20. by which we are to
be absolutely settled, and governed: and unto which we are to be subject in all
our actions. Whether these two principles so professed, and practiced, be not
the two witnesses spoken of, Revel. 11. that are to prophecy a thousand, two
hundred, and threescore days in sackcloath: and during that time to be
confined and fettered by the outward forms of men's inventions, set up and
enjoined as the will and mind of Christ, by the power of man for the
suppressing of Blasphemies, Heresy, and Schism. Whether, at the end of their
testimony, the last enemy they are to conflict with, be not those, who having a
form of godliness, deny the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. ver. 1. to 6. making the
Kingdom of God, to consist in word only, and not in power: being of the
spirit of that boasting Jew, 2 Romans 17, etc. who rested in the law, who made
his boasts of God, who knew his will, and approved the things most excellent,
being instructed out of the Law, who was confident of his being a guide to the
blind, a light to them that sat in darkness; and instructor of the foolish;
a teacher of babes; having the form of knowledge, and of the truth in the Law;
but notwithstanding all this, his praise was only of men, but not of God;
whether by this generation of men (which Christ Luke 21.32. says, were not to
pass away till his second coming) must not these witnesses have war made
against them, and be overcome, and slain, and must not their dead bodies lie in
the great City? Jerusalem in form or in letter, signified by the place where
our Lord was crucified, and which in the sense of the Holy Ghost, is accounted
Sodom and Egypt? and whether immediately after, shall not the spirit of God
raise them up in that power and glory, which their enemies shall tremble at,
and not be able to withstand, whereby the kingdoms of this world, shall become
the kingdoms of our Lord Christ, and he shall Reign for ever and ever: Ever
so Lord Jesus, Amen. Come quickly.

FINIS.

