THE FOREIGNERS. A POEM.

PART I.

LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin in VVarwicklane, MDCC.

The Foreigners.
LONG time had Israel been disused from Rest,
Long had they been by Tyrants sore oppressed;
Kings of all sorts they ignorantly craved,
And grew more stupid as they were enslaved;
Yet want of Grace they impiously disowned,
And still like Slaves beneath the Burden groaned:
With languid Eyes their Race of Kings they view,
The Bad too many, and the Good too few;
Some robbed their Houses, and destroyed their Lives,
Ravished their Daughters, and debauched their Wives;
Profaned the Altars with polluted Loves,
And worshipped Idols in the Woods and Groves.
To Foreign Nations next they have recourse;
Striving to mend, they made their State much worse.
They first from Hebron all their Plagues did bring,
Crammed in the Single Person of a King;
From whose base Loins ten thousand Evils flow,
Which by Succession they must undergo.
Yet sense of Native Freedom still remains,
They fret and grumble underneath their Chains;
Incensed, enraged, their Passion does arise,
Till at his Palace-Gate their Monarch dies.
This Glorious Feat was by the Fathers done,
Whose Children next deposed his Tyrant Son,
Made him, like Cain, a murderous Wanderer,
Both of his Crimes, and of his Fortunes share.
But still resolved to split on Foreign Shelves,
Rather than venture once to trust Themselves,
To Foreign Courts and Councils do resort,
To find a King their Freedoms to support:
Of one for mighty Actions famed they are told,
Profoundly wise, and desperately bold,
Skilful in War, Successful still in Fight,
Had vanquished Hosts, and Armies put to flight;
And when the Storms of War and Battles cease,
Knew well to steer the Ship of State in Peace.
Him they approve, approaching to their sight,
Loved by the Gods, of Mankind the Delight.
The numerous Tribes resort to see him land,
Cover the Beach, and blacken all the Strand;
With loud Huzza's they welcome him on shore,
And for their Blessing do the Gods implore.
The Sanhedrim convened, at length debate
The sad Condition of their drooping State,
And Sinking Church, just ready now to drown;
And with one Shout they do the Hero crown.
Ah Happy Israel! had there never come
Into his Councils crafty Knaves at home,
In combination with a Foreign Brood,
Sworn Foes to Israel's Rights and Israel's Good;
Who impiously foment Intestine Jars,
Exhaust our Treasure, and prolong our Wars;
Make Israel's People to themselves a prey,
Mislead their King, and steal his Heart away:
United Intrests thus they do divide,
The State declines by Avarice and Pride;
Like Beasts of Prey they ravage all the Land,
Acquire Preferments, and usurp Command:
The Foreign Inmates the Housekeepers spoil,
And drain the Moisture of our fruitful Soil.
If to our Monarch there are Honors due,
Yet what with Gibeonites have we to do?
When Foreign States employ 'em for their Food,
To draw their Water, and to hew their Wood.
What Mushroom Honors dos our Soil afford!
One day a Beggar, and the next a Lord.
What dastard Souls do Jewish Nobles wear!
The Commons such Affronts would never bear.
Let no Historian the sad Stories tell
Of thy base Sons, Oh servile Israel!
But thou, my Muse, more generous and brave,
Shall their black Crimes from dark oblivion save;
To future Ages shall their Sins disclose,
And brand with Infamy thy Nation's Foes.
A Country lies, due East from Judah's Shore,
Where stormy Winds and noisy Billows roar;
A Land much differing from all other Soils,
Forced from the Sea, and buttress'd up with Piles.
No marble Quarrys bind the spungy Ground,
But Loads of Sand and Cockle-shells are found:
Its Natives void of Honesty and Grace,
A Boorish, rude, and an inhumane Race;
From Nature's Excrement their Life is drawn,
Are born in Bogs, and nourished up from Spawn.
Their hard-smoak'd Beef is their continual Meat,
Which they with Rusk, their luscious Manna, eat;
Such Food with their chill stomachs best agrees,
They sing Hosannah to a Mare's-milk Cheese.
To supplicate no God, their Lips will move,
Who speaks in Thunder like Almighty Jove,
But watery Deities they do invoke,
Who from the Marshes most Divinely croak.
Their Land, as if ashamed their Crimes to see,
Dives down beneath the surface of the Sea.
Neptune, the God who does the Seas command,
Never stands on Tip-toe to descry their Land;
But seated on a Billow of the Sea,
With Ease their humble Marshes does survey.
These are the Vermin do our State molest;
Eclipse our Glory, and disturb our Rest.
BENTIR in the Inglorious Roll the first,
Bentir to this and future Ages cursed,
Of mean Descent, yet insolently proud,
Shunned by the Great, and hated by the Crowd;
Who neither Blood nor Parentage can boast,
And what he got the Jewish Nation lost:
By lavish Grants whole Provinces he gains,
Made forfeit by the Jewish Peoples Pains;
Till angry Sanhedrims such Grants resume,
And from the Peacock take each borrowed Plume.
Why should the Gibeonites our Land engross,
And aggrandize their Fortunes with our loss?
Let them in foreign States proudly command,
They have no Portion in the Promised Land,
Which immemorially has been decreed
To be the Birthright of the Jewish Seed.
How ill does Bentir in the Head appear
Of Warriors, who do Jewish Ensigns bear?
By such we are grown even Scandalous in War.
Our Fathers Trophies wore, and often could tell
How by their Swords the mighty Thousands fell;
What mighty Deeds our Grandfathers had done,
What Battles fought, what Wreaths of Honor won:
Through the extended Orb they purchased Fame,
The Nations trembling at their Awful Name:
Such wondrous Heroes our Forefathers were,
When we, base Souls! but Pigmies are in War:
By Foreign Chieftains we improve in Skill;
We learn how to entrench, not how to kill:
For all our Charge are good Proficients made
In using both the Pickax and the Spade.
But in what Field have we a Conquest wrought?
In Ten Years War what Battle have we fought?
If we a Foreign Slave may use in War,
Yet why in Council should that Slave appear?
If we with Jewish Treasure make him great,
Must it be done to undermine the State?
Where are the Ancient Sages of Renown?
No Magi left, fit to advise the Crown?
Must we by Foreign Councils be undone?
Unhappy Israel, who such Measures takes,
And seeks for Statesmen in the Bogs and Lakes;
Who speak the Language of most abject Slaves,
Under the Conduct of our Jewish Knaves.
Our Hebrew's murdered in their hoarser Throats;
How ill their Tongues agree with Jewish Notes!
Their untuned Prattle does our Sense confound,
Which in our Princely Palaces does sound;
The self-same Language the old Serpent spoke,
When misbelieving Eve the Apple took;
Of our first Mother why are we ashamed,
When by the self-same Rhetoric we are damned?
But Bentir, not content with such Command,
To canton out the Jewish Nation's Land;
He does extend to other Coasts his Pride,
And other Kingdoms into Parts divide:
Unhappy Hiram! dismal is thy Song;
Tho born to Empire, thou art ever young!
Ever in Nonage, can no Right transfer:
But who made Bentir thy Executor?
What mighty Power does Israel's Land afford?
What Power has made the famous Bentir Lord?
The Peoples Voice, and Sanhedrim's Accord.
Are not the Rights of People still the same?
Did they ever differ in or Place or Name?
Have not Mankind on equal Terms still stood,
Without Distinction, since the mighty Flood?
And have not Hiram's Subjects a free Choice
To choose a King by their united Voice?
If Israel's People could a Monarch choose,
A living King at the same time refuse;
That Hiram's People, shall it ever be said,
Have not the Right of Choice when he is dead?
When no Successor to the Crown's in sight,
The Crown is certainly the Peoples Right.
If Kings are made the People to enthral,
We had much better have no King at all:
But Kings, appointed for the Common Good,
Always as Guardians to their People stood.
And Heaven allows the People sure a Power
To choose such Kings as shall not them devour:
They know full well what best will serve themselves,
How to avoid the dangerous Rocks and Shelves.
Unthinking Israel! Ah henceforth beware
How you entrust this faithless VVanderer!
He who another Kingdom can divide,
May set your Constitution soon aside,
And over your Liberties in Triumph ride.
Support your Rightful Monarch and his Crown,
But pull this proud, this croaking Mortal down.
Proceed, my Muse; the Story next relate
Of Keppech the Imperious Chit of State,
Mounted to Grandeur by the usual Course
Of Whoring, Pimping, or a Crime that is worse;
Of Foreign Birth, and undescended too,
Yet he, like Bentir, mighty Feats can do.
He robs our Treasure, to augment his State,
And Jewish Nobles on his Fortunes wait:
Our ravished Honors on his Shoulder wears,
And Titles from our Ancient Rolls he tears.
Was ever a prudent People thus befooled,
By upstart Foreigners thus basely gulled?
Ye Jewish Nobles, boast no more your Race,
Or sacred Badges did your Fathers grace!
In vain is Blood, or Parentages, when
Ribbons and Garters can ennoble Men.
To Chivalry you need have no recourse,
The gaudy Trappings make the Ass a Horse.
No more, no more your Ancient Honors own,
By slavish Gibeonites you are outdone:
Or else your Ancient Courage reassume,
And to assert your Honors once presume;
From off their Heads your ravished Laurels tear,
And let them know what Jewish Nobles are.
THE END.
Books sold by A. Baldwin in VVarwicklane.
THE Dream. A Poem, addressed to Sir Charles Duncomb. By R. Gold.

A Description of Mr. D -- n's Funeral. A Poem. The 3d Edition enlarged.

A Letter to his Majesty K. William, showing, 1. The Original Foundation of the
English Monarchy. 2. The Means by which it was removed from that Foundation. 3.
The Expedients by which it has been supported since that Removal. 4. Its
present Constitution as to all its integral Parts. 5. The best Means by which
its Grandeur may be for ever maintained. By the Reverend Mr. Stephens Rector of
Sutton in Surrey.

A Letter to a Member of Parliament, showing that a Restraint on the Press is
inconsistent with the Protestant Religion, a^^ dangerous to the Liberties of
the Nation.

A short Account how the Kingdom of Denmark was changed from a Popular
Government to an Hereditary and Absolute Monarchy, through a Difference betwixt
he Lords and Commons.

An Answer to a Letter from a Gentleman in the Country, containing seven
Queries relating to the present Ministry, and Men in Employments. 1699.

The State of the Navy considered in relation to the Victualling, particularly
in the Straits and the West Indies. With some Thoughts on the late
Mismanagements of the Admiralty, and a Proposal to prevent the like for the
future. School.

Remarks on the present condition of the Navy, and particularly of the
Victualling. In two Parts. The first exploding the Notion of fortifying of
Garrisons, and proving that the only Security of England consists in a good
Fleet. The second containing a Reply to the Observations on the first Part,
with a Discourse on the Discipline of the Navy; showing that the Abuses of the
Seamen are the highest Violation of Magna Charta, and of the Rights and
Liberties of Englishmen. 1699.

A Letter to a Member of Parliament concerning Clandestine Trade; showing how
far the evil Practices at the Customhouse at London tend to the Encouragement
of such a Trade. Written by a fair Merchant.

A Dialogue between a Director of the New East India Company, and one of the
Committee for preparing Bylaws: in which those for an impartial Rotation of
Directors, and the preventing of Bribes, are particularly debated.

Memoirs of Sir John Berkely, containing an Account of his Negotiation with
Lieutenant General Cromwell, Commissary General Ireton, and other Officers of
the Army, for restoring K. Charles the First to the Exercise of the Government
of England.

Memoirs of Secret Service. Containing the fullest and most early Discovery, 1.
Of the late intended Assassination of his Majesty King William, with the
Consultations and Meetings in order thereunto. 2. Of the intended Invasion from
France. 3. Of the arrival of the Thoulon Fleet at Breast. 4. Of a Number of Arms
concealed in Warwickshire by Sir William Parkyns, which are since lodged in the
Tower: With other Affairs of great moment. To which is added, A Character of
Rob. F -- n. By Capt. Matthew Smyth, who kept a private Correspondence for
several years with a great Minister of State.

Two Pamphlets in vindication of the said Memoirs; the one in answer to the D.
of S's Letter, the other against R. K.

Books written against a Standing Army.
AN Argument showing, that a Standing Army is inconsistent with a Free
Government, and absolutely destructive to the Constitution of the English
Monarchy. In 2 Parts.

A Letter from the Author of the Argument against a Standing Army, to the
Author of the Ballancing Letter.

Some Queries for the better understanding K. James's List of 18000 Irish
Heroes published at the Savoy, in answer to what had bin, and what should be
writ against a Standing Army.

A Discourse of Government with relation to Militias.

The Militia Reformed, or an easy Scheme of furnishing England with a constant
Land Force, capable to prevent or to subdue any Foreign Power, and to maintain
perpetual Quiet at home, without endangering the Public Liberty.

A short History of Standing Armies in England.

A Letter to a Member of Parliament concerning Guards and Garrisons.

A 2 d Letter concerning the four Regiments commonly called Mareeners.

The Seaman's Opinion of a Standing Army, in opposition to a Fleet at Sea as
the best security of the Kingdom. In a Letter to a Merchant written by a Sailor.

The State of the Case, or the Case of the State.

A Confutation of a late Pamphlet entitled, A Letter ballancing the Necessity
of keeping up a Land Force in times of Peace with the Dangers that may follow
on it. Part I.

The second Part of the Confutation of the Ballancing Letter; containing an
occasional Discourse in vindication of Magna Charta. In which is shown, 1. That
Magna Charta is much older than K. John. 2. That the Confirmations procured to
it in his and Henry the 3 d's Reigns, were far from being gained by Rebellion.
The whole containing an Historical Account and Defense of the Proceedings of
the Barous against those Kings for their open and notorious Violations of Magna
Charta,and the English Laws and Liberties.


