Ad Nobilem Britannium. OR AN ABSTRACT FOR ENGLANDS Royal Peers.

By that worthy Gentleman M. W. Turner. D. of Physic.

Printed in the Year, 1641.

TO TO THE RIGHT HONORABE, AND TRVELY NOBLE, THE DVKES, AND EARLS OF THE
KINGDOM OF ENGLAND, etc.
IT were, Right Mighty Princes, a thing worthy the moving of the High and
Honorable assembly of Parliament, to grant this license, that all Dukes,
Earls, Lords, Barons, Knights, and their right begotten Sons, might have
authority, whenever they saw any startup which could not spend two Hundred
pounds a year of his own truly gotten lands, wearing silk, velvet, or any
Golden Chain to carry this Crow to the next Market Town, and there to pull
his feathers, that is to cut his clothes all to pieces, and to take his chain
from him; and take the one half thereof himself, and give the other half to
the poor of the Town. Elizabeth, the Countess of East Freseland when she was
certified, that a certain Yeamons wife had guarded her gown with a broad
guard of velvet, she sent her officers unto her, and caused them to cut all her
guards in pieces, and condemned her in a great some of money for her pride. Me
thinks you do very ill to suffer every man that lists to come into your
livery apparel, fellowship and orders, and refuse no man whatsoever he be.
Birds of a feather fly together, beasts of a kind flock together, fishes of a
sort swim together; only the Nobility of England suffer all kinds of men to
come into their order and livery. Every company will receive none into their
company but such as are of their company. If a man put a Priests cap upon a
sowes head, and a tippet about her neck, and set her up against a stall in
Cheapeside, and give her husks to eat, would not all the whole order of
Sacrificers be angry with him that clothed the sow so. If a man should shave
an ape in the crown, and set a miter upon his head, and put a rocket upon him,
would not the Bishops be displeased with him that did so? But Oh ye Nobles, do
not ye suffer Dicers and Carders, and all kind of unthrifts, not only to go
in Gentlemen's apparel, but also receive them into your houses: ye suffer also
a sort of false Apostles to take your honor from you, and to be your Lords and
Masters, and to occupy your offices, which should belong only unto your order
and dignity, is not this as it were a kind of leprosy in your faces to be
thus defaced and shamed by these crafty foxes. These false named Bishops and
Prelates become Ambassadors, or at least bear a great hand in it. Also
presidents, Justices of peace, and some full Lordly sit at Sises and Sessions
amongst temporal Judges, leaving their own Courts to some single sir John, or
to some blind Briber, sometimes they are Counselors of State, Knights of the
Garter, yea to be the High Chauncellor of England, and president of the
Council, above all the Lords. We read in Josephus, that the Nobility of the
Jews suffering them to partake with them in their office, in the end became
both Priests and Kings, and had all the Nobility under their girdle: And thus
it is at this day with the Bishops of Rome. And if you saw but how they use
hear to handle the Clargie in their Convocation House, you would say that they
were the Popes right shapen sons; for whereas their sits seven or eight
linen wearing Bishops: If there be forty Pastors, and Elders that are
wolwearers, yet in the coldest weather, whilst they stand there before them,
they must stand bareheaded, be they never so old or sickley. Is this pride to
be suffered; by this you may see how they would handle you, if they could get
the upper hand over you; thus was it with the Bishops of Mense, the Bishop of
Worms, and the Bishop of Collen came impudently to Henry the fourth, Emperor
of that name, and took his Crown from of his head. And Anno Dom. 1260. two
Canons under the Bishops, bad the Governor of Colen to dinner, and brought him
to a fair Chamber, wherein was an hungry Lion, and shut him in; but the
Governor whom God preserved, put his left hand into the Lions throat, and
with the other hand took out his dagger and slew the Lion; and within few
days after hanged up the two Canons (as they well deserved.) The Bishop of
Luke Anno Dom. 1460. would not hear of any mercy though the City petitioned
for Peace, but he caused his cosen Charles to kill 40000 men, and to drown
12000 women in the flood Mosa. And in Jermany, they made this rhyme of their
Bishops tyrany: Monks, Nuns, and Papes,
Goats, Rats, and Apes;
Flies, Catterpillers, and Mise,
Whores, wivelesse, and Lice;
Where they get the upper hand,
They destroy both City and Land.
And it may easily be perceived what an ambitious mind they bear amongst us,
and how they would gladly Reign over you if they could effect it. The only
remedy therefore is to drive these idle ambitious Bishops home to their studies,
and to cause them to preach Gods Word to the people committed to their charge.
To make good and honest Civilians, and Scripture-learned honest men; Lawyers
and no Priests to be Knights, Lords, Counselors, Justices of Peace,
Chancellors, etc. And to take your offices upon you, and to do them your
selves; But hold in no case the Bishops from their Pulpits, least the vengance
of God fall both on you, and them; upon you for holding of them from doing of
their duty, upon them for not doing of their duty, if ye drive these falsely
named Lords and Gentlemen out of your order, and company, and will do your
offices and duties in your own persons; as Almighty God would have you to do;
then shall ye have just honor in this world, and in the world to come, life
everlasting.

FINIS.

