THE TRIBE OF LEVI. A POEM.

Doubtless a Churchman, while he keeps within the Sphere of his Duty to God
and his People is an Angel of Heaven, but when he shall degenerate from his own
Calling, and fall into the Intriegues of State and Time-serving, he becomes a
Devil, and from a Star in the Firmament of Heaven, he becomes a Sooty Coal in
the blackest Hell, and receives the greatest Damnation. Dr. Gumble, Page 23.
of Monk 's Life. LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXCI.

THE TRIBE OF LEVI. A POEM.
SInce Plagues were ordered for a Scourge to Men,
And Egypt was chastised with her Ten,
No greaten Plague did any State molest,
Than the severe, the worst of Plagues, a Priest.
Some Savage Beasts, by Laws of Nature bound,
Only in Woods and desert Lands are found,
No Land, no Climate, can this Monster bind,
But like some Hydra multiplys his kind,
Through the extended Orb directs his Course,
And is at best a Universal Curse.
An happy Albion, to the Gods most dear!
How bright thy Rocks and fertile Lands appear?
The Oceans glory, and its Nymphs delight,
The Nations Terror by thy Men of Might:
Thrice happy Albion! had there never possessed
Thy spacious Kingdoms, the consuming Priest!
Who Locust-like the Nations overspread,
In every place a Priest erects his Head,
These, as the Fishes in the Water breed,
And on the Fat of all the Pastures feed.
Nor are they satisfied to have a Power
To drain the Nations and its Fat devour,
But like the Devil always bent on ill,
They plot new Mischiefs and Devices still,
Their unknown Virtues do the Crowd deceive,
What Priestly Knaves report, dull Fools believe;
Nor is a Prince (how great so'ere he be)
From their deceit and studdied Malice free,
Like Feinds ascending from the House of Smoke
They all aroud the gilded Palace flock,
And in the Ears of Monarchy they sing,
That had they not been Priests he had never been King.
Set off with Titles and a Specious name,
They quickly set the wondering World on flame;
Methinks I hear its burdened Axles break,
And of the Priests dead weight distinctly speak;
The senseless Elements together moan,
And all around the vast Creation groan.
Ye juster Deities are Friends to Men,
Assist my Muse, and guide my fainting Pen;
A generous Passion raise within my Breast*
That may affect the vilest Monster Priest,
Let my Muse lash, the strokes be bold and good,
As if my Pen were Steel, my Ink were Blood.
Close by those Banks, the Banks where Silver Theams
Still glides along with unpoluted Streams,
A Fabric stands, no Storm of Fate molests,
From its Foundation was possessed by Priests;
Here Levi lives, over grown with sin and Years,
Good God, what Lewdness lurks in hoary Hairs,
As chief of Priests imperial sway does bear,
For he alone is God's Vicegerent here;
His lesser Villians of the Church are Slaves,
For he that is chief of Priest is chief of Knaves.
'Twas this same Levi did our James enthrone,
And when h' had done as basely pulled him down:
The Levites first his Sovereign will declared,
The Levites first his Sovereign will debarred;
And thus old Levi, through mistaken fame,
Had got a Patriots and a Martyrs name;
Him the unstable Mob with praises grace't,
And thus his humor, for his Conscience past,
Morose and Peevish, insolently proud,
Levi would stoop to none but to the Crowd,
Who, e're the Rabble could his Blessings crave,
His Apostolic Benedictions gave.
Unhappy James! Prepostrous was the Fate!
That brought on thee the Clergys frown and hate,
Had thou our Civil Rights and Charters took
Not half a word the Clergy then had spoak;
But to molest the Church was to depose*
God's holy Blockheads, and set up his Foes.
Now Foreign Troops invited over the Main,
Come to disturb the Scenes of thy short Reign,
Grown mad with fear when thou had lost the Day,
And in inglorious haste did run away.
Our pious Levi, loyally came down
TO invite our future Monarch to the Town.
How beggerly's the Crown? how mean the State,
That does depend on Bishops love or hate!
Nor can Conventions now make him a King,
Till Levi does the Regal Vestments bring:
If vain's your reasoning, in vain your toil,
If Levi but keep back the anointing Oil.
'Twas not for this the Hero was brought over,
Only to settle Church as was before,
To beat his Dad, and call his Mother Whore.
Should he be crowned, Levi's Designs are crossed,
The juggle too of the Succession lost,
If James be reinthron'd we must ascribe
His Restoration unto Levi's Tribe:
And thus the Hierarchy of course bears Rule,
And the weak Monarch is the Bishop's Tool;
None but the Church should keep their Civil Rights,
And all Dissenters be but Gibeonites,
So much these Arguments with Levi swayed
That he aside his Faith and Conscience laid.
At once the Sanhedrim and God forsook,
And to his own pernicious Councils took,
Rather than have his Priests lest in the lurch,
Would damn himself only to save the Church.
Thus in a Fret he to his Cell retires,
To plot new Mischiefs and blow up new Fires.
Had this retirement been well designed,
Only to case the Plague of human kind,
Levi, thy absence then we never could mourn,
Nor been ambitious of thy loathed return;
But since thy Den's become the Lyon's Court,
Whether in Black the Beasts of Prey resort,
May thou from thence thy final Journey take*
And on some Gibbet thy just Exit make.
Nor shall thou Corah, now my hand is in,
Escape the justest censure of my Pen;
Corah, in the lewd List, must next take place,
To Man and to Religion a disgrace.
In him, when Young, the Priestly Sign appears,
Did promise Mischief in his tender Years,
No cost was wanting to provide him Tools,
To pass the learned drudgery of the Schools,
Where Youth is with the Laws Corruption fed,
Where Priests are formed and holy Cheats are bred.
Their cursed Tenants much our Corah loved,
And in the Tricks of Priesthood soon improved:
He from the Pulpit did his Doctrine breath,
And shed his Venom on the Crowd beneath:
He taught, That Kings might Govern by their Will,
And like the Gods themselves could nere do ill;
That Princes had an uncontrouled Power,
And might their Subjects, when they pleased, devour;
That God all Reason gave to Kings and Priests,
And that all men besides were only Beasts:
But when his Lion from the Throne was driven,
Disowned by all good men and juster heaven,
A King set up the Nations all approved
A King, that God and all the People loved,
Our treacherous Corah had his Faith forgot,
Ad turned his famed Obedience to a Plot;
His scruplous Conscience would not let him swear,
Whilst Father lived, Obedience to the Heir;
But in the head of a Rebellious Race,
As void of moral Virtues as of Grace.
Corah the new made Monarch did disown,
And since the other went, each Action done,
Until King William's Fate resounds from sar,
His great Success and Enterprise in War,
And Fame aloud does of his Fortunes tell,
How by his hand the Sons of Corah fell,
Now Corah is become a milder Priest,
And swears as well as any of the rest;
Priests are like* Spaniels never inclined to good,
No longer then they see* or feel the Rod.
Ah William had I but thy Scepter Royal!
By Heaven* i would beat the Dogs, till they were Loyal.
Ungrateful Corah! I Will bid the adieu!
Since God has left thee, I will leave thee too!
Nor shall my Satyr 'ere disturb thy Life,
Since thou have got a Satyr in a Wife.
Dathan must next be from Oblivion freed,
Who in the Field obtained the Bishops meed,
Was bred a Soldier, now by Trade a Priest,
Though not so wise or learned as the rest,
He seldom does to preaching make pretense,
But does excuse it by his want of sense.
Yet Dathan never like his Tribe was mad,
Nor were his Crimes so great or half so bad;
Dathan did never question his Belief,
But pinned his Faith upon his Father's Sleeve,
Sometimes was in the right, but vay'd soon,
And changed his Opinion with the Moon.
Dathan did with King William's Intrest close,
Yet like a Sot encouraged his Foes;
Who but wise Dathan would his sense prefer,
And take the part of a Petitioner?
Favor the City Mob so lately famed*
For Murderers and Evidences named;
Yet Dathan, though thy Crimes too far exceed,
I Will pardon all thy Faults for one good Deed.
But damned Abiram, must my Anger feel,
Whose lewdness is as deep, as black as Hell,
Such as a Muse, scarce as Old Nick can tell.
Abiram did late Iemmy's will control,
And made a Seventh in the famous Roll;
Abiram with 'em entered his Protest,
And grew as saucy as did all the rest:
But now his Conscience does by Levi's square,
And his lewd Thoughts with Levi's Notes Compare.
Levi, to God nor to the Kingdom true,
The Elder Brother of the Factious Crew;
He chose Abiram out of all the Tribe,
To be his Secretary and his Scribe,
Who best to Mr. Redding might present
The strength and weakness of the Government,
How stiff the Levites to his Intrest stood,
As true as Steel and firm as Oaken Wood:
But poor Abiram does the toil endure,
Whilst Levi in his Cell does sit secure:
Levi of freedom knew the worth and price,
And therefore sent the Fools to break the Ice;
Though some in forming Plots may well agree,
Yet few think good to hang for Company:
But poor Abiram! it would vex a stone,
To plot in number and to hang alone;
Yet never at thy Destiny repine,
Hanging's the fittest Death for a Divine:
For who does ever at the Gallows swing*
But 'ere he is turned off a Psalm does sing;
And though thou art a dire Example made,
Thou Wilt leave the World in thy way of Trade*
Nor must Abiathar be here forgot,
For he that will can write can make a plot:
Of any Faith he never makes doubt,
But like the Wind his Conscience veers about*
In lofty strains he Tyrant Noll did praise,
And to his Fame a lasting Statue raise;
Who in Usurpers praise employ their Pens,
Have no Affection to their Lawful Prince,
What e're pretense to Priesthood may belong,
Gold is their God and Glory guides their Tongue;
These even Beelzebub have quite outdone,
In Priest thy Athen's Plagues are crammed in one.
But now my Muse another Story tells,
Pray hear the sound of Pious Aaron's Bells,
Whose strength of Zeal suppresses that of Sense,
Where Flesh does fail Devotion does commence;
Tired with Age of Youthful Vigor free,
He is devout of mere necessity;
His great Austerity his Tribe does suit,
He sometimes rides, but oftener walks on foot;
Such pageant Zeal attends Bishoprics,
He well may walk* where follows Coach and Six*
Nor can he pray but where his Pictures stand,
To fix his Zeal and wandering Thoughts command;
Thcse Images do pious heats Confer,
And raise Devotion up the Lord knows where;
He soars so high and to the Clouds does grow,
He quite forgets all Loyalty below,
Can take no Oath nor swallow any Test,
But must be stubborn as are all the rest.
Let lasting Infamy Cursed Zadoc damn,
Who makes all Religion but a sham;
Zadoc, who boasts of Fighting, Drinking, Roaring,
And above all his mighty strength in Whoring;
Yet to debauch his Conscience is loath,
And swears by God, he cannot take the Oath:
Let Zadoc to his Sins stand firm and stiff,
'Till Triple Tree shall take the Triple F --
Next; in the List, must Eleazer come,
A Foe to England, and a Friend to Rome:
Priests in Divinity take little Pains,
And with Religion seldom crack their Brains:
This Want of Sense made Eleazer run
The first to worship the arising Sun.
When Brother Priests arrived here from Rome,
Good Eleazer did invite them Home:
He took his Coach, and mighty Stir he made
To be assistant at the Cavalcade;
But yet thy Coachman, as the Act expressed,
By most was thought the better sort of Priest,
He would not drive nor Rome's black Feinds adore,
When thou were but Postillion to the Whore,
Whilst honest Slash did for his freedom strive,
Thou, like the Devil, unto Rome did drive*
Thy Brethren banished by the present Reign,
Thou longst to view and welcome here again,
Not the lewd Levites, which arrive from Rome,
Are greater Villains than our Priests at home;
The Churches Warriors of thy py-bald band*
That Plague the Natives of this wretched Land,
That blow the Coals and warmer Blood ferment,
To cause a Fever in the Government.
I Will mention but one more and then have done,
It Is fighting Iosuah the Son of Nun,
Though he to Men of Sense is a Buffoon,
He serves to make a Spiritual Dragoon;
What though he cannot preach, or pray, or write,
He against his Country and his King can fight;
He Is strongly armed, with a double Sword,
To fight God's Battils and to preace his Word:
What Wonders in the Field were lately done,
By fighting Iosuah the Son of Nun?
He bravely Monmouth and his Force withstood,
And made the Western Land a Field of Blood;
There Iosuah did his reaking heat assuage,
On every Sign-Post Gibbet up his Rage,
Glutted with Blood like some most Christian Turk,
And scarce out done by Iefferies or K --;
Yet now the Priest is grown a Rebel too*
And what Monmothians did himself can do,
Since thou like them art equally to blame,
Their Fate was to be hanged, be thine the same.
Should I of all the lesser Villians tell,
It would a great, a bulky Vollume fill,
Fit for the Devil's Library in Hell.
Should I their lewdness and their crimes relate,
Their Lust, their Perjuries, these Envy, hate,
Their filthy Drunkenness, their height of Pride,
Their Avarice yet Luxury beside,
Their want of Goodness and their want of Sense,
And their Repentance in the future Tense,
Their new coined Tenets* which the Pulpits fill,
Would tire Pelling's Passive Lungs to tell.
Hophnie of old laid down his Rampant Whore,
And thump't her Carcass at the Temple-Door;
But who can tell what Tricks our Driests do use*
Behind the Altar, and within the Pews?
The ancient Levites (as the times then stood)
Were Men of Cruelty and Men of Blood,
The former harmless Bulls they did surprise,
And near the Altar show the Sacrifice;
Although the Butcher now does not take place,
The Cruelty's entailed upon the Race,
Our Priests are all descended from that Stem,
Nero and Aretine are Saints to them;
They often the Blood of War in Peace have spilled,
How many Prisons has their Malice filled?
How many Widows have they made a Prey?
What Goods the holy Guzmans stole away!
Well may they grieve now having lost the Power,
By which they Widows Houses did devour,
That Land's accursed, has reason to lament
Where Priests are made* a piece of Government;
They damn our Souls and lead us weary Lives,
Mislead our Daughters and debauch our Wives;
Whatever show of Zeal the Priesthood paints,
They are at best but Cucoldizing Saints,
The Pious Vermin, that molest a State,
The Scource of all Disorder and Debate:
The bane of Princes, a Tumultuous Crew,
Not satisfied with what is old or new*
For James they under went a wondrous Toll,
And greased his Head with their Anointing Oil:
But when he to the Jesuits tacked about,
They as the Devel with Prayer cast him out;
Nor are they with their new made Monarch glad,
(The Priests have still a privilege to be mad)
Though easy, gentle and averse to Blood,
His only Crime he is to his Foes too good*
Well may he have the Priests to be his Foes,
They even God Almighty would Depose.
FINIS.
ERRATUM.
Page 10. Line 1. for vay'd read v(...)'d.


