Tentamina Elegantiarum bina: OR, TWO ESSAYS OF Elegancies.

In order to the bringing of SCHOLARS, after they can Read and Write true
Grammatical Latin, to a full and clear Understanding and Writing of Terse and
Polite Latin.

Principally intended for accomplishing the more Adult YOUTHS in the
Free School at Newark upon Trent,

By John Twells, Schoolmaster.

Aliud est Grammatice, aliud Latin loqui. J. C. Scaliger. Licensed,

March 17. 1685/6. Rob. Midgley.



London, Printed by T.M. for Benjamin Crayle, at the Peacock and Bible at the
West End of St. Paul's in Ludgate Street. 1686.

DOCTISSIMO, EXPERIENTISSIMO, CLARISSIMO, REI MEDICAE Cum GALENICAE tum
CHYMICAE, VIRO, Dno. Johanni Yarborough, M. D.

Morborum fere omnium, qua Acutorum qua Chronicorum, ANIMOSO HOSTI, AGGRESSORI,
EXPUGNATORI, FELICISSIMO, Periclitantis hujusce (innumeras inter alias) Vitae,
ANNUENTE DEO, SAEPIUS RESTAURATORF, Tentamina haec Elegantiarum, Votivam quasi
Tabulam, AMORIS, HONORIS, GRATITUDINIS, ERGO, HUMILLIME, PIENTISSIME, SUSPENDIT
JOHANNES TWELLS, SCHOLAE PUBLICAE NOVARCENSIS MAGISTER.

Anno Domini M.DC.LXXX.V.
De Libelli hujus Utilitate ad Eloquentiae Studiosum Dactylicum Heroicum cum
Iambico Dimetro.
SI te vera juvat Romanae gloria Linguae,
Et ejus Elegantia;
Si cupis Eloquii flumen, gazasque Parentis
Totius Eloquentiae:
Huc tua men's adsit, modicum tua lumina lustrent
Hanc diligenter codicem,
Qui Ciceronis opes paucis brevibusque decenter
Comprendit omnes paginis.
Multa dabit multos, largo cum foenore, fructus
Illius ardens lectio.
Barbara formabit per se tibi protinus ora
Pure loquendi formulis.
Incertumque reget calamum vestigia caute
Servantis ejus jugiter.
Nec sinit ut similis sibi prorsus in omnibus exstet,
Et moveat aliis nauseam.
Pluribus ecquid opus? Quod Agro sunt Lilia, quodque
Est culta vestis corpori,
Arboribusque comae quod sunt auroque Lapilli,
Et quod cibis Aromata:
Hoc linguae scriptisque tuis omnino Libelli
Sunt hujus Elegantiae.
Quippe quod, his fastiditis, nihil amplius insit
Orationi gratiae.
The Author to the Bookseller.
Mr. Crayle,
THat I may in some measure satisfy your frequent importunities, and yet
safely and modestly consult as well your Advantage, as my own Repute, I have
thought fit, instead of the Two whole Books (which indeed are quite finished,
and ready for the Press) to send you at present for a New-years-Gift, only a
Specimen of each, viz. The two first Parts of the Examination of the Elegant
Grammar, out of Nine; and the Two and Twenty first Chapters of Scholastic
Prolusions, out of Three hundred. Let these first try their Fortunes in the
World for a Term or two, and, according to the Reception I find it gives them,
I will take my future measures, either of publishing, or for ever concealing
the Remainder.

However, Sir, believe me always to be

Your assured Friend, J. T.
Newark, January 1. 1685/6.
Plutarchus de Liberis educandis. p. 4. (...). Plutarch of the breeding of
Children. ANd yet many Fathers there are, that so love their Money, and hate
their Children, that lest it should cost them more than they are willing to
spare, to hire a good Schoolmaster for them, rather choose such persons to
instruct their Children, as are of no worth; thereby beating down the Market,
that they may purchase a cheap Ignorance. A GENERAL EXAMINATION OF THE Elegant
Grammar.
Senec. 3. Contr. Magna and varia res est Eloquentia, nec adhuc ulli sic
indulsit, ut tota contingeret. Satis felix est, qui in aliquam ejus partem
receptus est.
A. WHat is the Elegant Grammar?

B. The Elegant Grammar is the Art of speaking elegantly.

A. What mean you by speaking elegantly?

B. To speak elegantly, is to express the sense of our minds otherwise than the
rules of the native way of speaking require; and yet to be understood with more
delight, than we should be, should we follow the natural current of Speech.

To speak elegantly according to art, is to have in readiness the ways of
garnishing Speech; and to be able to give an account why a Sentence must be
changed so or so.

A. Wherein does the elegancy of a sentence consist?

B. The elegancy of a sentence consists generally in the transformation of the
same, from its native, into another aspect, the sense remaining unaltered.

A. How many ways may this transformation be performed?

B. Nine:

For the same thing may be expressed otherwise, three manners of ways
generally: the first of which is subdivided into two, the second into three,
the third into four ways.

For Example:

The same otherwise placed, by Perspicuity. 1. Transposition. 2.


The same thing may be expressed by words Other more Latin, by Idiotism. 3
simply equipollent, by Transmutat. 4 allegorically equipoll. by
Transnomination. 5.


The same, or other, yet expressed after another manner, viz. By more than the
matter requires, by Dilatation. 6 By fewer than ordinary, by Contraction. 7
With an unusual affection, by Figures. 8 Bound up, by Verse. 9


A. How many therefore are the parts of the Elegant Grammar?

B. Nine. I. Exposition, clarification, perspicuity. II. Idiotism. III.
Transposition IV. Transmutation. V. Transnomination. VI. Dilatation. VII.
Contraction. VIII. Figuration. IX. Versification.


A. Illustrate what you have said by an example; propose a sentence.

B. Magister meus docet exemplis perpetuis.

A. How many ways may this sentence be adorned?

B. These nine ways.

1. If there be any thing obscure or ambiguous, (or at least may seem such) by
explaining and limiting it by some addition, or mutation into another, not
ambiguous, word, so that nothing else can be understood, but what I design.

A. Is there any obscure or ambiguous word in the sentence you proposed?

B. Yes. Magister is an ambiguous word; for the Masters of diverse Arts and
Handy-crafts, the Masters of the Horse to Persons of Honor, and the rest, may
be styled Magistri: as, Magister Artis, Magister Tabernae, Officinae, Magister
Equitum, etc.

A. What must a Scholar do in this case?

B. In this case the Scholar must either add some other words, to restrain the
generality of the word Magister; as, Magister studiorum meorum: or change it
for another synonimous word, which is not ambiguous; as, Ludimagister, or
Praeceptor meus.

So if any one should be said cepisse labracem, the sentence will be obscure,
because there are few that understand the word, though it be extant in Pliny and
Plautus. And again, if a man be said cepisse Lupum, it will be ambiguous,
because it may be understood that he has caught either a four-footed Beast, or
a Fish, so called. Therefore, if you would have the latter understood, say,
Lupum piscem; or change it for a synonymous word signifying nothing else, and
say, Lucium cepit.

A. What do you call such an Explanation of Speech?

B. I call it Perspicuity.

A. What is Perspicuity?

B. Perspicuity is the easiness of a Sentence, as to the matter to be
understood.

A. What is the virtue of Perspicuity?

B. The Greeks call it (...), that is, so great a plainness of Speech, as that
the things seem to be set before the eyes.

A. What are the vices contrary to this virtue?

B. The vices contrary to Perspicuity, are Obscurity and Ambiguity.

A. When may a Sentence be said to be obscure?

B. When it can scarce be understood: as, that of Varro, Omnia dapatilia
comisse Jani cusiones; for, Omnia opipara comedisse Jani Curiones.

A. Whence arises this obscurity?

B. This obscurity proceeds from words unknown to the People.

A. What Sentence may be said to be ambiguous?

B. That which admits of a various interpretation: as, if a man should say,
Peto jus; he may mean either jusculum, or justitiam.

A. Whence arises this ambiguity?

B. It arises from equivocal or homonymous words.

Therefore a word that is obscure, homonymous, or too general, is, like a Rock,
to be avoided by him that has a mind to speak perspicuously.

For this reason in our familiar discourse we say not, Clepta, or Directarius,
but Fur; nor jus, but jusculum; nor rem inveni, but hoc, or illud.

Or, if such a word should thrust it self in, let another word more common,
distinct, and special, be immediately subjoyned, to enlighten and limit the
former; or let some explicatory, discretive, or determinative epithet be added:
as, Clepta, quod Latinis furem sonat. Jus seu jusculum. Rem perdidit, nempe
bona sua: Or, Clepta furax. Jus coctum. Rem possessam perdidit.

Words, that by chance light into the same termination, may sometimes be
changed into another, free from ambiguity; as, if you should say, Tu canis;
'twill be uncertain whether you call any one a Dog, or mean he sings. If the
first, you will speak more clearly by an Adjective, Tu impure Canis; or, Tu
latras ut Canis. If the latter, you had better say, Tu cantas, etc. Or they are
to be discriminated by an accent (if possible) either pronounced or marked: as,
venit in the present tense, from venit in the preterperfect tense. Moreover, he
that desires to acquire this great Ornament, must studiously avoid Amphibolie,
that is, such a placing of the words as may render the sense doubtful. Such is
that in Terence: Adeo uno animo omnes Socrus oderunt Nurus; for one would be at
a stand, scarcely discerning, whether Socrus was the Nominative Plural, and
Nurus the Accusative; or contrariwise. It is supposed the Poet so placed the
words, with a design to set out the reciprocal odium between Mothers-in-law and
Daughters-in-law; which, if so, 'twas artificially done.

A. Must then words that are obscure, homonymous, of a more general
signification, and amphibolous, be for ever interdicted a studied clarity?

B. To your fourfold question I answer distinctly, thus:

1. An obscure word appositely used, and in its right place, is commendable:
as, if there be any thing you would not have all men indifferently understand,
but some one only, that is privy to your counsels and purposes, or some few of
the more sagacious. With these did Cicero fill his Epistles to Atticus, a wise
man, and his intimate friend.

2. An homonymous word, in its proper place, cease to be such; because words
are understood according to the subject matter. For example: A Cook speaks not
ambiguously, that says, Jus piscinum; or an Astronomer, that says, Sol in
piscibus. An homonymous word set on purpose for the ambiguity of the sense, is
a pleasant elegancy. As when Tully said, that Octavius was laudandum and
tollendum, for he might be understood either tollendum esse laudibus, or
tollendum de vita.

3. Words of a very general signification are happily homonymous; for they
augment the treasure of the Language with variety of Elegancies. Such are these
Latin Nouns, Res, Vis, Locus, Natura, Substantia, Genus, Species; and the
Verbs, Sum, Habeo, Facio, Do, Gero, etc.

4. Words of a doubtful meaning fitly disposed in the same Sentence, increase
the Elegancy; as, Jura te velle servare jura. And Lingua puerorum facile discit
diversas linguas. Hence the Distick so much celebrated.

Quid facies, facies Veneris si veneris ante?
Ne sedeas, sed eas; ne pereas per eas.
A word so placed betwixt two, that it matters not to which it is referred, is
an Elegancy; as, Opus caeptum urgeas vehementer oro. For here it is a question
whether I mean the work is to be mightily hastened, or that I mightily desire
it: And yet, which way so ever you take it, it will not be amiss; and more full
if you understand it both ways. But if yet you have a mind to speak it very
perspicuously, you may do it by a Comma, or a Repetition, thus: Ut opus urgeas
vehementer, oro. Ut opus urgeas, vehementer oro. Ut opus vehementer urgeas,
vehementer oro.


A. Proceed to the second part.

B. Secondly, by putting, instead of the usual speech, and common language,
Idiotical, and proper only to the Latin tongue; as if, instead of Magister
studiorum meorum, one should say more latinely, Meus a studiis.

A. What do you call this Ornament?

B. This second part is called Idiotism, and in specie Latinism, Graecism,
Hebraism, etc. when this Language, or that, has an elegancy unknown to others.

A. What is Idiotism?

B. Idiotism is an emphatical custom of speaking, proper and peculiar to some
one tongue: Or thus,

Idiotism, or Idiom, is a propriety, phrase, or form of speaking, peculiar to
its own tongue, which cannot be rendered word for word into any other language,
but with much barbarity and baldness of expression.

A. How many fold is Idiotism?

B. Idiotism is two fold, or there are two sorts of Idiotism, i. e. Lexical and
Grammatical: Of the first in Latin this may be an example, Potiri rerum, to
reign; of the latter this, Potiente rerum Augusto, when Augustus reigned.

A. What mean you by Lexical Idiotisms?

B. By Lexical Idiotisms, I mean such as cannot be translated out of Latin
into English, Greek, etc. word for word, or iisdem verbis; as, Audire been,
Dare verba, etc.

A. What mean you by Grammatical Idiotisms?

B: By Grammatical, I mean such as cannot be translated by the same Case,
Person, Tense, etc. as, Sole orto, etc.

Of Lexical Idiotisms see a plentiful Harvest in Mr. Walker's Idiomatical
Dictionary; of Grammatical here.

A. How many are the general subjects of Grammatical Idiotisms?

B. The general subjects of Grammatical Idiotisms are two.

A. Which are they?

B. 1. Single words. 2. Phrases.

A. In what heads of single words are Grammatical Idiotisms found?

B. 1. In Substantives. 2. In Adjectives. 3. In Pronouns. 4. In Verbs. 5. In
Participles. 6. In Adverbs.

A. How many Rules do you observe in delivering the Idiotisms of Substantives?

B. Four.

A. Which is the first Rule?

B. It is an Elegancy, instead of the Substantive or Abstract, to use the
Adjective or concrete, in the neuter Gender, either singular or plural; as,
Verum, falsum, bonum, multum, etc. (or vera, falsa, etc.) for veritas,
falsitas, bonitas, multitudo, etc.

A. Which is the second?

B. To circumscribe the names of Offices by a Noun which denotes the Subject or
Object, with ab or ad, is the peculiar of the Latins:

For the say, For Secretarius, a secretis. Scriba, a manu, or ad manum.
Consiliarius, a consiliis, or ad consilia.


This form of speaking requires a Dative case of the person to whom this duty
or service is performed: as, Est mihi a manu; Domino suo a pedibus, etc. unless
you speak by a Personal Adjective, as Cicero did, when he said, Servus meus a
pedibus.

A. Which is the third?

B. Any Noun assuming Res, and being turned into the Genitive case, or into an
Adjective, makes an elegant Idiotism: For Plautus says, Res voluptatum, for
voluptas; res cibi, for cibus: and Cicero, Res bellica, militaris, nummaria,
etc. for bellum, militia, nummus or pecunia, etc. So also Vis: as, Vis flammae,
or flammea, for flamma; magna canum vis, for multi canes, etc.

A. Which is the fourth?

B. The Latins do elegantly compare Nouns Substantive by the Adverb magis: as
Plautus, Hominem magis asinum nunquam vidi.

In imitation of which, why may not one say, Magis Homo, Rex, Doctor, Miles,
etc. magis vinum, etc? that is verius, more truly; or melius, better. But that
jocular comparison of Nouns, which the same Author used, O patrue mi
patruissime! and, Nullus me est hodie punus punior, we ought not to imitate,
except, as he did it, for sport.

A. How many Rules are to be observed for the Idiotisms of Adjectives?

B. Four.

A. Which is the first?

B. A local Adjective is changed into its Substantive with the Preposition De,
or A: as, Aper Sylvestris, or de Sylva; Homo aulicus, de aula; Scholasticus, de
schola, etc. So Cicero's Poeta de papulo, that is; popularis; Ovid's Ales ab
Indis, for Indica.

Observation. Nay the Preposition is sometimes understood, especially in Poets;
as Sallust, Taeda pice and sulphur, for e pice and sulphur, or pieca and
sulphurea. Aere Clypeus Virg. Syracusis soleae, for e Syracusis, Syracusanae,
etc. Therefore we speak most latinely, Vinum Creta, Hispania, Hungaria, etc.
for e Creta or Cretense, etc.

A. Which is the secund Rule?

B. A Local or temporal Adjective is changed for on Adverb: as Plaut. Tu intus
pateram proferto for as, for pateram intraneam, or quae est intus. Virg. Apparet
domus intus, i. e. interior. Ter. Hinc civis, i. e. hujus loci. Idem. Interea
tempus, for interjectum tempus, etc. Plaut. Nunc copia, for praesens copia.

A. Is this elegancy common?

B. No. Very rare, yet worth knowing.

A. Which is the third Rule?

B. Adjectives of quality are changed into their abstract Nouns with the Verb
sapit, olet, or the like; for we say, instead of novus, novitaters sapit;
barbarus, barbariem olet, redolet; rusticus, rus refert, etc.

A. Which is the fourth Rule?

B. Partitive Adjectives are elegantly changed into the Noun Genus, or else
join themselves to it: as, Quidam homines, quoddam genus hominum. Omnes
homines, omne genus hominum. Nulli homines, nullum genus hominum. Quod genus
hominum, i. e. quales. Id genus hominum, i. e. tales homines, etc.

A. How many Rules are there for the Idiotisms of Pronouns?

B. Six.

A. Which is the first?

B. In lieu of the Interrogative quis, the Latins use quid with a Genitive
case, elegantly: as, Quid homo, or quid hominis? Quae res, of quid rei? The
same happens in the Redditive: as, id hominis, id rei, etc. for is homo, ea
res, etc.

A. Which is the second?

B. When any one speaks of his own affairs, he uses hoc; when of his, whom he
speaks to, istud; when of the affairs of some third man, and one who is absent,
illud: as, Per caput hoc juro, says the Deity in Virgil, pointing to its own.

Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic or a gerebat. Id.

A. Which is the third?

B. Ille and ipse demonstrate some person or thing with honor, iste with
content for the most part.

A. Which is the fourth?

B. When two things are to be expressed by Pronouns, hic is spoken of the
nearer, ille of the more remote: But when three, hic signifies the nearest,
iste the more remote, ille the farthest off. And yet Valerius Maximus, though a
superstitious observer of this elegancy, once neglected it: as, Brutus, inquit,
par gloria Romulo: quia ille urbem, hic libertatem Romanam condidit.

A. Which is the fifth?

B. Idem qui, and idem ac, and idem illi, are said most Latinely: but idem cum
illo wants the authority of the middle-age: as,

Hesperus eadem stella Quae Phosophorus. Ac Phosphorus. Cum Phosphoro.
Phosphoro in the Dative is Poetical.


A. Which is the fixth?

B. These Pronoun Primitives, Ego, tu, sui, do emphatically double their
Accusatives; as, meme, for me; tete, for te; sese, for se.

A. How many Rules are to be observed for the Idiotisms of Verbs?

B. Seven.

A. Which is the first?

B. The Latins very elegantly use some active Verbs, instead of passives: as,
Terra movet, for movetur. Cic. Venti posuere, for posuerunt se. And Tempestas
sedavit, for sedata est. Virg. Cum mare turbat, Varro. Mores Populi Romani
mutarunt, for mutati sunt. Live. Praecipitat nox. Virg. Olim volventibus annis,
Idem. Non qui volvunt, sed qui volvuntur. Decollat spes, i. e. decollatur.
Vehens curru; not the Charioteer, but the Passenger, etc.

N. B. In all these the Pronoun se seems to be ellipted. See the 1 Sylvula
Verborum in the Oxford Grammar.

A. Which is the second?

B. On the contrary, they use some absolute Verbs actively: as, Spirare odorem;
olere hircum; sapere rem suam. Plaut. Celerare iter; penetrare se aliquo; ruere
se, etc. See more of this sort in the second Sylvula Verborum.

A. Which is the third?

B. The Latins elegantly signify passion by Deponent Verbs, i. e. such as
indeed were once Commons, but even in Tully's age had either altogether, or
almost, laid down their passive signification: as, Adipiscor, auxilior,
complector, meditor, polliceor, testor, etc. For, says Flautus, Non aetate, sed
ingenio, adipiscitur sapientia. Lucil. Auxiliatus est a me. Cic. Uno maleficio
scelera omnia complexa esse videntur. Ter. Meditata mihi sunt omnia. Metellus,
Aliis statuae pollicebantur. Cic. Publicis literis testata sunt omnia, etc. See
the fourth Sylvula Verborum. But these are as it were Laxical; let us come to
Grammatical.

A. Which is the fourth?

B. Any one speaking of himself in Latin, may elegantly speak in the plural
number; as, Cic. Nos valemus, i. e ego valeo.

OBS. Modern Languages do the same in the second person, by way of complement:
but for that reason to speak so in Latin, ineptire est, says Comenius

B. Which is the fifth?

B. The Imperative Mood by the help of the Indicative of the same Verb, Si
coming between, commands more urgently; as, Plautus, Bibe, si bibis. In
imitation whereof you may rightly say, fac, si facis; scribe, si scribis;
perge, si pergis; by the figure Antanaclasis.

A. Which is the sixth?

B. Perfect time, whether past or to come, is very Latinely expressed by a
Participle of the preter or future tense, with the Verbs do, reddo, volo, curo,
rogo: as, Dabo tibi hoc effectum, for efficiam; curabo efficiendum; volo te
rogatum, etc.

A. Which is the seventh Rule?

B. An action perfectly past is elegantly expressed by a Neuter Participle of
that tense, with the Verb habeo: And therefore a man may say instead of feci,
habeo factum, scripsi, habeo scriptum; Solvi, habeo solutum. One would take it
for a mere Anglicism, Germanism, or Italism; but it flows from the nature of
things. And this construction is meat with the English and Germans, and sauce
with the Latins.

A. How many Rules do you give for the Idiotism of Participles?

B. One only.

A. What is it?

B. A Participle of the present tense, coming with a Verb of the preter tense,
or future, takes to it self the signification of that tense: as, that of
Martial, Vilior haec nobis alio mittente fuisset, i. e. si alius misisset.
Caesar. 1. Civil. Quos ab urbe discedens Pompeius erat adhortatus, i. e. quum
discessit. Plaut. Menaechmei A. 2. sc. 3. Herus emit me dicto audientem, non
imperantem sibi, i. e. qui futurus essem dicto audiens. See Franciscus
Sanctius, lib. 1. cap. 4. Vossius de Analogia page 233.

A. How many Rules do you give for the Idiotisms of Adverbs?

B. Four.

A. Which is the first?

B. Adverbs of place, time, and plenty, have elegantly a Genitive case after
them: as, Ubi locorum? Ubique terrarum, nusquam Gentium, interea loci, Nunc
temporis, olim seculorum, etc. Satis verborum, Ter. Abunde fraudis, Virg.
Largiter mercedis indipiscar, Plaut.

A. Which is the second?

B. By a Grecism also Adverbs of plenty admit of an Accusative case: as, Cic.
Satis tempus habet. Si satis consilium haberem. Ovid. fortunam habuit satis.
Apul. Vinum affatim habemus, etc.

A. Which is the third?

B. To change an Adverb into an Adjective of the Neuter Gender, either singular
or plural, is a pleasant hellenism: as, in the singular, Turbidum laetari, Hor.
Sursum ferri. Lucr. magnum clamare, Plaut. indoctum canere, Hor. In the plural,
Multa gemens; insueta rudentem; terram crebra ferit, for crebro, Virg.

A Which is the fourth?

B. It Is no less pleasant to leave that Adjective in the Gender of the person,
whether masculine or feminine: as, Virg. Nec minus Aeneas se matutinus agebat,
for mane. Idem. Gregibus nocturnus obambulat. Hor. Serus in coelum redeas.
Idem. Delicta majorum. Immeritus lues. Impar congressus Achilli, Virg. 1 Aen.
v. 479. for impariter.

A. In how many Rules do you lay down the Doctrine of Idiotical Phrases?

B. In Fifteen.

A. Which is the first?

B. A proper name being put by Apposition (as the modern Grammarians, or
Epexegesis, as the ancient call it) to a common name, may be turned into the
Genitive case, or changed into an Adjective: as, we say grammatically, Urbs
Romae, arbor ficus, etc. but more latinely, Urbs Romae, or Romana. Arbor fici,
Cic. or ficulnea, Appuleius. So Livie, Arboris abietis. For (says J. C.
Scaliger) it is one thing to speak Grammatically, another to speak Latinely.

A. Which is the second Rule?

B. It is a Grecism, when Nouns betokening diverse things are put in the same
case, as if they belonged to the same thing: as, we say grammatically, Terra
Galliae, Regio Thessaliae, etc. but more latinely, Terra Gallia, Regio
Thessalia, etc. Thus Livie and Appuleius use to speak.

A. Which is the third Rule?

B. A Noun Substantive is most latinely changed into an Adjective, and put into
the Neuter Gender: as, we say grammatically, Generosa honestas; mordax veritas;
quanta inanitas; major serenitas, etc. And yet Persius said more latinely,
Generosum honestum; mordaci radere vero auriculas. Quantum est in rebus inane!
And Statius also, Majus serenum, etc.

By the same Rule.

It is a Grecism, but most grateful, to Latine-ears, for the Adjective to be
changed into the Neuter Gender, and the Substantive to be put in the Genitive
case: as, we say grammatically, Secretus locus. Lubrica juventus: Ultima
seditio. Ardui montes. Serenum coelum. Vanus rumor; or inanis fama, etc. But
Tacitus and others have said more latinely, Secretum loci. Lubricum juventae.
Ultimum seditionis. Ardua montium. Serena coeli. Vana rumoris; inania famae,
etc.

It is also a Grecism to change the Adjective into an Adverb, and the
Substantive into the Genitive case: as, when Plautus, for larga merces, said
largiter mercedis. But it is an Hebraism to change the Adjective into the
Genitive case of the abstract Substantive: as when for vir iracundus, is said
vir irae. Jac. 1.20. for spiritus lenis, is said, spiritus lenitatis. Gal. 6.1.
And for Mammona iniquus Mammona iuiquitatis. Luc. 16.9. And so often in
Scripture.

A. Which is the fourth Rule?

B. An Adjective of fitness is elegantly omitted, and instead of the Dative
case, is used a Gerund in do: as we say grammatically, Esne par oneri ferendo?
Non sum sufficiens debito solvendo. Semen idoneum sationi. Charta apta
scriptioni, etc. Latinely, Esne ferendo? Non sum solvendo. Semen exoletum non
est ferendo, Plin. Charta emporeutica non est scribendo, etc.

A. Which is the fifth Rule?

B. It is a Grecism to put the part affected after Verbs, Participles, and
Adjectives in the Accusative case: as we say grammatically, Clarus genere.
Hirsutus pedibus. Similis voce, color, crinibus, etc. Tacitus more latinely,
Clari genus. Virg. Hirsutus crura. Mercurio similis vocemque coloremque and
flavos crines, etc. In the Accusatives, quod ad, quantum attinet are ellipted.

According to the same Rule.

Adjectives of plenty, knowledge, care, study, and their contraries, require in
a Latin construction an Ablative, in a Greek a Genitive case: as one may say
grammatically, Cantharus plenus aqua, vacuus vino; vir praestans animo,
invictus labor, eruditus artibus, plenus vitiis, etc. But more latinely,
Plenus aquae, vacuus vini. Arabes frugum pauperes, odorum divites, Apul.
Sociorum inops, Tac. Rudis artium. Peritus rerum, ignarus omnium. Praestans
animi. Invictuslaboris. Integer vitae scelerisque purus. Hor. Yet in all these
Genitives there is a defect of some Ablative, which governs them. As, Arabes
pauperes [proventu] frugum. Inops [a comitatu] sociorum. Rudis [cognitione]
artium. Purus [a crimine] sceleris, etc.

By the same.

Adjectives of power, in imitation of the Greeks, change an Ablative case for
an Infinitive Mood. A man may say grammatically, Dignus amore. Difficilis
fiexu. Largus donis. Audax subeundis passionibus. Bonus inflandis calamis, and
dicendis versibus etc. And yet more sweetly by an Infinitive Mood, Dignus
amari. Difficilis flecti. Largus donare, Horat. Audaxomnia perpeti, Idem. Boni
convenimus ambo, tu calamos inflare, ego dicere versus, Virg.

A. Which is the sixth Rule?

B. To express the Accusative case of the Pronoun me, te, se, before an
Infinitive Mood, after a Verb of a Finite Mood, signifying desire, is an
insolent, rare, and yet pleasant Latinism. Grammatically, Facere studeo.
Faciam, ut tu cupias facere sumtum. Quisque studet praestare caeteris. Plautus
more latinely, Ego me id facere studeo. Faciam, tu ut te cupias facere sumtum.
Omnes homines, qui sese student praestare caeteris, Sallust.

A. Which is the seventh Rule?

B. To Verbs of disagreeing, keeping off, contending with, and some signifying
motion is joined a Dative case, in imitation of the Greeks. Grammatically,
Dissidere ab aliquo. Differ ab alio. Arcere lupos a grege. Comitari aliquem,
etc. Latinely, Discordat parcus avaro, Hor. Differt sermoni sermo, Idem. Virg.
Solus tibicertet Amyntas. Idem, Arcebis gravido pecori. Idem, Solstitium pecori
defendite. Plaut. Voluptati comes maerer sequitur, etc:

A. Which is the eighth Rule?

B. The Latins have a custom of putting many Verbs Actives Absolute, that is
of concealing their Accusative cases. As you may say grammatically, Abstinere
se a placitis. Degere alicubi vitam. Solvere navim e portu. Fallere
hostem-Occupare animum, etc. Latinely, Abstinere placitis. Degere alicubi, for
habitare. Solvere e portu, for egredi. Non fefellerunt insidiae, Live. Opinio
falsa occupavit, for obtinuit, Agellius.

A. Which is the ninth Rule?

B. There are four ranks of Verbs, that instead of an Ablative case, elegantly
assume a Genitive; but by an ellipsis of some Ablative, viz. 1. Verbs of being
thoughtful, doubtful, and pensive. 2. Verbs of plenty or scarceness. 3. Verbs
of prising, and buying. 4. Verbs of accusing, condemning, or assoiling.

1. We say grammatically, pendere animo, and excruciari animo. Defipere mente.
Falli spe, etc. But Latinists had rather say, Pendere animi [supple,
cogitatione.] Excruciarianimi [sc. sollicitudine.] Desipere mentis [sc.
errore.] Falli spei [sc. opinione or expectatione, or some such Ablative.]

2. Grammatically, Abundare divitiis, egere consilio, implere vino, carere
pecunia, etc. More latinely, Quarum abundemus rerum, and quarum indigeamus,
Lucilius [sc. copia] Cic. egere consilii [sc. open, rc.] Virg. Implere vini [sc.
liquore.] Ter. carendem erat tui [sc. praesentia.]

3. Grammatically, Aestimare magno, Cic. Vendere plurimo, Idem. Valere minimo,
Ulpian. Data magno aestimas, accepta parvo, Sen. Yet the self-same good Authors
have spoken more latinely by a Genitive. Aestimare magni, vel parvi. Flocci
facere. Nihili pendere. Nauci habere, etc. Quanti vendidisti? Tanti, pluris,
minoris, etc. To complete the sense thus supply the ellipsis, Aestimare [rem]
magni [pretii;] or thus, [pro] magni [aeris pretio.] Facere [rem] flecci; or
[pro re] flocci. Quanti [aeris pretio] hoc emisti, aut vendidisti?

4. Cicero said grammatically, Accusare [aliquem] de veneficio; and again in
another place elliptically, Condemnare crimine [supple De.] But again elsewhere
more latinely by a Genitive, Postulare flagitii; Absolvere criminis, condemnare
capitis; tenere furti, etc.

That you may the better apprehend these elegancies, note that accusare de
veneficio is entire, but that the Genitive after these Verbs depends on some of
these Ablatives, either expressed, or suppressed, sc. Crimine, scelere,
peccato, action, causa, paena. So that a man may be said accusari, and
afterward condemnari, or absolvi de crimine veneficii, [which is complete.] But
for brevity and elegancy (the general causes of ellipsis's in all Languages)
[De] was first omitted. So Martial, Arguitur lentae crimine pigritiae. At
length the Ablative it self became concealed, and the Genitive only was
expressed: as, Arguere pigritiae. Accusare veneficii. Damnare sceleris, etc.

A. Which is the tenth Rule?

B. That which a Latin Grammarian speaks by Gerunds and Supines: Ibo visum, or
ad visendum. Misit quaesitum, etc. an imitator of Grecism expresses by an
Infinitive Mood: as, Ter. It visere ad eam. Plaut. Parasitum misi petere
argentum. Hor. Persequar frangere. Virg. Non venimus populare penates, etc.

A. Which is the eleventh Rule?

B. The common Grammar says, Cum hoc and hoc fieret, or sub, ab hoc; inter
haec; postquam, etc. Which are most latinely expressed by two Ablatives, the one
a Noun, the other a Particiciple, which the Latin Grammarians commonly call
Ablativus consequentiae, and the English the Ablative case Absolute: as,
Pompeio pugnante, that is, cum pugnaret, in ipsa pugna. Pompeio victo; postquam
esset victus: Or thus, [sub] Pompeio pugnante. [a] Pompeio victo.

Obs. 1. You may also find two Nouns so put, by an ellipsis of the Participle:
as, Cicerone Consule, sc. Res gerente. Me puero, sc. Existente. Navigare vento
secundo, sc. aspirante; vento adverso, sc. obsistente. Vento nullo, sc.
afflante, etc.

Obs. 2. Again you may find a Participle of the Preter tense used alone so, as
it may betoken a consequence; yet the Ablative case of some other Substantive
is tacitly employed: as, Caesar, audito, sc. rumore. Nondum comperto, sc.
Nuntio, etc.

A. Which is the twelfth Rule?

B. Instead of a Participle you may use a Verbal Substantive most latinely: as,
Agellius says, Homo fabulator. Virgil, Populum late regem, i. e. regnantem.

A. Which is the thirteenth Rule?

B. A Grammarian to the Verb joins its Adverb, but a Latinist had rather have
an Adjective in the Neuter Gender, nay sometimes in the Masculine or Feminine,
either singular or Plural. See the third and fourth Rules for the Idiotisms of
Adverbs.

By a Hebraism also, not grating to Latine-ears, a Gerund noting the certainty
of the action may be joined to a Verb: as, Videndo videre, etc.

A. Which is the fourteenth Rule?

B. The Latins have a strong inclination to the ellipsis of Prepositions,
especially in Nouns, 1 of Time, 2 of Place, 3 of Measure, 4 of the Cause.

1. Of Time. Anno hoc, (i.e. in anno hoc.) Mense Maio [in.] Die quinta [in.]
Colloquebamur tres horas, [i. e. per] or tribus horis, [in.]

2. Of place. Unde venis? Ex Italia, Venetiis, Mediolano, Roma. [i.e. ex
Venetiis, e Mediolano, etc.

Quo ibis? In Italiam, Venetias, Mediolanum, Romam, [i.e. in Venetias, etc.]

Ubi est ille? In Italia. Venetiis, [i. e. in] Mediolani. Roma.

Here the Candidate of Eloquence must observe three things.

1. That Names of Cities and Towns are very commonly used elliptically: the
Names of whole Countries and Islands very seldom: as, Navigare Cyprum, for in
Cyprum, said Livie. And Ter. Proficisci Aegyptum, [i. e. in Aegyptum.]

2. That the Names of Cities of the first and second Declension, and the
singular number, are put in the Genitive case instead of the Ablative, by a
double ellipsis. So, Ubi? Romae [in urbe Remae.] Mediolani [sc. in urbe
Mediolani.]

3. That this ellipsis is imitated by five Noun-Substantives common, viz.
Domus, humus, rus, bellum, militia: and yet not in every thing; for we say
only, Ubiest? Domi, humi, rure, or ruri, belli, militiae.
Unde redis? Domo, rure. Toll humo.
Quo ibis? Domum, rus.


3. Of Measure. The Preposition is understood in Nouns of Measure: as, Capua
distat Roma Iter tridui [per iter tridui.] Itinere tridui [ab itinere tridui.


4. Of the Cause, Whence, or why, any thing is, or is said, may also be put
elliptically in the Ablative case: as, Est puer aetate, [i. e. ab aetate.]
Sapientia senex, [i. e. a.] Est matter nomine [a nomine.] Noverca re, etc.

The same Latins put two Prepositions together, one of their casual words
being understood. Cicero often, In ante Calendas [in Diem ante Call.] Ex ante
diem nonarum [ex termino, qui fuit ante -- ] Live. Ex templo e circa Praetorem
missi ad civitates nuntii [ex hominibus, qui erant circa Praetorem.] So Seneca
in de ira [in libro de ira,] etc.

A. Which is the fifteenth Rule?

B. It is a delicacy amongst the Latins to join together two Conjunctions, or
Adverbs of the same signification: as, 1. Copulatives, Que and; Etiam and;
Etiam quoque Quoque etiam: for says Cicero, Apertaque and clara voce dicere.
Macrobius, Existimo nonnihil ad consuetudinem veterum, etiam and Praetoris,
accedere. Plaut. Et hoc quoque etiam. Lucret. Est etiam queque ubi proprio cum
lumine possit, etc. 2. Concessives, Etsi quamvis non fueris suasor, approbator
certe fuisti, Cic. Quanquam etsi magnum me dixisset, Apul. 3. Ordinatives, Post
deinde, Ter. Deinceps inde, Live. Deinde postea, Ulp. Tandem denique Apul. 4.
Illatives, Ergo igitur, Apul. Itaque ergo; Ter.

A. Are Idioms always confined to some one language only?

B. Idioms, strictly so called, are so peculiar to one Language, that others
cannot imitate them, whether they lie in single words: as the Greek (...),
which the Romans themselves are fain to circumlocute thus, Vis rerum viva,
motuum principium; and the Latin, Parentare, i. e. Personis funeratis aut
funerandis, ceremoniarum apparatu, honorem (veluti Parentibus) exhibere: Or in
Sentences: as, Post homines natos, Since the creation of man, which no modern
Language can translate ad verbum, no nor the Greek neither. These are termed
Idiotismi stricti.

Others are not so the monopoly of any one tongue, but that they may be common
to two or more Languages. Such are all pure Latin words used by Classic
Authors, and many Sentences: as that of Plautus, Nescio quid habeo in mundo;
Anglice, I know not what in the world I have. So habeo scriptum, solutum, may
idiomatically be translated verbum de verbo into the English, German, and
Italian Tongues. Quantum est in rebus inane? for quanta est in rebus inanitas?
is common to Latin and Greek: So inania famae, lubricum juventae, for inanis
fama, lubrica juventus, etc.

Vir irae, spiritus lenitatis, mammona iniquitatis, are common Idioms to the
Hebrew, Latin, and English Languages. These therefore are styled Idiotismi
laxi.

A. Wherein lies the Virtue of Idiotism?

B. The Virtue of this Ornament lies in the Emphasis that is in the validity of
the signification, which other tongues cannot attain to even with a
Periphrasis; such are many expressions of the Greeks, Latins, English, etc.
inimitable in equal nervositie by other Languages.

A. How many Vices are contrary to this Virtue?

B. The Vices which stand in opposition to this Virtue are Three, sc.
Barbarism, Solecism, Xenism, or Peregrinity.

A. What it Barbarism?

B. Barbarism is defined by Diogenes in his seventh Book thus, O (...) [ vel
(...). By Suidas thus, (...). In English thus, Barbarism is a word used
contrary to the custom of approved Authors. Again, Comenius defines it thus,
Barbarism is, when in a Latin Sentence a word is made use of, which either is
not Latin, as avisare for certiorem facere, or praemonere, or not conformable,
in some circumstance or other to the practice of pure writers, as filie for
fili.

Sciopius thus, Barbarism is a sin against the Rules of Orthoepia, Prosodia,
Etymologia: such Rules, I mean, as are built upon the Writers of Tully's Age.

1. Against Orthoepia: as, Mecaenas for Maecenas, Expecto for exspecto, doc-tus
for do-ctus, etc.

2. Prosodia: as, Competitor for Competitor, Oporinus for Oporinus.

3. Analogia: as, Gratitudo and ingratitudo for animus gratus and ingratus, or
gratum and ingratum, certitudo and incertitudo for certum and incertum,
adversitas for res adversae, turbidae, gravis fortuna, etc.

A. What is the true signification of the Adjective barbarus, a, um?

B. Barbarus is synonymous to extraneus, peregrinus, one of another Country,
from (...) extra, for as.

A. What is Solecism?

B. Suidas defines Solecism thus, (...). Vox incongrue constructa, the Latins
call it Stribligo.

Sciopius thus, It is (says he) a sin against the Rules and Figures of
Construction.

Comenius thus, It is a Solecism when Latin words are joined together
unlatinely, that is, after a manner unusual to the Latins: as if one should
say, Facere damnum for dare, or dare jacturam for facere. Milites viligant in
monte for milites speculantur de monte, in these the words are Latin, but
coupled unlatinely. So if one should say, Magna fur, or misera homo, it would
be Solecism, no less than pugio mea, profectus Londini, penes Romany, or
suchlike.

A. What is Xenism or Pereginity?

B. Peregrinity or Xenism is when we in Latin, or Greek, etc. unelegantly
imitate an Idiotism, elegant in another Language.

Sciopius defines it thus, Peregrinitas est verborum Latinorum usus ad idiomata
aliarum linguarum consuetudinem conformatus: as, Non me latet is an unelegant
imitation of the Greeks (...). So superior illius is a Peregrinity in imitation
of the Greeks, who use a Genitive case after a Comparative degree, by an
ellipsis of (...), which really governs the case, instead of illo, which is
governed of prae understood.

So the verbal translations of our English Idioms into Latin is mostly Xenism:
as, Let us take our heels and run away: Capiamus nostros calces and fugiamus:
for which Terence says elegantly, Nos in pedes conjiciamus, etc. Caesar, Nos
fugae mandemus.

He does the clean contrary: Politum oppositum facit, for which Tully says, Ab
illo contra fit.

I stand in great need of Learning: Sto in magno opere doctrinae: for which
Cicero said, Doctrinam magnopere desidero, and suchlike.

A. Methinks no man should ever happen upon such uncouth expressione, but
having consulted his Grammar and Dictionary, should without any more to de, say
with Terence, Nos in pedes conjiciamus, or with Caesar, etc.

B. You think so, because you have already gone through Terence and Plautus,
Caesar and Cicero, and by long use and custom have bin so inured to this and no
other Phrases upon this subject, that all other seem uncouth to you: but to
convince you that it is far otherwise than you imagine, do but consult the
Vulgars translated last night by one of the lower Forms, or rather those your
self translated three or four years ago. And again, Tell me this, seeing every
thing may be expressed so many several ways (I have heard our Master say at
least an hundred) in a queint and elegant style, and seeing some few of the
ways are only proper in a plain and familiar style, which we are now speaking
of, because they only are idiotical, and in use: do you think that all Nations
have made choice of the same forms and expressions to be in common use, and
agreed together which should be rejected?

A. It were impessible that they should: for how should we that speal English
know what Phrases they have made use of to be in common use in France, Italy,
or Spain; or what are the common Phrases in German, Turkish, or Persian
Languages? And as impossible it would be for them to know what ours are:

B. So that you must now confess, that if One of any of these Nations should
come to learn our Language, or One of our Country to learn theirs, and know the
significations of all words in their respective Tongues, yet he might fall upon
as uncouth Phrases as those I propounded.

A. I am now convinced that he may: for how shall we Englishment know that
these are in use more than any other in their Languages, having one perhaps
clear differing from theirs in our own Mother Tongue; and probably Theirs will
seem as strange to Us, as Ours do to Them.

B. No question but it will; but this, which you rightly apprehend, will be
more clear by an instance or two. Suppose Latin was now spoke in Italy, as
once it was; here comes one of that Country into England, and English is the
Language, he has a desire upon occasion to speak the same in effect with this
piece of his Mother Tongue, Rogo te, amice, mihi Virgilium tuum ad horam unam
aut alteram utendum des, and cum tibi reddam integrum: How do you think he
would express himself?

A. I fancy that he (not knowing the Idiom of our Language, and observing the
manner of speech in use in his own tongue) would be apt to say thus: I entreat
thee, my Friend, that thou may give to me, to be used, thy Virgil, to one
hour or another, and I shall render him to you entire. Nor indeed can I well
conceive how he should speak any otherwise, being ignorant of our usual manner
of speech, in this particular; but surely we should count it very strange
English.

B. If a French man should come, he would have some other kind, which yet would
differ as much from our English, and seem as strange, the same you may
understand of an Italian, of a Spaniard of a Dutchman, or any other whatever.
All would be different, and all uncouth:

A. How would a Frenchman speak in this case?

B. My master, I pray you of lending me your Virgil for an hour or two, etc.

A. How a Dutchman?

B. Do me though (i. e. amabo) your Virgil an hour, two, three, and I will give
you it back again unhurt.

A. How an Englishman that can speak pure, i. e. proper, good English?

B. Sir, I would desire you to lend me your Virgil for an hour or two, and I
will send it safe back.

This is Idiotical; the other Peregrinity.

A. How would a Latinist ( for want of skill in the propriety of the English
tongue) at the first meeting salute you?

B. Be safe, Friend.

A. Why do you suppose he would choose that form of expressing himself?

B. Because it is an Idiom in Latin, Salve amice.

A. How would a Frenchman speak upon the same occasion, and for the same reason?

B. Good day, my Master, how do you bear your self?

A. An Italian how?

B. How stands your Lordship? or, how stand you?

A. How a Dutchman?

B. Good day, my Master, how goes it with your health?

A. What should they say, if they would speak proper English?

How do you do, Sir? I am glad to see you well: for the other are Xenisms in
imitation of their own familiar expressions; but this is our Idiom.

A. Are these three all the vices opposite to the virtue of Idiotism?

B. To these you may add one more, though some comprise it under Xenism.

A. What is that?

B. It is called Archaism.

A. What is Archaim?

B. Scioppius answers for me thus, Archaismus est usus verborum, quae
intelligebantur quidem Ciceronis aetate, sed tamen in usu esse desierunt.
Archaism is the use of words, which truly were understood in the Age wherein
Tully lived, but yet had ceased to be in use: as, Senati for Senatus, Plebes
for Plebs, Satias for Satietas, Secus virile for Sexus virilis, Locus hostibus
ignarus for ignotus, Bellum Punicum posterior for posterius. Such are Naevius's
words, who begins his first Punick War thus, Queiterrai Latiai (vel Latiei)
hemones tuserint. Viresque frudesque Poinicas fabor; for Qui terrae Latiae
homines tuderint (vel fregerint) vires fraudesque Punicas fabor.

FINIS.
Scholastic Prolusions TO THE ART OF ORATORY.

J.A. Comenius de finibus Latinae Scholae. PVram requirimus Latinitatem, ad
inescandum obleetandumque Ingenia: Quia impurae, qualis sordida illa vulgaris,
variss variarum Gentium Barbarismis and Solaecismis inquinata Latinitas,
gratiae inessenihil petest: nausea potius and fastidium, etiam ad elegantes
Authors, perinelegantem illam viam translatis. Vt ergo Latina quaevis Schola
purum putum referat Latium, danda est omnino opera. Idem de Eleganti Elegantiae
studio: OMnium hominum nemo est, qui pulchro aliquo Terrae tractu, amoeno
camporum and montium conspectu, pulchrisque hortis and vineis, and speciosis
animalium formis, and concinnis aedificiorum structuris, and decora vest, and
been conditis cibis, and suaviter modulante Musica, etc. non capiatur. Et cur
ergo non magis illis, per quae Homines magis sumus, afficiamur and oblectemur,
Cogitationum and Linguae Elegantiis? Ah quam pulchrum est sapere! mente
sciticet ad quidvis pulchrum pulchre excogitandum pollere. Quam pulchrum lingua
esse politum! ad quidvis pulchrum pulchre eloquendum, animisque persuadendum,
potentem. Ibidem. QVin and Deo ipsinos per verbum suum alloquenti, seimonis
artificia adhibere placuit omnia, plusquem ullus Demosthenes aut Cicero
imitariposset. Ad divinorum itaque Eloquiorum intelligentiam facit Elegantiae
sermonis non ignorare Arts. Hinc summi Theologi antiqui and recentes,
Tertullianus imprimis, and Lactantius, Hieronymus, Ambrosius, Augustinus,
Gregorius, nuperque Joh. Calvinus, Sermenis elegantium cum Rerum majestate ita
copularunt ut non sapientiae tantum divinae doctores, sed and Esoquentiae
Romanae, tersissimique stili agnoscantur ab ipsismet Criticis duces. Vt mhil,
sit cur Voe, Theologiae studiosi, purioris Latinitatis studium a vobis putetis
alienum. Vobis prae omnibus, qui homines humana alloqui necesse habetis lingua,
hoc incumbit, ut cum pro Deo, Deique leco, Vebis conveniat loqui, lequi
annitamini Deo digne, h. e. Lingua erudita (Jes. 50.4.) Scholastic Prolusions
TO THE Art of ORATORY.
CHAP. I. What means we are to use, to make a Sentence Elegant.
I Have always been of an Opinion, that whatever is to be exploded in Manners,
ought to be hissed off the Stage in Speech. For as the Manners of the rude
Mobile are not much approved, so Speech is little graced by the gibberish of
the half-learn'd Vulgar.

Language, if it be not ordinary and trite, attracts the minds of the Hearers,
and with a kind of Majesty offers it self to be adored with admiration.
Wherefore we conclude it ought to be of another make than that of the common
people.

By the Language of the Vulgar, Note.
I mean not that which is Latin, Learned, and Elegant, though the common sort
use it: for it is impossible but that the People should retain to themselves
some things, of what they have received from the more learned, pure, and
unprophaned.

First therefore,

Observe,

Thirdly, Phrases, and such as stand at a great distance from the sense of the
Vulgar, will leave the Sentence more graceful.

Of the first of these I design only to advertise you here, reserving the
particulars for Chap. 22. where I intend a most exquisite and curious account
of all those impurities that stain and soil the native complexion of the
Latin Tongue.

Of the second there will all over occur many both Precepts and Submonitions.

Of the third I shall speak somewhat in this place, and therefore do thus
exemplify.

Whereas in English the ignorant Many are used to write thus,

I have not received a Letter from you this Twelvemonth:

A lover of quaintness and elegancy will raise himself above the common level,
and express himself on this, or some suchlike manner;

You write Letters to me, as Astrologers to Almanacks, once a Year.

This is now the second August, since I saw your hand at a Letter.

The Sun has once completed his yearly circuit, since you graced me with a
Letter.

The Sun has made his annual progress through all his Caelestial Houses, since I
broke up the seal of one of your Letters.

The Sun has run through all the Lines in the Zodiac, since I saw one from you.

And whereas our common form of Speech used to be,

Sir, I shall make bold to come and see you by and by:

The more polite and genteel make use of this, as a more elegant and civil
expression,

Sir, I shall take the boldness to wait upon you.

Again the proletarious and homely Phrase creeps thus upon the ground,

I do verily believe such or such a thing:

But they, that by a liberal and more generous Education are become Sons of
Art, distinguish themselves, as by their Manners, so by their Language, from
these Plebeians, and say,

I do verily persuade my self, I am very confident, I do assure my self of such
or such a thing; and so a thousand ways, according as every man's Fancy leads
him.

So in Latin,

Amicitiae nostrae integritas nos delectat maxim.

Nondum Saturni revolutionem absolvit.

For which the illiterate swarm would have said,

Multum gaudemus, quia boni sumus Amici.

Nondum complevit annos triginta.

Magnitudo amoris in te mei officium linguae vel expeditissimae superat.

Virtus tua me tibi amicum fecit.

Vivite felices, memores and vivite nostri, Tibullus:


Sive erimus, seu nos fata fuisse velint. Horatius.


Porcis haec comedenda relinquis.

Hoc animo scito omnes sanos, M. Cicero.
ut mortem servituti anteponant.

Hyems adhuc rem geri prohibuerat. Idem.


Nec vero Aristotelem in Philosophia deteruit a scribendo amplitudo Platonis.
Idem. Orat. 5.


Queniam me loqui voluistis, Ibidem.
aliquid de vestris vitiis audiatis.

Haec quum Crassus dixisset, 3. de Ora: 141.
parumper and ipse conticuit, and a caeteris silentium fuit.

Namque haec duo, Ibid. 172.
Musici qui erant quondam iidem Poetae, machinati ad voluptatem sunt versum
atque cantum, ut verborum numero and vocum modo, delectatione vincerent aurium
satietatem.

Sic omnibus in rebus, Ibid. 98
voluptatibus maximis fastidium finitum est.

CHAP. II. How the Obscurity of a Sentence is to be avoided.
WHen Nature first gave Mankind the use of Speech, it was past all doubt, to
the intent that what we had conceived in our minds, we might utter in our
words. For this reason it is one of the principal virtues of Speech, to be
dilucid. For he that speaks obscurely, had almost as good hold his peace, and
say nothing.

And there is nothing that works more effectually the obscurity of a
Sentence, than a vulgar Persuasion, that between the Adjective and Substantive,
between the Supposite [ i. e. the Nominative Case] and its Verb, between the
word governing and the word governed, and such other like, something ought to
be inserted.

Now,

Calliope princeps sapientipsallerat ore. Bassus.
Such is that of Cicero, (nor indeed can the like be easily found in him again.

Bona adolescentibus indole praeditis sapientes senes delectantur.

CHAP. III. That the Comparative and Superlative Degrees are very elegantly set
after their Substantives.
YOu will perceive a greater Elegancy, and, I fancy, Precept:
more taking to the ears, if you place a Comparative or Superlative after its
Substantive; though some others, of whom Valerius Maximis is one, do not very
religiously observe it: as, Plato, Qui sana mente est, cui rei adhibeat
diligentiam majorem non novi, quam ut filium reddat optimum. Idem, Nullius
injuriae qui sibi ipse conscius est, ei jucunda spes senectutis nutrix optima
semper adest.

Nunc est ille dies, Ennius.
quum gloria maxima sese.

Nobis ostendat, sive vivimus sive morimur.

Fortissimi viri and milites strenuissimi ex agricolis gignuntur. Plinius.


Hippocrates divina vir scientia de coitu Venereoita existimabat, Aul. Gellius,
or rather Agellius.
partem esse quandam morbi teterrimi: quem nostri comitialem dixerunt.

In Theodoro quoque viro gravissimo Hieronymus tyrannus tortorum manus frustra
fagitavit. Valerius Maximus.


Nunc isti pretia maxima ob tacendum accipiunt. C. Gracchus


Imperatorem liberalissimum, M. Cicero, Epist. lib. 7. ep. 7.
aetatem opportunissimam, commendationem certe singularem habes.

Cultura animi Philosophia, Idem 2 Tusc. 13.
quae extrahit vitia radicitus; and praeparat animos ad satus accipiendos;
eaque mandat iis, and, ut ita dicam, serit, quae adulta fructus uberrimos
ferant.

CHAP. IV. That Numerals, or those Nouns which signify Number, are set after
their Substantives.
THus much you may learn by the first Example, Precept.
that those Nouns that signify Number (be they Cardinals, Ordinals, or
Distributives) are elegantly set after their Substantives, which in ordinary
discourse use to be set before them; as, Aristoteles. Babylon [Ninus] capta
quum est ab host, ferunt partem aliquam civitatis ejus die tertia nondum
quicquam sensisse. Zeno Citticus adolescentulo inepta loquenti plurima, duas,
inquit, aures ideo habemus, and os unum, ut audiamus multa, pauca loquamur.

Teneros laedunt juga prima juvencos; Ovidius.

Fraenaque vix patitur de grege captus equus.
Pluris est testis oculatus unus, Plautus*
quam auriti december. Qui audiunt audita dicunt: qui vident plane sciunt.

Prima vitae tempora, media patriae, Plonius junior.
extrema nobis impertire debemus, ut ipsae leges monent, quae majorem annis
sexaginta otio reddunt.

Homini non ante diem septimum lethalis inedia. Plinius.


Demosthenes melius, Quintilianus.
qui se in locum ex quo nulla ex audiri vox, nihilque prospici posset,
recondebat: ne alind agere mentem cogerent oculi. Ideoque lucubrantes silentium
noctis, and clusum cubiculum, and lumen unum maxim teneat.

Herodotus homo fabulator, Agellius.
in primo historiarum, inventum esse sub terrascripsit Oresti corpus, cubita
longitudinis habens septem: quae faciunt pedes duodecim and quadrantem.

Si cujus legati violati essent, M. Varro.
qui id fecissent, quamvis nobiles essent, ut dederentur civitati, statuerunt
faeciales viginti, qui de his rebus cognoscerent, judicarent, and statuerent,
and constituerent.

Quem laborem nobis Attici nostri levavit labor, M. Cicero. Orat. 120.
qui conservatis notatisque temporibus, nihil quum illustre praetermitteret,
annorum septingentorum memoriam uno libro colligavit.

CHAP. V. That dissyllable Adjectives are to be postpon'd to plurisyllable
Substantives.
GReat is the Elegancy of a Sentence then, Animus aequus optimum est aerumnae
condimentum. Socrates saltabat saepius, eamque exercitationem valetudini bonae
non parum confer putabat. Plato, Amicum bonum habere malim, quam
pretiosissimam coturnicem, aut Gallum, aut per Jovem potius quam equum and
canem ac medius fidius potius quam Darii aurum adipisci, aut Darium ipsum
capere.

Concilium bonum gratia parvi faciatur. [faciatur prisce dictum.] Titinnius.


-- Cineri gloria sera venit. Martialis:


Casta placent superis, Tibullus.
pura cum vest venite Et manibus puris sumite fontis aquam. Pub. Cornelius
Rufinus manu quidem strennuus, and bellator bonus, Agellius.
militarique disciplina peritus admodum fuit: sed furax homo and avaritia acri
erat.

Avaritia pecuniae studium habet, Sallustius.
quam nemo sapiens concupivit: ea quasi venenis malis imbuta, corpus animumque
virilem effoeminat: semper infinita insatiabilisque est, neque copia, neque
inopia rerum minuitur.

Pythagoreis interdictum putatur, Cicero de divin. lib. 1.62.
ne faba vescerentur, quae res habet inflationem magnam.

Though you may not find this always observed by great Authors, Submonition.
yet you will perceive it to have a great deal of fineness, if you take your
measures from the judgment of the ear.

Grandes materias ingenia parva non sufferunt, Divus Hicronymus.
and in ipso conatu ultra vires ausa succumbunt.

CHAP. VI. That the word Omnis loves to be placed after its Substantive.
EVery Sentence almost uses to be more venust, Precept.
wherein the word Omnis is set after its Substantive; as, Aristoteles,
Animantium omnium homo corporis habita proportione, cerebri habet plurimum.
Plato, Oleum arboribus omnibus herbisque prodest maxim, pilis autem animantium
omnium nisi hominum necet plurimum. Idem, Peccatis multis oneratam animam ad
inferos descendere malorum omnium extremum est. Plutarchus, Viro bono diem
omnem festum esse Diogenes dicebat.

Ut te Dii omnes infelicitent, Caecilius.
cum male monita memoria.

Gnato ordinem omnem ut dederit, Pacuvius.
enodat patri.

Rugosi passique senes eadem omnia quaerunt. Lucilius.


Scriptorum cherus omnis amat nemus and fugit urbes. Horatius.


Matres omnes filiis in peccato adjutrices, Terentius.
and auxilio in paterna injuria solent esse.

Quadrupes animal omne, Cornelius Celsus.
si lactans est, minus alimenti praestat.

Hordeum frugum omnium nobilissimum est. Plinius.


Frustra mala omnium ad crimen fortunae relegamus. Quintilianus.


Virtutis laus omnis in action consist it: Cicero 2 Offic. 19.
a qua tamen scepe fit intermissio.

Ut deos esse natura opinamur, Id. 1 Tusc. 56.
qualesque sunt ratione cognoscimus, sic permanere animos arbitramur consensu
nationum omnium.

And yet Tully 1 Offic. 57. says, Submonition.
Chari sunt parents, chari liberi, propinqui, familiares: sed omnes omnium,
charitates patria una complexa est. And Domitius Afer. Mulier rerum omnium
merita, in omnibus rebus infelix.

CHAP. VII. That Nullus uses not unelegantly to be placed after the Substantive
it agrees with.
THere is almost no manner of speaking, Precept.
disagreeable to ordinary speech, but has something of Elegancy: And such is
the Noun Nullus, which therefore is more ornately postpon'd its Substantive,
because in common Language it usually precedes it. Aristoteles, Lacedaemoniorum
Lege, qui hestem nullum interfeeisset, capistro cingebature. Idem, Apud Scythas
epulo solenni pateram circumlatam accipere non licebat ei, qui hostem nullum
occidisset. Plato, Si quis falso iterum dixisse testimonium convictus sit,
tertio lege nulla testari agatur: Sin autem tertio, ratione nulla et postea
testimonium dicere liceat.

Namque Catullus.
ego ab indignis praemia nulla peto.

Fabula nulla tuas de nobis concitet aures. Propertius.


Cognatos affinesque nullos ferme tam esse objequibiles ait, Agellius.
ut laborem ad capessendum nihil cunctentur, and statim dicto obedient.

Bellum nullum nisi pium geri putabant M. Varro.


Illud magis mihi selet esse molestum, M. Cicero Epist. lib. 12. ep. 30.
tantis me impedire occupationibus: ut ad te scribendi meo arbitratu facultas
nulla detur.

Majus mihi dare beneficium nullum potes. Idem l. 15. ep. 8.


CHAP. VIII. That Alienum, Aliud, Alterum, Utrumque, Solum, Ullum, Tale,
Singula, and other suchlike Adjectives, are to be put after their Substantives.
HE that in reading of good current Authors, Precept.
does strictly examine the situation of each word, will find more than once or
twice the Adnouns, alienum, aliud, alterum, utrumque, solum, ullum, tale, and
it there be any more of the same kind, placed after their Substantives: as,
Aristoteles, Advenarum quorundam legibus alienis educatorum uti consuetudine
creditum est inutile esse ad rectam civitatis disciplinam. Plato, Principium
operis totius dimidium esse proverbio dicitur: eumque qui been caepit laudamus.

Cui cepe edendo oculus alter profluit. Naevius.


Illud ediscendo scribendoque commune est, Quintilianus.
utrique plurimum confer bonam valetudinem, digestum cibum, animum
cogitationibus aliis liberum.

Nunc autem plerique, inquit, Agellius.
partis utriusque amici, quasi probe faciant, duos litigantes destituunt, and
relinquunt, deduntque advocatis malevolis aut avaris, qui lites animosque eorum
inflamment aut odii studio, aut lucri.

Multam nos queque apud veteres scriptores locutionum talium copiam offendimus.
Idem.


Quid de nostris ambitionibus? M. Cicero 2 Tusc. 62.
quid de cupiditate bonorum loquar? que flamma est, per quam non cucurrerint
ii, qui haec olim punctis singulis colligebant?

To these add quodvis, Note.
quodlibet, totum, caetera, reliqua, and such others that signify multitude,
commonly called Collectives.

However, Submonition.
Tully, pro Dei 24. has, Sed in eo etiamsi accidisset, culpam regis fuisse
nullam arbitrarer, alieni autem a te animi fuit.

CHAP. IX. When Tale and Aliud are set before.
MY mind runs upon nothing else, but how I may most profit all the Scholars
committed to my charge, by laying out my utmost care and pains to breed them up
unto Religion as well as unto Learning: For, alas! where there is One without
the Other, namely Learning without Religion, it serves many times but to make
men the more desperately debauched, and the more mischievously wicked. But at
present it is You, my young Candidates of more polite Eloquence, whom I address
in these my Labors, and therefore it is that I bring such unheardof, in a
manner unusual, (I fear) ways of speaking out of darkness (as it were) into
open light: Of which sort this is one.

After the Adjective Tale, Precept.
we elegantly place these words: Nihil, nemo, nullus, and Pronouns of the
Primitive species, which is the self-same; as also, quicquam and ullum we in
like manner set after Aliud, nay in different cases: as, Tale nihil de amico
unquam putassem. Alium nemo vidit. Alias quasdam accepi literas.

Nec nobis praeter me alius quisquam servus Sosia. Plautus.


Tale nihil de te, creed mihi, Ang. Politianus.
homines existimant.

Si alium, inquit tribunus, Agellius.
neminem reperies, me licet ad hoc periculum utare.

Alius quidam veterum poetarum cujus nomen nunc mihi memoriae non est, Idem.
veritatem temporis filiam esse dixit.

His vero temporibus habemus aliud nihil, M Cicero, Epist. l. 4. ep. 3. Id. l.
2. de Leg. Id. Tusc. lib. 5: 31.
in quo acquiescamus.

Is enim Magistratus in nostro municipio, nec alius ullus creari solet.

Humanus autem animus decerptus ex mente divina, cum alio nullo nisi cum ipso
Deo, si hoc fas est dictu, comparari potest.

Necesse est homini tale aliquid accidere. Idem.


Quod si tales nos Natura genuisset; Idem 3. Tusc. 2.
ut eam ipsam intueri and prospicere, eademque optima duce cursum vitae
conficere possemus: hand erat sane, quid quisquam rationem ac doctrinam
requireret, quum Natura satisfaceret.

Tales nos esse putamus, Idem.
ut jure laudemur. For,

These Pronoun Primitives are very elegantly set after such Adjectives, Note.
as otherwise would be placed after their Substantives: as, Unum id. Omne id.

Quicquid praeter spem evenit, Terentius:
omne id deputato esse in lucro.

Edepol senectus, Caecilius.
si nihil apportestecum quum advenis, unum id satis est. Here would Quintilian
have said, Id unum. For says he,

Discipulos id unum moneo, Quintilian
ut Praeceptores suos non minus quam ipsa studia ament: and Parents esse non
quidem Corporum sed Mentium credant. Multum haec pietas confert studio.

CHAP. X. That a Pronoun Adjective may be put after its Substantive.
THis is a Precept great in vogue, Precept.
and much in use, viz. That before the Pronoun Adjective may be set his
Substantive: as, Bion Borysthenites ad eum qui agros suos voraverat: terra,
inquit, Amphiaraum absorbuit, tu vero terram. Plato, Necessitati neque dii ipsi
repugnant.

Si quisquam hodie praeter hanc, Titinnius.
posticum nostrum pepulerit, patibulo hoc ei caput defringam.

Noli ex stultitia multarum credere esse animum meum. Afranius.


Is demum miser est qui aerumnam suam nequit occultare. Ceciline.


Domina nostra privignum suum amat efflictim. Laberius.


Ecquis est, Turpilius.
qui interrumpit sermoneus meum obitu suo.

Dicere labora, Lucilius.
ne res ipsa, ac ratio ipsa refellat.

Munus nostrum ornato verbis, Terentius.
quoad poteris.

Homo hic ebrius est, Plautus.
ut opinior.

Res eadem magis alit jurulenta quam assa, Cor. Celsut.
magis assa quam frixa.

Oleum ipsum sale vindicatur a pinguedinis vitio. Plinius.


Nec interest discentium quibus quidque nominibus appelletur, Quintilian
dum res ipsa manifesta sit.

Ea demum tuta potentia est, Val. Max.
qui viribus suis modum imponit.

Dum te pudet Mani, M. Varro.
quod domi tuae vides commilitonum tuorum cohortes servis tuis ministrare
coementa.

Dotes filiabus suis non dant. M. Cato. C. Caesar apud Sallustium. M. Cicero, 3
Tusc. 2.


Neque cuiquam mortalium injuriae suae parvae videntur.

Sunt ingeniis nostris semina innata virtutum, quae si adolescere liceret, ipsa
nos ad beatam vitam natura perduceret.

Hic est ille vultus semper idem, Id. 3 Tusc.
quem dicitur Xantippe praedicare solita in viro suo fuisse Socrate, eodem
vultu semper se vidisse exeuntem illum domo and revertentem.

But lest you should think that this Submonition.
Precept requires your perpetual regard, observe these underwritten Examples.

Unum etiam vos oro, Terentius.
ut me in vestrum gregem recipiatis.

Ita versatus sum in provincia, C. Gracchus
ut nemo posset vere dicere, assem aut eo plus in muneribus me accipisse, aut
mea opera quempiam sumtum fecisse.

Priscian, Note.
and other not ignoble Grammarians, allow the Relative Qui, quae, quod, no room
among the Pronouns, and indeed their number is very uncertain among the
Grammarians; Vossius, lib. 1. de Analogia, and some others, adding to those
commonly received, Quis, cujus, cujas; as also, Unus, ullus, nullus, solus,
totus, uter, alter, neuter, aliquis, alius, reliquus, caeterus, omnis, quisque,
nemo, quidam, ambo, uterque: However it be, this is certain, that both Qui and
its compounds share this kind of Elegancy with the rest of the Vice-Nouns: for
we read in

Urbem quam statuo vestraest. Virgilius.


Eunuchum quem dedisti nobis, Terentius.
quas turbas dedit?

Naucratem quem convenire volui, Plautus.
in navi non erat.

In animis omnium fere est natura, M. Cicero, 2 Tusc. 47.
molle quiddam, demissum, humile, enervatum quodammodo and languidum, senile.
Sed aliud nihil est in homine deformius.

Somnum denique Id. 5 de finibus bonorum: 54.
nisi requietem corpor is and medicinam quandam laboris afferret, contra
naturam putaremus datum: aufert enim sensus, actionemque tollit omnem.

Graves enim dominae cogitationum libidines infinita quaedam cogunt, Idem in
Fragm. de Repub. l. 6.
atque imperant: quae quia expleri, ac satiari nullo modo possunt, ad omne
facinus impellunt eos, qui illecebris suis alliciuntur.

CHAP. XI. That a Pronoun Adjective is to be placed between the Noun Adjective
and its Substantive.
BY this graceful way of speaking, Precept.
one may make a Sentence more composed: If there be two Adjectives, the one
nominal, and the other pronominal, which do belong to one Substantive, set the
nominal first, betwixt which and the Substantive place the pronominal: as
Plato, Mare civitati proximum quotidiana quadam delectatione eam afficit. Idem.
Spartani quoties bonum quendam virum commendare volunt. Hic vir, inquiunt,
divinus est.

Mollis illa educatio, Quintilian
quam indulgentiam vocamus, nervos emnes and mentis and corporis frangit. M.
Cicero. 1 de leg. l. 19.


Subcisiva quaedam tempora incurrunt, quae ego perire non patior,

Leviora sunt ea, Id. Offic. 127.
quae repentino aliquo motu accidunt, quam ea quae meditata, quae praeparata
inferuntur.

Commendo vobis parvum meum filium. Idem.


Memini in hoc genere gloriari solitum esse familiarem nostrum Hortensium, Id.
Epist. l. 2. ep. 16.
quod nunquam bello civili interfuisset.

If you can intersert any thing betwixt the Pronoun Adjective and the
Substantive, 1 Note.
that may respect both, or either of them, you will be sensible of a certain
greater Elegancy: as, Morituro Socrati Apollodorus pretiosum quoddam, in quo
moreretur, pallium obtulit; cui Socrates: Nunquid moriturus mihi, inquit, non
conveniet hoc, quod viventi convenit?

Dii tibi dent propria [i. e. Afraniut.
perpetua] quaecunque exoptes bona.

Qualem fuisse accepimus ferum quendam in ludo Caesaris gladiatorem: Agellius.
qui cum vulnera ejus a medico execabantur, ridere solitus fuit.

In omnibus meis epistolis, M. Cicero, Epist. l. 7. ep. 6.
quas ad Caesarem aut ad Balbum mitto, legitima quaedam est accessio
commendationis tuae.

Auditis oratoribus Graecis, Id. 1 de Orat. 14.
cognitisque eorum literis adhibitisque doctoribus, incredibili quodam nostri
homines dicendi studio flagrarunt.

If in this kind of Speech two Noun Adjective be joined by a copulative
Particle, 2 Note.
let the pronominal Adjectives be set between both, just before the
Conjunction: as, Libero tuo and admirabili ingenio dilector.

In nobis egregiam quandam ac praeclaram indolem ad dicendum esse cognovi. M.
Cicero, 1 de Orat. 131.


CHAP. XII. The place of Omne, Nullum, and numeral Adjectives, in company with
other Adjectives.
THe Latin Tongue, as Servius well remarks, permits not two full Adjectives to
be joined to one Substantive without a Conjunction: And that is the reason why
we style Pronouns, Omne and Nullum, and Nouns that signify number, not full
Adjectives: for one may find them adjoined to Substantives, together with other
Adjectives. Of the Pronoun we have already spoken, of there is we are now to speak.

Omne therefore, Nullum, Precept!
and the numeral Adjective, being in combination with another Adjective also
not full, linked to one Substantive, do indifferently claim to themselves with
equal elegancy every place in the Sentence, and to be set before or after
either the Substantive or Adjective: as, Omnis mea felicitas; or, Mea omnis
felicitas; or, Felicitas omnis mea. Thus

Omnis nostra vis in animo and corpore sita est. Animi imperio, Sallustius.
Animi imperio, corporis servitute magis utimur. Alterum nobis cum diis,
alterum commune cum belluis est.

Quicquid enim a sapiente proficiscitur, M. Cicero. 3de fin. 32.
id continuo debet expletum esse omnibus suis partibus.

O mearum voluptatum omnium inventor, incaeptor, perfector! Terentius.


In me plane dii potestatem suam omnem Idem.
ostendere: cui tam subito tot contigerunt commoda.

Libros tres reliquos mercatur. Agellius.


Illum, Terentius.
liquet mihi dejerare, his mensibus sex vel septem prorsus non vidisse
proximis.

Unless when the other Adjective is full; Submonition.
for then these Adjectives less full, the full ones being set first, are placed
before the Substantive very sweetly: as, Bona omnis valetudo.

Tace tu, Terentius.
quem esse infra infimos puto homines.

Nunc videre est Philosophos ultro currere, Agellius.
ut doceant, ad fores juvenum divitum: eosque ibi sedere atque opperiri prope
ad meridiem: donec discipuli nocturnum omne vinum edormiant.

Ludosque Valerius.
and lectisterina continuis tribus noctibus, quia totidem filii periculo
liberati erant, fecit.

Pro Academia autem quae dicenda erant, M. Cicero, Tusc. lib. 2.4.
satis accurate in Academicis quatuor libris explicata arbitramur.

But that this neither is unexceptionable, Except.
the ensuing instances do demonstrate.

Adolescens mori sic mihi videtur: M. Cic. de Senect. 71.
ut quum aquae multitudine vis flammae opprimitur: Senes autem sicut sua
sponte, nulla adhibita vi, consumtus ignis extinguitur.

Omnium magnarum artium sicut arborum altitudo nos delectat, Id. 1 Offic. 147:
radices stirpesque non item: sed esse illa sine his non potest.

Neque ego quenquam hominum esse ararbitror, Terentius.
cui magis bonae felicitates omnes adversae sient.

Spes nulla reliquain te siet tibi. Idem.


Eorum consilio saepe aut non suscepta aut confecta bella sunt, M. Cic. 1.
Offic. 79.
nonnunquam autem illata: ut M. Catonis, bellum tertium Punicum, in quo etiam
mortui valuit Autoritas.

CHAP. XIII. That if any thing interpose between the Adjective and Substantive,
it is no matter whether be set first, but that the Substantive does more
frequently lead the way.
I Have already informed you by some Precepts, Precept.
that the Adnoun is very elegantly placed after its Noun; Nevertheless if any
thing intervene betwixt both, though, what I advised, you will for the most part
find hold; yet I have often observed the contrary position: as, Omnium natura
est animantium, or Animantium natura est omnium: for both may be said in a
manner indifferently for matter of Elegancy. So, Pietas in Parents tua, tua in
Parents pietas. Anno aetatis quarto, quarto aetatis anno. As He in Aristotle,
Quem populus celebrant, omnino fama perire nulla potest. Plato, Nullus in
civitate nostra mendicus sit. Idem, Majorem certe virtutem Religione Pietateque
in Deum nullam in hominum genere inveniri quisquam sibi persuadeat. Idem, Oleum
externis corporis nostri partibus optimum, interioribus pessimum est: qua
propter aegrotantibus olei usum Medici prohibent. Idem, Qui in foro vendit.
venalis suae rei pretia duo nunquam dicar, sed quum unum dixerit precium, si
non vendiderit, referat iterum: nec eodem die majus minusve pretium petat.

Malo hercle suo magno convivant [pro convivantur] sine modo. Ennius.


Amorem intercapedine ipse lenivit dies. Turpilius.


Longa dies meum incertat animum. Plautus.


Sela Gallia monstra non habuit: Divus Hieronymus.
sed viris semper fortibus, and eloquentissimis abundavit.

Temporantia quoque Agellius.
Socratem fuisse tanta traditum est: ut omnia fere vitae suae tempora
valetudine inoffensa vixerit.

Caesar Augustus duodecim natus annos aviam pro rostris laudaverit.
Quintilianus.


Unde autem facilius, M. Cicero, in Hort.
quam ex annalium monumentis, aut bellicae res, aut omnis Reipub. disciplina
cognoscitur?

Quid enim videatur ei magnum in rebus humanis, cui aeternitas omnis, Id. 4
Tuse. 37.
totiusque mundi nota sit magnitudo.

Sed quoniam Grammaticus es, Id. ad Attic. l. 7. ep. 3.
si hoc mihi setema persolveris, magna me molestia liberabis.

CHAP. XIV. That to other Adjectives their Substantives are often postpon'd.
BY the assiduous reading of Orators about the placing of other Adjectives,
Precept:
whether they are to be set before or after, you can find nothing certain: and
yet one may observe they are generally set first; as,

Magna ossa lacertique apparent homini^ Ennius:


Magna penus parvo spatio consumta peribit. Lucilius.


Ea oblectat spes aerumnosum hospitem, Actius.
dum hic quod miser est, clam esse censet alteros.

Martialis.
In steriles campos nolunt juga far juvenci.

Pingue solum lassat, sed juvat ipse labor.

Assiduae multis odium peperere querelae, Propertius


Frangitur in tacito femina saepe viro.

Pauperibus sacros vilia thura damus. Idem. Quintilianus.


Natura tenacissimi sumus eorum, quae rudibus annis percepimus.

Neque ingenium sine disciplina, Vitruvius.
aut disciplina sine ingenio perfectum artificem potest efficere.

Aliter enim ampla domus dedecori domino saepe fit, M. Cicero, 1 Offic. 133
si est in ea solitudo, and maxim si aliquando alio dominosolita est
frequentari.

CHAP. XV. That Nouns of Measure and Weight ought to be put in the Accusative
case, or in the Genitive.
THat Nouns signifying the Mete and Balance, Precept.
instruments we measure and weigh by, are wont to be put in the Ablative, the
meanest Grammarian sure is not ignorant: as, Jugerum fune dimensus sum. Romani
Brenno aurum bilance appendunt. But Nouns that denote the measure of Length,
breadth, height, depth, or thickness of any thing, the space between place and
place, or the weight of any thing, are very often wont to be placed by the
Learned in the Genitive Case, or Accusative, seldom in the Ablative: as, Puteus
altus ulnarum december, latus pedes quinq,, longus cubitorum centum.

Haec autem basis erat long a pedes duodecim, lat a pedes octo, alta pedes sex.
Vitruvius.


Jugerum vocabatur, Plinius.
quod uno jugo boum in die exarari potuisset. Actus, in quo boves agerentur,
quum aratur uno impetu justo. Hic erat centum viginti pedum, duplicatusque in
longitudinem jugerum faciebat

In morem horti areas latas pedum denum, Columella.
longas pedum quinquagenum facito.

Tres pateat coeli spatium non amplius ulnas. Virgilius.

Sulmo mihi patria est, Ovidius.
claris uberrimus undis,
Millia qui novies distat ab urbe december.
Is locus est citra Leucadem stadia centum viginti. M. Cicero Epist. l. 16. ep.
2. Id. ad Attic. Plinius junior.


Cum in castra proficisceretur, a quibus aberam bidui.

December and septem milibus passuum ab urbe secessit.

Tam multa ille meo divisa est millia lecto, Propertius

Quantum Hypanis Veneto dissidet Eridano.
A quo mons aberat ferme millia passuum triginti. Sallustius.


In Creta terrae motu rupto monte inventum est corpus stans quadraginta sex
cubitorum: Plinius.
quod alii Orionis, alii Etionis fuisse tradunt.

Babylon Chaldaicarum gentium caput diu summam claritatem obtinuit in tot orb;
Idem
propter quam reliqua pars Mesopotamiae Assyriaeque Babylonia appellata est,
sexagenta millia passuum, emplexa muris ducentos pedes altis.

By these you may take notice that learned men speak by mill much more usually
than by milliare, Submonition.
or milliarium; and yet if any man upon other reasons and authorities will
defend the use of either, or both, I shall not contend with him about it.

CHAP. XVI. That Nouns signifying Time are put very venustly in the Accusative,
and when in that signification they are to be put in the Ablative.
HE that for many days has been exercised in attentive and sedulous reading of
the finest Authors, Precept.
will own that it is not foreign to their almost daily usage, for Nouns
importing Time to be put in the Accusative Case: as, Plato, Ad literas pueri
decennes proficiscantur; ibique triennium insistant.

Vix unumpotes infelix requiescere mensem. Propertius

Tu faciem illius noctem amplius unam Fall dolo.
Virgilius.
Sum totos dies cum eo, M. Cicero filius.
noctisque saepe numero partem.

Nemo est tam senex, M. Cic. de Senectute.
qui se annum non putet posse vivere.

Quae potest in vita esse jucunditas, Ibidem.
quum dies and noctes cogitandum sit jamjamque esse moriendum.

Nonius Marcellus, Note.
I know, makes a distinction. As often, says he, as we express years or days by
the Accusative, we mean whole years and days together; and as often as we use
the Ablative, we intend them by intervals, some years or days interposing. And
truly Mr. Lilly does not much ablude from him in his Rules for Construction,
where he tells the young Fry, that Nouns that betoken continual term of Time,
without ceasing or intermission, be commonly used in the Accusative Case.

Now to this hypercritical distinction, I declare, I cannot assent.

For Nouns that betoken a term of Time, whether continued and without
intermission, or discontinued and by intervals, if they answer to the question,
How long? are so more usually, as more elegantly, put in the Accusative Case,
than in the Ablative.

But then indeed we use the Ablative Case, when we speak of part of Time, such
as answers to the question, When? As, for example, if I was any part of the
night sick, I may say, Valetudo mihi nocte familiaris non fuit. Ad te visam
anno proximo.

Non amplius quum plurimum, Suetonins de Divo Augusto.
quam septem horas dormiebat, ac ne eas quidem continuas.

And yet, Submonition.
lest you should take this for a Precept of perpetual force, you may sometimes,
let me tell you, find a Noun of continual Time in the Ablative Case: as,

Nihil salutare est, Plinius.
nisi quod toto anno salubre.

Quem ego hedie toto non vidi die. Terentius:


Biennio continuo post adeptum imperium pedem porta non extulit. Sneton. de
Divo Tiberio.


CHAP. XVII. That Nouns signifying Time, conjoined with some Nouns that
signify Number, are to be used in the Accusative Case; with others, in the
Ablative:
THose Nouns that signify time, Precept.
if they be conjoined to cardinal Numerals, such as Unum, duo, tria, and the
like, are more usually and elegantly put in the Accusative, but and if they
confort with Ordinals, such as Primum, secundum, tertium, then they delight
more in the Ablative Case: as, Annos viginti Platonem Aristoteles audivit.
Urbem Romam Senones Galli octo menses vastavere. Regis Alexandri equus
Bucephalus vixit annos triginta. Post eversam Trojam anno centesimo sexagesimo,
and annts totidem ante conditam Urbem Romam natus est Homerus. Plato anno
aetatis suae octogesimo primo mortuus est. Anno post Urbem e Gallorum manibus
recuperatam septimo natus est Aristoteles.

Horarum nomen non minus annos trecentos Romae ignoratum esse credibile est.
Censorinus


Duodequadriginta annos tyrannus Syracusanorum fuit Dionysius, M. Cic. Tusc. 57.
quum quinque and vigintinatus annos dominatum occupasset.

Postquam mulieris uterus conceperit semen, Agellius.
gigni hominem septimo mense rarenter, nunquam octavo, saepe nono, saepenumero
decimo mense.

Plato, Cicero de Senect.
uno and octogesimo anno scribens, est mortuus.

Quapropter tum primum ex plebe alter Bos. Agellius. l. 5. c. 4.
factus est duo and vigesimo anno postquam Galli Romam ceperunt.

Cicero indeed lib. 8. ep. 26. Submonition.
expresses duration of Time in the Accusative case by an Ordinal, thus: Quum
decimum jam diemgraviter ex intestinis laborarem.

One may find [in] the ellipted proposition, sometimes, Note.
though seldom, expressed: as,

Hoc venisse usu Romae comperi, Agellius,
feminam bonis atque honestis moribus, non ambigua pudicitia, in undecimo mense
post mariti mortem peperisse.

December virt in decimo mense gigni hominem, non in undecimo scripserunt. Idem,


CHAP. XVIII. In what Case Nouns signifying Time are to be put, when the
Particles Ante and Post do precede, succeed, or intervene betwixt the
Substantive and Adjective.
IS not this too frequent with Orators? viz. Precept.
That Nouns signifying Time, if the Particles Post or Ante do stand before
them, be put in the Accusative Case, as being governed thereof; if behind them,
in the Ablative, the casual word depending on the Prepositions being
suppressed; if between the Adjective and Substantive, as they are sometimes put
in the Accusative, governed of the said Particles Post or Ante, so often in the
Ablative, the casual word influenced by the Prepositions being ellipted: as,

Post diem quartum quam est in Britanniam ventum. Caesar.


Post dies quadraginta, Sallust Jug. Cicero ad Attic.
quam eo ventum est.

Hora post Gabinium condemnaverunt.

Hither refer Tanto post, Aliquanto post, Paulo post, Haudita multo post, etc.

Annum post quintum decimum creati consules. Livius:


Alter triumphum patris funere suo quartum ante diem praecessit: Val. Max.
alter in triumphali curru conspectus post diem tertium expiravit.

Quo gaudio elatus non temperavit, Suetonius.
quin paucos post dies frequenti curia jactaret, invitis and gementibus
adversariis, adeptum se quae concupisset.

Annibal tertio post die, quam venit, Livius de 3. l. 5.
copias in aciem eduxit.

Quae si hoc tempore non suum diem obiisset, Servius Sulpitius:
paucis post annis tamen ei moriendum fuit, quia homo nata fuerat.

Paucis ante mensibus quam ad te scriberem, excessit e vita. Aldus Manutius.


Themistocles aliquot ante annis, Cicero:
quum in epulis recusasset lyram, est habitus indoctior.

CHAP. XIX. The Division and Use of Numerals.
IN cardinal Numerals from the Unit to Ten we use one single word: as, Precept
1.
Tria, Quinque, Novem, December. After Ten till Sixteen we use a compound word,
wherein the lesser number precedes: for we say Undecim, Duodecim, Tredecim,
Quatuordecim, Quindecim, Sexdecim. After this number, even to Twenty, Priscian
[in his Book de Numeris, Nummis, and Ponderibus] charges us to set the greater
number first, and then bring in the copulative with the lesser number, thus:
December and septem, December and octo, December and novem. So,

December and septem millibus passuum ab urbe secessit. Plinius.
Tho, M. Cicero said,

Ille egit septem and december annos.

But either our most classic Authors are corrupted, Priscian is silent in, one
may authentically say, Septendecim, Octodecim, Novendecim; for in Cicero's
Orations against Verres, and Suetonius's Nero, you may read Septendecim, as
also Octodecim and Novendecim in Eutropius's Breviary. And therefore Dr.
Linacer thinks it lawful to speak both ways.

Elias Vinetus (a vere great Critic) is of opinion, Solution.
that because Priscian is silent therein, the Ancients did not speak so, but
that Cicero, Suetonius, and Eutropius, used these Ciphers, XVII, XVIII, XIX,
which the Transcribers expressed in whole words, but unlatine; especially
because in the old Codexs it is more frequently read Priscian's way.

In Ordinals after the twelfth the Copulative is omitted, Precept 2
if the lesser number precede: as, Tertiusdecimus, Quartusdecimus,
Quintusdecimus, Sextusdecimus, Septimusdecimus, Octavusdecimus; otherwise,
ducdevigesimus, novusdecimus; otherwise, Undervigesimus, thus;

Namque octavodecimo die excludunt, Plinius lib. 10. cap. 58.
statimque concipiunt.

Though in these also the number uses oftener to be expressed by numeral notes,
than in words at length.

But if the greater number lead, Priscian advises to clap in the Copulative:
as, Decimus and septimus, Decimus and octavus; and yet in the common Prints you
may read Decimustertius, Decimusquartus, and so forward without the Copulative.

But here too it is the judgment of Vinetus that we may more safely follow
Priscian, in whose days Books were more incorrupt than they are in ours.

From Twenty to a Hundred, Precept 3:
if the greater number precede, the Conjunction is let alone: as, Viginti octo,
not Viginti and octo; Trigesimus octavus, not trigesimus and octavus.

Ex feminis Livia Rutilii nonaginta septem annos excessit. Plininslib. 7. cap.
47.
And elsewhere, Quinquagesimo quarto, Sexagesimo quinto, and the like.

But the lesser number is set before the greater, if any Conjunction do
interpose: as, Primus and vicesimus, or also unus and vicesimus; secundus and
quinquagesimus, or also duo and quinquagesimus.

Plato uno and octogesimo anno scribens est mortuus. Cicero de Senect.


Duo and vigesimo anno postquam Galli Romam ceperunt. Agellius lib. 5. cap. 7.


Marcus Cicero tertio and sexagesimo aetatis anno obtruncatus est.

Annus tertius aetatis and sexagesimus Aristoteli atque Demostheni vitam eodem
prope tempore ademit.

In like manner in Distributives we may say without a Conjunction, Viceni,
singuli, Triceni bini, sexageni quaterni; but with a Copulative singuli and
viceni, bini and triceni, quaterni and sexageni.

Sometime the greater number is set before in the purest writers: as,
Submonition.


Equidem haud sum natus annos praeter quinquaginta and quatuor. Plautus.


Fero annos octoginta and quatuor. Idem.


Funeratus tricesimo and octavo aetatis anno, and nonagesimo and quinto Imperii
die. Suetonius:


Quum aetas tua quinquagesimum and sextum, annum compleverit, M. Cicero.
quae summa tibi fatalis erat, spes quidem salutis publicae te videbit.

Venerunt post diem quadrage simum and sextum, quam a nobis discesserant. M.
Cicero Filius.


The former way of speaking is more usual, though this spoken very sparingly,
Note.
may, I think, pass: As there is no fault neither in placing the lesser number
first without a Conjunction, so it be done mighty warily: as,

Periit cum fratre and filio anno vitae septimo quinquagesimo. Suetonius.


Sine ulla molestia sumtuve sociorum septimo quinquagesimo die rem confeci. M.
Cicero.


After a hundred the greater number uses to lead, the letter to follow, Precept
4.
with a Conjunction in the middle.

Illa praeclara institutio Romuli, M Cicero, de Repub.
quum ducentos annos and triginta fere firma mansisset.

Leontinus Gorgias centum and septem implevit annos. Idem de Senect. 13.


Fuit, Ibid. 68.
ut scriptum video, Argantonius Gadibus, qui octoginta regnavit annos, centum
and viginti vixit.

Nondum centum and december anni sunt, Id. 2 Offic. 65.
quum de pecuniis repetundis a L. Pisone lata est lex.

And yet the Copulative is more elegantly, I know not how, omitted.

Epigenes centum duos annos impleri negavit posse: Plinius lib. 7. cap. 49. M
ad Attic. lib. 6. ep. 1. Id. Offic. lib. 1.
Berosus centum septendecim

Post Leutricam pugnam die septingesimo sexagesimo quinto.

Ut ille, qui quum centum triginta dierum essent cum host pactae induciae,
noctu populabatur agros, quod dierum essent pactae non noctium induciae.

Is locus est citra Leucadem stadia centum viginti. Id. Epist. l. 16. ep. 2.


But that the lesser number may in this case precede, that of Valerius Maximus
is proof enough.

Repudium inter uxorem and virum a condita Urbe usque ad vicesimum and
quingentesimum annum nullum intercessit. Valerius Maximus


Legis, M. Caelius.
inquit, quae unum and centesimum caput legit, in quo ita erat: quod eorum
judicium major pars judicarit, id jus judicatumq, esto.

Ut tamen in septimum and quinquagesimum atque centesimum duraret annum.
Plinius lib. 7. cap. 17. de Epimenide.


CHAP. XX. That Nouns of Number are divided by Poets, compounded by Orators.
ANd forasmuch as Poets too have their Elegancies in speaking, we shall now
consider what the Poets and what the Orators are wont to observe in Nouns of
Number.

Poets do put asunder those Numerals that Orators put together; Precept.
for these use to say, December, duodecim, quindecim, viginti, triginta, etc.
Those, Bis quinque, bis sex, ter quinque, bis december, ter december, etc.

Tempus ad hoc lustris mihi jam bis quinque peractis. Ovidius.

Omne fuit Musae carmen inerne meae.
Bis senos cui nostra dies altaria fumant. Virgilius. Idem.

Bis denis Phrygium conscendi navibus aequor.
Hic jam tercentum totos regnabitur annos. Idem:

The unskilful commonly say, Note.
Quater viginti, which I had rather they would exchange for Octoginta, Ducenti
and Trecenti, and suchlike others, are in Prose much more usual.

But as Virgil spoke by a compound number, Submonition.
Trigin amagnos volvendis mensibus orbs; Virgilius.

So did linie by a divided one,
Homo crescit in longitudinem ad annos ter septenos, Plinius.
tum deinde ad plenitudinem.


CHAP. XXI. That Mill and Sexcenta use to be spoken, one by Orators, the other
by Poets.
THere are a thousand testimonies of this Precept, both in Writers of former
times, and especially in those to whose lot it has fallen to live in this age
of ours: And it hes thus;

When you have occasion to speak some great uncertain number, Precept.
in Prose say Sexcenta, in Verse Mill: as, Gaudia mill feres me si laudabis
amicum. Sexcentas amicitiae nostrae testes literas ultro citroque
missiculavimus. In vulgaribus hominum amicitiis sexcentos invenias, qui
neglecta amicorum utilitate, suam diligenter exquirant.

Tu mill nummum potes uno quaerere centum. Lucilius.


Non anni domuere december, non mill carinae. Virgilius.

Ecquis non causas mill doloris habet. Ovidius.

Plus millies jam audivi. Terentius. Bartolomaeus Scala.

Ex eodem videntur genere error, marra, susurri, barri, horror, ferrum and
hujusmodi sexcenta.

Testes sunt Schol astici sexcenti. Beroaldus. Politianus. M. Cicero, Epist.
lib. 7. ep. 1. Submonition.


Possum tibi vero proferre sexcentos.

Quid enim delectationis habent sexcenti muli in Clytemnestra.

Yet Agellius sometimes, and Quintilian very often, use Mill, as also Cicero
elsewhere Millies, in this sense.

Ajax quo animo traditur millies oppetere mortem, M. Cicero, 1 Offic. 113.
quam illam perpeti ab alio maluisse.

CHAP. XXII. That some Words and Phrases have been polluted by the use of the
ignorant and unlearned.
WE must needs confess that it fares with the use of the Latin Tongue much
after the same manner as it does with Manners; Precept.
now for the good to be changed for the worse, and for our Youth it self to
copy out the bad with more ease than the good, this is nothing strange or
incredible: Let us therefore (that our Young Men may not be wholly immerst in
the filth and offscouring as it were of the Latin Tongue, when they have
occasion (as they daily have) for speaking and writing that Language) specify
a few of those impure barbarous Words and Phrases which have been foisted in,
whilst those that are Latin and pure have been carelessly neglected, and set
aside.

In the first place therefore, I do impeach Salust laesae Linguae Romanae, for
barbarously using Soluit, for solitus est; and
Paritas opes for partas.
And Joseph Scaliger for using juvarunt and adjuvarunt.
Aures erroribus personantur.
Valiant, qui bonis obtrectantur.
Hoc me injusso factum est.
Materia ictibus resistendis apta.
Canes mundiora loca immingunt.
Justus Lipsius, for
Canis illum permingit.
Frigidis imprime juvor.
Mihi abunde satisfacitur.
Isaac Causabon, for
Tot palmis, tot lauribus.
Lana pectita.
Strigil est supellex.
Omnes mortales omnium aevorum.
Mensura cujus fundum sit collisum.
Jacobus Thuanus, for saying
Substraxit, Substractus, Aboletus, Coliturus, Perculsit.
And Paulus Jovius, for saying
Prosternentes se, for Prostrantes.
Burdo-Scaliger makes a most notorious Solecism in the Preface to his
conjectanea upon M. T. Varro De Lingua Latina (for the use of which excellent
book I am indebted to the most learned Dr. White, the Reverend Archdeacon of
Notinghamshire, since Lord Bp. of Peterborough;) which he thus begins:

Non dubito quin haec Conjectanea in M. Varronem maturius edenda erant, quod a
quibusdam, etc.

So does Lipsius, in saying Sol meridies erat.
Vereor ut milites non pellant.
Non ambigo quin peregrinationem laudabis.


And Cazabon,

Multa quorum interpretibus ne suboluisse quidem videbamus.

Jussit me Rex ut tibi significarem.

Thuanus,

Castellum aggrediuntur, sed irrito successu, qui intro erant, gnaviter se
defendentibus.

Tantum terroris oppidanis injecit, ut tandem positis armis deditionem faciunt.

Incommodare aliquem.

Maffeius,

Amiculam breviorem tunicae superinduunt.

And Famianus Strada,

Nos monitore necesse non habemus, for moneri necesse non habemus.

Pecuniam mutuo dare, for mutuam.

Paulus Jovius, Henricus Stephanus, and Jos. Scaliger.

Putant se occisos iri: which deserves a lash.

Lipsius, an exact imitator of the faults, i. e. of the Archaisms, of Varro,
Sallust, and Sisenna, how insolently and obsoletly does he speak!

Volupe mihi auditu est.
Hilum non ego deterior.
Vale mioculissime.
Non magis propritim expresseris.
In civitatibus est confluges vitiorum.
Nay he began one of his Epistles in the first Edition of his first Century
thus: Aio Locutio tu lita: ego fidei strenue. Guess what the man means.

Durst I presume to be this enigmatical Gentleman's OEdipus, I would unriddle
him thus:

Tu noli silere diutius, sed scribe, ut Deum illum, qui ab aiendo and loquendo
nomen sortitus est, habeas propitium; sicut ego fidem habeo propitiam, quam
servavi, scribendo scilicet, sicut acturum me promiseram.

And indeed this Sentence is rather obscure than antique: So is that of Hen.
Stephanus, conceived on the nonce to puzle Boys with.

Rebare te fari scio, fabare nescio. Of Salust's Archaisms these are a
Specimen; Famae, famarum, famas.
Magnas vis, for vires.
Armis decoribus, for decoris.
Senati, for Senatus.
Plebis, for plebs.
Satias, for Satietas.
Sallere, for Sallire.
Secus virile, for sexus virilis.
Calui, for Decipi.
Claudere, for claudicare.
Egere aliquam rem.
Supplicium, for Supplicatio.
Locus hostibus ignarus, for ignotus.


Nay even Erasmus himself, a Writer of yesterday, is not without expressions
which were accounted Archaical or old-fashioned by Caesar and Cicero: for what
else are those in the end of a Colloquie entitled Male valere?

Ge. Ciendus est alvus, movendus est alvus.

Li. Imo sistendus est magis, for cienda, movenda, sistenda.

It smells old, says Angelius Politianus, to say totiens quotiens, quinquiens,
deciens, viciens, triciens, vicensimum, tricensimum, for toties quoties, etc.

Adrian the Emperor, cited by Charisius, lib. 2. taxes Augustus himself of
Innovation, for using the word obiter instead of per viam, (for which very
expression, i. e. per viam, Augustus reprehends Tiberius Claudius: Scribis enim
(says he) per viam (...) obiter) used by Plautus Cistell. or in via used by
Ter. Hec. 5.3. or in itinere used by Cicero at Artic. l. 9.

And lest you should stand in a maze at this, I do assure you, that in the
latter-end of Augustus's reign the face of the Latin Tongue was so innovated,
that shortly after Seneca says that the men of his Age do not speak Latin. His
very words are these, Ep. 39.

Vide ne plus profectura sit oration ordinaria, quam haec quae nunc vulgo
Breviarium dicitur, olim cum Latin loqueremur, Summarium vecabatur.

Of this Impurity called Neoterism, are they guilty, says Quintil. lib. 9.
cap. 3. and l. 8. c. 3. who say

Huic rei invidere, and not with Cicero and others hanc rem.

Incumbere illi, and not in illum.

Plenum vino, and not vini.

So was Muretus, for saying

Figmenta Poetarum.

Ne optimi quidem jaculatores semper collimant [aim] for collineant [hit the
mark.]

Juxta praeceptum Hesiodi.

Martialis Silio Italico coaevus fuit.

Quorsum necesse est?

Hoc tibi imputabis.

Syllabae modus impedire mutationi videtur.

Ad Episcopi munus promoveri.

How severe was Tullie upon Antonie for innovating the signification of one
word, viz.

Contumeliam facere, for pati. Nonne melius est (says he) mutum esse, quam quod
nemo intelligat, dicere?

How much more then, think you, had he been alive, would he have stormed at
Paulus Manutius, who, though otherwise a most fine Writer, innovates both
significations and Phrases; such are, Ingratitudo, Speculatio, Contrarietas.

Damnum pati.

Dissuadere aliquem ab aliqua re, for dehortari.

Adhibere fidem alicui, for habere fidem, or credere. Such also are these of
Maffeius,

Mercimonio dare operam, for Mercaturae.

Locus exercendo mercimonio idoneus.

Fluvios, quamvis ad jugulum usque aqua pertingeret, transibat, for pertineret:
For pertingere was not used in this sense in the Golden Age of the Latin
Tongue, although it be found in one corrupt place of Salust and Cicero.

So quae Arabes de Angelorum corporibus turpiter astruunt, for affirmant.

Ut minimum, for minimum, or ad minimum.

Spiritum mortificationis spiritui speculationis praeferre.

Hactenus de toto vitae cursu, nunc praecipua de dictis ac moribus per species
exsequemur, for distinct or singulatim.

Toto ditionis suae imperio, for regni or provinciae.

Cujus bonitatem supplices exoramus, ut nos ad caelestia regna pervenire
patiatur, for oramus, imploramus.

Aliquot Collegia in ea Urbe fundavit, for condidit, constituit; for fundare is
as much as stabilire.

Proprium Navarrae gentis est conversio Ethnicorum.

Compenset Deus hanc ejus in nos voluntatem.

Virgo a Meacensi quodam procere expetita; for Magnate.

Christianae doctrinae fundamenta memoriter hauserat, for memoriae mandarat.

Meminisse and Recitare memoriter is Latin, but not discere memoriter.

Totum illud bellum circiter annum viguit, for tenuit: Vigere is averred by
Festus not to belong to warlike affairs.

Secus mare; secus aream (which Charisius says are both fatuum and sordidum
dictu) for juxta, secundum.

Talarem tunicam in caligas infundunt, for in Braccas or femoralia; for calige
are Soldiers shoes.

Detrimentum passus est.

Homini voluptuoso jucunda proponere, for voluptuario, as Cicero, Plautus, and
Terence speak. Pliny the younger makes voluptuosus adequate to voluptate
plenus, but Maffeius unskilfully uses it for one that hunts after pleasure.

These, and suchlike new-fangl'd words and phrases, do extremely muddy
Maffeius's Latin, and argue that he took more pains than reason or science to
write that Language.

Now Lipsius's upstart novities would amount to a complete Volume, I shall
there give you a taste, and away. He uses

Septimana sustantively for dierum hebdomas, which is spoken not only nove, but
also sordide, says the greatest of Critics.

Saltem, for tantummodo.

In Consistorio decretum est.

Vide ne seducat te affectus, for auferat, in errorem inducat.

Gratitudo. Ut quid, for quare.

In locis dissitis, for long remotis.

Juramentum, for jusjurandum, sacramentum.

Ore ad os aliquem alloqui.

Nepos ex fratre.

In ditione Leodicensi subsistam.

Ubi leonina pellis non pertingit, vulpinam asserere oportet, for quo non
pertinet.

Meus amanuensis.

Dio asserit aliter vixisie Senecam, quam scripserit, for affirmat.

Rerum circumstantiae, for attributiones.

Lenocinium circumponere dolori, for delinimentum.

Te volo meum amicum and crebrum invisorem esse, for visitatorem.

Quid agas, fac me scitiorem, for scientem, certiorem.

Ex cord, ex pectore dico, for vero, serio.

Invalentia mea causam sustinet, for invaletudo.

Aequitas ipsa sententiam a me donet.

There are a great number too of Causabon's Neoterisms: as,

Accomplices conjurationis, for affines, participes, populares, conscii.

Consequentias elicere.

Carentia, for orbatio, detractio, caritas.

Rebus sic stantibus, for his rebus, quomodo nunc est.

Tenetur nuptias cogitare, for debet.

Mutuo rogare pecuniam, for mutuam.

Tu unus a multis retro seculis extitisti.

Tuas lauds attaminare.

Errant in observantia hujus rei.

Risum alicujus tollere, for movere alicui.

Turpis and defaedus mos.

Conciliare duas lectiones diversas, for in concordiam vel consensum redigere.

Libri manuales, for manu descripti.

Multum sibi in barbaris dictionibus permiserunt, for vocabulis.

Versus penultimus, and antepenultimus.

Cibi aliis indicti and innominati.

Error memorialis.

Multoties, for Saepius.

Judiciosissimus.

Balbutie laborare.

Monstruositas.

Thuanus's novities are almost innumerable; such are,

Nullatenus, for nihil penitus, omnino non, nullo modo.

Juxta veterem sententiam.

Nostra and retro seculorum memoria, which, though Schottus the Jesuit boasts for
Ciceronian, yet is no more worthy of Tullie than Congrue loqui, which being
swallowed up by the Monks, he makes use of.

Pejerare in Deum.

Impar contra tantam multitudinem.

Vir nupsit puellae.

Literae fiduciariae, for Authoritates, commonly called Credentiales.

Caligae, for Braccae.

Improperare alicui, for exprobrare, since Varro used it for intro properare.

Obiter notandum.

Dejerementa in Deum.

Ad mortem damnare aliqi em, for capitis.

Ne ipsorum dignitati tractu temporis praejudicetur, for ne in posterum fraudi
sit.

Dietim, for in singulos dies.

Ultroneus, spontaneus.

De rerum statu optime instructus.

Per trasennam appellare.

Nay the so much admired Barclay's novel words and phrases would fill a good
large Volume, I shall therefore pass them by in silence: for to endeavor to
purge away the filth of his writings, would be a matter of as great
loathsomness and difficulty as to cleanse Augeas's Stable; and if this required
a River of Water, that would ask a Sea of Ink.

It is a vulgar modern error to write to speak octuaginta, or quatuor viginti,
octuagesimus and octuagenarius, for octoginta, octogesimus, octogenarius.

Nonies, for novies. Vigesies, trigesies, quadragesies, septuagesies,
octogesies, nonagesies, centesies, millesies, for vieies, tricies, quadragies,
sezagies, septagies, octogies, nonagies, centies, millies.

Indignor, quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus.

I am grieved that the incomparably learned, great and good, Gerard John
Vossius should be now and then caught napping in his (though, to give the old
Gentleman his due, he apologizes for fear of the worst) in his excellent Books
de Vitiis sermonum; where he says,

Desita Romae sermonis puritate, and nondum collapsa Romanae linguae puritate.

Acceptum Aegyptiis ferimus Zythum, for referimus.

Decerptum for discerptum.

Animus mihi est ita tractare literas, ut neminem depretiem.

Ab iis oris long dissiti erant Daci. In terras longinquas, dissitasque for
remoti and remotas.

Hodieque for hodie quoque.

Juxta Stoicos, for secundum Stoicos, de Stoicorum sententia.

Collaterales sunt, quorum alter alterius latus claudit; for which Horace said
tegit, Catullus adhaeret.

Muto sumere est mutuari, for mutuam.

Non vero, for non autem.

Nuspiam clathrus legitur. Nuspiam aeque peccatum. Hoc nuspiam extat, for
nusquam.

Ex Hispania Paenos petituri obiter visemus Sardos, for pretereuntes; or in
Greek (...). In transitu, in trancursu, per viam.

Primum universe aliqua praemittam de long vetustissimis Aeuropae linguis, tum
particulatim dicam de linguae Latinae natalibus, for separatim, seorsum.

Passivus est error, for vulgaris, by his own confession.

Praeclara eorum reperta; sine quibus esset, defraudaremur magna doctrinarum
part, for absque quibus esset, etc.

But certainly there is nothing can make Latin so impure, and debase it so
much, as Xenism, or Peregrinity;

Which is the usage of Latin words in conformity to the Idiotisms, or proper
custom of other Languages. And this Vice, this (...) as the Greeks call it,
this foolish affectation, began so early to taint the Latin Tongue, that
Sallust himself cannot plead not guilty, when charged by Quintilian for saying
Amat fieri, in imitation of the Greek Idiom (...), for the Latin solet.

Muretus also, among other learned men, must pardon my boldness, if I call him
(...), for saying, Non me latet, because forsooth (...) and (...), whence lateo
seems to be formed, is construed with an Accusative Case; whereas Latet me is
no more Latin than Patet me. Nor indeed did ever Lucretius, Plautus, or Cicero
use other than latet mihi.

For why? Because forsooth the Greek is a Language of great elegancy, will it
be therefore praiseworthy always to use Latin words after the Greek way? Why
then let us even say with Vitruvius, Nummus ex auri, and Poculum ex ligni, and
studium in Juris, for ex auro, ex ligno, in Jure; because a Writer of
Augustus's age thought good thus to Grecissate.

And in no wise less is Tacitus's evil-affectation, who in the beginning of the
5th. Book of his Annals writes thus: Titus, ut superior sui jam crederetur,
decorum se, promtumque in armis ostendebat. Here our Historian indiscreetly
imitates the Greek custom, saying superior sui for superiorse; which Lipsius,
not discerning, and yet well knowing it was not right sterling Latin, did what
Critics commonly do, viz. go about to correct what they do not understand, and
so endeavored ridiculously to amend, and set it to rights thus; Titus ut super
fortunam crederetur, etc.

Moreover, if we consult Reason (which Cicero advises all learned men to use
as a Test, or Touchstone, to try, refine, and purify the corrupt custom of
speaking) we shall find that it is absurdly done of him who after the Greek
custom dares say Superior illius: for in the Greek there is suppressed the
Preposition (...) or (...), which governs the Genitive Case; but in the Latin
prae is ellipted, which ever governs an Ablative Case.

In Greek therefore by regular Syntax we say, (...); but figuratively and
usually, (...). In Latin according to Rule, Major prae his charitas; by a
Figure, Major his. If you say Major horum, why then you grecissate, and are
cacozelous, laying aside both your Reason and Judgment:

But more intolerable are they, that foist upon the Latin Tongue the Idioms of
living Languages, as the most learned Jesuit Johannes Mariana did in that; Rex
sumtus istos excusare debet, for compendifacere, ponere ad compendium, sumtibus
supersedere; because in the Spanish Idiom it is said, Escusar los gastos.

So Lipsius, Orientales Imperatores in specie, gestu and cultu magis curiosi
aut affectati, for ista talia magis ducupantur, venantur, nimio studio
persequuntur, sunt putidi and nimii in talibus; because indeed the Italian
Idiom bears it: sc. E troppo affettato in questo.

So Thuanus, Rex Episcopum aliquando deponere potest; for Episcopatu abigere,
exuere, movere, removere, dimovere, depellere, detrudere, desicere, abire,
cogere, or Episcopatum alicui abolere, or abrogare.

His also is this, Viginti ad minus dies; because, you must know, the French
say, Au moins; the Italians, Al meno o manco; the Spaniards, A lo menos; which
the Latins express thus, Minimum, quod minimum est, minime and sometimes
saltem, duntaxat, certe, at, vel.

And this reminds me of a novel expression that Dr. Busbey, after Pasor upon
the Verb (...), uses, viz. ut plurimum [most an end] I know not by what
authority: Pasor, says he, in Lexico N. T. ad verbum (...), ut plurimum dicit
resumi 1, quae in indefinito primo abjicitur. Gr. Gram. Rud. p. 298.

There are some of our own Countrymen too, that being deceived by the Idiom of
our Mother Tongue, stick not to say, Fidem dare alicui, for credere; because we
commonly say, to give credit, or trust, to any one, or any thing. Nay Dr.
Robinson in his Phrase-book commonly called Winchester-Phrases, appoints it
Children for a Phrase. Phr. 186. Title, To believe or credit. Whereas Fidem
dare alicui is to promise, or pass ones word to any body. Nempe (says
Scioppius) cum fidem tibi dedi, i. e. promisi, ac veluti fidem meam apud te
deposui, tu mihi fidem habes, sive est mihi apud te fides; hoc est, Tu mihi
credis. Instead of which, Ausonius, Manutius, Scaliger, alias Burdo, and Dr.
Robinson in the forecited place, say newly and barbarously, Tu mihi fidem
adhibes, whenas adhibere fidem is afferre fidem ad rem aliquam, uti fide, even
as adhibere diligentiam. And here give me leave to observe to you, that
Lucretius innovated in saying Fidem dare, for persuadere, facere ut res habeat
fidem, or credatur. l: 5. Dictis dabit ipsa fidem res forsitan -- which he
presently interprets thus; Hoc ratio potius quam res persuadeat ipsa. But note,
Fidem habeo signifies one while credere, other whiles credi, or credibile esse.

Certainly Mr. Merryweather showed himself to be more skilful in foreign and
ancient customs, than in the vernacular practice and usage of the Language of
his own Country, when in his Latin Translation of Religio Medici he turns this
passage of the Author, Yet have I not so shaken hands with those desperate
Resolvers, [Roman-Catholicks] as to stand in diameter and at swords point with
them, we have reformed from them, not against them; thus: Nec tamen in vecordem
illum pertinacium hominem gregem memet adjungo, ita ut iisdem ex diametro
repugnent; ab illis, non contra illos reformationem instituimus. -- Neither
Latin, nor Sense! for, Nec tamen vecordi illi pertinacium hominum gregi ita
valedixi, ut iisdem ex diametro repugnem, etc.

Nay, what is stranger still, a witty and ingenious Physician has had the
misfortune in diverse places of his Book to write neither Concord nor Government
true. A Paradox! Well, take down Dr. Tho. Skinner's Motus compostti, turn to
page 111. Dum Aurangii authoritatem apud Ordines imminutam iret, cuncta ipse
administravit solus; for imminutum. To page 113. Vnam interim [navim] immensis
opibus refertam, and pulrimis fatiscentem ictibus voracior pelagus hausit, for
voracius. To page 140. Cernere erat rutilantium hic flammarum fulgor, illie
ruentium prope tectorum fragor; for fulgorem, fragorem. Ohe! jam satis est,
Ohe! If your spleen be not ready to crack, I could furnish you with more such
as these be, not only Xenisms, but even Barbarisms and Solecisms, (collected
out of English Authors, Latin Treatises) which I have in store lying by me, as
finding them matter of almost every tormenting observation.

-- Pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
There is yet one offense more, which unskilful men do often unwarily commit
against the purity of the Latin Tongue, whereby, though the words of a sentence
be neither barbarous, antique, nor novel, and the Construction nor false, nor
cacozelous, the Language suffers extremely. You Will say, what can this be? Why,
I answer, it is mala junctura, it is an unlawful joining of words together, never
warranted by the practice of the purest Age.

Of this Crime are those Onocrotali, those Latin-bablers most notoriously
guilty, who value themselves highly upon their prating, where they chance to
come, Latin unlatinly and rudely to the listening and all-admiring Semidocti.

How often have I blushed to hear these Asses bray out

Vigilant milites in monte, for speculantur de monte.

Janizarit tentant frangere aciem Polonorum, for conantur aciem perrumpere.

Dimisit suos milites Rex Gallicus, for dimisit copias or exercitum:

Impedivit commeatum Dux Lotharus, for interclusit.

Triduum victu carebant Christiani, for re frumentaria.

Duxit vineas, for egit.

Primi in consilio, for consilii principes.

Reportarunt praedas, for egerunt.

Milites monuit, for hortatus est.

Signum fecit, for signum dedit.

Renovavit praelium, for restituit, or redintegravit.

Aciem ordinavit, for instruxit.

Tuto redierunt Christiani, for receperunt se.

Misit ad succurrendum, for misit subsidio.

Fecerunt vim, for impetum fecerunt.

Magnis viis contendit, for magnis itineribus.

Perdidit opportunitatem, for amisit occasionem.

Facere orationem, for habere.

Agere verba, for facere. Facere gratias, for agere.

Damnum pati or facere, for dare.

Jacturam pati or dare, for facere.

Contumeliam facere or dare, for pati; and suchlike.

And now, my young Sailers in the wide and perilous Ocean of the Latin Tongue,
I have discharged the duty of a faithful Pilot, I have pointed out to you all
those Quicsands, Shelves, and Rocks, upon which others, not altogether
unskilful Mariners, both of the last and present Age, have, and do yet daily
split: It is yours to advert diligently to my directions, to lanch forth your
Vessels cautiously, lest after a heedless and temerarious Wrack, you fall a
Sacrifice to those gaping Sea Monsters, unlamented because fore-warned, and
unpitied.

FINIS.

