The Joyful News OF OPENING THE EXCHEQUER TO THE GOLDSMITHS OF Lombard Street,
and their CREDITORS.

As it was celebrated in a LETTER to the same Friend in the Country, to whom
the Bankers Case was formerly sent.

By the Author of the same CASE.

Justitia stabilitur Solium.

Prove. 16.12. Optime hoc Exemplum Principi constituo, ut se talem Civibus
praebeat, quales Sibi Deos velit

Seneca de Clementia, Lib. 1. Sect. 7. Licensed, April 7. 1677.

ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for William Place, at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn; and
Thomas Basset, at the George near Cliffords-Inn in Fleet Street. M.DC.LXXVII.

The Joyful News of Opening the Exchequer to the Goldsmiths of Lombard Street,
and their Creditors, etc.
SIR,
I Am now to inform you of one of the most glorious Pieces of Royal Justice,
that perhaps any Age has afforded. His Majesty has heard the Cries of his
Loyal Subjects, and (in imitation of the Divinity) has been pleased to come
down and deliver them. I will no longer either amuse or torture you with
Expectation, but shall now at once overwhelm you with the Joyful Tidings: The
King has settled the Debt of the Goldsmiths, and their Creditors, and the
Letters Patents are now ennobled under the Great Seal of England.

When this Heroic Act of Justice was lately proposed by His Majesty in Council,
the Noble Lords, and other the Worthies of the Council, assented thereunto,
with the most generous Unanimity and Concurrence that ever has been known, not
so much as one contradicting.

And particularly that Noble Lord, who has the Administration of the Treasury,
has, upon every occasion, contributed to it all the furtherance imaginable.

Neither is it to be forgotten, that One Illustrious Person, who in truth was
concerned to have obstructed this Settlement with all his vigor and puissance,
(for I should have told you, this Debt is charged upon the Hereditary part of
the Excise) was pleased notwithstanding to relinquish his own Interest, and the
Grandeur of his Person, to that degree, as to become even the very
indefatigable Solicitor therein. I say Solicitor, for by that very word
himself was often pleased to express his Fervor and Zeal for the
accomplishment of this Business. An Action certainly of great Glory! fit indeed
to be illustrated with a Beam of the Sun! and to be celebrated with due praise
by every good Englishman to the end of the World!

I remember you told me two or three Months ago, that this Debt had been then
dead and buried five years complete, and that Miracles were ceased, and
therefore Men did in vain expect the Resurrection thereof. But you see now it
is a Prerogative peculiar to God, and his Vicegerent the King, to restore to
Life and Vigor, what, in humane Apprehension, was long since dead and extinct.

Sir, This Glorious Action has replenished all Places here with Exultation! An
inexpressible Joy has hereupon invaded all men's Souls! Upon the breaking this
Box of Precious Ointment, the whole Kingdom is filled with the Redolency and
Sweetness thereof! If I should tell you, that this happy News was received here
with the same Transports of Gladness, that those People which inhabit that part
of the Globe, where there is a Six months continued darkness, do entertain the
first Returns of the Sun, I should give you but a very languid and faint
representation of the Joy; for indeed, while I labor to disclose so
stupendous a passion, I find Nature wanting to me in Metaphors and
Similitudes. It shall suffice me then to tell you only, That the Tears of the
Widow are now dried up, the Cries of the Orphan are quieted; that the Aged poor
man weeps no longer, unless it be for excessive joy; and that all Mankind here
has conceived an unspeakable Contentment in the Action.

Neither shall you need to wonder, Sir, that all men here whatsoever take
themselves to be sharers in this Jubilee; for though every individual person,
it is true, is not immediately concerned in the Debt, yet I must tell you, Sir,
every man is concerned in the Justice and Generosity of his Prince, though
shower'd down upon his Fellow Subjects. To say nothing, that there be few
persons in the Kingdom, but will, by this Emanation of His Majesty's Clemency,
receive direct and real advantage to Themselves, or Relations, in some Capacity
or other.

Sir, The Fraternity of Kings are the Subjects of God, as the rest of Mankind
are of Kings (whom the Scriptures likewise call Gods) And can there be any
thing more Divine, than for a Prince thus to handle his Subjects with the
Passion and Tenderness, with the which he desires the Immortal God should treat
his own Royal Person? The great Roman Emperors valued themselves more upon
their Style of Fathers of the Country, than upon all their other August and
Illustrious Attributes, because that Compellation expressed (as they conceived)
some Affinity with Divine Honor. If thou art a God, as thou pretendest (said
the Scythian Qu. Curtius, lib. 7.
Ambassadors to the Great Alexander, when he was about to invade their Masters
Territories) thou ought to be a Benefactor to poor Mortals, not to commit
Rapines upon them, for in doing so, thou will be less than a Man. And it was
not without Mystery, that God chose the first Governors of His People from the
Flocks and the Sheepfolds, that they might be the better instructed to become
the indulgent Shepherds and Pastors of Mankind. Nay, we find, that the very
first Question made by the first Saul.
King that God Almighty appointed in the World, was, [Quid est huic populo quod
plorat?] What aileth this People that they weep?

Without all peradventure, Sir, the Redress of Grievances of this kind, and the
obliging of the World with Clemency and Justice, is the very Pinnacle of that
Renown, which a Mortal Nature can hope to attain to in this Life. This was the
way, Sir, this was the way by which the Hero's of old time consecrated their
names to Immortality! by which they ascended the Triumphal Chariot of Glory!
and were at length ascribed into the number of the Deities! And if this be a
true Doctrine, (as I think no man will doubt it) how precious and sweet will
the memory of his Majesty's Name be to the Present and Future Ages, by reason
of this so magnificent an expression of His Grace and Justice to His People.

Sir, You cannot with any reason suppose me herein to play the Parasite or
Flatterer, (you well know the aversions of my Nature to all the servile Arts of
that kind) the true and substantial Greatness and Glory of this Action will
acquit me from all those little Surmises, and Suspicions. For my own part, I
cannot but declare to you, and all the World, that if the like Act of Justice
had been done by a Prince that Reigned here a thousand years ago; or by a King
that at this time inhabited the farthest parts of the Indies, I could not but
have conceived in my mind a singular Deference and Veneration for the Action.
And withal I must tell you, Sir, That the Envy and Discontents are great, and
in no wise to be excused, when the most laudable Actions of a Prince or State,
and which ought to give the greatest Satisfaction, are yet taken in ill sense,
and not thought worthy of that Applause and Remarque which is due unto them.
Especially when it has also been sometime seen, that the best Governments,
yea, and the best Men, are like the choicest precious Stones, wherein the least
Flaw or Speck is presently discovered; when as those that are generally foul
and corrupted, are not observed with the same Niceness and Curiosity.

Sir, The People of Egypt (they say) do presage the Fertility of the ensuing
year, from the gradual Inundations of their River Nilus: I think a man may,
with equal reason, prognosticate a great Harvest of Felicity to this Nation,
from this late fructifying Overflow of his Majesty's Justice. I pretend not to
foretell Futurities; but, in so plain a case, I think, a very weak person may
undertake to be a Prophet: You will give me leave then to instance in two or
three particulars which come first to my mind.

In the first place then, this Action will, in all probability, conduce to the
Sedation and Quieting of men's minds, when they shall observe His Majesty's so
singular Regard and Tenderness to His Subjects Property (a word which has been
always Precious and Sacred in this Nation, and I doubt not will for ever so
continue) that so Vast and Immense a Debt, a Debt, humanely speaking, long ago
dead and buried; that a Debt of this nature, I say, should be thus honorably
revived, and secured, and yet with such Difficulties too, and Hare Shifts to
the Crown (as His Majesty was lately pleased to express himself in an Audience
of the whole Kingdom) This, this, Sir, is a matter not altogether to be
neglected, and (as my Lord Chancellor then also said) None but a Just and
Generous Prince would ever have undergone it.

I remember In Prafatione ad Vitam Jul. Agricolae.
Tacitus does tell us (not without some Ostentation) that his Divus Nerva and
Divus Trajanus (two excellent Emperors it must be confessed) had the knack of
rightly mixing and tempering [ Principatum and Libertatem] Sovereignty and
Liberty, two things (he adds) which before those times did not often keep
company together. Our King has, in this Action, discovered himself a great
Master in the same Art, and therefore deserves equal Glory with them. And his
Majesty seems to have acted herein according to that Great Saying of His Royal
Grandfather King James, (which my Lord Chancellor Advancement of Learning, lib.
7. cap. 2.
Bacon could not be persuaded, but that King spoke by nothing less than a
Divine Inspiration) viz. That Kings should rule by the Laws of their Kingdoms,
as God did by the Laws of Nature; and ought as rarely to put in use their
Prerogative, which transcends Laws, as we see God put in Use his power of
working Miracles.

Secondly, This Action will undoubtedly have a sweet Influence upon the Nation
in point of Trade, Commerce, and indeed all Negotiations and Business of what
nature soever. I have observed to you heretofore, That Money is the Blood of
the Body Politic, and that if the Circulation thereof he stopped in one Member,
that Blood can never be transmitted to the Neighboring Veins, and thereupon
not only that part, but the whole Body, in fine, becomes fev'rish and
distempered. But this Gracious Act of His Majesty has removed the Obstruction,
opened again the Passages and Current of the Blood, and thereupon the Body will
be restored to its pristine Health and Vigor. To say nothing, that as the Sea
will now feed the Rivers and little Brooks, so these again will, in good
measure, disburthen themselves into the Sea in matter of Parliamentary Taxes,
Customs, Imposts, and other Returns of that Nature; the Advantage being
reciprocal both to King and People.

Lastly, (and which perhaps will be more considerable than all the rest, in the
opinion of all good Englishmen) The Sacred Honor and Declarations of the King,
the Common Faith, and Laws of the Nation (which were indeed the Hostages and
Guaranty for this Debt, and ought to be as immovable as the Center of the
Earth) will be hereby preserved Chaste and Inviolate. States and Communities,
Sir, are supported by Fame and Reputation, as well as Individuals, and single
Bodies. And the honorable Performances of public Sanctions, are the Arteries
and Ligaments which hold together a Body Politic, which may not be cut
assunder, or loosed without a manifest Peril to the Whole. This Royal Balsome,
Sir, has now perfectly healed up the Wound, and a new and more vigorous
Phoenix of Credit and Reputation will arise again, as it were, out of its own
Ashes.

Sir, After the time of that excellent Prince Trajan, there was, amongst the
Romans, under every renowned Emperor, a form of Acclamation of this kind, Long
may thou live, Antonius! Long may thou reign, Theodosius! happier than
Augustus, better than Trajan! I am sure we of England may, with much more
reason, proclaim, Long may Thou live, CHARLES THE SECOND! the grand Exemplar
of Clemency to all the Potentates of the Earth! Long may Thou Reign here in
Happiness and Glory! and make a slow, though sure, Return to Heaven! And let
this Illustrious and Immortal Act of Thy Justice, fill the mouth of Fame, and
be resounded with loud Applause throughout the whole Universe, as long as the
Sun and Moon endure! So prays,

SIR, Your affectionate Friend and Servant, THO. TURNOR.
Gray's Inn, May 7th 1677.

