TWO LETTERS FROM ROTTERDAM. Dated July 14. Stilo novo, 1642, Wherein is
discovered a most Divelish and desperate design contriv^d by the Lord Digby,
Captain Hide, Sir Lewis Daves, Mr. Iermin, Mr. Percy, and other Fugitive
Traitors in those parts, against the Parliament of England.

With the names of the Ships, number of men, Arms, Ordnance, Bullets, Powder,
and match, with other Ammunition now in readiness, to be transported into the
North.

Also, The names of the most eminent Persons which are to come over in the
aforesaid Ships.

And diverse other matters of extraordinary note and Consequence.

Read in both Houses of Parliament, and Published by Command.

Printed at London for Joseph Hunscot, and John Wright, July the 6. 1642.

Worshipful Sir,
SInce my last Per post, many things of consequence have come to my hands. The
Ship Providence of the Kings, with the Lion, which brought over the Ladies of
honor to the Queen, bring over for the North parts of England, all these
Gentlemen mentioned within the enclosed, with three or fourscore more; It is
thought here, they go for Newcastle, some of Prince Roberts men, told me, they
were bound for York, they are all desperate in their way, that whosoever they
meet with, if they oppose them, to fight it out to the last man.

The Lion has 42. Guns, the Providence has 14. and is to take in two more,
which we know of, now being within one mile of Rotterdam, they are 12. foot
long, and shoot a Bullet of 44. l. weight, every one there is fearful of a
desperate design upon the premises, you may please not to harbor any thought
of faithfulness in the Officers of the Lion, for ^e have certain intelligence
of the truth hereof, I my self went to the Helleford Sluice, and saw Cavaliers
there, and going thither, some whereof told me, that they went in the Ship, and
named all the enclosed; We cannot yet hear of any further pawning of the
Jewels, yet all men think they have gotten much money upon them, for they have
provided all sorts of Arms of proof, and others: Some that had Pistols to
make a^ ^^^ghe, could not get them done, till all their work was done, which
now is finished, and they be all for a ^^ind: much of their Baggage being laden
at Brill, aboard the Providence, and at Helleford Sluice a board the Lion, the
Scout of Crawling, a small Town near Rotterdam, told one of this Town, that
Prince Robert, has hired a Boyer to carry horse for England, the Scout is the
only Master of Horses in these parts.

One Isaac Light a Merchant of the Company, has bought 15000. weight of
Powder, and is now gone to Utrech to buy match; all which presently to be shipped
for England. They give out, it is for the Parliament; and by their Order. This
Merchant, late Factor for Master Christofer, Tomlings Merchant of London, and
Thomas Ashton, servant to Master Laurence Halsted of London, has shipped here
38. cases of Arms, being but the remainder of 700. cases, for which they
obtained license to ship here, and at Amsterdam; we are informed that the
greatest part of those are shipped, in 3 Flemish Boyers or Hoyes, now lying for a
wind at the Tassell this information we had of one of the Custome-hou^^ in
Rotterdam, upon occasion of a Merchants sight o^ the warrant. Yesterday a
Jewel was sent to Rotterdam from the Haghe, valewed at 40000. Guilders, by a
Jeweller here. Master Percy, Master Iermin, Master W. Mount^gue, and Master
Davenant, came into the Haghe this day seven night, at 12. a clock at night in
the Queens Coach, and with her Footmen. These are all that for present I shall
write, but shall inform you more by word of mouth, if I can get passage one
way or other. Thus with my humble service remembered, I take my leave and rest,

Yours to command.
Rotterdam primo July, 1642. Stilo novo Of all these we have sufficient proof,

In one white of Dover, ketch there are many Fats of Match, with other
provision of war. I hope to be with you before this Letter.

Of the most material of these particulars -- by the advice of Friends, I have
informed the Earl of Warwick by this bearer, the 38. cases are shipped aboard on
Rich. Lindall, a Hull man, laden for London.



The Contents of the enclosed note.
Prince Robert. Prince Maurice. Lord Denby. Lord Digby. Oneale that Traitor.
Captain Hide. Sir Lewis Dives, Colonel Wilson sent for out of Germany with
very many other Gentlemen and Comanders, and is credibly known, that they have
all sorts of Arms for horse, and that in great quantity, there being a great
Hoy or Boyer a Dutchman hired and paid the freight before hand, to carry the
Arms and Provision that Prince Robert, and the rest from the Haghe have made
for their Transportation into the North, and is undertaken, that this Boyer
shall be conveyed as well home, as out.

Worshipful Sir;
I Wrote to you on Tuesday last by a Merchant that had a Pass to come over
land, but least that should not come to hand, though little has happened here
since, I cannot omit this Post. The ship Lion that brought over Ladies of
Honor, is now fitted to transport into England P. Robert Prince Maurice, Lord
Digby, Lord Denby, Collonell Cockeram, Captain Hyde. Oneale, Sir Lewis Di^es,
with 80 or 90 Cavaleeres more; they have fitted themselves with armor of
proof, and all other accoutrements of war, they have been very merry, and
have drunk many healths to their good voyage, and in their cups have made
dividents of the Parliament men's lands; they are very jocund, and were all
aboard yesterday morning, the wind being then fair, but held but a little
space, and now blows very hard; so that God has now stayed them. The
Providence that lies at Brill, is to take in diverse of them; she has taken in
much of their luggadge, with two great Gunnes, each 12 foot long, and shoot a
bullet of 44 pounds. Also the Lion at Helleford sluice has taken in much
luggadge, there are 3 Boys or Hoyes lying at Tassell, laden with arms and 38
Cases of armor shipped in Richard Lyndall of Hull, bound for London, I hear
they be all muskets; and there are in that ship 700 Corslets, besides this, I
was told by one whose son sits in the Customehouse, all these shipped here
by a warrant which they had obtained for 700 Cases which a Merchant in this
Town saw and told, he besides one of the Customehouse did confess it true.
They give out diverse reports of staying of arms, and of their declining their
voyage. But we knowing their endeavor to work with all deceivablenesse,
think them only tricks to confound our intelligence; for we see such as are
laden here, are not stayed. Indeed for certain the States General have given
out a warrant of stay for arms; But so they did when all the arms provided
against the Scots were transported; the Officers are corrupted. There is a
Boyer lying within a mile of this Town to be fraughted with horse for P.
Robert, a Merchant of this Town saw the Shippers Charter party, which is, that
he carry them to what part shall be appointed by him between Dover and
Newcastle; The Prince undertakes his safe-convoy out, and home, and Isaac
Light a Merchant of the Company here, has bought 600 pound worth of powder,
and much match, where it is shipped, we cannor yet hear,; they work with much
privacy. Monday last, there came a jewel from the Hage valewed at 40000
Guilders by the Jewellers, they were offered 10000 Guilders upon it, but would
not, and so it was returned again. We cannot hear of any further pawning of
the jewels, nor where they be, Master Webster went with Sir William Boswell to
the Queen Monday last. Tuesday last was sevenighr at 12 a clock in the night
Master Piercy, Master Germyn, Master W. Montague, and Davenant, came into the
Hage with the Queens Coach, and Footmen, this I was told by one Master. The
Cavaleers do boast; that having a ship of 40 pieces of Ordnance, and another
of 16 Pieces, that will fight till they sink, if any oppose them, this is the
resolution of Captain Strachin Captain of the Providence; yesterday at
Helleford Sluice arrived Gustavus Horn with the happy entrance of the King, I
hope the Captain of her, will not do as the Captain of the Lion; This being
all of any moment that we hear here, I humbly take my leave and rest,

Yours to command.
Rotterdam the 4 of July 1642. Stilo novo.
FINIS.

