OF THE SACRED ORDER AND OFFICES OF EPISCOPACIE, By Divine Institution,
Apostolical Tradition, and Catholic Practice.

TOGETHER WITH Their Titles of Honor, Secular Employment, Manner of Election,
Delegation of their Power, and other appendant questions, asserted against the
Aerians, and Acephali, new and old.

By IER: TAILOR, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY

Published by His MAJESTY'S Command.

ROMANS 13. 1. There is no power but of God. The Powers that be, are ordained of
God. COUNCIL. CHALCED. (...).

LONDON, Printed for RICHARD ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1647.

TO THE TRVLY WORTHY, AND MOST ACCOMPLISHED St CHRISTOPHER HATTON Knight of the
Honorable Order of the BATH.
SIR,
I AM engaged in the defense of a Great Truth, and J would willingly find a
shroud to cover my self from danger, and calumny; and although the cause both
is and ought to be defended by Kings, yet my person must not go thither to
Sanctuary, unless it be to pay my devotion, and I have now no other left for
my defense, I am robbed of that which once did bless me, and indeed still does,
(but in another manner) and I hope will do more; but those distillations of
celestial dewes are conveyed in Channels not pervious to an eye of sense, and
now adays we seldom look with other, be the object never so beauteous or
alluring. You may then think, Sir, I am forced upon You; may that beg my pardon
and excuse, but I should do an injury to Your Nobleness, if I should only
make You a refuge for my need, (pardon this truth) you are also of the fairest
choice, not only for Your love of Learning, (for although that be eminent in
You, yet it is not Your eminence) but for Your duty to H. Church, for Your
loyalty to His sacred Majesty. These did prompt me with the greatest
confidence to hope for Your fair encouragement, and assistance in my pleadings
for Episcopacy, in which cause Religion, and Majesty, the King, and the Church
are (...) ago, and registered in the Law to make it authentic, Laici sunt
infensi Clericis. Now the Clergy pray, but fight not, and therefore if not
specially protected by the King contra Ecclesiam Malignantium, they are made
obnoxious to all the contumelies, and injuries, which an envious multitude will
inflict upon them. It was observed enough in King Edgars time, In Charta Edgar.
Regi^ A. D. 485. apud Hen. Spelman.
Quamvis decreta Pontificum, and verba Sacerdotum in convul^is ligaminibus
velut fundamenta montium fixa sunt, tamen plerumque tempestatibus, and
turbinibus saecularium rerum Religio S. Matris Ecclesiae maculis reproborum
dissipatur, acrumpitur. Idcirco Decrevimus Nos etc. There was a sad example of
it in K. John's time. For when he threw the Clergy from his Protection, it is
incredible what injuries, what affronts, what robberies, yea what murders were
committed upon the Bishops, and Priests of H. Church, whom neither the
Sacredness of their persons, nor the Laws of God, nor the terrors of
Conscience, nor fears of Hell, nor Church Censures, nor the Laws of
Hospitality could protect from Scorn (...) near a tie as the necessity of
their own preservation in the midst of so apparent danger, it will tie the
Bishops hearts, and hands to the King faster then all the ties of
Lay-Allegiance, (all the Political ties I mean,) all that are not precisely
religious, and obligations in the Court of Conscience.

2. But the interest of the Bishops is conjunct with the prosperity of the
King, besides the interest of their own security; by the obligation of secular
advantages. For they who have their livelihood from the King, and are in
expectance of their fortune from him are more likely to pay a tribute of
exacter duty, then others, whose fortunes are not in such immediate dependancy
on His Majesty. Aeneas Sylvius once gave a merry reason why Clerks advanced the
Pope above a Council, viz. because the Pope gave spiritual promotions, but
the Councels gave none. It is but the Common expectation of gratitude, that a
Patron Paramount shall be more assisted by his Beneficiaries in cases of
necessity, then by those, who receive nothing from him but the common
influences of Government.

3. But the Bishops duty to the King derives it self from a higher fountain.
For it is one of the maine excellencies in Christianity, that it advances the
State, and well being of Monarchies, and Bodies Politic. Now then the Fathers
of Religion the Reverend Bishops, whose peculiar office it is to promote the
interests of Christianity, are by the nature and essential requisites of their
office bound to promote the Honor and Dignity of Kings, whom Christianity
would have so much honored, as to establish the just subordination of people
to their Prince, upon better principles then ever, no less then their precise
duty to God, and the hopes of a blissful immortality. Here then is utile,
honestum, and necessarium, to tie Bishops in duty to Kings; and a threefold
Cord is not easily broken.

In pursuance of these obligations Episcopacy pays three returns of tribute
to Monarchy.

1. The first is the Duty of their people. For they being by God himself set
over souls, judges of the most secret recesses of our Consciences, and the
venerable Priests under them, have more power to keep men in their duteous
subordination to the Prince, then there is in any secular power, by how much
more forcible the impressions of the Conscience are, then all the external
violence in the world. And this power they have fairly put into act, for there
was never any Protestant Bishop yet in Rebellion, unless he turned recreant to
his Order, and it is the honor of the Church of England, that all her
Children, and obedient people are full of indignation against Rebels, be they
of any interest, or party whatsoever. For here (and for it we thank God and
good Princes) Episcopacy has been preserved in fair privileges and honor,
and God has blessed and honored Episcopacy with the conjunction of a loyal
people. As if because in the law of Nature the Kingdom and Priesthood were
joined in one person, it were natural, and consonant to the first justice,
that Kings should defend the rights of the Church, and the Church advance the
honor of Kings. And when I consider that the first Bishop that was
exauctorated was a Prince too, Prince, and Bishop of Geneva, me thinks it was
an ill Omen, that the cause of the Prince, and the Bishop should be in
Conjunction ever after.

2. A second return that Episcopacy makes to Royalty is that which is the Duty
of all Christians, the paying tributes, and impositions. And though all the
Kings Liege people do it, yet the issues of their duty, and liberality are
mightily disproportionate if we consider their unequal Number, and Revenues.
And if Clergy-subsidies be estimated according to the smallness of their
revenue, and paucity of persons, it will not be half so short of the number,
and weight of Crowns from Lay Dispensation, as it does far exceed in the
proportion of the Donative.

3. But the assistance that the Kings of England had in their Counsels, and
affairs of greatest difficulty, from the great ability of Bishops, and other
the Ministers of the Church, I desire to represent in the words of K. Alvred to
Walfsigeus the Bishop, in an Epistle where he deplores the misery of his own
age by comparing it with the former times, when the Bishops were learned, and
exercised in public Counsels. Faelicia tum tempora fuerunt inter omnes Angliae
populos; Reges Deo, and scriptae ejus voluntati obsecundarunt in sua pace, and
bellicis expeditionibus, atque regimine domestico domi se semper tutati
fuerint, atque etiam foris nobilitatem suam dilataverint. The reason was, as he
insinuates before, Sapi^ntes extiterunt in Anglica gente de spirituali gradu
etc. The Bishops were able by their great learning, and wisdom to give
assistance to the Kings affairs. And they have prosper'd in it, for the most
glorious issues of Divine Benison upon this Kingdom were conveyed to us by
Bishops hands, I mean the Union of the houses of York and Lancaster, by the
Counsels of John Speeds Hist. l. 9. c. 19. n. 23. p. 716.
Bishop Morton, and of England and Scotland by the treaty of Ibid. c. 20. n.
64. p. 747.
Bishop Fox, to which if we add two other in Materia religionis, I mean the
conversion of the Kingdom from Paganism, by St Augustine Archbishop of
Canterbury; and the reformation, begun and promoted by Bishops, I think we
cannot call to mind four blessings equal to these in any age or Kingdom, in
all which God was pleased by the mediation of Bishops, as he uses to do, to
bless the people. And this may not only be expected in reason, but in good
Divinity, for amongst the gifts of the spirit, which God has given to his
Church, are reckoned Doctors, Teachers, and 1 Cor. ca* 12. v. 28.
helps in government. To which may be added this advantage, that the services
of Churchmen are rewardable upon the Churches stock; no need to disimprove the
Royal Banks to pay thanks to Bishops.

But, Sir, I grow troublesome. Let this discourse have what ends it can; the
use J make of it, is but to pretend reason for my Boldness, and to entitle You
to my Book: for I am confident you will own any thing that is but a friends
friend to a cause of Loyalty. I have nothing else to plead for your acceptance,
but the confidence of your Goodness, and that I am a person capeable of your
pardon, and of a fair interpretation of my address to you, by being

SIR Your most affectionate Servant J. TAILOR.

Syllabus Paragraphorum.
, 1. Christ did institute a government in his Church. p. 7 2 This government
was first committed to the Apostles by Christ, p. 12 3. With a power of joining
others and appointing Successors in the Apostolate, p. 13 4. This succession
into the ordinary office of Apostolate is made by Bishops, p. 15. For the
Apostle and the Bishop are all one in name and person, 5. And office, p. 20. 6.
Which Christ himself has made distinct from Presbyters, p. 22 7. Giving to
Apostles a power to do some offices perpetually necessary, which to others he
gave not, p. 23 As of Ordination, 8. And Confirmation, p. 28 9. And superiority
of Jurisdiction. p. 35 10. So that Bishops are successors in the office of
Apostleship, according to the general tenent of antiquity, p. 49 11. And
particularly of S. Peter, p. 54 12 And the institution of Episcopacy as well as
of the Apostolate expressed to be Divine by primitive authority. p. 62 13 In
pursuance of the Divine institution, the Apostles did ordain Bishops in
several Churches, p. 68 As St James at Jerusalem, S. Simeon to be his
successor, 14 S. Timothy at Ephesus, p. 75 15 S. Titus at Creet, p. 85 16 S.
Mark at Alexandria, p. 93 17 S. Linus and S. Clement at Rome, p. 96 18 S.
Polycarp at Smyrna, and diverse others. p. 97 19 So that Episcopacy is at least
an Apostolical Ordinance, of the same authority with many other points
generally believed, p. 100 20 And was an office of power and great authority,
p. 102 21 Not lessened by the assistance and Council of Presbyters, p. 104 22
And all this has been the faith and practice of Christendom, p. 125 23 Who
first distinguished names used before in common, p. 128 24 Appropriating the
word Episcopus or Bishop to the supreme Church Officer, p. 139 25 Calling the
Bishop and him only the Pastor of the Church, p. 145 26 And Doctor, p. 149 27
And Pontifex, And Sacerdos. p. 150 28 And these were a distinct order from the
rest, p. 156 29 To which the Presbyterate was but a degree, p. 160 30 There
being a peculiar manner of Ordination to a Bishopric, p. 161 31 To which
Presbyters never did assist by imposing hands. p. 164 32 Bishops had a power
distinct, and superior to that of Presbyters, p. 175 33 Power of Confirmation,
p. 198 34 Power of Jurisdiction, p. 209 Which they expressed in attributes of
authority and great power. 35 Universal obedience given to Bishops by Clergy
and Laity. p. 214 36 Bishops were appointed Judges of the Clergy, and
spiritual causes of the Laity. p. 220 37 Presbyters forbidden to officiate
without Episcopal license. p. 251 38 Church-goods reserved to Episcopal
dispensatio^. 264 39 Presbyters forbidden to leave their own Dioces, or to
travel without leave of the Bishop. p. 266 40 The Bishop had power to prefer
which of his Clerks he pleased. p. 267 41 Bishops only did vote in Councels,
and neither Presbyters, nor People. p. 282 42 The Bishop had a propriety in the
persons of his Clerks. p. 292 43 The Bishops Jurisdiction was over many
Congregations, or Parishes. p. 295 44 Their Jurisdiction was aided by
Presbyters, but not impaired. p. 311 45 The government of the Church by Bishops
was believed necessary. p. 323 46 They are Schismatics that separate from
their Bishop, p. 327 47 And Heretics. p. 329 48 Bishops were always in the
Church men of great honor, p. 335 49 And trusted with affairs of Secular
interest, p. 351 50 And therefore were enforced to delegate their power and put
others in substitution, p. 371 51 But they were ever Clergymen, for there
never was any Lay Elders in any Church-office heard of in the Church. p. 375
ERRATA.
Page 21. line 8. insert, except S. John. Page 141. l. 15. Presbyters, read
Bishops. Page 243. line 14. after Episcopacy, insert etc. and l. 15. after
Bishops insert Clerk. Page 354. l. 11. read were Farmers.

OF THE Sacred Order, and Offices of EPISCOPACY BY DIVINE INSTITUTION,
APOSTOLICAL TRADITION, and Catholic practice etc.
IN all those accursed machinations, which the device, and artifice of Hell
has invented, for the supplanting of the Church, Inimicus homo, that old
superseminator of heresies, and crude mischiefs, has endeavored, to be
curiously compendious, and with Tarquin's device, putare summa papaverum. And
therefore in the three ages of Martyrs, it was a ruled case in that Burgundian
forge, Qui prior erat dignitate prior trahebatur ad Martyrium. The Priests, but
to be sure the Bishops must pay for all. Tolleimpios, Polycarpus requiratur.
Away with these pedling persecutions, (...). Lay the axe at the root of the
tree. Insomuch that in Rome from S. Peter, and S. Paul to S. Sylvester, thirty
three Bishops of Rome, in immediate succession, suffered an Honorable, and
glorious Martyrdom, unless Maximini jussu Martyrio coronatur. Says Platina,
but that is wholly uncertain.
Meltiades be perhaps excepted, whom Eusebius, and Optatus report to have lived
till the time of the third Consulship of Constantine and Licinius. Conteret
caput ejus, was the glorious promise, Christ should break the Divell's head,
and though the Divell's active part of the Duel was far less, yet he would
venture at that too, even to strike at the heads of the Church, capita vicaria,
for the head of all was past his striking now; And this, I say, he offered to
do by Martyrdom, but that instead of breaking, crowned them.

His next onset was by Julian, and occidere Presbyterium, that was his
Province. To shut up public Schools, to force Christians to ignorance, to
impoverish, and disgrace the Clergy, to make them vile, and dishonorable,
these were his arts; and he did the Devil more service in this finenesse of
undermining, then all the open battery of the ten great Rams of persecution.
But this would not take. For that which is without cannot defile a man, So it
is in the Church too. Cedunt in bonum, all violences ab extr^.

But therefore besides these he attempted by heresies to rent the Churches
bowels all in pieces; but the good Bishops gathered up the scattered pieces and
reunited them at Nice, at Constantinople, at Ephesus, at Chalcedon, at
Carthage, at Rome, and in every famous place of Christendom, and by God's
goodness, and the Bishops industry Catholic religion was conserved in Unity,
and integrity. Well! however it is, Antichrist must come at last, and the great
Apostasy foretold must be, and this, not without means proportionable to the
production of so great declensions of Christianity. When ye hear of wars,
and rumors of wars, be not afraid (said our B. Savior,) the end is not yet.
It is not war that will do this great work of destruction, for then it might
have been done long 'ere now. What then will do it? We shall know when we see
it. In the mean time when we shall find a new device, of which indeed the
platform was laid, in Aerius, and the Acephali, brought to a good possibility
of completing, a thing that whosoever shall hear, his ^ars shall tingle, an
abomination of desolation standing where it ought not, in sacris, in holy
persons, and places, and offices, it is too probable that this is the
praeparatory for the Antichrist, and grand Apostasy.

For if Antichrist shall exalt himself above all that is called God, and in
Scripture none but Kings, and Priests are such, Dii vocati, Dii facti, I think
we have great reason to be suspicious, that he that devests b^th of their power
(and they are, if the King be Christian, in very near conjunction,) does the
work of Antichrist for him; especially if the men, whom it most concerns, will
but call to mind, that the discipline, or Government, which Christ has
instituted, is that Kingdom, by which he governes all Christendom (so
themselves have taught us) so that, in case it be proved, that Episcopacy is
that government, then they (to use their own expressions) throw Christ out of
his Kingdom; and then, either they leave the Church without a head, or else
put Antichrist in substitution.

We all wish, that our fears in this, and all things else, may be vain, that
what we fear, may not come upon us; but yet that the abolition of Episcopacy
is the forerunner, and praparatory to the great Apostasy, I have these reasons
to show, at least the First, Because here is a concurse of times; for now after
that these times have been called the last times, for 1600 years together, our
expectation of the Great revelation is very near accomplishing; and what a
Grand innovation of Ecclesiastical government, contrary to the faith, and
practice of Christendom, may portend now in these times, when we all expect
Antichrist to be revealed is worthy Secondly, Episcopacy, if we consider the
final cause, was instituted as an obstructive to the diffusion of Schism and
Heresy. So in 1. ad Titu^
S. Hierome. In toto orb decretum est, ut unus de Presbyteris electus
superponeretur coeteris, VT SCHISMATVM SHMINA TOLLE^ENTUR. And therefore if
Unity and division be destructive of each other, then Episcopacy is the best
deletery in the world for Schism: and so much the rather because they are in
eadem materia; for Schism is a division for things either personal, or
accidental, which are matters, most properly the subject of government, and
there to be tried, there to receive their first, and last breath, except where
they are starved to death by a desuetude; and Episcopacy is an Unity of person
governing, and ordering persons, and things, accidental, and substantial; and
therefore a direct confronting of Schism, not only in the intention of the
author of it, but in the nature of the institution. Now then, although Schisms
always will be, and this by divine prediction (which clearly shows the
necessity of perpetual Episcopacy, and the intention of its perpetuity, either
by Christ himself ordaining it, who made the prophecy, or by the Apostles and
Apostolic men at least, who knew the prophecy:) yet to be sure, these
divisions, and dangers shall be greater about, and at the time of the Great
Apostasy; for then, were not the hours turned into minutes, an universal
ruin should seize all Christendom [ No flesh should be saved if those days
were not shortened.] is it not next to an evidence of fact, that this
multiplication of Schisms must be removendo prohibens? and therefore that must
be by invalidating Episcopacy, ordayn'd as the remedy and obex of Schism,
either tying their hands behind them, by taking away their coercion, or by
putting out their eyes, by denying them cognizance of causes spiritual, or by
cutting off their heads, and so destroying their order. How far these will
lead us, I leave to be considered. This only; Percute pastores, atque oves
despergentur; and I believe it will be verified at the coming of that wicked
one, I saw all Israel scattered upon the Mountains as sheep having no
sheapheard.

I am not new in this conception, I learned it of S. Cyprian; Epist. 55.
Christi adversarius, and Ecclesiae ejus inimicus ad hoc, ECCLESIAE PRAEPOSITVM
sua infestatione persequitur, ut, Gubernatore sublato, atrocius, atque
violentius circa Ecclesiae naufragia grassetur. The adversary of Christ and
enemy of his Spouse therefore persecutes the Bishop, that having taken him
away, he may without check pride himself in the ruins of the Church; and a
little after speaking of them, that are enemies to Bishops, he says, that,
Antichristi jam propinquantis adventum imitantur, their deportment is just
after the guise of Antichrist who is shortly to be revealed.

But be this conjecture vain, or not, the thing, of it self is of deep
consideration, and the Catholic practice of Christendom for 1500 years is so
insupportable a prejudice against the enemies of Episcopacy, that they must
bring admirable evidence of Scripture, or a clear revelation proved by
Miracles, or a contrary undoubted tradition Apostolical for themselves, or
else hope for no belief against the prescribed possession of so many ages.

But before I begin, me thinks in this contestation, ubi potior est conditio
possidentis, it is a considerable Question; what will the Adversaries stake
against it? For if Episcopacy cannot make its title good, they loose the
benefit of their prescribed possession. If it can; I fear they will scarce
gain so much, as the obedience of the adverse party by it, which yet already is
their due. It is very unequal; but so it is ever, when Authority is the matter
of the Question. Authority never gains by it; for although the cause go on
its side, yet it looses costs, and damages; for it must either by fair
condescension to gain the adversaries', loose something of it self, or, if it
asserts it self to the utmost, it is but where it was; but that seldom or
never happens, for the very questioning of any authority, hoc ipso, makes a
great intrenchment even to the very skirts of its clothing.

But huc deventumest. Now we are in, we must go over.

FIrst then, that we may build upon a Rock.. 1. Christ did institute a
government in his Church.
Christ did institute a government to order and rule his Church by his
authority, according to his laws, and by the assistance of the B. Spirit.

1. If this were not true, how shall the Church be governed? For I hope the
adversaries of Episcopacy, that are so punctual to pitch all upon Scripture
ground, will be sure to produce clear Scripture for so maine a part of
Christianity, as is the form of the Government of Christ's Church. And, if for
our private actions; and duties Oeconomicall, they will pretend a text, I
suppose, it will not be thought possible, Scripture should make default in
assignation of the public Government, insomuch as all laws intend the
public, and the general directly; the private, and the particular, by
consequence only, and comprehension within the general.

2. If Christ himself did not take order for a government, then we must derive
it from humane prudence, and emergency of conveniences, and concurse of new
circumstances, and then the Government must often be changed, or else time must
stand still, and things be ever in the same state and possibility. Both the
consequents are extremely full of inconvenience. For if it be left to humane
prudence, then either the government of the Church is not in immediate order to
the good, and benison of souls, or if it be, that such an institution, in such
immediate order to eternity, should be dependant upon humane prudence, it were
to trust such a rich commodity in a cock-boat, that no wise Pilot will be
supposed to do. But if there be often changes in government Ecclesiastical
(which was the other consequent) in the public frame I mean, and constitution
of it; either the certain infinity of Schisms will arise, or the dangerous
issues of public inconsistence, and innovation, which, in matters of religion,
is good for nothing, but to make men distrust all; and, come the best that can
come, there will be so many Church-governments, as there are humane Prudences.
Simler: de rep: Helvet: fol* 148. and 172.
For so (if I be not misinformed) it is abroad in some towns that have
discharged Episcopacy. At St Galls in Switzerland there the Ministers, and
Laymen rule in Common, but a Layman is president. But the Consistories of
Zurick and Basil are wholly consistent of Laymen, and Ministers are joined as
assistants only, and Counselors, but at Schaffhausen the Ministers are not
admitted to so much, but in the Huguenot Churches of France, the Ministers do
all.

3. In such cases, where there is no power of the sword for a compulsory (and
confessedly of all sides there can be none in causes and Courts
Ecclesiastical) if there be no opinion of Religion, no derivation from a
divine authority, there will be sure to be no obedience, and indeed nothing but
a certain, public, calamitous irregularity. For why should they obey? Not for
Conscience, for there is no derivation from divine authority. Not for fear,
for they have not the power of the sword.

4. If there be such a thing as the power of the keys, by Christ concredited
to his Church, for the binding and loosing delinquents, and penitents
respectively on earth, then there is clearly a Court erected by Christ in his
Church, for here is the delegation of Judges, Tu Petrus, v^s Apostoli,
whatsoever ye shall bind. Here is a compulsory, ligaveritis; Here are the
causes of which they take cognizance, Quodcunque viz. in materia scandali. For
so it is limited Matthew. 18. but it is indefinite Matthew. 16. and Universal,
John. 20. which yet is to be understood secundum materiam subjectam, in causes,
which are emergent from Christianity, ut sic, that secular jurisdictions may
not be entrenched upon. But of this hereafter. That Christ did in this place
erect a Jurisdiction, and establish a government (besides the evidence of fact)
is generally asserted by primitive exposition of the Fathers, affirming, that
to S. Peter the Keys were given, that to the Church of all ages a power of
binding and loosing might be communicated. Has igitur claves dedit Ecclesiae,
ut quae solveret in terra, s^luta essent in coelo; scil. ut ut quisquis in
Ecclesia ejus dimitti sibi peccata crederet, seque ab iis correctus averteret
in ejusdem Ecclesiae gremio constitutus eadem side atque correctione sanaretur.
So De doctr. Christ. lib. 1. c. 18. tract. 118. in Johan. vide etiam tract.
124. and tract. 50. in Ioh, de Agon. Christ. cap. 30 de bapt. contr. Donatist.
lib. 3. c. 17.
S. Austin. And again, Omnibus igitur sanctis ad Christi corpus
insepar^biliter pertinentibus propter hujus vitae proce^^osissima gubernacu^um
ad ligand^ and solvenda peccat^ claves regni coelorum primu^ Apostolorum Petrus
accepit; Quoniam nec ille solus, sed universa Ecclesia ligat, solvitque
peccata. S. Peter first received the government in the power of binding and
loosing. But not he alone but all the Church, to wit, all succession, and ages
of the Church. Vniversa Ecclesia, viz. in Pastoribus solis, as De Sacerd. lib.
3.
S. Chrysostom, In Episcopis and Presbyteris as In 16. Matt.
S. Jerome. The whole Church, as it is represented in the Bishops and
Presbyters. The same is affirmed by Lib. de pudicit.
Tertullian, Epist. 27.
S. Cyprian, Lib. quoth Christus est Deus.
S. Chrysostom, Lib. 6. de Trinit.
S. Hilary, Lib. 3. in Apocal. Luke, 12. 42.
Primasius, and generally by the Fathers of the elder, and Divines of the
middle ages.

5. When our blessed Savior had spoken a parable of the sudden coming of the
son of Man, and commanded them therefore with diligence to stand upon their
watch, the Disciples asked him, speak thou this parable to us, or even to
all? And the Lord said, who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom his
Lord shall make ruler over his household to give them their portion of meat in
due season? As if he had said, I speak to You, for to whom else should I speak
and give caution for the looking to the house in the Masters absence? You are
by office and designation my stewards, to feed my servants, to govern my house.

6. In Scripture, and other writers, to Feed, and to Govern, is all one when
the office is either Political or Oeconomicall, Psalm: 78.
or Ecclesiastical. So he FED them with a faithful and true heart, and RULED
them prudently with all his power. And S. Peter joins, (...) and (...)
together. 1. Pet. 5. 2. Acts. 20.
(...). So does S. Paul, (...). Rulers or overseers in a flock. Pastors. It is
ordinary. (...). Homer. (...). Euripides calls the Governors and guides of
Chariots, (...). And our blessed Savior himself is called the Great
sheapheard of our souls; and that we may know the intentum of that
compellation, it is in conjunction also with (...). He is therefore our
sheapheard, for he is our Bishop, our Ruler, and Overseer. Since then Christ
has left Pastors or Feeders in his Church, it is also as certain he has left
Rulers, they being both one in name, in person, in office. But this is of a
known truth to all that understand either laws or languages: (...) says in
lib: de eo quod deterior p^tiori infidiatur.
Philo, they that feed have the power of Princes and rulers; the thing is an
undoubted truth to most men, but because all are not of a mind something was
necessary for confirmation of it.

THis government was by immediate substitution delegated to the Apostles by
Christ himself, 2. This government was first committed to the Apostles by
Christ
in traditione clavium, in spiratione Spiritus, in missione in Pentecoste. When
Christ promised them the Keys, he promised them power to bind and loose, when
he breathed on them the holy Ghost, he gave them that actually, to which by the
former promise they were entitled; and in the octaves of the Passion, he gave
them the same authority, which he had received from his Father, and they were
the faithful and wise stewards whom the Lord made RULERS over his Household.
vide Hilarium in hunc locum and pp. communiter.
But I shall not labor much upon this. Their founding all the Churches from
Eastro West, and so, by being Fathers, derived their authority from the nature
of the thing, their appointing rulers in every Church, their Synodall decrees
de Suffocato and Sanguine, and letters missive to the Churches of Syria and
Cilicia, their excommunications of Hymeneus, Alexander, and the incestuous
Corinthian, their commanding, and requiring obedience of their people in all
things, as S. Paul did of his subjects of Corinth, and the Hebrews by precept
Apostolical, their threatening the Pastoral rod, their calling Synods and
public assemblies, their ordering rites and ceremonies, composing a Symbol as
the tessera of Christianity, their public reprehension of delinquents, and
indeed the whole execution of their Apostolate is one continued argument of
their superintendency, and superiority of jurisdiction.

THis power so delegated was not to expire with their Persons; 3. With a power
of joining others and appointing successors in the Apostolate
For when the Great sheapheard had reduced his wandering sheep into a fold, he
would not leave them without guides to govern them, so long as the wolf might
possibly prey upon them, and that is, till the last separation of the Sheep
from the Goats. And this Christ intimates in that promise, Ero vobiscum
(Apostolis) usque ad consummationem saeculi. Vobiscum; not with your persons,
for they dyed long ago, but vobiscum and v^stri similibus, with Apostles to
the end of the world. And therefore that the Apostolate might be successive and
perpetual, Christ gave them a power of ordination, that by imposing hands on
others they might impart that power which they received from Christ. For in the
Apostles there was something extraordinary; something ordinary. Whatsoever was
extraordinary, as immediate mission, unlimited jurisdiction, and miraculous
operations, that was not necessary to the perpetual regiment of the Church,
for then the Church should fail when these privileges extraordinary did
cease. It was not therefore in extraordinary powers and privileges that Christ
promised his perpetual assistance; not in speaking of tongues, not in doing
miracles, whether in Materia censurae, as delivering to Satan; or, in materia
misericordiae, as healing sick people; or in re Naturali, as in resisting the
venom of Vipers, and quenching the violence of flames; in these Christ did not
promise perpetual assistance, for then it had been done, and still these
signs should have followed them that believe. But we see they do not. It
follows then, that in all the ordinary parts of power and office Christ did
promise to be with them to the end of the world, and therefore there must
remain a power of giving faculty, and capacity to persons successively for the
execution of that, in which Christ promised perpetual assistance. For since
this perpetual assistance could not be meant of abiding with their persons,
who in few years were to forsake the world, it must needs be understood of
their function, which either it must be succeeded to, or else it was as
temporary as their persons. But in the extraordinary privileges of the
Apostles they had no successors, therefore of necessity a succession must be
constituted in the ordinary office of Apostolate. Now what is this ordinary
office? Most certainly since the extraordinary (as is evident) was only a help
for the founding and beginning, the other are such as are necessary for the
perpetuating of a Church. Now in clear evidence of ^ence, these offices and
powers are Preaching, Baptizing, Consecrating, Ordaining, and Governing. For
these were necessary for the perpetuating of a Church, unless men could be
Christians that were never Christened, nourished up to life without the
Eucharist, become Priests without calling of God and Ordination, have their
sins pardoned without absolution, be members and parts and sons of a Church
whereof there is no coadunation, no authority, no Governor. These the Apostles
had without all Question, and whatsoever they had, they had from Christ, and
these were eternally necessary, these then were the offices of the Apostolate,
which Christ promised to assist for ever, and this is that which we now call
the Order and Office of Episcopacy.

FOR although Deacons and Priests have part of these offices, 4. This
succession into the ordinary office of Apostolate is made by Bishops
and therefore (though in a very limited sense) they may be called successores
Apostolorum, to wit, in the power of Baptizing, consecrating the Eucharist, and
Preaching (an excellent example whereof, though we have none in Scripture, yet
if I mistake him not we have in Ignatius, calling the College of Presbyters
(...), a Combination of Apostles) yet the Apostolate and Episcopacy which did
communicate in all the power, and offices which were ordinary and perpetual,
are in Scripture clearly all one in ordinary ministration, and their names are
often used in common to signify exactly the same ordinary function.

1. The name was borrowed from the Prophet David in the prediction of the
Apostasy of Judas, For the Apostle and the Bishop are all one in name and person
and Surrogation of S. Matthias; (...). His Bishopric, that is, his Apostolate
let another take. The same word according to the translation of the 70. is used
by the Prophet Isaiah, in an Evangelicall prediction, (...) I will give thy
Princes in peace, and thy Bishops in righteousness. Principes Ecclesiae vocat
futuros Episcopos, says In cap. 60. Isai. v. 17.
S. Hierome, herein admiring Gods Majesty in the destination of such Ministers
whom himself calls Princes. And to this issue it is cited by S. Clement in his
famous epistle to the Corinthians. But this is no ways unusual in Scripture.
For,

2. S. James the Brother of our Lord is called an Apostle, and yet he was not
in the number of the twelve, but he was Bishop of Jerusalem. 1. That S. James
was called an Apostle appears by the testimony of S. Paul, 1. Galat. 19.
[ But other Apostles saw I^none, save James the Lords Brother.] 2. That he was
none of the twelve, appears also because among the twelve Apostles, there were
but two James's. The son of Alpheus, and James the son of Zebedee, the
Brother of John. But neither of these was the James whom S. Paul calls the
Lords brother. 1. Corin. 15.
And this S. Paul intimates in making a distinct enumeration of all the
appearances which Christ made after the resurrection. First to Cephas, then to
the twelve, then to the 500. Brethren, then to James, then to all the Apostles.
So that here S. James is reckoned distinctly from the twelve, and they from the
whole College of the Apostles, for there were (it seems) more of that dignity
then the twelve. But this will also safely rely upon the concurrent testimony
of Vide Carol. Bovium in constit. Apost. Schol. Hieron. de Script. Eccl. in
Jacobo. and in 1. Galat. Epiphan. haeres. 78, 79.
Hegesippus, * S. Clement, Eusebius, Epiphanius, S. Ambrose, and S. Hierome. 3.
That S. James was Bishop of Jerusalem, and therefore called an Apostle, appears
by the often commemoration of his presidency, and singular eminency in holy
Scripture. Priority of order is mentioned, Galat. 2. even before S. Peter, who
yet was primus Apostolorum, natura unus homo, Cratiaunus Christianus,
abundantiore gratia unus idemque primus Apostolus; Tract. 124. in Johan.
(as S. Austin) yet in his own diocese S. James had priority of order before
him. v. 9. And when 1 James, 2 Cephas, and 3 John, etc. First James before
Cephas i.e. S. Peter. S. James also was president of that Synod which the
Apostles convocated at Jerusalem about the Question of circumcision; as is to
be seen Vide page
Act. 15. to him S. Paul made his address, Act. 21. to him the brethren
carried him, where he was found sitting in his College of Presbyters, there he
was always resident, and his seat fixed, and that he lived Bishop of Jerusalem
for many years together, is clearly testified by all the faith of the Primitive
Fathers and Historians. But of this hereafter.

3. Epaphroditus is called the Apostle of the Philippians. Philip. 2. 25.
I have sent unto you Epaphrodit^^ (...), My compeere and your Apostle. In bunc
locum ^terque and Theod. in 1. Tim 3.
Gradum Apostolatus recepit Epaphroditus, says Primasius, and what that is we
are told by Theodoret, dictus Philippensium Apostolus a S. Paulo, quid hoc
aliud nisi Episcopus? Because he also had received the office of being an
Apostle among them, says S. Jerome upon the same place; and it is very
observeable, that those Apostles to whom our blessed Savior gave immediate
substitution are called (...), Apostles of Jesus Christ, but those other men
which were Bishops of Churches, and called Apostles by Scripture, are called
(...), Apostles of Churches, or sometime Apostles, alone, but never are
entitled of Jesus Christ. Other of the Apostles saw I none but James the Lords
Brother, Gal. 1. There S. James the Bishop of Jerusalem is called an Apostle
indefinitely. But S. Paul calls himself often the Apostle of Jesus Christ, not
of man, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ. So, Peter an Apostle of Jesus
Christ, but S. James in his Epistle to the Jews of the dispersion, writes not
himself the Apostle of Jesus Christ, but (...). James the servant of God and
of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Further yet: S. Paul, although as having an immediate calling from Christ to
the office of Apostolate at large, calls himself the Apostle of Jesus Christ,
yet when he was sent to preach to the Gentiles by the particular direction
indeed of the holy Ghost, Acts. 13. v. 2, 3.
but by Humane constitution, and imposition of hands; in relation to that part
of his office, and his cure of the uncircumcision, he limits his Apostolate to
his Diocese and calls himself, (...), Romans 11, 13.
The Apostle of the Gentiles; as S. Peter for the same reason, and in the same
modification is called (...), Galat. 2, 8.
that is, the Apostle of those who were of the Circumcision. And thus
Epaphroditus is called the Apostle of the Philippians, who clearly was their
Bishop (as I shall show in the sequel) that is, he had an Apostolate limited to
the Diocese of Philippi. Pa^latim vero tempore procedente, and ali^ ab his
quos Dominus eleger at ordinati sunt Apostoli, sicut ille ad Philippenses sermo
declarat, In 1. cap. Galat.
dicens, necessarium autem existimo Epaphroditum, etc. So S. Jerome. In
process of time others besides those whom the Lord had chosen, were ordained
Apostles; and particularly he instances in Epaphroditus from the authority of
this instance, adding also that by the Apostles themselves Judas and Silas were
called Apostles.

4. Thus Titus, and some other with him, 2. Corinthians. 8, 23.
who came to Jerusalem with the Corinthian benevolence, are called (...). The
Apostles of the Churches. Apostles, I say, in the Episcopal sense. They were
none of the twelve, they were not of immediate divine mission, but of
Apostolic ordination, they were actually Bishops as I shall show hereafter.
Titus was Bishop of Crete, and Epaphroditus of Philippi, and these were the
Apostles, for Titus came with the Corinthian, Epaphroditus with the Colossian
liberality. Now these men were not (...), called, Messengers in respect of
these Churches sending them with their contributions. 1. Because they are not
called the Apostles of these Churches, to wit, whose alms they carried, but
simply (...), of the Churches, viz. of their own of which they were Bishops.
For if the title of [ Apostle] had related to their mission from these
Churches, it is unimaginable that there should be no term of relation
expressed. 2. It is very clear that although they did indeed carry the
benevolence of the several Churches, Verse. 22.
yet S. Paul, not those Churches sent them, And we have sent with them our
Brother, etc. 3. They are called Apostles of the Churches, not going from
Corinth with the money, but before they came thither from whence they were to be
dispatched in legation to Jerusalem. V. 23.
[ If any enquire of Titus.... or the Brethren, they are the Apostles of the
Church, and the glory of Christ.] So they were Apostles before they went to
Corinth, not for their being employed in the transportation of their charity.
So that it is plain, that their Apostolate being not relative to the Churches
whose benevolence they carried, and they having Churches of their own, as Titus
had Crete, Epaphroditus had Philippi, their Apostolate was a fixed residence,
and superintendency of their several Churches.

But in holy Scripture the identity of the ordinary office of Apostleship and
Episcopacy, 5. And office,
is clearer yet. For when the holy Spirit had sent seven letters to the seven
Asian Bishops, Apocal. 2.
the Angel of the Church of Ephesus is commended for trying them, which say
they are Apostles and are not, and hathfound themlyars. This Angel of the
Church of Ephesus, as Antiquity has taught us, was at that time Timothy, or
Doroth. Synops.
Gajus, the first a Disciple, the other had been an entertainer of the
Apostles, and either of them knew them well enough; it could not be that any
man should dissemble their persons and counterfeit himself S. Paul, or S.
Peter. And if they had, yet little trying was needful to discover their folly
in such a case, and whether it was Timothy or Gajus he could deserve but small
commendations for the mere believing of his own eyes and memory. Besides the
Apostles all were then dead, and he known to live in Patmos, known by the
public attestation of the sentence of relegation ad insulam. These men
therefore dissembling themselves to be Apostles, must dissemble an ordinary
function, not an extraordinary person. And indeed by the concurse of of story,
place, and time, Diotrephes was the Man S. John chiefly pointed at. For he
seeing that of Ephesus there had been an Episcopal chair placed, and Timothy
a long while possessed of it, and Vide Constit. Apost. per Clement. ubi quidam
Johannes in Epheso Episc. post Timoth. collocatur.
perhaps Gajus after him, if we may trust Dorotheus, and the like in some other
Churches, and that S. John had not constituted Bishops in all the other
Churches of the lesser Asia, but kept the Jurisdiction to be ministered by
himself, would arrogantly take upon him to be a Bishop without Apostolical
ordination, obtruding himself upon the Church of Ephesus, so becoming (...), a
busy man in another Diocese. This, and such impostors as this the Angel of
the Church of Ephesus did try, and discover, and convict, and in it he was
assisted by S. John himself, as is intimated in S. John's third Epistle written
to this Gajus [v. 9.] I wrote unto the Church (to wit of Asia) but Diotrephes
who loves to have the pre-eminence among them receives us not.] Clearly this
(...) would have been a Bishop. It was a matter of ambition, a quarrel for
superintendency and pre-eminence that troubled him; and this also appears
further in that he exercised jurisdiction, and excommunication where he had
nothing to do, [v. 10.] He forbids them that would receive the Brethren, and
casts them out of the Church. So that here it is clear, this false
Apostolate, was his ambitious seeking of Episcopal pre-eminence and
jurisdiction without lawful ordination. (...), that was his design, He loved
to be the first in the Church, esse Apostolum, esse Episcopum, to be an
Apostle, or a Bishop.

But this office of the ordinary Apostleship or Episcopacy, 6. Which Christ
himself has made distinct from Presbyters
derives its fountain from a Rock; Christ's own distinguishing the Apostolate
from the function of Presbyters. For when our blessed Savior had gathered many
Disciples who believed him at his first preaching, Vocavit Discipulos suos, and
elegit duodecem ex ipsis quos and Apostolos nominavit, Luke 10.
says S. Luke. He called his Disciples, and out of them chose twelve, and
called them Apostles. That was the first election. Post haec autem designavit
Dominus and alios septuaginta duos. That was his second election; the first
were called Apostles, the second were not, and yet he sent them by two and two.

We hear but of one commission granted them, which when they had performed and
returned joyful at their power over Devils, we hear no more of them in the
Gospel, but that their Names were written in heaven. We are likely therefore
to hear of them after the passion, if they can but hold their own. And so we
do. For after the Passion the Apostles gathered them together, and joined them
in Clericall commission by virtue of Christ's first ordination of them, for a
new ordination we find none in holy Scripture recorded, before we find them
doing Clericall offices. Ananias we read baptizing of Saul, Philip the
Evangelist we find preaching in Samaria, and baptizing his Converts; Others
also we find, Presbyters at Jerusalem, especially at the first Council, for
there was Judas surnamed Iustus, and Silas, and S. Mark, and John (a
Presbyter, Lib. 3. cap. 3.
not an Apostle as Eusebius reports him) and Simeon Cleophas who tarried there
till he was made Bishop of Jerusalem, these and diverse others, are reckoned to
be of the number of the 72, by Eusebius and Dorotheus.

Here are plainly two offices of Ecclesiastical Ministeries. Apostles and
Presbyters, so the Scripture calls them. 7. Giving to Apostles a power to do
some offices perpetually necessary, which to others he gave not.
These were distinct, and not temporary, but succeeded to, and if so, then here
is clearly a Divine institution of two Orders, and yet Deacons neither of
them. Here let us fix a while.

1. THen; It is clear in Scripture that the Apostles did some acts of
Ministry which were necessary to be done for ever in the Church, and therefore
to be committed to their successors, which acts the seventy Disciples or
Presbyters could not do, (...) says S. Denis of the Highest Order of the
Hierarchy. Eccles. hierarch. c. 5.
The law of God has reserved the Greater and Diviner Offices to the Highest
Order.

First, As of Ordination,
the Apostles imposed hands in Ordinations, which the 72 did not, the case is
known, Act. 6. The Apostles called the Disciples, willing them to choose
seven men whom they might constitute in the ministration and oversight of the
poor, They did so, and set them before the twelve Apostles, so they are
specified and numbered verse. 2. cum 6. and when they had prayed, they laid
their hands on them. They, not the Disciples, not the 72 who were there
actually present, and seven of them were then ordayn'd to this Ministry, for
they were not now ordayn'd to be (...), but (...), as the In Trullo. can. 16.
Council of Constantinople calls them, and that these were of the number of
the 72. Disciples, Epiphanius bears witness. Haeres. 20.
He sent other 72. to preach (...), of which Number were those seven ordained
and set over the widows. And the same is intimated by S. Chrysostom, Homil.
14. in Act. 6.
if I understand him right, (...). What dignity had these seven here ordained?
of Deacons? No; for this dispensation is made by Priests not Deacons; In hanc
locu^.
and Theophylact more clearly repeating the words of S. Chrysostom, pro more
suo, adds this, (...). The name and dignity of these seven was no less, but
even the dignity of Presbyters, only for the time they were appointed to
dispense the goods of the Church for the good of the faithful people.
Presbyters they were say S. Chrysostom and Theophylact; of the number of the
72. says Epiphanius. But however, it is clear that the 72. were present, for
the whole multitude of the Disciples was as yet there resident, they were not
yet sent abroad, they were not scattered with persecution till the Martyrdom
of S. Stephen, [but the twelve called the whole multitude of the Disciples] to
them about this affair. verse. 2. But yet themselves only did ordain them.

2. An instance parallel to this, is in the imposition of hands upon S. Paul
and Barnabas, Acts. 13.
in the first ordination that was held at Antioch. [Now there were in the
Church that was at Antioch certain Prophets and Teachers, as Barnabas and
Simeon, and Lucius, and Manaen, and Saul. (...), while these men were
Ministering, the holy Ghost said to them, separate me Barnabas and Saul.] They
did so, they [fasted, they prayed, they laid their hands on them, and sent them
away. So they being sent forth by the holy Ghost, departed into Seleucia.] This
is the story, now let us make our best on it. Here then was the ordination and
imposition of hands complete, and that was said to be done by the holy Ghost
which was done by the Prophets of Antioch. For they sent them away, and yet the
next words are, so they being sent forth by the holy Ghost. So that here was
the thing done, and that by the Prophets alone, and that by the command of the
Holy Ghost, and said to be his act. Well! but what were these Prophets? They
were Prophets in the Church of Antioch, Prophetas duplici genere intelligamus,
and futura dicentes and Scripturas revelantes. S. Ambros: in 1. Corinthians. 12.
not such as Agabus, and the daughters of Philip the Evangelist, Prophets of
prediction extraordinary, but Prophets of ordinary office and ministration,
(...), Prophets and Teachers and Ministers. More then ordinary Ministers, for
they were Doctors or Teachers, and that is not all, for they were Prophets too.
This even at first sight is more then the ordinary office of the Presbytery. We
shall see this clear enough in S. Paul Ephesians. 4.
where the ordinary office of Prophets is reckoned before Pastors, before
Evangelists, next to Apostles, that is next to such Apostles (...), as S. Paul
there expresses it, next to those Apostles to whom Christ has given immediate
mission. And these are therefore Apostles too, Apostles secundi or dinis, none
of the twelve, but such as S. James, and Epaphroditus, and Barnabas and S. Paul
himself. To be sure they were such Prophets as S. Paul and Barnabas, for they
are reckoned in the number by S. Luke, for here it was that S. Paul although he
had immediate vocation by Christ, yet he had particular ordination to this
Apostolate or Ministry of the Gentiles. It is evident then what Prophets these
were, they they were at the least more then ordinary Presbyters, and therefore
they imposed hands, and they only. And yet to make the business up complete,
S. Mark was amongst them, but he imposed no hands, he was there as the Deacon
and Minister [ verse. 5.] but he meddled not, S. Luke fixes the whole action upon
the Prophets, such as S, Paul himself was, and so did the Holy Ghost too, but
neither did S. Mark who was an Evangelist, and one of the 72 Disciples (as he
is reckoned in the Primitive Catalogues by Eusebius and Dorotheus) nor any of
the College of the Antiochian Presbyters, that were less then Prophets, that
is, who were not more then mere Presbyters.

The sum is this: Imposition of hands is a duty and office necessary for the
perpetuating of a Church, ne Gens sit Vnius aetatis, least it expire in one
age: this power of imposition of hands for Ordination was fixed upon the
Apostles and Apostolic men, and not communicated to the 72 Disciples or
Presbyters; for the Apostles, and Apostolic men, did so de facto, and were
commanded to do so, and the 72 never did so, therefore this office and
Ministry of the Apostolate is distinct, and superior to that of Presbyters,
and this distinction must be so continued to all ages of the Church, for the
thing was not temporary but productive of issue and succession, and therefore
as perpetual as the Clergy, as the Church it self.

2. THe Apostles did impose hands for confirmation of Baptized people, 8. And
Confirmation,
and this was a perpetual act of a power to be succeeded to, and yet not
communicated, nor executed by the 72, or any other mere Presbyter. That the
Apostles did confirm Baptized people, and others of the inferior Clergy
could not, is beyond all exception clear in the case of the Samaritan
Christians. Acts. 8. For when S. Philip had converted, and Baptized the Men of
Samaria, the Apostles sent Peter and John to lay their hands on them that they
might receive the Holy Ghost. S. Philip he was an Evangelist, he was one of the
72 Disciples, S. Cyprian: ad Iubajan.
a Presbyter, and appointed to the same ministration that S. Stephen was about
the poor Widows, yet he could not do this, the Apostles must and did. This
giving of the Holy Ghost by imposition of the Apostles hands, was not for a
miraculous gift, but an ordinary Grace. For S. Philip could, and did do
miracles enough, but this Grace he could not give, the Grace of consigning or
confirmation. The like case is in Acts. 19. where some people having been
Baptized at Ephesus, S. Paul confirmed them, giving them the Holy Ghost by
imposition of hands. The Apostles did it; not the twelve only, but Apostolic
men, the other Apostles. S. Paul did it. S. Philip could not, nor any of the
72, or any other mere Presbyters ever did it, that we find in Holy Scripture.

Yea; but this imposition of hands, was for a Miraculous issue, for the
Ephesine Christians received the Holy Ghost, and spoke with tongues and
prophesied, which effect because it is ceased, certainly the thing was
temporary and long ago expired. 1. Not for this reason to be sure. For
extraordinary effects may be temporary, when the function which they attest may
be eternal, and therefore are no signs of an extraordinary Ministry. The
Apostles preaching was attended by Miracles, and extraordinary conversions of
people [ ut in exordio, Apostolos divinorum signorum comitabantur effectus and
Spiritus Sancti gratia, ita ut videres una alloquutione integros simul populos
ad cultum divinae religionis adduci, and praedicantium verbis nonesse tardiorem
audientium fidem,] as lib: 3 hist: cap. 37.
Eusebius tells of the success of the preaching of some Evangelists; yet I hope
preaching must not now cease because no Miracles are done, or that to convert
one man now would be the greatest Miracle. The Apostles when they cursed and
anathematized a delinquent, he dyed suddenly, as in the case of Ananias and
Saphira, whom S. Peter slew with the word of his Ministry, and yet now
although these extraordinary issues cease, it is not safe venturing upon the
curses of the Church. When the Apostles did excommunicate a sinner, he was
presently delivered over to Satan to be buffeted, that is, to be afflicted
with corporal punishments, and now although no such exterminating Angels beat
the bodies of persons excommunicate, yet the power of excommunication I hope
still remains in the Church, and the power of the Keys is not also gone: So
also in the power of confirmation, vide Augast. tract. 6. in 1. Epist. Johan.
which however attended by a visible miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost in
gifts of languages and healing, yet like other miracles in respect of the whole
integrity of Christian faith, these miracles at first did confirm the
function, and the faith for ever.

Now then that this right of imposing hands for confirming of baptized people,
was not to expire with the persons of the Apostles, appears from these
considerations.

1. Because Christ made a promise of sending Vicarium suum Spiritum, the Holy
Ghost in his stead; and this by way of appropriation is called the promise of
the Father; This was pertinent to all Christendom. Effundam de spiritu meo
super omnem carnem, so it was in the Prophecy. For the promise is to you and to
your Children (...), Act. 2. 39.
and to all them that are a far off, even to as many as the Lord shall call.
So it was in the first accomplishing. To all. And this for ever, for [I will
send the Holy Ghost unto you, and he shall abide with you for ever] for it was
in subsidium, to supply the comforts of his desired presence, and must
therefore ex vi intentionis be remanent till Christ's coming again. Now then
this promise being to be communicated to all, and that for ever, must either
come to us by 1 extraordinary and miraculous mission, or by 2 an ordinary
Ministry. Not the first; for we might as well expect the gift of Miracles. If
the second (as it is most certain so) then the main Question is evicted, viz:
that something perpetually necessary was in the power of the Apostles, which
was not in the power of the inferior Ministers, nor of any, but themselves and
their Colleagues, to wit, Ministerium S. Spiritus, or the ordinary office of
giving the holy Ghost by imposition of hands. For this promise was performed to
the Apostles in Pentecost, to the rest of the faithful after Baptism, Quod
n^nunc in confirmandis Neophyt is manus impositio tribuit singulis, hoc tunc
spiritus sancti descensio, in credentium populo donavit Vniversis, Sermon. de
Penticoste.
says Eusebius Emissenus, Now we find no other way of performing it, nor any
ordinary conveyance of the Spirit to all people, but this; and we find that the
H. Ghost actually was given this way. Therefore the effect, to wit, the H.
Ghost being to continue forever, and the promise of Universal concernement,
this way also of it is communication, to wit, by Apostolical imposition of
hands, is also perpetuum ministerium, to be succeeded to and to abide for ever.

2 This Ministry of imposition of hands for confirmation of baptized people is
so far from being a temporary Grace, and to determine with the persons of the
Apostles, that it is a fundamental point of Christianity, an essential
ingredient to it is composition. Hebr. 6. 2.
S. Paul is my Author. [Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of
Christ, let us go on unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of
Repentance from dead works, faith toward God, the doctrine of baptism, and of
laying on of hands. etc. Here is imposition of hands reckoned as part of the
foundation and a principle of Christianity in S. Paul's Catechism. Now,
imposition of hands is used by Name in Scripture but for two Ministrations. 1
For ordination, and 2 for this whatsover it is. Imposition of hands for
ordination does indeed give the Holy Ghost, but not as he is that promise which
is called the promise of the Father. For the Holy Ghost for ordination was
given before the ascension. John. 20. But the promise of the H. Ghost the
comforter [the Paraclete, I say, not the Ordayner or fountain of Priestly
order, that] was not given till the day of Pentecost; and besides, it was
promised to all Christian people, and the other was given only to the Clergy.

* Add to this, that S. Paul having laid this in the foundation makes his
progress from this to perfection (as he calls it) that is to higher mysteries,
and then his discourse is immediately of the Priesthood Evangelicall, which is
Originally in Christ, ministerially in the Clergy; so that unless we will
either confound the terms of his progress, or imagine him to make the
Ministry of the Clergy, the foundation of Christ's Priesthood, and not rather
contrary, it is clear that by imposition of hands, S. Paul means not
ordination, and therefore confirmation, there being no other ordinary Ministry
of imposition of hands but these two specifyed in Holy Scripture. For, as for
benediction in which Christ used the ceremony, and as for healing in which
Ananias and the Apostles used it; the first is clearly no Principle or
fundamental point of Christianity; and the Second is confessedly
extraordinary, therefore the argument is still firm upon it is first principles.

3. Lastly, the Primitive Church did de facto, and believed themselves to be
tied de jure to use this rite of Confirmation and giving of the Holy Ghost
after Baptism.

S. Clemens Alexandrinus in Eusebius tells a story of a young man whom S. John
had converted and committed to a Bishop to be brought up in the faith of
Christendom, lib: 3. hist: cap. 17.
Qui (says S. Clement) eum baptismi Sacramento illuminavit, postea vero
sigillo Domini tanquam perfecta and tuta ejus animi custodia obsignavit. The
Bishop first baptized him, then consigned him. Quaest. 137. ad Orthod:
Justin Martyr says (speaking pro more Ecclesiae, according to the Custom of
the Church) that when the mysteries of baptism were done, then the faithful
are consigned, or confirmed.

S. Cyprian relates to this story of S. Philip and the Apostles, Epist: 73. ad
lubajan:
and gives this account of the whole affayre, Et idcirco quia legitimum and
Ecclesiasticum baptismum consequuti fuerant, baptizarieos ultra non oportebat;
Sed tantummodo id quod deerat, id a Petro and Iohanne factum erat, ut oratione
pro cis habita and manu imposita invocaretur, and infunderetur super eos
Spiritus S. Quod nunc quoque apud nos geritur, ut qui in Ecclesia baptiz antur,
Praepositis Ecclesiae offer antur, ut per nostram orationem ac manus
impositionem Spiritum S. consequantur, and signaculo Dominico confirmentur. S.
Peter and S. John by imposing their hands on the Converts of Samaria, praying
over them, and giving them the Holy Ghost, made supply to them of what was
wanting after Baptism: and this is to this day done in the Church, for new
baptized people are brought to the Bishops, and by imposition of their hands
obtain the Holy Ghost.

But for this who pleases to be farther satisfied in the Primitive faith of
Christendom, may see it in the decretall Epistles of Cornelius the Martyr to
Fabianus recorded by Eusebius; in the Lib. 6. hist. cap: 33.
Epistle written to Julius and Iulianus Bishops, under the name of S. Clement,
in the in 1. tom. Council:
Epistle of Urban P. and Martyr, lib. de baptismo. c. 8
in Tertullian, in lib: 2. contra lit: Petil: cap. 104. and lib. 15. de
Trinitic 26. vide etiam S Hieron: contra Luciferianos. S. Ambros: lib. 2. c. 2
de sacramentis Epist: 3. Eusebij P. and M. ad Episc. Tusciae and Campon: I
sidor: Hispal de eccles: offic. lib. 2. c. 26.
S. Austen, and in S. Cyrill of Jerusalem whose whole third Mistagogique
Catechi^me is concerning Confirmation. This only. The Catholics, whose
Christian prudence it was, in all true respects to disadvantage Heretics,
least their poison should infect like a Pest, laid it in Novatus dish as a
crime, He was baptized in his bed, and was not confirmed, Vnde nec Spiritum
sanctum unquam potuerit promereri, therefore he could never receive the gift of
the holy Ghost. So Cornelius in the forequoted Epistle. Whence it is evident,
that then it was the belief of Christendom, that the holy Ghost was by no
ordinary ministry given to faithful people after Baptism, but only by
Apostolical, or Episcopal consignation and imposition of hands.

What also the faith of Christendom was concerning the Minister of
confirmation, and that Bishops only could do it, I shall make evident in the
descent of this discourse. Here the Scene lies in Scripture, where it is clear
that S. Philip, one of the 72. Disciples, as antiquity reports him, and an
Evangelist and a Disciple, as Scripture also expresses him, could not impose
hands for application of the promise of the Father, and ministerial giving of
the holy Ghost, but the Apostles must go to do it; and also there is no
example in Scripture of any that ever did it but an Apostle, and yet this is an
ordinary Ministry which de jure ought, and de facto always was continued in
the Church. Therefore there must always be an ordinary office of Apostleship
in the Church to do it, that is, an office above Presbyters, for in Scripture
they could never do it, and this is it which we call Episcopacy.

3. THe Apostles were rulers of the whole Church, 9. And Superiority of
Jurisdiction,
and each Apostle respectively of his several Diocese, when he would fix his
chair; and had superintendency over the Presbyters, and the people, and this
by Christ's donation, the Charter is by the Fathers said to be this. John. 20.
21.
Sicut misit me Pater, sic ego mitto vos. As my Father has sent me, even so
send I you. Manifesta enim est sententia Domini nostri Jesus Christi Apostolos
suos mittentis, Lib. 7. de baptism. Contra Donatist. c. 43. vide etiam S.
Cyprian, de Unit. Eccles. and S. Cyrill. in Ioh. lib. 12. c. 55.
and ipsis solis potestatem a Patre sibi datam permittentis quibus nos
successimus eadem potestate Ecclesiam Domini gubernantes, said Clarus a
Muscula, the Bishop in the Council of Carthage related by S. Cyprian and S.
Austin. But however it is evident in Scripture, that the Apostles had such
superintendency over the inferior Clergy (Presbyters I mean and Deacons) and a
superiority of jurisdiction, and therefore it is certain that Christ gave it
them, for none of the Apostles took this honor, but he that was called of God
as was Aaron.

1. Our blessed Savior gave to the Apostles plenitudinem potestatis. It was
sicut misit me Pater, etc. As my Father sent, so I send. You, my Apostles whom
I have chosen. This was not said to Presbyters, for they had no commission at
all given to them by Christ, but at their first mission to preach repentance, I
say no commission at all, they were not spoken to, they were not present. Now
then consider. Suppose that as Aerius did deny the Divine institution of
Bishops over the Presbyters cum grege, another as confident as he should deny
the Divine institution of Presbyters, what proof were there in all the holy
Scripture to show the Divine institution of them as a distinct order from
Apostles or Bishops. Indeed Christ selected 72. and gave them commission to
preach, but that commission was temporary and expired before the crucifixion
for ought appears in Scripture. If it be said the Apostles did ordain
Presbyters in every City, it is true, but not sufficient, for so they ordained
Deacons at Jerusalem, and in all established Churches, and yet this will not
tant' amount to an immediate Divine institution for Deacons, and how can it
then for Presbyters? If we say a constant Catholic traditive interpretation of
Scripture, does teach us, that Christ did institute the Presbyterate together
with Episcopacy, and made the Apostles Presbyters as well as Bishops; this is
true. But then 1. We recede from the plain words of Scripture, and rely upon
tradition, which in this question of Episcopacy will be of dangerous
consequence to the enemies of it, for the same tradition, if that be admitted
for good probation, is for Episcopal pre-eminence over Presbyters, as will
appear in the sequel. 2. Though no use be made of this advantage, yet to the
allegation it will be quickly answered, that it can never be proved from
Scripture, that Christ made the Apostles Priests first, and then Bishops or
Apostles, but only that Christ gave them several commissions, and parts of the
office Apostolical, all which being in one person, cannot by force of
Scripture prove two orders. Truth is, if we change the scene of war, and say
that the Presbyterate, as a distinct order from the ordinary office of
Apostleship, is not of Divine institution, the proof of it would be harder then
for the Divine institution of Episcopacy. Especially if we consider that in all
the enumerations of the parts of Cleric^^l offices, Ephesians. 4.
there is no enumeration of Presbyters, 1. Corinthians. 12.
but of Apostles there is; and the other members of the induction are of gifts
of Christianity, or par^^ of the Apostolate, and either must infer many more
orders, then the Church ever yet admitted of, or none, distinct from the
Apostolate, insomuch as Apostles were Pastors, and Teachers, and Evangelists,
and Rulers, and had the gift of tongues, of healing, and of Miracles. This
thing is of great consideration, and this use I will make of it: That either
Christ made the 72 to be Presbyters, and in them instituted the distinct order
of Presbyterate, as the ancient Church always did believe, or else he gave no
distinct commission for any such distinct order. If the second be admitted,
then the Presbyterate is not of immediate divine institution, but of
Apostolical only, as is the Order of Deacons, and the whole plenitude of power
is in the order Apostolical alone, and the Apostles did constitute Presbyters
with a greater portion of their own power, as they did Deacons with a less.
But if the first be said, then the commission to the 72 Presbyters being only
of preaching that we find in Scripture, all the rest of their power which now
they have is by Apostolical ordinance, and then although the Apostles did
admit them in partem sollicitudinis, yet they did not admit them in
plenitudinem potestatis, for then they must have made them Apostles, and then
there will be no distinction of order neither by Divine nor Apostolical
institution neither.

I care not which part be chosen, one is certain; but if either of them be
true, then since to the Apostles only, Christ gave a plenitude of power, it
follows, that either the Presbyters have no power of jurisdiction, as affixed
to a distinct order, and then the Apostles are to rule them by virtue of the
order and ordinary commission Apostolical; or if they have jurisdiction they
do derive it a font Apostolorum, and then the Apostles have superiority of
Jurisdiction over Presbyters, because Presbyters only have it by delegation
Apostolical. And that I say truth (besides that there is no possibility of
showing the contrary in Scripture, by the producing any other commission given
to Presbyters, then what I have specified,) I will hereafter show it to have
been the faith and practice of Christendom not only that Presbyters were
actually subordinate to Bishops (which I contend to be the ordinary office of
Apostleship) but that Presbyters have no Jurisdiction essential to their
order, but derivative only from Apostolical pre-eminence.

2. Let us now see the matter of fact. They that can inflict censures upon
Presbyters have certainly superiority of Jurisdiction over Presbyters, for
Aequalis aequalem coercere non potest, says the Law. Now it is evident in the
case of Diotrephes a Presbyter, and a Bishop Would be, that for his peremptory
rejection of some faithful people from the Catholic communion without cause,
and without authority, S. John the Apostle threatened him in his Epistle to
Gajus, (...) etc. Wherefore when I come I will remember him, and all that would
have been to very little purpose, if he had not had coercitive jurisdiction to
have punished his delinquency.

3. Presbyters many of them did succeed the Apostles by a new ordination, as
Matthias succeeded Judas, who before his new ordination was one of the 72. as
Lib. 1. hist. c 12. and l. 2. c 9.
Eusebius, Haeres. 20.
Epiphanius, and De script. Eccles. in Matthew. vide Irenaeum l 4. c. 63. Tertul
de praescript.
S. Jerome affirm, and in Scripture is expressed to be of the number of them
that went in and out with Jesus; S. Clement succeeded S. Peter at Rome, S.
Simeon Cleophae succeeded S. James at Jerusalem, S. Philip succeeded S. Paul at
Caesarea, and diverse others of the 72, reckoned by Dorotheus, Eusebius, and
others of the Fathers, did govern the several Churches after the Apostles
death which before they did not. Now it is clear that he that receives no more
power after the Apostles, then he had under them, can no way be said to succeed
them in their Charge, or Churches. It follows then, since (as will more fully
appear anon) Presbyters did succeed the Apostles, that under the Apostles they
had not such jurisdiction as afterward they had. But the Apostles had the same
to which the Presbyters succeeded to, therefore greater then the Presbyters had
before they did succeed. When I say Presbyters succeeded the Apostles, I mean,
not as Presbyters, but by a new ordination to the dignity of Bishops, so they
succeeded, and so they prove an evidence of fact, for a superiority of
Jurisdiction in the Apostolical Clergy. *** Now that this superiority of
Jurisdiction was not temporary, but to be succeeded in, appears from Reason,
and from ocular demonstration, or of the thing done.

1. If superiority of Jurisdiction was necessary in the ages Apostolical for
the regiment of the Church, there is no imaginable reason why it should not be
necessary in succession, since upon the emergency of Schisms and Heresies
which were foretold should multiply in descending ages, government and
superiority of jurisdiction, unity of supremacy, and coercion was more
necessary then at first, when extraordinary gifts might supply, what now we
expect to be performed by an ordinary authority.

2. Whatsoever was the regiment of the Church in the Apostles times that must
be perpetual (not so as to have Vt puta, viduarum collegium, and Diaconorum,
and coenobium fidelium. etc:
all that which was personal, and temporary, but so as to have no other) for
that, and that only is of Divine institution which Christ committed to the
Apostles, and if the Church be not now governed as then, We can show no Divine
Authority for our government, which we must contend to do, and do it too, or
be called usurpers. For either the Apostles did govern the Church as Christ
commanded them, or not. If not, then they fayl'd in the founding of the Church,
and the Church is not built upon a Rock. If they did (as most certainly they
did) then either the same disparity of jurisdiction must be retayn'd, or else
we must be governned with an Unlawful and unwarranted equality, because not by
that which only is of immediate divine institution; and then it must needs be a
fine government, where there is no authority, and where no man is superior.

3. We see a disparity in the Regiment of Churches warranted by Christ
himself, and confirmed by the Holy Ghost in fairest intimation. I mean the
seven Angel-Presidents of the seven Asian Churches. If these seven Angels
were seven Bishops, that is, Prelates or Governors of these seven Churches,
in which it is evident and confessed of all sides, there were many Presbyters,
then it is certain that a Superiority of Jurisdiction was intended by Christ
himself, and given by him, insomuch as he is the fountain of all power
derived to the Church; For Christ writes to these seven Churches, and directs
his Epistles to the seven Governors of these Churches calling them Angels,
which it will hardly be supposed he would have done, if the function had not
been a ray of the Sun of righteousness, they had not else been Angels of
light, nor stars held in Christ's own right hand.

This is certain, that the function of these Angels (whatsoever it be) is a
Divine institution. Let us then see what is meant by these stars and Angels.
Revel. 1. verse. 20.
[ The seven stars are the Angels of the seven Churches, and the seven
Candlesticks are the seven Churches.]

1. Then it is evident, that although the Epistles were sent with a final
intention for the edification and confirmation of the whole Churches or people
of the Diocese, with an [ Attendite quid Spiritus dicit Ecclesijs] yet the
personal direction was not to the whole Church, for the whole Church is called
the Candlestick, and the superscription of the Epistles is not to the seven
Candlesticks, but to the seven stars which are the Angels of the seven
Churches, viz. the lights shining in the Candlesticks. By the Angel therefore
is not, cannot be meant the whole Church.

2. It is plain that by the Angel is meant the Governor of the Church, 1.
Because of the title of eminency, The Angel (...), that is, the Messenger, the
Legate, the Apostle of the Church. (...). For these words, Angel, or Apostle,
although they signify Mission or Legation, yet in Scripture they often relate
to the persons to whom they are sent. As in the examples before specified.
(...). Their Angels. (...). The Apostles of the Churches. (...). The Angel of
the Church of Ephesus, and diverse others. Their compellation therefore being a
word of office in respect of him that sends them, and of Eminence in relation
to them to whom they are sent, shows that the Angel was the Ruler of each
Church respectively. 2. Because acts of jurisdiction are concredited to him;
as, not to suffer false Apostles; So to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus,
which is clearly a power of cognizance and coercion in causis Clericorum: to be
watchful and strengthen the things that remain; as to the Angel of the Church
in Sardis, (...), The first is the office of Rulers, for they Watch for your
Souls; Hebr. 13.
And the second, of Apostles, and Apostolic men. (...), Judas and Silas
confirmed the Brethren, for these men, although they were but of the 72 at
first, yet by this time were made Apostles and [cheife men among the Brethren]
S. Paul also was joined in this work, Act. 15.
(...), He went up and down confirming the Churches. And (...). S. Paul. 1.
Cor. 11.
To confirm the Churches, and to make supply of what is deficient in
discipline and government, these were offices of power and jurisdiction, no
less then Episcopal or Apostolical; and besides, the Angel here spoken of
had a propriety in the people of the Diocese [ Thou have a few names even in
Sardis] they were the Bishops people, the Angel had a right to them. And good
reason that the people should be his, for their faults are attributed to him,
as to the Angel of Pergamus, and diverse others, and therefore they are
deposited in his custody, He is to be their Ruler and Pastor, and this is
called his Ministry. To the Angel of the Church of Thyatira (...), I have
known thy Ministry. His office therefore was Clericall, it was an
AngelMinister, and this his office must make him the guide and superior to the
Rest, even all the whole Church, since he was charged with all.

3. By the Angel is meant a singular person, for the reprehensions and the
commendations respectively imply personal delinquency, or suppose personal
excellencyes. Add to this that the compellation is singular, and of
determinate number, so that we may as well multiply Churches as persons, for
the seven Churches had but seven stars, and these seven stars were the
Angels of the seven Churches. And if by seven stars they may mean 70 times
seven stars (for so they may if they begin to multiply) then by one star
they must mean many stars, and so they may multiply Churches too, for there
were as many Churches as stars, and no more Angels then Churches, and it is
as reasonable to multiply these seven Churches into 7000, as every star into
a Constellation, or every Angel into a Legion.

But besides the Exigency of the thing it self, these seven Angels are by
Antiquity called the seven Governors or Bishops of the seven Churches, and
their very names are commemorated. Unto these seven Churches S. John, says
Arethas, in 1. Apocal.
reckons (...), an equal number of Angel-Governours, and Oecumenius in his
scholia upon this place, says the very same words. Septem igitur Angelos
Rectores septem Ecclesiarum debemus intelligere, ibid:
eo quod Angelus Nuntius interpretatur, says S. Ambrose, and again, Angelos
Episcopos dicit sicut docetur in Apocalypsi Iohannis. Let the woman in 1. Cor.
11.
have a covering on her head because of the Angels, that is, in reverence and
subjection to the Bishop of the Church, for Bishops are the Angels as is taught
in the Revelation of S. John. Divina voce sub Angeli Nomine laudatur
praepositus Ecclesiae so S. Austin. Epist. 162. and in Apocal.
By the voice of God the Bishop of the Church is commended under the title of
an Angel. Eusebius names some of these Angels who were then Presidents and
actually Bishops of these Churches. S. Policarpe was one to be sure, apud
Smyrnam and Episcopus and Martyr, lib. 5. c. 24.
says Eusebius, He was the Angel of the Church of Smyrna; And he had good
authority for it, for he reports it out of Polycrates who a little after, was
himself an Angel of the Church of Ephesus, lib. 4 c. 10.
and he also quotes S. Irenaeus for it, lib. 4. cap. 15.
and out of the Encyclicall Epistle of the Church of Smyrna it self, and
besides these authorities it is attested by S. Epist. ad Policarp.
Ignatius, and de praescrip.
Tertullian. S. Timothy was another Angel, to wit, of the Church of Ephesus;
to be sure had been, and most likely was still surviving. Antipas is reckoned
by Name in the Revelation, and he had been the Angel of Pergamus, vide Aretha.
in 1. Apoc.
but before this book written he was turned from an Angel to a Saint. Melito
in all probability was then the Angel of the Church of Sardis. Melito quoque
Sardensis Ecclesiae Antistes, and Apollinaris apud Hierapolim Ecclesiam regens
celeberrimi inter caeteros habebantur, lib. 4. cap. 26.
says Eusebius. These men were actually living when S. John writ his
Revelation, for Melito writ his book de Paschate when Sergius Paulus was
Proconsul of Asia, and writ after the Revelation, for he writ a treatise of it,
as says Eusebius. However, at least some of these were then, and all of these
about that time were Bishops of these Churches, and the Angels S. John speaks
of were such who had Jurisdiction over their whole Diocese, therefore these,
or such as these were the Angels to whom the Spirit of God writ hortatory and
commendatory letters, such whom Christ held in his Right hand and fixed them in
the Churches like lights set on a Candlestick that they might give shine to the
whole house.

The Sum of all is this; that Christ did institute Apostles and Presbyters or
72 Disciples. To the Apostles he gave a plenitude of power, for the whole
commission was given to them in as great and comprehensive clauses as were
imaginable, for by virtue of it, they received a power of giving the Holy Ghost
in confirmation, and of giving his grace in the collation of holy Orders, a
power of jurisdiction and authority to govern the Church: and this power was
not temporary, but successive and perpetual, and was intended as an ordinary
office in the Church, so that the successors of the Apostles had the same right
and institution that the Apostles themselves had, and though the personal
mission was not immediate, as of the Apostles it was, yet the commission and
institution of the function was all one. But to the 72 Christ gave no
commission but of preaching, which was a very limited commission. There was all
the immediate Divine institution of Presbyterate as a distinct order, that can
be fairly pretended. But yet farther, these 72 the Apostles did admit in
partem sollicitudinis, and by new ordination or delegation Apostolical, did
give them power of administering Sacraments, of absolving sinners, of governing
the Church in conjunction and subordination to the Apostles, of which they had
a capacity by Christ's calling them at first in sortem Ministerii, but the
exercise, and the actuating of this capacity they had from the Apostles. So
that not by Divine ordination, or immediate commission from Christ, but by
derivation from the Apostles (and therefore in minority and subordination to
them) the Presbyters did exercise acts of order and jurisdiction in the absence
of the Apostles or Bishops, or in conjunction consiliary, and by way of advice,
or before the consecration of a Bishop to a particular Church. And all this I
doubt not, but was done by the direction of the Holy Ghost, as were all other
acts of Apostolical ministration, and particularly the institution of the
other order, viz. of Deacons. This is all that can be proved out of Scripture
concerning the commission given in the institution of Presbyters, and this I
shall afterward confirm by the practice of the Catholic Church, and so
vindicate the practices of the present Church, from the common prejudices that
disturb us, for by this account, Episcopacy is not only a Divine institution,
but the only order that derives immediately from Christ.

For the present only, In Lucae cap. 10.
I sum up this with that saying of Theodoret speaking of the 72 Disciples.
Palmae sunt isti qui nut riuntur ac erudiuntur ab Apostolis. Nam quanquam
Christus hos etiam elegit, erant tamen duodecem illis inferiores, and postea
illorum Discipuli and sectatores. The Apostles are the twelve fountains, and
the 72 are the palms that are nourished by the waters of those fountains. For
though Christ also ordained the 72, yet they were inferior to the Apostles, and
afterward were their followers and Disciples.

I know no objection to hinder a conclusion; only two or three words out of
Ignatius, are pretended against the maine question, viz. to prove that he,
although a Bishop, yet had no Apostolical authority, Epist. ad Philadelph.
(...), I do not command this as an Apostle, (for what am I, and what is my
Fathers house, that I should compare my self with them) but as your fellow
soldier and a Monitor. But this answers it self, if we consider to whom he
speaks it. Not to his own Church of Antioch, for there he might command as an
Apostle, but to the Philadelphians (...) might not, they were no part of his
Diocese, he was not their Apostle, and then because he did not equal the
Apostles in their commission extraordinary, in their personal privileges, and
in their universal jurisdiction, therefore he might not command the
Philadelphians, being another Bishops charge, but admonish them with the
freedom of a Christian Bishop, to whom the souls of all faithful people were
dear and precious. So that still Episcopacy and Apostolate may be all one in
ordinary office, this hinders not, and I know nothing else pretended, and that
Antiquity is clearly on this side, is the next business.

For, hitherto the discourse has been of the immediate Divine institution of
Episcopacy, by arguments derived from Scripture; I shall only add two more
from Antiquity, 10. So that Bishops are successors in the office of
Apostleship, according to the general tenent of Antiquity.
and so pass on to tradition Apostolical.

1. THE belief of the primitive Church is, that Bishops are the ordinary
successors of the Apostles, and Presbyters of the 72, and therefore did believe
that Episcopacy is as truly of Divine institution as the Apostolate, for the
ordinary office both of one and the other is the same thing. For this there is
abundant testimony. Some I shall select, enough to give fair evidence of a
Catholic tradition.

S. Irenaeus is very frequent and confident in this particular, Lib. 3. cap. 3.
Habemus annumerare eos qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis,
Er SUCCESSORES EORUM usque ad nos... Etenim si recondita mysteria scissent
Apostoli... his vel maxim traderent eaquibus etiam ipsas Ecclesias
committebant... quos and SUCCESSORES relinquebant SUUM IPSORUM LOCUM MAGISTERII
tradentes. We can name the men the Apostles made Bishops in their several
Churches, appointing them their successors, and most certainly those mysterious
secrets of Christianity which themselves knew; they would deliver to them to
whom they committed the Churches, and left to be their successors in the same
power and authority themselves had.

Tertullian reckons Corinth, Philippi, Thessalonica, Ephesus and others to be
Churches Apostolical, Lib. de praescript. c. 36.
apud quas ipsae adhuc Cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis praesident.
Apostolical they are from their foundation, and by their succession, for
Apostles did found them, and Apostles, or men of Apostolic authority still do
govern them.

S. Cyprian; Hoc enim vel maxim Frater, Epist. 42. ad Cornelium.
and laboramus and laborare debemus ut Vnitatem a Domino, and per Apostolos
NOBIS SUCCESSORIBUS traditam quantum possumus obtinere curemus. We must
preserve the Unity commanded us by Christ, and delivered by his Apostles to us
their Successors. To us Cyprian and Cornelius, for they only were then in view,
the one Bishop of Rome, the other of Carthage. And in his Epistle ad Florentium
Pupianum; Nec haec jacto, Epist. 69.
sed dolens profero, cum te Iudicem Dei constituas and Christi, qui dicit ad
Apostolos ac per hoc adomnes praepositos qui Apostolis Vicaria ordinatione
succedunt, qui vos audit, me audit, etc. Christ said to his Apostles, and in
them to the Governors or Bishops of his Church who succeeded the Apostles as
Vicars in their absence, he that hears you hears me.

Famous is that saying of Clarus a Muscula the Bishop, spoken in the Council
of Carthage and repeated by S. Austin, Lib. 7. c. 43. de baptis. cont. Donatist.
Manifesta est sententia Domini nostri Jesus Christi Apostolos suos mittentis
and ipsis solis potestatem a patre sibi datam permittentis, quibus nos
successimus eadem potestate Ecclesiam Domini gubernantes. Nos successimus. We
succeed the Apostles governing the Church by the same power. He spoke it in
full Council in an assembly of Bishops, and himself was a Bishop.

The Council of Rome under S. Sylvester speaking of the honor due to Bishops
expresses it thus, Non oportere quenquam Domini Discipulis, id est, Apostolorum
successoribus detrahere. No man must detract from the Disciples of our Lord,
that is, from the Apostles successors.

S. Hierome speaking against the Montanists for undervalning their Bishops,
Epist. 54.
shows the difference of the Catholics honoring, and the Heretics
disadvantaging that sacred order. Apud nos (says he) Apostolorum locum
Episcopi tenent, apud eos Episcopus tertius est. Bishops with us [Catholicks]
have the place or authority of Apostles, but with them [Montanists] Bishops are
not the first but the third state of Men. And upon that of the Psalmist, pro
Patribus nati sunt tibi filii, S. Hierome, and diverse others of the Fathers
make this gloss, Pro Patribus Apostolis filii Episcopi ut Episcopi Apostolis
tanquam filii Patribus succedant; The Apostles are Fathers, instead of whom
Bishops do succeed, whom God has appointed to be made Rulers in all lands. So
S. Hierome, S. Austin, and Euthymius upon the 44. Psalm. alias 45.

But S. Austin for his own particular makes good use of his succeeding the
Apostles, De verbis Dom. sermon. 24
which would do very well now also to be considered. Si solis Apostolis dixit,
qui vos spernit me spernit, spernite nos: si autem sermo ejus pervenit ad nos,
and vocavit nos, and in eorum loco constituit nos, videte ne spernatis nos. It
was good counsel not to despise Bishops, for they being in the Apostles places
and offices are concerned and protected by that saying, he that despises you,
despises me. I said it was good counsel, especially if besides all these, we
will take also S. Chrysostomes testimony, Potestas anathematizandi ab Apostolis
ad successores eorum nimirum Episcopos transiit. A power of anathematizing
delinquents is derived from the Apostles to their successors, even to Bishops.

S. Ambrose upon that of S. Paul Ephesians. 4. Quosdam dedit Apostolos, Apostoli
Episcopi sunt, In Ephesians. 4.
He has given Apostles, In 1. Corinthians. 12. 28.
that is, he has given some Bishops. That Is down right, and this came not by
chance from him; he doubles his assertion. Caput itaque in Ecclesia Apostolos
posuit, qui legati Christi sunt, sicut dicit idem Apostolus [pro quo legatione
fungimur.] Ipsi sunt Episcopi, firmante istud Petro Apostolo, and dicente inter
caetera de Judah, and Episcopatum ejus accipiat alter. And a third time. In
verse. 29. ibid.
Numquid omnes Apostoli? verum est; Quia in Ecclesia Vnus est Episcopus. Bishop
and Apostle was all one with S. Ambrose, when he spoke of their ordinary
offices; which puts me in mind of the fragment of Polycrates of the Martyrdom
of Timothy in Photius, Biblioth. Phot. n. 254.
(...). The Apostle Timothy was ordained Bishop in the Metropolis of Ephesus by
S. Paul, and there enthroned. To this purpose are those compellations and
titles of Bishoprics usually in antiquity. S. Basil calls a Bishopric, (...),
and (...). So Theodoret. Lib. 4. c. 18.
An Apostolical presidency. The sum is the same which S. Peter himself
taught the Church, as S. Clement his Scholar, or some other primitive man in
his name reports of him. Episcopos ergo vicem Apostolorum gerere Dominum
docuisse dicebat, Epist. 1.
and reliquorum Discipulorum vicem tenere Presbyteros debere insinuabat. He
[Peter] said that our Lord taught that Bishops were to succeed in the place of
the Apostles, and Presbyters in the place of the Disciples. Who desires to be
farther satisfied concerning Catholic consent, for Bishops succession to
Apostles in their order and ordinary office, he may see it in Epist. 1* ad
Simpron.
Pacianus the renowned Bishop of Barcinona, in Homil. 26. in Evang.
S. Gregory, Orat. 2. de imagine.
S. John Damascen, in S. Sixtus the first his second decretall Epistle, and
most plentifully in Epist. 7.
S. Caelestine writing to the Ephesine Council, in the Epistle of Habetur Can.
in Novo distinct. 21.
Anacletus de Patriarchis and Primatibus etc. In In synod. Hispal.
Isidore, and in Lib. 3. c. 15. super Lucam.
Venerable Bede. His words are these, sicut duodecem Apostolos formam
Episcoporum exhibere simul and demonstrare nemo est qui dubitet: sic and 72
figuram Presbyterorum gessisse sciendum est, tamet si primis Ecclesiae
temporibus, ut Apostolica Scriptura testis est, utrique Presbyteri, and utrique
vocabantur Episcopi, quorum unum scientiae maturitatem, aliud industriam curae
Pastoralis significat. Sunt ergo jure Divino Episcopi a Presbyteris praelatione
distincti. As no man doubts but Apostles were the order of Bishops; so the 72
of Presbyters, though at first they had names in common. Therefore Bishops by
Divine right are distinct from Presbyters, and their Prelates or Superiors.

TO the same issue drive all those testimonies of Antiquity that call all
Bishops ex aequo successors of S. Peter. 11. And particularly of S. Peter,
So S. Cyprian. Dominus noster cujus praecepta metuere and observare debemus,
Episcopi honorem and Ecclesiae suaerationem disponens in Evangelio, loquitur
and dicit Petro, ego tibi dico, Quia tu es Petrus, etc. Inde per temporum and
successionum vices, Episcoporum ordinatio and Ecclesiae ratio decurrit, Epist.
27. ad Lapsos.
ut Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur, etc. When our B. Savior was
ordering his Church and instituting Episcopal dignity, he said to Peter, thou
art Peter, and on this rock will I build my Church. Hence comes the order of
Bishops, and the constitution or being of the Church, that the Church be
founded upon Bishops. etc.

The same also S Jerome intimate's, Epist. 1.
Non est facile stare loco Pauli, tenere gradum Petri. It is not a small thing,
to stand in the place of Paul, to obtain the degree of Peter, so he, while he
disswades Heliodorus from taking on him the great burden of the Episcopal
office. Pasceoves meas, said Christ to Peter, and feed the flock of God which
is amongst you said S. Peter to the Bishops of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bithynia. Similia enim Successoribus suis Petrus scripsit praecepta,
says Theodoret, Lib. 12. these. cap. 13. Orat. de laud. Basil:
S. Peter gave the same precepts to his successors which Christ gave to him;
And S. Ephrem speaking of S. Basil the Bishop of Caesarea Cappadocia, and sicut
rursus Petrus Ananiam and Saphiram fraudantes de precio agri enecavit: ita and
Basilius, locum Petri obtinens ejasque pariter authoritatem libertatemque
participans, suam ipsius promissionem fraudantem Valentem redarguit ejusque
filium morte mulctavit. As S. Peter did to Ananias and Saphira, So Basil did to
Valens and his Son for the same delinquency, for he had the place, liberty,
and authority of S. Peter.

Thus Gaudentius of Brixia calls S. Ambrose the Successor of S. Peter, tract.
prima die suae ordinat.
and Gildas surnamed the wise, says that all evil Bishops whatsoever do with
unhallowed and unclean feet usurp the seat of S. Peter. But this thing is
of Catholic belief, and of this use. Biblioth. SS. PP. tom. 5 in Eccles. ord.
in crepat.
If the order and office of the Apostolate be eternal and to be succeeded in,
and this office Superior to Presbyters, and not only of Divine institution,
but indeed the only order which can clearly show an immediate Divine
commission for it is power and authority (as I have proved of the function
Apostolical) then those which do succeed the Apostles in the ordinary office
of Apostolate, have the same institution and authority the Apostles had, as
much as the successors of the Presbyters have with the first Presbyters, and
perhaps more.

For in the Apostolical ordinations, they did not proceed as the Church since
has done. Themselves had the whole Priesthood, the whole commission of the
Ecclesiastical power and all the offices. Now they in their ordayning
assistant Ministers, did not in every ordination give a distinct order, as the
Church has done since the Apostles. For they ordained some to distinct
offices, some to particular places, some to one part, some to another part of
Clericall employment, as S. Paul who was an Apostle yet was ordained by
imposition of hands to go to the Churches of the Uncircumcision, so was
Barnabas: S. John, and James, and Cephas to the Circumcision, and there was
scarce any public design or Grand employment but the Apostolic men had a new
ordination to it, a new imposition of hands as is evident in the Acts of the
Apostles. So that the Apostolical ordinations of the inferior Clergy were
only a giving of partilar commissions to particular men to officiate such
parts of the Apostolical calling as they would please to employ them in. Nay
sometimes their ordinations were only a delivering of Jurisdiction when the
persons ordained had the order before, as it is evident in the case of Paul and
Barnabas. Acts, 13.
Of the same consideration is the institution of Deacons to spiritual offices,
and it is very pertinent to this Question. For there is no Divine institution
for these rising higher then Apostolical ordinance; and so much there is for
Presbyters as they are now authorized; for such power the Apostles gave to
Presbyters as they have now, and sometimes more, as to Judas and Silas, and
diverse others, who therefore were more then mere Presbyters as the word is
now used.

* The result is this. The office and order of a Presbyter is but part of the
office and order of an Apostle, so is a Deacon, a lesser part, so is an
Evangelist, so is a Prophet, so is a Doctor, so is a helper, or a Surrogate in
Government, but these will not be called orders, every one of them will not I
am sure, at least not made distinct orders by Christ, for it was in the
Apostles power to give any one or all these powers to any one man, or to
distinguish them into so many men, as there are offices, or to unite more or
fewer of them. All these I say, clearly make not distinct orders, and why are
not all of them of the same consideration? I would be answered from Grounds of
Scripture. For there we fix as yet.

* Indeed the Apostles did ordain such men, and scattered their power at
first, for there was so much employment in any one of them, as to require one
man for one office; but a while after they united all the lesser parts of power
into two sorts of men whom the Church has since distinguished by the Names of
Presbyters and Deacons, and called them two distinct orders. But yet if we
speak properly and according to the Exigence of Divine institution, there is
Vnum Sacerdotiam, one Priesthood appointed by Christ, and that was, the
commission given by Christ to his Apostles, and to their Successors precisely,
and those other offices of Presbyter and Deacon are but members of the Great
Priesthood, and although the power of it, is all of Divine institution, as the
power to baptize, to preach, to consecrate, to absolve, to Minister, yet that
so much of it should be given to one sort of men, so much less to another,
that is only of Apostolical ordinance. For the Apostles might have given to
some only a power to absolve, to some only to consecrate, to some only to
baptize. We see that to Deacons they did so. They had only a power to baptize
and preach, whether all Evangelists had so much or no, Scripture does not tell
us.

* But is to some men they had only given a power to use the Keys, or made
them officers spiritual to restore such as are overtaken in a fault, and not
to consecrate the Eucharist, (for we see these powers are distinct, and not
relative and of necessary conjunction, no more then baptizing and consecrating)
whether or no had those men who have only a power of absolving or consecrating
respectively, whether (I say) have they the order of a Presbyter? If yea, then
now every Priest has two orders besides the order of Deacon, for by the power
of Consecration he has the power of a Presbyter, and what is he then by his
other power? But if such a man ordayn'd with but one of these powers have not
the order of a Presbyter, then let any man show me where it is ordained by
Christ, or indeed by the Apostles, that an order of Clerks should be
constituted with both these powers, and that these were called Presbyters. I
only leave this to be considered.

* But all the Apostolical power we find instituted by Christ, and we also
find a necessity, that all that power should be succeeded in, and that all that
power should be united in one order, for he that has the highest, viz. a power
of ordination, must needs have all the other, else he cannot give them to any
else, but a power of ordination I have proved to be necessary and perpetual.

So that, we have clear evidence of the Divine institution of the perpetual
order of Apostleship, mary for the Presbyterate I have not so much either
reason or confidence for it, as now it is in the Church; but for the
Apostolate, it is beyond exception. And to this Bishops do succeed. For that
it is so, I have proved from Scripture, and because [ no Scirpture is of
private interpretation] I have attested it with the Catholic testimony of the
Primitive Fathers, calling Episcopacy, the Apostolate, and Bishops successors
of S. Peter in particular, and of all the Apostles in general in their ordinary
offices in which they were Superior to the 72, the Antecessors of the
Presbyterate.

One objection, I must clear. For sometimes Presbyters are also called
Apostles, and Successors of the Apostles, as in Ignatius, in Irenaeus, in S.
Hierome. I answer.

1. They are not called Successores Apostolorum by any dogmaticall resolution
or interpretation of Scripture, as the Bishops are in the examples above
alleged; but by allusion, and participation at the most. For true it is that
they succeed the Apostles in the offices of baptizing, consecrating, and
absolving in privato foro, but this is but part of the Apostolical power, and
no part of their office as Apostles were superior to Presbyters.

2. It is observeable that Presbyters are never affirmed to succeed in the
power and regiment of the Church, but in subordination, and derivation from the
Bishop, and therefore they are never said to succeed in Cathedris Apostolorum,
in the Apostolic Sees.

3. The places which I have specifyed, and they are all I could ever meet
with, are of peculiar answer. For as for Ignatius in his Epistle to the Church
of Trallis, Idem fere habet in Epist. ad Magnes: and Smyrnens.
he calls the Presbytery or company of Priests, the College, or combination of
Apostles. But here S. Ignatius as he lifts up the Presbyters to a comparison
with Apostles, so he also raises the Bishop to the similitude and resemblance
with God. Episcopus typum Dei Patris omnium gerit, Presbyteri vero sunt
conjunctus Apostolorum caetus. So that although Presbyters grow high yet they
do not overtake the Bishops, or Apostles, who also in the same proportion grow
higher then their first station. This then, will do no hurt.

As for S. Irenaeus, he indeed does say that Presbyters succeed the Apostles,
but what Presbyters he means, he tells us, even such Presbyters as were also
Bishops, such as S. Peter and S. John was, who call themselves Presbyters, Lib.
4. c. 43.
his words are these. Propterea eis qui in Ecclesia sunt Presbyteris abandire
oportet his qui successionem habent ab Apostolis, qui cum Episcopatus
successione charisma veritatis certum secundum placitum Patris acceperunt. Cap.
44*
And a little after, Tales Presbyteros nutrit Ecclesia, de quibus and Propheta
ait, and dabo Principes tuos in pace, and Episcopos tuos in Iustitia. So that
he gives testimony for us, not against us. As for S. Hierome, the third man, he
in the succession to the honor of the Apostolate joins Presbyters with
Bishops, and that is right enough, for if the Bishop alone does succeed in
plenitudinem potestatis Apostolicae ordinariae, as I have proved he does, then
also it is as true of the Bishop together with his consessus Presbyterorum.
Epist. 13.
Episcopi and Presbyteri habeant in exemplum Apostolos and Apostolicos viros,
quorum honorem possidentes, habere nitantur and meritum, those are his words,
and enforce not so much as may be safely granted, for reddendo singula
singulis, Bishops succeed Apostles, and Presbyters Apostolic men, and such
were many that had not at first any power Apostolical, and that is all that can
be inferred from this place of S. Hierome. I know nothing else to stay me, or
to hinder our assent to those authorities of Scripture I have alleged, and
the full voice of traditive interpretation.

THE second argument from Antiquity is the direct testimony of the Fathers for
a Divine institution. 12. And the institution of Episcopacy as well as of the
Apostolate expressed to be Divine, by primitive authority, Epist. 27.
In this S. Cyprian is most plentiful. Dominus noster ** Episcopi honorem and
Ecclesiae suo rationem disponens in Evangelio, dicit Petro etc: Inde per
tamporum and successionum vices Episcoporum ordinatio and Ecclesi^ rati^
decurrit, ut Ecclesia super Episcopos canstituatur and omnis actus Ecclesiae
per eosdem Praepositos gubernetur. Cum hos itaque Divina l^ge fundatum sit etc:
Our Lord did institute in the Gospel the honor of a Bishop. Hence comes the
ordination of Bishops, and the Church is built upon them, and every action of
the Church is to be governed by them, and this is founded upon a Divine law.
Epist. 65. Rogatian.
Meminisse autem Diaconi debent quoniam Apostolos. i.e. Episcopos, and
praepositos Dominus elegit. Our Lord has chosen Apostles, that is, Bishops and
Church Governors. And a little after. Quod si nos aliquid auder^ contra Deum
possumus qui Episcopos facit, possunt and contra nos audere Diaconi, a quibus
fiunt. We must not attempt any thing against God who has instituted Bishops.
The same Father in his Epistle to Magnus disputes against Novatianus his being
a Bishop. Epist. 76.
Novatianus in Ecclesia non est, nec Episcopus computari potest, qui Evangelica
and Apostolica traditione contempta, nemini succedens a seipso ordinatus est.
If there was both an Evangelicall, and an Apostolic tradition, for the
successive ordination of Bishops, by other Bishops, (as S. Cyprian affirms
there is, by saying Novatianus contemned it,) then certainly the same
Evangelicall power did institute that calling, for the modus of whose election,
it took such particular order.

S. Ignatius long before him, speaking concerning his absent friend S^tion the
Deacon, Epist, ad Magnes.
(...). He wishes for the good man's company, because by the grace of God, and
according to the law of Jesus Christ, he was obedient to the Bishop and his
Clergy. And a little after. (...). It is home enough. Ye ought to obey your
Bishop, and to contradict him in nothing. It is a fearful thing to contradict
him: For whosoever does so, does not mock a visible man, but the invisible,
undeceiveable God. For this contumely relates not to man but to God. So S.
Ignatius, which could not be true, were it a humane constitution and no Divine
ordinance. But more full are those words of his in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, (...). He that obeyes the Bishop and Clergy obeyes Christ, who did
constitute and ordain them. This is plain and dogmaticall, I would be loath to
have two men so famous, so Ancient, and so resolute, speak half so much
against us.

But it is a general resolve, Quaest. Vet. and N. Testam. qu. 97.
and no private opinion. For S. Austin is confident in the case with a Nemo
ignorant Episcopos Salvatorem Ecclesiis instituisse. Ipse enim priusquam in
coelos ascenderet, imponens manum Apostolis, ordinavit eos Episcopos. No man is
so ignorant but he knows that our blessed Savior appointed Bishops over
Churches, for before his ascension into Heaven, he ordained the Apostles to be
Bishops. But long before him,

Hegesippus going to Rome, Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 22.
and by the way calling in at Corinth, and diverse other Churches, discoursed
with their several Bishops, and found them Catholic and Holy, and then staid
at Rome three successions of Bishops, Anicetus, Soter, and Eleutherius. Sed in
omnibus istis ordinationibus, vel in caeteris quas per reliquas urbes videram
ita omnia habebantur, sicut lex antiquitus tradidit, and Prophetae
indicaverunt, ET DOMINUS STATUIT. All things in these ordinations or
successions were as our Lord had appointed. All things, therefore both of
doctrine and discipline, and therefore the ordinations themselves too. Further
yet, and it is worth observing, there was never any Bishop of Rome from S.
Peter to S. Sylvester, that ever writ decretall Epistle now extant and
transmitted to us, but either professedly or accidentally he said or intimated,
that the order of Bishops did come from God.

S. Irenaeus speaking of Bishops successors to the Apostles, Lib. 4. c. 43.
says that with their order of Bishopric, they have received charisma
veritatis certum, a true, and certain or indelible character; secundum
placitum Patris, according to the will of God the Father. And this also is the
doctrine of S. Ambrose, In 1. Corinthians. 12.
Ideo quanquam melior Apostolus aliquando tamen eget Prophetis, and quia ab uno
Deo Patre sunt omnia, singulos Episcopos singulis Ecclesiis praeesse decrevit.
God from whom all good things do come, did decree that every Church should be
governed by a Bishop. De dignit. Sacerd. cap. 2.
And again, Honor igitur, Fratres, and sublimitas Episcopalis, nullis poterit
comparationibus adaequari; Si Regum fulgori compares etc: and a little after,
Quid jam de plebeia dixerim multitudine, cui non solum praeferri a Domino
meruit, sed ut eam quoque jure tueatur patrio, praeceptis imperatum est
Evangelicis. The honor and sublimity of the Bishop is an incomparable
pre-eminence and is by God set over the people, and it is commanded by the
precept of the holy Gospel that he should guide them by a Fathers right. And
in the close of his discourse, Sic certe a Domino ad B. Petrum dicitur, Petre
amas me?.... repetitum est a Domino tertio, Pasceoves meas. Quas oves, and quem
gregem non solum tunc B. suscepit Petrus, sed and cum illo nos suscepimus
omnes. Our blessed Lord committed his sheep to S. Peter to be fed, and in him
we (who have Pastoral or Episcopal authority) have received the same
authority and commission. Thus also diverse of the Fathers speaking of the
ordination of S. Timothy to be Bishop, and of S. Paul's intimation, that it was
by Prophecy, affirm it to be done by order of the Holy Ghost. (...), says S.
Chrysostom, Homil. 4. Graec. 5. lat. in 1. Tim. 1. cap.
he was ordained by Prophecy, that is by the Holy Ghost. (...), Thou were not
made Bishop by humane constitution. In 1. Tit.
(...), so Oecumenius. By Divine revelation, says Theodoret. By the command of
the Holy Ghost, so Theophylact; and indeed so S. Paul, to the assembly of
Elders and Bishops met at Miletus, Acts 20.
Spiritus S. posuit vos Episcopos, the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops: and to
be sure S. Timothy was amongst them, and he was a Bishop, and so were diverse
others there present; therefore the order it self is a ray streaming from the
Divine beauty, since a single person was made Bishop by revelation. I might
multiply authorities in this particular, which are very frequent and confident
for the Divine institution of Episcopacy, in Hom. 32. in Johan.
Origin, in the Council of Carthage recorded by S. Cyprian, in the collection
of the Can. 6.
Oriental Canons by Martinus Bracarensis: in the Counsels of C. 25.
Aquisgrane, and Octauum Can. 7.
Toledo, and many more. The sum is that which was taught by Epist. 2.
S. Sixtus, Apostolorum dispositione, ordinante Domino Episcopi primitus sunt
constituti. The Lord did at first ordain, and the Apostles did so order it,
and so Bishops at first had their Original constitution.

These and all the former who affirm Bishops to be successors of the Apostles,
and by consequence to have the same institution, drive all to the same issue,
and are sufficient to make faith, that it was the dodoctrine Primitive, and
Catholic that Episcopacy is a divine institution, which Christ Planted in the
first founding of Christendom, which the Holy Ghost Watered in his first
descent on Pentecost, and to which we are confident that God will give an
increase by a never failing succession, unless where God removes the
Candlestick, or which is all one, takes away the star, the Angel of light
from it, that it may be invelop'd in darkness, usque ad consummationem sae^uli
and aperturam tenebrarum. The conclusion of all, I subjoyne in the words of
Venerable Bede before quoted, Lib. 3. in Lucam. c. 15.
sunt ergo jure Divino Episcopi a Presbyteris praelatione distincti. Bishops
are distinct from Presbyters, and Superior to them by the law of God.

THE second Basis of Episcopacy is Apostolical tradition. We have seen what
Christ did, now we shall see what was done by his Apostles. And since they
knew their Masters mind so well, we can never better confide in any argument
to prove Divine institution of a derivative authority then the practice
Apostolical. Lib. 3. cap. 5.
Apostoli enim Discipuli veritatis existentes, extra omne mendacium sunt, non
enim communicate mendacium veritati, sicut non communicant tenebrae luci, 13. In
pursuance of the Divine institution, the Apostles did ordain Bishops in
several Churches,
sed praesentia alterius excludit alterum. says S. Irenaeus.

FIrst, then, the Apostles did presently after the ascension fix an Apostle or
a Bishop in the chair of Jerusalem. For they knew that Jerusalem was shortly
to be destroyed, they themselves foretold of miseryes and desolations to ensue,
( Petrus and Paulus praedicunt cladem Hierosolymitanam, says Lactantius l. 4.
inst.) famines and wars, and not a stone left upon another was the fate of
that Rebellious City by Christ's own prediction, which themselves recorded in
Scripture. And to say they understood not what they writ, is to make them
Enthusiasts, and neither good Doctors nor wise seers. But it is (...) that the
holy Spirit which was promised to lead them into all truth would instruct them
in so concerning an issue of public affairs, as was so Great desolation, and
therefore they began betimes to establish that Church, and to fix it upon it is
perpetual base. 2ly The Church of Jerusalem was to be the president and
platform for other Churches. [ The word of God went forth into all the world,
beginning first at Ierusalem], and therefore also it was more necessary a
Bishop should be there placed betimes, that other Churches might see their
government from whence they received their doctrine, that they might see from
what stars their continual flux of light must stream. 3ly The Apostles
were actually dispersed by persecution, and this to be sure they looked for,
and therefore (so implying the necessity of a Bishop to govern in their
absence or decession any ways) they ordayn'd S. James the first Bishop of
Jerusalem; As S. James at Jerusalem.
there he fixed his chair, there he lived Bishop for 30 years, and finished
his course with glorious Martyrdom. If this be proov'd we are in a fair way
for practice Apostolical.

First, let us see all that is said of S. James in Scripture, that may concern
this affayre. Acts. 15. We find S. James in the Synod at Jerusalem, not
disputing, but giving final determination to that Great Qu: about
Circumcision. [ And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up and said
etc:] He first drove the question to an issue, and told them what he believed
concerning it, with a (...), we trust it will go as well with us without
circumcision, as with our Forefathers who used it. But S. James when he had
summed up what had been said by S. Peter, gave sentence and final
determination. (...). wherefore I judge or give sentence. So he. The Acts of
Council which the Brethren or Presbyters did use were deliberative, they
disputed, v. 7. S. Peter's act was declarative, but S. James his was decisive;
which proves him clearly (if by reasonableness of the thing and the
successive practice of Christendom in imitation of this first Council
Apostolical we may take our estimate) that S. James was the President of this
Synod, which considering that he was none of the twelve (as I proved formerly)
is unimaginable, were it not for the advantage of the place, it being held in
Jerusalem, where he was Hierosolymorum Episcopus (as S. Clement call's him)
especially in the presence of S. Peter, who was primus Apostolus, and decked
with many personal privileges and prerogatives.

*Add to this, that although the whole Council did consent to the sending of
the Decretall Epistle, and to send Judas and Silas, yet because they were of
the Presbytery, and College of Jerusalem, S. James his Clergy, they are said,
as by way of appropriation to come from S. James. Gal. 2. v. 12. Upon which
place S. Austin says thus, Cum vidisset quosdam venisse a Iacobo, i. e. a
Iudaea, nam Ecclesiae Hierosolymitanae Iacobus praefuit. To this purpose that
of Ignatius is very pertinent calling S. Stephen the Deacon of S. James, Epist.
ad Trall,
and in his Epistle to Hero, saying that he did Minister to S. James and the
Presbyters of Jerusalem, which if we expound according to the known discipline
of the Church in Ignatius time (who was Suppar Apostolorum, only not a
contemporary Bishop) here is plainly the eminency of an Episcopal chair, and
Jerusalem the seat of S. James, and the Clergy his own, of a College of which
he was the praepositus Ordinarius, he was their Ordinary.

*The second evidence of Scripture is [Acts. 21. And when we were come to
Jerusalem the Brethren received us gladly, and the day following Paul went in
with us unto James, and all the Elders were present.] Why unto James? Why not
rather into the Presbytery, or College of Elders, if James did not eminere,
were not the (...), the Praepositus or Bishop of them all?

Now that these conjectures are not vain and impertinent, see it testified by
Antiquity, to which in matter of fact, and Church-story, he that will not give
faith upon concurrent testimonies, and uncontradicted by Antiquity is a mad
man, and may as well disbeleive every thing that he has not seen himself,
and can no way prove that himself was Christened, and to be sure, after 1600
years there is no possibility to disprove a matter of fact that was never
questioned or doubted of before, and therefore can never obtain the faith of
any man to his contradictory, it being impossible to prove it.

Eusebius reports out of S. Clement. lib. 2. hist. cap. 1.
(...). S. Peter and S. John although they were honored of our Lord, yet they
would not themselves be, but made James surnamed the Just, Bishop of Jerusalem;
And the reason is that which is given by Hegesippus in Eusebius for his
successor Simeon Cleophae, for when S. James was crowned with Martyrdom, and
immediately the City destroyed, lib. 3. c. 11.
Traditur Apostolos qui supererant in commune consilium habuisse quem oportere
dignum SUCCESSIONE IACOBI judicari. It was concluded for Simeon, because he was
the Kinsman of our Lord as S. James also his Predecessor. The same concerning
S. James is also repeated by Eusebius. Iudaei ergo cum Paulus provocasset ad
Caesarem..... In Iacobum fratrem Domini CUI AB APOSTOLIS SEEDS HIEROSOLYMITANA
DELATA FUIT, lib. 2. c. 22.
omnem suam malevolentiam convertunt.

In the Apostolical constitutions under the name of S. Clement the Apostles
are brought in speaking thus. lib. 7. c. 46. and lib. 8. cap. ult:
De ordinatis autem a nobis Episcopis in vita nostra, significamus vobis quod
hi sunt; Hierosolymis ordinatus est Iacobus Frater Domini. S. James the Brother
of our Lord was ordained Bishop of Jerusalem by us [Apostles.] The same is
witnessed by Anacletus. Porro and Hierosolymitarum primus Episcopus B. Iacobus
qui Iustus dicebatur, Epist. 2.
and secundum carnem Domini nuncupatus est frater, a Petro, Iacobo, and Iohanne
Apostolis est ordinatus. And the same thing in terms is repeated by Anicetus,
Epist. decret. Vnic:
with a Scimus enim Beatissimum Iacobum etc: Just as Anacletus before. S. James
was Bishop of Jerusalem, and Peter, James, and John were his Ordayners.

But let us see the testimony of one of S. James his Successors in the same
Chair, who certainly was the best witness of his own Church Records. S.
Cyrill of Jerusalem is the man. Nam de his non mihi solum, Catech. 4.
sed etiam Apostolis, and IACOBO HUIVS ECCLESIae OLIM EPISCOPO curae fuit,
speaking of the question of circumcision, and things sacrificed to Idols,
Catech. 16.
and again, he calls S. James, primum hujus parochiae Episcopum, the first
Bishop of this Diocese.

S. Austin also attests this story. lib: 2. cont. lit: Peti^* c. 51. and lib:
2. cont: Crescon: c. 37.
Cathedra tibi quid fecit Ecclesiae Romanae, in qua Petrus sedit, and in qua
hodie Anastasius sedet? Vel Ecclesiae Hierosolymitanae IN QVA IACOBUS SEDIT,
and in qua hodie Johannes sedet? I must not omit the testimony of S. Jerome,
lib: de Script. Eccles. in Iacobo.
for it will be of great use in the sequel, Iacobus (says he) post passionem
Domini statim ab Apostolis Hierosolymorum Episcopus ordinatus, and the same
also he repeates out of Hegesippus.* There are many more testimonies to this
purpose, as of S. homil: 38. in 1. Cor. 15. and 33. hom: in 15. Act.
Chrysostom, haeres. 66.
Epiphanius, S. in 1. Galat.
Ambrose, the Council of cap. 33.
Constantinople in Trullo. But Gregorius Turonensis rises a little higher,
Iacobus Frater Domini vocitatus, ab ipso Domino nostro Jesus Christo Episcopus
dicitur ordinatus. S. James the Brother of our Lord is said to have been
ordained Bishop by our Lord Jesus Christ himself. If by [ Ordinatus] he means
[ designatus] he agrees with S. Chrysostom: homil. 3. in Act.
But either of them both will serve the turn for the present. But either in
one sense or the other it is true, and attested also by Epiphanius, haeres. 78.
and primus hic accepit Cathedram Episcopatus, cui concredidit Dominus thronum
suum in terra primo. S. James had first the Episcopal chair, for our Lord
first entrusted his earthly throne to him. And thus we are incircled with a
cloud of witnesses, to all which if we add what I before observed, that S.
James is in Scripture called an Apostle, and yet he was none of the twelve, and
that in the sense of Scripture and the Catholic Church, a Bishop and an
Apostle is all one, it follows from the premises, (and of them already there
is faith enough made) that S. James was by Christ's own designation, and
ordination Apostolical made Bishop of the Church of Jerusalem, that is, had
power Apostolical concredited to him which Presbyters had not, and this
Apostolate was limited and fixed, as his Successors since have been.

But that this also was not a temporary business, S. Simeon to be his
successor,
and to expire with the persons of S. James and the first Apostles, but a
regiment of ordinary and successive duty in the Church, it appears by the
ordination of S. Simeon the son of Cleophas to be his Successor. lib. 3.
hist. cap. 11.
It is witnessed by Eusebius, Post martyrium Iacobi.... traditur Apostolos etc.
habuisse in commune Concilium quem oporteret dignum successione Iacobi
judicari; omnesque uno consilio, atque uno consensu Simeonem Cleophae filium
decrevisse ut Episcopatus sedem susciperet. The same also he transcribes out of
Hegesippus, lib 4. cap. 22.
Posteaquam Iacobus Martyr effectus est.... electione divina Simeon Cleophae
filius Episcopus ordinatur, electus ab omnibus pro eo quod esset consobrinus
Domini. S. Simeon was ordayn'd Bishop by a Divine election; haeres. 66.
And Epiphanius in the Catalogue of the Bishops of Jerusalem, reckons first
James, and next Simeon, qui sub Trajano crucifixus est.

THe next Bishop we find ordayn'd by the Apostles was Timothy at Ephesus. 14.
S. Timothy at Ephesus,
That he was ordayn'd by an Apostle appears in Scripture. For S. Paul imposed
hands on him, that is certain, Excita Gratiam quae in te est per impositionem
manuum mearum, 2. Tim. 1. 6.
by the laying on of MY HANDS. That he was there a Bishop is also apparent,
from the power and offices concredited to him. 1. He was to be 1. Tim. 1. 3.
resident at Ephesus. And although for the public necessityes of the Church,
and for assistance to S. Paul he might be called sometimes from his Charge, yet
there he lived and dyed as the Church story writes, there was his ordinary
residence, and his avocations were but temporary and occasional, and when it
was, his Cure was supplied by Tychicus, whom S. Paul sent to Ephesus as his
Vicar, as I shall show hereafter.

2. S. Paul in his epistles to him, gave directions to him for Episcopal
deportment as is plain. A Bishop must be blameless, the husband of one wife,
1. Tim. 3.
etc. 3. S. Paul concredits jurisdiction to S. Timothy. Over the people; (...)
is of as great extent in S. Timothies commission as (...). Commanding as
teaching. Over Presbyters; but yet so as to make difference between them and
the Neotericks in Christianity, the one as Fathers, the other as Brethren. 1.
Tim. 5. 1.
(...) is denied to be used toward either of them. (...) says Suidas, a
dishonorable upbraiding or objurgation. Nay it is more; (...) is castigo,
plagam infero, says Budaeus: so that, that kind of Rebuking the Bishop is
forbidden to use, either toward Priest or Deacon, Clergy or Laity, Old or
Young. [ for a Bishop must be no striker.] but (...), that is given him in
commission both to old and young, Presbyters and Catechumens, that is, Require
them; postula, provoca. (...). Synesius. To be provoked to a Duel, to be
challenged. and (...). Chrysostom. Ad precandum vos provoco. (...). Eurip.
Thou make me, or compeliest me to shed tears. Suaviter omnia. That Is the way
S. Paul takes. Meekely; but yet so as to do his office, to keep all in their
several duties, and that is by a (...), command these things, for so he sums
up the Bishops duty toward Presbyters, Neophytes, and Widows. Give all these
things in charge. 1. Tim. 5. 7.
Command all to do their duty. Command, but not objurgate. Et quid negotii
esset Episcopo ut Presbyterum non objurgaret si super Presbyterum non haberet
potestatem. So Epiphanius urges this argument to advantage. haeres. 75.
For indeed it had been to little purpose for S. Paul to have given order to
Timothy, how he should exercise his jurisdiction over Presbyters and people, if
he had had no jurisdiction and coercitive authority at all. Nay, and howsoever
S. Paul forbids to Timothy to use (...), which is (...), yet S. Paul in his
second Epistle bids him use it, intimating, upon great occasion. (...). 2. Tim.
4. 2.
To be sure (...), if it be but an urging, or an exhortation, is not all, for
S. Paul gives him coercitive jurisdiction, as well as directive. Over Widows.
(...). Reject the younger Widows, viz. a collegio viduarum, ab eleemosynis
Ecclesiae. Over Presbyters. for he commands him to have sufficient probate in
the accusation of Presbyters, of which if he was not to take cognizance, it was
to no purpose to number witnesses. (...). Receive not a public accusation [in
foro externo] against a Priest, Non vocabis in jus nisi in testimonio duorum,
etc. to wit, in causes criminal, That is sufficient intimation of the Bishops
power TO TAKE COGNIZANCE in causes criminal; then for his punishing in such
causes, it follows in the next words, 1. Tim. 5. 20.
(...). Reprehend them publicly, that is, disgrace them. (...) (...) is (...),
ind^corus..... (...). Homer Iliad. (...). So that (...) in S. Paul, is to call
them to public account; that is one part of the jurisdiction. (...), is to
examine. Plato Epist. (...), to give an account of one's life* idem in Apolog.
And then also it implies punishment upon conviction, (...)
(...). Hom. ^. Iliad.
But the words in S. Paul will clear this business. Let them that sin be
publikly shamed, (...), that the rest may fear; A punishment most certainly,
something that is (...), Malum in genere poenae. What else should they fear?
to sin? Most true. But why upon this reprehension, if not for fear of being
punished?

Add to all this, that here is in this chapter the plain giving of a
jurisdiction, an erection of a judicatory, and is all the way, direction for
his proceeding in causes criminal, appears most evidently, v. 21. I charge
thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ and the elect Angels, that thou
observe these things, (...), without prejudging the cause of any man before it
comes in open contestatio^ under public test of witnesses, (...), doing
nothing for favor or partiality. Nothing in the world is plainer for the
erection of a Consistory then these mandates of S. Paul.

Lastly, to make up his Episcopal function complete S. Paul gives him also
direction concerning giving of orders. Verse. 22.
[ Lay hands suddenly on no man.] sub testatione ergo ea quae ad ordinationem
Ecclesiae mandat custodiri.... Ne facile aliquis accipiat Ecclesiasticam
dignitatem.... peccat enim si non probat and si^ ordinet. Melior enim caeteris
debet probari qui ordinandus est. Haec Episcopus custodiens, castum se
exhibebit religioni, cujus rei in futuro praemium consequetur. So S. Ambrose
upon the place, who is so far from exempting Presbyters from being submitted
to the Bishops consistory, that he does appropriate all his former cautions
concerning the judicature, and coercitive jurisdiction to causes of the Clergy.

Add to this evidence of Scripture the testimony of Catholic and unquestioned
Antiquity affirming S. Timothy to have been ordained Bishop of Ephesus by S.
Paul. Eusebius speaking of the successions to S. Paul, Lib. 3. c. 4.
sed and Lucas (says he) in actibus Apostolorum plurimos ejus socios memorat,
sicut Timothei and Titi, quorum alter in Ephesi Episcopus... ab eo ordinatus
praeficitur. Praefat. in 1. Tim.
S. Ambrose affirms that S. Paul having ordained him Bishop writes his first
Epistle to him to instruct him in his Episcopal office. Hunc igitur jam
creatum Episcopum instruit per Epistol^m quomodo deberet Ecclesiam ordinare.
And that this Epistle was written to instruct S. Timothy for his own person,
and all Bishops in him for their deportment in the office of a Bishop is the
united, concurrent testimony of S. Contr. haeres.
Vincentius, contr Marcion ^. 5.
Tertullian, S. hom. (...) in 1. Timoth.
Chrysostom, S. in 6. cap. in 1. Tim.
Ambrose, in 1. Tim. 4. c. and 5. c.
Oecumenius, haeres. 75.
Epiphanius, ad Timoth. cap. 4.
Primasius, and S. in Pastor. part. 2. c. 11. Acts. 11.
Gregory. As for Epiphanius in the place now quoted he uses it as an argument
against the madness and stupidity of Aerius contending a Bishop and a
Presbyter to be all one; docet Divinus Apostoli sermo quis sit Episcopus and
quis Presbyter quum dicit ad Timotheum qui erat Episcopus, Presbyterum ne
objurges, etc. I shall transcribe no more testimonies for this particular but
that of the general Council of Chalcedon in the case of Bassianus and
Stephanus; Leontius the Bishop of Magnesia spoke it in full Council, (...),
(...). From S. Timothy until now there have been 27 Bishops ordained in
Ephesus. Who desires a multitude of testimonies (though enough already have
deposed in the cause, beside the evidence of Scripture) may to these add that
saying of S. Chrysostom, In Titum. and 1. Philip. In 1. Tim. 3.
that to Timothy was committed (...); of Theodoret, calling him Episcopum
Asianorum; the subscription to the first Epistle to Timothy, (which if it were
not writ by S. Paul, yet at least, will prove a primitive record, and very
Ancient,) the fragment of the Martyrdom of S. Timothy Biblioth* Photi^. n. 254.
in Photius, Descript. Eccles.
S. Jerome, In praefat. in 1. Timoth.
Theophylact, De vita ^ morr^ SS 87, and 88.
Isidore* and Lib. 2. c. 34. 2. Tim. 4. 5.
Nicephorus.

And now all is well if after all this Timothy do not prove an Evangelist, for
this one objection will be sufficient to catch at to support a drowning cause,
and though neither pertinent nor true, yet shall be laid in the balance
against all the evidence of Scripture and Catholic antiquity. But [ do the
work of an Evangelist] (says S. Paul) therefore it is clear S. Timothy was no
Bishop. No, was not? That Is hard. But let us try however.

1. (...), those are the next words, fulfill thy Deaconship. And therefore he
was no Bishop? As well this as the other, for if Deaconship do not exclude
Episcopacy, why shall his being an Evangelist exclude it? Or why may not his
being a Deacon exclude his being an Evangelist, as well as his being an
Evangelist, exclude his being a Bishop? Whether is higher, a Bishopric, or the
office of an Evangelist? If a Bishops office be higher, and therefore cannot
consist with an Evangelist, then a Bishop cannot be a Priest, and a Priest
cannot be a Deacon, and an Evangelist can be neither, for that also is thought
to be higher then them both. But if the office of an Evangelist be higher, then
as long as they are not disparate, much less destructive of each other, they
may have leave to consist in subordination. For as for the pretense that an
Evangelist is an office of a moveable employment, and a Bishopric of fixed
residence, that will be considered by and by.

2. All the former discourse is upon supposition, that the word (...), implies
the office of a Deacon, and so it may as well as S. Paul's other phrase implies
S. Timothy to be an Evangelist. For if we mark it well it is (...), do the
work, not the office of an Evangelist. And what is that? We may see it in the
verses immediately going before, (...). And if this he the work of an Evangelist
which S. Paul would have Timothy perform, viz. to preach, to be instant in
season, and out of season, to reprove, to rebuke, to exhort, there is no harm
done, a Bishop may, nay he must do all this.

3. Consider we what an Evangelist is, and thence take our estimate for the
present. 1. He that writes the story of the Gospel is an Evangelist, so the
Greek Scholiast calls him. And in this sense indeed S. Timothy was not an
Evangelist, but yet if he had, he might have been a Bishop, because S. Mark was
an Evangelist to be sure, and perhaps as sure that he was a Bishop; sure
enough; for they are both delivered to us by the Catholic testimony of the
Primitive Church, as we shall see hereafter, so far as concerns our
Question. But then again; an Apostle might be an Evangelist, S. Matthew was,
and S. John was, and the Apostolical dignity is as much inconsistent with the
office of an Evangelist, as Episcopal pre-eminence, for I have proved these
two names Apostle, and Bishop to signify all one thing. In 4. Ephesians.
2. S. Ambrose gives another exposition of [ Evangelists.] Evangelistae Diaconi
sunt sicut fuit Philippus. S. Philip was one of the leaven, commonly called
Deacons, and he was also a Presbyter, and yet an Evangelist, and yet a
Presbyter in it is proportion is an office of as necessary residence as a
Bishop, or else why are Presbyters cried out against so bitterly in all cases,
for non-residence, and yet nothing hinders, but that S. Timothy, as well as S.
Philip, might have been a Presbyter and an Evangelist together, and then why
not a Bishop too, for why should a Deaconship, or a Presbyterate consist with
the office of an Evangelist, more then a Bishopric? 3. Another acceptance of
[ Evangelist] is also in Eusebius. Lib. 3. hist. cap. 37.
Sed and alii plurimi per idem tempus Apostolorum Discipuli superstites
erant.... Nonnulli ex his ardentiores Divinae Philosophiae... animas suas verbo
Dei consecrabant.... ut si quibus forte provinciis nomen fidei esset incognitum
praedicarent, primaque apud eos Evangelii fundamenta collocantes....
Evangelistarum fungebantur officio. They that planted the Gospel first in any
Country, they were Evangelists. S. Timothy might be such a one, and yet be a
Bishop afterward. And so were some of this sort of Evangelists. For so
Eusebius, Primaque apud eos fundamenta Evangelii collocantes, atque ELECTIS
QUIBUS QUE EX IPSIS officium regendae Ecclesiae quam fundaverant committentes,
ipsi rursum ad alias gentes properabant. So that they first converted the
Nation, and then governed the Church, first they were Evangelists and
afterward Bishops; and so was Austin the Monk that converted England in the
time of S. Gregory and Ethelbert* he was first our Evangelist, and afterward
Bishop of Dover. Nay why may they not in this sense be both Evangelists and
Bishops at the same time, insomuch as many Bishops have first planted
Christianity in diverse Countries, Lib. 10. tripart. hist. cap. 5. Theodoret.
as S. Chrysostom in Scythia, S. Trophimus, S. Denis, S. Mark, and many more.
By the way only, according to all these acceptations of the word [ Evangelist]
this office does not imply a perpetual motion. Evangelists many of them did
travel, but they were never the more Evangelists for that, but only their
office was writing or preaching the Gospel, and thence they had their name.

4. The office of an Evangelist was but temporary, and take it in either of the
two senses of Eusebius or Oecumenius, which are the only true and genuine, was
to expire when Christianity was planted every where, and the office of
Episcopacy, if it was at all was to be succeeded in, and therefore in no
respect could these be inconsistent, at least, not always. * And how S. Paul
should intend that Timothy should keep those rules he gave him, [ to the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,] 1. Tim. 6. 14
if the office for the execution of which he gave him the rules, was to expire
long before, is not so easily imagined. For if S. Paul did direct him in a
temporary and expiring office, then in no sense, neither in person, nor in
succession could those rules of S. Paul be kept till Christ's coming, to wit, to
judgment. But if he instructed him in the perpetual office of Episcopacy,
then it is easy to understand that S. Paul gave that caution to Timothy, to
intimate that those his directions were not personal, but for his successors
in that charge, to which he had ordained him, viz. in the sacred order and
office of Episcopacy.

5. Lastly, After all this stir, there are some of the Fathers, that will by
no means admit S. Timothy to have been an Evangelist. So S. Chrysostom, so
Theophylact, In Ephesians. 4.
so the Greek Scholiast, now though we have no need to make any use of it, yet
if it be true, it makes all this discourse needless, we were safe enough
without it; if it be false, then it self we see is needless, for the
allegation of S. Timothy's being an Evangelist, is absolutely impertinent,
though it had been true.

But now I proceed.

TItus was also made a Bishop by the Apostles. 15. S. Titus at Crete.
S. Paul also was his ordainer. 1. Reliqui te Cretae. There S. Paul fixed his
seat for him, at Crete. 2. His work was (...), to set in order things that are
wanting, viz. to constitute rites and forms of public Liturgy, to erect a
Consistory for cognizance of causes criminal, to dedicate houses for prayer by
public destination for divine Service, and in a word, by his authority to
establish such Discipline and Ritualls, as himself did judge to be most for
edification and ornament of the Church of God. For he that was appointed by S.
Paul, to rectify, and set things in order, was most certainly by him supposed
to be the Judge of all the obliquities which he was to rectify. 2. The next
work is Episcopal too, and it is the ordaining Presbyters in every City. Not
Presbyters collectively in every City, but distributively, (...), City by
City, that is Elders in several Cities, one in one City, Many in many. For
by these Elders are certainly meant Bishops. Of the identity of Names I shall
afterward give an account, but here it is plain S. Paul expounds himself to
mean Bishops.

1. In terms and express words. [ To ordain Elders in every City; If any be
the husband of one wife, etc. For a Bishop must be blameless.] That is, the
elders that you are to ordain in several Cities must be blameless, for else
they must not be Bishops. 2. The word (...) cannot hinder this exposition, for
S. Peter calls himself (...), and S. John, Presbyter electae Dominae, and
Presbyter dilectissimo Gajo. Such Presbyters as these were Apostolical, and
that is as much as Episcopal to be sure. 3. S. Paul adds farther [ a Bishop
must be blameless AS THE STEWARD OF GOD. Who then is that faithful and wise
Steward, whom his Lord shall make ruler?] S. Paul's Bishop is Gods steward,
Titus. 1.
and Gods steward is the ruler of his hous-hold, says our blessed Savior
himself, and therefore not a mere Presbyter, amongst whom indeed there is a
parity, but no superintendency of Gods making. 4. S. Paul does in the sequel
still qualify his Elders or Bishops with more proprieties of rulers. A Bishop
must be no striker, not given to wine. They are exactly the requisites which
our blessed Savior exacts in his Stewards or Rulers accounts. [ If the Steward
of the house will drink and be DRUNK, and BEAT his fellow servants, then the
Lord of that servant shall come and divide him his portion with unbelievers.]
The steward of the hous-hold, this Ruler, must not be (...), nor (...), no more
must a Bishop, he must not be given to wine, no striker; Neque enim pugilem
describit sermo Apostolicus, sed Pontificem instituit quid facere non debeat,
Advers: Iovinian.
says S. Hierome: still then, these are the Rulers of the Church, which S.
Titus was to ordain, and therefore it is required should Rule well his own
house, for how else shall he take charge of the Church of God, implying that
this his charge is to Rule the house of God. 5. The reason why S. Paul
appointed him to ordain these Bishops in Cities is in order to coercitive
jurisdiction, because [ many unruly and vain talkers were crept in, verse. 10.]
and they were to be silenced (...). Their mouths must be stopped. Therefore
they must be such Elders as had superiority of jurisdiction over these
impertinent Preachers, which to a single Presbyter, either by Divine or
Apostolical institution no man will grant, and to a College of Presbyters S.
Paul does not intend it, for himself had given it singly to S. Titus. For I
consider,

Titus alone had coercitive jurisdiction before he ordayn'd these Elders, be
they Bishops, be they Presbyters. The Presbyters which were at Crete before his
coming had not Episcopal power, or coercitive jurisdiction, for why then was
Titus sent? As for the Presbyters which Titus ordayn'd, before his ordayning
them, to be sure they had no power at all, they were not Presbyters. If they
had a coercitive jurisdiction afterward, to wit, by their ordination, then
Titus had it before in his own person, (for they that were there before his
coming, had not, as I showed) and therefore he must also have it still, for he
could not loose it by ordaining others, or if he had it not before, how could
he give it unto them whom he ordained? For plus juris in alium transfer nemo
potest, quam ipse habet.

Howsoever it by then, to be sure, Titus had it in his own person and then it
follows Undeniably, that either this coercitive jurisdiction was not necessary
for the Church (which would be either to suppose men impcccable, or the Church
to be exposed to all the inconveniences of Schism and tumutuary factions
without possibility of releife) or if it was necessary, then because it was in
Titus not as a personal prerogative, but a power to be succeeded to; he might
ordain others, he had authority to do it, with the same power he had
himself, and therefore since he alone had this coercion in his own person, so
should his Successors, and then because a single Presbyter, could not have it
over his brethren by the confession of all sides, nor the College of
Presbyters which were there before his coming had it not, for why then was
Titus sent with a new commission, nor those which he was to ordain if they
were but mere Presbyters could not have it, no more then the Presbytes that
were there before his coming, it follows that those Elders which S. Paul sent
Titus to ordain being such as were to be constituted in opposition and power
over the false Doctors and prating Preachers, and with authority to silence
them, (as is evident in the first chapter of that Epistle) these Elders (I say)
are verily, and indeed such as himself call's Bishops in the proper sense, and
acceptance of the word.

6. The Cretan Presbyters who were there before S. Titus coming, had not power
to ordain others, that is, had not that power which Titus had. For Titus was
sent thither for that purpose, therefore to supply the want of that power. And
now, because to ordain others was necessary for the conservation and
succession of the Church, that is, because new generations are necessary for
the continuing the world, and mere Presbyters could not do it, and yet this
must be done, not only by Titus himself, but after him, it follows
undeniably that S. Paul sent Titus to ordain men with the same power that
himself had, that is with more then his first Cretan Presbyters, that is
Bishops, and he means them in the proper sense.

7. That by Elders in several Cities he means Bishops is also plain from the
place where they were to be ordained, (...), not (...), or (...). In populous
Cities, not in village Towns, For no Bishops were ever suffered to be in
village Towns, as is to be seen in the Council of cap. 6.
Sardis, of can. 17.
Chalcedon, and S. Epist. 87. ad Episc. Afric.
Leo, the Cities therefore do at least highly intimate that the persons to be
ordained were not mere Presbyters.

The issue of this discourse is, that since Titus was sent to Crete to ordain
Bishops, himself was a Bishop to be sure, at least. If he had ordained only
Presbyters, it would have proved that. But this inferres him to be a
Metropolitan, forasmuch as he was Bishop of Crete, and yet had many suffragans
in subordination to him, of his own constitution, and yet of proper diocesses.
However, if this discourse concludes nothing peculiar, it frees the place from
popular prejudice and mistakes, upon the confusion of Episcopus, and Presbyter;
and at least inferres his being a Bishop, if not a great deal more.

Yea; but did not S. Titus ordain no mere Presbyters? yes most certainly.
But, so he did Deacons too, and yet neither one nor the other are otherwise
mentioned in this Epistle but by consequence and comprehension within the
superior order. For he that ordaines a Bishop, first makes him a Deacon, (and
then he obtaines (...) a good degree) and then a Presbyter, and then a Bishop.
So that these inferior orders are presupposed in the authorizing the Supreme,
and by giving direction for the qualifications of Bishops, he sufficiently
instructs the inferior orders in their deportment, insomuch as they are
probations for advancement to the higher.

2. Add to this, that he that ordaines Bishops in Cities sets there (...),
ordinem generativum Patrum, as Epiphanius calls Episcopacy, and therefore most
certainly with intention, not that it should be (...) Manus Mortua, but, to
produce others, and therefore Presbyters and Deacons.

3. S. Paul made no express provision for villages, and yet most certainly
did not intend to leave them destitute, and therefore he took order that such
ordinations should be made in Cities which should be provisionary for Villages,
and that is, of such men as had power to ordain and power to send Presbyters
to what part of their charge they pleased. For since Presbyters could not
ordain other Presbyters, as appears by S. Paul's sending Titus to do it
there, where, most certainly, many Presbyters before were actually resident,
if Presbyters had gone to Villages they must have left the Cities destitute, or
if they staid in Cities the Villages would have perished, and at last, when
these men had dyed both one and the other, had been made a prey to the wolf,
for there could be no sheapheard after the decay of the first generation.

But let us see further into S. Titus his commission and letters of orders, and
institution. Tit. 3. 10.
[ A man that is an heretic after the first and second admonition reject.]
Cognizance of heretical pravity, and animadversion against the heretic
himself is most plainly concredited to S. Titus. For first he is to admonish
him, then to reject him upon his pertinacy, from the Catholic communion.
Cogere autem illos videtur, qui saepe corripit, says S. Ambrose, upon the
establishing a coactive, or coercitive jurisdiction over the Clergy and whole
Diocese.

But I need not specify any more particulars, for S. Paul committed to S.
Titus (...) 2. Titus. 15.
all authority and power. The consequence is that which S. Ambrose prefixes to
the Comentary on this Epistle. Titum Apostolus consecravit Episcopum, and ideo
commonet eum ut sit sollicitus in Ecclesiastica ordinatione* id est, ad quosdam
qui simulatione quadam dignos se ostentabant ut sublimem ordinem tenerent,
simulque and haereticos ex circumcisione corripiendos.

And now after so fair preparatory of Scripture we may hear the testimonies
of Antiquity witnessing that Titus was by S. Paul made Bishop of Crete. Sed and
Lucas (says Eusebius) in actibus Apostolorum.... Timothei meminit and Titi
quorum alter in Epheso lib. 3. c. 4.
Episcopus: alter ordinandis apud Cretam Ecclesiis ubi supra.
ab eo ordinatus praeficitur. That is it which S. Ambrose expresses something
more plainly, Titum Apostolus consecravit Episcopum, The Apostle consecrated
Titus Bishop; and Theodoret, calling Titus, Cretensium in 1. Tim. 3.
Episcopum. The Bishop of the Cretians. And for this reason says S. Chrysostom.
S. Paul did not write to Sylvanus, or Silas, or Clemens, but to Timothy and
Titus (...), because to these he had already committed the government of
Churches. But a fuller testimony of S. Titus being a Bishop who please may see
in S. de Script: Eccl in ^ito.
Hierome, in in Sin^psi.
Dorotheus, in de vita and morte. S Sanct.
Isidore, in lib. 38. c. 10.
Vincentius, in apud Oecumen. in praefat. in Tit. and in 1. Timoth. 3.
Theodoret, in in pastor. part. 2. c. 11.
S. Gregory, in Praefat: in 1. Tim. and in 2. Tim. 1.
Primatius, in 1. Tim. 1. and in 2. Tim. 1. 6.
Sedulius, in 1. Tit.
Theophilact and lib. 2. c. 34.
Nicephorus. To which if we add the subscription of the Epistle asserted from
all impertinent objections by the clearer testimony of S. In Synopsi Sacr.
Script.
Athanasius, S ad Paulam and Eustoch.
Jerome, the Syriack translation, Comment. ad Titum.
Oecumenius and ibid*
Theophylact, no confident denial can ever break through, or escape conviction.

And now I know not what objection can fairly be made here; for I hope S.
Titus was no Evangelist, he is not called so in Scripture, and all Antiquity
calls him a Bishop, and the nature of his offices, the eminence of his dignity,
the superiority of jurisdiction, the cognizance of causes criminal, and the
whole exigence of the Epistle proclaim him Bishop. But suppose a while Titus
had been an Evangelist, I would feign know who succeeded him? Or did all his
office expire with his person? If so, then who shall reject Heretics when
Titus is dead? Who shall silence factious Preachers? If not, then still who
succeeded him? The Presbyters? How can that be? For if they had more power
after his death then before, and governed the Churches which before they did
not, then to be sure their government in common, is not an Apostolical
Ordinance, much less is it a Divine right, for it is postnate to the^ both.
But if they had no more power after Titus then they had under him, how then
could they succeed him? There was indeed a dereliction of the authority, but no
succession. The succession therefore both in the Metropolis of Crete, and also
in the other Cities was made by singular persons, not by a College, for so we
find in the (...) recorded by Eusebius that in Gnossus of Crete, Pinytus was a
most eminent Bishop, and that Philip was the Metropolitan at Gortyna. Sed and
Pinytus nobilissimus apud Cretam in Episcopis fuit, says Eusebius. But of
this, lib. 4. c. 21.
enough.

MY next instance shall be of one that was an Evangelist. 16. S. Mark at
Alexandria,
indeed, one that writ the Gospel, and he was a Bishop of Alexandria. In
Scripture we find nothing of him but that he was an Evangelist, and a Deacon,
for he was Deacon to S. Paul and Barnabas, when they went to the Gentiles, by
ordination and special designement made at Antioch; (...). Acts. 12. and Acts.
13.
They had John to be their Minister; viz: John whose surname was Mark. * But
we are not to expect all the ordinations made by the Apostles in their acts
written by S. Luke, which end at S. Paul's first going to Rome; but many other
things, their founding of diverse Churches, their ordination of Bishops, their
journeyes, their persecutions, their Miracles and Martyrdomes are recorded, and
rely upon the faith of the primitive Church. And yet the ordination of S. Mark
was within the term of S. Lukes story, for his successor Anianus was made
Bishop of Alexandria in the eight year of Nero's reign, five or six years
before the death of S. Paul. Igitur Neronis PRIMO Imperij anno post Marcum
Evangelistam Ecclesiae apud Alexandriam Anianus Sacerdotium suscepit. So the
Latin of Ruffinus reads it, in stead of octavo. Sacerdotium, (...), that is the
Bishopric, for else there were many (...), and Priests in Alexandria besides
him, and how then he should be S. Marks successor more then the other
Presbyters, is not so soon to be contrived. But so the Collecta of the Chapter
runs. Quod post Marcum primus Episcopus Alexandrinae Ecclesiae ordinatus sit
Anianus, Anianus was consecrated the first Bishop of Alexandria after S. Mark.
* And Philo the Jew telling the story of the Christians in Alexandria, called
by the inhabitants, Cultores, and Cultrices, The worshippers, Addit autem adhuc
his (says Eusebius) quomodo sacerdotes vel Ministri exhibeant officia sua,
lib. 2. hist. cap. 17.
vel quae sit supra omnia Episcopalis apicis seeds, intimating that beside the
offices of Priests and Ministers, there was an Episcopal dignity which was
apex super omnia, a height above all employments, established at Alexandria;
and how soon that was, is soon computed, for Philo lived in our blessed
Saviors time, and was Ambassador to the Emperor Cajus, and survived S. Mark
a little.

But S. Jerome will strike up this business, A Marco Evangelista ad Heraclam
usque, Epist. ad Evagr.
and Dionysiam Episcopos, Presbyteri Egypti semper unum ex se electum in
celsiori gradu collocatum Episcopum nominabant. And again, Marcus interpres
Apostoli Petri, de Script: Eccles. and in proem in Matthew.
and Alexandrinae Ecclesiae primus Episcopus. The same is witnessed by lib. 6.
Epist. 371.
S. Gregory, lib 14. cap 39.
Nicephorus, and diverse others.

Now although the ordination of S. Mark is not specified in the Acts, as
innumerable multitudes of things more, and scarce any thing at all of any of
the twelve but S. Peter, nothing of S. James the son of Thaddaeus, nor of
Alpheus, but the Martyrdom of one of them, nothing of S. Bartholomew, of S.
Thomas, or Simon zelotes, of S. Jude the Apostle, scarce any of their names
recorded, yet no wise man can distrust the faith of such records, which all
Christendom hitherto, so far as we know, has acknowledged as authentic,
and these ordinations cannot possibly go less then Apostolical, being done
in the Apostles times, to whom the care of all the Churches was concredited,
they seeing and beholding several successions in several Churches before
their death, as here at Alexandria, first Saint Mark, then Anianus, made
Bishop five or six years before the death of S. Peter and S. Paul. But yet who
it was that ordained S. Mark Bishop of Alexandria (for Bishop he was most
certainly) is not obscurely intimated by the most excellent man S. Gelasius in
the Roman Council, Marcus a Petro Apostolo in Aegyptum directus verbum
veritatis praedicavit, In decret. de lib. authent. and apocryph.
and gloriose consummavit Martyrium. S. Peter sent him into Egypt to found a
Church, and therefore would furnish him with all things requisite for so great
employment, and that could be no less, then the ordinary power Apostolical.

BUt in the Church of Rome, 17. S. Linus, and S. Clement at Rome.
the ordination of Bishops by the Apostles, and their successions during the
times of the Apostles, is very manifest by a concurrent testimony of old
writers. Fundantes igitur, and instruentes beati Apostoli Ecclesiam Lino
Episcopatum administrandae Ecclesiae tradiderunt. Hujus Lini Paulus in his quae
sunt ad Timotheum Epistolis meminit. Succedit autem ei Anacletus, post cum
tertio loco ab Apostolis Episcopatum sortitur Clemens, qui and vidit ipsos
Apostolos, and contulit cum eis, cum adhuc insonantem praedicationem
Apostolorum, lib 3 cap. 3.
and traditionem ante oculos haberet. So S. Irenaeus. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Memoratur autem ex comitibus Pauli Crescens quidam ad Gallias esse praefectus.
Linus vero and Clemens in urbe Roma Ecclesiae praefuisse. Many more testimonies
there are of these means being ordained Bishops of Rome by the Apostles, as of
de praescript.
Tertullian, lib, 2. contr. Parmen.
Optatus, Epist. 165.
S. Austin, and de Script. Eccles.
S. Hierome. But I will not cloy my Reader with variety of one dish, and be
tedious in a thing so evident and known.

S. John ordained S. Polycarpe Bishop at Smyrna.... sicut Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia
habens Polycarpum ab Iohanne conlocatum refert; 18. S. Polycarpe at Smyrna, and
diverse others.
sicut Romanorum Clementem a Petro ordinatum edit, proinde utique and caeterae
exhibent quos ab Apostolis in Episcopatum constitutos Apostolici seminis
traduces habeant. So Tertullian. De praescript.
The Church of Smyrna says that Polycarpe was placed there by S. John, as the
Church of Rome says that Clement was ordained there by S. Peter, and other
Churches have those whom the Apostles made to be their Bishops. De Script.
Eccles. lib. 3. c. 35.
Polycarpus autem non solum ab Apostolis edoctus.... sed etiam ab Apostolis in
Asia, in ea quae est Smyrnis Ecclesia constitutus Episcopus.... and testimonium
his perhibent quae sunt in Asia Ecclesiae omnes, and qui usque adhuc
successerunt Polycarpo etc. The same also is witnessed by S. Jerome, and *
Eusebius: Quoniam autem valde longum est in tali volumine omnium Ecclesiarum
successiones enumerare, to use S. Irenaeus his expression; It were an infinite
labor to reckon up all those whom the Apostles made Bishops with their own
hands, as Eusebius. l. 4. c. 23. and lib. 3. c. 4.
S. Dionysius the Areopagite at Athens, Origin. lib. 10. in 16. Romans
Cajus at Thessalonica, S. Ambros. in 4 Coloss.
Archippus at Colosse, Ignatius Epist. ad Ephesians. and Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 35.
Onesimus at Ephesus, Arethas in 1. Apocal.
Antipas at Pergamus, Epist. ad Philip. and Theodoret. ib. and in 1. Tim. 3.
Epaphroditus at Philippi, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 4. apud Gallias. So Ruffinus reads
it. In Galatia, so is intimated in Scripture, and so the Roman Martyrol.
Crescens among the Gauls, Ignatius Epist. ad Antioch. and Eusebius. lib. 3. c.
22.
Evodias at Antioch, In Martyrologio Roman*
Sosipater at Iconium, Erastus in Macedonia, Trophimus at Arles, Jason at
Tarsus, Silas at Corinth, Onesiphorus at Colophon, Quartus at Berytus, Paul the
Proconsul at Narbona, besides many more whose names are not recorded in
Scripture, as these forecited are, so many as lib. 3. cap. 37.
Eusebius counts impossible to enumerate; it shall therefore suffice to sum
up this digest of their acts and ordinations in those general foldings used by
the Fathers, saying that the Apostles did ordain Bishops in all Churches, that
the succession of Bishops down from the Apostles first ordination of them was
the only argument to prove their Churches Catholic, and their adversaries who
could not do so, to be Heretical; This also is very evident, and of great
consideration in the first ages while their tradition was clear, and evident,
and not so bepudled as it since has been with the mixture of Heretics,
striving to spoil that which did so much mischief to their causes.

Edant origines Ecclesiarum suarum, evolvant ordinem Episcoporum suorum ita per
successiones ab initio decurrentem, ut primus ille Episcopus aliquem ex
Apostolis, aut Apostolicis viris habuerit authorem and antecessorem, hoc modo
Ecclesiae Apostolicae census suos deferunt, Lib. 3. cap. 3.
etc. And when S. Irenaeus had reckoned twelve successions in the Church of
Rome from the Apostles, nunc duodecimo loco ab Apostolis Episcopatum habet
Eleutherius. Hac ordinatione (says he) and successione, and ea quae est ab
Apostolis in Ecclesia traditio and veritatis praeconiatio pervenit usque ad
nos; and est plenissima haec ostensio unam and candem vivatricem fidem esse
quae in Ecclesia ab Apostolis usque nunc sit conservata, and tradita in
veritate. So that this succession of Bishops from the Apostles ordination, must
of it self be a very certain thing, when the Church made it a maine probation
of their faith; for the books of Scripture were not all gathered together, and
generally received as yet. Now then, since this was a main pillar of their
Christianity, viz. a constant reception of it from hand to hand, as being
delivered by the Bishops in every chair, till we come to the very Apostles
that did ordain them, this (I say) being their proof, although it could not be
more certain then the thing to be proved, which in that case was a Divine
revelation, yet to them it was more evident as being matter of fact, and known
almost by evidence of sense, and as verily believed by all, as it was by any
one, that himself was baptized, both relying upon the report of others. Epist.
42,
Radix Christianae societatis per seeds Apostolorum, and successiones
Episcoporum, certa per orbem propagatione diffunditur, says S. Austin. The
very root and foundation of Christian communion is spread all over the world,
by the successions of Apostles and Bishops.

And is it not now a madness to say there was no such thing, no succession of
Bishops in the Churches Apostolical, no ordination of Bishops by the Apostles,
and so (as S. Paul's phrase is) overthrow the faith of some, even of the
Primitive Christians, that used this argument as a great weapon of offense
against the invasion of haereticks and factious people? It is enough for us
that we can truly say with S. Irenaeus, Vbi supra.
Habemus annumerare eos qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis
usque ad nos. We can reckon those who from the Apostles until now were made
Bishops in the Churches; and of this we are sure enough, if there be any faith
in Christians.

THE sum is this. 19. So that Episcopacy is at least an Apostolical
ordinance:
Although we had not prooved the immediate Divine institution of Episcopal
power over Presbyters and the whole flock, yet Episcopacy is not less then an
Apostolical ordinance, and delivered to us by the same authority that the
observation of the Lord's day is. For, for that in the new Testament we have no
precept, of the same authority with many other points generally believed.
and nothing but the example of the Primitive Disciples meeting in their
Synaxes upon that day, and so also they did on the saturday in the Jewish
Synagogues, but yet (however that at Geneva, they were once in meditation to
have changed it into a Thursday meeting to have shown their Christian liberty)
we should think strangely of those men that called the Sunday-Festivall less
then an Apostolical ordinance, and necessary now to be kept holy with such
observances as the Church has appointed.

* Baptism of infants is most certainly a holy and charitable ordinance, and
of ordinary necessity to all that ever cried, and yet the Church has founded
this rite upon the tradition of the Apostles; and wise men do easily observe
that the Anabaptists can by the same probability of Scripture enforce a
necessity of communicating infants upon us, as we do of baptizing infants upon
them, if we speak of immediate Divine institution, or of practice Apostolical
recorded in Scripture, and therefore a great Master of Geneva in a book he writ
against the Anabaptists, was forced to fly to Apostolical traditive
ordination, and therefore the institution of Bishops, must be served first, as
having fairer plea, and clearer evidence in Scripture, then the baptizing of
infants, and yet they that deny this, are by the just anathema of the Catholic
Church, confidently condemned for Heretics.

* Of the same consideration are diverse other things in Christianity, as the
Presbyters consecrating the Eucharist; for if the Apostles in the first
institution did represent the whole Church, Clergy and Laity, when Christ said
[ Hoc facite, Do this] then why may not every Christian man there represented,
do that which the Apostles in the name of all were commanded to do? If the
Apostles did not represent the whole Church, why then do all communicate? Or
what place, or intimation of Christ's saying is there in all the four
Gospells, limiting [ Hoc facite, id est, benedicite] to the Clergy, and
extending [ Hoc facite, id est, accipite and manducate] to the Laity? This also
rests upon the practice Apostolical and traditive interpretation of H. Church,
and yet cannot be denied that so it ought to be, by any man that would not have
his Christendom suspected.

* To these I add the communion of Women, the distinction of books
Apocryphal, from Canonical, that such books were written by such Evangelists,
and Apostles, the whole tradition of Scripture it self, the Apostles Creed,
the feast of Easter (which amongst all them that cry up the Sunday-Festivall
for a Divine institution, must needs prevail as Caput institutionis, it being
that for which the Sunday is commemorated.) These and diverse others of greater
consequence (which I dare not specify for fear of being misunderstood) rely
but upon equal faith with this of Episcopacy (though I should wave all the
arguments for immediate Divine ordinance) and therefore it is but reasonable it
should be ranked amongst the Credenda of Christianity, which the Church has
entertained upon the confidence of that which we call the faith of a Christian,
whose Master is truth it self.

What their power and eminence was, 20. And was an office of power and great
authority,
and the appropriates of their office so ordained by the Apostles, appears also
by the testimonies before alleged, the expressions whereof run in these
high terms. Episcopatus administrandae Ecclesiae in Lino. Linus his Bishopric
was the administration of the whole Church. Ecclesiae praefuisse was said of
him and Clemens, they were both Prefects of the Church, or Prelates, that is the
Church-word. Ordinandis apud Cretam Ecclesiis praeficitur, so Titus, he is set
over all the affairs of the new-founded Churches in Crete. In celsiori gradu
collocatus, placed in a higher order or degree, so the Bishop of Alexandria,
chosen ex Presbyteris, from amongst the Presbyters. Supra omnia Episcopalis
apicis seeds, so Philo of that Bishopric, The seat of Episcopal height above
all things in Christianity. These are its honors. Its offices these. (...)
etc. To set in order whatsoever he sees wanting, or amiss; to silence vain
prating Preachers, that will not submit to their superiors, to ordain elders,
to rebuke delinquents, to reject Heretics, viz. from the communion of the
faithful (for else why was the Angel of the Church of Pergamus reproved for
tolerating the Nicolaitan heretics, but that it was in his power to eject
them? And the same is the case of the Angel of Thyatira in permitting the
woman to teach and seduce the people) but to the Bishop was committed the
cognizance of causes criminal and particular of Presbyters, (so to Timothy in
the instance formerly alleged) nay, (...), all authority, so in the case of
Titus, and officium regendae Ecclesiae, the office of ruling the Church, so to
them all whom the Apostles left in the several Churches respectively which
they had new founded. Vbi supra. apud Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 23.
So Eusebius. For the Bishop was (...), set over all, Clergy and Laity, says
S. Clement.

This was given to Bishops by the Apostles themselves, and this was not given
to Presbyters, as I have already prooved, and for the present, it will
sufficiently appear in this, that Bishops had power over Presbyters, which
cannot be supposed they had over themselves, unless they could be their own
superiors.

BUt a Council,. 21. Not lessened by the assistance and Council of Presbyters,
or College of Presbyters might have jurisdiction over any one, and such
Colleges there were in the Apostles times, and they did in communi Ecclesiam
regere, govern the Church in common with the Bishop, as says S. Hierom, viz.
where there was a Bishop, and where there was none they ruled without him. *
This indeed will call us to a new account, and it relies upon the testimony of
S. Hierome which I will set down here, Comment. in ep. ad Titum.
that we may leave the sun without a cloud. S. Ierom's words are these.

Idem est enim Presbyter quod Episcopus, and antequam Diaboli instinctu studia
in religione fierent, and diceretur in populis, ego sum Pauli ego Apollo, ego
autem Cephae, communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur. Postquam
vero unusquisque eos quos baptizabat suos putabat esse, non Christi, in toto
orb decretum est, ut unus de Presbyter is electus superponeretur caeteris ut
Schismatum semina tollerentur.

Then he brings some arguments to confirm his saying, and sums them up thus.

Haec diximus ut ostenderemus apud veteres eosdem fuisse Presbyteros quos
Episcopos, and ut Episcopi noverint se magis consuetudine quam Dominicae
dispositionis veritate Presbyteris esse majores: and in communi debere
Ecclesiam regere, etc.

The thing S. Hierome aims to prove, is the identity of Bishop, Presbyter, and
their government of the Church in common. * For their identity, It is clear
that S. Hierome does not mean it in respect of order, as if a Bishop and a
Presbyter had both one office per omnia, one power; for else he contradicts
himself most apertly, for in his Epistle ad Evagrium, Quid facit (says he)
Episcopus excepta ordinatione quod Presbyter non faciat? A Presbyter may not
ordain, a Bishop does, which is a clear difference of power, and by S.
Hierome is not expressed in matter of fact, but of right [quod Presbyter non
FACIAT] not [non facit;] that a Priest may not, must not do, that a Bishop
does, viz. he gives holy orders. * And for matter of fact S. Hierome knew that
in his time a Presbyter did not govern in common, but because he conceived it
was fit he should be joined in the common regiment and care of the Diocese,
therefore he asserted it as much as he could; And therefore if S. Hierome had
thought that this difference of the power of ordination, had been only
customary, and by actual indulgence, or incroachment, or positive
constitution, and no matter of primitive and original right, S. Hierome was
not so diffident but out it should, come what would have come. And suppose S.
Hierome, in this distinct power of ordination had intended it only to be a
difference in fact, not in right (for so some of late have muttered) then S.
Hierome had not said true according to his own principles, for [Quid facit
Episcopus excepta ordinatione quod Presbyter non faciat?] had been quickly
answered, if the Question had only been de facto; For the Bishop governed the
Church alone, and so in Jurisdiction was greater then Presbyters, and this was
by custom, and in fact at least, S. Hierome says it, and the Bishop took so
much power to himself, that de facto Presbyters were not suffered to do any
thing sine literis Episco, palibus, without leave of the Bishop, and this S.
Hierome complained of; Ad Nepotian. and de 7. ordin. Eccles.
so that de facto the power of ordination was not the only difference: That
then (if S. Hierome says true) being the only difference between Presbyter
and Bishop, must be meant de jure, in matter of right, not humane positive, for
that is coincident with the other power of jurisdiction which de facto, and at
least by a humane right the Bishop had over Presbyters, but Divine, and then
this identity of Bishop and Presbyter by S. Hierom's own confession cannot be
meant in respect of order, but the Episcopacy is by Divine right a superior
order to the Presbyterate.

* Add to this that the arguments which S. Hierome uses in this discourse are
to prove that Bishops are sometimes called Presbyters. To this purpose he urges
Act. 20. And Philippians 1. and the Epistles to Timothy, and Titus, and some
others, but all driving to the same issue. To what? Not to prove that
Presbyters are sometimes called Presbyters; For who doubts that? But that
Bishops are so may be of some consideration and needs a proof, and this he
Undertook. Now that they are so called must needs infer an identity and a
disparity in several respects. An identity, at least of Names, for else it had
been wholly impertinent. A disparity, or else his arguments were to prove idem
affirmari de eodem, which were a business next to telling pins. Now then this
disparity must be either in order, or jurisdiction. By the former probation it
is sure that he means the orders to be disparate; If jurisdiction too, I am
content, but the former is most certain, if he stand to his own principles.

This identity then which S. Hierome expresses of Episcopus and Presbyter, must
be either in Name or in Jurisdiction. I know not certainly which he means,
for his arguments conclude only for the identity of Names, but his conclusion
is for identity of jurisdiction, and in communi debere Ecclesiam regere, is the
intent of his discourse. If he means the first, viz: that of Names, it is well
enough, there is no harm done, it is in confesso apud omnes, but concludes
nothing (as I shall show hereafter) but because he intends (so far as may be
guessed by his words) a parity and concurrence of jurisdiction, this must be
considered distinctly.

1. Then; in the first founding of Churches the Apostles did appoint
Presbyters, and inferior Ministers with a power of baptizing, preaching,
consecrating and reconciling in privato foro, but did not in every Church at
the first founding it, constitute a Bishop. This is evident in Crete, in
Ephesus, in Corinth, at Rome, at Antioch.

2. Where no Bishops were constituted there the Apostles kept the jurisdiction
in their own hands [There comes upon me (says S. Paul) daily the care or
Supravision of all the Churches] Not all absolutely, for not all of the
Circumcision, but all of his charge, with which he was once charged, and of
which he had not exonerated himself by constituting Bishops there, for of
these there is the same reason. And again [If any man obey not our word, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14.
(...), signify him to me by an Epistle] so he charges the Thessalonians, and
therefore of this Church, S. Paul as yet, clearly kept the power in his own
hands. So that the Church was ever in all the parts of it, governed by
Episcopal, or Apostolical authority.

3. For ought appears in Scripture, the Apostles never gave any external, or
coercitive jurisdiction in public, and criminal causes, nor yet power to
ordain Rites or Ceremonies, or to inflict censures, to a College of mere
Presbyters. * The contrary may be greedily swallowed, and I know not with how
great confidence, and prescribing prejudice; but there is not in all Scripture
any commission from Christ, any ordinance or warrant from the Apostles to any
Presbyter, or College of Presbyters without a Bishop, or express delegation
of Apostolical authority (tanquam vi^ario suo, as to his substitute in absense
of the Bishop or Apostle) to inflict any censures, or take cognizance of
persons and causes criminal. Presbyters might be surrogati in locum Episcopi
absentis, but never had any ordinary jurisdiction given them by virtue of their
ordination, or any commission, from Christ or his Apostles.

This we may best consider by induction of particulars.

1. There was a Presbytery at Jerusalem, but they had a Bishop always, and the
College of the Apostles sometimes, therefore whatsoever act they did, it was
in conjunction with, and subordination to the Bishop and Apostles. Now it
cannot be denied both that the Apostles were superior to all the Presbyters in
Jerusalem, and also had power alone to govern the Church. I say they had power
to govern alone, for they had the government of the Church alone before they
ordayn'd the first Presbyters, that is before there were any of capacity to
join with them, they must do it themselves, and then also they must retain
the same power, for they could not loose it by giving Orders. Now if they had a
power of sole jurisdiction, then the Presbyters being in some public acts in
conjunction with the Apostles cannot challenge a right of governing as affixed
to their Order, they only assisting in subordination, and by dependency.

This only by the way; In Jerusalem the Presbyters were some thing more then
ordinary, and were not mere Presbyters in the present, and limited sense of
the word. For Barnabas, and Judas, and Silas [(...) S. Luke calls them] were of
that Presbytery. Act. 15.
(...). They were Rulers, and Prophets, Chief men amongst the Brethren, and
yet called Elders, or Presbyters though of Apostolical power and authority,
(...) says Oe^umenius. in Act. Apost.
For truth is, that diverse of them were ordained Apostles with an Vulimited
jurisdiction, not fixed upon any See, that they also might together with the
twelve, exire in totum mundum. * So that in this Presbytery either they were
more then mere Presbyters, as Barnabas, and Judas, and Silas, men of
Apostolical power, and they might well be in conjunction with the twelve, and
with the Bishop, they were of equal power, not by virtue of their
Presbyterate, but by their Apostolate; or if they were but mere Presbyters,
yet because it is certain, and proov'd, and confessed that the Apostles had
power to govern the Church alone, this their taking mere Presbyters in partem
regiminis, was a voluntary act, and from this example was derived to other
Churches, and then it is most true, that Presbyteros in communi Ecclesiam
regere, was rather, consuetudine Ecclesiae, then dominicae dispositionis
veritate, (to use S. Hierom's own expression) for this is more evident then
that Bishops, do eminere caeteris, by custom rather then Divine institution.
For if the Apostles might rule the Church alone, then that the Presbyters were
taken into the Number was a voluntary act of the Apostles, and although fitting
to be retained where the same reasons do remain, and circumstances concur,
yet not necessary because not affixed to their Order; not, Dominicae
dispositionis veritate, and not laudable when those reasons cease, and there is
an emergency of contrary causes.

2. The next Presbytery we read of is at Antioch, but there we find no acts
either of concurrent, Act. 13.
or single jurisdiction, but of ordination indeed we do, and that performed by
such men as S. Paul was, and Barnabas, for they were two of the Prophets
reckoned in the Church of Antioch, but I do not remember them to be called
Presbyters in that place, to be sure they were not mere Presbyters as we now
Understand the word, as I proved formerly.

3. But in the Church of Ephesus there was a College of Presbyters and they
were by the Spirit of God called Bishops, Act. 20.
and were appointed by him to be Pastors of the Church of God. This must do it
or nothing. In quo spiritus S. posuit vos Episcopos, In whom the holy Ghost
has made you Bishops. There must lay the exigence of the argument, and if we
can find who is meant by [Vos] we shall, I hope, gain the truth. * S. Paul
sent for the Presbyters, or Elders to come from Ephesus to Miletus, and to them
he spoke. * * It Is true, but that is not all the [vos], For there were present
at that Sermon, Sopater, and Aristarchus, and Secundus, and Gaius, Act. 20. 4.
and Timothy, and Tychicus, and Trophimus; And although he sent to Ephesus as
to the Metropolis, and there many Elders were either accidentally, or by
ordinary residence, yet those were not all Elders of that Church, but of all
Asia, in the Scripture sense, the lessar Asia. For so in the preface of his
Sermon S. Paul intimates [ye know that from the first day I came into Asia
after what manner I have been with you at all seasons] His whole conversation
in Asia was not confined to Ephesus, verse. 18.
and yet those Elders who were present were witnesses of it all, and therefore
were of dispersed habitation, and so it is more clearly inferred from verse. 25.
And now behold I know that YE ALL AMONG WHOM I HAVE GONE preaching the Kingdom
of God etc: It was a travail to preach to all that were present, and therefore
most certainly they were inhabitants of places very considerably distant.

Now upon this ground I will raise these considerations.

1. If there be a confusion of Names in Scripture, particularly of Episcopus
and Presbyter, as it is contended for, on one side, and granted on all sides,
then where both the words are used, what shall determine the signification? For
whether (to instance in this place) shall Presbyter limit Episcopus, or
Episcopus extend Presbyter? Why may not Presbyter signify one that is verily a
Bishop, as Episcopus signify a mere Presbyter? For it is but an ignorant
conceit, where ever Presbyter is named, to fancy it in the proper and limited
sense, and not to do so with Episcopus, and when they are joined together,
rather to believe it in the limited and present sense of Presbyter, then in the
proper and present sense of Episcopus. So that as yet we are indifferent upon
the terms. These men sent for from Ephesus, are called (...), Elders or
Presbyters of the Church, but at Miletus, Spiritus S. posuit vos Episcopos,
there they are called Bishops or overseers. So that I may as well say here were
properly so called Bishops, as another may say, here were mere Presbyters. *
And least it be objected in prejudice of my affirmative, that they could not be
Bishops, because they were of Ephesus, there never being but one Bishop in one
Church. I answer, that in the Apostles times this was not true. For at
Jerusalem there were many at the same time that had Episcopal, and
Apostolical authority, and so at Antioch; as at Jerusalem, where James, and
Judas, and Silas, and the Apostles, and Paul and Barnabas at Antioch, and at
Rome, at the same time Peter and Paul, and Linus, and Clemens, but yet but one
of them was fixed, and properly the Bishop of that place. But 2ly All these were
not of Ephesus, but the Elders of all Asia, but some from other countries as
appears verse. 4. So that although they were all Bishops, we might easily find
distinct Diocesses for them, without incumbring the Church of Ephesus with a
multiplied incumbency. Thus far then we are upon even terms, the community
of compellations used here, can no more force us to believe them all to be
mere Presbyters, then Bishops in the proper sense.

2. It is very certain that they were not all mere Presbyters at his farewell
Sermon, for S. Timothy was there, and I proved him to be a Bishop by abundant
testimony, and many of those which are reckoned v. 4. were companions of the
Apostle in his journey, and employed in mission Apostolical for the founding
of Churches, and particularly, Sosipater was there, and he was Bishop of
Iconium, and Tychicus of Chalcedon in Bythinia, Vbi supra.
as Dorotheus and Eusebius witness; and Trophimus of Arles in France, for so
is witnessed by the suffragans of that province in their Epistle to S. Leo. But
without all doubt here were Bishops present as well as Presbyters, for besides
the premises we have a witness beyond exception, Lib. 3. cap. 14.
the ancient S. Irenaeus, In Mileto enim conv^catis Episcopis, and Presbyteris
qui erant ab Epheso, and a reliquis proximis civitatibus, quoniam ipse
festinavit Hierosolymis Pentecosten agere, etc. S. Paul making have to keep his
Pentecost at Jerusalem, at Miletus, did call together the Bishops and
Presbyters, from Ephesus, and the neighboring Cities. * Now to all these in
conjunction S. Paul spoke, and to these indeed the Holy Ghost had concredited
his Church to be fed, and taught with Pastoral supravision, but in the mean
while here is no commission of power, or jurisdiction to Presbyters distinctly,
nor supposition of any such praeexistent power.

3. All that S. Paul said in this narration, was spoken in the presence of them
all, but not to them all. For that of v. 18. [ ye know how I have been with you
in Asia in all seasons,] that indeed was spoke to all the Presbyters that came
from Ephesus and the voisinage, viz. in a collective sense, not in a
distributive, for each of them was not in all the circuit of his Asian
travailes; but this was not spoken to Sopater the Beraean, or to Aristarchus
the Thessalonian, but to Tychicus, and Trophimus, who were Asians it might be
addressed. And for that of v. 25. [ ye all among whom I have gone preaching
shall see my face no more,] this was directed only to the Asians, for he was
never more to come thither; but Timothy to be sure, saw him afterward, for S.
Paul sent for him, a little before his death, to Rome, and it will not be
supposed he neglected to attend him. So that if there were a conjunction of
Bishops, and Presbyters at this meeting, as most certainly there was, and of
Evangelists, and Apostolical men besides, how shall it be known, or indeed
with any probability suspected that, that clause of verse. 28. Spiritus S.
posuit vos Episcopos pascere Ecclesiam Dei, does belong to the Ephesine
Presbyters, and not particularly to Timothy, who was now actually Bishop of
Ephesus, and to Gajus, and to the other Apostolical men who had at least
Episcopal authority, that is, power of founding, and ordering Churches without
a fixed and limited jurisdiction?

4. Either in this place is no jurisdiction at all intimated de antiquo, or
concredited de novo, or if there be, it is in the word (...), and (...) v. 28.
Bishops, and Feeders; and then it belongs either to the Bishops alone, or to
the Presbyters in conjunction with, and subordination to the Bishops, for to
the mere Presbyters it cannot be proved to appertain, by any intination of
that place.

5. How and if these Presbyters, which came from Ephesus and the other parts of
Asia were made Bishops at Miletus? Then also this way all difficulty will be
removed. And that so it was is more then probable; for to be sure, Timothy was
now entering, and fixing upon his See; and it was consonant to the practice of
the Apostles, and the exigence of the thing it self, when they were to leave a
Church to fix a Bishop in it; for why else was a Bishop fixed in Jerusalem, so
long before in other Churches, but because the Apostles were to be scattered
from thence, and there the first bloody field of Martyrdom was to be fought.
And the case was equal here, for S. Paul was never to see the Churches of Asia
any more, and he foresaw that ravening wolves would enter into the folds, and
he had actually placed a Bishop in Ephesus, and it is unimaginable, that he
would not make equal provision for other Churches, there being the same
necessity from the same danger, in them all, and either S. Paul did it now, or
never; and that about this time the other six Asian Churches had Angels, or
Bishops set in their candlesticks, is plain, for there had been a succession in
the Church of Pergamus, Antipas was dead, and S. Timothy had sat in Ephesus,
and S. Polycarpe at Smyrna many years before S. John writ his Revelation.

6. Lastly, that no jurisdiction was in the Ephesine Presbyters, except a
delegate, and subordinate, appears beyond all exception, by S. Paul's first
epistle to Timothy, establishing in the person of Timothy power of coercitive
jurisdiction over Presbyters, and ordination in him alone, without the
conjunction of any in commission with him, for ought appears either there, or
elsewhere.

* 4. The same also in the case of the Cretan Presbyters is clear. For what
power had they of Jurisdiction? For that is it, we now speak of. If they had
none before S. Titus came, we are well enough at Crete. If they had, why did S.
Paul take it from them to invest Titus with it? Or if he did not, to what
purpose did he send Titus with all those powers before mentioned? For either
the Presbyters of Crete had jurisdiction in causes criminal equal to Titus
after his coming, or they had not. If they had, then what did Titus do there?
If they had not, then either they had no jurisdiction at all, or whatsoever it
was, it was in subordination to him, they were his inferiors, and he their
ordinary Judge and Governor.

5. One thing more before this be left, must be considered concerning the
Church of Corinth, for there was power of excommunication in the Presbytery
when they had no Bishop, for they had none of diverse years after the founding
of the Church, and yet S. Paul reprooves them for not ejecting the incestuous
person out of the Church.

* This is it that I said before, that the Apostles kept the jurisdiction in
their hands where they had founded a Church, and placed no Bishop. For in this
case of the Corinthian incest the Apostle did make himself the sole Judge. 1.
Cor. 5. 3.
[ For I verily as absent in body but present in spirit have judged already]
and then secondly, V. ^.
S. Paul gives the Church of Corinth commission and substitution to proceed in
this cause [ In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered
together, and MY SPIRIT, that is, My power, My authority, for so he explaines
himself, MY SPIRIT, WITH THE POWER OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, to deliver him
over to Satan. And 3. As all this power is delegate, so it is but declarative
in the Corinthians, for S. Paul had given sentence before, and they of Corinth
were to publish it. 4. This was a commission given to the whole assembly, and
no more concerns the Presbyters, then the people, and so some have contended;
but so it is, but will serve neither of their turns, neither for an
independent Presbytery, nor a conjunctive popularity. As for S. Paul's
reprooving them for not inflicting censures on the peccant, I have often heard
it confidently averred, but never could see ground for it. The suspicion of it
is v. 2. [ And ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that he that has
done this deed might be TAKEN AWAY FROM AMONG YOU] Taken away. But by whom?
That Is the Question. Not by them, to be sure. For TAKEN AWAY FROM YOU, implies
that it is by the power of another, not by their act, for no man can take away
any thing from himself. He may put it away, not take it, the expression had
been very imperfect if this had been his meaning. * Well then: In all these
instances, viz. of Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Crete, and Corinth (and these
are all I can find in Scripture of any consideration in the present Question)
all the jurisdiction was originally in the Apostles while there was no Bishop,
or in the Bishop when there was any; And yet that the Presbyters were joined in
the ordering Church affairs I will not deny, to wit, by voluntary assuming
them, in partem sollicitudinis, and by delegation of power Apostolical, or
Episcopal, and by way of assistance in acts deliberative, and consiliary,
though I find this no where specified but in the Church of Jerusalem, where I
prooved that the Elders were men of more power then mere Presbyters, men of
Apostolical authority. But here lies the issue, and strain of the Question.

Presbyters had no jurisdiction in causes criminal, and pertaining to the
public regiment of the Church, by virtue of their order, or without particular
substitution, and delegation. For there is not in all Scripture any commission
given by Christ to mere Presbyters, no divine institution of any power of
regiment in the Presbytery; no constitution Apostolical, that mere Presbyters
should either alone, or in conjunction with the Bishop govern the Church; no
example in all Scripture of any censure inflicted by any mere Presbyters,
either upon Clergy or Laity; no specification of any power that they had so to
do; but to Churches where Colleges of Presbyters were resident, Bishops were
sent by Apostolical ordination; not only with power of imposition of hands,
but of excommunication, of taking cognizance even of causes, and actions of
Presbyters themselves, as to Titus, and Timothy, the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus; and there is also example of delegation of power of censures from the
Apostle to a Church where many Presbyters were fixed, as in the case of the
Corinthian delinquent before specified, which delegation was needless, if
coercitive jurisdiction by censures had been by divine right in a Presbyter, or
a whole College of them.

Now then, return we to the consideration of S. Hieromes saying: The Church
was governed (says he) communi Presbyterorum consilio, by the common Counsel
of the Presbyters. But,

1. Quo jure was this? That the Bishops were Superior to those which were then
called Presbyters, by custom rather then Divine disposition S. Hierome
affirms; but that Presbyters were joined with the Apostles and Bishops at
first, by what right was that? Was not that also by custom and condescension
rather then by Divine disposition? S. Hierome does not say but it was. For he
speaks only of matter of fact, not of right, It might have been otherwise,
though de facto it was so in some places.

* 2. [ Communi Presbyterorum consilio] is true in the Church of Jerusalem,
where the Elders were Apostolical men, and had Episcopal authority and
something superadded, as Barnabas, and Judas and Silas, for they had the
authority and power of Bishops, and an unlimited Diocese besides, though
afterward Silas was fixed upon the Sea of Corinth. But yet even at Jerusalem
they actually had a Bishop, who was in that place superior to them in
Jurisdiction, and therefore does clearly evince, that the common-counsell of
Presbyters is no argument against the superiority of a Bishop over them.

* 3. [ Communi Presbyterorum consilio] is also true, because the Apostles
called themselves Presbyters, as S. Peter, and S. John, in their Epistles. Now
at the first, many Prophets, many Elders (for the words are sometimes used in
common) were for a while resident in particular Churches, and did govern in
common; As at Antioch were Barnabas, and Simeon, and Lucius, and Manaen, and
Paul. Communi horum Presbyterorum consilio the Church of Antioch for a time was
governed; for all these were Presbyters, in the sense that S. Peter and S. John
were, and the Elders of the Church of Jerusalem.

* 4. Suppose this had been true in the sense that any body please to imagine,
yet this not being by any divine ordinance, that Presbyters should by their
Counsel assist in external regiment of the Church, neither by any intimation
of Scripture, nor by affirmation of S. Hierome, it is sufficient to stifle this
by that saying of S. Ambrose, in Ephesians. 4.
Postquam omnibus locis Ecclesiae sunt constitutae, and officia ordinata,
aliter composita res est quam caperat. It might be so at first de facto, and
yet no need to be so neither then, nor after. For at first Ephesus had no
Bishop of it is own, nor Crete, and there was no need, for S. Paul had the
supra-vision of them, and S. John, and other of the Apostles, but yet
afterward S. Paul did send Bishops thither; for when themselves were to go
away, the power must be concredited to another; And if they in their absence
before the constituting of a Bishop had entrusted the care of the Church with
Presbyters, yet it was but in dependence on the Apostles, and by substitution,
not by any ordinary power, and it ceased at the presence or command of the
Apostle, or the sending of a Bishop to reside. Epist. ad Antioch.
(...). So S. Ignatius being absent from his Church upon a business of being
persecuted, he writ to his Presbyters, Do you feed the flock amongst you, till
God shall show you who shall be your Ruler, viz. My Successor. No longer. Your
commission expires when a Bishop comes.

* 5. To the conclusion of S. Hieromes discourse, viz. That Bishops are not
greater then Presbyters by the truth of divine disposition; I answer, that this
is true in this sense, Bishops are not by Divine disposition greater then all
those which in Scripture are called Presbyters, such as were the Elders in the
Council at Jerusalem, such as were they of Antioch, such as S. Peter and S.
John, (...), all, and yet all of them were not Bishops in the present sense,
that is of a fixed and particular Diocese, and Jurisdiction. * 2ly S. Hieromes
meaning is also true in this sense, [ Bishops by the truth of the Lords
disposition are not greater then Presbyters,] viz. quoad exercitium actus, that
is, they are not tied to exercise jurisdiction solely in their own persons,
but may asciscere sibi Presbyteros in commune consilium, they may delegate
jurisdiction to the Presbyters; and that they did not so, but kept the exercise
of it only in their own hands in S. Hieromes time, this is it, which he says
is rather by custom, then by Divine dispensation, for it was otherwise at
first, viz. de facto, and might be so still, there being no law of God against
the delegation of power Episcopal. * As for the last words in the objection, [
Et in communi debere Ecclesiam regere,] it is an assumentum of S. Hieromes
own; for all his former discourse was of the identity of Names, and common
regiment de facto, not de jure, and from a fact to conclude with a Debere, is a
Non sequitur, unless this Debere be understood according to the exigence of
the former arguments, that is, THEY OUGHT, not by Gods law, but in imitation of
the practice Apostolical; to wit, when things are as they were then, when the
Presbyters are such as then they were; THEY OUGHT, for many considerations, and
in Great cases, not by the necessity of a Divine precept.

* And indeed to do him right he so explaines himself, [ Et in communi debere
Ecclesiam regere, imitantes Moysen qui cum haberet in potestate solus praeesse
populo Israel, septuaginta elegit, cum quibus populum judicaret.] The
Presbyters ought to Judge in common with the Bishop, for the Bishops ought to
imitate Moses, who might have ruled alone, yet was content to take others to
him, and himself only to rule in chief. Thus S. Hierome would have the
Bishops do, but then he acknowledges the right of sole jurisdiction to be in
them, and therefore though his Council perhaps might be good then, yet it is
necessary at no time, and was not followed then, and to be sure is needless
now. * For the arguments which S. Hierome uses to prove this his intention what
ever it is, I have and shall else where produce, for they yield many other
considerations then this collection of S. Hierome, and prove nothing less then
the equality of the offices of Episcocy and Presbyterate. The same thing is per
omnia respondent to the parallel place of In 1. Tim. 3. (...). Homil. 11.
S. Chrysostom, It is needless to repeat either the objection, or answer.

* But however this saying of S. Hierome, and the parallel of S. Chrysostom is
but like an argument against an Evident truth, which comes forth upon a
desperate service, and they are sure to be killed by the adverse party, or to
run upon their own Swords; For either they are to be understood in the
senses above explicated, and then they are impertinent, or else they contradict
evidence of Scripture and Catholic antiquity, and so are false, and dye within
their own trenches.

I end this argument of tradition Apostolical with that saying of S. Hierome
in the same place. Postquam Vnusquisque eos quos baptiz abat suos put abat
esse, non Christi, and diceretur in populis, Ego sum Pauli, Ego Apollo, Ego
autem Cepha, in toto orb decretum est ut Vnus de Presbyteris electus
superponeretur caeter is, ut schismatum semina tollerentur. That is, a public
decree issued out in the Apostles times, that in all Churches one should be
chosen out of the Clergy, and set over them, viz. to rule and govern the flock
committed to his charge. This I say was in the Apostles times, even upon the
occasion of the Corinthian schism, for then they said I am of Paul, and I of
Apollo, and then it was, that he that baptized any Catechumens, took them for
his own not as Christ's disciples. So that it was, tempore Apostolorum, that
this decree was made, for in the time of the Apostles S. James, and S. Mark,
and S. Timothy, and S. Titus were made Bishops by S. Hieromes express
attestation; It was also [ toto orb decretum] so that if it had not been
proved to have been an immediate Divine institution, yet it could not have
gone much less, it being, as I have proved, and as S. Hierome acknowledges
CATHOLIC, and APOSTOLIC. *

Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ, 22. And all this has been the
says and practice of Christendom.
is an Apostolical precept. We have seen how the Apostles have followed
Christ, how their tradition is consequent of Divine institution; Next let us
see, how the Church has followed the Apostles, as the Apostles have followed
Christ. CATHOLIC PRACTICE is the next Basis of the power and order of
Episcopacy. And this shall be in subsidium to them also that call for reduction
of the state Episcopal to a primitive consistence, and for the confirmation of
all those pious sons of Holy Church, who have a venerable estimate of the
public and authorized facts of Catholic Christendom.

* For Consider we, Is it imaginable, that all the world should immediately
after the death of the Apostles conspire together to seek themselves, and not,
caquae sunt Jesus Christi; to erect a government of their own devising, not
ordayn'd by Christ, not delivered by his Apostles, and to relinquish a Divine
foundation, and the Apostolical superstructure, which if it was at all, was a
part of our Masters will, which whosoever knew, and observed not, was to be
beaten with many stripes? Is it imaginable, that those gallant men who could
not be brought off from the prescriptions of Gentilisme to the seeming
impossibilities of Christianity, without evidence of Miracle, and clarity of
Demonstration upon agreed principles, should all upon their first adhesion to
Christianity, make an Universal dereliction of so considerable a part of their
Masters will, and leave Gentilisme to destroy Christianity, for he that erects
another Economy then what the Master of the family has ordayn'd, destroys
all those relations of mutual dependence which Christ has made for the
coadunation of all the parts of it, and so destroys it in the formality of a
Christian congregation or family?

* Is it imaginable, that all those glorious Martyrs, that were so curious
observers of Divine Sanctions, and Canons Apostolical, that so long as that
ordinance of the Apostles concerning abstinence from blood was of force, they
would rather dye then eat a strangled hen, or a pudding, (for so Eusebius
relates of the Christians in the particular instance of Biblis and Blandina)
that they would be so sedulous in the contemning the government that Christ
left for his family, and erect another?

* To what purpose were all their watchings, their banishments, their fears,
their fastings, their penances and formidable austerities, and finally their so
frequent Martyrdomes, of what excellency or avail, if after all, they should
be hurried out of this world and all their fortunes and possessions, by
untimely, by disgraceful, by dolourous deaths, to be set before a tribunal to
give account of their universal neglect, and contemning of Christ's last
testament, in so great an affair, as the whole government of his Church?

* If all Christendom should be guilty of so open, so united a defiance
against their Master, by what argument, or confidence can any misbeliever be
persuaded to Christianity, which in all its members for so many ages together
is so unlike its first institution, as in its most public affair, and for
matter of order of the most general concernement, is so contrary to the first
birth?

* Where are the promises of Christ's perpetual assistance, of the impregnable
permanence of the (...) ^^ch against the gates of Hell, of the Spirit of truth
to lead it into all truth, if she be guilty of so grand an error, as to erect
a throne where Christ had made all level, or appointed others to sit in it,
then whom he suffers. * Either Christ has left no government, or most
certainly the Church has retained that Government whatsoever it is, for the
contradictory to these would either make Christ improvident, or the Catholic
Church extremely negligent (to say no worse) and incurious of her depositum. *
But upon the confidence of all * Christendom (if there were no more in it) I *
suppose we may fairly venture. Sit anima mea * cum Christianis.

THE first thing done in Christendom, 23. Who first distinguished Names used
before in common.
upon the death of the Apostles in this matter of Episcopacy, is the
distinguishing of Names, which before were common. For in holy Scripture all
the names of Clericall offices were given to the superior order, and
particularly all offices, and parts, and persons designed in any employment of
the sacred Preisthood, were signified by Presbyter and Presbyterium. And
therefore least the confusion of Names might persuade an identity and
indistinction of office, the wisdom of H. Church found it necessary to
distinguish and separate orders, and offices by distinct and proper
appellations. [ For the Apostles did know by our Lord Jesus Christ that
contentions would arise, (...), about the name of Episcopacy,] says S.
Clement, and so it did in the Church of Corinth, Epist. ad Corinth.
as soon as their Apostle had expired his last breath. But so it was.

1. The Apostles, which I have proved to be the supreme ordinary office in the
Church, and to be succeeded in, we called in Scripture (...), Elders or
Presbyters, (...), 1. Pet. 5. 1.
says S. Peter the Apostle, the Elders, or Presbyters that are among you, I
also who am an Elder, or Presbyter do entreat. Such elders S. Peter spoke to,
as he was himself, to wit, those to whom the regiment of the Church was
committed, the Bishops of Asia, Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, and Bithynia, that
is to Timothy, to Titus, to Tycbicus, to Sosipater, to the Angels of the Asian
Churches, and all others whom himself in the next words points out by the
description of their office, (...), etc. Feed the flock of God as Bishops, or
being Bishops and overseers over it; And that to rulers he then spoke is
evident by his (...), for it was impertinent to have warned them of tyranny,
that had no rule at all. * The mere Presbyters, I deny not, but are included
in this admonition; for as their office is involved in the Bishops office, the
Bishop being Bishop and Presbyter too, so is his duty also in the Bishops; so
that, pro rata the Presbyter knows what lies on him by proportion and
intuition to the Bishops admonition. But again. * (...), says S. John the
Apostle; and, (...). The Presbyter to Gajus; the Presbyter to the elect Lady.

2. * If Apostles be called Presbyters, no harm though Bishops be called so
too, for Apostles, and Bishops are all one in ordinary office as I have proved
formerly. Thus are those Apostolical men in the College at Jerusalem called
Presbyters, whom yet the Holy Ghost calls, (...), principal men, ruling men,
and (...), the Presbyters that rule well. By Presbyters are meant Bishops, to
whom only according to the intention, and exigence of Divine institution the
Apostle had concredited the Church of Ephesus, and the neighboring Cities, ut
solus quisque Episcopus praesit omnibus, as appears in the former discourse.
The same also is Acts 20. The Holy Ghost has made you Bishops, and yet the
same men are called (...). The one place expounds the other, for they are both
ad idem, and speak of Elders of the same Church.

* 3. Although Bishops be called Presbyters, yet even in Scripture names are so
distinguished, that mere Presbyters are never called Bishops, unless it be in
conjunction with Bishops, and then in the General address, which, in all
fair deportments, is made to the more eminent, sometimes Presbyters are, or
may be comprehended. This observation if it prove true, will clearly show,
that the confusion of names of Episcopus, and Presbyter, such as it is in
Scripture, is of no pretense by any intimation of Scripture, for the
indistinction of offices, for even the names in Scripture it self are so
distinguished, that a mere Presbyter alone is never called a Bishop, but a
Bishop an Apostle is often called a Presbyter, as in the instances above. But
we will consider those places of Scripture, which use to be pretended in those
impertinent arguings from the identity of Name, to confusion of things, and
show that they neither enterfere upon the maine Question, nor this observation.
* Paul and Timotheus to all the saints which are in Christ Jesus which are at
Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons. I am willinger to choose this instance,
because the place is of much consideration in the whole Question, and I shall
take this occasion to clear it from prejudice and disadvantage.

* By Bishops are here meant Presbyters, because * many Bishops in a Church
could not be, and yet * S. Paul speaks plurally of the Bishops of the * Church
of Philippi, and therefore must mean * mere Presbyters * so it is pretended.
1. Then; By [ Bishops] are, or may be meant the whole superior order of the
clergy, Bishops and Priests, and that he speaks plurally, he, may besides the
Bishops in the Church, comprehend under their name the Presbyters too; for why
may not the name be comprehended as well as the office, and order, the
inferior under the superior, the lesser within the greater; for since the
order of Presbyters is involved in the Bishops order, and is not only
inclusively in it, but derivative from it; the same name may comprehend both
persons, because it does comprehend the distinct offices and orders of them
both. And in this sense it is (if it be at all) that Presbyters are sometimes
in Scripture called Bishops.

* 2. Why may not [ Bishops] be understood properly; For there is no necessity
of admiitting that there were any mere Presbyters at all at the first founding
of this Church, It can neither be proved from Scripture, not antiquity, if it
were denied: For indeed a Bishop or a company of Episcopal men as there were
at Antioch, might do all that Presbyters could, and much more. And considering
that there are some necessities of a Church which a Presbyter cannot supply,
and a Bishop can, it is more imaginable that there was no Presbyter, then that
there was no Bishop. And certainly it is most unlikely, that what is not
expressed, to wit, Presbyters should be only meant, and that which is
expressed should not be at all intended.

* 3. [ With the Bishops] may be understood in the proper sense, and yet no
more Bishops in one Diocese then one, of a fixed residence; for in that sense
is S. Chrysostom and the fathers to be understood in their commentaries on
this place, (...). Chrysostom. in 1. Phil.
affirming that one Church could have but one Bishop; but then take this along,
that it was not then unusual in such great Churches, to have many men who were
temporary residentiaries, but of an Apostolical and Episcopal authority, as
in the Churches of Jerusalem, Rome, Antioch, there was as I have proved in the
premises. Nay in Philippi it self, If I mistake not, as instance may be given,
full, and home to this purpose. Salutant te Episcopi Onesimus, Bitus, Demas,
Polybius, and omnes qui sunt Philippis in Christo, unde and haec vobis Scripsi,
says Ignatius in his Epistle to Hero his Deacon. So that many Bishops (we see)
might be at Philippi, and many were actually there long after S. Paul's dictate
of the Epistle.

* 4. Why may not [ Bishops] be meant in the proper sense? Because there could
not be more Bishops then one, in a Diocese. No? By what law? If by a
constitution of the Church after the Apostles times, that hinders not, but it
might be otherwise in the Apostles times. If by a Law in the Apostles times,
then we have obtained the main question by the shift, and the Apostles did
ordain that there should be one, and but one Bishop in a Church, although it is
evident they appointed many Presbyters. And then let this objection be admitted
how it will, and do its worst, we are safe enough.

* 5. [ With the Bishops] may be taken distributively, for Philippi was a
Metropolis, and had diverse Bishoprics under it, and S. Paul writing to the
Church of Philippi, wrote also to all the daughter Churches within its circuit,
and therefore might well salute many Bishops, though writing to one Metropolis,
and this is the more probable, if the reading of this place be accepted
according to Oecumenius, for he reads it not (...), but (...), Coepiscopi^, and
Diaconis, Paul and Timothy to the Saints at Philippi, and to our fellow Bishops.

* 6. S. Ambrose referres this clause of [ Cum Episcopis, and Diaconis,] to S.
Paul and S. Timothy, In 1. Philip.
intimating that the benediction, and salutation was sent to the Saints at
Philippi from S. Paul and S. Timothy with the Bishops and Deacons, so that the
reading must be thus; Paul, and Timothy with the Bishops and Deacons, to all
the Saints at Philippi etc. Cum Episcopis and Diaconis, hoc est, cum Paulo, and
Timotheo, qui utique Episcopi erant, simul and significavit Diaconos qui
ministrabant ei. Ad plebem enim scribit. Nam si Episcopis scriberet, and
Diaconi, ad personas eorum scriberet, and loci ipsius Episcopo scribendum erat,
non duobus, vel tribus, sicut and ad Titum and Timotheum.

Page 54.
7. The like expression to this is in the Epistle of S. Clement to the
Corinthians, which may give another light to this; speaking of the Apostles,
(...). They delivered their first fruits to the Bishops and Deacons. Bishops
here indeed may be taken distributively, and so will not infer that many
Bishops were collectively in any one Church, but yet this gives intimation for
another exposition of this clause to the Philippians. For here either
Presbyters are meant by (...), Ministers, or else Presbyters are not taken care
of in the Ecclesiastical provision, which no man imagines, of what interest
soever he be; it follows then that [ Bishops and Deacons] are no more but
Majores, and Minores Sacerdotes in both places; for as Presbyter, and Episcop^s
were confounded, so also Presbyter and Diaconus; And I think it will easily be
shown in Scripture, that the word [ Diaconus,] is given oftener to Apostles,
and Bishops, and Presbyters, then to those ministers which now by way of
appropriation we call Deacons. But of this anon. Now again to the main
observation.

1. Timoth, 3.
Thus also it was in the Church of Ephesus, for S. Paul writing to their
Bishop, and giving order for the constitution and deportment of the Church
orders and officers, gives directions first for Bishops, then for Deacons.
Where are the Presbyters in the interim? Either they must be comprehended in
Bishops or in Deacons. They may as well be in one as the other; for [ Diaconus]
is not in Scripture any more appropriated to the inferior Clergy, then
Episcopus to the Superior, nor so much neither. For Episcopus was never used
in the new Testament for any, but such, as had the care, regiment, and
supra-vision of a Church, but Diaconus was used generally for all Ministeries.

But yet supposing that Presbyters were included under the word Episcopus, yet
it is not because the offices and orders are one, but because that the order of
a Presbyter is comprehended within the dignity of a Bishop. And then indeed the
compellation is of the more principal, and the Presbyter is also comprehended,
for his conjunction, and involution in the Superior, which was the principal
observation here intended. Nam in Episcopo omnes ordines sunt, quia primus
Sacerdos est, hoc est, Princeps est Sacerdotum, and Propheta and Evangelista,
and caetera adimplenda officia Ecclesiae in Ministerio Fidelium. in Ephis. 4.
says S. Ambrose. Idem ait S. Dionysius Eccles. hierarch. cap. 5. (...).
So that if in the description of the qualifications of a Bishop, he intends to
qualify Presbyters also, then it is Principally intended for a Bishop, and of
the Presbyters only by way of subordination and comprehension. This only by the
way, because this place is also abused to other issues; To be sure it is but a
vain dream that because Presbyter is not named, that therefore it is all one
with a Bishop, when as it may be comprehended under Bishop as a part in the
whole, or the inferior, within the superior, (the office of a Bishop having
in it the office of a Presbyter and something more) or else it may be as well
intended in the word [ Deacons,] and rather then the word, [ Bishop] 1. Because
[ Bishop] is spoken of in the singular number, [ Deacons] in the Plural, and
so liker to comprehend the multitude of Presbyters. 2. Presbyters, or else
Bishops, and therefore much more Presbyters, are called by S. Paul, (...),
Ministers, Deacons is the word, (...), Deacons by whose Ministration ye
believed; and 3. By the same argument Deacons may be as well one with the
Bishop too, for in the Epistle to Titu^, S. Paul describes the office of a
Bishop, and says not a word more either of Presbyter or Deacons office; and
why I pray, may not the office of Presbyters in the Epistle to Timothy be
omitted, as well as Presbyters, and Deacons too in that to Titus? or else why
may not Deacons be confounded, and be all one with Bishop, as well as
Presbyter? It will, it must be so, if this argument were any thing else but an
aerie and impertinent nothing.

After all this yet, it cannot be shown in Scripture that any one single, and
mere Presbyter is called a Bishop, but may be often found that a Bishop, nay
an Apostle is called a Presbyter, as in the instances above, and therefore
since this communication of Names is only in descension, by reason of the
involution, or comprehension of Presbyter within ( Episcopus), but never in
ascension, that is, an Apostle, or a Bishop, is often called Presbyter, and
Deacon, and Prophet, and Pastor, and Doctor, but never retro, that a mere
Deacon or a mere Presbyter, should be called either Bishop, or Apostle, it can
never be brought either to depresse the order of Bishops below their throne, or
erect mere Presbyters above their stalls in the Quire. For we may as well
confound Apostle, and Deacon, and with clearer probability, then Episcopus, and
Presbyter. For Apostles, and Bishops, are in Scripture often called Deacons. I
gave one instance of this before, but there are very many. (...) was said of S.
Matthias when he succeeded Judas in the Apostolate. (...), said S. Paul to
Timothy Bishop of Ephesus. 2 Cor. 6. 4.
S. Paul is called (...). A Deacon of the New Testament, 1, Cor. 3. 5.
and (...), is said of the first founders of the Corinthian Church; Deacons by
whom ye believed. Paul and Apollos were the men. It is the observation of S.
Chrysostom, in 1. Philip;
(...) (...). And a Bishop was called a Deacon, wherefore writing to Timothy he
says to him being a Bishop, Fulfill thy Deaconship.

* Add to this, that there is no word, or designation of any Clericall office,
but is given to Bishops, and Apostles. The Apostles are called [ Prophets] Acts
13. The Prophets at Antioch, were Lucius and Manaen, and Paul and Barnabas; and
then they are called [ Pastors] too; and indeed, hoc ipso that they are
Bishops, they are Pastors. Spiritus S. posuit vos Episcopos PASCERE ECCLESIAM
DEI. Whereupon trhe Geeke Scholiast expounds the word [ Pastors] to signify
Bishops, (...). And ever since that S. Peter set us a copy in the compellation
of the Prototype calling him the Great Sheapherd, and Bishop of our souls, it
has obtained in all antiquity, that Pastors and Bishops are coincident, and we
shall very hardly meet with an instance to the contrary.

* If Bishops be Pastors, then they are Doctors also, for these are conjunct,
when other offices which may in person be united, yet in themselves are made
disparate; Ephesians. 4.
For [ God has given some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
PASTORS AND TEACHERS.] (...), If Pastors, then also Doctors, and Teachers. And
this is observed by S. Austin. Epist. 59. ad Paulinum.
Pastors, and Doctors whom you would have me to distinguish, I think are one
and the same. For Paul does not say; some Pastors, some Doctors, but to Pastors
he joyneth Doctors, that Pastors might understand it belongs to their office
to teach. The same also is affirmed by Sedulius upon this place.

Thus it was in Scripture; But after the Churches were settled and Bishops fixed
upon their several Sees, then the Names also were made distinct, only those
names which did design temporary offices did expire (...) says S.
Chrysostom, Thus far the names were common, viz. in the sense above
explicated, (...). But immediately the names were made proper and distinct, and
to every order it is own Name is left, of a Bishop to a Bishop, of a Presbyter
to a Presbyter. * This could not be supposed at first, for when they were to
borrow words from the titles of secular honor, or offices, and to transplant
them to an artificial, and imposed sense; USE, which is the Master of
language, must rule us in this affair, and USE is not contracted but in some
process, and descent of time. * For at first, Christendom it self wanted a
Name, and the Disciples of the Glorious Nazarene were Christ'ned first in
Antioch, for they had their baptism some years before they had their Name. It
had been no wonder then, if per omnia it had so happened in the compellation of
all the offices and orders of the Church.

But immediately after the Apostles, 24. Appropriating the word Episcopus or
Bishop to the Supreme Church Officer,
and still more in descending (...) Episcopus signified only the Superintendent
of the ^^rch, the Bishop in the present, and vulgar concept^^ ^ome few examples
I shall give instead of Myriads (...) Canons of the Apostles the word '(...),
^^shop is used 36 times in appropriation to him that (...) Ordinary Ruler and
president of the Church above the Clergy and the Laity, being 24 times
expressly distinguished from Presbyter, and in the other 14 having particular
care for government, jurisdiction, censures and Ordinations committed to him as
I shall show hereafter, and all this is within the verge of the first 50 which
are received as Authentic, by the Council of Can. 15. and 16.
Nice; of c. 9. and alibi.
Antioch, 25 Canons whereof are taken out of the Canons of the Apostles: the
Council of Gangra calling them Canones Ecclesiasticos, and Apostolicas
traditiones; by the Epistle of the first Council of Constantinople to Damasus,
which Theodoret has inserted into his story; by the post advent. Episc. Cypri.
Council of Ephesus; by advers. Praxeam.
Tertullian; by lib. 3. c. 59. de vita Constable.
Constantine the Great; and are sometimes by way of eminency called THE CANONS,
sometimes, THE ECCLESIASTICAL CANONS, sometimes, the ancient and received
Canons, of our Fathers, sometimes the Apostolical Canons, (...), Ca. 4. cap.
18. de Orthod: fide
said the Fathers of the Council in Trullo: and Damascen puts them in order
next to the Canon of Holy Scripture: so in effect does Isidore in his preface
to the work of the Counsels, for he sets these Canons in front, because
Sancti Patres eorum sententias authoritate Synodali roborarunt, and inter
Canonicas posuerunt Constitutiones. The H. Fathers have established these
Canons by the authority of Counsels, and have put them amongst the Canonical
Constitutions. And great reason, for in Pope Stephens time, they were
translated into Latin by one Dionysius at the entreaty of Laurentius, Anno
Dom: 257.
because then the old Latin copies were rude and barbarous. Now then this
second translation of them being made in Pope Stephens time, who was
contemporary with S. Irenaeus and S. Cyprian, the old copy, elder then this,
and yet after the Original to be sure, shows them to be of prime antiquity,
and they are mentioned by S. Stephen in an Epistle of his to Bishop Hilarious,
where he is severe in censure of them who do prevaricate these Canons.

* But for farther satisfaction I refer the Reader to the Epistle of Gregory
Holloander to the Moderators of the City of Norimberg. I deny not but they are
called Apocryphal by Gratian, and some others, viz. in the sense of the
Church, just as the wisdom of Solomon, or Ecclesiasticus, but yet by most,
believed to be written by S. Clement, from the dictate of the Apostles, and
without all Question, are so far Canonical, as to be of undoubted
Ecclesiastical authority, and of the first Antiquity.

Ignatius his testimony is next in time and in authority, Epist. ad. Trall.
(...). The Bishop bears the image and representment of the Father of all. And
a little after, (...). etc. What is the Bishop, but he that has all authority
and rule? What is the Presbytery, but a sacred College, Counselors and
helpers or assessors to the Bishop? what are Deacons etc: So that here is the
real, and exact distinction of dignity, the appropriation of Name, and
intimation of office. The Bishop is above all, the Presbyters his helpers, the
Deacons his Ministers, (...), imitators of the Angels who are Ministering
Spirits. But this is of so known, so evident a truth, that it were but
impertinent to insist longer upon it. Himself in three of his Epistles uses it
nine times in distinct enumeration, viz. to the Trallians, to the
Philadelphians, to the Philippians. * And now I shall insert these
considerations.

1. Although it was so that Episcopus, and Presbyter were distinct in the
beginning after the Apostles death, yet sometimes the names are used
promiscuously, which is an evidence, that confusion of names is no intimation,
much less an argument for the parity of offices, since themselves, who
sometimes though indeed very seldom, confound the names, yet distinguish the
offices frequently, and dogmatically. Epist, ad Heron.
(...). Where by (...), he means the Presbyters of the Church of Antioch, so
indeed some say, and though there be no necessity of admitting this meaning,
because by (...) he may mean the suffragan Bishops of Syria, yet the other may
be fairly admitted, for himself their Bishop was absent from his Church, and
had delegated to the Presbytery Episcopal jurisdiction to rule the Church till
he being dead another Bishop should be chosen, so that they were Episcopi
Vicarii, and by representment of the person of the Bishop and execution of the
Bishops power by delegation were called (...), and this was done least the
Church should not be only without a Father, but without a Guardian too; and yet
what a Bishop was, and of what authority no man more confident and frequent
then Ignatius. * Another example of this is in Eusebius, speaking of the youth
whom S. John had converted and commended to a Bishop. Clemens, whose story this
was, proceeding in the relation says, (...) etc. But the Presbyter; unless by
(...) here S. Clement means not the Order, but age of the Man, as it is like
enough he did, for a little after, he calls him [(...)] The old man, Tum vero
PRESBYTER in domum suam suscipit adolescentem. Read depositum, O EPISCOPE,
says S. John to him. Tunc graviter suspirans SENIOR etc. So S. Clement. * But
this, as it is very unusual, so it is just as in Scripture, viz. in descent
and comprehension, for this Bishop also was a Presbyter, as well as Bishop, or
else in the delegation of Episcopal power, for so it is in the allegation of
Ignatius.

2. That this name Episcopus or Bishop was chosen to be appropriate to the
supreme order of the Clergy, was done with fair reason and design. For this
is no fastuous, or pompous title, the word is of no dignity, and implies none
but what is consequent to the just and fair execution of its offices. But
Presbyter is a name of dignity and vene^ation, Rise up to the gray head, and it
transplants the honor and Reverence of age to the office of the Presbyterate.
And yet this the Bishops left, and took that which signifies a mere
supra-vision, and overlooking of his charge, so that if we take estimate from
the names, Presbyter is a name of dignity, and Episcopus, of office and burden.
* [ He that desires the office of a Bishop, desires a good work.] (...). Says
S. Chrysostom. Nec dicit si quis Episcopatum desiderat, bonum desiderat
gradum, sedbonum ^pus desiderat, quod in majore ordine constitutus possit si
velit occasionem habere exercendarum virtutum. So S. Hierome. It is not an
honorable title, but a good office, and a great opportunity of the exercise of
excellent virtues. But for this we need no better testimony then of S. Isidore.
Episcopatus autem vocabulum inde dictum, Lib. 7. etymolog. c. 12.
quod ille qui superefficitur superintendat, curam scil. gerens subditorum.
But, Presbyter Greece, latin senior interpretatur, non pro atate, vel decrepita
senectute, sed propter honorem and dignitatem quam acceperunt. (...), says;
Julius Pollux.

3. Supposing that Episcopus and Presbyter had been often confounded in
Scripture, and Antiquity, and that, both in ascension and descension, yet as
Priests may be called Angels, and yet the Bishop be THE ANGEL of the Church,
[THE ANGEL,] for his excellency, [OF THE CHURCH,] for his appropriate
pre-eminence, and singularity, so though Presbyters had been called Bishops in
Scripture (of which there is not one example but in the senses above
explicated, to wit, in conjunction and comprehension;) yet the Bishop is (...)
by way of eminence, THE BISHOP: and in descent of time, it came to pass, that
the compellation, which was always his, by way of eminence was made his by
appropriation. And a fair precedent of it we have from the compellation given
to our blessed Savior, (...), The great sheapheard, and Bishop of our souls.
The name [ Bishop] was made sacred by being the appellative of his person, and
by fair intimation it does more immediately descend upon them, who had from
Christ more immediate mission, and more ample power, and therefore [ Episcopus]
and [ Pastor] by way of eminence are the most fit appellatives for them who in
the Church have the greatest power, office and dignity, as participating of the
fullness of that power and authority for which Christ was called the Bishop of
our souls. * And besides this so fair a Copy; besides the useing of the word
in the prophecy of the Apostolate of Matthias, and in the prophet Isaiah, and
often in Scripture, as I have shown before; any one whereof is abundantly
enough, for the fixing an appellative upon a Church officer; this name may also
be intimated as a distinctive compellation of a Bishop over a Priest, because
(...) is indeed often used for the office of Bishops, as in the instances
above, but (...) is used for the office of the inferiors, for S. Paul writing
to the Romans, who then had no Bishop fixed in the chair of Rome, Romans 16. 17.
does command them (...), not (...), this for the Bishop, that for the
subordinate Clergy. So then, the word [ Episcopus] is fixed at first, and that
by derivation, and example of Scripture, and fair congruity of reason.

But the Church used other appellatives for Bishops, 25. Calling the Bishop and
him only the Pastor of the Church,
which it is very requisite to specify, that we may understand diverse
authorities of the Fathers useing those words in appropriation to Bishops,
which of late have bin given to Presbyters, ever since they have begun to set
Presbyters in the room of Bishops.

And first, Bishops were called [ Pastors] in antiquity, in imitation of their
being called so in Scripture. Eusebius writing the story of S. Ignatius, lib.
3. hist. c. 36.
Denique cum Smyrnam venisset, ubi Polycarpus erat, scribit inde unam epistolam
ad Ephesios, eorumque Pastorem, that is, Epist. ad Ephesians.
Onesimus, for so follows, in qua meminit Onesimi. Now that Onesimus was their
Bishop, himself witnesses in the Epistle here mentioned, (...) etc. Onesimus
was their Bishop, and therefore their Pastor, and in his Epistle ad Antiochenos
himself makes mention of Evodius (...) your most Blessed and worthy PASTOR.

* When Paulus Samosatenus first broached his heresy against the divinity of
our blessed Savior, presently a Council was called where S. Denis Bishop of
Alexandria could not be present, Caeteri vero Ecclesiarum PASTORES diversis e
locis and urbibus.... convenerunt Antiochiam. In quibus insignes and caeteris
praecellentes erant Firmilianus a Caesarea Cappadociae, Gregorius, Eusebius. lib.
7. cap. 24.
and Athenodorus Fratres.... and Helenus Sardensis Ecclesiae Episcopus.... Sed
and Maximus Bostrensis Episcopus dignus eorum consortio cohaerehat. These
Bishops, Firmilianus, and Helenus, and Maximus were the PASTORS; and not only
so, but Presbyters were not called PASTORS, for he proceeds, sed and Prebyteri
quamplurimi, and Diaconi ad supradictam Vrbem.... convenerunt. So that these
were not under the general appellative of Pastors. Can. 6.
* And the Council of Sardis making provision for the manner of election of a
Bishop to a Widdow-Church, when the people is urgent for the speedy institution
of a Bishop, if any of the Comprovincialls be wanting he must be certifi'd by
the Primate, (...), that the multitude require a Pastor to be given unto them.
* The same expression is also in the Epistle of Julius Bishop of Rome to the
Presbyters, Deacons, hist. tripart. lib. 4. c. 29.
and People of Alexandria in behalf of their Bishop Athanasius, Suscipite
itaque Fratres charissimi cum omni divina gratia PASTOREM VESTRUM AC PRAESULEM
tanquam vere (...). And a little after, and gaudere fruentes orationibus qui
PASTOREM VESTRUM esuritis and sititis etc: The same is often used in S. Hilary
and S. Gregory Nazianzen, where Bishops are called PASTORES MAGNI, Great
sheapheards, or PASTORS; * When Eusebius the Bishop of Samosata was banished,
Vniversi lachrymis prosequuti sunt ereptionem PASTORIS sui, says Theodoret,
they wept for the loss of their lib. 4. cap. 14.
PASTOR. And Eulogius a Presbyter of Edessa when he was arguing with the
Prefect in behalf of Christianity, and PASTOREM (inquit) habemus, and nutus
illius sequimur, we have a PASTOR (a Bishop certainly, for himself was a
Priest) and his commands we follow. But, Theodoret. lib. 4. c. 18.
I need not specify any more particular instances; I touched upon it before. *
He that shall consider, that to Bishops the regiment of the whole Church was
concredited at the first, and the Presbyters were but his assistants in Cities
and Villages, and were admitted in partem sollicitudinis, first casually and
cursorily, and then by station and fixed residency when Parishes were divided,
and endowed, will easily see, that this word [ Pastor] must needs be
appropriated to Bishops to whom according to the conjunctive expression of S.
Peter, and the practice of infant Christendom (...) and (...), was entrusted,
first solely, then in communication with others, but always principally.

* But now of late, especially in those places where Bishops are exauctorated,
and no where else, that I know, but amongst those men that have complying
designs, the word [ Pastor] is given to Parish Priests against the manner and
usage of Ancient Christendom; and though Priests may be called Pastors in a
limited, subordinate sense, and by way of participation (just as they may be
called Angels, when the Bishop is the Angel, and so Pastors when the Bishop is
the Pastor, and so they are called Pastores ovium in S. Cyprian) but never are
they called Pastores simply, Epist. 11.
or Pastores Ecclesiae for above 600 years in the Church, and I think 800
more. And therefore it was good counsel which S. Paul gave, to avoid vocum
Novitates, because there is never any affectation of New words contrary to the
Ancient voice of Christendom, but there is some design in the thing too, to
make an innovation: and of this we have had long warning, in the New use of the
word [ Pastor].

IF Bishops were the Pastors, 26. And Doctor.
then Doctors also; it was the observation which S. Austin made out of Ephesians.
4. as I quoted him even now, [ For God has given some Apostles, some
Prophets.... some Pastors and Doctors]. So the Church has learned to speak. In
the Greeks Council of Carthage it was decreed, that places which never had a
Bishop of their own should not now have (...), a DOCTOR of their own, that is
a Bishop, but still be subject to the Bishop of the Diocese to whom formerly
they gave obedience; and the title of the chapter is, that the parts of the
Diocese without the Bishops consent (...), must not have another Bishop. He
who in the title is called Bishop, in the chapter is called the DOCTOR. And
thus also, haeres. 75.
Epiphanius speaking of Bishops calls them, (...), Fathers and DOCTORS,
Gratia enim Ecclesiae laus DOCTORIS est, says S. Ambrose, speaking of the
eminence of the Bishop, over the Presbyters and subordinate Clergy. The same
also is to be seen in S. Epist 59.
Austin, Sedulius, and diverse others. I deny not but it is in this
appellative, as in diverse of the rest, that the Presbyters may in
subordination be also called DOCTORS, for every Presbyter must be (...), 1.
Tim. 3.
apt to teach (but yet this is expressed as a requisite in the particular
office of a Bishop) and no where expressly of a Presbyter that I can find in
Scripture, but yet because in all Churches, it was by license of the Bishop,
that Presbyters did Preach, if at all, and in some Churches the Bishop only did
it, particularly of Alexandria ((...), lib. 7. c. 19.
says Sozomen) therefore it was that the Presbyter, in the language of the
Church was not, but the Bishop, was often called, DOCTOR of the Church.

THe next word which the Primitive Church did use as proper to express the
offices and eminence of Bishops, 27. And Pontifex.
is PONTIFEX, and PONTIFICATUS for Episcopacy. Sed a Domino edocti
consequentiam rerum, Episcopis PONTIFICATUS munera assignavimus, said the
Apostles, as lib. 8. c. ult. Apost. constitut.
S. Clement reports. PONTIFICALE (...) S. John the Apostle wore in his
forehead, as an Ensign of his Apostleship, a gold plate or medall, when he was
IN PONTIFICALIBUS, in his pontifical or Apostolical habit, says Eusebius.
lib. 3. hist. cap. 31.
* De dispensationibus Ecclesiarum Antiqua sanctio tenuit and definitio SS.
Patrum in Nicaea convenientium.... and si PONTIFICES voluerint, ut cum cis
vicini propter utilitatem celebrent ordinationes. Said the Fathers of the
Council of Constantinople. lib. 9. c. 14. hist. tripart.
* Qua tempestate in urbe Roma Clemens quoque tertius post Paulum and Petrum,
PONTIFICATUM tenebat, says lib. 3. c. 21.
Eusebius according to the translation of Ruffinus. * Apud Antiochiam vero
Theophilus per idem tempus sextus ab Apostolis Ecclesiae PONTIFICATUM tenebat,
says the same Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 20.
* And there is a famous story of Alexander Bishop of Cappadocia, that when
Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, was invalid and unfit for government by reason
of his extreme age, he was designed by a particular Revelation and a voice
from Heaven, Suscipite Episcopum qui vobis a Deo destinatus est; Receive your
Bishop whom God has appointed for you, but it was when Narcissus jam senio
fessus PONTIFICATUS Ministerio sufficere non posset, says the story. Eusebius.
lib. 6. c. 9.
* Eulogius the confessor discoursing with the Prefect, that wished him to
comply with the Emperor, asked him; Numquid ille una cum Imperio etiam
PONTIFICATUM est consequutus? He has an Empire, but has he also a Bishopric?
PONTIFICATUS is the word. * But Eccles. hierarch.
S. Dionysius is very exact in the distinction of clericall offices, and
particularly gives this account of the present. Est igitur PONTIFICATUS ordo
qui praeditus vi perficiente munera hierarchiae quae perficiunt etc. And a
little after, Sacerdotum autem ordo subjectus PONTIFICUM ordini etc. To which
agrees Lib. 7. 12.
S. Isidore in his etymologies, Ideo autem and Presbyteri Sacerdotes vocantur,
quia sacrum dant sicut and Episcopi, qui licet Sacerdotes sint, tamen
PONTIFICATUS apicem non habent, quia nec Chrismate frontem signant, nec
Paracletum spiritum dant, quod solis deberi Episcopis lectio actuum
Apostolicorum demonstrat; and in the same chapter, PONTIFEX Princeps
Sacerdotumest.

One word more there is often used in antiquity for Bishops, And Sacerdos.
and that is SACERDOS. Sacerdotum autem ^ipartitu^ est ordo, say S. Clement and
Anacletus, for they are Majores and Minores. The Majores, Bishops, the Min^res,
Presbyters, for so it is in the Apostolical Constitutions attributed to Lib.
8. c. 46.
S. Clement, Episcopis quidem assignavimus, and attribuimus quae ad PRINCIPATUM
SACERDOTII pertinent, Presbyteris vero quae ad Sacerdotium. And in Lib. 3. Ep.
1.
S. Cyprian, Presbyteri cum Episcopis Sacerdotali honor conjuncti. But
although in such distinction and subordination and in concretion a Presbyter is
sometimes called Sacerdos, yet in Antiquity Sacerdotium Ecclesiae does evermore
signify Episcopacy, and Sacerdos Ecclesiae the Bishop. Theotecnus SACERDOTIUM
Ecclesiae tenens in Episcopatu, says Lib. 7. c. 28.
Eusebius, and summus Sacerdos, the Bishop always, Dandi baptismum jus habet
summus SACERDOS, qui est Episcopus, says Lib. de baptism.
Tertullian: and indeed Sacerdos alone is very seldom used in any respect but
for the Bishop, unless when there is some distinctive term, and of higher
report given to the Bishop at the same time.

Ecclesia est plebs SACERDOTI adunata, and Grex pastori suo adhaerens, says S.
Epist. 69.
Cyprian. And that we may know by [ Sacerdos] he means the Bishop, his next
words are, Vnde scire debes Episcopum in Ecclesia esse, and Ecclesiam in
Episcopo. And in the same Epistle, qui ad Cyprianum Episcopum in carcere
literas direxerunt, SAC^RDOTEM Dei agnoscentes, and contestantes. * Eusebius. lib.
3. c. 21.
Eusebius reckoning some of the chief Bishops assembled in the Council of
Antioch, In quihus erant Helenus Sardensis Ecclesiae Episcopus, and Nicomas ab
Iconio, and Hierosolymorum PRAECIPUUS SACERDOS Hymenaeus, and vicinae huic
urbis Caesareae Theotecnus; and in the same place the Bishops of Pontus are
called Ponti provinciae SACERDOTES. Abilius apud Alexandriam tredecem annis
SACERDOTIO, ministrato diem obiit, for so long he was Bishop, cui succedit
Cerdon tertius in SACERDOTIUM. Et Papias similiter apud Hierapolim SACERDOTIUM
gerens, for he was Bishops of Hierapolis says Lib. 3. c. 35.
Eusebius, and the Epist. Comprovinc. ad S. L^onem.
Bishops of the Province of Arles, speaking of their first Bishop Trophimus,
ordained Bishop by S. Peter, say, quod prima inter Gallias Arelatensis civitas
missum a Beatissimo Petro Apostolo sanctum Trophimum habere meruit SACERDOTEM.
*** The Bishop also was ever designed when ANTISTES Ecclesiae was the word.
Lib. 4 c. 26.
Melito quoque Sardensis Ecclesiae ANTISTES, says Eusebius out of Irenaeus:
(...) is the name in Greek, and used for the Bishop by Justin Martyr (and is
of the same authority and use with PRAELATUS and praepositus Ecclesiae.)
ANTISTES autem SACERDOS dictus, ab eo quod antestat. Primus est enim in ordine
Ecclesiae; and suprase nullum habet, Lib 7. Etymol c. 12.
says S. Isidore.

*** But in those things which are of no Question, I need not insist. One title
more I must specify to prevent misprision upon a mistake of theirs of a place
in S. Ambrose. The Bishop is sometimes called PRIMUS PRESBYTER. Comment. in 4.
Ephesians.
Nam and Timotheum Episcopum a secreatum Presbyterum vocat: quia PRIMI
PRESBYTERI Episcopi appellabantur, ut recedente eo sequens ei succederet.
Elections were made of Bishops out of the College of Presbyters (Presbyteri
unum ex se electum Episcopum nominabant, says S. Hierome) but at first this
election was made not according to merit, but according to seniority, and
therefore Bishops were called PRIMI PRESBYTERI, Quast. Vet. et N. Testam. Qu.
101.
that is S. Ambrose his sense. But S. Austin gives another, PRIMI PRESBYTERI,
that is chief above the Presbyters. Quid est Episcopus nisi PRIMUS PRESBYTER,
h.e. summus Sacerdos (says he) And S. Ambrose himself gives a better
exposition of his words, then is intimated in that clause before, Episcopi, In
1. Tim. 3.
and Presbyteri una ordinatio est? Vterque enim Sacer dos est, sed Episcopus
PRIMUS est, ut omnis Episcopus Presbyter sit, non omnis Presbyter Episcopus.
Hic enim Episcopus est, qui inter Presbyteros PRIMUS est. The bishop is PRIMUS
PRESBYTER, that is, PRIMUS SAC^RDOS, h. e. PRINCEPS EST SACERDOTUM, In 4. Ephesians.
so he expounds it, not Princeps, or Primus INTER PRESBYTEROS, himself
remaining a mere Presbyter, but PRINCEPS PRESBYTERORUM; for PRIMUS PRESBYTER
could not be Episcopus in another sense, he is the chief, not the senior of
the Presbyters. Nay Princeps Presbyterorum is used in a sense lower then
Episcopus, for Theodoret speaking of S. John Chrysostom, says, that having
been the first Presbyter at Antioch, yet refused to be made Bishop, for a long
time. Johannes enim qui diutissime Princeps fuit Presbyterorum Antiochiae, ac
saepe electus praesul perpetuus vitator dignitatis illius de hoc admirabili
solo pullulavit.

*** The Church also in her first language when she spoke of Praepositus
Ecclesiae, meant the Bishop of the Diocese. Of this there are innumerable
examples, but most plentifully in S. Cyprian in his 3, 4, 7, 11, 13, 15, 23, 27
Epistles; and in Tertullian his book ad Martyrs; and infinite places more. Of
which this advantage is to be made, that the Primitive Church did generally
understand those places of Scripture which speak of Prelates, or Praepositi, to
be meant of Bishops; Obedite praepositis, Heb. 13. says S. Paul, Obey your
Prelates, or them that are set over you. Praepositi autem Pastores sunt, says
S. Austin, Prelates are they that are Pastors. But S. Cyprian sums up many of
them together, and insinuates the several relations, expressed in the several
compellations of Bishops. Epist. 69.
For writing against Florentius Pupianus, ac nisi (says he) apud te purgati
fuerimus.... ecce jam sex annis nec fraternitas habuerit Episcopum, nec plebs
praepositum, nec grex Pastorem, nec Ecclesia gubernatorem, nec Christus
antistitem, nec Deus Sacerdotes; and all this he means of himself, who had
then been six years Bishop of Carthage, a Prelate of the people, a governor
to the Church, a Pastor to the flock, a Priest of the most high God, a Minister
of Christ.

The sum is this; When we find in antiquity any thing asserted of any order
of the hierarchy, under the names of Episcopus, or Princeps Sacerdotum, or
Presbyterorum primus, or Pastor, or Doctor, or Pontifex, or Major, or Primus
Sacerdos, or Sacerdotium Ecclesiae habens, or Antistes Ecclesiae, or Ecclesiae
sacerdos; (unless there be a specification, and limiting of it to a
parochial, and inferior Minister) it must be understood of Bishops in its
present acceptance. For these words are all by way of eminency, and most of
them by absolute appropriation, and singularity the appellations, and
distinctive names of Bishops.

BUT, 28. And these were a distinct order from the rest.
(...) (says the Philosopher) and this their distinction of Names did amongst
the Fathers of the Primitive Church denote a distinction of calling, and
office, supereminent to the rest.

For first Bishops are by all Antiquity reckoned as a distinct office of
Clergy. Si quis Presbyter, aut Diaconus, aut quilibet de Numero Clericorum....
pergat ad alienam parochiam praeter Episcopi sui conscientiam, etc. So it is in
the fifteenth Canon of the Apostles, and so it is there plainly distinguished
as an office different from Presbyter, and Deacon, above thirty times in those
Canons, and distinct powers given to the Bishop, which are not given to the
other, and to the Bishop above the other. * The Council of Ancyra inflicting
censures upon Presbyters first, Can. 1. and 2.
then Deacons which had fallen in time of persecution, gives leave to the Bishop
to mitigate the pains as he sees cause. Sed si ex Episcopis aliqui in iis vel
afflictionem aliquam.... viderint, in eorum potestate id esse. The Canon would
not suppose any Bishops to fall, for indeed they seldom did, but for the rest,
provision was made both for their penances, and indulgence at the discretion of
the Bishop. And yet sometimes they did fall, Optatus bewailes it, but withal
gives evidence of their distinction of order. Lib. 1. ad Parmen.
Quid commemorem Laicos qui tunc in Ecclesia nulla fuerant dignitate suffulti?
Quid Ministros plurimos, quid Diaconos in tertio, quid Presbyteros in secundo
Sacerdotio constitutos? Ipsi apices, and Principes omnium aliqui Episcopi
aliqua instrumenta Divinae Legis impie tradiderunt. The Laity, the Ministers,
the Deacons, the Presbyters, nay the Bishops themselves, the Princes and chief
of all proved traditors. The diversity of order is here fairly intimated, but
dogmatically affirmed by him in his 2d book adv. Parmen. Quatuor genera capitum
sunt in Ecclesia, Episcoporum, Presbyterorum, Diaconorum, and fidelium. There
are four sorts of heads in the Church, Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, and the
faithful Laity. And it was remarkable that when the people of Hippo had as it
were by violence carried S. Austin to be made Priest by their Bishop Valerius,
some seeing the good man weep in consideration of the great hazard and
difficulty accruing to him in his ordination to such an office, thought he had
wept because he was not Bishop, they pretending comfort told him, De vita
August. c. 4.
quia locus Presbyterii licet ipse majore dignus esset appropinquaret tamen
Episcopatui. The office of a Presbyter though indeed he deserved a greater, yet
was the next step in order to a Bishopric. So Possidonius tells the story. It
was the next step, the next in descent, in subordination, the next under it. So
the Council of Chalcedon, Can. 29.
(...). It is sacrilege to bring down a Bishop to the degree and order of a
Presbyter, (...), so the Council permits in case of great delinquency, to
suspend him from the execution of his Episcopal order, but still the character
remains, and the degree of it self is higher.

* Nos autem idcirco haec scribimus (Fratres chariss.) quia novimus quam
Sacrosanctum debeat esse Episcopale Sacerdotium, quod and clero, and plebi
debet esse exemplo, said the Fathers of the Council of Antioch, Lib. 7. c. 26.
in Eusebius, The office of a Bishop is sacred, and exemplary both to the
Clergy, and the People. Interdixit per omnia, Can. 3. Nicen. Council.
Magna Synodus, non Episcopo, non Presbytero, non Diacono licere, etc. And it
was a remarkable story that Arius troubled the Church for missing of a
Prelation to the order and dignity of a Bishop. Post Achillam enim
Alexander.... ordinatur Episcopus. Hoc autem tempore Arius in ordine
Presbyterorum fuit, Alexander was ordained a Bishop, and Arius still left in
the order of mere Presbyters. * Of the same exigence are all those clauses of
commemoration of a Bishop and Presbyters of the same Church. Julius autem
Romanus Episcopus propter senectutem defuit, erantque pro^o praesentes Vitus,
and Vincentius Presbyteri ejusdem Ecclesiae. They were his Vicars, and deputies
for their Bishop in the Nicene Council, faith Sozomen. Lib. 2. c. 1. hist.
tripart.
But most pertinent is that of the Indian persecution related by the same man.
Many of them were put to death. Lib. 3. tripart. c. 2.
Erant autem horum alii quidem Episcopi, alii Presbyteri, alii diversorum
ordinum Clerici. * And this difference of Order is clear in the Epistle of the
Bishops of Illyri^um to the Bishops of the Levant, De Episcopis autem
constituendis, vel comministris jam constitutis si permanserint usque ad finem
sani, been.... Similiter Presbyteros atque Diaconos in Sacerdotali ordine
definivimus, etc. And of Sabbatius it is said, Nolens in suo ordine Manner
Presbyteratus, desiderabat Episcopatum; he would not stay in the order of a
Presbyter, but desired a Bishopric. Ordo Episcoporum quadripartitus est, Hist.
tripart. l. 11. c. 5.
in Patriarchis, Archiepiscopis, Metropolitanis, and Episcopis, says S.
Isidore; Omnes autem superius disignati ordines uno eodemque vocabulo Episcopi
Nominantur. Lib. 7. etymol. c. 12.
But it were infinite to reckon authorities, and clauses of exclusion for the
three orders of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; we cannot almost dip in any tome
of the Counsels but we shall find it recorded: And all the Martyr Bishops of
Rome did ever acknowledge, and publish it, that Episcopacy is a peculiar
office, and order in the Church of God; as is to be seen in their decretall
Epistles, in the first tome of the Counsels. * I only sum this up with the
attestation of the Church of England, Per Binium Parts.
in the preface to the book of ordination. It is evident to all men diligently
reading holy Scripture and Ancient Authors, that from the Apostles times, there
have been these ORDERS of Ministers in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons. The same thing exactly that was said in the second Council of
Carthage, (...) (...). Can* 2.
But we shall see it better, and by more real probation, for that Bishops
were a distinct order appears by this;

1. THe Presbyterate was but a step to Episcopacy, 29. To which the
Presbyterate was but a degree. Can. 10.
as Deaconship to the Presbyterate, and therefore the Council of Sardis
decreed, that no man should be ordained Bishop, but he that was first a Reader,
and a Deacon, and a Presbyter, (...) That by every degree he may pass to the
sublimity of Episcopacy. (...) etc. But the degree of every order must have the
permanence and trial of no small time. Here there is clearly a distinction of
orders, and ordinations, and assumptions to them respectively, all of the same
distance and consideration; And Theodoret out of the Synodicall Epistle of the
same Council, Lib. 5. c. 8.
says that they complained that some from Arrianisme were reconciled, and
promoted from Deacons to be Presbyters, from Presbyters to be Bishops, calling
it (...), a greater degree, or Order: And S. Gregory Nazianz. in his Encomium
of S. Athanasius, speaking of his Canonical Ordination, and election to a
Bishopric, says that he was chosen being (...), most worthy, and (...),
coming through all the infertor Orders. The same commendation S. Cyprian gives
of Cornelius. Epist. 52.
Non iste ad Episcopatum subito pervenit, sed per omnia Ecclesiastica officia
promotus, and in divinis administrationibus Dominum sepe promeritus ad
Sacerdotii sublime fastigium cunct is religionis gradibus ascendit.... and fact
us est Episcopus a plurimis Collegiis nostris qui tunc in Vrbe Roma aderant,
qui ad nos literas.... de ejus ordinatione miserunt. Here is evident, not only
a promotion, but a new Ordination of S. Cornelius to be Bishop of Rome; so that
now the chair is full (says S. Cyprian) and quisquis jam Episcopus fieri
voluerit foris fiat necesse est, nec habeat Ecclesiasticam ordinationem etc. No
man else can receive ordination to the Bishopric.

2. THe ordination of a Bishop to his chair was done de Novo after his being a
Presbyter, 30. There being a peculiar manner of Ordination to a Bishopric.
Can. Apost. 1, and 2.
and not only so, but in another manner then he had when he was made Priest.
This is evident in the first Ecclesiastical Canon that was made after
Scripture. (...). A Priest and Deacon must be ordained of one Bishop, but a
Bishop must be ordained by two or three at least. And that we may see it yet
more to be Apostolical, S. Anacletus in his second Epistle reports,
Hierosolymitarum primus Episcopus B. Iacobus a Petro, Iacobo, and Iohanne
Apostolis est ordinatus. Three Apostles went to the ordaining of S. James to be
a Bishop, and the self same thing is in words affirmed by Anicetus; ut in ore
duorum, veltrium stet omnis veritas; Epist. Vnic^.
And S. Cyprian observes that when Cornelius was made Bishop of Rome, there
happened to be many of his fellow Bishops there, and factus est Episcopus a
plurimis collegis nostris qui tunc in urbe Roma aderant. These Collegae could
not be mere Priests, for then the ordination of Novatus had been more
Canonical, then that of Cornelius, and all Christendom had been deceived, for
not Novatus who was ordained by three Bishops, but Cornelius had been the
Schismatic, as being ordained by Priests, against the Canon. But here I
observe it for the word [ plurimis,] there were many of them ordination.

Can 4.
In pursuance of this Apostolical ordinance, Nicene Fathers decreed that a
Bishop should be ordayn'd, (...) by all the Bishops in the Province, unless it
be in case of necessity, and then it must be done by three being gathered
together, and the rest consenting; so the ordination to be performed. Can. 19.
The same is ratified in the Council of Antioch, (...). A Bishop is not to be
ordained without a Synod of Bishops, and the presence of the Metropolitan of
the province. But if this cannot be done conviniently, yet however it is
required (...), the ordinations must be performed by many. The same was decreed
in the Council of Laodicea, can: 12. in the 13. Canon of the African Code, in
the 22th Canon of the first Council of Arles, Can. 12.
and the fifth Canon of the second Council of Arles, and was ever the practice
of the Church; and so we may see it descend through the bowels of the fourth
Council of Carthage to the inferior ages. Can. 4.
Episcopus qunm ordinatur, duo Episcopi ponant, and ten^ant Evangeliorum
codicem super caput, and cervicem ejus, and uno super eum fundente
benediction^m, reliqui (...) Episcopi qui adsunt manibus suis caput ejus
tangant.

The thing was Catholic, and Canonical. It was prima, and immutabilis
constitutio, so the first Canon of the Council of A. D. 509.
Epaunu^ calls it; And therefore after the death of Meletius Bishop of Antioch,
a schism was made about his successor, Theodoret. l. 9. cap 44.
and Evagrius his ordination condemned; because, praeter Ecclesiastica^ regulam
fuerit ordinatus, it was against the rule of Holy Church. Why so? Solus enim
Paulinus eum instituerat plurimas regulas praevaricatus Ecclesiasticas. Non
enim praecipiunt ut per se quilibet ordinare possit, sed convocare Vniversos
provinciae Sacerdotes, and praeter tres Pontifices ordinationem penitus fieri,
interdicunt. Which because it was not observed in the ordination of Evagrius
who was not ordayn'd by three Bishops, the ordination was cassated in the
Council of Rhegium. And we read that when Novatus would feign be made a Bishop
in the schism against Cornelius, Cap. 1. 2.
he did it tribus adhibitis Episcopis (says Eusebius,) he obtained three
Bishops, lib. 6. hist. cap. 33.
for performance of the action.

Now besides these Apostolical, and Catholic Canons, and precedents, this
thing according to the constant, and United interpretation of the Greek
Fathers was actually done in the ordination of S. Timothy to the Bishopric of
Ephesus. [ Neglect not the grace that is in thee by the laying on of the hands
of the Presbytery.] The Latin Fathers expound it abstractly, viz. to signify
the office of Priesthood, that is, neglect not the grace of Priesthood that
is in thee by the imposition of hands, and this Erasmus helps by making [
Presbyterij] to pertain to [ Gratiam] by a new inter-punction of the words;
but however, Presbyterij with the Latin Fathers signifies Presbyteratus, not
Presbyterorum, and this Presbyteratus is in their sense used for Episcopatus
too. But the Greek Fathers understand it collectively, and (...) is put for
(...), not simply such, but Bishops too, all agree in that, that Episcopacy is
either meant in office, or in person. (...). So Oecumenius; and S. Chrysostom,
(...). So Theophilact, So Theodoret. The probation of this lies upon right
reason, an^d Catholic tradition; For,

3. THE Bishops 31. To which Presbyters never did assist by imposing hands,
ordination was peculia^ in this respect above the Presbyters, for a Presbyter
did never impose hands on a Bishop. On a Presbyter they did ever since the
fourth Council of Carthage; but never on a Bishop. And that was the reason of
the former exposition. By the Presbytery S. Paul means Bishops, (...).
Presbyters did not impose hands on a Bishop, and therefore Presbyterium is not
a College of mere Presbyters, for such could never ordain S. Timothy to be a
Bishop. The same reason is given by the Latin Fathers why they expound
Presbyterium to signify Episcopacy. For (says S. Ambrose) S. Paul had
ordained Timothy to be a Bishop, Vnde and quemadmodum Episcopum ordinet
ostendit. Neque enim fas erat, aut licebat, ut inferior ordinaret Majorem. So
he; and subjoynes this reason, Nemo n. tribuit quodnon accepit. The same is
affirmed by S. Chrysostom, and generally by the authors of the former
expositions, that is, the Fathers both of the East, and West. For it was so
General and Catholic a truth, that Priests could not, might not lay hands on
a Bishop, that there was never any example of it in Christendom till almost
600 years after Christ, and that but once, A.D. 555.
and that irregular, and that without imitation in his Successors, or example
in his Antecessors. It was the case of Pope Pelagius the first, and dum non
essent Episcopi, qui eum ordinarent, inventi sunt duo Episcopi, Johannes de
Perusio, and Bonus de Ferentino, and Andraeas Presbyter de Ostia, and
ordinaverunt eum Pontificem. Tunc enim non ^rant in Clero qui eum possent
promovere. Says Damasus. in libr. Pontificali. vit. Pelag. 1.
It was in case of necessity, because there were not three Bishops, therefore
he procured two, and a Priest of Ostia to supply the place of the third, that
three, according to the direction Apostolical, and Canons of Nice, Antioch,
and Carthage, make Episcopal ordination. * The Church of Rome is concerned in
the business to make fair this ordination, and to reconcile it to the
Council of Rhegium, and the others before mentined, who if ask't would declare
it to be invalid. * But certainly as the Canons did command three to impose
hands on a Bishop, so also they commanded that those three, should be three
Bishops, and Pelagius might as well not have had three, as not three Bishops;
and better, because, so they were Bishops the first Canon of the Apostles,
approves the ordination if done by two, (...). And the Nicene Canon is as much
exact, in requirng the capacity of the person, as the Number of the Ordainers.
But let them answer it. For my part, I believe that the imposition of hands by
Andreas, was no more in that case then if a lay man had done it; it was (...),
and though the ordination was absolutely Un canonical, yet it being in the
exigence of Necessity, and being done by two Bishops according to the
Apostolical Canon, it was valid in natura rei, though not in forma Canonis,
and the addition of the Priest was but to cheat the Canon, and cozen himself
into an impertinent belief of a Canonical ordination. Can. 6. Council. Sardic.
(...), says the Council of Sardis. Bishops must ordain Bishops; It was
never heard that Priests did, or de jure might.

These premises do most certainly infer a real difference, between
Episcopacy, and the Presbytera^e. But whether or no they infer a difference
of order, or only of degree; or whether degree, and order be all one, or no,
is of great consideration in the present, and in relation to many other
Questions.

1. Then it is evident, that in all Antiquity, Ordo, and Gradus were used
promiscuously. [(...)] was the Greek word, and for it the Latins used [ Ordo]
as is evident in the instances above mentioned, to which, Epist. 3.
add, that Anacletus says, that Christ did instituere duos Ordines,
Episcop^rum, and Sacerdotum. Epist. 84. c. 4.
And S. Leo affirms; Primum ordinem esse Episcopalem, secundum Presbyteralem,
tertium Leviticum; And these among the Greeks are called (...), three degrees.
So the order of Deaconship in S. Paul is called (...), a good degree; and
(...), etc: is a censu^e used alike in the censures of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons. They are all of the same Name, and the same consideration, for order,
distance, and degree, amongst the Fathers; Gradus, and ordo are equally
affirmed of them all; and the word gradus is used sometimes for that which is
called Ordo most frequently. Lib. 1 c. 12. de actis cum Felice Manich. lib 4.
Epist. 2.
So Felix writing to S. Austin, Non tantum ego possum contra tuam virtutem,
quia mira virtus est GRADUS EPISCOPALIS; and S. Cyprian of Cornelius, ad
Sacerdotij sublime sastigium cunctis religionis GRADIBUS ascendit. Degree, and
Order, are used in common, for he that speaks most properly will call that an
Order in persons, which corresponds to a degree in qualities, and neither of
the words are wronged by a mutual substitution.

2. The promotion of a Bishop ad Munus Episcopale, was at first called
ordinatio Episcopi. Stir up the Grace that is in the, juxta ORDINATIONEM tuam
in Episcopatum, says Sedulius; And S. Hierome; Prophetiae grat^am habebat cum
ORDINATIONE Episcopatus. in 1. Tim. 3.
* Neque enim fas erat aut licebat at inferior ORDINARET majorem, says S.
Ambrose, proving that Presbyters might not impose hands on a Bishop. *
Romanorum Ecclesia Clementem a Petro ORDINATUM edit, says Tertullian; and S.
Hierome affirms that S. de praescript. cap. 32.
James was ORDAIND Bishop of Jerusalem immediately after the Passion of our
Lord. [ Ordinatus] was the word at first, and afterward [CONSECRATUS] came in
conjunction with it, When Moses the Monk was to be ordained, to wit, a Bishop,
for that is the title of the story in Theodoret, and spyed that Lucius was there
ready to impose hands on him, lib. 4. cap. 23.
absit (says he) vt manus tua me CONSECRET.

3. In all orders, there is the impresse of a distinct Character; that is, the
person is qualified with a new capacity to do certain offices, which before
his ordination he had no power to do. A Deacon has an order or power

-- Quo pocula vitae

Misceat, and latices, cum Sanguine porrigat agni, as Arator himself a Deacon
expresses it. A Presbyter has an higher order, or degree in the office or
ministry of the Church, whereby he is enabled, (...), as the Council of
Ancyra does intimate. But a Bishop has a higher yet; cap. 1.
for besides all the offices communicated to Priests, and Deacons; he can give
orders, which very one thing makes Episcopacy to be a distinct order. For,
Ordo, is defined by the Schools to be, traditio potestatis spiritualis, and
collatio gratiae, ad obeunda Ministeria Ecclesiastica; a giving a spiritual
power, and a conferring grace for the performance of Ecclesiastical
Ministrations. Since then Episcopacy has a new ordination, and a distinct
power (as I shall show in the descent) it must needs be a distinct order, both
according to the Name given it by antiquity, and according to the nature of the
thing in the de^^nitions of the School.

There is nothing said against this but a fancy of some of the Church of Rome,
obtruded indeed upon no grounds; for they would define order to be a special
power in relation to the Holy Sacrament, which they call corpus Christi
natural; and Episcopacy indeed to be a distinct power in relation ad corpus
Christi Mysticum, or the regiment of the Church, and ordayning laborers for
the harvest, and therefore not to be a distinct order.

But this to them that consider things sadly, is true or false according as any
man list. For if these men are resolved they will call nothing an order but
what is a power in order to consecration of the Eucharist, who can help it?
Then indeed, in that sense, Episcopacy is not a distinct order, that is, a
Bishop has no new power in the consecration of the Venerable Eucharist, more
then a Presbyter has. But then why these men should only call this power [ an
order] no man can give a reason. For, 1. in Antiquity the distinct power of a
Bishop was ever called an Order, and I think, before Hugo de S. Victore, and
the Master of the Sentences, no man ever denied it to be an order. 2. According
to this rate, I would feign know how the office of a Subdeacon, and of an
Ostiary, and of an Acolouthite, and of a Reader, come to be distinct Orders;
for surely the Bishop has as much power in order to consecration de Novo, as
they have de integr^. And if I mistake not; that the Bishop has a new power to
ordain Presbyters who shall have a power of consecrating the Eucharist, is
more a new power in order to consecration, then all those inferior officers
put together have in all, and yet they call them Orders, and therefore why not
Episcopacy also, I cannot imagine, unless because they will not.

*** But however in the mean time, the denying the office and degree of
Episcopacy to be a new and a distinct order is an Innovation of the production
of some in the Church of Rome, without all reason, and against all antiquity.
This only by the way.

The Enemies of Episcopacy call in aid from all places for support of their
ruinous cause, and therefore take their maine hopes from the Church of Rom^ by
advantage of the former discourse. For since (say they) that consecration of
the Sacrament is the Greatest work, S. Hieromad Rusticum Narbonens: apud
Gratian. did: 95. can: ec^e ego. casus, i^id^
of the most seeret mystery, greatest power, and highest dignity that is
competent to man, and this a Presbyter has as well as a Bishop, is it likely
that a Bishop should by Divine institution be so much Superior to a Presbyter,
who by the confession of all sides communicates with a Bishop in that which is
his highest power? And shall issues of a lesser dignity distinguish the Orders,
and make a Bishop higher to a Presbyter, and not rather the Greater raise up a
Presbyter to the Counter poise of a Bishop? Upon this surmise the men of the
Church of Rome, would infer an identity of order, though a disparity of
degree, but the Men of the other world would infer a parity both of order and
degree too. The first are already answered in the premises. The second must now
be served.

1. Then, whether power be greater, of Ordaining Priests, or Consecrating the
Sacrament is an impertinent Question; possibly, it may be of some danger;
because in comparing Gods ordinances, there must certainly be a depression of
one, and whether that lights upon the right side or no, yet peradventure it
will not stand with the consequence of our gratitude to God, to do that, which
in Gods estimate, may tant' amount to a direct Undervaluing; but however it is
unprofitable, of no use in case of conscience either in order to faith, or
manners, and besides, cannot fix it self upon any basis, there being no way
of proving either to be more excellent then the other.

2. The Sacraments, and mysteries of Christianity if compared among themselves,
are greater, and lesser in several respects. For since they are all in order
to several ends, that is, productive of several effects, and they all are
excellent, every rite, and sacrament in respect of its own effect, is more
excellent then the other not ordained to that effect. For example. Matrimony is
ordained for a means to preserve chastity, and to represent the mystical union
of Christ and his Church, and therefore in these respects is greater then
baptism, which does neither. But The Nicen^ Creed.
baptism is for remission of sins and in that is more excellent then
Matrimony; the same may be said for ordination, and consecration, the one being
in order to Christ's natural body (as the Schools speak) the other in order to
his mystical body, and so have their several excellencies respectively; but
for an absolute pre-eminence of one above the other, I said there was no basis
to fix that upon, and I believe all men will find it so that please to try.
But in a relative, or respective excellency, they go both before, and after
one another. Thus Wool, and a Jewel, are better then each other; for wool is
better for warmth, and a jewel for ornament. A frogge has more sense in it,
then the Sun; and yet the Sun shines brighter.

3. Suppose consecration of the Eucharist were greater then ordaining Priests,
yet that cannot hinder, but that the power of ordaining may make a higher and
distinct order, because the power of ordaining, has in it the power of
consecrating and something more; it is all that which makes the Priest, and it
is something more besides, which makes the Bishop. Indeed if the Bishop had it
not, and the Priest had it, then supposing consecration to be greater then
ordination, the Priest would not only equal, but excel the Bishop, but
because the Bishop has that, and ordination besides, therefore he is higher
both in Order, and Dignity.

4. Suppose that Consecration were the greatest Clericall power in the world,
and that the Bishop, and the Priest, were equal in the great^st power, yet a
lesser power then it, superadded to the Bishop's, may make a distinct order,
and superiority. Thus it was said of the son of Man. Constituit eum paulo
minorem Angelis, he was made a little lower then the Angels. It was but a
little lower, and yet so much as to distinguish their Natures, for he took not
upon him the NATURE of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. So it is in proportion
between Bishop, and Priest; for though a Priest communicating in the greatest
power of the Church, viz. consecration of the venerable Eucharist, yet
differing in a less is paulo minor Angelis, a little lower then the Bishop,
the Angel of the Church, yet this little lower, makes a distinct order, and
enough for a subordination. * An Angel, and a man communicate in those great
excellencies of spiritual essence, they both discourse, they have both
election, and freedom of choice, they have will, and understanding, and
memory, impresses of the Divine image, and loco-motion, and immortality. And
these excellencies are (being precisely considered) of more real and eternal
worth, then the Angelical manner of moving so in an instant, and those other
forms and modalities of their knowledge and volition, and yet for these
superadded parts of excellency, the difference is no less then specificall. If
we compare a Bishop and a Priest thus, what we call difference in nature there,
will be a difference in order here, and of the same consideration.

5. Lastly it is considerable, that these men that make this objection, do not
make it because they think it true, but because it will serve a present turn.
For all the world sees, that to them that deny the real presence, this can be
no objection; and most certainly the Anti-episcopall men do so, in all senses;
and then what excellency is there in the power of consecration, more then in
ordination? Nay is there any such thing as consecration at all? This also would
be considered from their principles. But I proceed.

One thing only more is objected against the maine Question. If Episcopacy be a
distinct order, why may not a man be a Bishop that never was a Priest, as
(abstracting from the laws of the Church) a man may be a Presbyter that never
was a Deacon, for if it be the impresse of a distinct character, it may be,
imprinted per saltum, and independantly, as it is in the order of a Presbyter.

To this I answer, It is true if the powers and characters themselves were
independent; as it is in all those offices of humane constitution, which are
called the inferior orders; For the office of an Acolouthite, of an Exorcist,
of an Ostiary, are no way dependant on the office of a Deacon, and therefore a
man may be Deacon, that never was in any of those, and perhaps a Presbyter too,
that never was a Deacon, as it was in the first example of the Presbyterate in
the 72. Disciples. But a Bishop though he have a distinct character, yet it is
not disparate from that of a Presbyter, but supposes it ex vi ordinis. For
since the power of ordination (if any thing be) is the distinct capacity of a
Bishop, this power supposes a power of consecrating the Eucharist to be in the
Bishop, for how else can he ordain a Presbyter with a power, that himself
has not? can he give, what himself has not received?

Haeres 75.
I end this point with the saying of Epiphani. us, Vox est Aerii haretici unus
est ordo Bpisoeperum, and Presbyterorum, una dignitas. To say that Bishops are
not a distinct order from Presbyters, was a heresy first broached by Aerius,
and has lately been (at least in the manner of speaking) countenanced by many
of the Church of Rome.

FOR to clear the distinction of order, 32. For Bishops had a power distinct,
and Superior to that of Presbyters.
it is evident in Antiquity, that Bishops had a power of imposing hands, for
collating of Orders, which Presbyters have not. * What was done in this affair
in the times of the Apostles I have already explicated: but now the inquiry is,
what the Church did in pursuance of the practice, As of Ordination.
and tradition Astolicall. The first, and second Canons of the Apostles command
that two, or three Bishops should ordain a Bishop, and one Bishop should
ordain a Priest, and a Deacon, A Presbyter is not authorized to ordain,
Eccles. hier. c. 5.
a Bishop is. * S. Dionysius affirms, Sacerdotem non posse initiari, nisi per
invocationes Episcopales, and acknowledges no ordainer but a Bishop. No more
did the Church ever; Insomuch that when Novatus the Father of the old Puritans,
did ambire Episcopatum, he was feign to go to the utmost parts of Italy, and
seduce or entreat some Bishops to impose hands on him, as Cornelius witnesses
in his Epistle to Fabianus, in Eusebius. Lib. 6. cap 33.
To this we may add as so many witnesses, all those ordinations made by the
Bishops of Rome, mentioned in the Pontifical book of Damasus, Platina, and
others. Habitis de more sacris ordinibus Decembris mense, Presbyteros december,
Diaconos duos, etc. creat (S. Clemens) Anacletus Presbyteros quinque, Diaconos
tres, Episcopos diversis in locis sex numero creavit, and so in descent, for
all the Bishops of that succession for many ages together.

But let us see how this power of ordination went in the Bishops hand alone, by
Law and Constitution; for particular examples are infinite.

In the Council of Ancyra it is determined (...) Can. 13.
That Rural Bishops shall not ordain Presbyters or Deacons in another
diocese without letters of license from the Bishop. Neither shall the Priests
of the City attempt it. * First not Rural Bishops, that is, Bishops that are
taken in adjutorium Episcopi Principalis, Vicars to the Bishop of the diocese,
they must not ordain Priests and Deacons. For it is (...), It is another
diocese, and to be (...), is prohibited by the Canon of Scripture. But then
they may with license? Yes; for they had Episcopal Ordination at first, but
not Episcopal Jurisdiction, and so were not to invade the territories of their
neighbor. The tenth Canon of the Council of Antioch clears this part. The
words are these as they are rendered by Dionysius Exiguus. Qui in villis, and
vicis constituti sunt Chorepiscopi tametsi manus impositionem ab Episcopis
susceperunt, [and ut Episcopisunt consecrati] tamen aportet eos modum proprtum
retinere, etc. (...), the next clause [and ut Episcopi consecrati sunt]
although it be in very ancient Latin copies, years not found in the Greek, but
is an assumentum for exposition of the Greek, but is most certainly employed in
it; for else, what description could this be of Chorepiscopi, above Presbyter^
rurales, to say that they were (...), for so had country Priests, they had
received imposition of the Bishops hands. Either then the Ch^repiscopi had
received ordination from three Bishops, and (...) is to be taken collectively,
not distibutively, to wit, that each Country Bishop had received ordination
from Bishops, many Bishops in conjunction, and so they were very Bishops, or
else they had no more then Village Priests, and then this caution had been
impertine^^.

* But the City Priests were also included in this prohibition. True it is, but
it is in a Parenthesis; with an (...), in the midst of the Canon, and there was
some particular reason for the involving them, not that they ever did actually
ordain any, but that since it was prohibited to the chorepiscopi to ordain
(to them I say who though for want of jurisdiction they might not ordain
without license, it being in aliena Parochia, yet they had capacity by their
order to do it) if these should do it, the City Presbyters who were often
dispatched into the Villages upon the same employment, by a temporary mission,
that the Chorepiscopi were by an ordinary, and fixed residence might perhaps
think that their commission might extend farther then it did, or that they
might go beyond it, as well as the Ch^r^pisc^pi, and therefore their way was
obstructed by this clause of (...).

* Add to this; The Presbyters of the City were of great honor, and peculiar
privilege, as appears in the thirteenth Canon of the Council of Neo.
Caesare^, and therefore might easily exceed, if the Canon had not been their
bridle.

The sum of the Canon is this. With the Bishops license the Chorepiscopi
might ordain, for themselves had Episcopal ordination, but without license
they might not, for they had but delegate, and subordinate jurisdiction, And
therefore in the fourteenth Canon of Ne^-Caesarea are said to be (...), like
the 70 Disciples, that is, inferior to Bishops, and the 70 were to the twelve
Apostles, viz. in hoc perticulari, not in order, but like them in subordination
and inferiority of jurisdiction: but the City Presbyters might not ordain,
neither with, nor without license; for they are in the Canon only by way of
parenthesis, and the sequence of procuring a faculty from the Bishops to
collate orders, is to be referred to Chorepiscopi, not to Presbyteri Civitat
is, unless we should strain this Canon into a sense contrary to the practice
of the Catholic Church. Res euim ordinis non possunt delegari, is a most
certain rule in Divinity, and admitted by men of all sides, and most different
interests. * However we see here, that they were prohibited, and we never find
before this time, that any of them actually did give orders, neither by
ordinary power, nor extraordinary dispensation; and the constant tradition of
the Church, and practice Apostolical is, that they never could give orders;
therefore this exposition of the Canon is liable to no exception, but is clear
for the illegality of a Presbyt^r giving holy orders, either to a Presbyter, or
a Deacon, and is concluding for the necessity of concurrence both of Episcopal
order, and jurisdiction for ordinations, for, re^d^ndo singula singulis, and
expounding this Canon according to the sense of the Church, and exigence of
Catholic Custom, the Chorepiscopi are excluded from giving orders for want of
jurisdiction, and the Priests of the City for want of order; the first may be
supplied by a delegate power in literis Episcopalibus, the second cannot, but
by a new ordination, that is, by making the Priest a Bishop. For if a Priest of
the City have not so much power as a Chorepiscopus, as I have proved he has
not, by showing that the Chorepiscopus then had Episcopal ordination, and yet
the Chorepiscopus might not collate orders without a faculty from the Bishop,
the City Priests might not do it, unless more be added to them, for their
want was more. They not only want jurisdiction, but something besides, and that
must needs be order,

* But although these Chorepiscopi at the first had Episcopal Ordination, yet
it was quickly taken from them for their incroa^h^^^ upon the Bishops Diocese,
and as they were but (...) or (...) Episcoporum in villis, so their ordination
was but to a mere Presbyterate. And this we find, as soon as ever we hear
that they had had Episcopal Ordination. For those who in the beginning of the
10th Canon of Antioch we find had been consecrated as Bishops, in the end of
the same Cahon, we find it decreed de novo: (...). The Chorepiscopus or Country
Bishop must be ordayn'd by the Bishop of the City, in whose jurisdiction he
is; which was clearly ordination to the order of a Presbyter, and no more. And
ever after this all the ordinations they made were only to the inferior
Ministeries, with the Bishop's License too, but they never ordayn'd any to be
De^cons, or Priests; for these were Orders of the Holy Ghost's appointing, and
therefore were gratiae Spiritus Sancti, and issues of order; but the inferior
Ministeries, as of a Reader, an Ostiary etc. were humane constitutions, and
required not the capacity of Episcopal Order to collate them; for they were
not Graces of the Holy Ghost; as all Orders properly so called are, but might
by humane dispensation be bestowed, as well as by humane Ordinance, they had
their first constitution. * * The Chorepiscopi lasted in this consistence till
they were quite taken away by the Council of Hispalis: save only, that such
men also were called Chorepiscopi who had been Bishops of Citied but had
fallen from their honor by communicating in Gentile Sacrifices, and by being
traditors, but in case they repented and were reconciled, they had not indeed
resti^tution to their See, but, because they had the indelible character of a
Bishop, they were allowed the Name, and honor, and sometime the execution of
offices Chorepiscopall. Now of this sort of Chorepiscopi no objection can be
pretended, if they had made ordinations; and of the other nothing pertinent,
for they also had the ordination, and order of Bishops. The former was the case
of Meletius in the Nicene Council, as is to be seen in the Epistle of the
Fathers to the Church of Alexandria. * But however all this while, tripart.
hist. lib 2. c, 12. ex Theodoret.
the power of ordination is so fast held in the Bishops hand, that it was
communicated to none though of the greatest privilege.

* I find the like care taken in the Council of Sardis, Can: 19.
for when Musaeus, and Eutychianus had ordained some Clerks, themselves not
being Bishops, Gaudentius (one of the moderate men, it is likely) for quietness
sake, and to comply with the times, would feign have had those Clerks received
into Clericall communion; but the Council would by no means admit that any
should be received into the Clergy (...) (...), ( as B^l^amon expresses upon
that Canon,) but such as were ordained by them who were Bishops verily, and
indecd. But with those who were ordained by Musaeus and E^tychianus, (...), we
will communicate as with Laymen: (...), for they were no Bishops that imposed
hands ^n them; and therefore the Clerks were not ordained truly, but were
(...), dissemblers of ordination. Quae autem de Musaeo and Entychiano dicta
sunt, trahe etiam ad alios qui non ordinati fveront, etc. Says Balsamon,
intimating, that it is a ruled case and of public interest.

* The same was the issue of those two famous cases, the one of Ischiras
ordained of Colluthus (...), one that dreamed only he was a Bishop. Ischiras
being ordained by him could be no Priest, nor any else of his ordaining, (...),
and Ischyr as himself was reduced into laycommunion, being deposed by the
Synod of Alexandria, (...), falling from the imagination of his Presbyterate,
Apud Athanas: Apolog. 2. epist. Presb. and Diacon: Mareotic: ad Curiosum and
Philagrium.
say the Priests and Deacons of Mareotis; And of the rest that were ordained
with Ischir as, (...) says S. Athanasius, and this so known a business,
(...), No man made scruple of the Nullity. ** The parallel case is of the
Presbyters ordained by Maximus, who was another Bishop in the air too; all his
ordinations were pronounced null, by the Fathers of the Council in
Constantinople. Cap. 4.
A third is of the blind Bishop of Agabra imposing hands while his Presbyters
read the words of ordination, the ordination was pronounced invalid by the
first Council of Sevill. Cap. 5.
These cases are so known, I need not insist on them. This only,

In diverse cases of Transgression of the Canons, Clergy men were reduced to
lay communion, either being suspended, or deposed; that is, from their place of
honor, and execution of their function, with, or without hope of restitution
respectively; but then still they had their order, and the Sacraments conferred
by them were valid, though they indeed were prohibited to Minister; but in the
cases of the present instance, the ordinations were pronounced as null, to have
bestowed nothing, and to be merely imaginary.

* But so also it was in case that Bishops ordained without a title, or in the
diocese of another Bishop, as in the Council of Can. 6.
Chalcedon, and of Can. 13.
Anti. ^ch (...), And may be it was so in case of ordination by a Presbyter, it
was by positive constitution pronounced void, and no more, and therefore may be
rescinded by the Counter-mand of an equal power; A Council at most may do
it, and therefore without a Council, a probable necessity will let us loose.
But to this the answer is evident.

1. The expressions in the several cases are several, and of diverse issue,
for in case of those nullities which are merely Canonical, they are expressed
as then first made, but in the case of ordination by a Non-Bishop, they are
only declared voy'd ipso facto. And therefore in that decree of Chalcedon
against Sinetitul^r ordinations, the Canon says; (...), IRRITAM EXISTIMARI
manus impositionem, to be esteemed as null, that is, not to have Canonical
approbation, but is not declared null, in Natura rei, as it is in the foregoing
instances.

2. In the cases of Antioch, and Chalcodon, the decree is pro futuro, which
makes it evident that those nullities are such as are made by Canon, but in the
cases of Colluthus, and Maximus, there was declaration of a past nullity and
that before any Canon was made; and though Synodall declarations pronoun'd such
ordinations invalid, yet none decreed so for the future, which is a clear
evidence, that this nullity, viz: in case of ordination by a Non-Presbyter, is
not made by Canon, but by Canon *declared to be invalid in the nature of the
thing.

3. If to this be added, that in antiquity it was dogmatically resolved that by
the Nature, and institution of the Order of Bishops; ordination was appropriate
to them, then it will also from hence be evident, that the nullity of
ordination without a Bishop is not dependant upon positive constitution, but on
the exigence of the institution. ** Now that the power of ordination was only
in the Bishop, even they, who to advance the Presbyters, were willing enough to
speak less for Episcopacy, give testimony; making this the proper distinctive
cognizance of a Bishop from a Presbyter, that the Bishop has power of
ordination, the Presbyter has not. So S. Jerome, ad Evagrium.
Quid facit Episcopus (except a ordinatione) quod Presbyter non faciat. All
things (says he) [to wit all things of precise order] are common to Bishops
with Priests, except ordination, for that is proper to the Bishop. homil. 2.
in. 1. Tim. 2.
And S. Chrysostom, Sola quippe ordinatione superiores illis sunt [ Episcopi]
atque hoctantum plusquam Presbyteri habere videntur. Ordination is the proper,
and peculiar function of a Bishop; and therefore not given him by positive
constitution of the Canon.

4. No man was called an heretic for breach of Canon, but for denying the
power of ordination to be proper to a Bishop: Aerius was by Epiphanius,
Philastrius, and S. Austin condemned, and branded for heresy, and by the
Catholic Church says Epiphanius. This power therefore came from a higher
spring, then positive and Canonical Sanction. But now proceed.

The Council held in Trullo, Can. 37.
complaining that the incursion of the barbarous people upon the Churches
inheritance, says that it forced some Bishops from their residence, and made
that they could not (...), according to the guise of the Church, give Orders
and do such things as DID BELONG TO THE BISHOP; and in the sequel of the Canon
they are permitted in such cases, ut and diversorum Clericorum ordinationes
canonice faciant, to make Canonical ordinations of Clergymen. Giving of
Orders is proper, it belongs to a Bishop. So the Council. And therefore
Theodoret expounding that place of S. Paul [ by the laying on the hands of the
Presbytery] interprets it of Bishops; for this reason, because Presbyters did
not impose hands. * There is an imperfect Canon in the Arausican Council that
has an expression very pertinent to this purpose, Can. 20.
Ea quae non nisi per Episcopos geruntur, those things that are not done, but
by Bishops, they were decreed still to be done by Bishops, though he that was
to do them regularly, did fall into any infirmity whatsoever, yet non sub
praesentia sua Presbyteros agere permittat, sed evocet Episcopum. Here are
clearly by this Canon some things supposed to be proper to the Bishops, to the
action of which Presbyters must in no case be admitted. The particulars, what
they are, are not specified in the Canon, but are named before, viz: Orders,
and Confirmation, for almost the whole Council was concerning them, and
nothing else is properly the agendum Episcopi, and the Canon else is not to be
Understood. * To the same issue is that circum-locutory description, or name of
a Bishop, used by S. Chrysostom, (...). The man that is to ordain Clerks.

haeres. 7 5.
And all this is but the doctrine of the Catholic Church which S. Epiphanius
opposed to the doctrine of Aerius, denying Episcopacy to be a distinct order
(...) (speaking of Episcopacy) (...), speaking of Presbytery. The order of
Bishops begets Fathers to the Church of God, but the order of Presbyters begets
sons in baptism, but no Fathers or Doctors by ordination. Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap. 33.
It is a very remarkable passage related by Eusebius in the ordination of
Novatus to be Presbyter, the Bishop did it (...), all the whole Clergy was
against it, yet the Bishop did ordain him, and then certainly searce any
conjunction of the other Clergy can be imagined; I am sure none is either
expressed or intimated. For it was a ruled case, and attested by the Uniforme
practice of the Church, which was set down in the third Council of Carthage,
Can. 45.
Episcopus vnus esse potest per quem dignatione Divina Presbyteri multi
constitui possunt. This case I instance the more particularly, because it is an
exact determination of a Bishops sole power of ordination. Aurelius made a
motion, that, if a Church wanted a Presbyter to become her Bishop, they might
demand one from any Bishop. It was granted; But Posthumianus the Bishop put
this case. Deinde qui vnum habuerit, numquid debet illi ipse vnus Presbyter
auferri? How if the Bishop have but one Priest, must his Bishop part with him
to supply the necessity of the Neighbor widdow-Church? Yea, that he must. But
how then shall he keep ordinations when he has never a Presbyter to assist
him? That indeed would have been the objection now, but it was none then. For
Aurelius told them plainly, there was no inconvenience in it, for though a
Bishop have never a Presbyter, no great matter, he can himself ordain many
(and then I am sure, there is sole ordination) but if a Bishop be wanting to a
Church, he is not so easily found.

** Thus it went ordinarily in the style of the Church, ordinations were made
by the Bishop, and the ordainer spoken of as a single person. Cap. 19.
So it is in the Nicene Council, the Council of Cap. 9.
Antioch, the Council of Cap. 2. and 6.
Chalcedon, and S. Jerome who writing to Pammachius against the errors of John
of Jerusalem; If thou speak (says he) of Paulinianus, he comes now and then
to visit us, not as any of your Clergy, but ejus a quo ordinatus est, that
Bishop's who ordained him.

* So that the issue of this argument is this. The Canons of the Apostles, and
the rules of the Ancient Counsels appropriate the ordination of Bishops to
Bishops, of Presbyters to one Bishop, (for I never find a Presbyter ordained by
two Bishops together, but only Origin by the Bishops of Jerusalem, and
Caesarea) Presbyters are never mentioned in conjunction with Bishops at their
ordinations, and if alone they did it, their ordination was pronounced invalid
and void ab initio.

* To these particulars add this, that Bishops alone were punished if
ordinations were Vncanonicall, which were most unreasonable if Presbyters did
join in them, and were causes in conjunction. But unless they did it alone,
we never read that they were punishable; indeed Bishops were pro toto, and
integro, as is reported by Sozomen in the case of Elpidius, Eustathius,
Basilius of Ancyra, and Eleusius. Thus also it was decreed in the second, and
sixth Chapters of the Council of Chalcedon, and in the Imperial constitutions.
Novell: constir. 6. and 1. 23. cap. 16.
Since therefore we neither find Presbyters joined with Bishops in commission,
or practice, or penalty all this while. I may infer from the premises the
same thing which the Council of Hispal expresses in direct, and full sentence,
Episcopus Sacerdotibus, Cap: 6.
ac Ministris solus honorem dare potest, solus auferre non potest. The Bishop
alone may give the Priestly honor, he alone is not suffered to take it away. *
This Council was held in the year 657, Can: 2, and 3.
and I set it down here for this purpose to show that the decree of the fourth
Council of Carthage which was the first that licensed Priests to assist
Bishops in ordinations yet was not obligatory in the West; but for almost 300
years after, ordinations were made by Bishops alone. But till this Council no
pretense of any such conjunction, and after this Council sole ordination did
not expire in the West for above 200 years together; but for ought I know,
ever since then, it has obtained, that although Presbyters join not in the
consecration of a Bishop, yet of a Presbyter they do; but this is only by a
positive subintroduced constitution first made in a Provincial of Africa, and
in other places received by insinuation and conformity of practice.

* I know not what can be said against it. I only find a piece of an objection
out of S. Cyprian, who was a Man so complying with the Subjects of his
Diocese, that if any man, he was like to furnish us with an Antinomy.* Epist.
33.
Hunc igitur (Fratres Dilectissimi) a me, and a Collegis qui praesentes aderant
ordinatum sciatis. Here either by his Colleagues he means Bishops, or
Presbyters. If Bishops, then many Bishops will be found in the ordination of
one to an inferior order, which because it was (as I observed before) against
the practice of Christendom, will not easily be admitted to be the sense of S.
Cyprian. But if he means Presbyters by [ Collegae] then sole ordination is
invalidated by this example, for Presbyters joined with him in the ordination
of Aurelius.

I answer, that it matters not whether by his Colleagues he means one, or the
other, for Aurelius the Confessor who was the man ordained, was ordained but to
be a Reader, and that was no Order of Divine institution, no gift of the Holy
Ghost, and therefore might be dispensed by one, or more; by Bishops, or
Presbyters, and no way enters into the consideration of this question
concerning the power of collating those orders which are gifts of the Holy
Ghost, and of divine ordinance; and therefore, this, although I have seen it
once pretended, yet has no validity to impugn the constant practice of
Primitive antiquity.

But then are all ordinations invalid which are done by mere Presbyters
without a Bishop? What think we of the reformed Churches?

1. For my part I know not what to think. The question has been so often asked
with so much violence, and prejudice; and we are so bound by public interest
to approve all that they do, that we have disabled our selves to justify our
own. For we were glad at first of abettors against the Errors of the Roman
Church, we found these men zealous in it, we thanked God for it (as we had
cause) and we were willing to make them recompense, by endeavoring to justify
their ordinations; not thinking what would follow upon our selves. But now it
is come to that issue, that our own Episcopacy is thought not necessary,
because we did not condemn the ordinations of their Presbytery.

2. Why is not the question rather, what we think of the Primitive Church, then
what we think of the reformed Churches? Did the Primitive Counsels, and
Fathers do well in condemning the ordinations made by mere Presbyters? If
they did well, what was a virtue in them, is no sin in us. If they did ill,
from what principle shall we judge of the right of ordinations? since there is
no example in Scripture of any ordination made but by Apostles, and Bishops,
and the Presbytery that imposed hands on Timothy, is by all antiquity expounded
either of the office, or of a College of Presbyters; and S. Paul expounds it
to be an ordination made by his own hands, as appears by comparing the two
epistles to S. Timothy together; and may be so meant by the principles of all
sides, for if the names be confounded, then Presbyter may signify a Bishop, and
that they of this Presbytery were not Bishops, they can never prove from
Scripture, where all men grant that the Names are confounded.

* So that whence will men take their estimate for the rites of ordinations?
From Scripture? That gives it always to Apostles, and Bishops (as I have
proved) and that a Priest did ever impose hands for ordination can never be
shown from thence. From when (...) then? From Antiquity? That was so far
from licensing ordinations made by Presbyters alone, that Presbyters in the
primitive Church did never join with Bishops in Collating holy Orders of
Presbyter, and Deacon, till the 4th Council of Carthage; much less do it
alone, rightly, and with effect. So that, as in Scripture there is nothing for
Presbyters ordaining, so in Antiquity there is much against it; And either in
this particular we must have strange thoughts of Scripture, and Antiquity, or
not so fair interpretation of the ordinations of reformed Presbyteries. But
for my part I had rather speak a truth in sincerity, then err with a glorious
correspondence.

But will not necessity excuse them who could not have orders from Orthodoxe
Bishops? shall we either sin against our consciences by suscribing to
heretical, and false resolutions in materia fidei, or else loose the being of
a Church, for want of Episcopal ordinations? * Indeed if the case were just
thus it was very hard with the good people of the transmarine Churches; but I
have here two things to consider.

1. I am very willing to believe that they would not have done any thing either
of error, or suspicion, but in cases of necessity. But then I consider that M.
Du Plessis, de Eccles. cap. 11.
a man of honor, and Great learning does attest, that at the first reformation
there were many Archbishops and Cardinals in Germany, England, France, and
Italy that joined in the reformation, whom they might, but did not employ in
their ordinations; And what necessity then can be pretended in this case, I
would feign learn that I might make their defense. But, which is of more, and
deeper consideration; for this might have been done by inconsideration, and
irresolution, as often happens in the beginning of great changes, but, it is
their constant and resolved practice at least in France, that if any returns
to them they will reordayne him by their Presbytery, Danaeus part. 2. Isagog;
lib. 2. cap. 22. Perron. repl. fol: 92. impress. 1605.
though he had before Episcopal Ordination, as both their friends and their
enemies bear witness.

2. I consider that necessity may excuse a personal delinquency; but I never
heard that necessity did build a Church. Indeed no man is forced for his own
particular to committ a sin, for if it be absolutely a case of necessity, the
action ceases to be a sin; but indeed if God means to build a Church in any
place, he will do it by means proportionable to that end; that is, by putting
them into a possibility of doing, and acquiring those things which himself
has required of necessity to the constitution of a Church. * So that,
supposing that Ordination by a Bishop is necessary for the vocation of Priests,
and Deacons (as I have proved it is) and therefore for the founding, or
perpetuating of a Church, either God has given to all Churches opportunity and
possibility of such Ordinations, and then, necessity of the contrary, is but
pretense and mockery, or if he has not given such possibility, then there is
no Church there to be either built, or continued, but the Candlestick is
presently removed.

There are diverse stories in Ruffinus to this purpose. Ecclesihist: lib. 10.
cap. 9. per Ruffinum.
When Aedesius and Frumentius were surprised by the Barbarous Indians, they
preached Christianity, and baptized many, but themselves being but Laymen
could make no Ordinations, and so not fix a Church. What then was to be done
in the case? Frumentius Alexandriam pergit.... and rem omnem, ut gesta est,
narrat EPISCOPO, ac monet, ut provideat virum aliquem dignum quem congregatis
jam plurimis Christianis in Barbarico solo Episcopum mittat. Frumentius comes
to Alexandria to get a Bishop. Athanasius being then Patriarch ordayn'd
Frumentius their Bishop, and tradito ei Sacerdotio, redire eum cum Domini
Gratia unde venerat jubet.... ex quo (says Ruffinus) in Indiae partibus, and
populi Christianorum and Ecclesiae factaae sunt, and Sacer dotium caepit.

The same happened in the case of the Iberians converted by a Captive woman;
Ibidem c. 10. and apud Theodoret. l. 1.
postea vero quam Ecclesia magnifice constructa est, and populi fidem Dei
majore ardore sitiebant, captivae monitis ad Imperatorem Constantinum totius
Gentis legatio mittitur: Res gesta exponitur: SACERDOTES mittere oratur qui
caeptum erga se Dei munus implerent. The work of Christianity could not be
completed, nor a Church founded without the Ministry of Bishops. * Thus the
case is evident, that the want of a Bishop will not excuse us from our
endeavors of acquiring one; and where God means to found a Church there he
will supply them with those means, and Ministeries which himself has made of
ordinary and absolute necessity. And therefore if it happens that those Bishops
which are of ordinary Ministration amongst us, prove heretical, still Gods
Church is Catholic, and though with trouble, yet Orthodoxe Bishops may be
acquired. For just so it happened when Mauvia Queen of the Saracens was so
earnest to have Moses the Hermit made the Bishop of her Nation, and offered
peace to the Catholics upon that condition; Lucius an Arrian troubled the
affayre by his interposing and offering to ordain Moses; The Hermit discovered
his vileness, Eccles: hist. lib. 11. cap. 6. per Ruffinum.
and ita majore dedecore deformatus compulsus est acquiescere. Moses refused to
be ordayn'd by him that was an Arrian. So did the reformed Churches refuse
ordinations by the Bishops of the Roman communion. But what then might they
have done? Even the same that Moses did in that necessity; compulsus est ab
Episcopis quos in exilium truserat (Lucius) sacerdotium sumere. Those good
people might have had orders from the Bishops of England, or the Lutheran
Churches, if at least they thought our Churches Catholic, and Christian.

If an ordinary necessity will not excuse this, will not an extraordinary
calling justify it? Yea, most certainly, could we but see an ordinary proof
for an extraordinary calling, viz: an evident prophecy, demonstration of
Miracles, certainety of reason, clarity of sense, or any thing that might make
faith of an extraordinary mission.

But shall we then condemn those few of the Reformed Churches whose
ordinations always have been without Bishops? No indeed. That must not be.
They stand, or fall to their own Master. And though I cannot justify their
ordinations, yet what degree their Necessity is of, what their desire of
Episcopal ordinations may do for their personal excuse, and how far a good
life, and a Catholic belief may lead a man in the way to heaven, (although
the forms of external communion be not observed) I cannot determine. * For
ought I know, their condition is the same with that of the Church of Pergamus [
I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is, and
thou heldest fast my FAITH, and have not denied my Name; Nihilominus habeo
adversus te pauca, some few things I have against thee;] and yet of them, the
want of Canonical ordinations is a defect which I trust themselves desire to
be remedied; but if it cannot be done, their sin indeed is the less, but
their misery the Greater. * I am sure I have said sooth, but whether or no it
will be thought so, I cannot tell; and yet why it may not I cannot guess,
unless they only be impeccable, which I suppose will not so easily be thought
of them, who themselves think, that all the Church possibly may fail. But
this I would not have declared so freely, had not the necessity of our own
Churches required it, and that the first pretense of the legality, and validity
of their ordinations been boyed up to the height of an absolute necessity; for
else why shall it be called Tyranny in us to call on them to conform to us,
and to the practice of the Catholic Church, and yet in them be called a good
and a holy zeal to exact our conformity to them; But I hope it will so happen
to us, that it will be verifyed here, what was once said of the Catholics
under the fury of Iustina, sed tanta fuit perseverantia fidelium populorum, vt
animas prius amittere, quam Episcopum mallent; If it were put to our choice,
rather to dye (to wit the death of Martyrs, not rebels) then loose the sacred
order, and offices of Episcopacy, without which no Priest, no ordination, no
consecration of the Sacrament, no absolution, no rite, or Sacrament
legitimately can be performed in order to eternity.

The sum is this. If the Canons, and Sanctions Apostolical, if the decrees
of eight famous Counsels in Christendom, of Ancyra, of Antioch, of Sardis, of
Alexandria, two of Constantinople, the Arausican Council, and that of
Hispalis; if the constant successive Acts of the famous Martyr Bishops of Rome
making ordinations, if the testimony of the whole Pontifical book, if the
dogmaticall resolution of so many Fathers, S. Denis, S. Cornelius, S.
Athanasius, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Epiphanius, S. Austin, and diverse
others, all appropriating ordinations to the Bishops hand: if the constant
voice of Christendom, declaring ordinations made by Presbyters, to be null,
and void in the nature of the thing: and never any act of ordination by a
Non-Bishop, approoved by any Council, decretall, or single suffrage of any
famous man in Christendom: if that ordinations of Bishops were always made,
and they ever done by Bishops, and no pretense of Priests joining with them in
their consecrations, and after all this it was declared heresy to communicate
the power of giving orders to Presbyters either alone, or in conjunction with
Bishops, as it was in the case of Aerius: if all this, that is, if whatsoever
can be imagined, be sufficient to make faith in this particular; then it is
evident that the power, and order of Bishops is greater then the power, and
order of Presbyters, to wit, in this Great particular of ordination, and that
by this loud voice, and united vote of Christendom.

* BUT this was but the first part of the power which Catholic antiquity
affixed to the order of Episcopacy. 33. And Confirmation,
The next is of Confirmation of baptized people. And here the rule was this,
which was thus expressed by Damascen: Epist. de Chorepisc.
Apostolorum, and Successorum eorum est per manus impositionem donum Spiritus
sancti tradere. It belongs to the Apostles and their successors to give the
Holy Ghost by imposition of hands. But see this in particular instance.

The Council of Eliberis giving permission to faithful people of the Laity to
baptize Catechumens in cases of necessity, and exigence of journey; ita tamen
ut si supervixerit [baptizatus] ad Episcopum cum perducat, ut per manus
impositionem proficere possit. Let him be carried to the Bishop to be improved
by imposition of the BISHOPS hands. This was Law.

It was also custom says S. Cyprian, Epist. ad Iubaian.
Quod nunc quoque apud nos geritur, ut qui in Ecclesia baptizantur, per
Praepositos Ecclesiae offerantur, and per nostram orationem, and manus
impositionem Spiritum sanctum consequantur, and signaculo Dominico
consummentur. And this custom was Catholic too, and the Law was of Universal
concernement. OMNES Fideles per manuum impositionem EPISCOPORUM Spiritum
Sanctum post baptismum accipere debent, ut pleni Christiani accipere debent. So
S. Vrbane in his decretall Epistle; Apud Sev. Binium in 1. tom. Council.
And, Omnibus festinandum est sine mora renasci, and demum CONSIGNARI AB
EPISCOPO Et septiformem Spiritus sancti gratiam recipere; so says the old
Author of the fourth Epistle under the name of S. Clement. ALL FAITHFUL
baptized people must go to the Bishop to be consigned, and so by imposition of
the Bishops hands to obtain the seven fold gifts of the Holy Ghost.

Meltiades in his Epistle to the Bishops of Spain affirms confirmation in
this, to have a special excellency besides baptism, quod solum a summis
Sacerdotibus confertur, because Bishops only can give confirmation; And the
same is said, and proov'd by S. Eusebius in his third Epistle enjoining great
veneration to this holy mystery, quod ab aliis perfici non potest nisi a summis
Sacerdotibus. It cannot, it may not be performed by any, but by the Bishops.

Thus S. Chrysostom speaking of S. Philip converting the Samaritans, Homil.
18. in Act.
(...) (...) (...) Philip baptizing the men of Samaria, gave not the Holy Ghost
to them whom he had baptized. For HE HAD NOT POWER. For this gift was only of
the twelve Apostles. And a little after: (...). This was PECULIAR to the
Apostles. (...), whence it comes to pass, that the principal and chief of
the Church do it, and none else. And George Pachymeres, the Paraphrast of S.
Dionysius; In cap. 5. de Eccles. hierarch.
(...). It is required that a Bishop should consigne faithful people baptized.
For this was the Ancient practice.

I shall not need to instance in too many particulars, for that the Ministry of
confirmation was by Catholic custom appropriate to Bishops in all ages of the
Primitive Church is to be seen by the concurrent testimony of Counsels, and
Fathers; particularly of S. Clemens Alexandrinus in Lib. 3. hist. cap. 17.
Eusebius, De Baptismo.
Tertullian, S. Epist. 1. cap. 3. ad Decent.
Innocentius the first, Epist. 4.
Damasus, Epist. 88.
S. Leo, in Epist. ad. Epis^. German.
John the third, in S. Lib. 3. ep. 9.
Gregory, Amphilochius in the life of S. Basil telling the story of Bishop
Maximinus confirming Basilius, and Eubulus, the Apud Gratian. de consecrat.
did. 5. can. ut jejuni.
Council of Orleans, and of Ibid. Can. ut Episcopi.
Melda, and lastly of Council. Hispal. can. 7.
Sevill which affirms, Non licere Presbyteris.... per impositionem manus
fidelibus baptiz andis paracletum spiritum tradere. It is not lawful for
Presbyters to give confirmation, for it is properly an act of Episcopal
power.... Chrismate spiritus S. superinfunditur. Vtraque vero ista manu, and
ore Antistitis impetramus. These are enough for authority, and dogmaticall
resolution from antiquity. For truth is, the first that ever did communicate
the power of confirming to Presbyters was Photius, the first author of that
unhappy and long lasting schism between the Latin, and Greek Churches, vide
Anasta. biblioth. praefat. in Can. 8. Synodi.
and it was upon this occasion too. For when the Bulgarians were first
converted, the Greeks sent Presbyters to baptize, and to confirm them. But
the Latins sent again to have them re-confirmed, both because (as they
pretended) the Greeks had no jurisdiction in Bulgaria, nor the Presbyters a
capacity of order to give confirmation.

The matters of fact, and acts Episcopal of confirmation are innumerable, but
most famous are those confirmations made by S. Rembert Bishop of Brema, vide
Optatum. lib. 2. S. Bernard. in vita S Malachiae. Surium. tom. 1. in Febr.
and of S. Malchus attested by S. Bernard, because they were ratified by
miracle, says the Ancient story. I end this with the saying of S. Hierome,
Exigis ubi scriptum sit? In Actibus Apostolorum. Sed etiamsi Scripturae
authoritas non subesset, dial. adv. Lucifer.
totius orbis in hanc partem consensus instar praecepti obtineret. If you ask
where it is written? (viz. that Bishops alone should confirm) It is written in
the Acts of the Apostles (meaning, by precedent, though not express precept)
but if there were no authority of Scripture for it, yet the consent of all the
world upon this particular is instead of a command. *** It was fortunate that
S. Hierome has expressed himself so confidently in this affair, for by this
we are armed against an objection from his own words, for in the same dialogue,
speaking of some acts of Episcopal privilege and peculiar ministration,
particularly, of Confirmation, he says, it was ad honorem potius Sacerdotii
quam ad legis necessitatem. For the honor of the Priesthood, rather then for
the necessity of a law.

To this the answer is evident from his own words: That Bishops should give the
Holy Ghost in confirmation, is written in the Acts of the Apostles; and now
that this is reserved rather for the honor of Episcopacy, then a simple
necessity in the nature of the thing makes no matter. For the question here
that is only of concernment, is not to what end this power is reserved to the
Bishop, but by whom it was reserved? Now S. Hierome says it was done apud
Acta, in the Scripture, therefore by Gods Holy Spirit, and the end he also
specifies, viz. for the honor of that sacred order, non propter legis
necessitatem, not that there is any necessity of law, that confirmation should
be administered by the Bishop. Not that a Priest may do it, but that, as S.
Hierome himself there argues, the Holy Ghost being already given in baptism,
if it happens that Bishops may not be had (for he puts the case concerning
persons in bondage, and places remote, and destitute of Bishops) then in that
case there is not the absolute necessity of a Law, that Confirmation should be
had at all. A man does not perish if he have it not; for that this thing was
reserved to a Bishops peculiar ministration, was indeed an honor to the
function, but it was not for the necessity of a Law tying people in all cases
actually to acquire it. So that this [ non necessarium] is not to be referred
to the Bishops ministration, as if it were not necessary for him to do it when
it is to be done, not that a Priest may do it if a (...) may not be had, but
this non necessity is to be referred to confirmation it self; so that if a
Bishop cannot be had, confirmation, though with much loss, yet with no danger,
may be omitted. This is the sum of S. Hieroms discourse, this reconciles him
to himself, this makes him speak conformably to his first assertions, and
consequently to his arguments, and to be sure, no exposition can make these
words to intend that this reservation of the power of confirmation to Bishops,
is not done by the spirit of God, and then let the sense of the words be what
they will, they can do no hurt to the cause; and as easily may we escape from
those words of his, to Rusticus Bishop of Narbona. Sed quia scriptum est,
Presbyteri duplici honor honorentur.... praedicare eos decet, utile est
benedicere, congruum confirmare, etc. It is quoted by Gratian did. 95. can.
ecce ego. But the gloss upon the place expounds him thus, i. e. in fide, the
Presbyters may preach, they may confirm their Auditors, not by consignation of
Chrisme, but by confirmation of faith; and for this, quotes a parallel place
for the use of the word [ Confirmare] by authority of S. Gregory, Cause. 11. q.
3. can Quod pradecessor.
who sent Zachary his legate into Germany from the Sea of Rome, ut Orthodoxes
Episcopos, Presbyteros, vel quos^unque reperire potuisset in verbo
exhortationis perfectos, amplius confirmaret. Certainly S. Gregory did not
intend that his legate Zachary should confirm Bishops and Priests in any other
sense but this of S. Hieroms in the present, to wit, in faith and doctrine, not
in rite, and mystery, and neither could S. Hierome himself intend that
Presbyters should do it at all but in this sense of S. Gregory, for else he
becomes an Antistrephon, and his own opposite.

in Ephesians. 4.
* Yea, but there is a worse matter then this. S. Ambrose tells of the Egyptian
Priests, that they in the absence of the Bishop do confirm. Denique apud
Egyptum Presbyteri consignant si praesens non sit Episcopus. But,

1. The passage is suspicious, for it interrupts a discourse of S. Ambrose's
concerning the Primitive Order of election to the Bishopric, and is no way
pertinent to the discourse, but is incircled with a story of a far different
consequence, which is not easily thought to have been done by any considering
and intelligent Author.

2. But suppose the clause is not surreptitious, but natural to the discourse,
and borne with it, yet it is matter of fact, not of right, for S. Ambrose
neither approves, nor disproves it, and so it must go for a singular act
against the Catholic practice and Laws of Christendom.

3. If the whole clause be not surreptitious, yet the word [ Consignant] is,
for S. Austin who has the same discourse, the same thing, viz: of the dignity
of Presbyters, tells this story of the Act and honor of Presbyters in
Alexandria, and all Egypt, almost in the other words of his Master S. Ambrose,
but he tells it thus, Nam and in Alexandria and per totum Aegyptum si desit
Episcopus, Quaest. 101. Vet. and N. Testam. Basileae.
Consecrat Presbyter. So that it should not be consignat, but consecrat; for no
story tells of any confirmations done in Egypt by Presbyters, but of
consecrating the Eucharist in cases of Episcopal absence, or commission I
shall give account in the Question of Jurisdiction; that was indeed permitted
in Egypt, and some other places, but Confirmation never, that we can find else
where, and this is too improbable to bear weight against evidence and practice
Apostolical, and four Counsels, and 16 ancient Catholic Fathers, testifying
that it was a practice and a Law of Christendom that Bishops only should
confirm, and not Priests, so that if there be no other scruple, this Question
is quickly at an end.

** But S. Gregory is also pretended in objection; for he gave dispensation to
the Priests of Sardinia, vt baptizatos Vguant, lib. 3. eist p. 26.
to aneale baptized people. Now anointing the forehead of the baptized person,
was one of the solemnityes of confirmation, so that this indulgence does arise
to a power of Confirming; for Vnctio and Chrismatio in the first Arausican
Council, and since that time Sacramentum Chrismatis has been the usual word
for confirmation. But this will not much trouble the buisinesse.

Because it is evident that he means it not of confirmation, but of the
Chrisme in those times by the rites of the Church used in baptism. For in his
9th Epistle he forbids Priests to anoint baptized people, now here is precept
against precept, therefore it must be understood of several anoyntings, and so
S. Gregory expounds himself in this 9th Epistle, Presbyteri baptizatos
infantes signare bis in front Chrismate non praesumant. Presbyters may not
anoint baptized people twice, once they might; now that this permission of
anointing was that which was a ceremony of baptism, not an act of
confirmation, we shall see by comparing it with other Canons. *In the
collection of the Oriental Canons by Martinus Bracarensis, Can. 52.
It is decreed thus, [ Presbyter praesente Episcopo non SIGNET infantes, nisi
forte ab Episcopo fuerit illi praeceptum. A Priest must not sign infantes
without leave of the Bishop if he be present. Must not sign them] that is with
Chrisme in their foreheads, and that in baptism; for the circumstant Canons
do expressly explicate, and determine it; for they are concerning the rites of
baptism, and this in the midst of them. And by the way this may answer S.
Ambrose his [ Presbyteri consignant absente Episcopo] in case it be so to be
read; for here we see a consignation permitted to the presbyters in the
Eastern Churches to be used in baptism, in the absence of the Bishop, and
this an act of indulgence and favor, and therefore extraordinary, and of use
to S. Ambrose his purpose of advancing the Presbyters, but yet of no objection
in case of confimation. * And indeed [ Consignari] is used in Antiquity for any
signing with the Cross, and anealing. Thus it is used in the first Arausican
Council for extreme Unction, Can. 2
which is there in case of extreme necessity permitted to Presbyters:
Haereticos in mortis discrimine positos, Si Catholici esse desiderent, si desit
Episcopus a Presbyteris cum Chrismate, and benedictione CONSIGNARI placet.
Consigned is the word, and it was clearly in extreme Unction, for that rite
was not then ceased, and it was in anealing a dying body, and a part of
reconciliation, and so limited by the sequent Canon and not to be fancyed of
any other consignation. But I return. Can. 20.
*** The first Council of Toledo prohibites any from making Chrisme, but
Bishops only, and takes order, ut de singulis Ecclesiis ad Episcopum anto diem
Paschae Diaconi destinentur, ut confectum Chrisma ab Episcopo destinatum ad
diem Paschae possit occurrere; that the Chrisme be fetched by the Deacons from
the Bishop to be used in all Churches. But for what use? why, it was destinatum
ad diem Pascbae says the Canon, against the Holy time of Easter, and then, at
Easter was the solemnity of public baptismes, so that it was to be used in
baptism. And this sense being premised, the Canon permits to Presbyters to
sign with Chrisme, the same thing that S. Gregory did to the Priests of
Sardinia. Statutum vero est, Diaconum non Chrismare, sed Presbyterum absente
Episcopo, praesente vero, si ab ipso fuerit praeceptum. Now although this be
evident enough, yet it is something clearer in the first Arausican Counsel,
Can. 1.
Nullus ministrorum qui BAPTIZANDI recipit officium sine Chrismate usquam debet
progredi, quia inter nos placuit semel in baptismate Chrismari. The case is
evident that Chrismation or Consigning with ointment was used in baptism, and
it is as evident that this Chrismation was it which S. Grogory permitted to the
Presbyters, not the other, for he expressly forbad the other and the exigence
of the Canons, and practice of the Church expound it so, and it is the same
which S. Innocent the first decreed in more express and distinctive terms,
Presbyteris Chrismate baptizetos ungere licet, Epist. 1. ad Decent. Cap. 3.
sed quod ab Episcopo fuerit Consecratum; there is a clear permission of
consigning with Chrisme in baptism, but he subjoynes a prohibition to Priests
for doing it in confirmation; non tamen frontem eodem oleo signare, quod solis
debetur Episcopis cum tradunt Spiritum Sanctum Paracletum.

By the way; some, that they might the more clearly determine S. Gregory's
dispensation to be only in baptismall Chrisme, read it, [ Vt baptiz andos
ungant] not [ baptizatos] so Gratian, so S. Thomas, but it is needless to be
troubled with that, for Innocentius in the decretall now quoted uses the word
[ Baptizatos] and yet clearly distinguishes this power from the giving the
Chrisme in Confirmation.

I know no other objection, and these we see hinder not but that having such
evidence of fact in Scripture of confirmations done only by Apostles, and this
evidence urged by the Fathers for the practice of the Church, and the power of
cofirmation by many Counsels, and Fathers appropriated to Bishops, and denied
to Presbyters, and in this they are not only Doctors teaching their own
opinion, but witnesses of a Catholic practice, and do actually attest it as
done by a Catholic consent; and no one example in all antiquity ever produced
of any Priest that did, no law that a Priest might impose hands for
confirmation; we may conclude it to be a power Apostolical in the Original,
Episcopal in the Succession, and that in this power, the order of a Bishop is
higher then that of a Presbyter, and so declared by this instance of Catholic
Practice.

THus far I hope we are right. 34. And jurisdiction,
But I call to mind, that in the Nosotrophium of the old Philosopher that
undertook to cure all Calentures by Bathing his Patients in water; some were up
to the Chin, some to the Middle, some to the Knees; So it is amongst the
enemies of the Sacred Order of Episcopacy; some endure not the Name, and they
indeed deserve to be over head and ears; some will have them all one in office
with Presbyters, as at first they were in Name; and they had need bath up to
the Chinne; but some stand shallower, and grant a little distinction, a
precedence perhaps for order sake, but no pre-eminence in reiglement, no
superiority of Jurisdiction; Others by all means would be thought to be quite
thorough in behalf of Bishops order, and power such as it is, but call for a
reduction to the primitive state, and would have all Bishops like the
Primitive, but because by this means they think to impair their power, they
may well endure to be up to the ankles, their error indeed is less, and their
pretense fairer, but the use they make of it, of very ill consequence. But
curing the mistake will quickly cure this distemper, That then shall be the
present issue, that in the Primitive Church Bishops had more power, and greater
exercise of absolute jurisdiction, then now Men will endure to be granted, or
then themselves are very forward to challenge.

1. Then; Which they expressed in attributes of authority, and great power,
The Primitive Church expressing the calling and offices of a Bishop, did it in
terms of presidency and authority. Episcopus typum Dei Patris omnium gerit,
says S. Ignatius; The Bishop carries the representment of God the Father, that
is, in power and authority to be sure, (for how else?) so as to be the supreme
in suo ordine, in offices Ecclesiastical. And again, Quid enim aliud est
Episcopus quam is qui omni Principatu, Epist. ad Trallian.
and potestate superior est? Here his superiority and advantage is expressed to
be in his power; A Bishop is greater and higher then all other power, viz: in
materia, or gradu religionis. And in his Epistle to the Magnesians; Hortor ut
hoc sit omnibus studium in Dei concordia omnia agere EPISCOPO PRESIDENTE LOCO
DEI. Do all things in Unity, the Bishop being PRESIDENT IN THE PLACE OF GOD.
President in all things. And with a fuller tide yet, in his Epistle to the
Church of Smyrna, Honora Episcopum ut PRINCIPEM SACER DOTUM imaginem Dei
referentem, Dei quidem propter Principatum, Christi vero propter Sacerdotium.
It is full of fine expression both for Eminency of order, and Jurisdiction. The
Bishop is the PRINCE OF THE PRIESTS bearring the image of God for his
Principality (that is his jurisdiction and power) but of Christ himself for his
Priesthood, (that is his Order.) S. Ignatius has spoken fairly, and if we
consider that he was so primitive a man that himself saw Christ in the flesh,
and lived a man of exemplary sanctity, and dyed a Martyr, and has been
honored as holy Catholic by all posterity, certainly these testimonies must
needs be of Great pressure, being Sententiae repetiti dogmatis, not casually
slipped from him, and by incogitancy, but resolutely and frequently.

But this is attested by the general expressions of after ages. Fungaris circa
eum POTESTATE HONORIS tui, lib. 3. epist. ^.
says S. Cyprian to Bishop Rogatianus. Execute the POWER OF THY DIGNITY upon
the refractary Deacon; And VIGOR EPISCOPALIS, and AUTHORITAS CATHEDRae are the
the words expressive of that power whatsoever it be which S. Cyprian calls upon
him to assert, in the same Epistle. This is high enough. So is that which he
presently subjoynes, calling the Bishops power Ecclesiae gubernandae sublimem
ac divinam potestatem, a high and a divine power and authority in regiment of
the Church. * Locus Magisterij traditus ab Apostolis, So S. Irenaeus calls
Episcopacy; lib. 4. cap. 63.
A place of Mastership or authority delivered by the Apostles to the Bishops
their successors.* Eusebius speaking of Dionysius, who succeeded Heraclas, he
received (faith he) (...). lib. 6. hist. cap. 26.
The Bishopric of the PRECEDENCE over the Churches of Alexandria. *(...), Can.
10.
says the Council of Sardis; to the TOP or HEIGHT os Episcopacy. APICES and
PRINCIPES OMNIUM, so Optatus calls Bishops; the CHIEF, and HEAD of all; and S.
Denis of Alexandria, lib. 2. adv. Parmen.
Scribit ad Fabianum Vrbis Romae Episcopum, and ad alios quamplurimos
ECCLESIARUM PRINCIPES de fide Catholica sua, says Eusebius. lib. 6. hist. cap.
26. Homil. 7. in Ierem.
And Origin calls the Bishop, eum qui TOTIUS ECCLESIae ARCEM obtinet, He that
has obtayn'd the TOWER OR HEIGHT of the Church.

The Fathers of the Council of Constantinople in Trullo ordayn'd that the
Bishops dispossessed of their Churches by encroachments of Barbarous people
upon the Church's pale, so as the Bishop had in effect no Diocese, yet they
should enjoy (...) the authority of their PRESID^NCY according to their proper
state; their appropriate presidency. And the same Council calls the Bishop
(...) the PRELATE or PREFECT of the Church; I know not how to expound it
better. But it is something more full in the Greeks Council of Carthage
Commanding that the convert Donatists should be received according to the will
and pleasure of the Bishop, Can. 69.
(...), that GOVERNES the Church in that place.* Can. 25.
And in the Council of Antioch (...), The Bishop has POWER OVER the affayrs
of the Church. * Hoc quidem tempore Romanae Ecclesiae Sylvester retinacula
gubernabat. S. Sylvester [ the Bishop] held the Reins or the stearne of the
Roman Church, says Theodoret. hist: tripart: lib. 1. cap. 12.


But the instances of this kind are infinite, two may be as good as twenty, de
dignit. sacerdot. c. 2.
and these they are. The first is of S. Ambrose; HONOR, and SUBLIMITAS
Episcopalis nullis poterit comparationibus adaequari. The HONOR and SUBLIMITY
of the Episcopal Order is beyond all comparison great. And their commission he
specifyes to be in Pasce oves meas; Vnde regendae Sacerdotibus contraduntur,
merito RECTORIBUS suis subdi dicuntur etc: The sheep are delivered to Bishops,
as to RULERS and are made their Subjects; And in the next chapter, Haec vero
cuncta, Cap. 3.
Fratres, ideo nos praemisisse cognoscere debetis, vt ostenderemus nihil esse
in hoc saeculo excellentius Sacerdotibus, nihil SUBLIMIUS EPISCOPIS reperiri:
vt cum dignitatem Episcopatus Episcoporum oraculis demonstramus, and digne
noscamus quid sumus.... action potius, quam Nomine demonstremus. These things
I have said that you may know nothing is higher, nothing more excellent then
the DIGNITY, AND EMINENCE OF A BISHOP, etc. The other is of S. Hierome, CURA
TOTIUS ECCLESIAE AD EPISCOPUM PERTINET, The care of the whole Church
appertains to the Bishop. But more confidently spoken is that in his dialogue
adversus Luciferianos; Ecclesiae salus in SUMMI SACERDOTIS DIGNITATE pendet,
Cap. 4.
cui si non exors quaedam and ab omnibus EMINENS DETUR POTESTAS, tot in
Ecclesiis efficientur schismata, quot Sacerdotes, The safety of the Church
consists in the DIGNITY OF A BISHOP, to whom unless an EMINENT and
UNPARALLELED POWER be given by all, there will be as many Schisms as Priests.

Here is dignity, and authority, and power enough expressed; and if words be
expressive of things (and there is no other use of the^) then the Bishop is
SUPERIOR IN A PEERLESS, AND INCOMPARABLE AUTHORITY, and all the whole
Diocese are his subjects, viz: in regimine Spirituali.

BUT from words let us pass to things. 35. Requiring Universal obedience to
be given to Bishops by Clergy and Laity.
For the Faith and practice of Christendom requires obedience, Universal
obedience, to be given to Bishops. I will begin again with Ignatius, that
these men who call for reduction of Episcopacy to Primitive consistence, may
see what they gain by it, for the more primitive the testimonies are, the
greater exaction of obedience to Bishops; for it happened in this, as in all
other things; at first, Christians were more devout more pursuing of their
duties, more zealous in attestation of every particle of their faith; and that
Episcopacy is now come to so low an ebb, it is nothing, but that it being a
great part of Christianity to honor, and obey them, it has the fate of all
other parts of our Religion, and particularly of Charity, come to so low a
declension, as it can scarce stand alone; and faith, which shall scarce be
found upon earth at the coming of the Son of Man.

But to our business.

S. Ignatius in his epistle to the Church of Trallis, Necesse itaque est (says
he) quicquid facitis, ut sine EPISCOPO NIHIL TENTETIS. So the Latin of
Vedelius, which I the rather choose, because I am willing to give all the
advantage I can. It is necessary (says the good Martyr) that whatsoever ye
do, you should attempt nothing without your BISHOP. And to the Magnesians,
Decet itaque vos obedire EPISCOPO, ET IN NULLO ILLI REFRAGARI. It is fitting
that ye should obey your BISHOP, and in NOTHING to be refractory to him. Here
is both a Decet, and a Necesse est, already. It is very fitting, it is
necessary. But if it be possible, we have a fuller expression yet, in the same
Epistle; Quemadmodum enim Dominus sine Patre nihil facit, nec enim possum
facere a me ipso quicquam: sic and vos SINE EPISCOPO, nec Presbyter, nec
Diaconus, nec Laicus. Nec QUICQUAM videatur VOBIS CONSENTANEUM quod sit PRAETER
ILLIUS IUDICIUM, quod enim tale est, iniquum est, and Deo inimicum. Here is
obedience Universal, both in respect of things, and persons; and all this no
less then absolutely necessary. For as Christ obeyed his Father in all things,
saying, of my self I can do nothing: so nor you without your BISHOP; whoever
you be, whether Priest, or Deacon, or Layman. Let nothing please you, which
the Bishop mislikes, for all such things are wicked, and in enemity with God. *
But it seems S. Ignatius was mightily in love with this precept, for he gives
it to almost all the Churches he writes to. We have already reckoned the
Trallians, and the Magnesians. But the same he gives to the Priests of Tarsus,
(...). Ye Presbyters be subject to your Bishop. The same to the Philadelphians.
Sine EPISCOPO nihil facite, Do nothing without your BISHOP. But this is better
explicated in his Epistle to the Church of Smyrna. Sine EPISCOPO NEMO QUIC QUAM
FACIAT eorum quae ad Ecclesiam spectant. No man may do ANY THING WITHOUT THE
BISHOP, viz. of those things which belong to the Church. So that this saying
expounds all the rest, for this universal obedience is to be understood
according to the sense of the Church, viz. to be in all things of
Ecclesiastical cognizance, all Church affairs. And therefore he gives a
charge to S. Polycarpe their Bishop; that he also look to it, that nothing be
done without his leave. Nihil sine TUO ARBITRIO agatur, nec item tu quicquam
praeter Dei facies voluntatem. As thou must do nothing against Gods will, so
let nothing (in the Church) be done without thine. By the way, observe, he
says not, that as the Presbytery must do nothing without the Bishop, so the
Bishop nothing without them; But, so the Bishop nothing without God. But so it
is. Nothing must BE DONE without the Bishop; And therefore although he
incourages them that can, to remain in Virginity, yet this, if it be either
done with pride, or without the Bishop, it is spoiled. For, si gloriatus
fuerit, periit, and si id ipsum statuatur SINE EPISCOPO, corruptum est. His
last dictate in this Epistle to S. Polycarpe, is with an [ Episcopo attendite,
sicut and Deus vobis] The way to have God to take care of us, is to observe our
Bishop. Hinc and vos decet accedere SENTENTIAE EPISCOPI, Epist. as Ephes^.
qui secundum Deum vos pascit, quemadmodum and facitis, edocti a spiritu; you
must therefore conform to the sentence of the BISHOP, as indeed ye do
already, being taught so to do by Gods holy Spirit.

There needs no more to be said in this cause, if the authority of so great a
man will bear so great a burden. What the man was, I said before: what these
Epistles are, and of what authority, let it rest upon Apologia pro Ignatio.
Vedelius, a man who is no ways to be suspected as a party for Episcopacy, or
rather upon the credit of Lib. 3. hist. c. 30.
Eusebius, De Script. Eccles.
S. Hierome, and Apud Eusebius. quem Latin reddidit.
Ruffinus who reckon the first seven out of which I have taken these excerpta,
for natural and genuine. And now I will make this use of it; Those men that
call for reduction of Episcopacy to the Primitive state, should do well to
stand close to their principles, and count that the best Episcopacy which is
first; and then consider but what S. Ignatius has told us for direction in
this affair, and see what is gotten in the bargain. For my part, since they
that call for such a reduction hope to gain by it, and then would most
certainly have abidden by it, I think it not reasonable to abate any thing of
Ignatius his height, but expect such subordination and conformity to the Bishop
as he then knew to be a law of Christianity. But let this be remembered all
along, in the specification of the parts of their Jurisdiction. But as yet I am
in the general demonstration of obedience.

The Council of Laodicea having specified some particular instances of
subordination, Can. 56.
and dependence to the Bishop, sums them up thus, Idem videre est apud
Damasum. Epist. de Chorepiscopis.
(...). So likewise the Presbyters let them do nothing without the precept and
counsel of the Bishop, so is the translation of Isidore, ad verbum. This
Council is ancient enough, for it was before the first Nicene. So also was
that of Arles commanding the same thing exactly. Can. 19.
* Vt Presbyteri sine conscientia Episcoporum nihil faciant. Sed nec
Presbyteris civitatis sine Episcopi praecepto amplius aliquid imperare, vel
sine authoritate literarum ejus in Vnaquaque parochia aliquid agere, says the
thirteenth Canon of the An^yran Council according to the Latin of Isidore.
The same thing is in the first Council of Toledo, Can. 20.
the very same words for which I cited the first Council of Arles, viz. That
Presbyters do nothing without the knowledge or permission of the Bishop.
Epist. ad Nepotian.
* Esto SUBIECTUS PONTIFICI Tuo, and quasi animae parentem suscipe. It is the
counsel of S. Hierome. Be subject to thy Bishop and receive him as the Father
of thy soul.

I shall not need to derive hither any more (...) the Ecclesiastical orders;
they therefore are to submit to the government of the Clergy in matters
Spiritual with which they are entrusted. For either there is no Government at
all, or the Laity must govern the Church, or else the Clergy must. To say
there is no Government, is to leave the Church in worse condition then a
tyranny. To say that the Laity should govern the Church, when all
Ecclesiastical Ministeries are committed to the Clergy, is to say, Scripture
means not what it says; for it is to say, that the Clergy must be Praepositi,
and (...), and praelati, and yet the prelation, and presidency, and rule is in
them who are not ever by Gods spirit called Presidents or Prelates, and that it
is not in them who are called so. * In the mean time if the Laity in matters
Spiritual are inferior to the Clergy, and must in things pertaining to the
Soul be ruled by them, with whom their Souls are entrusted; then also much
rather they must obey those of the Clergy, to whom all the other Clergy
themselves are bound to be obedient. Now since by the frequent precept of so
many Counsels, and Fathers, the Deacons and Presbyters must submit in all
things to the Bishop, much more must the Laity, and since the Bishop must rule
in chief, and the Presbyters at the most can but rule in conjunction, (...) S.
James translated by Ruffinus, says it was the doctrine of Peter, according to
the institution of Christ, that Presbyters should be obedient to their Bishop
in all things; and in his third Epistle; that Presbyters, and Deacons and
others of the Clergy must take heed that they do nothing without the license
of the Bishop. * And to make this business up complete, all these authorities
of great antiquity, were not the prime constitutions in those several Churches
respectively, but mere derivations from tradition Apostolical; for not only
the thing, but the words so often mentioned are in the 40th Canon of the
Apostles. (...) (the same is repeated in the twenty fourth Canon of the
Council of Antioch) (...) Presbyters and Deacons must do nothing. without
leave of the Bishop, for to him the Lords people is committed, and he must give
an account for their souls. * And if a Presbyter shall contemn his own
Bishop making conventions apart, and erecting another altar, he is to be
deposed, (...) (says the 32. Canon) as a lover of Principality: intimating,
that he arrogates Episcopal dignity, and so is ambitious of a Principality.
The issue then is this. * The Presbyters, and Clergy, and Laity must obey,
therefore the Bishop must govern and give them laws. It was particularly
instanced in the case of S. Chrysostom, (...) says Theodoret, He adorned, and
instructed Pontus with these Laws, Lib. 5. cap. 28.
so he, reckoning up the extent of his jurisdiction.

* But now descend we to a specification of the power and jurisdiction * of
Bishops. 36. Appointing them to be Judges of the Clergy and spiritual causes
of the Laity.


THE Bishops were Ecclesiastical Judges over the Presbyters, the inferior
Clergy and the Laity. What they were in Scripture who were constituted in
presidency over causes spiritual, I have already twice explicated; and from
hence it descended by a close succession that they who watched for souls they
had the rule over them, and because no regiment can be without coercion,
therefore there was inherent in them a power of cognition of causes, and
coercion of persons. * The Canons of the Apostles appointing censures to be
inflicted on delinquent person's makes the Bishop's hand to do it. Can. 33.
(...). If any Presbyter or Deacon be excommunicated BY THE BISHOP he must not
be received by any else, but by him that did so censure him, unless the BISHOP
THAT CENSURED HIM be dead. The same is repeated in the Nicene Council; Can. 5.
only it is permitted that any one may appeal to a Synod of BISHOPS, si forte
aliqua indignatione, aut contentione, aut qualibet commotione Episcopi sui,
excommunicati sint, if he thinks himself wronged by prejudice or passion; and
when the Synod is met, hujusmodi examinent Quaestiones. But by the way it must
be Synodus Episcoporum, so the Canon; ut ita demum hi qui ^b culpas suas
EPISCOPORUM SUORUM OFFENSAS merito contraxerunt digne etiam a caeteris
excommunicati habeantur, quousque in c^mmuni, vel IPSL ERISCOPO SUO UISUM
FUERIT humaniorum circa eos far sententiam. The Synod of Bishops must ratify
the excommunication of all those who for their delinquencies have justly
incurred the displeasure of their Bishop, and this censure to stick upon them
till either the Synod, or their own Bishop shall give a more gentle sentence.
* * This Canon we see, relates to the Canon of the Apostles, and affixes the
judicature of Priests, and Deacons to the Bishops: commanding their censures to
be held as firm and valid: only as the Apostles Canon names Presbyters, and
Deacons particularly; so the Nicene Canon speaks indefinitely and so
comprehends all of the Diocese and jurisdiction.

The fourth Council of Carthage gives in express terms the cognizance of
Clergy-causes to the Bishop, Can. 59.
calling aid from a Synod in case a Clergyman prove refractary, and
disobedient. Discordantes Clericos Episcopus vel ratione, vel potestate ad
concordiam trahat, inobedientes Synodus per audientiam damnet. If the Bishops
reason will not end the controversies of Clergymen, his power must; but if any
man list to be contentious, intimating (as I suppose out of the Nicene
Council) with frivolous appeals, and impertinent protraction, the Synod [of
Bishops] must condemn him, viz. for his disobeying his Bishops sentence. * The
Council of Antioch is yet more particular in it is Sanction for this affayre,
intimating a clear distinction of proceeding in the causes of a Bishop, and
the other of Priests, and Deacons. Can. 4.
(...) etc. If a Bishop shall be deposed by a Synod (viz. of Bishops, according
to the exigence of the Nicene Canon) or a PRIEST, OR DEACON BY HIS OWN BISHOP,
if he meddles with any Sacred offices he shall be hopeless of absolution. But
here we see that the ordinary Judge of a Bishop is a Synod of Bishops; but of
Priests and Deacons the Bishop alone: And the sentence of the Bishop is made
firm omnimodo in the next Canon; Si quis Presbyter, vel Diaconus proprio
contempto Episcopo.... privatim congregationem effecerit, and altar erexerit,
and Episcopo accersente non obedierit nec velit ei parere, nec morem gerere
primo and secundo vocanti, hic damnetur omni modo.... Quod si Ecclesiam
conturbare, and sollicitare persistat tanquam seditiosus per potestates exter
as opprimatur. What Presbyter soever refuses to obey his Bishop and will not
appear at his first, or second Summons, let him be deposed, and if he shall
persist to disturb the Church, let him be given over to the secular powers. *
Add to this the first Canon of the same Council, (...) etc: If any one be
excommunicate by his own Bishop etc: as it is in the foregoing Canons of Nice
and the Apostles. The Result of these Sanctions is this. The Bishop is the
Judge: the Bishop is to inflict censures; the Presbyters, and Deacons are
either to obey, or to be deposed: No greater evidence in the world of a
Superior jurisdiction, and this established by all the power they had; and
this did extend, not only to the Clergy, but to the Laity; for that is the close
of the Canon, (...). This constitution is concerning the Laity, and the
Presbyters, and the Deacons, and all that are within the rule, viz: that if
their Bishop have sequestered them from the holy Communion, they must not be
suffered to communicate elsewhere.

But the AUDIENTIA EPISCOPALIS, The Bishops Audience-Court is of larger power
in the Council of Chalcedon, Can. 9.
(...). If any Clergy man have any cause against a Clergy man, let him by no
means leave his own Bishop and run to SECULAR COURTS, (...). But first le^
the cause be examined before their own BISHOP, or by the BISHOPS LEAVE before
such persons as the contesting parties shall desire. (...). Whosoever does
otherwise let him suffer under the censures of the Church. Here is not only a
subordination of the Clergy in matters criminal, but also the civil causes of
the Clergy must be submitted to the Bishop, under pain of the Canon. * I end
this with the at^estation of the Council of Sardis, exactly of the same
Spirit, the same injunction, and almost the same words with the former Canons.
Hosius the President said; Can. 13, and 14.
If any Deacon, or Priest, or of the inferior Clergy being excommunicated
shall go to another Bishop (...), knowing him to be excommunicated by his own
BISHOP, that other Bishop, must by no means receive him into his communion.

Thus far we have matter of public right, and authority declaring the Bishop
to be the Ordinary Judge of the causes, and persons of Clergy men; and have
power of inflicting censures both upon the Clergy, and the Laity. And if there
be any weight in the concurrent testimony of the Apostolicall-Canons, of the
General Counsels of Nice, and of Chalcedon, of the Counsels of Antioch, of
Sardis, of Carthage; then it is evident, that the Bishop is the Ordinary Judge
in all matters of Spiritual cognizance, and has power of censures, and
therefore a Superiority of jurisdiction.

This thing only by the way; in all these Canons there is no mention made of
any Presbyters assistant with the Bishop in his Courts. For though I doubt not
but the Presbyters were in some Churches, and in some times (...); and as (...)
S. Ignatius calls them; counselors and assessors with the Bishop; yet the
power, and the right of inflicting censures is only expressed to be in the
Bishop, and no concurrent jurisdiction mentioned in the Presbytery: but of this
hereafter more particularly.

* Now we may see these Canons attested by practice, and dogmaticall
resolution. S. Cyprian is the man whom I would choose in all the world to
depose in this cause; because he, if any man, has given all dues to the
College of Presbyters: and yet if he reserves the Superiority of jurisdiction
to the Bishop, and that absolutely, and independently of conjunction with the
Presbytery, we are all well enough, and without suspicion. * Diu patientiam
meam tenui (Fratres Charissimi) says he, Epist. 10.
writing to the Presbyters and Deacons of his Church. He was angry with them
for admitting the lapsi without his consent* and though he was as willing as
any man to comply both with the Clergy, and people of his D^^cesse, yet he also
must assert his own privileges, and peculiar. Quod enim non periculam metuere
debemus de offensa Domini, quando aliqui de Presbyteris nec Evangelij nec loci
(...) memores, ^ed neque futurum Domini judicium, neque nunc praepositum sibi
Episcopum cogitantes, quod nunquam omnino sub antecessoribus factum est ut cum
co^tumelia and contemtu Praeposititotum sibi vendicent. The matter was, that
certain Presbyters had reconciled them that fell in persecution without the
performance of penance according to the severity of the Canon; and this was
done without the Bishops leave, by the Presbyters [ Forgetting their own place
and the GOSPEL and their BISHOP set over them] a thing that was never heard
of, till that time. Totum sibi vendicabant, They that might do nothing without
the Bishops leave, yet did this whole affair of their own heads. Well! Upon
this S. Cyprian himself, by his own authority alone, suspends them till his
return, and so shows that his authority was independent, theirs was not, and
then promises they shall have a fair hearing before him, in the presence of
the Confessors, and all the people. Vtar ea admonitione qua me vti Dominus
jubet, ut interim prohibeantur offerre, acturi and apud nos, and apud
Confessores ipsos, and apud plebem Vniversam causam suam. * Here it is plain
that S. Cyprian suspended these Presbyters, by his own authority, in absence
from his Church, and reserved the further hearing of the cause till it should
please God to restore him to his See.

But this fault of the Presbyters S. Cyprian in the two next Epistles does
still more exaggerate; saying, they ought to have asked the Bishops leave,
Sicut in praeteritum semper sub antecessoribus factum est, for so was the
Catholic custom ever, that nothing should be done without the Bishops leave;
but now by doing otherwise they did prevaricate the divine commandment, Epist.
1^.
and dishonor the Bishop. Yea, but the Confessors interceeded for the lapsi,
and they seldom were discountenanced in their requests. What should the
Presbyters do in this ca^e^ S. Cyprian tells them, writing to the Confessors.
Petitiones itaque, and desideria vestra EPISCOPO servent. Let them keep your
petitions for the BISHOP to consider of. But they did not, Epist. 12.
therefore he suspended them, because they did not reservare Episcopo honorem
Sacerdotij sui, and cathedrae; Preserve the honor of the Bishops chair, and
the Episcopal authority in presuming to reconcile the penitents without the
Bishops leave.

The same S. Cyprian in his Epistle to Rogatianus resolves this affayre; Epist.
65.
for when a contemptuous bold Deacon had abused his Bishop, he complained to S.
Cyprian who was an Archbishop, and indeed S. Cyprian tells him he did honor
him in the business that he would complain to him, cum pro EPISCOPATUS
VIGORE, and CATHEDRAE AUTHORITATE haberes potestatem qua posses de illo statim
vindicari; When as he had power Episcopal and sufficient authority himself to
have punished the Deacon for his petulancy. The whole Epistle is very pertinent
to this Question, and is clear evidence for the great authority of Episcopal
jurisdiction, the sum whereof is in this encouragement given to Rogatianus by
S. Cyprian; Fungaris circa cum POTESTATE HONORIS TUI, ut eum vel deponas, vel
abstineas. Exercise the power of your honor upon him, and either suspend him,
or depose him. * And therefore he commends Cornelius the Bishop of Rome for
driving Felicissimus the Schismatic from the Church, Epist. 55.
vigore pleno quo Episcopum agere oportet with full authority, as becomes a
Bishop,

Socrates telling of the promotion, and qualities of S. John Chrysostom,
Tripart. hist. lib. 10. cap. 3.
says, that in reforming the lives of the Clergy, he was too fastuous and
severe. Mox igitur in ipso initio quum Clericis asper videretur Ecclesiae, erat
plurimis ex^sus, and veluti furiosum universi declinabant. He was so rigid in
animadversions against the Clergy, that he was hated by them, which clearly
shows that the Bishop had jurisdiction, and authority over them; for tyranny
is the excess of power, and authority is the subject matter of rigor, and
austerity. But this power was intimated in that bold speech of his Deacon
Serapio, nunquam poteris, a Episcope, hos corrigere, nisi uno baculo
percusseris Vniversos. Thou can not amend the Clergy unless thou strikest
them all with thy Pastoral rod. S. John Chrystome did not indeed do so, but
non multum post temporis plurimos clericorum pro diversis exemit causis. He
deprived, and suspended most of the Clergy men for diverse causes: and for this
his severity he wanted no slanders against him; for the delinquent Ministers
set the people on work against him. * But here we see that the power of
censures was clearly, and only in the Bishop, for he was incited to have
punished all his Clergy, [ Vniversos;] And he did actually suspend most of
them, [ plurimos:] and I think it will not be believed the Presbytery of his
Church should join with their Bishop to suspend themselves. Ibid. cap. 4.
Add to this that Theodoret also affirms that Chrysostom entreated the
Priests to live Canonically according to the sanctions of the Church, quas
quicunque praevaricari praesumerent eas ad tomplum prohibebat accedere, ALL
them that transgressed the Canons he forbad them entrance into the Church.

*** Thus S. Hierome to Riparius, Advers. Vigilant. Epist. 53.
Miror sanctum Episcopum, in cujus Parochia esse Presbyter dicitur, acquiescere
furori ejus, and non virga APOSTOLICA, virgaque ferrea confringere vas inutile,
and tradere in interitum carnis, ut spiritus salvus fiat. I wonder (says he)
that the holy Bishop is not moved at the fury of Vigilantius, and does not
break him with his APOSTOLICAL rod, that by this temporary punishment his
soul might be saved in the day of the Lord. * Hitherto the Bishops Pastoral
staff is of fair power and coercion.

The Council of Aquileia convoked against the Arians, is full and mighty in
asserting the Bishops power over the Laity, and did actually exercise censures
upon the Clergy, where S. Ambrose was the Man that gave sentence against
Palladius the Arian* Palladius would have declined the judgment of the
Bishops, for he saw he should certainly be condemned and would feign have been
judged by some honorable personages of the Laity. But S. Ambrose said,
Sacerdotes de Laicis judicare debent, non Laici de Sacerdotibus. Bishops must
judge of the Laity, not the Laity of Bishops. That Is for the jus; and for the
factum it was the shutting up of the Council; S. Ambrose Bishop of Millaine
gave sentence [ Pronuncio illum indignum Sacerdotio, and carendum, and in loco
ejus Catholicus ordinetur.] * The same also was the case of Marcellus Bishop of
Ancyra in Galatia whom for heresy the Bishops at Constantinople deposed,
Eusebius giving sentence, Tripart. hist. lib. 3. cap. 9.
and chose Basilius in his Room.

* But their Grandfather was served no better. Alexander Bishop of Alexandria
served him neither better nor worse. Tripart. hist. lib. 1. c. 12.
So Theodoret. Alexander autem Apostolicorum dogmatum praedicator, prius quidem
revocare eum admonitionibus, and consilijs nitebatur. Cum vero eum superbire
vidisset, and aperte impietatis facinora praedicare, ex ordine Sacerdotali
removit. The Bishop first admonished the heretic, but when to his false
doctrine he added pertinacy he deprived him of the execution of his Priestly
function.

This crime indeed deserved it highly. It was for a less matter that Triferius
the Bishop excommunicated Exuperantius a Presbyter, viz. for a personal
misdemeanour, and yet this censure was ratified by the Council of Taurinum,
Can. 4. Ann. Dom. 397.
and his restitution was left arbitrio Episcopi, to the good will and pleasure
of the Bishop who had censured him. statuit quoque de Exuperantio Presbytero
sancta Synodu^, qui ad injuriam sancti Episcopi sui Triferii gravia and multa
congesserat, and frequentibus ^um contumeliis provocaverat.... propter quam
causam ab eo fuerat Dominica communione privatus, ut in ejus sit arbitrio
restitutio ipsius, in cujus potestate ejus fuit abjectio. His restitution was
therefore left in his power, because originally his censure was. * The like was
in the case of Palladius a Laick in the same Council, qui a Triferio Sacerdote
fuerat mulctatus, who was punished by Triferius the Bishop* hoc ei humanitate
Concilii reservato, at ipse Triferius in potestate habeat, quando voluerit ei
relaxare.

Here is the Bishop censuring Palladius the Laick, and excommunicating
Exuperantius the Priest, and this having been done by his own sole authority
was ratified by the Council, and the absolution reserved to the Bishop too,
which indeed was an act of favor; for they having complained to the Council,
by the Council might have been absolved, but they were pleased to reserve to
the Bishop his own power.

These are particular instances, and made public by acts conciliary
intervening. But it was the General Canon and Law of H. Church. Thus we have
it expressed in the Council of Agatho. Cap. 2*
Contumaces vero Clerici prout dignitatis ordo permiserit ab Episcopis
corrigantur. Refractary Clerks must be punished by their Bishops, according at
the order of their dignity allows. I end this particular with some Canons
commanding Clerks to submit to the judgment and censures of their Bishop,
under a Canonical penalty; and so go on ad alia.

In the second Council of Carthage, Ca. 8.
Alypius Episcopus dixit, nee illud praetermittendum est, ut si quis forte
Presbyter ab Episcopo suo correptus, aut excommunicatus, rumore vel superbia
inflatus, putaverit separatim Deo sacrificia offerenda, vel aliud erigendum
altar contra Ecclesiasticam fidem disciplinamque crediderit, non exeat
impunitus. And the same is repeated in the Greek Code of the African Canons.
Can. 10.
If any Presbyter being excommunicated, or otherwise punished by his Bishop,
shall not desist, but contest with his Bishop, let him by no means go
unpunished. Act. 4. can. 83.
* The like is in the Council of Chalcedon, the words are the same that I
before cited out of the Canons of the Council of Antioch, and of the Apostles.
Post epist. Archimandritarum ad Concilium pro Dioscori rehabilitatione.
But Carosus the Archimandrite spoke home in that action. (...). The faith of
the 318 Fathers of the Council of Nice into which I was baptized I know, Other
faith I know not. They are Bishops; They have power to excommunicate and
condemn, and they have power to do what they please: other faith then this I
know none. * This is to purpose, and it was in one of the four great Counsels
or Christendom which all ages since have received, with all veneration and
devout estimate.

Another of them was that of Ephesus convened against Nestorius, Council. Ephesians.
c. 5.
and this ratifies those acts of condemnation which the Bishops had passed upon
delinquent Clerks. (...) etc. They who are for their unworthy practices
condemned by the Synod or by their OWN BISHOPS; although Nestorius did
endeavor to restore them, yet their condemnation should still remain vigorous
and confirmed. Upon which Canon Balsamon makes this observation, which indeed
of it self is clear enough in the Canon. (...). Hence you have learned that
Metropolitans and Bishops can judge their Clergy, and suspend them, and
sometimes depose them. Nay, they are bound to it, Pastoralis tamen necessitas
habet (ne per plures serpant dira contagia) separare ab ovibus sanis morbidam.
It is necessary that the BISHOP should separate the scabbed sheep from the
sound, least their infection scatter, C^p. 15. de co^rept. and gratoa.
so S. Austin. * And therefore the fourth Council of Can. 55.
Carthage commands, ut Episcopus accusatores Fratrum excommunicet, That the
Bishop excommunicate the accuser of their Brethren (viz. such as bring Clergy
causes* and Catholic doctrine, to be punished in secular tribunalls;) For
Excommunication is called by the Fathers Mucro Episcopalis, the Bishops sword
to cut offenders off from the Catholic communion. I add no more but that
excellent saying of S. Au^tin, which does freely attest both the preceptive,
(...) power of the Bishop over his whole (...) Ergo praecipiant tantummodo
nobis quid facere debeiamus qui nobis praesunt, and faciamus orent pro nobis,
non autem nos corripiant, and arguant, si non fecerimus. Imo omnia fiant,
quoniam Doct^res Ecclesiarum Apostoli omnia faciebant, and praecipiebant quae
fierent, and corripiebant si non fierent etc. And again; Cap. 15. ibid.
Corripiantur itaque a praepositis suis subditi correptionibus de charitate
venientibus, pro culparum diversitate diversis, vel minoribus, vel amplioribus,
quia and ipsa quae damnatio nominatur quam facit Episcopale judicium, qua poena
in Ecclesia nulla major est, potest, si Deus voluerit, in correptionem
saluberrimam cedere, atque proficere. Here the Bishops have a power
acknowledged in them to command their Diocese, and to punish the disobedient,
and of excommunication by way of proper Ministry, [ damnatio quam facit
Episcopale judicium] a condemnation of the Bishops infliction.

Thus it is evident by the constant practice of Primitive Christendom, by the
Canons of three General Counsels, and diverse other Provincial, which are
made Catholic by adoption, and inserting them into the Code of the Catholic
Church, that the Bishop was Judge of his Clergy, and of the Lay People of his
Diocese; that he had power to inflict censures upon them in case of
delinquency; that his censures were firm and valid; and as yet we find no
Presbyters joining either in commission, or fact* in power, or exercise: but
excommunication and censures to be appropriated to Bishops and to be only
dispatched by them, either in full Council, if it was a Bishops cause, or in
his own Consistory, if it was the cause of a Priest, or the inferior Clergy, or
a Laick, unless in cases of appeal, and then it was in plen^ Concilio
Episcoporum, in a Synod of Bishops; And all this was confirmed by secular
authority, as appears in the Imperial Constitutions. Novel. constit. 123. c.
11.


For the making up this Paragraph complete, I must insert two considerations.
First concerning universality of causes within the Bishops cognizance. And
secondly of Persons. The Ancient Canons asserting the Bishops power in
Cognitione causarum speak in most large, and comprehensive terms. (...). They
have power to do what they list. Their power is as large as their will. So the
Council of Chalcedon before cited. It was no larger though, then S. Paul's
expression, [ for to this end also did I write, that I might know the proof of
you, 2. Corinthians. 2. 9.
whether ye be obedient IN ALL THINGS.] A large extent of power when the
Apostles expected an Universal obedience. (...). And so the style of the
Church run in descention, (...), so Ignatius, ye must do NOTHING without
your BISHOP, (...), Vbi supra.
to contradict him in NOTHING. The expression is frequent in him, (...), to
comprehend all things in his judgment, or cognizance, so the Council of
Antioch. Ca. 9.


* But these Universal expressions must be understood secundum Materiam
subjectam, so S. Ignatius expresses himself. Ye must without your Bishop do
nothing; nothing (...), of things pertaining to the Church. So also the
Council of Antioch, (...), The things of the Church, are (...) committed to
the Bishop to whom all the people is entrusted. They are Ecclesiastical
persons, it is an Ecclesiastical power they are endowed with, it is for a
spiritual end, viz the regiment of the Church, and the good of souls, and
therefore only those things which are in this order are of Episcopal
cognizance. And what things are those?

1. Then, it is certain that since Christ has pro^essed, his Kingdom is not
of this world, that government which he has constituted de novo does no way in
the world make any intrenchment upon the Royalty.

Hostis Herodes impie
Christum venire quid times?
Non cripit mortalia
Qui regna dat Coelestia. So the Church used to sing. Whatsoever therefore the
secular tribunal did take cognizance of before it was Christian, the same it
takes notice of after it is Christ'ned. And these are; all actions civil, all
public violations of justice, all breach of Municipall laws. These the Church
has nothing to do with, unless by the favor of Princes and commonwealths
it be indulged to them in honorem Dei and S. Matris Ecclesiae; but then when it
is once indulged, that act which does annull such pious vows, is just contrary
to that religion which first gave them, and then unless there was sin in the
donative, the ablation of it is contra honorem Dei and S. Matris Ecclesiae. But
this it may be is impertinent.

2. The Bishops ALL, comes in after this; And he is judge of all those causes
which Christianity has brought in upon a new stock, by it is new distinctive
Principles. I say, by it is new Principles; for there where it extends justice,
and pursues the laws of nature, there the secular tribunal is also extended
if it be Christian; The Bishop gets nothing of that: But those things which
Christianity (as it prescinds from the interest of the republike) has
introduced all them, and all the causes emergent from them the Bishop is judge
of. Such are causes of faith, Ministration of Sacraments, and Sacramentals,
subordination of inferior Clergy to their Superior, censures, irregularities,
Orders hierarchicall, rites and ceremonies, liturgyes, and public forms of
prayer, (as is famous in the Ancient story of Ignatius teaching his Church the
first use of Antiphona's and Doxologyes, tripart. hist. lib. 10. cap. 9.
and thence was derived to all Churches of Christendom) and all such things as
are in immediate dependence of these, as dispensation of Church Vessels, and
Ornaments, and Goods, receiving and disposing the Patrimony of the Church, and
whatsoever is of the same consideration, according to the 41 Canon of the
Apostles. Praecipimus ut in potestate sua Episcopus Ecclesiae res habeat. Let
the Bishop have the disposing the goods of the Church; adding this reason. Si
enim animae hominum pretiosae illi sint credita, multo magis eum oportet curam
pecuniarum gerere. He that is entrusted with our precious souls, may much more
be entrusted with the offertoryes of faithful people.

3. There are some things of a mixed nature; and something of the secular
interest, and something of the Ecclesiastical concur to their constitution,
and these are of double cognizance: the secular power, and the Ecclesiastical
do both in their several capacities take knowledge of them. Such are the
delinquencyes of Clergymen, who are both Clergy, and subjects too; Clerus
Domini, and Regis subditi; and for their delinquencyes which are in materia
justitiae the secular tribunal punishes as being a violation of that right
which the State must defend, but because done by a person who is a member of
the sacred hierarchy, and has also an obligation of special duty to his
Bishop, therefore the Bishop also may punish him; And when the commonwealth
has inflicted a penalty, the Bishop also may impose a censure, for every sin
of a Clergyman is two. But of this nature also are the convening of Synods,
the power whereof is in the King, and in the Bishop severally, insomuch as both
the Church and the commonwealth in their several respects have peculiar
interest; The commonwealth for preservation of peace and charity, in which
religion has the deepest interest; and the Church, for the maintenance of
faith. And therefore both Prince and Bishop have indicted Synods in several
ages, upon the exigence of several occasions, and have several powers for the
engagement of Clericall obedience, and attendance upon such solemnities.

4. Because Christianity is after the commonwealth, and is a capacity
superadded to it, therefore those things which are of mixed cognizance are
chiefly in the King; The Supremacy here is his, and so it is in all things of
this nature, which are called [ Ecclesiasticall] because they are in materia
Ecclesiae, ad finem religionis, but they are of a different nature, and use
from things [ Spirituall] because they are not issues of those things which
Christianity has introduced de integro, and are separate from the interest of
the commonwealth in it is particular capacity, for such things only, are
properly spiritual.

5. The Bishops jurisdiction has a compulsory derived from Christ only, viz.
infliction of censures by excommunications, or other minores plagae which are
in order to it. But yet this internal compulsory through the duty of good
Princes to God, and their favor to the Church, is assisted by the secular
arm, either superadding a temporal penalty in case of contumacy, or some
other way abetting the censures of the Church, and it ever was so since
commonwealths were Christian. So that ever since then, Episcopal Jurisdiction
has a double part; an external, and an internal; this is derived from
Christ, that from the King, which because it is concurrent in all acts of
Jurisdiction, therefore it is, that the King is supreme of the Jurisdiction,
viz. that part of it which is the external compulsory.

* And for this cause we shall sometimes see the Emperor, or his Prefect, or
any man of consular dignity sit Judge when the Question is of Faith, not that
the Prefect was to Judge of that, or that the Bishops were not; But in case of
the pervicacy of a peevish heretic who would not submitt to the power of the
Church, but flew to the secular power for assistance, hoping by taking
sanctuary there, to engage the favor of the Prince: In this case the Bishops
also appealed thither, not for resolution, but assistance, and sustentation of
the Church's power. * It was so in the case of Aetius the Arian, and Honoratus
the Prefect, Tripart. hist. lib. 5. c. 35.
Constantius being Emperor. For, all that the Prefect did, or the Emperor in
this case, was by the prevalency of his intervening authority to reconcile the
disagreeing parties, and to encourage the Catholics; but the precise act of
Judicature even in this case was in the Bishops, for they deposed Aetius for
his heresy, for all his confident appeal, and Macedonius, Eleusius, Basilius,
Ortasius, and Dracontius for personal delinquencyes. * And all this is but to
reconcile this act to the resolution, and assertion of S. Ambrose, who refused
to be tried in a cause of faith by Lay-Iudges, though Delegates of the
Emperor. S. Ambros. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 13.
Quando audisti (Clementissime Imperator) in causa fidei Laicos de Episcopo
judicasse? When was it ever known that Laymen in a cause of Faith did judge a
Bishop? To be sure, it was not in the case of Honoratus the Prefect; for if
they had appealed to him, or to his Master Constantius for judgment of the
Article, and not for encouragement and secular assistance, S. Ambrose his
confident Question of [ Quando audisti?] had quickly been answered, even with
saying; presently after the Council of Ariminum in the case of Aetius, and
Honoratus. * Nay it was one of the causes why S. Ambrose deposed Palladius in
the Council of Aquileia, because he refused to answer, except it were before
some honorable personages of the Laity. And it is observeable that the Arians
were the first (and indeed they offered at it often) that did desire Princes to
judge matters of faith, for they despayring of their cause in a Conciliary
trial, hoped to engage the Emperor on their party, by making him Umpire. But
the Catholic Bishops made humble, and fair remonstrance of the distinction of
powers, and Jurisdictions; and as they might not entrench upon the Royalty, so
neither betray that right which Christ concredited to them to the incroachment
of an exterior jurisdiction and power. It is a good story that Suidas tells of
Leontius Bishop of Tripolis in Lydia, In verbo (...).
a man so famous and exemplary, that he was called (...), the rule of the
Church that when Constantius the Emperor did preside amongst the Bishops, and
undertook to determine causes of mere spiritual cognizance, instead of a
Placet, he gave this answer, (...). I wonder that thou being set over things of
a different nature, medlest with those things that only appertain to Bishops.
The MILITIA, and the POLITI^ are thine, but matters of FAITH, and SPIRIT, are
of EPISCOPAL cognizance. (...). Such was the freedom of the ingenuaus
L^^ntius. Answerable to which, was that Christian and fair acknowledgement of
Valentinian when the Arian Bishops of Bithynia and the Hellespont sent
Hypatianus their legate to desire him, ut dignaretur ad emendationem dogmatis
interesse, that he would be pleased to mend the Article. Respondens
Valentinianus, ait, Mihi quidem quum vnus de populo sim fas non est talia
perscrutari. Verum Sacerdotes apud se ipsos congregentur vbi voluerint. Cumque
haec respondisset Princeps in Lampsacum convenerunt Episcopi. hist. tripart.
lib. 7. c. 12.
So Sozomen reports the story. The Emperor would not meddle with matters of
faith, but referred the deliberation, and decision of them to the Bishops to
whom by God's law they did appertain; Upon which intimation given, the Bishops
convened in Lampsacum. And thus a double power met in the Bishops. A divine
right to decide the article. Mihi fas non est, (says the Emperor) it is not
lawful for me to meddle; And then a right from the Emperor to assemble, for
he gave them leave to call a Council. These are two distinct powers, One from
Christ, the other from the Prince. ***

And now upon this occasion, I have fair opportunity to insert a
consideration, The Bishops have power over all causes emergent in their
diocesses; all, (I mean) in the sense above explicated; they have power to
inflict censures, excommunication is the highest, the rest are parts of it, and
in order to it. Whether or no must Church Censures be used in all such causes
as they take cognizance of, or may not the secular power find our some
external compulsory in stead of it, and forbid the Church to use
excommunication, in certain cases?

1. To this, I answer, that if they be such cases in which by the law of Christ
they may, or such in which they must use excommunication, then, in these cases
no power can forbid them. For what power Christ has given them, no man can
take away.

2. As no humane power can disrobe the Church of the power of excommunication;
so no humane power can invest the Church with a lay Compulsory. For if the
Church be not capable of a jus gladij, as most certainly she is not, the
Church cannot receive power to put men to death, or to inflict lesser pains in
order to it, or any thing above a salutary penance, I mean in the formality of
a Church-tribunall, then they give the Church what she must not, cannot take.
I deny not but Clergy men are as capable of the power of life and death, as any
men; but not in the formality of Clergymen. A Court of life and death, cannot
be an Ecclesiastical tribunal; and then if any man, or company of Men should
persuade the Church not to inflict her censures upon delinquents, in some cases
in which she might lawfully inflict them, and pretend to give her another
compulsory; they take away the Church-consistory, and erect a very secular
Court, dependant on themselves, and by consequence to be appealed to from
themselves, and so also to be prohibited as the Lay-Superiour shall see cause
for. * Whoever therefore should be consenting to any such permutation of power,
is traditor potestatis quam S. Matter Ecclesia a sponso suo acceperat, he
betrays the individual, and inseparable right of holy Church. For her
censures she may inflict upon her delinquent children without asking leave.
Christ is her (...) for that, he is her warrant and security. The other is
begged, or borrowed, none of her own, nor of a fit edge to be us 'd in her
abscissions, and coercions. Can. 39.
I end this consideration with that memorable Canon of the Apostles of so
frequent use in this Question, (...). Let the Bishop have the care or provision
for all affairs of the Church, and let him dispense them velut Deo
contemplante as in the sight of God, to whom he must be responsive for all his
Diocese.

The next Consideration concerning the Bishop's jurisdiction is of what persons
he is Judge? And because our Scene lies here in Church-practice I shall only
set down the doctrine of the Primitive Church in this affair, and leave it
under that representation.

Presbyters, and Deacons, and inferior Clerks, and the Laity are already
involved in the precedent Canons; No man there, was exempted of whose soul any
Bishop had charge. And all Christ's sheep hear his voice, and the call of his
sheap-heard-Ministers. * Theodoret tells a story that when the Bishops of the
Province were assembled by the command of Valentinian the Emperor for the
choice of a Successor to Auxentius in the Sea of Millayne, the Emperor wished
them to be careful in the choice of a Bishop, Theodoret. lib. 4. c. 5.
in these words, (...). Set such an one in the Archiepiscopall throne, that we
who rule the Kingdom may sincerely submitt our head unto him, viz: in matters
of spiritual import. * And since all power is derived from Christ, who is a
King, and a Priest, and a Prophet, Christian Kings are Christi Domini, and
Vicars in his Regal power, but Bishops in his Sacerdotall, and Prophetical. *
So that the King has a Supreme Regal power in causes of the Church, ever
since his Kingdom became Christian, and it consists in all things, in which
the Priestly office is not precisely by Gods law employed for regiment, and
cure of souls, and in these also, all the external compulsory and
jurisdiction in his own. For when his Subjects became Christian Subjects,
himself also upon the same terms becomes a Christian Ruler, and in both
capacities he is to rule, viz: both as Subjects, and as Christian Subjects,
except only in the precise issues of Sacerdotall authority. And therefore the
Kingdom, and the Priesthood are excelled by each other in their several
capacities. For superiority is usually expressed in three words, (...) and
(...), Excellency, Impery, and Power. The King is supreme to the Bishop in
Impery; The Bishop has an Excellency, viz. of Spiritual Ministration which
Christ has not concredited to the King; but in Power, both King, and Bishop
have it distinctly in several capacity; the King in potentia gladii, the
Bishop in potestate clavium. The Sword, and the Keys are the emblems of their
distinct power. Something like this is in the third Epistle of S. Clement
translated by Ruffinus, Quid enim in praesenti saeculo propheta gloriosius,
Pontifice clarius, Rege sublimius? King, and Priest, and Prophet, are in their
several excellencies, the Highest powers under heaven. *** In this sense it is
easy to understand those expressions often used in Antiquity, which might seem
to make intrenchment upon the sacredness of Royal prerogatives; were not both
the piety, and sense of the Church sufficiently clear in the issues of her
humblest obedience. Epist. ad Philadelph.
And this is the sense of S. Ignatius that holy Martyr, and disciple of the
Apostles: Diaconi, and reliquus Clerus, una cum populo Vniverso, Militibus,
Principibus, and Caesare, ipsi Episcopo pareant. Let the Deacons and all the
Clergy, and all the people, the Soldiers, the Princes, and Caesar himself
obey the Bishop. Lib. de dignit. Sacerd. cap. 2.
This is it, which S. Ambrose said; Sublimitas Episcopalis nullis poterit
comparationibus adaequari. Si Regum fulgori compares, and Principum diademati,
erit inferius etc. This also was acknowledged by the great Constantine, that
most blessed Prince, Deus vos constituit Sacerdotes, and potestatem vobis
dedit, de nobis quoque judicandi, and ideo nos a vobis recte judicamur. Vos
autem non potestis ab hominibus judicari, [ viz. saecularibus, Lib. 10. Eccles.
hist. c. ^.
and in causis simplicis religionis.] So that good Emperor in his oration to
the Nicene Fathers.

It was a famous contestation that S. Ambrose had with Auxentius the Arian
pretending the Emperors command to him to deliver up some certain Churches in
his Diocese to the Arians. His answer was, that Palaces belonged to the
Emperor, but Churches to the Bishop; and so they did, by all the laws of
Christendom. The like was in the case of S. Athanasius, and Constantius the
Emperor, exactly the same per omnia, as it is related by Ruffinus. Lib. 10.
Eccles. hist. cap. 19.
* S. Ambrose his sending his Deacon to the Emperor, to desire him to go
forth of the Cancelli, in his Church at Millain, shows that then the powers
were so distinct, that they made no intrenchment upon each other. * It was no
greater power, but a more considerable act, and higher exercise, the forbidding
the communion to Theodosius, Theodor. lib. 5. c. 18.
till he had by repentance, washed out the blood that stuck upon him ever since
the Massacre at Thessalonica. It was a wonderful concurrence of piety in the
Emperor, and resolution and authority in the Bishop. But he was not the first
that did it; For Philip the Emperor was also guided by the Pastoral rod, and
the severity of the Bishop. Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 25.
De hoc traditum est nobis, quod Christianus fuerit, and in die Paschae, i.e.
in ipsis vigiliis cum interesse voluerit, and communicare mysteriis, ab
Episcopo loci non prius esse permissum, nisi confiteretur peccata, and inter
poenitentes staret, nec ullo modo sibi copiam mysteriorum futuram nisi prius
per poenitentiam, culpas que de eo ferebantur plurimae, deluisset. The Bishop
of the place would not let him communicate till he had washed away his sins
by repentance. And the Emperor did so. Ferunt igitur libenter eum quod a
Sacerdote imperatum fuerat, suscepisse. He did it willingly, undertaking the
impositions laid upon him by the Bishop.

I doubt not but all the world believes the dispensation of the Sacraments
entirely to belong to Ecclesiastical Ministry. Homil. 83. in 26. Matthew.
It was S. Chrysostomes command to his Presbyters, to reject all wicked persons
from the holy Communion. If he be a Captain, a Consul, or a Crowned King that
comes unworthily, forbid him and keep him off, thy power is greater then his.
If thou dare not remove him, tell it me, I will not suffer it, etc. And had
there never been more error in the managing Church Censures, then in the
foregoing instances, the Church might have exercised censures, and all the
parts of power that Christ gave her, without either scandal or danger to her
self, or her penitents. But when in the very censure of excommunication there
is a new ingredient put, a great proportion of secular inconveniences, and
humane interest, when excommunications, as in the Apostles times they were
deliverings over to Satan, so now, shall be deliverings over to a foreign
enemy, or the peoples rage; as then, to be buffeted, so now to be deposed, or
disinterest in the allegiance of subjects; in these cases, excommunication
being nothing like that which Christ authorized, and no way cooperating toward
the end of its institution, but to an end of private designs, and rebellious
interest, Bishops have no power of such censures, not is it lawful to inflict
the^, things remaining in that consistence, and capacity. And thus is that
famous saying to be understood reported by S. Thomas to be S. Austin's, In 3.
partis Supplem. q. 22 a. 5. Vide Aug. ep. 75. and Gratian. did. 24. q. 2. c.
Si habet sed ibi [Princeps] non inseritur, sed tantum in glossa ordinaria.
but is indeed found in the Ordinary Gloss upon Matthew. 13. Princeps and
multitudo non est excommunicanda. A Prince or a Common wealth are not to be
excommunicate.

Thus I have given a short account of the Persons, and causes of which Bishops
according to Catholic practice did, and might take cognizance. This use only I
make of it. Although Christ has given great authority to his Church in order
to the regiment of souls, such a power, quae nullis poterit comparationibus
adaequari, yet it has its limits, and a proper cognizance, viz. things
spiritual, and the emergencies, and consequents from those things which
Christianity has introduced de novo, and superadded, as things totally
disparate from the precise interest of the Commonwealth; And this I the rather
noted, to show how those men would mend themselves that cry down the tyranny
(as they list to call it) of Episcopacy, and yet call for the Presbytery. ***
For the Presbytery does challenge cognizance of all causes whatsoever, which
are either sins directly, or by reduction. Vide the book of Order of Excomm.
in Scotland. and the Hist. of Scotland. Admonit. 2. p. 46. Knox his exhortation
to England.
* [ All crimes which by the Law of God deserve death.] There they bring in
Murders, Treasons, Witchcrafts, Felonies. Then the Minor faults they bring in
under the title of [ Scandalous and offensive] Nay [ Quodvis peccatum,] says
Snecanus, to which if we add this consideration, that they believe every
action of any man to have in it the malignity of adamnable sin, there is
nothing in the world, good or bad, vicious or suspicious; scandalous, or
criminal; true, or imaginary; real actions, or personal, in all which, and
in all contestations, and complaints one party is delinquent, either by false
accusation, or real injury; but they comprehend in their vast gripe, and then
they have power to nullify all Courts, and judicatories, besides their own:
and being, for this their cognizance they pretend Divine institution, there
shall be no causes IMPERFECT in their Consistory, no appeal from them, but
they shall hear, and determine with final resolution, and it will be sin,
and therefore punishable, to complain of injustice and illegality. * If this
be confronted but with the pretenses of Episcopacy, and the Modesty of their
several demands, and the reasonableness, and divinity of each vindication
examined, I suppose, were there nothing but Prudentiall motives to be put into
balance to weigh down this Question, the cause would soon be determined, and
the little finger of Presbytery, not only in it is exemplary, and tried
practices, but in its dogmaticall pretensions, is heavier then the loins, nay
then the whole body of Episcopacy; but it seldom happens otherwise, but that
they who usurp a power, prove tyrants in the execution, whereas the issues of
a lawful power are fair and moderate.

BUT I must proceed to the more particular instances of Episcopal
Jurisdiction. 37. Forbidding Presbyters to officiate without Episcopal license,
The whole power of Ministration both of the Word and Sacraments was in the
Bishop by prime authority, and in the Presbyters by commission and delegation,
insomuch that they might not exercise any ordinary ministration without license
from the Bishop. They had power and capacity by their order to Preach, to
Minister, to Offer, to Reconcile, and to Baptize. They were indeed acts of
order, but that they might not by the law of the Church exercise any of these
acts, without license from the Bishop, that is an act or issue of jurisdiction,
and shows the superiority of the Bishop over his Presbyters, by the practice
of Christendom.

S. Ignatius has done very good offices in all the parts of this Question, and
here also he brings in succor. Epist. ad Smyrn.
(...). It is not lawful without the Bishop (viz. without his leave) either to
baptize, or to offer Sacrifice, or to make oblation, or to keep feasts of
charity: and a little before; speaking of the B. Eucharist, and its
ministration, and having premised a general interdict for doing any thing
without the Bishops consent, (...). But let that Eucharist (says he) be held
valid which is celebrated under the Bishop, or under him, to whom the Bishop
shall permit. ***

* I do not here dispute the matter of right, and whether or no the Presbyters
might de jure do any offices without Episcopal license, but whether or no de
facto it was permitted them in the primitive Church? This is sufficient to
show, to what issue the reduction of Episcopacy to a primitive consistence will
drive; and if I mistake not, it is at least a very probable determination of
the question of right too. For who will imagine that Bishops should at the
first in the calenture of their infant devotion, in the new spring of
Christianity, in the times of persecution, in all the public disadvantages of
state and fortune, when they anchored only upon the shore of a Holy Conscience,
that then they should have thoughts ambitious, incroaching, of usurpation and
advantages, of purpose to divest their Brethren of an authority entrusted them
by Christ, and then too when all the advantage of their honor did only set
them upon a hill to feel a stronger blast of persecution, and was not, as
since it has been, attested with secular assistance, and fair arguments of
honor, but was only in a mere spiritual estimate, and ten thousand real
disadvantages. This will not be supposed either of wise or holy men. But
however. Valeat quantum val^^e potest. The question is now of matter of fact,
and if the Church of Martyrs, and the Church of Saints, and Doctors, and
Confessors now regnant in heaven, be fair precedents for practices of
Christianity, we build upon a rock, though we had dug no deeper then this
foundation of Catholic practice.

Upon the hopes of these advantages, Can. Apost. 32
I proceed. (...). If any Presbyter disrespecting his own Bishop shall make
conventions apart, or erect an altar (viz. without the Bishops license) let him
be deposed; clearly intimating that potestas faciendi concionem, the power of
making of Church-meetings and assemblies, for preaching or other offices is
derived from the Bishop; and therefore the Canon adds (...). He is a lover of
Rule, he is a Tyrant, that is, an usurper of that power and government which
belongs to the Bishop. The same thing is also decreed in the Council of
Antioch, Ca. 5. Act. 4.
and in the Council of Chalcedon, (...), All the most Reverend Bishops cried
out, this is a righteous law, this is the Canon of the holy Fathers. [This]
viz. The Canon Apostolical now cited. De baptism.
* Tertullian is something more particular, and instances in Baptism. Dandi
baptismum jus habet summus Sacerdos, qui est Episcopus. Dehinc Presbyteri and
Diaconi, non tamen sine Episcopi authoritate, propter honorem Ecclesiae, quo
salvo salva pax est; alioquin etiam Laicis jus est. The place is of great
consideration, and carries in it its own objection and its answer. The Bishop
has the right of giving baptism. Then after him, Presbyters and Deacons, but
not without the authority of the Bishop. (So far the testimony is clear) and
this is for the honor of the Church. * But does not this intimate it was only
by positive constitution, and neither by Divine nor Apostolical ordinance? No
indeed. It does not. For it might be so ordained by Christ or his Apostles
propter honorem Ecclesia; and no harm done. For it is honorable for the
Church, that her Ministrations should be most ordinate, and so they are when
they descend from the superior to the subordinate. But the next words do of
themselves make answer, [ Otherwise laymen have right to baptize] That is,
without the consent of the Bishop Laymen can do it as much as Presbyters and
Deacons. For indeed baptism conferred by Laymen is valid and not to be
repeated, but yet they ought not to administer it, so neither ought Presbyters
without the Bishops license: so says Tertullian, let him answer it. Only the
difference is this, Laymen cannot jure ordinario receive a leave or commission
to make it lawful in them to baptize any; Presbyters and Deacons may, for
their order is a capacity or possibility. ** But besides the Sacrament of
Baptism, De corona milit* c. 3. vide S. Chrysostom. hom. 11. in 1. Tim. and S.
Hieron. dial. adv. Lucifer.
Tertullian affirms the same of the venerable Eucharist. Eucharistiae
Sacramentum non de aliorum manu quam Praesidentium sumimus. The former place
will expound this, if there be any scruple in [ Praesidentium] for clearly the
Christians receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist from none but Bishops. I
suppose he means [ without Episcopal license.] whatsoever his meaning is,
these are his words.

The Council of Gangra, Can. 6.
forbidding conventicles, expresses it with this intimation of Episcopal
authority. If any man shall make assemblies privately, and out of the Church,
so despising the Chutch, or shall do any Church-offices (...), without the
presence of a Priest by THE DECREE OF A BISHOP, let him be anathema. The Priest
is not to be assistant at any meeting for private offices without the Bishops
license. If they will celebrate Synaxes privately, it must be by a Priest, and
he must be there by leave of the Bishop, and then the assembly is lawful. *
And this thing was so known, that the Fathers of the second Council of
Carthage call it ignorance or hypocrisy in Priests to do their offices without
a license from the Bishop. Ca. 9.
Numidiu^ Episcopus Massilytanus dixit, In quibusdam locis sunt Presbyteri qui
aut ignorantes simpliciter, aut dissimulantes audacter, praesente, and
inconsulto Episcopo complurimis in domicilijs agunt agenda, quod disciplinae
incongruum cognoscit esse Sanctitas vestra. In some places there are Priests
that in private houses do offices (houseling of people is the office meant,
communicating them at home) without the consent or leave of the Bishop, being
either simply ignorant, or boldly dissembling; Implying, that they could not
else but know their duties to be, to procure Episcopal license for their
ministrations. Ab Vniversis Episcopis dictum est. Quisquis Presbyter inconsulto
Episcopo agenda in quolibet loco v^luerit celebrare, ipse honroi suo contrarius
existit. All the Bishops said, if any Priest without leave of his Bishop shall
celebrate the mysteries, be the place what it will be, he is an Enemy to the
Bishops dignity.

After this in time, but before in authority is the great Council of
Chalcedon. Can. 8. part. 2. Act. 14.
(...). Let the Clergy according to the tradition of the Fathers, remain under
the power of the Bishops of the City. So that they are for their offices in
dependence of the authority of the Bishop. The Canon instances particularly to
Priests officiating in Monasteries and Hospitalls, but extends it self to an
indefinite expression (...), They must not dissent or differ from their Bishop.
(...) etc: All they that transgress this Constitution in ANY WAY, not
submitting to their Bishop, let them be punished canonically. So that now these
general expressions of obedience and subordination to the Bishop being to be
Understood according to the exigence of the matter, to wit, the Ministeries of
the Clergy in their several offices, the Canon extends it is prohibition to all
ministrations without the Bishops authority.

But it was more clearly and evidently law and practice in the Roman Church,
we have good witness for it; S. Leo the Bishop of that Church is my author.
Epist. 86.
Sed neque coram Episcopo licet Presbyteris in baptisterium introire, nec
praesente Antistite infantem tingere, aut signare, nec poenitentem sine
praeceptione Episcopi sui reconciliare, nec eo praesente nisi illo jubente
Sacramentum corpor is and Sanguinis Christi conficere, nec eo coram posito
populum docere, vel benedicere etc. It is not lawful for the Presbyters to
enter into the baptistery, nor to baptize any Catechumens, nor to consecrate
the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood in the presence of the Bishop without
his command. From this place of S. Leo, if it be set in conjunction with the
precedent, we have fair evidence of this whole particular. It is not lawful
to do any offices without the Bishops leave; So S. Ignatius, so the Canons of
the Apostles, so Tertullian, so the Counsels of Antioch and Chalcedon. It is
not lawful to do any offices in the Bishops presence without leave, so S.
Leo. The Council of Carthage joins them both together, neither in his
presence, nor without his leave in any place.

Now against this practice of the Church, if any man should discourse as S.
Hierome is pretended to do by Gratian, did. 95. cap. Ecce ego.
Qui non vult Presbyteros facere quae jubentur a Deo, dicat quis major est
Christo. He that will not let Presbyters do what they are commanded to do by
God, let him tell us if any man be greater then Christ, viz: whose command it
is, that Presbyters should preach. Why then did the Church require the Bishop's
leave? might not Presbyters do their duty without a license? This is it which
the practice of the Church is abundantly sufficient to answer. * For to the
Bishop is committed the care of the whole diocese, he it is that must give the
highest account for the whole charge, he it is who is appointed by peculiar
designation to feed the flock, so the Canon of the Can. 40.
Apostles, so Epist. ad Ephesians.
Ignatius, so the Council of Cap. 24.
Antioch, so every where; The Presbyters are admitted in partem sollicitudinis,
but still the jurisdiction of the whole Diocese is in the Bishop, and without
the Bishop's admission to a part of it per traditionem subditorum, although the
Presbyter by his ordination have a capacity of preaching and administering
Sacraments, yet he cannot exercise this without designation of a particular
charge either temporary or fixed. And therefore it is, that a Presbyter may not
do these acts without the Bishops leave, because they are actions of relation,
and suppose a congregation to whom they must be administered, or some particular
person; for a Priest must not preach to the stones as some say Venerable Bede
did, nor communicate alone, the word is destructive of the thing, nor baptize
unless he have a Chrysome Child, or a Catechumen; So that all of the Diocese
being the Bishop's charge, the Bishop must either authorize the Priest, or the
Priest must not meddle, least he be (what S. Peter blamed) (...), a Bishop in
another Diocese: Not that the Bishop did license the acts precisely of
baptizing, of consecrating etc. For these he had by his oxdination, but that in
giving license he did give him a subject to whom he might apply these relative
actions, and did quoad hoc take him in partem sollicitudinis and concredit some
part of his diocese to his administration cum cura animarum.

But then on the other side because the whole cure of the Diocese is in the
Bishop, he cannot exonerate himself of it, for it is a burden of Christ's
imposing, or it is not imposed at all, therefore this taking of Presbyters into
part of the regiment and care does not divest him of his own power, or any part
of it, nor yet ease him of his care, but that as he must still (...), visit and
see to his Diocese, so he has authority still in all parts of his Diocese,
and this appears in these places now quoted; insomuch as when the Bishop came
to any place, there the Vicaria of the Presbyters did cease. In praesentia
Majoris cessat potest as minoris. And, though because the Bishop could not do
all the Minor and daily offices of the Priesthood in every congregation of his
Diocese, therefore he appointed Priests severally to officiate, himself
looking to the Metropolis and the daughter Churches by a general supravision;
yet when the Bishop came into any place of his Diocese, there he being present
might do any office, because it was in his own charge, which he might
concredit to another, but not exonerate himself of it; And therefore praesente
Episcopo (says the Council of Carthage, and S. Leo) if the Bishop be present,
the Presbyter without leave might not officiate; For he had no subjects of his
own, but by trust and delegation, and this delegation was given him to supply
the Bishops absence, who could not simul omnibus interesse, but then, where he
was present, the cause of delegation ceasing, the jurisdiction also ceased, or
was at least absorpt in the greater, and so without leave might not be
exercised; like the stars which in the noon day have their own natural
light, as much as in the night, but appear not, shine not in the presence of
the Sun.

This perhaps will seem uncouth to those Presbyters, who (as the Council of
Carthage's expression is) are contr^rii honort Episcopali; but yet if we keep
our selves in our own form, where God has placed us, and where we were in
the Primitive Church, we shall find all this to be sooth, and full of order.
For Consider. The elder the prohibition was, the more absolute and indefinite
it runs. [ Without the Bishop it is not lawful to baptize, to consecrate] etc.
So Ignatius. The prohibition is without limit. But in descent of the Church it
runs, [ praesente Episcopo] the Bishop being present they must not without
leave. The thing is all one, and a derivation from the same original, to wit,
the Universality of the Bishops Jurisdiction, but the reason of the difference
of expression is this. At first Presbyters were in Cities with the Bishop, and
no parishes at all concredited to them. The Bishops lived in Cities, the
Presbyters preached and offered (...) from house to house according as the
Bishop directed them. Here they had no ordinary charge, and therefore the first
prohibitions run indefinitely, they must not do any Clericall offices sine
Episcopo, unless the Bishop sends them. But then afterward when the Parishes
were distinct, and the Presbyters fixed upon ordinary charges, then it was
only, praesente Episcopo, if the Bishop was present, they might not officiate
without leave. For in his absence they might do it, I do not say without
leave, but I say they had leave given them, when the Bishop sent them to
officiate in a Village with ordinary or temporary residence; as it is to this
day, when the Bishop institutes to a particular charge, he also gives power hoc
ipso, of officiating in that place. So that at first when they did officiate in
places by temporary missions, then they were to have leave, but this license
was also temporary; but when they were fixed upon ordinary charges they might
not officiate without leave, but then they had an ordinary leave given them in
traditione subditorum, and that was done in subsidium Muneres Episcopalis,
because it was that part of the Bishops charge, which he could not personally
attend for execution of the Minor offices, and therefore concredited it to a
Presbyter, but if he was present, a new leave was necessary, because as the
power always was in the Bishop, so now the execution also did return to him
when he was there in person, himself if he listed, might officiate.

All this is excellently attested in the example of S. Austin, of whom
Possidonius in his life reports that being but a Presbyter, Valerius the Bishop
being a Greek borne, and not well spoken in the Latin tongue, and so unfit for
public orations, eidem Presbytero (viz. to Austin) potestatem dedit coram se
in Ecclesia Evangelium praedicandi, ac frequentissime tractandi contra. USUM
quidem, and CONSUETUDINEM Africanarum Ecclesiarum. He gave leave to Austin then
but Presbyter, to preach in the Church, even while himself was present, indeed
against the USE and CUSTOM of the African Churches. And for this act of his he
suffered soundly in his report. * For the case was thus. In all Africa ever
since the first spring of the Arian heresy, the Church had then suffered so
much by the preaching of Arius the Presbyter, that they made a Law not to
suffer any Presbyter to preach at all, at least in the Mother Church, and in
the Bishops presence. (...) (says Socrates.) Lib. 5. c. 22.
Thence came this Custom in the African Churches. But because Valerius saw S.
Austin so able, and himself for want of Latin so unfit, he gave leave to
Austin to preach before him, against the Custom of the African Churches. But
he adds this reason for his excuse too; it was not indeed the custom of
Africa, but it was of the Oriental Churches. For so Possidonius proceeds, sed
and ille vir venerabilis, ac providus, in orientalibus Ecclesiis id ex more
fieri sciens, in the Levant it was usual for Bishops to give Presbyters leave
to preach, dummodo factitaretur a Presbytero quod a se Episcopo impleri minime
posse cernebat, which determines us fully in the business. For this leave to
do offices was but there to be given where the Bishop himself could not
fulfill the offices, which shows the Presbyters in their several charges,
whether of temporary mission, or fixed residence, to be but Delegates, and
Vicars of the Bishop admitted in partem Sollicitudinis, to assist the Bishop in
his great charge of the whole Diocese.

Against this it is objected out of S. Hierome, Ad Rustic. Narbon. did. 95.
can. Ecce ego.
and it is recorded by Gratian, Ecce ego dico praesentibus Episcopis suis,
atque adstantibus in altari Presbyteros posse Sacramenta conficere. Behold, I
say that Presbyters may minister Sacraments in presence of the Bishop. So
Gratian quotes it indeed, but S. Hierome says the express contrary, unless
we all have false copies. For in S. Hierome it is not [ Ecce ego dico] but [
Nec ego dico.] He does not say it is lawful for Presbyters to officiate in the
presence of their Bishop. Indeed S. Hierome is angry at Rusticus Bishop of
Narbona because he would not give leave to Presbyters to preach, nor to bless
etc. This, perhaps it was not well done, but this makes not against the former
discourse; for though it may be fit for the Bishop to give leave, the Church
requiring it still more and more in descent of ages, and multiplication of
Christians, and Parishes, yet it is clear that this is not to be done without
the Bishops leave, for it is for this very thing that S. Hierome disputes
against Rusticus, to show he did amiss, because he would not give his
Presbyters license. * And this he also reprehends in his epistle ad Nepotianum,
Pessimae consuetudinis est in quibusdam Ecclesiis tacere Presbyteros, and
praesentibus Episcopis non loqui. That Presbyters might not be suffered to
preach in presence of the Bishop, that was an ill custom, to wit, as things
then stood, and it was mended presently after, for Presbyters did preach in the
Bishops presence, but it was by license from their Ordinary. For so Possidonius
relates, that upon this act of Valerius before mentioned, Postea currente and
volante hujusmodi fama, bono praecedente exemplo, ACCEPTA AB EPISCOPIS
POTESTATE Presbyteri nonnulli coram Episcopis, populis tractare caeperunt
verbum Dei. By occasion of this precedent it came to pass, that some
Presbyters did preach to the people in the Bishops presence, having first
obtained faculty from the Bishop so to do. And a little after it became a
custom from a general faculty and dispensation indulged to them in the second
Council of Vase. ^an. 12.
Now if this evidence of Church practice be not sufficient to reconcile us to
S. Hierome, let him then first be reconciled to himself, and then we are sure
to be helped. For in his dialogue against the Luciferians, his words are these,
Cui si non exors quaedam and ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot efficientur
Schismata quot sunt Sacerdotes. Inde venit ut sine Episcopi missione neque
Presbyter, neque Diaconus jus habeant baptizandi. Because the Bishop has an
eminent power, and this power is necessary, thence it comes that neither
Presbyter nor Deacon may so much as baptize without the Bishops leave.

** This whole discourse shows clearly not only the Bishops to be superior
in jurisdiction, but that they have sole jurisdiction, and the Presbyters only
in substitution and vicaridge. 38. Reserving Church goods to Episcopal
dispensation,


** Diverse other acts there are to attest the superiority of the Bishops
jurisdiction over Priests and Deacons, as, that all the goods of the Church
were in the Bishops sole disposing, and as at first they were laid at the
Apostles feet, so afterward, at the Bishops. So it is in the 41. Canon of the
Apostles, so it is in the Council of Gangra, and all the world are excluded
from intervening in the dispensation, without express delegation from the
Bishop, as appears in the seventh and eight Canons, and that under pain of an
anathema by the holy Council. * And therefore when in success of time, some
Patrons that had founded Churches and endowed them, thought that the
dispensation of those lands did not belong to the Bishop; of this the third
Council of Toledo complains, An. Do^. 589.
and makes remedy, commanding, ut omnia SECUNDUM CONSTITUTIONEM ANTIQUAM, ad
Episcopi ordinationem and potestatem pertineant. The same is reniewed in the
fourth Council of Toledo. Cap. 32.
Noverint autem conditores basilicarum in rebus quas eisdem Ecclesiis
conferunt, nullam se potestatem habere, SED IUXTA CANONUM INSTITUTA, sicut
Ecclesiam, ita and dotem ejus ad ordinationem Episcopi pertinere. These
Counsels I produce not as Judges, but as witnesses in the business, for they
give concurrent testimony that as the Church it self, so the dowry of it too
did belong to the Bishops disposition by the Ancient Canons. For so the third
Council of Toledo calls it, antiquam Constitutionem, and it self is almost
1100. years old, so that still I am precisely within the bounds of the
Primitive Church though it be taken in a narrow sense. Can. 26. vide Zonaram in
hunc Canonem.
For so it was determined in the great Council of Chalcedon, commanding that
the goods of the Church should be dispensed by a Clergy steward, Videatur
Council. Carthag. Graec. can. 36* 38. and 41. and Balsam. ibid. and apologia 2.
Iustini Martyris.
(...), according to the pleasure or sentence of the Bishop.

Add to this, that without the Bishop's dimissory letters Presbyters might not
go to another Diocese. 39. Forbidding Presbyters to leave their own Diocese,
or to travel without leave of the Bishop.
So it is decreed in the fifteenth Canon of the Apostles, under pain of
suspension or deposition, (...) is the censure; and that especially, (...), if
he would not return when his Bishop calls him. The same is renewed in the
Council of Antioch, cap. 3. and in the Council of Constantinople in Trullo,
cap. 17. the censure there is, (...), let him be deposed that shall without
dimissory letters from his Bishop, (...), fix^ himself in the Diocese of
another Bishop. But with license of his Bishop, he may. Sacerdotes, vel alii
Clerici concessione suorum Episcoporum possunt ad alias Ecclesias transmigrare.
Vide Council. Epaun. c. 5. and venet. c. 10.
But this is frequently renewed in many other Synodall decrees, these may
suffice for this instance.

* But this not leaving the Diocese is not only meant of promotion in another
Church, but Clergy men might not travail from City to City, without the
Bishops license; which is not only an argument of his regiment in genere
politico, but extends it almost to a despotick; But so strict was the Primitive
Church in preserving the strict tie of duty, and Clericall subordination to
their Bishop. Can. 41.
The Council of La^dicea commands a Priest, or Clergy man (...), not to
travail without Canonical, or dimissory letters. And who are to grant these
letters, is expressed in the next Canon which repeats the same prohibition,
Can. 42.
(...), a Priest or a Clerk must not travail without the command of his
Bishop; and this prohibition is inserted into the body of the Law, de
consecrat. did 5. can. non oportet, which puts in the clause of [ Neque etiam
Laicum,] but this was beyond the Council, The same is in the Council of Can.
38.
Agatho. The Council of Can. 5.
Venice adds a ce^sure, that those Clerks should be like persons excommunicate
in all those places whither they went, without letters of license from their
Bishop. The same penalty is inflicted by the Council of Epaunum, Can. 6.
Presbytero, vel Diacono sine Antistitis sui Epistolis ambulanti communionem
nullus impendat. The first Council of Tourayne in France, and the third
Council of Orleans attest the self same power in the Bishop, and duty in all
his Clergy.

BUT a Coercitive authority makes not a complete jurisdiction, 40. And the
Bishop had power to prefer which of his Clerks he pleased,
unless it be also remunerative, and [ the Princes of the Nations are called
(...) Benefactors] for it is but half a tie to indeare obedience, when the
Subject only fears quod prodesse non poterit, that which cannot profit. And
therefore the primitive Church, to make the Episcopal jurisdiction up entire,
gave power to the Bishop to present the Clerks of his Diocese to the higher
Orders and nearer degrees of approximation to himself, and the Clerks might
not refuse to be so promoted. Item placuit ut quicunque Clerici vel Diaconi pro
necessitatibus Ecclesiarnm non obtemperaverint EPISCOPIS SUIS VOLENTIBUS EOS AD
HONOREM AMPLIOREM IN SUA ECCLESIA PROMOVERE, nec illic ministrent in gradu suo
unde recedere noluerunt. Can. 31.
So it is decreed in the African Code, They that will not by their by Bishop be
promoted to a Greater honor in the Church, must not enjoy what they have
already.

But it is a question of great consideration, and worth a strict inquiry, in
whom the right and power of electing Clerks was resident in the Primitive
Church: for the right and the power did not always go together, and also
several Orders had several manner of election; Presbyters and inferior Clergy
were chosen by the Bishop alone, the Bishop by a Synod of Bishops, or by their
Chapter; And lastly, because of late, strong outcries are made upon several
pretensions, amongst which the people make the biggest noise, though of all,
their title to election of Clerks be most empty, therefore let us consider it
upon all its grounds.

1. In the Acts of the Apostles, which are most certainly the best precedents
for all acts of holy Church we find that [ Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders in
every Church] and [ they passed thorough Lystra, Iconium, Antioch, and Derbe
(...), appointing them Elders. * S. Paul chose Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, and
he says of himself and Titus, [ For this cause I SENT thee to Crete, (...),
that thou should oppoint Presbyters, or Bishops (be they which they will) in
every City]. The word (...), signifies that the whole action was his. For that
he ordained them no man questions, but he also APPOINTED THEM, 1. Titus. V: 5.
and that was, says S. Paul, (...), as I commanded thee. It was therefore an
Apostolical ordinance, that the BISHOP SHOULD APPOINT PRESBYTERS. Let there be
half so much shown for the people, and I will also endeavor to promote their
interest. **** There is only one pretense of a popular election in Scripture;
It is of the seven that were set over the widows. * But first, this was no
part of the hierarchy: This was no cure of souls: This was no divine
institution: It was in the dispensation of monyes: it was by command of the
Apostles the election was made, and they might recede from their own right: it
was to satisfye the multitude: it was to avoid scandal, which in the
dispensation of moneys might easily arise: it was in a temporary office: it
was with such limitations, and conditions as the Apostles prescribed them: it
was out of the number of the 70 that the election was made, if we may believe
S. Epiphanus, so that they were Presbyters before this choice: and lastly, it
was only a Nomination of seven Men, the determination of the buisinesse, and
the authority of rejection was still in the Apostles, and indeed the whole
power [ Whom WE MAY APPOINT over this businesse] and after all this, there can
be no hurt done by the objection, especially since clearly and indubiously the
election of Bishops, and Presbyters was in the Apostles own persons ((...),
says S. Ignatius of Evodias; Evodias was first APPOINTED to be your Governor,
or Bishop, Epist. ad Antioch.
by the APOSTLES) and themselves did committ it to others that were Bishops, as
in the instances before reckoned. Thus the case stood in Scripture.

2. In the practice of the Church it went according to the same law, and
practice Apostolical. The People did not, might not choose the Ministers of
holy Church. Began. 13.
So the Council of Laodicea, (...). The people must not choose those that are
to be promoted to the Priesthood. The prohibition extends to their Non-election
of all the Superior Clergy, Bishops and Presbyters. But who then must elect
them? The Council of Nice determines that, for in 16 and 17 Canons the
Council forbids any promotion of Clerks to be made, but by the Bishop of that
Church where they are first ordained, which clearly reserves to the Bishop the
power of retayning, or promoting all his Clergy.

* 3. All Ordinations were made by Bishops alone, (as I have already prooved.)
Now let this be confronted with the practice of Primitive Christendom, that no
Presbyter might be ordained sine titulo without a particular charge, which was
always custom, and at last grew to be a law in the Council of Chalcedon, and
we shall perceive that the ordainer was the only chooser; for then to ordain
a Presbyter was also to give him a charge; and the Patronage of a Church was
not a lay inheritance, but part of the Bishops cure, for he had (...), the care
of the Churches in all the Diocese; as I have already shown. And therefore
when S. Jerome, according to the custom of Christendom, Epist. 61. and 62.
had specified some particular ordinations or election of Presbyters by
Bishops, as how himself was made Priest by Paulinus, and Paulinus by
Epiphanius of Cyprus, Hieron. ad Nepotian.
Gaudeat Episcopus judicio suo, cum tales Christo elegerit Sacerdotes, let the
Bishop rejoice in his own act, having chosen such worthy Priests for the
service of Christ.

Thus S. Ambrose gives intimation that the dispensing all the offices in the
Clergy was solely in the Bishop. lib. 1. offic. cap. 44.
Haec spectet Sacerdos, and quod cuique congruat, id officij deputet. Let the
Bishop observe these rules, and appoint every one his office as is best
answerable to his condition and capacity. And Theodoret reports of Leontius the
Bishop of Antioch, Tripart. hist. lib. 5. cap. 32.
how being an Arian, adversarios recti dogmatis suscipiens, licet turpem
habentes vitam, ad Presbyteratus tamen ordinem, and Diaconatus evexit. Eos
autem qui Vniversis virtutibus ornabantur, and Apostolica dogmata defendebant,
absque honor deseruit. He advanced his own faction, but would not promote any
man that was Catholic and pious. So he did. The power therefore of Clericall
promotion was in his own hands. This thing is evident and notorious; And there
is scarce any example in Antiquity of either Presbyters, or people choosing any
Priest, but only in the case of S. Austin whom the Peoples have snatched, and
carried him to their Bishop Valerius entreating him to ordain him Priest. This
indeed is true, that the testimony of the people, for the life of them that
were to be ordayn'd was by S. Cyprian ordinarily required; In ordinandis
Clericis (Fratres Charissimi) solemus vos ante consulere, lib. 1. Epist. 5.
and mores, ac merita singulorum communi consilio ponderare. It was his custom
to advise with his people concerning the public fame of Clerks to be ordayn'd;
It was usual (I say) with him, but not perpetual, for it was otherwise in the
case of Celerinus, and diverse others, as I showed elsewhere.

4. In election of Bishops (though not of Priests) the Clergy and the people
had a greater actual interest, and did often intervene with their silent
consenting suffrages, or public acclamations. But first; This was not
necessary. It was otherwise among the Apostles, and in the case of Timothy, of
Titus, of S. James, of S. Mark, and all the Successors whom they did
constitute in the several chayres. 2ly. This was not by law, or right, but in
fact only. It was against the Canon of the Laodicean Council, and the 31th
Canon of the Apostles, which under pain of deposition commands that a Bishop
be not promoted to his Church by the intervening of any lay power.

Against this discourse S. Cyprian is strongly pretended. Epist. 68.
Quando ipsa [ plebs] maxim habeat potestatem vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes,
vel indignos recusandi. Quod and ipsum videmus de divina authoritate descendere
etc. Thus he is usually cited. The people have power to choose, or to refuse
their Bishops, and this comes to them from Divine authority. No such matter.
The following words expound him better, [ Quod and ipsum videmus de divina
authoritate descendere, ut Sacerdos PLEBE PRAESENTE sub omnium oculis
deligatur, and dignus, atque idoneus publico judicio ac testimonio comprobetur:
that the Bishop is chosen publicly, in the presence of the people, and he only
be thought fit who is approved by public judgment, and testimony; or as S.
Paul's phrase is [ he must have a good report of all men] that is indeed a
divine institution, and that to this purpose, and for the public attestation
of the act of election and ordination the peoples presence was required,
appears clearly by S. Cyprian's discourse in this Epistle. For what is the
divine authority that he mentions? It is only the example of Moses whom God
commanded to take the Son of Eleazer and cloth him with his Fathers robes
coram omni Synagoga, before all the congregation. The people chose not, God
chose Eleazar, and Moses consecrated him, and the people stood, and looked on;
that is all that this argument can supply. * Just thus Bishops are, and ever
were ordayn'd, non nisi sub populi assistentis conscientia, in the sight of the
people standing by; but to what end? Vt plebe praesente detegantur malorum
crimina, vel bonorum merita praedicentur. All this while the election is not in
the people, nothing but the public testimony, and examination, for so it
follows, and sit ordinatio justa and legitima quae omnium suffragio, and
judicio fuerit examinata.

** But S. Cyprian has two more proof's whence we may learn either the sense,
or the truth of his assertion. The one is of the Apostles ordayning the seven
Deacons (but this we have already examined,) the other of S. Peter choosing S.
Matthias into the Apostolate; it was indeed done in the presence of the people.
* But here it is considerable that at this surrogation of S. Matthias the
Number of the persons present was but 120, of which eleven were Apostles, and
72 were Disciples and Presbyters, they make up 83, and then there remains but
37 of the Laity, of which many were women, which I know not yet whether any man
would admit to the election of an Apostle, and whether they do or do not,
the Laity is a very inconsiderable Number if the matter had been to be carried
by plurality of voices; so that let the worst come that is imaginable, the
whole business was in effect carried by the Clergy, whom in this case we have
no reason to suspect to be divided, and of a distinct, or disagreeing
interest.* 2. Let this discourse be of what validity it will, yet all this
whole business was miraculous, and extraordinary; For though the Apostles
named two Candidates yet the holy Ghost chose them by particular revelation.
And yet for all this, it was lawful for S. Peter alone to have done it without
casting lots. An non licebatipsi [Petro] eligere? licebat, and quidem maxim;
verum id non facit ^e cui videretur gratificari. Quanquam alioqui non erat
particeps Spiritus. For all, he had not as yet received the holy Ghost, yet he
had power himself to have completed the election. homil. 3. in Act.
So S. Chrysostom.

So that now, if S. Cyprian means more then the presence of the people for
suffrage of public testimony, and extends it to a suffrage of formal choice,
his proofs of the divine authority are invalid, there is no such thing can be
deduced from thence, and then this is his complying so much with the people
(which has been the fault of many a good man) may be reckoned together with
his rebaptization. But truth is, he means no more then suffrage of testimony,
viz: That he who is to be chosen Bishop be for his good life a man of good
fame, and approved of before God and all the people, and this is all the share
they have in their election. * And so indeed himself sums up the whole
business and tells us of another jus Divinum too. [ Propter quod diligenter de
traditione Divina, and Apostolica observatione, observandum est and tenendum,
quod apud nos quoque, and fere apud Provincias Vniversas tenetur, ut ad
ordinationes rite celebrandas ad eam plebem cui Praepositus ordinatur, Episcopi
ejusdem provinciae proximi quique conveniant, and Episcopus deligatur pl^be
praesente que singuloram vitam plenissime novit. It is most diligently to be
observed, for there is a Divine tradition, and an Apostolical ordinance for
it, and it is used by us and almost by all Churches, that all the Bishops of
the Province assemble to the making of right ordinations, and that a Bishop be
chosen in the face of the people who best know their life and conversation.] So
that the Bishops were to make the formal election, the people to give their
judgment of approbation in this particular, and so much as concerned the
exemplary piety, and good life of him that was to be their Bishop. Here we see
in S. Cyprian is a jus Divinum for the Bishops choosing a Colleague, or a
Brother- Bishop, as much as for the presence of the people, and yet the
presence was all. And howsoever the people were present to give this testimony,
yet the election was clearly in the Bishops, and that by Divine tradition, and
Apostolical observation says S. Cyprian; And thus it was in all Churches
almost.

In Africa this was, Epist. 120. lib. 3. de Sacerd.
and so it continued till after S. Austins time, particularly in the choice of
Eradius his successor. It was so in the Greek Church as S. Chrysostom tells us.
It was so in Spain, as S. lib. 2. de offic.
Isidore tells us; and in many other places, that the people should be present,
and give acclamation, and tumultuary approbation; but to the formal election
of the Clergy, made by enumeration of votes and subscription, the people never
were admitted.

5. Although that in times of persecution, at first, and to comply with the
people who were in all respects to be sweetened, to make them with easier
appetite swallow the bitter pill of persecution, and also to make them more
obedient to their Bishop, if they did, though but in a tumult and noise cry him
up in his ordination, ne plebs invita Episcopum non optatum, aut contemnat, aut
oderit, and fiat minus religiosa quam convenit, cui non licuerit habere quem
voluit, (for so S. Leo expresses the cause) yet the formality, Epist. 84. c. 5.
and right of proper election was in the Clergy, and often so practiced without
any consent at all, or intervening act of the people. The right, I say, was in
the Bishops, so it was decreed in the Ni^ene Council, Can. 4.
(...). The Bishop must be appointed or constituted by all the BISHOPS of the
province, (...). It must be confirmed, and established by the METROPOLITAN. No
Presbyters here all this while, no people. * But the exercise of this power is
more clearly seen in the Acts of some Counsels, where the Fathers degraded
some Bishops, and themselves appointed others in their Rooms. * The Bishops in
the Council of Constantinople deposed Marcellus. In cujus locum Basilium in
Ancyram miserunt. They sent Basilius Bishop in his room, Tripart. hist. lib.
3. cap. 9.
says Sozomen. * Ostendat Bassianus si per Synodum Reverendissimorum
Episcoporu^, and consueta lege Episcopus Ephesiorum Metropolis est constitutus,
(said the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedo^. Act. 11.
) Let Bassianus show that he was made BISHOP OF EPHESUS BY A SYNOD OF BISHOPS,
and according to the accustomed Law. The Law I showed before, even the Nicene
Canon. The fathers of which Council sent a Synodall Epistle to the Church of
Alexandria, to tell them they had deposed Militius from the office of a Bishop,
only left him the name, but took from him all power, Tripart. hist. lib. 2.
cap. 12.
nullam vero omnimodo habere potestatem, neque ELIGENDI, NEQUE ORDINANDI: etc.
Neither suffering him to choose nor to ordain Clerks. It seems then that was
part of the Episcopal office in ordinary, placit^s sibi eligere, as the
Epistle expresses it in the sequel, to choose whom they listed. But the
Council deposed Melitius, and sent Alexander their Bishop, and Patriarch to
rule the Church again. ** And particularly to come home to the ^ase of the
present question, when Auxentius Bishop of Millaine was dead, and the Bishops
of the Province; and the Clergy of the Church, and the people of the City,
were assembled at the choosing of another, Theodor. lib. 4. c. 5.
the Emperor makes a speech to the Bishops only, that they should be careful
in their choice. So that although the people were present, quibus profide, and
religione etiam honor deferendus est (as S. Cyprians phrase is) to whom respect
is to be had, and fair complyings to be used so long as they are pious,
catholic, and obedient, yet both the right of electing, and solemnity of
ordaining was in the Bishops, the peoples interest did not arrive to one half
of this.

6. There are in Antiquity diverse precedents of Bishops, who chose their own
successors; it will not be imagined the people will choose a Bishop over his
head, and proclaim that they were weary of him. In those days they had more
piety. * Agelius did so, he chose Sisinnius, and that it may appear it was
without the people, they came about him, and entreated him to choose Marcian,
to whom they had been beholding in the time of Valens the Emperor; he complied
with them, and appointed Marcian to be his successor, and Sisinnius whom he had
first chosen, to succeed Marcian. Socrat. lib. 5. c. 21.
Thus did Valerius choose his successor, S. Austin; for though the people named
him for their Priest, and carried him to Valerius to take Orders, yet Valerius
chose him Bishop. And this was usual; (...), (as* Epiphanius expresses this
case,) it was ordinary to do so in many Churches.

7. The manner of election in many Churches was various, for although indeed
the Church had commanded it, and given power to the Bishops to make the
election, yet in some times and in some Churches the Presbyters, or the
Chapter, chose one out of themselves. S. Hierome says they always did so in
Alexandria, from S. Marks time to Heraclas and Dionysius. In Ephesians. 4.
* S. Ambrose says that at the first, the Bishop was not, by a formal new
election promoted, but recedente uno sequens ei succedebat. As one dyed so the
next senior did succeed him. In both these cases no mixture of the peoples
votes.

8. In the Church of England the people were never admitted to the choice of a
Bishop from its first becoming Christian to this very day, and therefore to
take it from the Clergy, in whom it always was by permission of Princes, and
to interest the people in it, is to recede a traditionibus Majorum, from the
religion of our forefathers, and to INNOVATE in a high proportion.

9. In those Churches where the peoples suffrage (by way of testimony, I mean,
and approbation) did concur with the Synod of Bishops* in the choice of a
Bishop, the people at last according to their usual guise grew hot, angry, and
tumultuous, and then were engaged by divisions in religion to Name a Bishop of
their own sect; and to disgrace one another by public scandal, and
contestation, and often grew up to Sedition, and Murder; and therefore although
they were never admitted, (unless where themselves usurped) farther then I
have declared, yet even this was taken from them, especially, since in
tumultuary assemblies, they were apt to carry all before them, they knew not
how to distinguish between power, and right, they had not well learned to take
denial, but began to obtrude whom they listed, to swell higher like a torrent
when they were checked; and the soleship of election, which by the Ancient
Canons was in the Bishops, they would have asserted wholly to themselves both
in right, and execution.

* I end this with the annotation of Zonaras upon the twelfth Canon of the
Laodicean Council. Populi suffragiis olim Episcopi eligebantur (understand him
in the senses above explicated) Sed cum multae inde seditiones existerent, hinc
factum est ut Episcoporum Vniuscujusque provinciae authoritate eligi Episcopum
quemque oportere decreverint Patres: of old time Bishops were chosen, not
without the suffrage of the people (for they concurred by way of testimony and
acclamation) but when this occasioned many seditions and tumults, the Fathers
decreed that a Bishop should be chosen by the authority of the Bishops of the
Province. And he adds that in the election of Damasus 137 men were slain, and
that six hundred examples more of that nature were producible.

Truth is, the Nomination of Bishops in Scripture was in the Apostles alone,
and though the Kindred of our Blessed Savior were admitted to the choice of
Simeon Cleophae, the Successor of S. James to the Bishopric of Jerusalem, as
Eusebius witnesses; lib. 3. hist. cap. 11.
it was propter singularem honorem, an honorary, and extraordinary privilege
indulged to them for their vicinity and relation to our Blessed Lord the
fountain of all benison to us; and for that very reason Simeon himself was
chosen Bishop too. Yet this was praeter regulam Apostolicam. The rule of the
Apostles, and their precedents were for the sole right of the Bishops to choose
their Colleagues in that Sacred order. * And then in descent, even before the
Nicene Council the people were forbidden to meddle in election, for they had
no authority by Scripture to choose; by the necessity of times and for the
reasons before asserted they were admitted to such a share of the choice as is
now folded up in a piece of paper, even to a testimonial; and yet I deny not
but they did often take more as in the case of Nilammon, quem cives elegerunt,
Tripart. hist. lib. 10. c. 14.
says the story out of Sozomen, they chose him alone, (though God took away
his life before himself would accept of their choice) and then they behaved
themselves oftentimes with so much insolency, partiality, faction, sedition,
cruelty, and Pagan baseness that they were quite interdicted it, above 1200
years agone. * So that they had their little in possession but a little while,
and never had any due, and therefore now, their request for it is no petition
of right, vide did. 63. per tot. Gratian.
but a popular ambition and a snatching at a sword to hew the Church in pieces.

But I think I need not have troubled my self half so far, for they that
strive to introduce a popular election, would as feign have Episcopacy out, as
popularity of election let in. So that all this of popular election of Bishops,
may seem superfluous. For I consider, that if the peoples power of choosing
Bishops be founded upon Gods law, as some men pretend from S. Cyprian (not
proving the thing from Gods law, but Gods law from S. Cyprian) then Bishops
themselves must be by Gods law: For surely God never gave them power to choose
any man into that office which himself has no way instituted. And therefore I
suppose these men will desist from their pretense of Divine right of popular
election, if the Church will recede from her divine right of Episcopacy. But
for all their plundering, and confounding, their bold pretenses have made this
discourse necessary.

IF we add to all these foregoing particulars the power of making laws to be
in Bishops, 41. Bishops only did Vote in Counsels and neither Presbyters, nor
People.
nothing else can be required to the making up of a spiritual Principality.
Now as I have shown that the Bishop of every Diocese did give laws to his
own Church for particulars, so it is evident that the laws of Provinces and
of the Catholic Church, were made by conventions of Bishops without the
intervening, or concurrence of Presbyters, or any else for sentence and
decision.

The instances of this are just so many as there are Counsels. S. Athanasius
reprehending Constantius the Arian for interposing in the Conciliary
determinations of faith, Epist. ad Solitar.
si judicium Episcoporum est (says he) quid cum eo commune habet Imperator? It
is a judgment to be passed BY BISHOPS, (meaning the determination of the
article,) and not proper for the Emperor. And when Hosius of Corduba reproved
him for sitting President in a Council, Quis enim videns eum IN DECERNENDO
PRINCIPEM SE FACERE EPISCOPORUM, non merito dicat illum eam ipsam
abhominationem desolationis? He that sits President, makes himself chief of
the Bishops, etc. intimating Bishops only to preside in Counsels, and to make
decision. And therefore conventus Episcoporum, and Concilium Episcoporum are
the words for General, and Provincial Counsels. Bis in ann^ Episcoporum
Concilia celebrentur, said the 38th Canon of the Apostles; and Congregatio
Episcopalis the Council of Sardis is called by Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 7.
And when the Question was started in the time of Pope Victor about the
celebration of Easter, ob quam causam (says Eusebius) conventus Episcoporum,
lib. 5. cap. 23.
and Concilia per singulas quasque provincias convocantur. Where by the way, it
is to be observeable, that at first, even provincial Synods were only held by
Bishops, and Presbyters had no interest in the decision; however we have of
late sat so near Bishops in Provincial assemblies, that we have sat upon
the Bishops skirts. But my Lords the Bishops have a concerning interest in
this. To them I leave it; And because the four general Counsels are the
Precedents and chief of all the rest, I shall only instance in them for this
particular.

1. The title of the Nicene Council runs thus. (...). The Canons of the 318
Fathers met in Nice. These Fathers were all that gave suffrage to the Canons,
for if there had been more, the title could not have appropriated the Sanction
to 318. And that there were no more S. Ambrose gives testimony in that he makes
it to be a mystical number; proem* in lib. de ^ide.
Nam and Abraham trecentos december and octo duxit ad bellum.... De Concilijs id
potissimum sequor quod trecenti december and octo Sacerdotes.... velut trophaeum
extulerunt, ut mihi videatur hoc esse Divinum, quod eodem numero in Concilijs,
fidei habemus oraculum, quo in historia, pietatis exemplum. Well! 318 was the
Number of the Judges, the Nicene Fathers, and they were all Bishops, for so is
the title of the subscriptions, Subscripserunt trecenti december and octo EPISCOPI
qui in eodem Concilio convenerunt; 13. whereof were Chorepiscopi, but not one
Presbyter, save only that Vitus, and Vincentius subscribed as legates of the
Bishop of Rome, but not by their own authority.

2. The great Council of Constantinople was celebrated by 150 Bishops: (...),
That Is the title of the Canons. The Canons of 150 holy Fathers who met in C. P.
and that these were all Bishops appears by the title of S. Gregory Nazianzen's
oration in the beginning of the Council. (...). The oration of S. Gregory
Nazianzen in the presence of 150 Bishops. And of this Council it was that
Socrates speaking, Imperator (says he) nulla mora interposita Concilium
EPISCOPORUM convocat. lib: 5. cap. 8.
Here indeed some few Bishops appeared by Proxy as Montanus Bishop of
Claudiopolis by Paulus a Presbyter, and Atarbius Bishop of Pontus by Cylus a
Reader, and about some four or five more. * This only, amongst the
subscriptions I find Tyrannus, Auxanon, Helladius, and Elpidius calling
themselves Presbyters. But their modesty hinders not the truth of the former
testimonies; They were Bishops, says the title of the Council, and the
Oration, and the Canons, and Socrates; And least there be scruple concerning
Auxanon Presbyter Apameae, because before, Johannes Apameensis subscribed,
which seems to intimate that one of them was the Bishop, and the other but a
Presbyter indeed, without a subterfuge of modesty, the titles distinguishes
them. For John was Bishop in the Province of Caele Syria, and Auxanon of Apamea
in ^isidia.

3. The third was the Council of Ephesus, Episcoporum plurium quam ducentorum,
as is often said in the acts of the Council [of above 200 Bishops.] But no
Presbyters, for, Cum Episcopi supra ducentos extiterint qui Nestorium
deposuerunt, horum subscriptionibus contenti fuimus. We were content with the
subscription of the 200 and odd Bishops, says the Council; Epist. Synod. ad
Clerum C. Ptanum. part. 2. act. 3. part. 1* c. 32. Vide. 36. de simil. fere
quaestione in fine.
and Theodosius junior, in his Epistle to the Synod, Illicitum est (says he)
eum qui non sit in ordine sanctissimorum Episcoporum Ecclesiasticis immisceri
tractatibus. It is unlawful for any but them who are in the order of the most
holy Bishops, to be interest in Ecclesiastical assemblies.

4. The last of the four great conventions of Christendom was, sexcentorum
triginta Episcoporum, of 630 Bishops at Chalcedon in Bithynia. But in all these
assemblies, no mere Presbyters gave suffrage except by legation from his
Bishop, and delegation of authority. And therefore when in this Council some
Laics, and some Monks, and some Clergymen, not Bishops, would interest
themselves Pulcheria the Empress sent letters to Consularius to repel them by
force; si praeter nostram evocationem, aut permissionem suorum Episcoporum
ibidem commorantur, who come without command of the Empress, or the Bishops
permission. Where it is observeable that the Bishops might bring Clerks with
them to assist, to dispute, and to be present in all the action; And thus they
often did suffer Abbots, or Archimandrites to be there, and to subscribe too,
but that was praeter regulam, and by indulgence only, and condescension;
Action. 1. Coxcil. Chalced.
For when Martinus the Abbot was requested to subscribe he answered, Non suum
esse, sed Episcoporum tantum subscribere, it belonged only to Bishops to
subscribe to Counsels. For this reason the Fathers themselves often called out
in the Council, Mitte for as superfluos, Concilium Episcoporum est.

But I need not more particular arguments, for till the Council of Basil, the
Church never admitted Presbyters as in their own right to voice in Counsels,
and that Council we know savourd too much of the Schismatic, but before this
Council, no example, no president of subscriptions of the Presbyters either to
Oecumenicall, or Provincial Synods. Indeed to a Diocesan Synod, viz. that of
Auxerre in Burgundy, I find 32 Presbyters subscribing. This Synod was neither
Oecumenicall nor Provincial, but merely the Convocation of a Diocese. For
here was but one Bishop, and some few Abbots, and 32 Presbyters. It was indeed
no more then a visitation, or the calling of a Chapter, for of this we receive
intimation in the seventh Canon of that assembly, Council. Ant^siodor. can. 7.
ut in medio Maio omnes Presbyteri ad Synodum venirent, that was their summons,
and in Novembri omnes Abbates ad Concilium: so that here is intimation of a
yearly Synod besides the first convention, the greatest of them but Diocesan,
and therefore the lesser but conventus Capitularis, or however not enough to
give evidence of a subscription of Presbyters to so much as a Provincial
Council. For the guise of Christendom was always otherwise, and therefore it
was the best argument that the Bishops in the Arian hurry used to acquit
themselves from the suspicion of heresy, Neque nos sumus Arii sectatores;
Socrat. lib. 2. c. 7.
Qui namque fieri potest, ut cum simus Episcopi Ario Presbytero auscultemus?
Bishops never receive determination of any article from Priests, but Priests
do from Bishops, Epist. 3. pe^ Ruffinum.
Nam vestrum est eos instruere (says S. Clement speaking of the Bishops office
and power over Priests and all the Clergy, and all the Diocese) eorum est
vobis obedire, ut Deo cujus legatione fungimini. And a little after; Audire
ergo eum attentius oportet, and ab ipso suscicere doctrinam fidei, monita autem
vitae a Presbyteris inquirere. Of the Priests we must inquire for rules of good
life, but of the Bishop receive positions and determinations of faith.

Against this if it be objected, Quod omnes tangit ab omnibus tractari debet,
That which is of general concernement, must also be of general Scrutiny. I
answer, it is true, unless where God himself has entrusted the care of
others in a body, as he has in the Bishops, and will require the souls of his
Diocese at his hand, and commanded us to require the Law at their mouths,
Hebr. 13. 7. and 17.
and to follow their faith, 1. Pet. 5. 2.
whom he has set over us. And therefore the determination of Counsels
pertains to all, Act. 20.
and is handled by all, not in diffusion but in representation. For, Ecclesia
est in Episcopo, and Episcopus in Ecclesia, (says S. Cyprian) the Church is in
the Bishop (viz. Epist. 69.
by representment) and the Bishop is in the Church ( viz. as a Pilot in a ship,
or a Master in a family, or rather as a steward, and Guardian to rule in his
Masters absence) and for this reason the Synod of the Nicene Bishops is called
(in Eusebius) conventus orbis terrarum, Lib. 3. de vita Constant. lib. de
baptis. cap. 18.
and by S. Austin, consensus totius Ecclesiae, not that the whole Church was
there present in their several persons, but was there represented by the
Catholic Bishops, and if this representment be not sufficient for obligation
to all, I see no reason but the Ladies too, may vote in Counsels, for I doubt
not, but they have souls too.

But however, if this argument were concluding in it self, yet it looses its
force in England, where the Clergy are bound by Laws of Parliament, and yet in
the capacity of Clergymen are allowed to choose neither Procurators to
represent us as Clergy, nor Knights of the shire to represent us as Commons. *
In conclusion of this I say to the Presbyters as S. Ambrose said of the
Lay-judges, whom the Arians would have brought to judge in Council (it was an
old heretical trick.) Veniant plane si qui sunt ad Ecclesiam, Epist. 32.
audiant cum populo, non ut QUIS QUAM IUDEX resideat, sed unu^ quisque de suo
affectu habeat examen, and eligat quem sequatur. So may Presbyters be present,
so they may judge, not for others, but for themselves. And so may the people be
present, and anciently were so; and therefore Counsels were always kept in
open Churches, [ ubi populus judicat] not for others, but for themselves, not
by external sentence, but internal conviction, so S. Ambrose expounds
himself in the forecited allegation.

There is no considerable objection against this discourse but that of the
first Council of Jerusalem; where the Apostles, and ELDERS did meet together
to DETERMINE of the question of circumcision. For although in the story of
celebration of it, we find no man giving sentence but Peter, and James; yet in
16. Acts, they are called (...), decrees JUDGED by the Apostles, and Elders.
But first, in this the difficulty is the less, because [ Presbyter] was a
general word for all that were not of the number of the twelve, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors. And then secondly, it is none at all,
because Paul, and Barnabas are signally, and by name reckoned as present in the
Synod, and one of them Prolocutor, or else both. So that such Presbyters may
well define in such conventuall assemblies. 3. If yet there were any difficulty
latent in the story, yet the Catholic practice of Gods Church, is certainly
the best expositor of such places where there either is any difficulty, or
where any is pretended. And of this, I have already given account.

* I remember also that this place is pretended for the peoples power of
voycing in Counsels. It is a pretty pageant; only that it is against the
Catholic practice of the Church, against the exigence of Scripture, which bids
us require the law at the Mouth of our spiritual Rulers, against the gravity
of such assemblies, for it would force them to be tumultuous, and at the best,
are the worst of Sanctions, as being issues of popularity, and to sum up all,
it is no way authorized by this first copy of Christian Counsels. The pretense
is, in the Synodall Acts 15. 23.
letter written in the name of [ the Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren] that
is, (says Geta,) The Apostles, and Presbyters, and People. But why not
BRETHREN, that is, all the Deacons, and Evangelists, and Helpers in
Government, and Ministers of the Churches? There is nothing either in words,
or circumstances to contradict this. If it be asked who then are meant by
Elders, if by [ Brethren] S. Luke understands these Church officers? I answer,
that here is such variety, that although I am not certain which officers he
precisely comprehends under the distinct titles of Elders, and Brethren, yet
here are enough to furnish both with variety, and yet neither to admit mere
Presbyters in the present acceptance of the word, nor yet the Laity to a
decision of the question, nor authorizing the decretall. For besides the twelve
Apostles, there were Apostolical men which were Presbyters, and something
more, as Paul and Barnabas, and Silas; and Evangelists, and Pastors besides,
which might furnish out the last appellative sufficiently. But however without
any further trouble it is evident, that this word [ Brethren] does not
distinguish the Laity from the Clergy. [ Now when they heard this, they were
pricked in their hearts, and said unto PETER, and to the rest of the APOSTLES,
Men and BRETHREN what shall we do. Judas and Silas who were Apostolical men,
are called in Scripture, chief men among the BRETHREN. But this is too known,
to need a contestation.

I only insert the saying of Basilius the Emperor in the 8th Synod. De vobis
autem Laicis tam qui in dignitatibus, quam qui absolute versamini quid amplius
dicam non habeo, quam quod nullo modo vobis licet de Ecclesiasticis causis
sermonem movere, neque penitus resistere integritati Ecclesiae, and universali
Synodo adversari. Laymen (says the Emperor) must by no means meddle with
causes Ecclesiastical, nor oppose themselves to the Catholic Church, or
Counsels Oecumenicall. They must not meddle, for these things appertain to
the cognizance of Bishops and their decision. * And now after all this, what
authority is equal to this LEGISLATIVE of the Bishops? (...), Lib. 4. polit.
^. 15.
(says Aristotle*) They are all evidences of power and authority, to
deliberate, to determine, or judge, to make laws. But to make laws is the
greatest power that is imaginable. The first may belong fairly enough to
Presbyters, but I have proved the two latter to be appropriate to Bishops.

LAstly, 42. And the Bishop had a propriety in the persons of his Clerks.
as if all the acts of jurisdiction, and every imaginable part of power were in
the Bishop, over the Presbyters and subordinate Clergy, the Presbyters are said
to be Episcoporum Presbyteri, the Bishops Presbyters; as having a propriety in
them, and therefore a superiority over them, and as the Bishop was a dispenser
of those things which were in bonis Ecclesiae, so he was of the persons too, a
Ruler in propriety. * S. Hilary in the book which himself delivered to
Constantine, Ecclesiae adhuc (says he) per Presbyteros MEOS communionem
distribuens, I still give the holy Communion to the faithful people by MY
Presbyters. And therefore in the third Council of Carthage a great
deliberation was had about requiring a Clerk of his Bishop, to be promoted in
another Church,.... Denique qui unum habuerit numquid debet illi ipse unus
Presbyter auferri? Can. 45. Council. Carthag. 3.
(says Posthumianus.) If the Bishop have but one Presbyter must that one be
taken from him? Id sequor (says Aurelius) ut conveniam Episcopum ejus, atque
ei inculcem quod ejus Clericus a qualibet Ecclesia postuletur. And it was
resolved, ut Clericum alienum nisi concedente ejus Episcopo. No man shall
retain another Bishop's without the consent of the Bishop whose Clerk he is.

* When Athanasius was abused by the calumny of the heretics his adversaries,
and entered to purge himself, Eccles. hist. lib. 10. cap. 17.
Athanasius ingreditur cum Timotheo Presbytero Suo. He comes in with Timothy
HIS Presbyter; and, Arsenius, cujus brachium dicebatur excisum, lector
aliquando fuerat Athanasii. Arsenius was Athanasius HIS Reader. Vbi autem
ventum est ad Rumores de poculo fracto a Macario Presbytero Athanasii, etc.
Macarius was another of Athanasius HIS Priests. So Theodoret. Peter, Lib. 2.
cap. 8.
and Irenaeus were two more of his Presbyters, as himself witnesses.
Paulinianus comes sometimes to visit us (says S. Hierome to Pammachius) but
not as your Clerk, Athanas. Epist. ad vitam ^olitar: agentes.
sed ejus a quo ordinatur. His Clerk who did ordain him. But these things are
too known to need a multiplication of instances.

The sum is this. The question was, whether or no, and how far the Bishops
had Superiority over Presbyters in the Primitive Church. Their doctrine, and
practice have furnished us with these particulars. The power of Church goods,
and the sole dispensation of them, and a propriety of persons was reserved to
the Bishop. For the Clergy, and Church possessions were in his power, in his
administration: the Clergy might not travail without the Bishops leave: they
might not be preferred in another Diocese without license of their own Bishop:
in their own Churches the Bishop had sole power to prefer them, and they must
undertake the burden of any promotion if he calls them to it: without him they
might not baptize, not consecrate the Eucharist, not communicate, not reconcile
penitents, not preach; not only, not without his ordination, but not without a
special faculty besides the capacity of their order: The Presbyters were bound
to obey their Bishops in their sanctions, and canonical impositions, even by
the decree of the Apostles themselves, and the doctrine of Ignatius, and the
constitution of S. Clement, of the Fathers in the Council of Arles, Ancyra,
and Toledo, and many others: The Bishops were declared to be Judges in ordinary
of the Clergy, and people of their Diocese by the concurrent suffrages of
almost 2000 holy Fathers assembled in Nice, Ephesus, Chalcedon, in Carthage,
Antioch, Sardis, Aquileia, Taurinum, Agatho, and by the Emperor, and by the
Apostles; and all this attested by the constant practice of the Bishops of the
Primitive Church inflicting censures upon delinquents, and absolving them as
they saw cause, and by the dogmaticall resolution of the old Catholics
declaring in their attributes, and appellatives of the Episcopal function that
they have supreme, and universal spiritual power, ( viz. in the sense above
explicated) over all the Clergy and Laity of their Diocese, as, [ that they
are higher then all power, the image of God, the figure of Christ, Christ's
Vicar, President of the Church, Prince of Priests, of authority incomparable,
unparalleled power,] and many more, if all this be witness enough of the
superiority of Episcopal jurisdiction, we have their depositions, we may
proceed as we see cause for, and reduce our Episcopacy to the primitive state,
for that is truly a reformation [ id Dominicum quod primum, id haereticum quod
posterius] and then we shall be sure Episcopacy will loose nothing by these
unfortunate contestations.

BUT against the cause, 43. Their Jurisdiction was over many congregations, or
Parishes,
it is objected super totam Materiam, that Bishops were not Diocesan, but
Parochial, and therefore of so confined a jurisdiction that perhaps our
Village, or City Priests shall advance their Pulpit, as high as the Bishops
throne.

* Well! put case they were not Diocesan, but parish Bishops, what then? yet
they were such Bishops as had Presbyters, and Deacons in subordination to them,
in all the particular advantages of the former instances.

2. If the Bishops had the Parishes, what cure had the Priests? so that this
will debate the Priests as much as the Bishops, and if it will confine a Bishop
to a Parish, it will make that no Presbyter can be so much as a Parish Priest.
If it brings a Bishop lower then a Diocese, it will bring the Priest lower
then a Parish. For set a Bishop where you will, either in a Diocese, or a
Parish, a Presbyter shall still keep the same duty and subordination, the same
distance still. So that this objection upon supposition of the former
discourse, will no way mend the matter for any side, but make it far worse,
it will not advance the Presbytery, but it will depresse the whole hierarchy,
and all the orders of H. Church.

* But because, this trifle is so much used amongst the enemies of Episcopacy,
I will consider it in little, and besides that it does no body any good
advantage, I will represent it in it is fucus and show the falsehood of it.

1. Then. It is evident that there were Bishops before there were any distinct
Parishes. For the first division of Parishes in the West was by Evaristus, who
lived almost 100 years after Christ, and divided Rome into seven parishes,
assigning to every one a Presbyter. So Damasus reports of him in the
Pontifical book. Hic titulos in urbe Roma divisit Presbyteris, and septem
Diaconos ordinavit qui custodirent Episcopum praedicantem propter stylum
veritatis. He divided the Parishes, or titles in the City of Rome to
Presbyters. The same also is by Damasus reported of Dionysius in his life, hic
Presbyteris Ecclesias divisit, and caemiteria, parochiasque and dioeceses
constituit. Marcellus increased the number in the year 305. Hic fecit
caemiterium via Salaria, and 25 Titulos in urbe Roma constituit quasi dioeceses
propter baptismum, and poenitentiam multorum qui convertebantur ex Paganis, and
propter sepulturas Martyrum. He made a Sepulture, or caemitery for the burial
of Martyrs, and appointed 25. Titles or Parishes: but he adds [ quasi
Dioeceses] as it had been diocesses, that is, distinct and limited to
Presbyters, as diocesses were to Bishops; and the use of parishes which he
subjoynes, cleares the business; for he appointed them only propter
baptismum, and poenitentiam multorum and sepulturas, for baptism, and penance,
and burial; for as yet there was no preaching in Parishes, but in the
Mother Church. Thus it was in the West.

* But in Egypt we find Parishes divided something sooner then the earliest of
these, for Eusebius reports out of Philo that the Christians in S. Marks time
had several Churches in Alexandria. Lib. 2. hist. cap. 17.
Etiam DE ECCLESIIS quae apudeos sunt, it a dicit. Est autem in singulis locis
consecrata orationi domus etc: But even before this, there were Bishops. For in
Rome there were four Bishops before any division of Parishes, though S. Peter
be reckoned for none. And before Parishes were divided in Alexandria, S. Mark
himself who did it was the Bishop, and before that time S. James was Bishop of
Jerusalem, and in diverse other places where Bishops were, there were no
distinct Parishes of a while after Evaristus time, for when Dionysius had
assigned Presbyters to several Parishes, he writes of it to Severus Bishop of
Corduba, and desires him to do so too in his Diocese, as appears in his
Epistle to him.

* For indeed necessity required it, apud Binium. tom. 1. Council.
when the Christians multiplied and grew to be (...), as Eusebius. lib. 6. cap.
43. Apolog. c. 37.
Cornelius called the Roman Christians, a great and innumerable people; and did
implere omnia, as Tertullians phrase is, filled all places, and public and
great assemblies drew danger upon themselves, and increased jealousies in
others, and their public offices could not be performed with so diffused and
particular advantage, then they were forced to divide congregations, and
assign several Presbyters to their cure, in subordination to the Bishop, and
so we see, the Elder Christianity grew the more Parishes there were. At first
in Rome there were none, lib. 2. contr. Parmeniam.
Evaristus made seven, Dionysius made some more, and Marcellus added 25, and in
Optatus time there were 40.

Well then! The case is thus. Parishes were not divided at first, therefore to
be sure they were not of Divine institution. Therefore it is no divine
institution that a Presbyter should be fixed upon a Parish, therefore also a
Parish is not by Christ's ordinance an independent body, for by Christ's
ordinance there was no such thing at all, neither absolute, nor in dependence
neither; and then for the maine issue, since Bishops were before Parishes (in
the present sense) the Bishops in that sense could not be Parochial.

* But which was first of a private congregation, or a Diocese? If a private
congregation, then a Bishop was at first fixed in a private congregation, and
so was a Parochial Bishop. If a Diocese was first, then the Question will be,
how a Diocese could be without Parishes, for what is a Diocese but a
jurisdiction over many Parishes?

* I answer, it is true that DIOCESE and PARISH are words used now in
contradistinction; And now, a Diocese is nothing but the multiplication of of
many Parishes: Sed non fuit sic ab initio. For at first, a Diocese was the
City and the Regio suburbicaria, the neighboring towns, in which there was
no distinction of Parishes: That which was a Diocese in the secular sense,
that is, a particular Province, or division of secular prefecture, that was the
assignation of a Bishops charge. * Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Laodicea were
(...) heads of the Diocese, (says Pliny,) meaning in respect of secular
jurisdiction; lib. 5. cap. 29. and 30. Vide Baron. A. D. 39. n. 10. and B.
Rhenan, in notit. provinc. Imperial. in descript. Illyrici.
and so they were in Ecclesiastical regiment. And it was so upon great reason,
for when the regiment of the Church was extended just so as the regiment of the
Commonwealth, it was of less suspicion to the secular power, while the Church
regiment was just fixed together with the political, as if of purpose to show
their mutual consistence, and it is own subordination. ** And besides this,
there was in it a necessity; for the subjects of another Province, or Diocese
could not either safely, or conveniently meet where the duty of the
Commonwealth did not engage them; but being all of one prefecture, and
Diocese, the necessity of public meetings in order to the Commonwealth would
be fair opportunity for the advancement of their Christendom. And this, which
at first was a necessity in this case, grew to be a law in all, by the sanction
of the Council of Can. 17.
Chalcedon, and of Constantinople in Can. 38.
Trullo, (...). Let the order of the Church, follow the order and guise of the
Commonwealth, viz. in her regiment, and prefefecture.

* But in the modern sense of this division a Bishops charge was neither a
Parish, nor a Diocese, as they are taken in relation; but a Bishop had the
supreme care of all the Christians which he by himself, or his Presbyters had
converted, and he also had the charge of endeavoring the conversion of all the
Country. So that although he had not all the Diocese actually in communion and
subjection, yet his charge, his Diocese was so much. Just as it was with the
Apostles, to whom Christ gave all the world for a Diocese, yet at first they
had but a small congregation that did actually obey them.

And now to the Question. Which was first, a particular congregation or a
Diocese? I answer, that a Diocese was first, that is, the Apostles had a
charge before they had a congregation of converts; And S. Mark was sent Bishop
to Alexandria by S. Peter before any were converted. * But ordinarily the
Apostles, when they had converted a City or Nation, then fixed Bishops upon
their charge, and there indeed the particular congregation was before the
Bishop's taking of the Diocese; But then, this City, or Nation although it was
not the Bishops Diocese before it was a particular congregation, yet it was
part of the Apostles Diocese, and this they concredited to the Bishops
respectively.

S. Paul was ordained by the Prophets at Antioch, Apostle of the
Uncircumcision; All the Gentiles was his Diocese, and even of those places he
then received power which as yet he had not converted. So that, absolutely, a
diocese was before a particular congregation. But if a diocese be taken
collectively, as now it is, for a multitude of Parishes united under one
Bishop, then one must needs be before 20, and a particular congregation before
a diocese; but then that particular congregation was not a parish, in the
present sense, for it was not a part of a Diocese taking a Diocese for a
collection of Parishes; but that particular Congregation was the first fruits
of his Diocese, and like a Grain of Mustard Seed that in time might, and did
grow up to a considerable height, even to a necessity of distinguishing titles,
and parts of the Diocese, assigning several parts, to several Priests.

2. We see that the Primitive Bishops, before the division of parishes, had the
City, and Country; and after the division of parishes, had them all under his
jurisdiction, and ever, even from the Apostles times had several provinces
(some of them I mean) within their limits and charges. * The 35 Canon of the
Apostles gives power to the Bishop to dispose only of those things (...), which
are under his Diocese and the Neighbor villages, and the same thing is
repeated in the ninth and tenth Canons of the Council of Antioch calling it
(...), the Ancient Canon of our fore fathers; and yet it self is elder then
three of the general Counsels, and if then it was an Ancient Canon of the
Fathers that the City, and Villages should be subject to the Bishop, surely a
Primitive Bishop was a Diocesan.

But a little before this was the Nicene Council, Can. 6.
and there I am sure we have a Bishop that is at least a Diocesan. (...). Let
the old Customs be kept. What are those? (...). Let the Bishop of Alexandria
have power over ALL Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis, It was a good large Parish;
And yet this parish if we have a mind to call it so, was (...), according to
the old custom of their forefathers, and yet that was so early that S. Anthony
was then alive, who was borne in S. Irenaeus his time, who was himself but
second from the Apostles.

It was also a good large parish that Ignatius was Bishop of, even all Syria,
Caelesyria, Mesopotamia, and both the Ciliciae. (...), The Bishop of Syria he
calls himself in his epistle to the Romans, and (...), lib. 5. ca. 23.
so Theodoret: and besides all these, his Successors, in the Council of
Chalcedon, Action. 7.
had the two Phaeniciae, and Arabia yielded to them by composition. These alone
would have made two or three reasonable good parishes, and would have taken up
time enough to preambulate, had that been then the guise of Christendom. * But
examples of this kind are infinite. Epist, ad Leon. 1.
Theodorus Bishop of Cyrus was Pastor over 800 parishes, Episc. Romans Haeres. 68.
Athanasius was Bishop of Alexandria, Egypt, Thebais, Marcotis, Libya,
Ammoniaca, and Pent apolis, says S. Epiphanius; And his predecessor Iulianus
successor of Agrippinus was Bishop Council Chalced act. 16.
(...), of the Churches about Alexandria. Either it was a Diocese, or at least
a plurality. * Theodoret. lib. 5. c. 28.
S. Chrysostom had Pontus, Asia, and all Thrace in his parish, even as much as
came to sixteen prefectures; a fair bounds surely; and so it was with all the
Bishops, a greater, or a lesser Diocese they had; but all were Diocesan; for
they had several parishes, singuli Ecclesiarum Episcopi habent sub se
Ecclesias, says Epiphanius in his epistle to John of Jerusalem, Apud. S.
Hieron. haeres. 69.
and in his book contra haereses, Quotquot enim in Alexandria Catholicae
Ecclesiae sunt, sub uno Archiepiscopo sunt, privatimque ad has destinati sunt
Presbyteri propter Ecclesiasticas necessitates, it aut habitatores vicini sint
uniuscujusque Ecclesiae. Lib. 4. c. 12, Encom. Cyprian.
* All Italy was the parish of Liberius (says Socrates.) Africa was S.
Cyprians parish, says S. Gregory Nazianzen, S^Zom. lib. 5. c. 18.
and S. Basil the Great was Parish Priest to all Cappadocia. But I rather
believe if we examine their several stories they will rather prove
Metropolitans, Vide apud Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 22.
then mere parochians.

3 ly The ancient Canons forbad a Bishop to be ordained in a Village, Castle,
or Town. It was so decreed in the Council of Laodicea before the first
Nicene. Can. 56.
(...). In the Villages, or Countries, Bishops must not be constituted. And
this was renewed in the Council of Sardis, Can. 6.
(...). It is not lawful to ordain Bishops in Villages or little Towns to
which one Presbyter is sufficient, (...), but Bishops must ordain Bishops in
those Cities where Bishops formerly have been. * So that this Canon does not
make a new Constitution, but perpetuates the old sanction. Bishops ab antiquo
were only ordained in great Cities, and Presbyters to little Villages. Who
then was the Parish Curate? the Bishop or the Priest? The case is too apparent.

Only, here it is objected that some Bishops were of small Towns, and
therefore these Canons were not observed, and Bishops might be, and were
parochial, as S. Gregory of Nazianzum, Zoticus of Comana, Maris in Dolicha.
The one of these is called (...) by Lib. 5. c. 16.
Eusebius; and another (...) by Lib. 5. cap. 4.
Theodoret, a little Town. This is all is pretended for this great Scarcrow of
parochial Bishops.

* But, first, suppose these had been parishes, and these three parochial
Bishops, it follows not that all were; not those to be sure, which I have
proved to have been Bishops of Provinces, and Kingdoms. 2ly It is a clear
case, that Nazianzum though a small City, yet was the seat of a Bishops
throne, so it is reckoned in the (...) made by Leo the Emperor, Ius GraeccRom.
p. 89.
where it is accounted inter thronos Ecclesiarum Patriarchae
Constantinopolitano subjectarum, and is in the same account with Caesarea, with
Ephesus, with Crete, with Philippi, and almost fourscore more.* As for
Zoticus, Vide Baron. An. Dom. 205 n. 27.
he indeed came from Comana, a Village town, for there he was born, but he was
Episcopus Otrenus, Bishop of Otrea in Armenia, says Lib. 4. c. 25.
Nicephorus. * And for Maris the Bishop of Dolicha, it was indeed such a small
City as Nazianzus was, but that proves not but his Diocese and territory was
large enough. Gennad. apud Hieron.
Thus was Asclepius vici non grandis, Johan. de Trittenheim de script. Eccles.
but yet he was Vagensis territorii Episcopus. His seat might usually be in a
little City, if it was one of those towns in which according to the exigence
of the Canons (...) in which Bishops anciently were ordained, and yet the
appurtenances of his Diocese large, and extended, and too great for 100 Parish
Priests.

4ly. The institution of Chorepiscopi proves most evidently that the Primitive
Bishops were Diocesan, not Parochial: for they were instituted to assist the
Bishop in part of his Country-charge, and were (...), Visiters, (as the
Council of Laodicea calls them.) But what need such Suffragans, such
coadjutors to the managing of a Parish. Indeed they might possibly have been
needful for the managing of a Citty-parish, especially if a whole City was a
Parish, as these objectors must pretend, or not say Primitive Bishops were
Parochial. But being these Chorepiscopi were Suffragans to the Bishop, and did
their offices in the country, while the Bishop was resident in the City,
either the Bishops parish extended it self from City to Country; and then it
is all one with a Diocese, or else we can find no employment for a
Chorepiscopus, or Visiter. * The tenth Canon of the Council of Antioch,
describes their use and power. Qui in villis and vicis constituti sunt
Chorepiscopi.... placuit sanctae Synodo ut modum proprium recognoscant, ut
gubernent sibi subjectas Ecclesias. They were to govern the Churches delegated
to their charge. It seems they had many Churches under their provision, and yet
they were but the Bishops Vicars, for so it follows in the Canon; he must not
ordain any Presbyters, and Deacons absque urbis Episcopo cui ipse subjicitu^,
and Regio; Without leave of the Bishop of the City to whom both himself, and
all the Country is subordinate.

5. The Bishop was one in a City wherein were many Presbyters. (...), says S.
Ignatius. Epist. ad Philadelph.
There is one Altar in every Church, and ONE BISHOP together with the
Presbytery, and the Deacons. Either then a whole City, such as Rome, or
Jerusalem (which as Josephus reports had 400 Synagogues,) must be but one
Parish, and then they had as good call a Bishops charge a Diocese, as a Parish
in that latitude; or if there were many Parishes in a City, and the Bishop
could have but one of them, why, what hindered but that there might in a City
be as many Bishops, as Presbyters? For if a Bishop can have but one Parish, why
may not every Parish have a Bishop? But by the ancient Canons, a City though
never so great, could have but one for it self and all the Country, therefore
every Parish Priest was not a Bishop, nor the Bishop a mere Parish Priest.

Ne in una civitate duo sint Episcopi, Lib. 10, Eccles. hist.
was the Constitution of the Nicene Fathers as says Ruffinus; and long before
this, it was so known a business that one City should have but one Bishop,
that Cornelius exprobrates to Novatus his ignorance, Apud Eusebius. lib. 6. cap.
33.
is ergo qui Evangelium vendicabat, nesciebat in Ecclesia Catholica unum
Episcopum esse debere, ubi videbat esse Presbyteros quadraginta and sex.
Novatus (the Father of the old Puritans) was a goodly Gospeller that did not
know that in a Catholic Church there should be but one Bishop wherein there
were 46 Presbyters; intimating clearly that a Church that had two Bishops is
not Catholic, but Schismatic at least, (if both be pretended to be of a fixed
residence) what then is he that would make as many Bishops in a Church as
Presbyters? He is (...), he fights against God, if S. Ambrose say true. In 1.
Cor. 12.
Deus enim singulis Ecclesiis singulos Episcopos praeesse decrevit. God has
decreed that one Bishop should rule in one Church; and of what extent his ONE
CHURCH was, may easily be guessed by himself who was the Ruler, and Bishop of
the great City, and province of Millaine. * And therefore when Valerius (...).
Epiphan. haeres. 66. n. 6. Possidon. in vita S. Aug. cap. 8.
as it was then sometimes used in several Churches had ordained S. Austin to
be Bishop of Hippo, whereof Valerius was also Bishop at the same time, S.
Austin was troubled at it as an act most Uncanonicall, and yet he was not
ordained to rule in common with Valerius, but to rule in succession and after
the consummation of Valerius. It was the same case in Agelius, Socrat. lib. 5.
cap. 21.
a Novatian Bishop ordaining Marcian to be his successor, and Sisinnius to
succeed him, the acts were indeed irregular, but yet there was no harm in it
to this cause, they were ordained to succeed, not in conjunction. Lib. 4. cap.
15.
(...), (says Sozomen) It is a note of Schism, and against the rule of H.
Church to have two Bishops in one chair. Secundus Episcopus nullus est (says
S. Lib. 4. Epist. 2.
Cyprian) And as Cornelius reports it in his epistle to S. Cyprian, it was the
voice of the Confessors that had been the instruments and occasions of the
Novatian Schism by erecting another Bishop; Nec non ignoramus unum Deum esse,
unum Christum esse Dominum quem confessi sumus, unum spiritum sanctum, unum
Episcopum in Catholica Ecclesia esse debere. And these very words the people
also used in the contestation about Liberius, and Faelix. For when the Emperor
was willing that Liberius should return to his See, on condition that Faelix
the Arian might be Bishop there too, they derided the suggestion, crying out,
One God, Lib. 2. c. 11.
one Christ, one Bishop. So Theodoret reports. But who lists to see more of
this, may be satisfied (if plenty will do it) in In 1. Philip.
S. Chrysostom, in 1. Philip.
Theodoret, S. in 1. Philip.
Hierom, in 1. Philip.
Oecumenius, lib. 2. contr. Parmen.
Optatus, S. in 1. Tim. 3. and in 1. Phil.
Ambrose, and if he please he may read a whole book of it written by S.
Cyprian, de Vnitate Ecclesiae, sive de singularitate Prelatorum.

6ly. Suppose the ordinary Diocesses had been parishes, yet what were the
Metropolitans, and the Primates, were they also parish-Bishops? Surely if
Bishops were parochial, then these were at least diocesan by their own
argument, for to be sure they had many Bishops under them. But there were none
such in the Primitive Church? yes most certainly. The 35 Canon of the Apostles
tells us so, most plainly, and at the worst, they were a very primitive
record. Episcopos gentium singularum scire convenit quis inter eos PRIMUS
HABEATUR, quem velut caput existiment, and nihil amplius praeter ejus
conscientiam gerant, quam ea sola quae parochiae propriae, and villis quae sub
ea sunt, competunt. The Bishops of every Nation must know who is their PRIMATE,
and esteem him as their HEAD, and do NOTHING without his consent, but those
things that appertain to their own Diocese. And from hence the Fathers of
the Council of Antioch derived their sanction, Council. Antioch. ca. 9.
per singulas regiones Episcopos convenit nosse METROPOLITANUM Episcopum
sollicitudinem totius provinciae gerere etc. The Bishops of every province must
know that their METROPOLITAN. Bishop does take cure of all the province. For
this was an Apostolical Constitution (says S. Clement) that in the conversion
of Gentile Cities in place of the Archflamines, Epist. 1. ad Iacobum Fratrem
Domini.
Archbishops, Primates, or Patriarchs should be placed, qui reliquorum
Episcoporum judicia, and majora (quoties necesse foret) negotiain fide
agitarent, and secundum Dei voluntatem, sicut constituerunt Sancti Apostoli,
definirent. * Alexandria was a Metropoliticall See long before the Nicene
Council, as appears in the sixth Canon before cited; vide Council. Chalced.
act. 1. in epist. Theod. and Valentin. Imp.
Nay, Dioscorus the Bishop of that Church was required to bring ten of the
METROPOLITANS that he had UNDER HIM to the Council of Ephesus, by Theodosius
and Valentinian Emperors, so that it was a PATRIARCHAT.

These are enough to show that in the Primitive Church there were Metropolitan
Bishops. Now then either Bishops were Parochial, or no: If no, then they were
Diocesan; if yea, then at least many of them were Diocesan, for they had
(according to this rate) many Parochial Bishops under them. * But I have stood
too long upon this impertinent trifle, but as now a days it is made, the
consideration of it is material to the maine Question. Only this I add; That
if any man should trouble the world with any other fancy of his own, and say
that our Bishops are nothing like the Primitive, because all the Bishops of the
Primitive Church had only two towns in their charge, and no more, and each of
these towns had in them 170 families, and were bound to have no more, how
should this man be confuted? It was just such a device as this in them that
first meant to disturb this Question, by pretending that the Bishops were
only parochial, not diocesan, and that there was no other Bishop but the
Parish Priest. Most certainly, themselves could not believe the allegation,
only they knew it would raise a dust. But by God's providence, there is water
enough in the Primitive fountains to allay it.

ANother consideration must here be interposed concerning the intervening of
Presbyters in the regiment of the several Churches.. 44. And was aided by
Presbyters but not impaired.
For though I have twice already shown that they could not challenge it of
right either by Divine institution, or Apostolical ordinance, yet here also it
must be considered how it was in the practice of the Primitive Church, for
those men that call the Bishop a Pope, are themselves desirous to make a
Conclave of Cardinals too, and to make every Diocese a Roman Consistory.

1. Then, the first thing we hear of Presbyters (after Scripture I mean, for
of it I have already given account) is from the testimony of S. Hierome, in
Epist. ad Titum. cap. 1.
Antequam studia in religione fierent, and diceretur in populis ego sum Pauli
etc: communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur. Before factions
arose in the Church, the Church was governed by the common Counsel of
Presbyters. Here S. Hierome either means it of the time before Bishops were
constituted in particular Churches, or after Bishops were appointed. If, before
Bishops were appointed, no hurt done, the Presbyters might well rule in common,
before themselves had a ruler appointed to govern both them and all the
diocese beside. Epist. ad Antioch.
For so S. Ignatius writing to the Church of Antioch exhorts the Presbyters to
feed the flock until God should declare (...) whom he would make their ruler.
Epist. 21.
And S. Cyprian speaking of Etecusa and some other women that had made
defaillance in time of persecution, and so were put to penance, praeceperunt
eas Praepositi tantisper sic esse, donec Episcopus constituatur. The
Presbyters, whom sede vacant he praeter morem suum calls Praepositos, they
gave order that they should so remain till the Consecration of a Bishop. *
But, if S. Hierome means this saying of his, after Bishops were fixed, then his
expression answers the allegation, for it was but communi CONSILIO
Presbyterorum, the IUDICIUM might be solely in the Bishop, he was the JUDGE,
though the Presbyters were the COUNSELORS. For so himself adds, that upon
occasion of those first Schisms in Corinth, it was DECREED in ALL THE WORLD,
vt omnis Ecclesiae cura ad unum pertineret, all the care of the diocese was in
the Bishop, and therefore all the power, for it was unimaginable that the
burden should be laid on the Bishop, and the strength put into the hands of the
Presbyters. * And so S. Ignatius styles them, [(...),] Assessors, and
Counselors to the Bishop. But yet if we take our estimate from Ignatius, The
Bishop is THE RULER, without him though all concurred, yet nothing could be
done, nothing attempted; The Bishop was Superior in ALL POWER and AUTHORITY,
He was to be obeyed in ALL THINGS, and contradicted in NOTHING; The Bishops
judgment was to sway, Ad Trallian. Ad Magnes.
and nothing must seem pleasing to the Presbyters that was cross to the
Bishops sentence: this, and a great deal more which I have formerly made use
of, is in Ignatius; And now let their assistance and Counsel extend as far
as it will, the Bishops authority is invulnerable. But I have already enough
discussed this instance of S. Hierome's.. thither I refer the Reader.

2. But S. Cyprian must do this business for us, if any man, for of all the
Bishops, he did acts of the greatest condescension, and seeming declination of
Episcopal authority. But let us see the worst. Epist. 6.
Ad id vero quod scripserunt mihi compresbyteri nostri.... solus rescribere
nihil potui, quando a primordio Episcopatus mei statuerim nihil sine consilio
vestro, and sine consensu plebis meae privata sententia gerere. And again,
Epist. 19.
quamvis mihi videantur debere pacem accipere, tamen ad consultum vestrum eos
dimisi, ne videar aliquid temere praesumere. And a third time, Epist. 18.
Quae res cum omnium nostrum consilium and sententiam spectet, praejudicare ego
and soli mihirem communem vindicare non audeo. These are the greatest steps of
Episcopal humility that I find in materia juridica, The sum whereof is this,
that S. Cyprian did consult his Presbyters and Clergy in matters of
consequence, and resolved to do nothing without their advice. But then,
consider also, it was, statui apud me, I have resolved with my self to do
nothing without your Counsel. It was no necessity ab extra, no duty, no
Sanction of holy Church that bound him to such a modesty, it was his own
voluntary act. 2. It was as well Diaconorum, as Presbyterorum consilium that he
would have in conjunction, as appears by the titles of the sixth and
eighteenth Epistles, Cyprianus Presbyteris, ac DIACONIS fratribus salutem: So
that here the Presbyters can no more challenge a power of regiment in common,
then the Deacons, by any Divine law, or Catholic practice. 3. S. Cyprian also
would actually have the consent of the people too, and that will as well
disturb the Ius Divinum of an independent Presbytery, as of an independent
Episcopacy.

But indeed neither of them both need to be much troubled, for all this was
voluntary in S. Cyprian, like Moses, qui cum in potestate sua habuit vt sol^^
possit praesse populo, seniores elegit ( to use S. Hierome's expression) who
when it was in his power alone to rule the people, in 1. ad. Titum.
yet chose seaventy Elders for assistants. For as for S. Cyprian, this very
Epistle cleares it that no part of his Episcopal authority was impaired. For
he shows what himself alone could do. Fretus igitur dilectione vestra, and
religione, quam satis n^vi, his literis and hortor and mando etc. I entreat and
COMMAND you.... vice mea fungamini circa gerenda ea quae administratio
religiosa deposcit, Re my substitutes in the administration of Church affairs.
He intreates them pro dilectione, because they loved him, he COMMANDS THEM PRO
RELIGIONE, by their religion, for it was a piece of their religion to obey him,
and in him was the government of his Church, else how could he have put the
Presbyters, and Deacons in substitution?

* Add to this; It was the custom of the Church that although the Bishop did
only impose hands in the ordination of Clerks, yet the Clergy did approve, and
examine the persons to be ordained, and it being a thing of public interest,
it was then not thought fit to be a personal action both in preparation, and
ministration too (and for this S. Chrysostom was accused in Concilionesario
[as the title of the edition of it, expresses it] that he made ordinations
(...)) yet when S. Cyprian saw occasion for it, Ius Graeco Romans page 556.
he did ordain without the consent of the Clergy of his Church, for so he
ordained Celerinus, so he ordained Optatus, and Satarus, when himself was from
his Church, and in great want of Clergymen to assist in the ministration of
the daily offices. *** He did as much in jurisdiction too, and censures; for
HIMSELF did excommunicate Felicissimus and Augendus, and Rep^stus, and Irene,
and Paula, as appears in his 38, and 39 epistles; and tells Epist. 65.
Rogatianus that he might have done as much to the petulant Deacon that abused
him by virtue of his Episcopal authority. And the same power singly, and
solely, he exercised in his acts of favor and absolution; Epist. 55.
Vnus atque alius OBNITENTE PLE^E ET CONTRADICENTE, M^A tamen FACILITATE
susceptisunt. Indeed here is no contradiction of the Clergy expressed, but yet
the absolution said to be his own act, against the people and without the
Clergy. For he alone was the IUDOE, insomuch that he declared that it was the
cause of Schism and heresy that the Bishop was not obeyed, ibidem.
nec UNUS in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos, and ad tempus IVDEX VICE CHRISTI
COGITATUR, and that ONE high Priest in a Church, and JUDGE INSTEAD OF CHRIST is
not admitted. So that the Bishop must be ONE, and that ONE must be JUDGE, and
to acknowledge more, in S. Cyprians Lexicon is called schism and heresy.
Farther yet, this Iudicatory of the Bishop is independent, and responsive to
none but Christ. Actum suum disponit, Epist. 52.
and dirigit Vnusquisque Episcopus rationem propositi sui Domino redditurus,
Epist. 72.
and again, habet in Ecclesiae administratione voluntatis suae arbitrium
liberum unusquisque Praepositus: rationem actus sui Domino redditurus. The
Bishop is Lord of his own actions, and may do what seems good in his own
eyes, and for his actions he is to account to Christ.

This general account is sufficient to satisfy the allegations out of the
6th, and 18th epistles, and indeed, the whole Question. But for the 18th
epistle, there is something of peculiar answer. For first, It was a case of
public concernement, and therefore he would so comply with the public
interest as to do it by public counsel, 2ly, It was a necessity of times
that made this case peculiar. NECESSITAS TEMPORUM facit ut non temere pacem
demus, they are the first words of the next epistle, which is of the same
matter; for if the lapsi had been easily, and without a public and solemn
trial reconciled, it would have made Gentile Sacrifices frequent, and
Martyrdom but seldom, 3ly, The common counsel which S. Cyprian here said he
would expect, was the Council of the Confessors, to whom for a peculiar honor
it was indulged that they should be interested in the public assoyling of such
penitents who were overcome with those fears which the Confessors had
overcome. So that this is evidently an act of positive, and temporary
discipline, and as it is no disadvantage to the power of the Bishop, so to be
sure, no advantage to the Presbyter. * But the clause of objection from the
19th epistle is yet unanswered, and that runs something higher,.... tamen ad
consultum vestrum eos dimisine videar aliquid temere praesumere. It is called
presumption to reconcile the penitents without the advice of those to whom he
writ. But from this we are fairly delivered by the title. Cypriano, and
Compresbyteris Carthagini consistentibus; Caldonius, salutem. It was not the
epistle of Cyprian to his Presbyters, but of Caldonius one of the suffragan
Bishops of Numidia to his Metropolitan, and now, what wonder if he call it
presumption to do an act of so public consequence without the advice of his
Metropolitan. He was bound to consult him by the Canons Apostolical, and so he
did, and no harm done to the present Question, of the Bishops sole and
independent power, and unmixt with the conjunct interest of the Presbytery, who
had nothing to do beyond ministry, counsel, and assistance.

3. In all Churches where a Bishops seat was, there were not always a College
of Presbyters, but only in the greatest Churches; for sometimes in the lesser
Cities there were but two, Esse oportet, and aliquantos Presbyteros, at bini
sint per Ecclesias, and unus incivitate Episcopus. In 1. Timoth. 3.
So S. Ambrose, sometimes there was but one in a Church. Posthumianus in the
third Council of Carthage put the case. D^inde qui unum [Presbyterum]
habuerit, numquid debet illi ipse unus Presbyter auferri? The Church of Hippo
had but one. Valerius was the Bishop, and Austin was the Priest; and after him
Austin was the Bishop, and Eradius the Priest. Sometimes not one, as in the
case Aurelius put in the same Council now cited, of a Church that had never a
Presbyter to be consecrated Bishop in the place of him that dyed; and once at
Hippo they had none, even then when the people snatched S. Austin and carried
him to Valerius to be ordained. In these cases I hope it will not be denied but
the Bishop was Judge alone, I am sure he had but little company, sometimes none
at all.

4. But suppose it had been always done that Presbyters were consulted in
matters of great difficulty, and possibility of Scandal, for so S. Ambrose
intimates, 1. Tim. 1.
Ecclesia seniores habuit sine quorum Consilio nihil gerebatur in Ecclesia
(understand, in these Churches where Presbyteries were fixed) yet this might be
necessary, and was so indeed in some degree at first, which in succession as it
proved troublesome to the Presbyters; so unnecessary and impertinent to the
Bishops. At first I say it might be necessary. For they were times of
persecution, and temptation, and if both the Clergy and people too were not
complied withal in such exigence of time, and agonies of spirit, it was the
way to make them relapse to Gentilisme; for a discontented spirit will hide it
self, and take sanctuary in the reeds and mud of Nilus, rather then not take
complacence in an imaginary security and revenge. 2. As yet there had been
scarce any Synods to determine cases of public difficulty, and what they could
not receive from public decision, it was fitting they should supply by the
maturity of a Consiliary assistance, and deliberation. For although, by the
Canons of the Apostles, Bishops were bound twice a year to celebrate Synods,
yet persecution intervening, they were rather twice a year a (...) then (...),
a dispersion then a Synod. 3. Although Synods had been as frequently convened
as was intended by the Apostles, yet it must be length of time, and a
successive experience that must give opportunity and ability to give general
rules for the emergency of all particulars, and therefore till the Church grew
of ^ome considerable age, a fixed standing College of Presbyters was more
requisite then since it has been, when the frequency of General Counsels,
and Provincial Synods, and the peace of the Church, and the innumerable
volumes of the Fathers, and Decretalls of Bishops, and a digest of
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, has made the personal assistance of Presbyters
unnecessary. 4. When necessity required not their presence and Counsel, their
own necessity required that they should attend their several cures. For let it
be considered; they that would now have a College of Presbyters assist the
Bishop whether they think of what follows. For either they must have
Presbyters ordained without a title, which I am sure they have complained of
these threescore years, or else they must be forced to Non-residence. For how
else can they assist the Bishop in the ordinary, and daily occurrences of the
Church, unless either they have no cure of their own, or else neglect it? And
as for the extraordinary, either the Bishop is to consult his Metropolitan, or
he may be assisted by a Synod, if the Canons already constitute do not aid
him, but in all these cases the Presbytery is impertinent.

5. As this assistance of Presbyters was at first for necessity, and after by
Custom it grew a Law; so now retro, first the necessity failed, and then the
desuetude abrogated the Law, which before, custom had established. Vbi supra.
[ quod qua negligentia obsoleverit nescio] says S. Ambrose, he knew not how
it came to be obsolete, but so it was, it had expired before his time. Not but
that Presbyters were still in Mother-Churches (I mean in Great ones) In
Ecclesia enim habemus Senatum nostrum, In Isaiae. 3.
actum Presbyterorum, we have still (says S. Hierome) in the Church our
Senate, a College, or Chapter of Presbyters, (he was then at Rome, or
Jerusalem) but they were not consulted in Church affairs, and matter of
jurisdiction, that was it, that S. Ambrose wondered how it came to pass. And
thus it is to this day. In our Mother Churches we have a Chapter too, but the
Bishop consults them not in matters of ordinary jurisdiction, just so it was in
S. Ambrose his time, and therefore our Bishops have altered no custom in this
particular, the alteration was pregnant even before the end of the four
general. Counsels, and therefore is no violation of a divine right, for then
most certainly a contrary provision would have been made in those conventions,
wherein so much sanctity, and authority, and Catholicisme and severe discipline
were conjunct; and then besides, it is no innovation in practice which pretends
so fair antiquity, but however it was never otherwise then voluntary in the
Bishops, and positive discipline in the Church, and convenience in the thing
for that present, and Council in the Presbyters, and a trouble to the
Presbyters persons, and a disturbance of their duties when they came to be fixed
upon a particular charge.

* One thing more before I leave. I find a Canon of the Council of Hispalis
objected. Can. 6.
Episcopus Presbyteris solus honorem dare potest, solus autem auferre non
potest. A Bishop may alone ordain a Priest, a Bishop may not alone depose a
Priest. Therefore in censures there was in the Primitive Church a necessity of
conjunction of Presbyters with the Bishop in imposition of censures.

* To this I answer, first it is evident, that he that can give an honor, can
also take it away, if any body can; for there is in the nature of the thing no
greater difficulty in pulling down, then in raising up. It was wont always to
be accounted easier; therefore this Canon requiring a conjunct power in
deposing Presbyters is a positive constitution of the Church, founded indeed
upon good institution, but built upon no deeper foundation, neither of nature
or higher institution, then its own present authority.

But that is enough, for we are not now in question of divine right, but of
Catholic and Primitive practice. To it therefore I answer, that the conjunct
hand required to pull down a Presbyter, was not the Chapter, or College of
Presbyters, but a company of Bishops, a Synodall sentence, and determination,
for so the Canon runs, qui profecto nec a^ un^ damna^i, nec un^ judicante
poterunt honoris sui privilegii^ exuised praesantati SYNODALL (...) quod canon
de illis praeceperit definiri. And the same thing was determined in the Greeks
Council of Carthage. Can. 20.
If a Presbyter or a Deacon be accused, their own Bishop shall judge them, not
alone, but with the assistance of six Bishops more, in the case of a
Presbyter; three, of a Deacon; (...). (...) But the causes of the other Clergy
the Bishop of the place must ALONE hear and determine them, So that by this
Canon, in some things the Bishop might not be alone, but then his assistants
were Bishops, not Presbyters, in other things he alone was judge without
either, and yet his sentences must not be cla^^cular, but in open Court, in the
full Chapter; for his Presbyters must be present; and so it is determind for
Africa in the fourth Council of Carthage, Vt Episcopu^ nullius causam audiat
absque praescutia (...) alioquin irrita erit sententia Episcopi nini praesentia
Clericonum confirmetur. Here is indeed a necessity of the presence of the
Clergy of his Church where his Consistory was kept, least the sentence should
be clandestine, and so illegal, but it is nothing but praesentia Clericorum,
for it is sententia Episcopi, the Bishops sentence, and the Clerks presence
only; for (...), the Bishop ALONE might give sentence in the causes of the
inferior Clergy, even by this Canon it self, which is used for objection
against the Bishops sole jurisdiction.

*** I know nothing now to hinder our process; for the Bishops jurisdiction is
clearly left in his own hand, and the Presbyters had no share in it, but by
delegation and voluntary assumption. Now I proceed in the maine question.

WE have seen what Episcopacy is in it self, 45. So that the government of
the Church by Bishops was believed necessary.
now from the same principles let us see what it is to us. Epist. ad Tral.
And first; Antiquity taught us it was simply necessary, even to the being and
constitution of a Church. That runs high, but we must follow our leaders. * S.
Ignatius is express in this question. Qui intra altar est, mundus est, quare
and obtemperat Episcope, and Sacerdotibus. Qui veto foris est hic is est, qui
sine Episcopo, Sacerdote, and Diacono quicquam agit, and ejusmodi inquinatum
habet conscientiam, and infideli deterior est. He that is within the Altar,
that is, within the Communion of the Church, he is pure, for he obeyes the
Bishop, and the Priests. But he that is without, that is, does any thing
without his Bishop and the Clergy, he has filthy conscience science and is
worse then an infidel. NECESSE itaque est, quicquid facitis, ut SINE EPISCOPO
NIHIL faciatis. It is NECESSARY that what ever ye do, ye be sure to do
nothing without the Bishop. Quid enim aliud est Episcopus, etc. For what else
is a Bishop but he that is greater then all power? So that the obeying the
Bishop is the necessary condition of a Christian, and Catholic communion, he
that does not, is worse then an infidel. The same also he affirms again.
Epist. ad Philadelph.
Quot quot enim Christi sunt partium Episcopi, qui vero ab illo declinant, and
cum maledictis communionem amplectuntur, hi came illis excidentur. All them that
are on Christ's side, are on the Bishops side, but they that communicate with
accursed Schismatics, shall be cut off with them. * If then we will be
Christ's servants, we must be obedient and subordinate to the Bishop. It is the
condition of Christianity. We are not Christians else. So is the intimation of
S. Ignatius. * As full and pertinent is the peremptory resolution of S. Cyprian
in that admirable epistle of his ad Laps^s, Epist. 27. and alibi.
where after he had spoken how Christ instituted the honor of Episcopacy in
concrediting the Keys to Peter and the other Apostles, Inde (says he) per
temporum and successionum vices, Episcoporum ordinatio, and ECCLESIAE RATIO
decurrit, VT ECCLESIA SUPER EPISCOPOS CONSTITUATUR, and omnis actus Ecclesiae
per EOSDEM PRAEPOSITOS gubernetur* Hence is it, that by several succession of
Bishops the Church is continued, so that the CHURCH HAS IT IS BEING, OR
CONSTITUTION BY BISHOPS, and every act of Ecclesiastical regiment is to be
disposed by them. Cum hoc itaque divina lege fundatum sit, miror etc. Since
therefore this is so ESTABLISHED BY THE LAW OF GOD, I wonder any man should
question it, etc. And therefore as in all buildings, the foundation being gone,
the fabric falls, so IF YE TAKE AWAY BISHOPS, the Church must ask a writing
of divorce from God, for it can no longer be called a Church. This account we
have from S. Cyprian, and he reenforces again upon the same charge in his
Epist. 69.
Epistle ad Florentium Pupianum, where he makes a Bishop to be ingredient into
the DEFINITION of a Church. [Ecclesia est plebs sacerdoti adunata, and Pastori
suo Grex adhaerens, The Church is a flock adhering to it is Pastor, and a people
united to their Bishop] for that so he means by Sacerdos, appears in the words
subjoined, Vnde and scire debes Episcopum in Ecclesia esse, and Ecclesiam in
Episcopo, and si qui Cum EPISCOPO NON SIT IN ECCLESIA NON ESSE, and frustra
sibi blandiri eos qui pacem cum Sacerdotibus Dei non habentes obrepunt, and
latenter apud quosdam communicare se credunt etc. As a Bishop is in the Church,
so the Church is in the Bishop, and he that does not communicate with the
Bishop is not in the Church; and therefore they vainly flatter themselves that
think their case fair and good, if they communicate in conventicles, and
forsake their Bishop.

And for this cause the holy Primitives were so confident, and zealous for a
Bishop, that they would ^ather expose themselves and all their tribes to a
persecution, then to the greater misery, the want of Bishops. vide Council.
Byzacenum. An. Dom. 504. and Surium die 1. Ianuar. and Baron. in A. D. 504.
Fulgentius tells an excellent story to this purpose. When Frasamund King of
Byzac in Africa had made anedict that no more Bishops should be consecrate; to
this purpose that the Catholic faith might expire (so he was sure it would, if
this device were perfected) vt arescentibus truncis absque palmitibus omnes
Ecclesiae desolarentur, the good Bishops of the Province met together in a
Council, and having considered of the command of the tyrant, Sacra turba
Pontificum qui remanser ant communicato inter se consilio definierunt adversus
praeceptum Regis in omnibus locis celebrare ordinationes Pontificum, cogitantes
aut Regis iracundiam, si qua forsan existeret, mitigandam, quo facilius
ordinati in suis plebibus viverent, aut si persecutionis violentia nasceretur,
coronandos etiam fidei confessione, quos dignos invenichant promotione. It was
full of bravery, and Christian sprite. The Bishops resolved for all the edict
against new ordination of Bishops to obey God, rather then man, and to
consecrate Bishops in all places, hoping the King would be appeased, or if not,
yet those whom they thought worthy of a Mitre were in a fair disposition to
receive a Crown of Martyrdom. They did so. Fit repent communis assumptio,
and they all strived who should be first, and thought a blessing would outstrip
the hindmost. They were sure they might go to heaven (though persecuted) under
the conduct of a Bishop, they knew, without him the ordinary passage was
obstructed.

Pius the first, Bishop of Rome, and Martyr, speaking of them that calumniate,
Epist. 2.
and disgrace their Bishops endeavoring to make them infamous, they add
(says he) evil to evil, and grow worse, non intelligentes quod Ecclesia Dei
in Sacerdotibus consistit, and cres^it in templum Dei; Not considering that THE
CHURCH OF GOD DOES CONSIST, or is established in BISHOPS, and grows up to a
holy Temple? advers. Lucifer. cap. 4.
To him I am most willing to add S. Hierome, because he is often obtruded in
defiance of the cause. Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet,
The safety of the Church depends upon the Bishops dignity.

THE Reason which S. Hierome gives, 46. For they are schismatics that separate
from their Bishop.
presses this business to a further particular. For if an eminent dignity, and
an Unmatchable power be not given to him, tot efficientur schismata, quot
Sacerdotes. So that he makes Bishops therefore necessary because without them
the Unity of a Church cannot be preserved; and we know that unity, and being,
are of equal extent, and if the Unity of the Church depends upon the Bishop,
then where there is no Bishop, no pretense to a Church; and therefore to
separate from the Bishop makes a man at least a Schismatic; For Unity which
the Fathers press so often, they make to be dependant on the Bishop. Nihil sit
in vobit quod possit vos dirimere, sed Vnimini Episcop^, subjecti Deo per illum
in Christo (says S. Ignatius.) Let nothing divide you, Epist. ad Magnes.
but be united to your Bishop, being subject to God in Christ through your
Bishop. And it is his conge to the people of Smyrna to whom he writ in his
epistle to Polycarpus, opto vos semper valere in Deo nostro Jesus Christo, in
quo manete per Vnitatem Dei and EPISCOPI, Farewell in Christ Jesus, in whom
remain by the Unity of God and of the BISHOP. * Quanto vos beatiores judico
qui dependetis ab illo [ Episcopo] vt Ecclesia a Domino Jesus, and Dominus a
Patre suo, Ad Ephesians.
vt omnia per Vnitatem consentiant. Blessed people are ye that depend upon your
Bishop, as the Church on Christ, and Christ on God, that all things may consent
in Unity.

* Neque enim aliunde haereses obortae sunt, S. Cyprian. ep. 55.
aut nata sunt schismata, quam inde quod Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur, nec
unus in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos, and ad tempus Iudex vice Christi
cogitatur. Hen^e come SCHISMS, hence spring HERESIES that the Bishop is not
obeyed, and admitted alone to be the high Priest, Epist. 69.
alone to be the Judge. The same, S. Cyprian repeates again, and by it, we may
see his meaning clearer. Qui vos audit, me audit etc: Inde enim haereses and
schismata obortae sunt and oriuntur, dum Episcopus qui unus est, and Ecclesiae
praeest superba quorundam praesumptione contemnitur, and homo dignatione Dei
honoratus, indignus hominibus judicatur. The pride and peevish haughtiness of
some factious people that contemn their Bishops is the cause of all heresy and
Schism. And therefore it was so strictly forbidden by the Ancient Canons, that
any Man should have any meetings, or erect an Altar out of the communion of his
Bishop, that if any man proved delinquent in this particular, he was punished
with the highest censures, as appears in the 32 Canon of the Apostles, in the
6th Canon of the Council of Gangra, the 5th Canon of the Council of Antioch,
Act. 4.
and the great Council of Chalcedon, all which I have before cited. The sum
is this, The Bishop is the band, and ligature of the Churches Unity; and
separation from the Bishop is (...), as Theodorets expession is; a Symbol of
faction, and he that separates is a Schismatic.

But how if the Bishop himself be a heretic, or schismatic? May we not then
separate? Yes, if he be judged so by a Synod of Bishops, but then he is sure to
be deposed too, and then in these cases no separation from a Bishop. For till
he be declared so, his communion is not to be forsaken by the subjects of his
diocese, least they by so doing become their Judges judge, and when he is
declared so, no need of withdrawing from obedience to the Bishop, for the
heretic, or schismatic must be no longer Bishop. * But let the case be what
it will be, no separation from a Bishop, ut sic, can be lawful; and yet if
there were a thousand cases in which it were lawful to separate from a Bishop,
yet in no case is it lawful to separate from Episcopacy; That is the
quintessence, and spirit of schism, and a direct overthrow to Christianity,
and a confronting of a Divine institution.

* BUt is it not also heresy?. 47. And Heretics*
Aerius was condemned for heresy by the Catholic Church. The heresy from
whence the Aerians were denominated was, sermo furiosus magis quam humanae
conditionis, and dicebat, Quid est Episcopus ad Presbyterum, nihil differt hic
ab illo. A mad, and an unmanly heresy, to say that a Bishop, haeres. 75.
and a Priest are all one. So Epiphanius. Assumpsit autem Ecclesia, and IN TOTO
MUNDO ASSENSUS FACTUS EST, antequam esset Aerius, and qui ab ipso appellantur
Aeriani. And the good Catholic Father is so angry at the heretic Aerius, that
he thinks his name was given him by Providence, and he is called Aerius, ab
aerijs spiritibus pravitatis, for he was possessed with an unclean spirit, he
could never else been the inventer of such heretical pravity. S. Austin also
reckons him in the accursed roll of heretics, and adds at the conclusion of
his Catalogue, that he is NO CATHOLIC CHRISTIAN that assents to any of the
foregoing Doctrines, amongst which, this is one of the principal. Philastrius
does as much for him.

But against this it will be objected. first, That heresies in the Primitive
Catalogues are of a large extent, and every dissent from a public opinion, was
esteemed heresy, 2ly, Aerius was called heretic, for denying prayer for the
dead. And why may he not be as blameless in equalling a Bishop, and a
Presbyter, as in that other, for which he also is condemned by Epiphanius, and
S. Austin. 3ly, He was never condemned by any Council, and how then can he be
called heretic?

I answer; that dissent from a public, or a received opinion was never called
heresy, unless the contrary truth was indeed a part of Catholic doctrine.
For the Fathers many of them did so, as S. Austin from the Millenary opinion;
yet none ever reckoned them in the Catalogues of heretics; but such things
only set them down there, which were either directly opposite to Catholic
belief, though in minoribus ^rticulis, or to a holy life. 2ly, It is true that
Epiphanius and S. Austin reckon his denying prayer for the dead to be one of
his own opinions, and heretical. But I cannot help it if they did, let him
and them agree it, they are able to answer for themselves. But yet they accused
him also of Arianisme; and shall we therefore say that Arianisme was no
heresy, because the Fathers called him heretic in one particular upon a wrong
principal? We may as well say this, as deny the other. 3ly, He was not
condemned by any Council. No. For his heresy was ridiculous, and a scorn to
all wise men; as Epiphanius observes, and it made no long continuance, neither
had it any considerable party. * But yet this is certain, that Epiphanius, and
Philastrius, and S. Austin called this opinion of Aerius a heresy and against
the Catholic belief. And themselves affirm that the Church did so; and then
it would be considered, that it is but a sad employment to revive old heresies,
and make them a piece of the New religion.

And yet after all this, if I mistake not, although Aerius himself was so
inconsiderable as not to be worthy noting in a Council, yet certainly the one
half of his error is condemned for heresy in one of the four General
Counsels, viz. the first Council of Constantinople. Can. 6.
(...). We call all them heretics whom the Ancient Church has condemned, and
whom we shall anathematize. Will not Aerius come under one of these titles for
a condemned heretic? Then see forward. (...). Here is enough for Aerius and
all his hyperaspists, new and old; for the holy Council condemns them for
heretics who do indeed confess the true faith, but separate from their
Bishops, and make conventicles apart from his Communion. Now this I the rather
urge because an Act of Parliament made 1o of Elizabeth does make this Council,
and the other three of Nice, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, the rule of judging
heresies.

I end this particular with the saying of the Council of Paris against the
Acephali (who were the branch of a Crabstock and something like Aerius,) cited
by Burchard; lib. 2. decret. cap. 226.
Nulla ratione Clerici aut Sacerdotes habendi sunt, qui sub nullius Episcopi
disciplina and providentia gubernantur. Tales enim Acephalos, id est, sine
capite Priscae Ecclesiae consuetudo nuncupavit. They are by no means to be
accounted Clergymen, or Priests, that will not be governed by a Bishop. For
such men the Primitive Church called (...), that is, headless, wittlesse
people.

This only. Acephali was the title of a Sect, a formal heresy, and condemned
by the Ancient Church, say the Fathers of the Council of Paris, Now if we can
learn exactly what they were, it may perhaps be another conviction for the
necessity of Episcopal regiment. lib. 18. ca. 45 Eccles. hist.
Nicephorus can best inform us. Eodem tempore, and Acephali, quorum dux
Severus Antiochenus fuit etc: Severus of Antioch was the first broacher of this
heresy. But why were they called Acephali? id est, sine capite, quem sequuntur
haeretici; Nullus enim eorum reperitur author a quo ex^rti sunt (says
Isidore). lib. 8. cap. 5. Etymol.
But this cannot be, for their head is known, Severus was the heresiarch. But
then why are they called Acephali? Nicephorus gives this reason, and withal a
very particular account of their heresy, Acephali autem ob eam causam dicti
sunt, quod sub Episcopis non fuerint. They refused to live under Bishops.
Thence they had their Name. what was their heresy? They denied the distinction
of Natures in Christ. That was one of their heresies, but they had more; for
they were trium capitulorum in Chalcedone impugnatores, says Isidore, they
opposed three Canons of the Council of Chalcedon. vbi supra.
One we have heard, what their other heresies were, we do not so well know,
but by the Canon of the Council of Paris, and the intimation of their name we
are guided to the knowledge of a second; They refused to live under the
government of a Bishop. And this also was impugnatio unius articuli in
Chalcedone, for the eighth Canon of the Council of Chalcedon commands that the
Clergy should be under Episcopal government. But these Acephali would not,
they were antiepiscopall men, and therefore they were condemned heretics;
condemned, In the Council of Paris, of Sevill, and of Chalcedon.

But the more particular account that Nicephorus gives of them I will now
insert, because it is of great use. Proinde Episcopis, and Sacerdotibus apud
eos defunctis, neque baptismus juxta solennem, atque receptum Ecclesiae morem
apud eos administratur, neque oblatio, aut res aliqua divina facta,
ministeriumve Ecclesiasticum, sicuti mos est, celebratum est. Communionem vero
illi a plurimo tempore asservatam habentes serijs pascalibus in minutissimas
incisam parts convenientibus ad se hominibus dederunt. Quo tempore quam
quisque voluisset placitam sibi sumebat potestatem. Et propterea quod quilibet,
quod si visum esset, fidei insertum volebat, quamplurima defectorum, atque
haereticorum turba exorta est. It is a story worthy observation. When any
Bishop dyed they would have no other consecrated in succession, and therefore
could have no more Priests when any of them dyed. But how then did they to
baptize their Children? Why, they were feign to make shift, and do it without
any Church-solemnity. But, how did they for the Holy Sacrament, for that could
not be consecrated without a Priest, and he not ordained without a Bishop?
True, but therefore they, while they had a Bishop, got a great deal of bread
consecrated, and kept a long time, and when Easter came, cut it into small
bitts, or crummes rather, to make it go the farther, and gave it to their
people. And must we do so too? God forbid. But how did they when all that was
gone? For crummes would not last always. The story specifies it not, but yet I
suppose they then got a Bishop for their necessity to help them to some more
Priests, and some more crummes; for I find the Council of Sevill the Fathers
saying, Can. 12.
Ingressus est ad nos quidem ex haeresi Acephalorum Episcopus; They had then it
seems got a Bishop, but this they would seldom have, and never but when their
necessity drove them to it. But was this all the inconvenience of the want of
Bishops? No. For every man (says Nicephorus) might do what he list, and if he
had a mind to it, might put his fancy into the Creed, and thence came
innumerable troops of Schismatics and Heretics. So that this device was one
simple heresy in the root, but it was forty heresies in the fruit, and
branches; clearly proving that want of Bishops is the cause of all Schism,
and recreant opinions that are imaginable.

I sum this up with the saying of S. Clement the Disciple of S. Peter, Epist.
3.
Si autem vobis Episcopis non obedierint omnes Presbyteri, etc. tribus, and
linguae non obtemperaverint, non solum infames, sed and extorres a regno Dei,
and consortio fidelium, ac a limitibus Sancti Dei Ecclesiae alieni erunt. All
Priests, and Clergymen, and People, and Nations, and Languages that do not
obey their Bishop shall be shut forth of the communion of Holy Church here, and
of Heaven hereafter. It runs high, but I cannot help it, I do but translate
Ruffinus,. 48. And Bishops were always in the Church, men of great Honor.
as he before translated S. Clement.

IT seems then we must have Bishops. But must we have Lord Bishops too? That
is the question now, but such an one as the Primitive piety could never have
imagined. For, could they, to whom Bishops were placed in a right and a true
light, they who believed, and saw them to be the Fathers of their souls, the
Guardian of their life and manners (as King Edgar called S. Dunstan) the guide
of their consciences, the instruments and conveyances of all the Blessings
heaven uses to power upon us, by the ministration of the holy Gospel; would
they, that thought their lives a cheap exchange for a free, and open communion
with a Catholic Bishop; would they have contested upon an aerie title, and the
imaginary privilege of an honor, which is far less then their spiritual
dignity, but infinitely less then the burden, and charge of the souls of all
their Diocese? Charity thinks nothing too much, and that love is but little,
that grutches at the good words a Bishopric carries with it.

However; let us see whether titles of honor be either unfit in themselves to
be given to Bishops, or what the guise of Christendom has been in her
spiritual heraldry.

1. S. Ignatius in his Epistle to the Church of Smyrna gives them this command.
Honora Episcopum ut Principem Sacerdotum, imaginem Dei referentem. Honor the
Bishop as the image of God, as the PRINCE OF PRIESTS. Now since honor, and
excellency are terms of mutual relation, and all excellency that is in men,
and things, is but a ray of divine excellency; so far as they participate of
God, so far they are honorable. Since then the Bishop carries the impresse
of God upon his forehead, and bears Gods image, certainly this participation of
such perfection makes him very honorable. And since honor est in honorante, it
is not enough that the Bishop is honorable in himself, but it tells us our
duty, we must honor him, we must do him honor: and of all the honors in the
world, that of words is the cheapest, and the least.

S. Paul speaking of the honor due to the Prelates of the Church, (...). Let
them be accounted worthy of double honor. And one of the honors that he there
means is a costly one, an honor of Maintenance, the other must certainly be an
honor of estimate, and that is cheapest. Can, 10. Graec.
The Council of Sardis speaking of the several steps and capacities of
promotion to the height of Episcopacy, uses this expression, (...). He that
shall be found worthy of so Divine a Priesthood, let him be advanced to the
HIGHEST HONOR. * Ego procidens ad pedes ejus rogabam, excusans me, and
declinans HONOREM CATHEDRAE, Epist. ^ ad lacobum.
and potestatem, (says S. Clement, when S. Peter would have advanced him to
the Honor and power of the Bishops chair.) But in the third epistle speaking
of the dignity of Aaron the High Priest, and then by analogy, of the Bishop,
who although he be a Minister in the order of Melchisedek, yet he has also the
honor of Aaron, Omnis enim Pontifex sacro crismate perunctus, and incivitate
constitutus, and in Scripturis sacris conditus, charus and preciosus hominibus
oppido esse debet. Every High Priest ordained in the City (viz. a Bishop)
ought forthwith to be Dear, and Precious in the eyes of men. Quem quasi
Christi locum tenentem honorare omnes debent, eique servire, and obedientes ad
salutem suam fideliter existere, scientes quod sive honor, sive injuria quae ei
defertur, in Christum redundat, and a Christo in Deum. The Bishop is Christ's
vicegerent, and therefore he is to be obeyed, knowing that whether it be
honor, or injury that is done to the Bishop, it is done to Christ, and so to
God. * And indeed what is the saying of our blessed Savior himself? He that
despises you, despises me. If Bishops be Gods Ministers and in higher order
then the rest, then although all discountenance, and disgrace done to the
Clergy reflect upon Christ, yet what it done to the Bishop is far more, and
then there is the same reason of the honor. And if so, then the Question will
prove but an odd one; even this, whether Christ be to be honored or no, or
depressed to the common estimate of Vulgar people? for if the Bishops be, then
he is. This is the condition of the Question.

2. Consider we, that all Religions, and particularly all Christianity did
give titles of honor to their Highpriests, and Bishops respectively. * I
shall not need to instance in the great honor of the Priestly tribe among the
Jews, and how highly Honorable Aaron was in proportion. Prophets were called
[ Lords] in holy Scripture. [ Art not thou MY LORD Elijah?] said Obed Edom to
the Prophet. [ Know thou not that God will take THY LORD from thy head this
day?] said the children in the Prophets Schools. So it was then. And in the
New Testament we find a Prophet HONORED every where, but in his own Country.
And to the Apostles and Presidents of Churches greater titles of honor given,
then was ever given to man by secular complacence and insinuation. ANGELS,
Apocal. 1.
and GOVERNORS, 1. Corinthians. 4.
and FATHERS OF OUR FAITH, and STARS, LIGHT OF THE WORLD, the CROWN OF THE
CHURCH, John 10.
APOSTLES OF JESUS CHRIST, nay, GODS, viz. to whom the word of God came; and of
the compellation of Apostles, particularly, S. Hierom says, that when S. Paul
called himself the Apostle of Jesus Christ, In Titum.
it was as Magnifically spoken, as if he had said, Praefectus praetorio Augusti
Caesaris, Magister exercit^s Tiberii Imperatoris; And yet Bishops are Apostles,
and so called in Scripture. I have prooved that already.

Indeed our blessed Savior in the case of the two sons of Zebedee, forbad
them to expect by virtue of their Apostolate any Princely titles, in order to a
Kingdom, and an earthly Principality. For that was it which the ambitious
woman sought for her sons, viz. fair honor, and dignity in an earthly
Kingdom; for such a Kingdom they expected with their Messiah. To this their
expectation, our Saviors answer is a direct antithesis; And that made the
Apostles to be angry at the two Petitioners, as if they had meant to supplant
the rest, and yet the best preferment from them, to wit, in a temporal
Kingdom. No; (says our blessed Savior) ye are all deceived. [ The Kings of
the Nations indeed do exercise authority, Matthew. 20.
and are called (...), Benefactors] so the word signifies, Mark 10.
[ Gracious Lords] so we read it, Luke 22.
[ But it shall not be so with you.] what shall not be so with them? shall not
they exercise authority? [ Who then is that faithful and wise steward whom his
Lord made ruler over his Household?] Surely the Apostles, or no body. Had Christ
authority? Most certainly. Then so had the Apostles, for Christ gave them his,
with a sicut misit me Pater, etc. Well! the Apostles might, and we know they
did exercise authority. What then shall not be so with them? shall not they be
called (...); Indeed if S. Mark had taken that title upon him in Alexandria,
the Ptolomies, whose Honourary appellative that was, would have questioned him
Highly for it. But if we go to the sense of the word, the Apostles might be
Benefactors, and therefore might be called so. But what then? Might they not be
called Gracious Lords? The word would have done no hurt if it had not been an
ensign of a secular Principality.

For as for the word [ Lord] I know no more prohibition for that, then for
being called RABBI, or MASTER, or DOCTOR, or FATHER. Matthew. 23. 8, 9. 10.
What shall we think now? Ephesians. 4.
May we not be called DOCTORS? [ God has constituted in his Church Pastors,
and Doctors, says S. Paul.] Therefore we may be called so. But what of the
other, the prohibition runs alike for all, as is evident in the several places
of the Gospells, and may no man be called MASTER, or FATHER? let an answer be
thought upon for these, and the same will serve for the other also without any
sensible error. It is not the word, it is the ambitious seeking of a temporal
principality as the issue of Christianity, and an affixe of the Apostolate that
Christ interdicted his Apostles. * And if we mark it, our B. Savior points it
out himself. [ The Princes of the Nations (...), exercise authority over them,
and are called Benefactors, (...). It shall not be so with you. Not so: how?
Not as the Princes of the Gentiles, for theirs is a temporal regiment, your
Apostolate must be Spiritual. They rule as Kings, you as fellow servants,
(...). He that will be first amongst you, let him be your Minister, or servant;
It seems then among Christ's Disciples there may be a Superiority, when there is
a Minister or servant; But it must be (...) that this greatness does consist,
it must be in doing the greatest service and ministration that the superiority
consists in. But more particularly, it must be (...). It must not be [ as the
Princes of the Gentiles] but it must be [ as the son of man] so Christ says
expressly. Luke 22.
And how was that? why, he came to Minister and to serve, John 13.
and yet in the lowest act of his humility (the washing his Disciples feet) he
told them, [ ye call me Lord, and Master, and ye say well, for so I am.] It may
be so with you. Nay it must be as the son of Man; But then, the being called
Rabbi, or Lord, nay the being Lord in spirituali Magisterio and regimine, in a
spiritual superintendency, and (...), may stand with the humility of the
Gospel, and office of Ministration.

So that now I shall not need to take advantage of the word In locis ubi supra.
(...), which signifies to rule with more then a political regiment, even with
an absolute, and despotick, and is so used in holy Scripture, viz. in sequiorem
partem. God gave authority to Man over the creatures, Genesis 1.
(...) is the word in the septuagint, and we know the power that man has over
beasts, is to kill, and to keep alive. And thus to our blessed Savior, Psalm.
110.
the power that God gave him over his enemies is expressed by (...). And this
we know how it must be exercised, Psalm. 2.
(...) with a rod of iron, (...). He shall break them in pieces like a potters
vessel. That Is (...). But it shall not be so with you.

But let this be as true as it will. The answer needs no way to rely upon a
Criticisme. It is clear, that the form of Regiment only is distinguished, not
all Regiment, and authority taken away. (...), but (...), Not as the Kings of
the Gentiles, but as the son of man; so must your regiment be, for sicut
misi^ me Pater, etc. As my father has sent me, even so send I you. It must be
a government, not for your Imprey, but for the service of the Church. So that
it is not for your advancement, but the public ministry that you are put to
rule over the Household. * And thus the Fathers express the authority and
regiment of Bishops. * Qui vocatur ad Episcopatum non ad Principatum vocatur,
sed ad servitutem totius siae (says Origin.) And S. Hierom; Episcopi
Sacerdotes se esse noverint, homil. 6. in Isai.
non Dominos; And yet S. Hierom himself writing to S. Austin, calls him,
Domine vere sancte, and suscipiende Papa. * Forma Apostolica haec est,
Dominatio interdicitur, S. Bernard. lib. 10. de confiderat.
indicitur Ministratio. It is no Principality that the Apostles have, but it is
a Ministry; a Ministry in chief, the officers of which Ministration must
govern, and we must obey. They must govern not in a temporal regiment by
virtue of their Episcopacy, but in a spiritual, not for honor to the Rulers,
so much as for benefit and service to the subject. So S. Austin. Nomen est
operis, non honor is, lib. 19. de civit. Dei. cap. 19.
ut intelligat se non esse Episcopum qui praeesse dilexerit, non prodesse. And
in the fourteenth chapter of the same book, Qui imperant serviunt ijs rebus
quibus videntur Imperare. Non enim dominandi cupidine imperant, sed officio
confulendi, nec principandi superbia, sed providendi misericordia. And all this
is intimated in the Prophetical visions, where the regiment of Christ is
designed by the face of a man; and the Empire of the world, by Beasts. The
first is the regiment of a Father, the second of a King. The first spiritual,
the other secular. And of the Fatherly authority it is that the Prophet says,
Instead of Fathers thou shall have Children, whom thou may make Princes in
all lands. This (say the Fathers) is spoken of the Apostles and their
Successors the Bishops, who may be (...), Princes or Rulers of Churches, not
Princes of Kingdoms by virtue or challenge of their Apostolate. But if this
Ecclesiastical rule, or cheifty be interdicted, I wonder how the Presidents of
the Presbyters, the (...) in the Reformed Churches will acquit themselves? How
will their Superiority be reconciled to the place, though it be but temporary?
For is it a sin, if it continues, and no sin if it lasts but for a week?
or is it lawful to sin, and domineere, and Lord it over their Brethren for a
week together? * But suppose it were, what will they say, that are perpetual
Dictators? Calvin was perpetual president; and Beza, till Danaeus came to
Geneva, even for many years together? * But beyond all this how can the
Presbytery which is a fixed lasting body rule and govern in causes Spiritual
and Consistoriall, and that over all Princes, and Ministers, and people, and
that for ever? For is it a sin in Episcopacy to do so, and not in the
Presbytery? If it be lawful here, then Christ did not interdict it to the
Apostles, for who will think that a Presbytery shall have leave to domineere,
and (as they call it now a days) to Lord it over their Brethren, when a
College of Apostles shall not be suffered to govern? but if the Apostles may
govern, then we are brought to a right understanding of our Saviors saying to
the sons of Zebedee, and then also, their successors, the Bishops may do the
same.

If I had any further need of answer or escape, it were easy to pretend, that
this being a particular directory to the Apostles, was to expire with their
persons. De Vnitat* Eccles.
So S. Cyprian intimates. Apostoli pari fuere consortio praediti, and honoris,
and dignitatis; and indeed this may be concluding against the Supremacy of S.
Peter's Successors, but will be no ways pertinent to impugn Episcopal
authority. For inter se they might be equal, and yet Superior to the
Presbyters, and the people.

Lastly, [ It shall not be so with you] so Christ said, non designando
officium, but Sortem; not their duty, but their lot; intimating that their
future condition should not be honorary, but full of trouble, not advanced, but
persecuted. But I had rather insist on the first answer; in which I desire it
be remembered, that I said, seeking temporal Principality to be forbidden the
Apostles, as an Appendix to the office of an Apostle. For in other capacities
Bishops are as receptive of honor and temporal principalities as other men.
Bishops vt sic are not secular Princes, must not seek for it; But some secular
Princes may be Bishops, as in Germany, and in other places to this day they
are. For it is as unlawful for a Bishop to have any Land, as to have a
Country, and a single acre is no more due to the Order, then a Province; but
both these may be conjunct in the some person, though still by virtue of
Christ's precept, the functions and capacities must be distinguish^d; according
to the saying of Synesius (...). To confound and intermixe the Kingdom and the
Priesthood, is to join things incompossible and inconsistent, Inconsistent (I
say) not in person, but absolutely discrepant in function.

3. Consider we, that S. Peter, when he speaks of the duteous subordination of
Sarah to her Husband Abraham, he propunds her as an example to all married
women, in these words [ she obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord] why was this
spoken to Christian women, but that they should do so too? And is it
imaginable that such an Honorable compellation as Christ allows every woman
to give to her husband, a Mechanic, a hard-handed artisan, he would forbid to
those eminent pillars of his Church, those lights of Christendom whom he
really endued with a plenitude of power for the regiment of the Catholic
Church. Credat Apella.

4. PASTOR, and FATHER, are as honorable titles as any. They are honorable in
Scripture. Honor thy Father etc: Thy Father, in all senses. They are also made
sacred by being the appellatives of Kings, and Bishops, and that not only in
secular addresses, but even in holy Scripture, as is known. * Add to this;
Acts. 15. Romans 12. Hebr. 13.
(...), and (...) are used in Scripture for the Prelates of the Church, and I
am certain, that, Duke, and Captain, Rulers, and Commanders are but just the
same in English, that the other are in Greek, and the least of these is as
much as (...), or Lord. And then if we consider that since Christ erected a
spiritual regiment, and used words of secular honor to express it, as in the
instances above, although Christ did interdict a secular principality, yet he
forbad not a secular title; He used many himself.

5. The voice of the Spouse, the holy Church has always expressed their
honorable estimate in reverentiall compellations and Epithets of honor to
their Bishops, and have taught us so to do. * Bishops were called Principes
Ecclesiarum, Princes of the Churches. I had occasion to instance it in the
question of Jurisdiction. Indeed the third Council of Carthage forbad the
Bishop of Carthage to be called Princeps Sacerdotum, or summus Sacerdos, or
aliquid hujusmodi, but only primae sedis Episcopus. I know not what their
meaning was, unless they would dictate a lesson of humility to their Primate,
that he might remember the principality not to be so much in his person, as in
the Sea, for he might be called Bishop of the prime See. But whatsoever fancy
they had at Carthage, I am sure it was a guise of Christendom, not to speak
of Bishops sine praefatione honoris, but with honorable mention. (...), To our
most blessed LORD. So the letters were superscribed to Julius Bishop of Rome
from some of his Brethren; lib. 3. cap. 23.
in Sozomen. Let no man speak Untruths of me (...), Epist. ad Greg. Nyssen.
Nor of MY LORDS THE BISHOPS, said S. Gregory Nazianzen. The Synodicall book of
the Council of Constantinople is inscribed DOMINI^ REVERENDISSIMIS, Theodo et.
lib. 5. ^. 9.
ac pijssimis Fratribus ac Collegis, Damaso, Ambrosio etc: To our most Reverend
LORDS, and holy Brethren etc: And the Council of Illyricum sending their
Synodall letters to the Bishops of Asia, by Bishop Elpidius, Haecpluribus (say
they) persequi non est visum, quod miserimus vnum ex omnibus, Theodor. lib. 4.
cap. 9.
DOMINUM, and Collegam nostrum Elpidium, qui cognosceret, esset ne sicut dictum
fuerat a DOMINO, and Collega nostro Eustathio. Our Lord, and Brother Elpidius.
Our Lord and Brother Eustathius. * The oration in the Council of Epaunum
begins thus. Quod praecipientibus tantis DOMINIS MEIS ministerium proferendi
sermonis assumo etc: The Prolocutor took that office on him, at the command of
so many GREAT LORDS THE BISHOPS. * When the Church of Spain became Catholic,
and adjur'd the Arian heresy, King Recaredus in the third Council of Toledo
made a speech to the Bishops, Non incognitum reor esse vobis, REVERENDISSIMI
Sacerdotes etc: Non credimus vestram latere SANCTITATEM etc: vestra Cognovit
BEATITUDO etc: VENERANDI PATRES etc: And these often. Your Holiness, your
Blessedness, Most Reverend, Venerable Fathers; Those were the addresses the
King made to the Fathers of the Synod. Thus it was when Spain grew Catholic;
But not such a Speech to be found in all the Arian records. They amongst them
used but little Reverence to their Bishops. But the instances of this kind are
innumerable. Nothing more ordinary in Antiquity then to speak of Bishops with
the titles of (...), Thedor. lib. 1. c. 4. etc. 5.
Domine vere Sancte, and suscipiende Papa, Athanas. Apolog. 2.
So S. Hierome a Presbyter, to S. Austin a Bishop. Secundum enim honorum
vocabula quae jam Ecclesiae usus obtinuit Episcopatus Presbyterio major est,
Epist. 17. 18. 19. apud. S. Augustine.
says S. Austin. Episcopacy is Greater then the office and dignity of a
Presbyter according to the TITLES OF HONOR which the custom of the Church
has introduced. * But I shall sum up these particulars in a total, which is
thus expressed by S. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 13. apud Baron. A^. Dom. 5^. n. 2.
Haeretici a Diabolo HONORUM VOCABULA Episcopis non dare didicerunt. Heretics
have learned of the Devil not to give due titles of honor to Bishops. The
good Patriarch was angry surely when he said so. * For my own particular, I am
confident that my Lords the Bishops do so undervalue any fastuous, or pompous
title, that were not the duty of their people in it, they would as easily
reject them, as it is our duties piously to use them. But if they still desire
appellatives of honor, we must give them, they are their due, if they desire
them not, they deserve them much more. So that either for their humility, or
however for their works sake we must [ highly honor them that have the rule
over us] It is the precept of S. Paul, 1. Thessal. 5. 13.
and S. Cyprian observing how Curious our blessed Savior was that he might
give honor to the Priests of the Jews, even then when they were reeking in
their malice hot as the fire of Hell; he did it to teach us a duty. Epist. 65.
Docuit enim Sacerdotes veros LEGITIME ET PLENE HONORARI dum circa falsos
Sacerdotes ipse talis extitit. It is the argument he uses to procure a full
honor to the Bishop.

* To these I add; If fitting in a THRONE even above the seat of Elders be a
title of a great dignity, then we have it confirmed by the voice of all
Antiquity calling the Bishops chair, A THRONE, and the investiture of a Bishop
in his Church AN INTHRONIZATION. Quando INTHRONIZANTUR propter communem
utilitatem Episcopi etc: says P. Anterus in his decretall Epistle to the
Bishops of Boetica and Toledo. INTHRONING is the Primitive word for the
consecration of a Bishop. Seeds in Episcoporum Eccles^is excelsae constitutae
and praeparatae, UT THRONUS speculationem and potestatem judicandi a Domino
sibi datam materiam docent, Epist. decret.
(says Urban). And S. Ignatius to his Deacon Hero, (...), Epist. ad Hero^.
I trust that the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ will show to me Hero sitting
upon my THRONE.

** The sum of all is this. Bishops if they must be at all, most certainly
must be beloved, it is our duties, and their work deserves it. S. Paul was as
dear to the Galathians, as their eyes, and it is true eternally, Form^sipedes
Evangelizantium, the feet of the Preachers of the Gospel are beauteous, and
then much more of the chief. Urban. ibid.
Ideo ista praetulimus (charissimi) vt intelligatis potestatem Episcoporum
vestrorum, in eisque Deum veneremini, and eos UT ANIMAS VESTRAS diligatis, vt
quibus illi non communicant, non communicetis etc: Now, love to our Superiors
is ever honorable, for it is more then amicitia, that is amongst Peers, but
love to our Betters, is Reverence, Obedience, and high Estimate. And if we have
the one, the dispute about the other would be a mere impertinence. I end this
with the saying of S. Ignatius, Epist. ad Mag^es.
and v^s decet non contemnere aetatem Episcopi, sed juxta Dei Patris arbitrium
OMNEM ILLI IMPERTIRI REVERENTIAM. It is the WILL OF GOD the Father, that we
should give all REVERENCE, HONOR, or veneration to our Bishops.

WELL! However things are now,. 49. And trusted with affairs of Secular
interest.
It was otherwise in the Old Religion; for no honor was thought too great for
them whom God had honored with so great degrees of approximation to himself in
power, and authority. But then also they went further. For they thought whom
God had entrusted with their souls, they might with an equal confidence trust
with their personal actions, and employments of greatest trust.

For it was Great Consideration that they who were Antistites religionis the
Doctors, and great Dictators of Faith and conscience, should be the composers
of those affairs in whose determination, a Divine wisdom, and interests of
conscience and the authority of religion were the best ingredients.

But, it is worth observing how the Church and the Commonwealth did actions
contrary to each other, in pursuance of their several interests. The
Commonwealth still enabled Bishops to take cognizance of causes, and the
confidence of their own people would be sure to carry them thither where they
hoped for fair issue, upon such good grounds as they might fairly expect from
the Bishops abilityes, authority, and religion; But on the other side, the
Church did as much decline them as she could, and made sanctions against it so
far as she might without taking from themselves all opportunities both of
doing good to their people, and engaging the secular arm to their own
assistance. But this we shall see by consideration of particulars.

1. It was not in Natura rei unlawful for Bishops to receive an office of
secular employment. S. Paul's tent-making was as much against the calling of an
Apostle, as sitting in a secular tribunal is against the office of a Bishop.
And it is hard, if we will not allow that to the conveniences of a Republike
which must be indulged to a private, personal necessity. But we have not S.
Paul's example only, but his rule too, 1. Cor. 6.
according to Primitive exposition. [ Dare any of you having a matter before
another go to law before the Unjust, and not before the Saints? If then ye
have judgments of things pertaining to this life, set them to judge who are
least esteemed in the Church] who are they? The Clergy I am sure, now adays.
In hunc Iocum.
But S. Ambrose also thought that to be his meaning seriously. Let the
Ministers of the Church be the Judges. For by [ least esteemed] he could not
mean the most ignorant of the Laity, they would most certainly have done very
strange justice, especially in such causes which they Understand not. No, but
set them to judge who by their office are Servants, and Ministers of all, and
those are the Clergy who (as S. Paul's expression is) Preach not themselves,
but Jesus to be the Lord, and themselves your servants for Jesus sake. Melius
dicit apud Dei Ministros agere causam. Yea but S. Paul's expression seems to
exclude the Governors of the Church from intermedling. [ Is there not one wise
man among you that is able to Judge between his Brethren?] Why Brethren, if
Bishops and Priests were to be the Judges, they are Fathers? The objection is
not worth the noting, but only for S. Ambrose his answer to it. Ideo autem
Fratrem Iudicem eligendum dicit, quia adhuc Rector Ecclesiae illorum non erat
ordinatus. S. Paul used the word [ Brethren] for as yet a Bishop was not
ordained amongst them of that Church, Vide etiam August. de opere Monach. ca.
29.
intimating that the Bishop was to be the man, though till then, in subsidium
any prudent Christian man might be employed.

2. The Church did always forbid to Clergymen A VOLUNTARY ASSUMPTION of
engagements in REBUS SAECULI. Can. 7. Latin.
So the sixth Canon of the Apostles, (...). A Bishop, Vide Zonar^n Can. Apostol.
and a Priest, and a Deacon, must not assume, or take on himself worldly
cares. If he does, let him be deposed. Here the Prohibition is general. No
worldly cares. Not domestic. But how if they come on him by Divine imposition,
or accident? That Is nothing, if he does not assume them; that is, by his
voluntary act acquire his own trouble. So that if his secular employment be an
act of obedience, indeed it is trouble to him, but no sin. But if he seeks
it, for it self, it is ambition. In this sense also must the following Canon
be understood. (...). A Clerk must not be a Tutor, or Guardian, viz: of secular
trust, that is must not seek a diversion from his employment by voluntary
Tutorship.

3. The Church also forbad all secular negotiation for base ends, not precisely
the employment it self, but the illness of the intention, and this indeed
she expressly forbids in her Canons. Council. Chalced. Act. 15. can. 3.
Pervenit ad Sanctam Synodum quod quidam qui in Clero sunt allecti PROPTER
LUCRA TURPIA conductores alienarum possessionum fiant, and saecularia negotia
sub cura sua suscipiant, Dei quidem Ministerium parvipendentes, Saecularium
vero discurrentes domos and PROPTER AVARITIAM patrimoniorum sollicitudinem
sumentes. Clergy men farmers of lands, and did take upon them secular
employment FOR COVETOUS DESIGNS, and with neglect of the Church. These are the
things the Council complained of, and therefore according to this exigence the
following Sanction is to be understood. Decrevit itaque hoc Sanctum magnumque
Concilium, nullum deinceps, non Episcopum, non Clericum vel Monachum aut
possessiones conducere, aut negotijs saecularibus se immiscere. No Bishop, No
Clergy man, N^ Monk must farm grounds, nor engage himself in secular
business. What in none? No, none, praeter pupillorum, si forte leges imponant
inexcusabilem curam, ant civitatis Episcopus Ecclesiasticarum rerum
sollicitudinem habere praecipiat, aut Orphanorum, and viduarum earum quae sine
ulla defensione sunt, ac personarum quae maxim Ecclesiastico indigent
adjutorio, and propter timorem Domini causa deposcat. This Canon will do right
to the Question.

All secular affairs, and bargains either for covetousness, or with
considerable disturbance of Church offices are to be avoided. For a Clergy man
must not be covetous, much less for covetise must he neglect his cure. To this
purpose is that of the second Council of Arles, Can. 14.
Clericus turpis lucri gratia aliquod genus negotiationis non exerceat. But nor
here, nor at Chalcedon is the prohibition absolute, nor declaratory of an
inconsistence and incapacity; for, for all this, the Bishop or Clerk may do
any office that is in pia cura. He may undertake the supravision of Widows,
and Orphans. And though he be forbid by the Canon of the Apostles to be a
guardian of pupills, yet it is expounded here by this Canon of Chalcedon, for a
voluntary seeking it is forbidden by the Apostles, but here it is permitted
only with, si forte leges imponant, if the Law, or Authority commands him, then
he may undertake it. That is, if either the Emperor commands him, or if the
Bishop permits him, then it is lawful. But without such command or license it
was against the Canon of the Apostles. And therefore S. Cyprian did himself
severely punish Geminius Faustinus, one of the Priests of Carthage, for
undertaking the executorship of the Testament of Geminius Victor: Epist. 66.
he had no leave of his Bishop so to do, and for him of his own head to
undertake that which would be an avocation of him from his office, did in S.
Cyprians Consistory, deserve a censure. 3. By this Canon of Chalcedon, any
Clerk may be the Oeconomus or steward of a Church, and dispense her revenue if
the Bishop command him. 4. He may undertake the patronage, or assistance of any
distressed person that needs the Churches aid. Vide Synod. Roman. sub
Sylvestr. c. 4. Council. Chalced. c. 26. and Zonar. ibid.
From hence it is evident that all secular employment did not hoc ipso avocate
a Clergyman from his necessary office and duty; for some secular employments
are permitted him, all causes of piety, of charity, all occurrences concerning
the revenues of the Church, and nothing for covetousness, but any thing in
obedience, any thing I mean of the forenamed instances. Nay the affairs of
Church revenues, and dispensation of Ecclesiastical Patrimony was imposed on
the Bishop by the Canons Apostolical, and then considering how many
possessions were deposited first at the Apostles feet, and afterward in the
Bishops hands, we may quickly perceive that a case may occur in which
something else may be done by the Bishop and his Clergy besides prayer and
preaching. (...). says Ignatius to S. Polycarpe of Smyrna. Let not the
Widows be neglected: after God, do thou take care of them. Justin. Martyr.
Apolog. 2.
Qui locupletes sunt, and volunt, pro arbitrio quisque suo quod libitum est
contribuit; and quod collectum est apud Praesidem deponitur, atque is inde
opitulatur Orphanis, and viduis, iisque quivel morbo, vel alia de causa egent:
tum iis qui vincti sunt, and peregre advenientibus hospitibus: and ut uno verbo
dicam, omnium indigentium Curator est. All the Collects and Offerings of
faithful people are deposited with the Bishop, and thence he dispenses for the
relief of the widows, and Orphans, thence he provides for travelers, and in
one word, he takes care of all indigent, and necessitous people. So it was in
Justin Martyrs time and all this, a man would think, required a considerable
portion of his time, besides his studies and prayer and preaching.

This was also done even in the Apostles times, for first they had the
provision of all the Goods, and persons of the coenobium, of the Church at
Jerusalem. This they themselves administered till a complaint arose, which might
have proved a Scandal; then they chose seven men, men full of the holy Ghost,
men that were Priests, for they were of the 70 Disciples says Epiphanius, and
such men as Preached, and Baptized, so S. Stephen, and S. Philip, therefore to
be sure they were Clergymen, and yet they left their preaching for a time, at
least abated of the height of the employment, for therefore the Apostles
appointed them, that themselves might not leave the word of God and serve
Tables; plainly implying that such men who were to serve these Tables, must
leave the Ministry of the word, in some sense or degree, and yet they chose
Presbyters, and no harm neither, and for a while themselves had the
employment. I say there was no harm done, by this temporary office, to their
Priestly function and employment. For to me it is considerable. If the calling
of a Presbyter does not take up the whole man, then what inconvenience though
his employment be mixed with secular allay. But if it does take up the whole
man, then it is not ^afe for any Presbyter ever to become a Bishop, which is a
dignity of a far greater burden, and requires more then a Man's all, if all
was required to the function of a Presbyter. But I proceed.

4. The Church prohibiting secular employment to Bishops and Clerks, do
prohibit it, only in gradu impedimenti officii Clericalis; and therefore when
the offices are supplied by any of the Order, it is never prohibited but that
the personal abilities of any man may be employed for the fairest advantages
either of Church, or Commonwealth. And therefore it is observeable that the
Canons provide that the Church be not destitute, not that such a particular
Clerk should there officiate. Thus the Council of Arles decreed, Apud
Burchard lib. 2. decret. cap. 99.
ut Presbyteri SICUT HACTENUS FACTUM EST, INDISCRETE per diversa non mittantur
loca... ne forte propter eorum absentiam, and animarum pericula, and
Ecclesiarum in quibus constituti sunt, negligantur officia. So that here we
see, 1. That it had been usual to send Priests on Embassyes [ sicut hactenus
factum est] 2. The Canon forbids the indiscreet or promiscuous doing of it; not
that men of great ability and choice be not employed, but that there be
discretion, or discerning in the choice of the men. viz. that such men be
chosen whose particular worth did by advancing the legation, make compensation
for absence from their Churches; and then I am sure there was no indiscretion
in the Embassy, quoad hoc at least; for the ordinary offices of the Church
might be dispensed by men of even abilities, but the extraordinary affairs of
both states require men of an heightened apprehension. 3. The Canon only took
care that the cure of the souls of a Parish be not relinquished, for so is the
title of the Canon, Ne Presbyteri causa legationis per diversa mittantur loca,
cura animarum relicta. But then if the cure be supplied by delegation, the
fears of the Canon are prevented.

* In pursuance of this consideration the Church forbad Clergymen to receive
honor, Part. 2. Act. 15. Can. 7.
or secular preferment; and so it is expressed where the prohibition is made.
It is in the Council of Chalcedon. Qui semel in clero deputati sunt, aut
Monachorum vitam expetiverunt, statuimus neque ad militiam, neque ad dignitatem
aliquam venire mundanam. That Is the inhibition; But the Canon subjoynes a
temper; aut hoc tentantes, and non agentes poenitentiam, quo minus redeant ad
hoc quod propter Deum primitus elegerunt, anathematizari, they must not turn
Soldiers, or enter upon any worldy dignity to make them leave their function,
which for the honor of God they have first chosen: for then, it seems, he
that took on him military honors, or secular prefectures, or consular
dignity, could not officiate in holy Orders, but must renounce them to assume
the other; It was in obstruction of this abuse that the Canon directed its
prohibition, viz. in this sense clearly, that a Clerk must not so take on him
secular offices, as to make him redire in saeculum, having put his hand to the
plow, to look back, to change his profession, or to relinquish the Church, and
make her become a Widow. The case of S. Matthew and S. Peter, distinguish, and
clear this business. Ecce reliquimus omnia, was the profession of their
Clericall office. S. Matthew could not return to his trade of Publican at all,
for that would have taken him from his Apostolate. But S. Peter might and did
return to his nets, for all his reliqui omnia. Plainly telling us that a
SECULAR CALLING, a CONTINUED FIXED ATTENDANCE on a business of the world is an
impediment to the Clericall office, and ministration, but not a temporary
employment or secession.

5. The Canons of the Church do as much forbid the cares of household, as the
cares of public employment to Bishops. So the fourth Council of Carthage
decrees. Can. 20.
Vt Episcopus nullam rei familiaris curam adse revocet, sed lectioni, and
orationi, and verbi Dei praedicationi tantummodo vacet. Now if this Canon be
confronted with that saying of S. Paul [ He that provides not for them of his
own household is worse then an infidell] it will easily inform us of the
Churches intention. For they must provide, says S. Paul, But yet so provide as
not to hinder their employment, or else they transgress the Canon of the
Council; but this caveat may be as well entered, and observed in things
Political, as Oeconomicall.

Thus far we have seen what the Church has done in pursuance of her own
interest, and that was that she might with sanctity, and without distraction,
tend her Grand employment; but yet many cases did occur in which she did
canonically permit an alienation of employment, and revocation of some persons
from an assiduity of Ecclesiastical attendance, as in the case of the seven
set over the widows, and of S. Peter, and S. Paul, and all the Apostles and
the Canon of Chalcedon.

Now let us see how the Commonwealth also pursued her interest, and because
she found Bishops men of Religion and great trust, and confident abilities,
there was no reason that the Commonwealth should be disserv'd in the promotion
of able men to a Bishops throne. * Who would have made recompense to the
Emperor for depriving him of Ambrose his prefect, if Episcopal promotion had
made him incapable of serving his Prince in any great Negotiation? It was a
remarkable passage in Ignatius, Epist. a^ Ephesians.
(...). As our Lord is to be observed so also must we observe the BISHOP,
because he assists and serves the Lord. And wisemen, and of great Understanding
must SERVE KINGS, for he must not be served with men of small parts. Here
either Ignatius commends Bishops to the service of Kings, or else propounds
them as the fittest men in the world to do them service. For if only men of
great abilities are fit to serve Kings, surely as great abilities are required
to enable a man for the service of God in so peculiar manner of approximation.
He then that is fit to be a Bishop, is most certainly fit for the service of
his King. This is the sense of Ignatius his discourse.

For consider. Christianity might be suspected for a design; and if the Church
should choose the best, and most pregnant Understandings for her employment,
and then these men become incapable of ayding the Republike, the promotion of
these men, would be an injury to those Princes whose affairs would need
support. * The interest of the Subjects also is considerable. For we find by
experience, that no authority is so full of regiment, and will so finely force
obedience, as that which is seated in the Conscience; And therefore Numa
Pompilius made his laws, and imposed them with a face of religious solemnity.
For the people are stronger then any one Governor, and were they not awed by
Religion, would quickly miscere Sacra prophanis, jumble heaven and earth into a
miscellany, and therefore not only in the Sanction of laws, but in the
execution of them, the Antistites religionis are the most competent
instruments; and this was not only in all religions that ever were, and in
ours ever till now, but even now we should quickly find it, were but our
Bishops in that Veneration, and esteem that by the law of God they ought, and
that actually they were in the Calenture of primitive devotion, and that the
Doctors of Religion were ever even amongst the most barbarous and untaught
Pagans.

Upon the confidence of these advantages, both the Emperors themselves when
they first became Christian allowed appeals from secular tribunalls to the
Sozoo^ lib. 1. cap. 9.
Bishops Consistory, even in causes of secular interest, and the people would
choose to have their difficulties there ended whence they expected the issues
of justice, and religion. * I say this was done as soon as ever the Emperors
were Christian Before this time, Bishops, and Priests (to be sure) could not be
employed in state affairs, they were odious for their Christianity; and then
no wonder if the Church forbad secular employment in meaner offices, the
attendance on which could by no means make recompense for the least avocation
of them from their Church employment. So that it was not only the avocation
but the sordidnesse of the employment that was prohibited the Clergy in the
Constitutions of holy Church. But as soon as ever their employment might be
such as to make compensation for a temporary secession, neither Church nor
State did then prohibit it; And that was as soon as ever the Princes were
Christian, for then immediately the Bishops were employed in honorary
negotiations. It was evident in the case of S. Ambrose. For the Church of
Millaine had him for their Bishop, and the Emperor had him one of his
prefects, and the people their judge in causes of secular cognizance. For when
he was chosen Bishop the Emperor who was present at the election cried out,
Tripart. hist. lib. 7. cap. 8.
Gratias tibi ago Domine... quoniam huic viro ego quidem commisi corpora; tu
autem animas, and meam electionem ostendisti tuae justitiae convenire. So that
he was Bishop, and Governor of Millaine at the same time; And therefore by
reason of both these offices S. Austin was forced to attend a good while before
he could find him at leisure. S. August. lib. 6. Consess. cap. 4.
Non enim quaerere ab eo poteram quod volebam sicut volebam, secludentibus me
ab ejus aure, atque ore catervis negotiosorum hominum, quorum infirmitatibus
serviebat. And it was his own condition too, when he came to fit in the chair
of Hippo; Epist. 110.
Non permittor ad quod volo vacare ante meridiem; post meridiem occupationibus
hominum teneor. And again, and homines quidam causas suas saeculares apud nos
finire cupientes, Epist. 147.
quando eis necessarij fuerimus, sic nos Sanctos, and Dei servos appellant, ut
negotia terrae suae peragant. Aliquando and agamus negotium salutis nostrae and
salut is ipsorum, non de auro, non de argento non de fundis, and pecoribus, pro
quibus rebus quotidie submisso capite salutamur ut dissensiones hominum
terminemus. It was almost the business of every day to him, to judge causes
concerning Gold, and Silver, Cattle, and glebe, and all appertenances of this
life. This S. Austin would not have done, if it had not been lawful, so we are
to suppose in charity; but yet this we are sure of, deepore Monach. cap: 29.
S. Austin thought it not only lawful, but a part of his duty, [ quibus nos
molestijs idem affixit Apostolus, and that by the authority, not of himself,
but of him that spoke within him, even the H. Ghost:] so he.

Thus also it was usual for Princes in the Primitive Church to send Bishops
their Ambassadors. Constans the Emperor sent two Bishops chosen out of the
Council of Sardis Tripart. hist: lib: 4. cap. 25.
together with Salianus the Great Master of his Army to Constantius * S.
Chrysostom was sent Ambassador to Gainas. lib: 10. cap: 6. ibid.
Maruthus the Bishop of Mesopotamia was sent Ambassador from the Emperor to
Isdigerdes lib. 11. cap. 8. ibid.
the King of Persia. S. Ambrose from Valentinian the younger to the Tyrant
Maximus. * lib. 5. Epist. Ambros. 33. Eusebius: lib. 8. cap. 1.
Dorotheus was a Bishop and a chamberlain to the Emperor. Many more examples
there are of the concurrence of the Episcopal office, and a secular dignity or
employment. Now then Consider. * The Church did not, might not challenge any
secular honor, or employment by virtue of her Ecclesiastical dignity
precisely. 2. The Church might not be ambitious, or indagative of such
employment. 3. The Church's interest abstractly considered was not promoted by
such employment, but where there was no greater way of compensation was
interrupted and depressed. 4. The Church (though in some cases she was allowed
to make secession, yet) might not relinquish her own charge, to intervene in
another aid. 5. The Church did by no means suffer her Clerks, to undertake
any low secular employment, much more did she forbid all sordid ends, and
Covetous designs. 6. The Bishop, or his Clerks might ever do any action of
piety, though of secular burden. Clerks were never forbidden to read Grammar,
or Philosophy to youth, to be Masters of Schools, of Hospitalls, they might
reconcile their Neighbors that were fallen out, about a personal trespass, or
real action, and yet since now adays a Clergy-man's employment and capacity
is bounded within his Pulpit, or reading deske, or his study of Divinity at
most, these that I have reckoned are as verily secular as any thing, and yet no
law of Christendom ever prohibited any of these or any of the like Nature to
the Clergy, nor any thing that is ingenuous, that is fit for a Scholar, that
requires either finenesse of parts, or great learning, or overruling authority,
or exemplary piety. 7. Clergymen might do any thing that was imposed on them
by their Superiors. 8. The Bishops, and Priests were men of Great ability and
surest confidence for determinations of Justice, in which, religion was ever
the strongest binder. And therefore the Princes and People sometimes forced the
Bishops from their own interest to serve the Commonwealth, and in it they
served themselves directly, and by consequence too, the Church had not only a
sustentation from the secular arm, but an addition of honor, and secular
advantages, and all this warranted by precedent of Scripture, and the practice
of the Primitive Church, and particularly of men whom all succeeding ages have
put into the Calender of Saints. * So that it would be considered, that all
this while, it is the kings interest, and the Peoples that is pleaded, when we
assert a capacity to the Bishops to undertake charges of public trust. It is
no addition to the calling of Bishops. It serves the King, it assists the
republike, and in such a plethory, and almost a surfeit of Clergymen as this
age is supplied with, it can be no disservice to the Church, whole daily
offices may be plentifully supplied by Vicars, and for the temporary avocation
of some few, abundant recompense is made to the Church (which is not at all
injured) by becoming an occasion of indearing the Church, to those whose aid
she is.

* There is an admirable epistle written by Petrus Blesensis Epist. 84.
in the name of the Archbishop of Canterbury to P. Alexander the third in the
defense of the Bishop of Ely, Winchester and Norwich that attended the Court
upon service of the King. Non est novum (says he) quod Regum Consiliis
intersint Episcopi. Sicut enim honestate, and sapientia caeteros antecedunt,
sic expeditiores, and efficaciores in reip. administratione censentur. Quia
sicut Scriptum est [minus salubriter disponitur regnum, quod non regitur
consilio sapientum] In quo notatur eos consiliis Regum debere assistere, qui
sciant and velint, and possint patientibus compati, paci terrae, ac populi
saluti prospicere, erudire adjustitiam Reges, imminentibus occursare periculis,
vitaeque maturioris exemplis informare subditos and quadam authoritate
potestativa praesumptionem malignantium cohibere. It is no new thing for
Bishops to be Counselors to Princes (says he) their wisdom and piety that
enables them for a Bishopric proclaims them fit instruments to promote the
public tranquillity of the Commonwealth. They know how to comply with
oppressed people, to advance designs of peace, and public security; It is
their office to instruct the King to righteousness, by their sanctity to be a
rule to the Court, and to diffuse their exemplary piety over the body of the
Kingdom, to mix influences of religion with designs of state, to make them
have as much of the dove as of the serpent, and by the advantage of their
religious authority to restrain the malignity of accursed people in whom any
image of a God, or of religion is remaining. * He proceeds in the discourse and
brings the examples of Samuel, Isaiah, Elisha, Iojada, Zecharias, who were
Priests and Prophets respectively, and yet employed in Princes Courts, and
Counsels of Kings, and adds this; Vnum noveritis, quia nisi familiares, and
Consiliarii Regis essent Episcopi, supra dorsum Ecclesiae hodie fabricarent
peccatores, and immaniter, ac intolerabiliter opprimeret Clerum praesumptio
Laicalis. That Is most true. If the Church had not the advantage of additionall
honorary employments, the plowers would plow upon the Churches back, and make
long furrows. * The whole Epistle is worth transcribing, But I shall content
my self with this summary of the advantages which are acquired both to policy
and Religion by the employment of Bishops in Princes Courts. Istis me diantibus
mansuescit circa simplices judiciarius rigor, admittitur clamor pauperum,
Ecclesiarum dignitas erigitur, relevatur pauperum indigentia, firmatur in clero
libertas, pax in populis, in Monasteriis quies, justitia libere exercetur,
superbia opprimitur, augetur Laicorum devotio, religio fovetur, diriguntur
judicia, etc. When pious Bishops are employed in Princes Counsels, then the
rigor of Laws is abated, equity introduced, the cry of the poor is heard,
their necessities are made known, the liberties of the Church are conserved,
the peace of Kingdoms labored for, pride is depressed, religion increases,
the devotion of the Laity multiplies, and tribunalls are made just, and
incorrupt, and merciful. Thus far Petrus Blesensis. * These are the effects
which though perhaps they do not always fall out, yet these things may in
expectation of reason be looked for from the Clergy, their principles and
calling promises all this, and quia in Ecclesia magis lex est, ubi Dominus
legis timetur, melius dicit apud Dei Ministros agere causam. Facilius enim Dei
timore sententiam legis veram promunt; In 1. Corinthians. 6.
(says S. Ambrose,) and therefore certainly the fairest reason in the world
that they be employed. But if personal defaillance be thought reasonable to
disimploy the whole calling, then neither Clergy nor Laity should ever serve a
Prince.

And now we are easily driven into an understanding of that saying of S. Paul
2. Timoth. 2. 4.
[ No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life.] For
although this be spoken of all Christian people, and concerns the Laity in
their proportion as much as the Clergy, yet nor one, nor the other is
interdicted any thing that is not a direct hinderance to their own precise
duty of Christianity. And such things must be pared away from the fringes of
the Laity, as well as the long robe of the Clergy. But if we should consider
how little we have now left for the employment of a Bishop, I am afraid a
Bishop would scarce seem to be a necessary function, so far would it be from
being hindered by the collateral intervening of a Lay-judicature. I need not
instance in any particulars; for if the judging matters and questions of
religion be not left alone to them, they may well be put into a temporal
employment, to preserve them from suspicion of doing nothing.

I have now done with this; only entreating this to be considered. Is not the
King fons utriusque jurisdictionis? In all the senses of Common Law, and
external compulsory he is. But if so, then why may not the King as well make
Clergy-Iudges, as Lay-Delegates? For (to be sure) if there be an incapacity in
the Clergy of meddling with secular affairs, there is the same at least in the
Laity of meddling with Church affairs. For if the Clergy be above the affairs
of the World, then the Laity are under the affairs of the Church; or else, if
the Clergy be incapable of Lay-businesse, because it is of a different and
disparate nature from the Church, does not the same argument exclude the Laity
from intervening in Church affairs? For the Church differs no more from the
commonwealth, then the commonwealth differs from the Church. And now after
all this, suppose a King should command a Bishop to go on Embassy to a
foreign Prince, to be a Commissioner in a treaty of pacification, if the
Bishop refuse, did he do the duty of a Subject? If yea, I wonder what
subjection that is which a Bishop owes to his Prince, when he shall not be
bound to obey him in any thing but the saying, and doing of his office, to
which he is obliged, whether the Prince commands him yea or no. But if no, then
the Bishop was tied to go, and then the calling makes him no way incapable of
such employment, for no man can be bound to do a sin.

BUt then did not this employment,. 50. And therefore were enforced to delegate
their power and put others in substitution,
when the occasions were great, and extraordinary, force the Bishops to a
temporary absence? And what remedy was there for that? For the Church is not to
be left destitute, that is agreed on by all the Canons. They must not be like
the Sicilian Bishops whom Petrus Blesensis complains of, that attended the
Court, and never visited their Churches, or took care either of the cure of
souls, or of the Church possessions. What then must be done? The Bishops in
such cases may give delegation of their power, and offices to others, though
now adays they are complained of for their care. I say, for their care; For if
they may intervene in secular affairs, they may sometimes be absent, and then
they must delegate their power, or leave the Church without a Curate. *** But
for this matter the account need not be long. For since I have proved that the
whole Diocese is in cura Episcopali, and for all of it, he is responsive to
God Almighty, and yet, that instant necessity and the public act of
Christendom has ratified it, that Bishops have delegated to Presbyters so
many parts of the Bishops charge as there are parishes in his Diocese, the
(...) which is pretended for delegation of Episcopal charge, is no less then
the act of all Christendom. For it is evident at first, Presbyters had no
distinct cure at all, but were in common assistant to the Bishop, and were his
emissaries for the gaining souls in City, or Suburbs; But when the Bishops
divided parishes, and fixed the Presbyters upon a cure, so many Parishes as they
distinguished, so many delegations they made; And these we all believe to be
good both in law, and conscience. For the Bishop per omnes divinos ordines
propriae hierarchiae exercet mysteria (says S. Denis, Eccles. hierdr. 6. 5.
) he does not do the offices of his order by himself only, but by others
also, for all the inferior orders doc so operate, as by them he does his proper
offices.

* But besides this grand act of the Bishops first, and then of all
Christendom in consent, we have fair precedent in S. Paul; for he made
delegation of a power to the Church of Corinth to excommunicate the incestuous
person. It was a plain delegation; for he commanded them to do it, and gave
them his own spirit, that is, his own authority; and indeed without it, I
scarce find how the delinquent should have been delivered over to Satan in the
sense of the Apostolic Church, that is, to be buffeted, for that was a
miraculous appendix of power Apostolic.

* When S. Paul sent for Timothy from Ephesus, 2. Timoth. 4. v. 9. and 12.
he sent Tychicus to be his Vicar. [ Do thy diligence to come unto me shortly,
for Demas has forsaken me etc. And Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus] Here was
an express delegation of the power of jurisdiction to Tychicus, who for the
time was Curate to S. Timothy. Epaphroditus for a while attended on S. Paul,
although he was then Bishop of Philippi, and either S. Paul, Philip. 2. v. 25.
26.
or Epaphroditus appointed one in substitution, or the Church was relinquished,
for he was most certainly non-resident.

* Thus also we find that S. Ignatius did delegate his power to the Presbyters
in his voyage to his Martyrdom. Epist. ad Antioch.
Presbyteri pascite gregem qui inter vos est, donec Deus designaverit eum qui
principatum in vobis habiturus est. Ye Presbyters do you feed the flock till
God shall design you a Bishop. Till then. Therefore it was but a delegate
power, it could not else have expired in the presence of a Superior. * Can. 56.
To this purpose is that of the Laodicean Council. Non oportet Presbyteros
ante ingressum Episcopi ingredi, and sedere in tribunalibus, nisi forte aut
aegrotet Episcopus, aut in peregrinis ^um esse constiterit. Presbyters must not
sit in Consistory without the Bishop, unless the Bishop be sick, or absent. So
that it seems what the Bishop does when he is in his Church, that may be
committed to others in his absence. And to this purpose S. Cyprian sent a
plain commission to his Presbyters. Fretus ergo dilectione and religione
vestra.... his literis hortor, Epist. 9.
and Mando vt vos.... VICE MEA FUNGAMINI circa gerenda ea quae administratio
religiosa deposcit. I entreat and command you, that you do my office in the
administration of the affairs of the Church; and another time he put
Herculanus, and Caldonius, two of his Suffragans, together with Rogatianus, and
Numidicus, two Priests, Epist. 38. and 39.
in substitution for the excommunicating Faelicissimus and four more. [ Cum
ego vos pro me VICARIOS miserim.] So it was just in the case of Hierocles
Bishop of Alexandria and Melitius his Surrogate in Epiphanius. haeres. 68.
Videbatur autem and Melitius praeminere etc: vt qui secundum locum habebat
post Petrum in Archiepiscopatu, velut adjuvandi ejus gratia sub ipso existens,
and sub ipso Ecclesiastica curans. He did Church offices under, and for
Hierocles; And I could never find any Canon or personal declamatory clause in
any Council, or Primitive Father against a Bishop's giving more or less of
his jurisdiction by way of delegation.

* Hitherto also may be referred, that when the goods of all the Church which
then were of a perplexe and buisy dispensation, were all in the Bishops hand as
part of the Episcopal function, yet that part of the Bishops office, the
Bishop by order of the Council of Chalcedon might delegate to a steward;
provided he were a Clergyman; and upon this intimation and decree of Chalcedon
the Fathers in the Council of Sevill forbid any laymen to be stewards for the
Church. Council. Hispal. cap. 6.
Elegimus vt vnusquisque nostrum secundum Chalcedonensium Patrum decreta ex
proprio Clero Oeconomum sibi constituat. But the reason extends the Canon
further. Indecorum est enim laicum VICARIUM esse Episcopi, and Saeculares in
Ecclesia judicare. VICARS OF BISHOPS the Canon allows, only forbids laymen
to be Vicars. In uno enim eodemque officio non decet dispar professio, quod
etiam in divina lege prohibetur, etc: In one and the same office the law of God
forbids to join men of disparate capacities. This then would be considered.
For the Canon pretends Scripture, Precepts of Fathers, and Tradition of
antiquity for it is Sanction.

* FOR although antiquity approves of Episcopal delegations of their power to
their Vicars,. 51. But they were ever Clergymen, for there never was any lay
Elders in any Church office heard of in the Church. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 37.
yet these Vicars and delegates must be Priests at least. Melitius was a
Bishop, and yet the Chancellor of Hierocles Patriarch of Alexandria, So were
Herculanus, and Caldonius to S. Cyprian. But they never delegated to any
layman any part of their Episcopal power precisely. Of their lay-power or the
cognizance of secular causes of the people, I find one delegation made to some
Gentlemen of the Laity, by Sylvanus Bishop of Troas, when his Clerks grew
covetous, he cured their itch of gold, by trusting men of another profession so
to shame them into justice, and contempt of money. * Si quis autem Episcopus
posthac Ecclesiasticam rem aut LAICALI PROCURATIONE administrandam elegerit....
non solum a Christo de rebus Pauperum judicatur reus, Council. Hispa^. ubi supra.
sed etiam and Concilio manebit obnoxious. If any Bishop shall hereafter
concredit any Church affairs to LAY ADMINISTRATION, he shall be responsive to
Christ, and in danger of the Council. But the thing was of more ancient
constitution. For in that Epistle which goes under the Name of S. Clement,
Epist. ad Jacob. Fratr. Dom.
which is most certainly very ancient whoever was the author of it, it is
decreed, Si qui ex Fratribus negotia habent inter se apud cognitores saeculi
non judicentur, sed apud Presbyteros Ecclesiae quicquid illud est dirimatur. If
Christian people have causes of difference and judicial contestation, let it
be ended before the PRIESTS. For so S. Clement expounds [ Presbyteros] in the
same Epistle, reckoning it as a part of the sacred Hierarchy. de 7. Ordin.
Eccles.
To this or some parallel constitution S. Hierome relates, saying that [
Priests from the beginning were appointed judges of causes]. He expounds his
meaning to be of such Priests as were also Bishops, and they were Judges ab
initio, from the beginning (says S. Hierom). So that this saying of the Father
may no way prejudge the Bishops authority, but it excludes the assistance of
laymen from their Consistories. Presybter, and Episcopus was instead of one
word to S. Hierom, but they are always Clergy, with him and all men else.

Epist. 13. ad Valent.
But for the main Question, S. Ambrose did represent it to Valentinian the
Emperor with confidence, and humility, In causa fidei, vel Ecclesiastici
alicujus ordinis eum judicare debere, qui nec Munere impar sit, nec jure
dissimilis. The whole Epistle is admirable to this purpose, Sacerdotes de
Sacerdotibus judicare, that Clergymen must only judge of Clergy-causes; and
this S. Ambrose there call's judicium Episcopale. The Bishops judicature. Si
tractandum est, tractare in Ecclesia didici, quod Majores fecerunt mei. Si
conferendum de fide, Sacerdotum debet esse ista collatio, sicut factum est sub
Constantino Aug. memoriae Principe. So that, both matters of Faith and of
Ecclesiastical Order are to be handled in the Church, and that by Bishops, and
that sub Imperatore, by permission and authority of the Prince. For so it was
in Nice, under Constantine. Thus far S. Ambrose.

Epist. ad Solitar.
S. Athanasius reports that Hosius Bishop of Corduba, president in the Nicene
Council, said, it was the abomination of desolation that a layman should be
judge in Ecclesiasticis judicijs, in Church-causes; And Leontius calls
Church-affayres, Suidas in vit^ Leontij.
Res alienas a Laicis, things of another Court, of a distinct cognizance from
the Laity. * To these add the Council of Venice, Can. 9. A. D. 453.
for it is very considerable in this Question. Clerico nisi ex permissu
Episcopi sui servorum suorum saecularia judicia adire non liceat. Sed si
fortasse Episcopi sui judicium caeperit habere suspectum, aut ipsi de
proprietate aliqua adversus ipsum Episcopum fuerit not a contentio, aliorum
Episcoporum audientiam, NON SAECULARIUM POTESTATUM debebit ambire. Aliter a
communione habeatur alienus. Clergymen without delegation from their Bishop
may not hear the causes of their servants, but the Bishop, unless the Bishop
be appealed from, then other Bishops must hear the cause, but NO LAY JUDGES by
any means.

Novell. constit. 123.
These Sanctions of holy Church it pleased the Emperor to ratify by an
Imperial edict, for so Justinian commanded that in causes Ecclesiastical,
Secular Judges should have no interest, SED SANCTISSIMUS EPISCOPUS SECUNDUM
SACRAS REGULAS CAUSAE FINEM IMPONAT. The Bishop according to the Sacred Canons
must be the sole judge of Church Matters. I end this with the decretall of S.
Gregory one of the four Doctors of the Church, Cavendum est a Fraternitate
vestra, lib. 7. epist. 66.
ne saecularibus viris, atque non sub regula nost^a degentibus res
Ecclesiasticae committantur. Heed must be taken that matters Ecclesiastical be
not any ways concredited to secular persons. But of this I have twice spoken
already.. 36. and. 41.

The thing is so evident, that it is next to impudence to say that in Antiquity
Laymen were parties and assessors in the Consistory of the Church. It was
against their faith, it was against their practice; and those few pigmy
objections, out of * Tertullian, Tertull. Apol. c. 33. S. Ambros. in 1. Tim. 5.
1. and lib. 1. de offic. c. 20. S. August. lib. 3. contra Crescon. and Epist.
137.
S. Ambrose, and S. Austin using the word Seniores, or Elders, sometimes for
Priests, as being the latin for the Greek (...), sometimes for a secular
Magistrate, or Alderman, (for I think S. Austin did so in his third book
against Cresconius) are but like Sophoms to prove that two and two are not
four; for to pretend such slight, aerie imaginations, against the constant,
known, open, Catholic practice and doctrine of the Church, and history of all
ages, is as if a man should go to fright an Imperial army with a single
bulrush. They are not worth further considering.

* But this is; That in this Question of Lay Elders the Modern Aerians and
Acephali do wholly mistake their own advantages. For whatsoever they object
out of antiquity for the white, and watery colors of Lay Elders is either a
very misprison of their allegations, or else clearly abused in the use of them.
For now adays they are only used to exclude and drive forth Episcopacy, but
then they misalledge antiquity, for the men with whose Heifers they would feign
plough in this Question were themselves Bishops for the most part, and he that
was not, would feign have been, it is known so of Tertullian, and therefore
most certainly if they had spoken of lay-Iudges in Church matters (which they
never dreamed of) yet meant them not so as to exclude Episcopacy, and if not,
then the pretended allegations can do no service in the present Question.

I am only to clear this pretense from a place of Scripture totally
misunderstood, and then it cannot have any color from any (...), either
divine, or humane, but that Lay-Iudges of causes Ecclesiastical as they are
unheard of in antiquity, so they are neither named in Scripture, nor receive
from thence any instructions for their deportment in their imaginary office,
and therefore may be remanded to the place from whence they came, even the lake
of Gebenna, and so to the place of the nearest denomination. * The objection is
from S. 1. Tim. 5. 17.
Paul, (...) etc. let the Elders that rule well, be accounted worthy of double
honor, especially they that labor in the word and doctrine. especially they.
-- therefore all Elders do not so. Here are two sorts of Elders, Preaching
Ministers, and Elders not Preachers. Therefore Lay Elders, and yet all are
governors.

1. But why therefore Lay Elders? Why may there not be diverse Church Officers,
and yet but one, or two of them the Preacher? [ Christ sent me not to Baptize
but to Preach] says S. Paul, and yet the commission of [ baptizate] was as
large as [ praedicate] and why then might not another say, Christ sent me not
to Preach, but to Baptize, that is, in S. Paul's sense, not so much to do one,
as to do the other, and if he left the ordinary ministration of Baptism, and
betook himself to the ordinary office of Preaching, then to be sure, some
Minister must be the ordinary Baptizer, and so, not the Preacher, for if he
might be both ordinarily, why was not S. Paul both? For though their power was
common to all of the same order, yet the execution and dispensation of the
Ministeries was according to several gifts, and that of Prophecy, or Preaching
was not dispensed to all in so considerable a measure, but that some of them
might be destined to the ordinary execution of other offices, and yet because
the gift of Prophecy was the greatest, so also was the office, and therefore
the sense of the words is this, that all Presbyters must be honored, but
especially they that Prophecy, doing that office with an ordinary execution and
ministry. So no Lay Elders yet. Add to this, that it is also plain that all
the Clergy did not Preach. Valerius Bishop of Hippo could not well skill in the
Latin tongue being a Greek borne, and yet a Godly Bishop, and S. Austin his
Presbyter preached for him. The same case might occur in the Apostles times.
For then was a concurse of all Nations to the Christian Synaxes, especially in
all great Imperial Cities, and Metropolitans, as Rome, Antioch, Jerusalem,
Caesarea, and the like. Now all could not speak with tongues, neither could all
Prophecy, they were particular gifts given severally, to several men
appointed to minister in Church-offices. Some Prophesied, some interpreted; and
therefore is is an ignorant fancy to think that he must needs be a Laick,
whosoever in the ages Apostolical was not a Preacher.

2. None of the Fathers ever expounded this place of Lay Elders, so that we
have a traditive interpretation of it in prejudice to the pretense of our new
office.

3. The word Presbyter is never used in the new Testament for a Layman, if a
Church officer be intended. If it be said, it is used so here, that is the
question, and must not be brought to prove it self.

4. The Presbyter that is here spoken of must be maintained by Ecclesiastical
revenue, for so S. Paul expounds [ honour] in the next verse. Presbyters that
rule well must be honored etc. For it is written, thou shall not muzzle the
mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn. But now, the Patrons of this new
devise are not so greedy of their Lay-Bishops as to be at charges with them,
they will rather let them stand alone on their own rotten legs, and so perish,
then fix him upon this place with their hands in their purses. But it had been
most fitting for them to have kept him, being he is of their own begetting.

5. This place speaks not of diverse persons, but diverse parts of the Pastoral
office, (...), and (...). To rule, and to labor in the word. Just as if the
expression had been in materia politica. All good Counselors of State are
worthy of double honor, especially them that disregarding their own private,
aim at the public good. This implies not two sorts of Counselors, but two
parts of a Counselors worth, and quality. Judges that do righteousness are
worthy of double honor, especially if they right the cause of Orphans, and
Widows, and yet there are no righteous judges that refuse to do both.

6. All Ministers of H. Church did not preach, at least not frequently. The
seven that were (...), set over the Widows were Presbyters, but yet they were
forced to leave the constant ministration of the word to attend that
employment, as I showed. 48. lib. 5: cap. 22.
formerly; and thus it was in descent too, for (...), (said Socrates) A
Presbyter does not Preach in Alexandria, the Bishop only did it. And then the
allegation is easily understood. For laboring in the word does not signify,
only making Homilies or exhortations to the people, but whether it be by word,
or writing, or traveling from place to place, still, the greater the sedulity
of the person is, and difficulty of the labor, the greater increment of honor
is to be given him. So that here is no Lay Elders; for all the Presbyters S.
Paul speaks of, are to be honored, but especially those who take extraordinary
pains in propagating the Gospel. For though all preach, (suppose that) yet all
do not (...), take such great pains in it, as is intimated in, (...). For
(...) is to take bodily labor, and travail, usque ad lassitudinem, (so
Budaeus renders it.) And so it is likely S. Paul here means. Honor the good
Presbyters, but especially them that travel for disseminating the Gospel. And
the word is often so used in Scripture. S. Paul, (...). I have traveled in the
word more then they all. Not that S. Paul preached more then all the Apostles,
for most certainly, they made it their business as well as he. But he
traveled further and more then they all for the spreading it. And thus it is
said of the good Woman that traveled with the Apostles, for supply of the
necessities of their diet and household offices, [ they labored much in the
Lord.] (...) is the word for them too. So it is said of Persis, of Mary, of
Tryphaena, of Triphosa. Romans 16.
And since these women were (...), that traveled with the Apostolical men and
Evangelists, the men also traveled to, and preached, and therefore were (...),
that is travelers in the word. 1. Epist. cap. 3.
[ We ought therefore to receive such] (says S. John) intimating a particular
reception of them, as being toward us of a peculiar merit. So that the sense
of S. Paul may be this also, All the Rulers of the Church, that is, all
Bishops, Apostles, and Apostolic men, are to be honored, but especially them
who, besides the former ruling, are also travelers in the word, or Evangelists.

7. We are furnished with answer enough to infatuate this pretense for
Lay Elders, from the common draught of the new discipline. For they have some
that Preach only, and some that Rule, and Preach too, and yet neither of them
the Lay-Elder, viz. their Pastors, and Doctors.

8. Since it is pretended by themselves in the Question of Episcopacy, that
Presbyter, and Episcopus is all one, and this very thing confidently obtruded
in defiance of Episcopacy, why may not Presbyteri in this place signify [
Bishops?] And then either this must be Lay-Bishops as well as Lay-Presbyters or
else this place is to none of their purposes.

9. If both these offices of RULING and PREACHING may be conjunct in one
person, then there is no necessity of distinguishing the Officers by the
several employments, since one man may do both. But if these offices cannot
be conjunct, then no Bishops must preach, nor no preachers be of the Consistory
(take which government you list) for if they be, then the offices being united
in one person, the inference of the distinct officer, the Lay-Elder, is
impertinent. For the meaning of S. Paul would be nothing but this. All
Church-Rulers must be honored, Especially for their preaching. For if the
offices may be united in one person (as it is evident they may) then this may
be comprehended within the other, and only be a vital part and of peculiar
excellency. And indeed so it is, according to the exposition of S. Chrysostom,
and Primasius, (...). They rule well, that spare nothing for the care of the
flock. So that this is the general charge, and preaching is the particular.
For the work in general they are to receive double honor, but this of
preaching, as then preaching was, had a particular excellency, and a plastic
power to form men into Christianity, especially it being then attested with
miracles.

But the new office of a Lay-Elder, I confess I cannot comprehend in any
reasonable proportion, his person, his quality, his office, his authority, his
subordination, his commission has made so many divisions and new emergent
Questions: and they, none of them all asserted either by Scripture or
Antiquity, that if I had a mind to leave the way of God and of the Catholic
Church, and run in pursuit of this meteor, I might quickly be amused, but
should find nothing certain but a certainty of being misguided. Therefore if
not for conscience sake, yet for prudence, bonum est esse hic, it is good to
remain in the fold of Christ, under the guard, and supravision of those
sheapheards Christ has appointed, and which his sheep have always followed.

For I consider this one thing to be enough to determine the Question. [ My
sheep (says our blessed Savior) hear^ my voice, if a stranger, or a thief
come, him they will not heare] Clearly thus. That Christ's sheep hear not the
voice of a stranger, nor will they follow him, and therefore those sheapheards
whom the Church has followed in all ages, are no strangers, but Sheapheards or
Pastors of Christ's appointing, or else Christ has had no sheep; for if he
has, then Bishops are the sheapheards, for them they have ever followed. I end
with that golden rule of Vincentius Lirinensis, Cap. 3. adv. haereses.
Magnopere curandum est ut id teneamus, quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab
omnibus creditum est. Hoc est enim vere, proprieque Catholicum. For certainly
the Catholic belief of the Church against Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius,
Apollinaris, and (the worst of heretics) the Cataphrygians was never more
truly received of all, and always, and every where then is the government of
the Church by Bishops. Annunciare ergo Christianis Catholicis praeter id quod
acceperunt, Cap. 14.
nunquam licuit, nunquam licet, nunquam licebit. It never was, is, nor ever
shall be lawful to teach Christian people any new thing then what they have
received from a primitive fountain, and is descended in the stream of
Catholic, uninterrupted succession.

* I only add, that the Church has insinuated it to be the duty of all good
Catholic Christians to pray for Bishops, and as the case now stands, for
Episcopacy it self, for there was never any Church-Liturgy but said Letanyes
for their KING, and for their BISHOP.

(...).

