TYRANNY NO MAGISTRACY, OR A modest and Compendious Inquiry into the nature,
and boundaries of that Ordinance of MAGISTRACY.

WITH An essay to Demonstrate it is specific distinction from Tyranny.

By an Enemy to Tyranny and lover of true Magistracy.

2 Samuel: Chap. 23. verse 3. He that rules over men must be Just, ruleing in the
fear of God.

Prove: Chap. 28. verse 15. As a roaring Lion and a rangeing Bear; so is a wicked
Ruler over the poor people.

Printed in the Year 1687.

AS Magistracy, that excellent ordinance of God (whereon much of his Sovereign
Majesty and glory is impressed) is not amongst the smallest privileges of the
sons of men; they being thereby not only preserved in their well and better
being, but even in their real and true being; enjoying thereby, not only
Religion, Right and Property, but even life, freedom and safety from all the
other inconveniences in the world; and that whilst these due bounds and
limits, which God has appointed in his Word, and given men to know by reason,
are so strictly observed, that Magistracy is thereby preserved; so, when
through the breach thereof there is a full perversion into Tyranny, that, which
once was the greatest privilege and blessing, does then become the greatest
misery and curse, according to that maxim, corruption optimi semper pessima.
But such a plague (and so much the greater, that the world has bin rather
doteing on, then seeking a remedy against it) has overtaken this generation,
that very properly an allusion to that of Isaiah may take place, Isai. 44. ver.
16. Where he speaks of such as take a piece of wood and burn part thereof in
the fire; with part thereof he eats flesh: rosteth roast and is satisfied; yea
he warmeth himself and says Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire. And the
residue thereof he makes a God, even his graven Image; he falls down unto it
and worshipeth it, and prays unto it, and says, deliver me; for thou art
my God. Such has bin the madness and folly, even of the true Christian world,
that they have set up persons most unfit for Government; and enlarged their
power beyond the due limits, that tyranny and oppression in the very abstract
has bin visible both in their persons and Government, and yet worshipped as so
many Idols, and all absolute obedience and non-resistance pleaded for, to an
absolute power and tyranny. One great reason whereof is, that foolish notion of
the sacredness of power in possession, never inquiring into right and title;
and the due distance, distinction and boundaries of Magistracy, and Tyranny,
that are as specifically distinct, as right and robry: honesty and knavery: a
blessing and a curse. Hence nothing would be more useful and advantageous to
the world, then to be induced to a serious inquiry, how these are to be
distinguished by their true characters. And that the matter may be the more
clearly illustrate, the question shall be stated thus;

What is it, that makes a just and lawful King, or Magistrate, and does
continue them such.

The which question shall be answered; first, negatively, and then positively:
Negatively, by removing what it is that does not: positively, in a plain
asserting and proveing what it is that does. In the negative part, there are
these two would be removed; first, that it is conquest that does it; and
secondly, that it is an hereditory title that does it.

That conquest is not that which does it, will easily be granted by all men;
for a man by violence may mount a Throne, and yet be no just and lawful King.
Absalom did mount the throne, and yet was no just and lawful King, as in 11
Sam. 15. Chapt. more particularly it is to be observed in the 19. ver. where
David designs him by the title of King, which in effect was only an usurped
title, he having come to it only by violence and robry. Zimri did the same, and
yet was no just and lawful King, as in 1 Kings 16. from the 9. ver. we find
his conspiracy against his master and killing of him: and after his
establishment upon the Throne, a destroying of all the house of Baasha, and in
ver. 16. when the people heard thereof, they made Omri King over Israel in the
Camp, and in the 17, and 18, ver. Omri pursued him, and took the City, so that
Zimri went into the Palace of the Kings house and burnd' the same over him with
fire. Athaliah destroyed also all the seed Royal of the house of Judah, and by
violence took possession of the power, as in 2 Chronicles. 22. ver. 10, 12. And yet
Joash is made King, and she destroyed; as in the following Chapter 12, 13, 14,
ver. Many more examples of this nature might be added: but we shall only say
this by way of argument, and so have done; that seeing neither the word of God,
nor reason does command, or allow a King, or any other Magistrate to mount a
Throne, and accordingly to take possession of the power by violence, and that
it would be a thing of most dangerous effects, if the minds of people should be
possessed with any such principle; (for there is such a lust and propensity in
the hearts of men to govern, that they would seek out all occasion to destroy
the very best of Magistrates; and thereby the people might be robbed of the
very best of Governors and Government: for the same principle that makes a man
usurp a power, makes him also usurp an unjust and unlawful power,) it is
evident that conquest makes not a good right. Now this being ended, our next is
to inquire into that of an hereditory title, and we shall state the argument
thus;

Quest. Whether or not does an hereditory title really in it self give a full
and real power to a King, and thereby make him a just, and lawful Magistrate.

Answ. That which neither in it self, nor by the Law of God, nor reason is
necessar, or essential to the being of a King, can never make a King; but an
hereditory title neither in it self, nor by the Law of God, nor reason is
necessar, or essential to the being of a King; therefore hereditory title can
never make a King. The major I hope none will deny; the minor I prove thus; as
for the first part of it, Viz: that an hereditory title in it self, does not
make etc. It is clear that hereditory title in it self, dot not make a King, or
then Kings could never have bin made without it, but Kings have, are, and may
be made without it, Ergo etc. And as for the latter part, that the word of God,
nor reason does not allow of it, nor command it, I prove thus,

That which does expressly thwart and contradict the word of God and reason,
must be inconsistant with the word of God and reason; but that an hereditory
title should be necessar and essential, and accordingly make a King does
expressly thwart and contradict the word of God and reason, ergo etc. which I
prove thus,

The word of God, and reason do expressly command and allow that a Magistrate
should have suitable qualifications for the office, as in Deutr. 17. from ver.
15. there the qualifications of a King are held forth and commanded; I shall
only mention one of those, which is this, that he should not be a stranger
born: which does clearly import that he should not be of a strange Religion;
for the reason why the Lord did lay such strict commands upon his people not to
marry with strangers, was not but that they had the bodies of men and women as
good as they, but that they were of a strange Religion and might draw them away
to Idolatry; and seeing the word of God does expressly command these
qualifications as necessar and essential, certainly reason does command and
allow that a people should have a respect to the glory of God, their own good
and safety, and accordingly make non King, but such as have these necessar and
essential qualifications: but that hereditory title, (which many do boast of,)
does allow and essentially make him a King, whether he have these
qualifications, or not; though he should be born a monster and not a man; a mad
man and not a sober man; a fool and an idiot, and not a wise man; a stranger
and of a strange Religion, and not a native, nor of the Religion of the Land;
yea though he were given to all manner of wickedness, yet he is said to be a
born King, and accordingly the Lords anointed: which is altogether inconsistant
with the word of God and reason. But that we may give satisfaction more fully
to all persons concerning this matter, let us inquire yet a little further into
the nature of this hereditory title, who it is that gives this title and what
it is they can give. I know that some of the vil'd of the earth, who would
flatter Princes and cheat the people out of their rights and liberties do
plainly say, that it is God only gives it, and that all Kings have their right
and power only, and immediately from God and so are accomptable to non but God.
I would gladly know where those Kings got these ladders, by which they went up
to Heaven to get those rights devolved upon them, and their Families, or if
there be such a thing recorded in Scripture, that such and such men should by
an hereditory title Reign as Kings on the earth, and in such and such parts of
the world, or if this right of reigning must only and immediately flow from the
people. There is nothing more certain than, that it is the gift of the people,
if it be not the effect of conquest, which is already spoke to, and excluded.
And therefore we shall next consider what a people can give, and what the
extent of this hereditory title can be. And it must be understood, that a
people can give no more then they have to give, which is, that if they be
persons so and so qualified for the office; then they shall be preferred before
others to such an office: but if a people should absolutely say and determine
that such a race and Family should be their born Kings, that were to take Gods
power unto them; for it is not in their power to bring such a thing to pass in
respect of these many natural accidents that are in the way, yea it were the
very way to make themselves slaves; and to bring that curse upon them, that is
there threatened in, Hos: 8. ver. 3, 4. and accordingly to forfeit Gods
protection. So that the extent of this hereditory title being only a promise in
the people that such a race shall succeed to such an office being qualified for
the same, it must of necessity follow that the people must be Judges of this
matter: for no foreign power can determine therein, the people being only and
immediately concerned therein. Let us now go to the case of Saul and David, and
there we find, though Saul had Gods absolute promise for it from the mouth of
the Prophet (for non can make an absolute promise of this nature, but God
only) and that also the Prophet did confirm the same unto him by anointing
him with oil, and telling him whom, and what he shoud meet with by the way;
yet all this did not make him King: for this was only a secret act of the
Prophet, whereby he did make known Gods mind and promise unto him; for when
Saul was made King, the people were gathered together for that purpose, and
presented before the Lord by their trybes and by their thousands: and when Saul
was taken by lot, he was lying hid amongst the stuff, being it seems
affrayed and doubtful, whether he should be chosen King, or not; as you shall
find in 1 Samuel 10. ver. 20, 21, 23. And accordinly David, though he had the
Lords promise in the same manner, yet he was not really King for many years
after, until the death of Saul; and he was first made King of Judah; and did
Reign seven years and six months, before he was made King over Israel, until
all the tribes went to him in Horeb, and David made a League with them, and
then they anointed him King over Israel. Now seeing we find clearly the Lords
promise (which was absolute) was not that which did really make them Kings, far
less does the lame promise of the people do it, which (we have made manifest
already) may come to nothing. I know some do allege that there was an
hereditory right settled upon the house of David: but we find that it was only
a secret promise of God to David upon conditions, that if he and his family
should keep Gods Covenant, then the Lord in his providence would so order it,
that there should not be one of the family wanting to sit, upon the Throne, and
this promise was not made to David simply as he was a King; for then it should
rather have bin made to the house of Saul; because he was before him: for God
did bless him with several blessings that no King on earth can pretend to; as
his being a Prophet, and Christ's coming out of his race. Yea that Prophecy and
blessing of Jacob to his Children in the 49. of Genesis, ver. 10. The Scepter
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh
come, was fulfilled in the person of David and his house; as we shall find by
David's own words in 1 Chronicles: 28. ver. 4. Howbeit the Lord God of Israel chose
me before all the house of my Fathers to be King over Israel for ever: for he
has chosen Judah to be the ruler; and of the house of Judah the house of my
father; and amongst the sons of my father he liked me, to make me King over all
Israel, etc. I know some do allege this hereditory title to be the absolute
promise and gift of the people and therefore becomes as really the right, and
property of that race and family, to whom it is given, as any other estate
does go-from father to son. Although there be anough said both from Scripture,
and reason sufficiently to answer the same, yet we shall come to matter of
practice in these Nations, where this hereditory title has bin most in use.
And in the first place, we shall consider the reason of this hereditory title,
the title it self, and the practice of the people concerning those, to whom
it did belong.

As for the reason thereof, there can be no other reason given then this, that
often times families fell a contending for the Government and thereby the
sheding of blood was occasioned, and therefore the people (to take away this
inconvenience) thought fit to settle the title to an office upon a particular
race.

As for the title self, though the very words granting it, may seem to be
absolute, admitting of no condition, or qualification vvhatsomever; yet it
cannot be thought, that any Nation who knevv any thing of a God, much less a
Christian Nation, and of the Reformed Religion would ever set the power and
providence of God so at naught, as not to respect the same in the doing of this
very thing: for though men do frequently say, that they will go such away, or
do such a thing, yet it is always understood, that they do respect the power
and providence of God in this matter, that they neither can go any way, or do
any thing, without God concur with them in giving them those necessar
qualifications, as health, strength, reason and understanding; and every way
make his power and providence good for them therein. So it must be understood
of such a Nation, when they give such a right, that as they are lead by some
reason for the doing thereof, so they do not intend thereby to destroy reason,
Religion and nature, and accordingly to set the power and providence of God at
naught. For it were against reason, Religion and nature, and a defying of Gods
power and providence for a people to give up themselves blindfoldedly to such
a race, in such an absolute manner as that. And as for the practice of the
people concerning those to whom this title did belong, we shall find, that
in Scotland, England and other parts of the world, when the people did find
that those persons, to whom this hereditory title did immediately belong, were
unqualified for the office, that they have taken it from them, and given it to
the next in line being more qualified for the same. Now if this promise and
gift had bin so absolute, as some do say, so as that these persons by their
birth had bin Just and lawful Kings, it had not bin in their power to have
taken the same from them. But seeing we have said anough from Scripture, reason
and the practice of the people to prove that this hereditory title neither in
it self, nor by the Law of God, or reason, is necessar, or essential to the
making of a King; and that it is inconsistant with the word of God and reason,
that a King can be made thereby; let us now consider what it is that does
really make a Just and lawful King, and continue him such.

It is necessar to be considered, that no supreme Magistrate comes justly to
the power without the call and election of the people; and that the people are
to call and elect non, but such as have those necessar and essential
qualifications.

First, that he be a man; and not a monster. Secondly, that he be a prudent,
wise and sober man; and not a fool, an Idiot, or a mad man. Thirdly, that he be
of the true Religion of the Land; and not of a strange Idolatrous Religion.
Fourthly, that he be Just and upright. I know, no rational man will object
against the first two, and therefore I shall labor only to prove the absolute
necessity of the last; that he be of the true Religion of the Land; and not of
a strange, Idolatrous Religion: and I do it thus; First, the Lord has commanded
it in his Word; secondly, reason does also enjoin it. Thirdly, from the bad
consequences that may follow, if it be not. Now that the Lord has commanded it,
is clear from that of Deuteronomy. 17. ver. 14. It is like some will object, that this
command was judicial and only binding upon the Jews, they being more
immediately under Gods own Government: but if the Text of Scripture be
considered, there can be no such mistake: for this is a Government common to
other Nations, to which God grantes them a liberty, these due measures being
observed, which a people, or Nation (who do worship the true God in the true
manner) ought to secure their Religion and liberty by. Now that reason does
enjoin it must natively follow; for that people, who would secure their
Religion and Liberty, could not at all be accounted men of reason, if they
should set up an Idolater to be their King. For it is too well known to the
true Christian world that no bonds can bind an Idolater, (especially a
Papist) who by the nature of his Religion and these his religious vows, does
not only stand at liberty, but obliedged upon all occasions to break all vows
and Oaths whatsomever, to those of the true Religion, when it does in any
measure prove consistent with the destruction of the true Religion, and the
advancement of Idolatry: and it must also follow, that the worst of
consequences will attend thereupon. For thereby a people are guilty of
rebellion against God by not observing, but rather forsakeing those due
measures, that the word of God and reason has commanded, and do accordingly
forfeit Gods protection: and it must of necessity be said, that they have cast
off that which is good, and that the enemies shall pursue them, as it is said
of that people, Hos. 8. ver. 3, 4. And as the worst of misery must follow
thereupon, so it must be acknowledged, that they have brought it on with their
own hands. And so long as they continue unpenitent for this their rebellion
against God, and treachery to their native Land, they can not pray with hopes
that God will either help, or relieve them out of their misery.

And that he be Just and upright, is most absolutely necessar: for that
Magistrate, who is not Just and upright in his office, can no more be said to
be a Just and lawful Magistrate, then a thief, or a murderer can be said to
be an honest man. David in his last words gives this as a thing most absolutely
necessar and essential to the real and true being of a Magistrate, in 2 Samuel
23. ver. 3. The God of Israel said, the rock of Israel spoke to me, he that
rules over men, must be Just, ruleing in the fear of God: This Text of
Scripture does not say, that it is necessar he should be Just, so as he might
be the better Magistrate (for that were only necessar to the well being of a
Magistrate) but that he must be Just, so as without it he cannot at all be
accounted a lawful Magistrate: and accordingly Jethro, Moses Father in law
gives this also, as a thing most absolutely necessar and essential to the true
being of a Magistrate, Exodus 18. ver. 21. Moreover thou shall provide out of
all the people, able men; such as fear God: men of truth, hating covetousness,
and place such over them etc. And it is a thing well known to all the world,
that the want of this can not be dispensed with in any manner of employment
whatsomever: for the meanest treadsman is obliedged to be Just and upright, or
if otherways he be found to malverse in his office, by cheating of people, he
can no more be looked upon as a Just and lawful treadsman, but a cheat and a
rogue. Now as it is most certain that the electing and chooseing of a King is
the proper, true, Just, and radical power of the people, and that they for
their convenience, further good, and safety do choose a King, so for their
convenience they do not now meet by their tribes and thousands, as in the days
of old: but do choose their representatives, and the representatives the King.
So that if the representatives malverse, the people may call them to an
account, and if the King malverse, the representatives may call him to an
account; and if both malverse, the people may call both to an account: for both
are chosen for the convenience, good and safety of the people and derive their
power only, and immediately from them, as the only qualified under God for
giveing the same unto them.

Now it is to be considered, when a people do call and choose a King, that there
are terms and conditions agreed upon by borh parties; the people they do
convoy and give into his hands the Just and lawful power of the supreme office
in the state, and accordingly he does receive the same from them, promising
faithfully to hold, possess, or use no other unlawful or tyrannical power:
but by virtue of that Just and lawful power, to maintain and preserve all
those rights and privileges; wherewith God has blessed them, both sacred and
civil, and as the peoples Magistrate to exercise the same for the glory of God
and their good and safety: for there is nothing more certain, then that all
Magistrates whatsomever are really ordained of God, and do receive their power
from the people to minister thereby for their good; and accordingly the people
do promise to maintain and desend them as such; This appears further from 1
Kings 12. ver. 7. The old men, when they gave their advice to Rehoboam, it was
to this purpose; And they spoke unto him, saying, if thou will be a servant
unto this people this day, and wilt serve them; and answer them, and speak
good words to them; then they will be thy Servants for ever. Now when this man,
who is to be their Magistrate, has this power convoyd unto him by the people,
and does promise to the people; to maintain, preserve and accordingly to act
by virtue of the same, it must necessarly follow that he is either really
sincere and upright in his undertakeing and promising, his heart being fully
determined to comply with the mind and purpose of the people, and accordingly
to become the Minister of God for good to the people, having nothing else
before his eyes but the glory of God, the good and safety of the people, over
whom he has that charge, or then he is false and treacherous, and does only
dissemble with them, taking occasion thereby only to possess himself of the
power, that then he may act according the purpose of his own wicked heart; if
he be real and sincere in his promises to the people, there is nothing more
certain then that he is a Just and lawful Magistrate; but if otherways he be
falls and treacherous, and does only take occasion by his thus receiveing of the
power, to change the same unto an unjust, unlawful, arbitrary, wicked and
tyrannical power, and accordingly to rob them of their rights and privileges,
both sacred and civil at his pleasure, then he can not at all be said to be a
Just and lawful Magistrate, but a deceiver and a tyrant: for a people can do
no more, then put a Just and lawful power in his hand; and accordingly to
cloth and possess him with the same: but it still remains that God give him
that grace of justness and uprightness to maintain, preserve and accordingly to
act by virtue of the same, as Prove. 8. ver. 15, 16. By me Kings Reign and
Princes decree Justice. 16. By me Princes rule and Nobles, even all the Judges
of the earth. Now, though there may be some that pervert and wrest this
Scripture to a proveing that Kings have their power immediately from God, yet
the true meaning of it is, that a King being lawfully chosen and set up by the
people, it is God that gives him the Spirit of Government, whereby he is in a
capacity to exercise that function, whereinto he is first installed by the
people; so that it does sufficiently prove what we were saying. For when a
people has brought a Magistrate to a Throne of Justice, and accordingly put a
sword of Justice in his hand; if he from the wicked purpose of his heart shall
immediately leave and forsake that Throne of Justice, and go to a Throne of
iniquity; whereby he shall fraime and establish mischief by a Law, and change
that sword of Justice into a sword of injustice, by destroying that very
interest, which he should have maintained; and become a murderer of those,
whom he should have defended, there is nothing more clear and certain then
that he is no longer a Just and lawful Magistrate.

Now this is to be known several ways; one way is this, that so soon as he has
received that Just and lawful power from the people, and finds himself well
fixed therein, if he shall immediately declare his false teracherous, and
sinistruous end in receiving that power, and that he was only dissembleing with
the people in all his vows and engagements, that were upon him, to them, and
accordingly formally renounce those very vows and engagements that were upon
him to the people, and declare himself an enemy to that very interest and
people, which he should have preserved and defended; then it is most clear and
certain that he is no Just and lawful Magistrate. The next way is this, that
though he should not do it in such a formal way, yet he may do it practically,
as many have done, who did not find it their interest in a formal way to
renounce their vows and engagements, but upon the contrary have endeavored
what they could to blind the eyes of the people, by all fair promises
whatsomever, and yet nothing has bin more clear and certain, then that their
practice has bin quite contrary; and that the people have found to their sad
experience many a time; as those two Queen Maryes of Scotland and England, both
of them at that very instant of time, when they were destroying the
Protestant interest, and murdering true Protestants were not vvanting by all
fair means to persuade the people of their resolute and unchangeable purpose
to maintain the same. I know some will object, and say that though a
Magistrate be found qualified for the office, as to all outvvard appearance and
have the power lavvfully convoyed to them, yet the people are still uncertain,
whether he be their lavvfull Magistrate, or not; and so are not obliedged to
maintain and defend him as their Just and lavvfull Magistrate, or give him any
obedience, as such. To which I answer, that when a people do diligently
inquire into the qualifications of a Magistrate, and as to all outvvard
evidences, they are assured and convinced of his suitable qualifications for
the office; and accordingly do convoy unto him the Just and lavvfull power
belonging to the office; though his heart be falls and treacherous, yet he is to
them a Just and lavvfull Magistrate, so long as he does not discover any thing
to the contrary. Neither is every act of wickedness in a Magistrate, that
which does really unmagistrate him; though I hope non will deny a Magistrate
ought to be as circumspeck as any other: for certainly he, who is to punish
vice and wickedness, should not be a bad example to others. I know some do
allege that a King is above the Law, and may do what he pleases: but non
will say so, but Court-flatterers; and non will pretend to such a power, but
tyrants and oppressors: for a person, who pretends to be above the Law of a
Nation, does thereby exclude himself from the society: that being nothing else
but a consociation of many persons of what ranks somever under common Law,
and so is incapable of any office in that Nation: but when a Magistrate does
either formally, or practically break his Faith to the people by proveing falls
and treacherous, and does thvvart and contradict the very end, for which he
was ordained, and becomes a destroyer and murderer of that very interest and
people, which he should have preserved and defended, he does then sufficiently
demonstrate himself to be no lavvfull Magistrate, but a tyrant and an
oppressor. Some do object, I know, and say that a Just and lavvfull power
being once convoyed unto a Magistrate by the people, even though he should
malverse never so much, and act never so wickedly in the power, yet still he
does remain a Just and lavvfull Magistrate, until that power, which gave him
the power, do in the same manner take the power from him. Though what I have
said already does sufficiently discover the weakness of this argument, yet I
shall give a particular answer thereto. As it is only in the people to give a
moral, external power, so as to render him a lavvfull Magistrate, upon
supposition of his justice and other necessary qualifications, which are gifts
of God; and that it does still remain that God give him that internal and
effectual power, whereby he does become really and in effect a Just
Magistrate, as in that forecited place of Proverh. 8. ver. 15, 16. so the not
formally taking away this moral, external power, does not at all continue
him a Just and lavvfull Magistrate: for when a murderer committes a murder
and afterward is brought before a Judge, and sentenced to die for the same;
it is not the sentence of the Judge that does really, materially, and in effect
make him a murderer, but only formally and declaratively, and accordingly
punishes him for the same; but it is his committing of murder, that does
really, materially and in effect make him a murderer. For though he should
never be brought before a Judge, or receive the sentence of death, yet from his
very committing the act of murder he is really, materially and in effect a
murderer. So that it is very strange that some are pleased to say, that a
Magistrate having once the power convoyed unto him by the people though he
should act never so wickedly, yet the power does still remain the same, so
long as he is not formally divested; and that these acts of wickedness are
only the bad exercise of that lavvfull power, which was given him of the
people; whereas Gods vvithlolding the qualification of justice, and other
qualifications supposed, the power granted upon the supposition falls ipso
facto, without any declarative sentence; and the people have a right vvhenever
an opportunity occurres to reject such a Magistrate. And it is, as impossible
that a Just and lavvfull Magistrate, by virtue of a Just and lavvfull power,
can bring forth acts of wickedness, as it is impossible for a good tree, by
virtue of it is goodness, to bring forth bad fruit. For the exercise of the
power is, as the fruit from the tree; so that if the exercise of the power
be wicked and unjust, there is nothing more certain, then that the power it
self must be wicked and unjust; and that, which once was a Just and lavvfull
power, must be changed into an unjust and unlawful power. For as a tree is
known by it is fruits, so is the power known to be Just by the good acts
thereof. And when our blessed Lord and Savior was charged by the Pharisees
of possessing a wicked and bad power in casting out of Devils by the power
of Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils, he gives no other reason for a certain
proof of the goodness of that power, by which he acted, then these very good
acts thereof, as Matthew. 12. ver. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. The Apostle Paul, when he
does commend obedience to higher powers, as those powers, which are ordained
of God, warning them not to resist the ordinance of God, he does not leave
people in the wilderness, but gives this as the certain and true Character of
Just and lavvfull Magistrates, that they were not a terror to good works,
but to the evil, and that they were the Ministers of God to the people for
good, Romans 13. ver. 3, 4. And accordingly the Apostle Peter, in his 1 Epist. 2.
ver. 14. gives the same Character, that they are for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well. So that this is the very
Character by which Just and lavvfull Magistrates are known to be such; I
know some will object and say, that the Apostles gave command to obey these
very Magistrates, who were then in place; and they were the quite contrary;
for they were not a terror to the evil works, but to the good, But I hope
non, who are in any measure acted by reason and Religion will ever allege,
that the Apostles did thvvart and contradict themselves, or that they were
lying and dissembling to the people: but that this was given as a standing
command for all times to come; that the people should give obedience to those
Magistrates, who should act by virtue of Gods ordinance, and therefore gives
them the certain and true Character, by which they shall know such
Magistrates, so that the Apostles doctrine, does not atall clash with the
necessity of obeying God rather then man. But I know some do allege that
Paul gave obedience to those very Magistrates, and did appeal unto Caesar, who
was a wicked tyrant, and thereby did acknovvledge them to be Just and
lavvfull Magistrates. To all which I answer, that neither the Apostle by his
practice consonant to his precept, does acknovvledge Caesar's being a Just, or
lavvfull Magistrate; nor yet does his precept, which is certainly perpetual,
extend beyond the case and state of the people he vvrote to; to wit the called
to be Sanctes, who were in Rome, Romans 1. ver. 7. no great number not to the
whole body of the Roman people: then it is concerning a power established,
though not lawfully, or by consent of the people; yet by the ordinance of God,
for his own wise ends, which does neither communicate justness, nor
lawfullness to that power, but single possession. For though God in his Justice
sets up a tyrant, who has no pretense of right, for a peoples punishment, and
that tyrants possession of power is an ordinance of God for a time; yet the
invader is neither Just, nor lawful Magistrate, as it is like non will deney:
but such as he is, Magistrate in possession, the debelled and subdued by him,
(according to the Apostles practice and doctrine), are free to plead before his
Courts, and obliedged to submit to their civil sentences, not only for wrath
(which is a good reason of prudence here allowed, they not being in a condition
to remove his yoke from them) but also for conscience sake, discerning clearly,
that God has ordained that power to be over them, or them to be under that
power, until he send an opportunity of outgate and deliverance, which, non can
deney, they are obliedged to lay hold on whenever it presents. But that the
Apostles doctrine commanding subjection to that ordinance of power, and his
practice of appealing to Caesar may be the better understood, it is fit to
consider what he writes to the Corinthians 1 Epist. 6. ver. 1. Dare any of you,
having a matter against another, go to Law before the unjust, and not before
the Sanctes? He rebooks them in the 7. verse. Now therefore this is utterly a
fault amongst you because ye go to Law one with another; why do you not rather
take wrong? why do you not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? There is
utterly a fault in you that you have pleaes amongst your selves, each of you
should deal justly with all men of choice, voluntarly, and without need of
being compelled. Nay ( ver. 8.) you do wrong, and defraud, and that even your
brethren. Here is the highest degree of the fault: but to the persons wronged
he says verse 7. why do you not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? then
have a plea with your brethren? before what ever Judge it be (as the text most
clearly importes) non must think, that there is here a command not to implead
a brother, as is clear by the 2, 3, 3, 4, 5, ver. Do ye not know that the
Sanctes shall judge the world? and if the world shall be judged by you, are ye
unworthie to judge the smallest matters? 3. Know ye not that we shall judge
Angels, hou much more things that pertain to this life? 4. If then ye have
Judgments of things pertaineing to this life, set them to judge who are least
esteemed in the Church. 5. I speak to your shame. Is it so, that there is not
a wise man amongst you? No not one, that shall be able to judge between his
brethren. Nor yet is it commanded as a positive duty to suffer defraud from a
brother, much less in such a measure as is inconsistant with what the Apostle
writes Romans 12. ver. 17. Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide things
honest in the sight of all men. 2 Corint. chap. 8, ver. 21. Provide for honest
things, not only in the sight of the Lord. but in the sight of men. 1 Timoth.
5. ver. 8. But if any provide not for his own, especially for those of his own
house, he has denied the faith and is worse then an infidele. But this
question, why etc. ver. 7. importes an advice in reference to a tolerable
loss, to an eminent degree of Charity toward the brethren in matters of meum
and tuum, and is of the same nature with these proposed 1 Corinthians. 7. ver. 38,
40. So then he that gives her in marriage, does well: but he that gives her
not in marriage, does better. 40. But she is happier if she so abide, after my
judgment, and I think also that I have the Spirit of God. Then the question
proceeds thus, if one keep back from another what of right he should have, and
the other is not able, or yet has not that measure of Charity to bear the
loss; or if there be doubtful questions of Law amongst you, why do you not
choose by consent a wise man of the best esteemed in the Church to judge between
his brethren, to whose determination you should stand; and not leave your
selves under a necessity (as that is of ones being wronged and defrauded of all
his means) of impleading the brethren before infideles. Note by the way, that
the whole argument runs upon matters commonly called civil; not criminal, as
Murder, Robbery, Adultery etc. Upon which they were not then in case to
appoint Judges, or endued in any case to coact, or compel: the next step he
makes is upon the supposition, that they have of their brethren persons
condescended upon to determine their differences ver. 1. Dare any of you etc:
implead or pursue before the unjust and not before the Sanctes.

From the whole these things will be clear to a discerning person, First, that
in criminalles, upon which they could have no Authoritative Judges of their
own; and in civills, in case by common fault they had non appointed of their
own, and also in case the injuring party would not stand to the Sentence given
(they having no power to compel him) they might lawfully pursue before the
power in being, though infidele: albeit in the last two cases it were more
Charitable to bear a comportable loss; and in all cases, though the loss be not
borne the injury must be forgiven, and vengeance laid aside according to Matthew.
6. ver. 14, 15. For if ye forgive men their trespasses, yeur heavenly father
will also forgive you. ver. 15. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses
neither will your heavenly father forgive your trespasses.

Secondly, That the party defendor in a just defense may plead before any Judge
he is called to, and appeal from an inferior to a superior, if expedient for
his safety, or cause.

Thirdly, That the just Sentences of such Judges are to be obeyed for
conscience sake; and the unjust may be yielded to (in civil cases especially)
if there be no shunning it, for wrathes sake; and in such things, one may still
choose the greater convenience, provided it be done salva innocentia: as he who
by an unjust sentence is appointed to pay 100 Crowns at a certain day, or 200,
if he pass it, may justly and innocently save 100 by preventing that set day.

Fourthly, That what is done in any of these cases, does no way acknowledge an
usurped power it is justness, or it is lawfulness, but only, (which can not be
denied) it is existance, And moreover it is not persecuting Religion simply, as
it is Religion, that unmagistrates a Magistrate, and thereby makes him become a
Tyrant, but it is the persecuting of Religion as it is the right and privilege
of a Nation. For those Magistrates, who did then persecute Religion, were not
at all guilty of the breach of Faith and trust to the people; because they were
not under any engagement to the people to defend the same; in respect of
Religions not being the right and privilege of those Nations: therefore the
persecuting Religion did not in the least unmagistrate them: but it is a far
different thing where Religion is become the right and privilege of the
Nation; and the Magistrate formally engaged to maintain and defend the same;
Then persecuting Religion is a formal breach of his Faith and trust to the
people, and a robbing them of the best and choicest privileges that they have,
upon which all their other privileges have a dependency. For there are some
privileges that a people can dispense with the want of: but this is such a
privilege, that the want thereof can not be dispensed with. For if they should
dispense with the want of Religion, then they should dispense with the want of
God also; for by their forsakeing of Religion they forsake God also. I know
some will object, and say, that the Magistrates may change their own Religion
and yet not take from the people theirs, and so not be guilty of the breach of
Faith and trust to the people. To which I answer, that the Magistrates
changeing from the Religion established forfeits, ipso facto, his right of
Magistracy: and when the Religion is condescended upon by the people, and the
Magistrate formally engaged to maintain and defend the same; his very changeing
therefrom is a breach of his Faith and trust to the people, and thereby he
becomes a Traitor to God and his native Country. But it is like some may
allege, that a Magistrate may give a tolleration of Religion, and thereby
tollerat a false Religion. To which I answer, that if the Constitution of the
Government does allow of the same, and it be done by the consent of the people,
or their representatives, the Magistrate is the more excusable: but if it be
done contrary to the expres Laws of the Land, and without the consent of the
people or their representatives, the Magistrate in this case is no less then a
thief and a robber; and as there is a curse due to such as do remove the
Landmarkes, and that as to the civil and common Interest of men amongst
themselves, Deutr. 19. ver. 14. and 27. ver. 17. Proverb. 22. ver. 28.
certainly there must be a great curse due to such as do remove the Landmarkes
of the Land, upon which the good, peace and safety, yea and glory of the Land
does depend. And as David understood it well to be his duty to pray that God
would confound all such as did worship graven Images, Psalm. 97. ver. 7.
Certainly it is the duty of the people of God to pray that God would confound
such as do, not only worship graven Images, but establish the same in a Land,
where the Glory of God has shined brightly in his pure Ordinances; and that
contrary to the Laws of the Land and consent of the people. And as there is a
command by the Lord to stone to death such as should but secretly entice and
lead the people away to Idolatry, Deutr. 13. ver. 6. and 17, ver. 2, 3, 4, 5,
and 6. certainly this command must in a great measure reach him, who does the
same in such a public manner. But I know some will yet allege that NERO was
not only a persecutor of Religion, but he was otherwise a persecutor and
destroyer of his people, and was really a Tyrant, and an oppressor. That he
was once this, I do acknowledge; but that he was such at that time, I will not
so easily grant, in respect of the good intertainement Paul had from him. And
those very Historians, who do say that NERO became a Tyrant, do also say that
it was not in the first five years of his Reign, but that for the first five
years he Reigned as a Sanct, so that the people said, that a God was come down
from Heaven to govern them. But grant he had bin a Tyrant, it was not Paul's
interest to call it in question being only a stranger, and what he did might
have bin done by him, though he had fallen unto the hands of thieves and
murderers by the way. For if a man should fall unto the hands of thieves and
murderers by the way, and if they were going to take away his life, if he knew
any of them to have a greater power then another, and to have some title of
honor above others, it were no sin in him to make application to him in the
same manner, by giveing those titles of honor that were any ways common and
ordinar to him, that thereby his generosity might be engaged to show him mercy.
There are some, I know, will still object, that the Kings of Israel, though
most wicked, and in effect Tyrants and oppressors, as Saul, Zedekiah and
others, yet they did still remain Just and lawful Magistrates until the day
of their death, and the people gave obedience to them as such; as also when the
people of Israel were subdued by Nebuchadnezar, though in effect a wicked
Tyrant and oppressor, yet the people are then enjoined to give obedience to
him, as their Magistrate in all things lawful. From what has bin said already
it does clearly appear, that when once a Magistrate does degenerate unto a
Tyrant, he can no more be accounted a Just and lawful Magistrate, then that
man, who committes all manner of Villainy, and knavery can be said to be an
honest man from what he has bin formerly. And as for Saul, we find that no
sooner he had committed Rebellion against God, but as soon the Prophet Samuel
is sent to tell him, that the Kingdom was rent out of his hand; and
accordingly David was anointed King in his place: and in respect that the
people did not perform their part in a formal divesting him of the power and
establishing of David, they were made sufficiently to smarte for it: for he
killed fourscore of the Priests of the Lord: and when foresaken of the Lord,
went to the Devil for council, and when invaded by the enemy he and they both
were destroyed, and the curse of God did lie heavily upon the Kingdom for his
sake, so that much blood was shed, till that David was put in full possession
of that, which was his Just and proper right. And although David's heart did
smite him, so that he could not kill him in the cave, from these reasons
following. First, That God honored him, making him King; and that he was not
as yet formally divested of the power. Secondly, That he was his Father in Law.
Thirdly, He was a brave man, as appears from that commendation David gives
him after his death, that his bovv did never return empty; Fourthly, The
braveness of David's spirit; yet David vvanted not a purpose to have done it in
Battle, as we may find from these words, some one day or other he shall fall
in Battle. And it could be for no other end, that David did keep so many in
arms with him; for if he had looked upon him to have bin the Just and
lavvfull Magistrate, it had bin usurpation and Rebellion in him to have
accepted of that right, which the Prophet had given him. And as for Zedekiah,
he did not so formally break to the people, as he and they went along
together in Apostasy and defection from God, as is clear from that Scripture,
Jerem. 38. ver. 5, 24, 25. when the Princes besought that Jeremiah's life
might be taken. Then Zedekiah the King said, behold, he is in your hand; for
the King is not he, that can do any thing against you; and yet we find, that
the Lord declared him to have no right to Reign, as in that Scripture, Ezekiel.
21. ver. 25, 26, 27. And thou profane, wicked Prince of Israel, whose day is
come, when iniquity shall have an end, 26. Thus says the Lord God, remove the
Diadem, and take off the Crown, this shall not be the same, exalt him that is
low, and abase him that is high. 2. I will overturn, overturn, overturn, and it
shall be no more, till he come whose right it is, and I will give it him. As
also when they were delivered into the hands of Nebuchadnezar, they were
commanded to renounce all alleadgeance in Zedekiah, and to take protection from
Nebuchadnezar, as prisoners of War, and so submit to him in all things
lavvfull, as their Magistrate, for a time; until God should deliver them out
of his hand.

Having now in some measure held forth and discovered what it is that makes
a Just and lavvfull Magistrate, and continues him such and thereby discovered,
what it is that makes a Tyrant; It remains now to be spoken to, whether a
people are obliedged to swear and keep alleadgeance, and do the same duty to
a Tyrant; that they are to a Just and lavvfull Magistrate.

That it is the duty of a people to swear, and keep alleadgeance to a Just
and lavvfull Magistrate, is not in the least to be questioned; for thereby a
Magistrate is in a capacity to do the duty of a Just and lavvfull Magistrate to
his people, and without it he is not: but to swear Alleadgeance to a Tyrant,
is most wicked and sinful. For Just and lavvfull Magistrates are ordinances
of God, for his Glory and the good of the people, as the true and real
Ministers of God, for the peoples good, but Tyrants and oppressors are only
raised up by the Lord, for Judgments and plagues to a people, for their
disobedience to God. For God never gave a right to Tyrants and oppressors to
govern his people, but ordained them for a peoples punishment, according to
that power, that the Devil has; for he has a power, both to tempt to sin,
and also the punish for sin; Although God has him always restrained as to
both; such is the power of Tyrants and oppressors; for as they are plagues
and Judgments against these parts of the world, where they have power, by
robbing them of their rights and privileges, so are they also by tempting
people to sin against God; to which assertion the Christian world this day
may give their vvitness; as in Britain, Ireland, France, and other parts of
the world, not only have they bin robbed of their rights and privileges, but
all manner of vvays used to make them sin against God. And as it is a great and
Rebellious sin against God to enter in any Compact, or Covenant with the
Devil, to mantain and keep up him in his wicked power, so it is the very
same, to enter in any Compact or Covenant with Tyrants, and oppressors to
mantain and keep them up, in their wicked power; for thereby Satan's Kingdom
is mantained and kept up; which I prove thus, such as do swear to mantain
and keep up those, who do mantain and keep up Satan's Kingdom; do swear to
mantain and keep up Satan's Kingdom; but such as do swear to mantain and keep
up Tyrants and oppressors, do swear to mantain and keep up those, who do
mantain and keep up Satan's Kingdom, Ergo, they do swear to mantain and keep
up Satan's Kingdom; for as Hell and Devils are immediately opposite, and
contradictory to Heaven and those holy Spirits, which are there; so Tyranny
and oppression; Tyrants, and oppressors are the same opposite and
contradictory to the true ordinance and Ministers of God here on earth, and it
does most natively follovv, that whatever wickedness they do commit, or
innocent blood they shed; their concurrance is not vvanting thereto; and that
they are guilty thereof; which I prove thus, such as do mantain and keep up a
Tyrant and an oppressor in a wicked and tyrannical power, are guilty of all
his vvickednesses, Tyranny, and bloodshed, but such as do swear Alleadgeance
to a Tyrant, and an oppressor, are thereby obliedged to mantain and keep him
up in that wicked and tyrannical power, Ergo, they are guilty of all his
wickedness, Tyranny and bloodshed; yea if it were in their power by a good
vvish, or prayer to God, or other endeavor to do good to the interest of God,
thy can not give it, or do it; for so long as they stand under that
Alleadgeance in the doing of any of these things they commit perjury. I know
some do object, and say that wicked Magistrates, yea Tyrants and oppressors
are raised up by the Lord as plagues and Judgments against a people for their
sines, and therefore they are obliedged patiently to bear the same from Gods
hand, without useing any resistance vvhatsomever; and accordingly to pray to
God for those Tyrants, that the Government may be blessed to them. That they
are raised up by the Lord as plagues and Judgments against a people for their
sins, as also that a people are obliedged patiently to endure, and bear the
same toward God, no vvays freteing at the dispensation of God therein,
knovving it be the Just, and real effects and fruits of sin; as also to pray
for them, is not in the least to be questioned: but that a people should
stupidly lie under the same, without useing any endeavor to remove the same,
is a most wicked delusion: for certainly all people vvhatsomever are obliedged
to use all means and endeavors vvhatsomever Religious and moral to the
removeing of plagues and Judgments from a Land, if it were even by prayers,
tears and fastings; yea ^^^e and sword. For as it is sin that brings them on,
so it is sin that keeps them on; and as it is a peoples duty most
circumspectly, and with all diligence to guard against those sins, that may
bring on plagues and Judgments, so it is their duty to put away those sins,
that does continue them, and use all endeavors to remove the same; otherwise
they will be found guilty of as great Rebellion against God by doing that,
which keeps them on, as by doing that which brought them on, though it were no
more but even in the very remisness of their duty. If any person through the
excess of Drunkeness should have so wasted and consumed his body, that nothing
but death in a very short time were expected, and if an Eminent Physician
should advise him to a more temperate and moderate life as the only certain
mean, whereby to recover his health and strength and to continue his days
longer in the world; if he should answer, that as by the excess of Drunkenness
he had brought on that punishment upon himself, and being convinced of it is
being the native and proper effects of his sin, so he would endure the same
patiently without useing any mean or endeavor to remove the same, and would
still go on in his Drunkeness praying to God to bless that unto him and make
the same effectual for his health and strength, would he not be accounted by
all understanding and good men a fool and a mad man, and a destroyer of both
soul and body. Now when a people through their madness and folly have enlarged
the power of Kings beyond those due limits, that the Word of God, and reason,
yea and the Laws of the Kingdom have set thereto, or if they by force and
treachery have done the same, so that both God and the people are robbed of
their right, and they become Tyrants and oppressors; if they should not only
be remiss as to all endeavors whatsomever, whereby to extricate and deliver
themselves from those plagues and Judgments, but go on in that very course of
sinning against God, by which they did bring them on, praying to God for the
long Reign and prosperity of those Tyrants and oppressors, and that the
Government might be blessed unto them, could they be accounted any thing else
then fools, and mad men; rebels and enemies to God and his Ordinance, yea
betrayers and destroyers of their own rights, liberties, peace, good and
prosperity in the world; for if there were a Company of Thieves and Murderers,
who by their cunning and force were most dexterous, and active in robbing, and
murdering upon all occasions, and if the people should pray only to convince
them of their sin and reclame them from the same without having the
leastdesire to God, that they might be apprehended, and Justice execute upon
them, that so God might be Glorified, and those plagues and Judgments removed
from a Land; certainly these would be but very lame prayers: but if these
thieves and murderers upon some great design of their own, and for the
advancement of their own interest, should for a time show great mercy and
favor, and if the people then should pray that they might live long and
prosper, and that, that dominireing and tyrannical power of theirs might be
blessed to them, certainly this would be great Rebellion against God, their own
rights and liberties: and there is nothing more certain then, that Tyrants and
oppressors are the greatest Thieves and Murderers in the world; for where
common and ordinary Thieves do rob and murder their tens, or twentyes, they do
rob and murder their thousands, and millions; for whole Kingdoms and Nations
do thus suffer by them, and though it be lawful, and duty to pray, that God
would convince and reclame such, and that with mercy to their Souls, yet this
must never be wanting, that God would bring down those Thrones of iniquity, and
cause Justice overtake those Tyrants and oppressors, that God may be glorified
and the Land delivered from such plagues, and Judgments: and as it is the duty
of every true Christian, so often as he minds the interest of his own Soul, not
to forget the interest of God, but to pray that Gods Kingdom may come, and his
will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven; and that all stopes and letes may be
taken out of the way of his Kingdom and Glory; and in a special manner
Tyrants and oppressors, those stoopes and pillars of that Antichristian and
Satanicall Kingdom in the world may be brought down, and levelled with the
dust; so it is the absolute duty of all Christians, to do it with hearts fully
purposed and determined to serve God in this very matter, and to this very end;
and to pray that God would give them occasion thus to Evidence their love,
zeal, and faithfullness for him; that so they may not be reckoned amongst those
cursed and useless creatures for God in their generation, and such, whose
hearts are not thus determined will be so far from being found to answer the
design and end of the second Article of our Lords Prayer, that they will be
found but mockeres and dissemblers of God. Now that all true Christians may
thus pray and do, is the earnest desire of him, who desires and hopes to be and
continue a true lover of God, his interest, and all such as are the true lovers
thereof in the world.

FINIS.

