AN HISTORICAL VINDICATION OF The Church of England In point of SCHISM, As it
stands separated from the ROMAN, and was reformed 1: Elizabeth.

Deuteronomy 32. 7. Remember the days of old, consider the years of many
generations: ask thy father, and he will show thee; thy elders, and they will
tell thee.

Jeremiah 6. 16. Ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk
therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Speed, at the Rainbow in Fleetstreet, near the
Inner Temple-gate. 1663.

To the READER.
I Know how easily men are drawn to believe, their own observations and
expressions may prove as welcome to others, as they are pleasing to themselves.
And though few books live longer then the Authors who send them to the press,
and fewer avoid an opinion they might have been as well spared as come abroad;
yet neither the hazard their makers run, nor the little gain they reap, can
hinder those have a Genius that way, from suffering others to be as well
Masters and censurers of their thoughts as themselves.

This being then the venture every writer exposes himself unto, the Reader may
not a little marvel how I have been brought to hazard my self on the same Seas
I have seen so many Shipwrackt in. I shall desire him to add this to what is
already in the first chapter, as my Apology.

Reading some times in Baronius, Veneranda Antiquitas, cujus praescrip^o cuncta
been geri in Ecclesia Catholica consueverunt. Baron. Annal. tom. 8. Anno 692,
n. 5.
that all things were well done in the Catholic Church had venerable antiquity
for their warrant, and that the Roman Church did not prescribe any thing as Non
p o arbitrio disser^ntium, verbisque pug^amium homi^um, sacra dogmata Romana
Ecelesia defini^et; sed quae ab Apostolis tradita, a majoribus deducta, a
patribus servata accepisset, haec ipsa, utpote sacrosancta, universae Ecclesiae
se^vand^, atque inviolabili l^ge custodienda, eadem Ecclesta Romana
praescri^eret; Baron. tom. 7. Anno 535. n. 90.
an holy tenet, but such only as delivered by the Apostles, preserved by the
Fathers, were by our ancestors transmitted from them to us; I cannot deny to
have thought (for certainly Truth is more ancient then Error) this being made
good, and that she did commend them to us, in no other degree of necessity then
those former ages had done, but she had much more reason on her side then I had
formerly conceived her to have: but in examining the assertions, it seemed to
me not only otherwise, but that learned Cardinal not to have ever been in
this consonant to himself, Sanctissimos patres in interpre^atione Scripturarum
non semper and in omnibus Catholica Ecclesia sequitur, tom. 1. Anne 34. n. 213.
confessing the Catholic Church not always, and in all things, to follow the
interpretations of the most holy Fathers.

On the other side, it seemed to me somewhat hard to affirm the Papacy had
incroached on the English, and neither instance when, where, nor how.

Hereupon, as I perused our ancient Laws, and Histories, I began to observe all
changes in matters Ecclesiastical reported by them; in which I had sometimes
speech with that learned Gentleman I mention in the first chapter, whom I ever
found a person of great candor, integrity, and a true Englishman. I noted
likewise how the Reformation of Religion was begun with us, how cautiously our
ancestors proceeded, not to invade the Rights of any, but to conserve their
own. Many years after, I know not by what fate, there was put into my hands (as
a piece not capable of answer, in relation as well to the fact as reason it
carried) without at all my seeking after it, or hearing of it, a treatise of
the Schism of England, carrying the name of one Philip Scot, but, as told me,
composed by a person of greater eminency, dedicated to both the Universities,
and printed permissu superiorum; truly, in my judgment, neither illiteratly nor
immodestly writ: but in reading of it, I found sundry particulars, some perhaps
only intimated, others plainly set down, I could no way assent unto; as that
Clement the vij. did exercise no other auctority in the Church then Gregory the
great had done, That the Religion brought hither by Augustine varyed not from
that was before the Reformation, That the English made the separation from the
Church of Rome, That in doing so we departed from the Church Catholic.

I was not ignorant it might be found in the writings of some Protestants, as
if we departed from Rome; which I conceive is to be understood in respect of
the Tenets we separate from holding Articles of faith, not of the manner how it
was made.

Having gone through the book, I began to look over my former notes, and
putting them for my own satisfaction in order, found them swell farther then I
expected; Vrceum institui, exit amphora: and when they were placed together, I
showed them to some very good friends, to whose earnest persuasions (being such
as might dispose of me and mine,) I have in the end been forced to yield,
making thee partaker of that I never intended should have past farther then
their eyes.

Yet in obeying them I shall desire to be rightly understood; That as I do not
in this take upon me the disputing the truth of any controversiall tenet, in
difference between us and the Church of Rome, so I meddle not with any thing
after Pius quintus came to the Papacy; who first by private practices, and then
open excommunication of her Majesty, declared himself an enemy, and in open
hostility with this state, which therefore might have greater reason to prevent
his endeavors, by some more sharp laws against such as were here of his
inclination, then had been seen formerly: with which I meddle not.

Thus the Reader has the truth, both how I came to compose, and how to print
this. If he find any thing in it like him, he must thank the importunity of
others; if to misdoubt, I give him in the margin what has lead me to that I
affirm; if to dislike, his loss will not be great either in time or cost: and
perhaps it may incite him to do better in the same argument, and show me my
errors, which (proceeding from a mind has not other intent then the discovery
of truth) no man shall be gladder to see, and readier to acknowledge then

From my House in East-Peckham the 22. May MDCLVII. Roger Twysden.

A TABLE Of the CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. AN Historical Vindication of the Church of England in point of
Schism: And how it came to be entered upon. fol. 1 Chap. II. Of the Britans.
fol. 7 Chap. III. Of the increase of the Papal power in England under the
Saxons and Normans, and what oppositions it met with. fol. 9 Chap. IV. Of the
Payments to the Papacy from England. fol. 74 Chap. V. How far the Regal power
did extend it self in matters Ecclesiastical. fol. 93 Chap. VI. How the Kings
of England proceeded in their separation from Rome. fol. 118 Chap. VII. How the
reformation was made under Queen Elizabeth. fol. 126 Chap. VIII. How Queen
Elizabeth settled in this Kingdom the proceeding against Heretics. fol. 135
Chap. IX. Of the farther proceeding of Queen Elizabeth in the Reformation. fol.
174
AN Historical Vindication OF THE Church of England in point of SCHISM.
CHAP. I.
1. IT is now more than twenty years since defending the Church of England as
it was settled 1 Eliz. for the most perfect and conformable to Antiquity of any
in Europe, a Gentleman, whose conversation for his Learning, I very much
affected, tole me, He was never satisfied of our agreeing with the Primitive
Church in two particulars; the one in denying all manner of Superiority to the
Bishop of Rome, to live in whose Communion the East and Western Christian did
ever highly esteem. The other, in condemning Monastique living, so far, as not
only to reform them, if any thing were amiss, but take down the very houses
themselves. To the first of these I said, We did not deny such a Primacy in the
Pope as the Ancients did acknowledge, but that he by that might exercise those
acts he of some years before Hen. the 8th had done, and had got by encroaching
on the English Church and State merely by their tolerance, which when the
Kingdom took to redress and restrain him in, he would needs interpret a
departing from the Church; yet if any made the departure, it must be the Pope,
the Kingdom standing only on those Rights it had ever used for its own
preservation, which putting in practice, it was interdicted the King,
excommunicated by him, etc. To which he replied in effect that of Henry the
eighth in his book against Luther, That it was very incredible the Pope could
do those acts he had sometimes exercised here by encroachment; for how could
he gain that power and none take notice of it? That this argument could have no
force if not made good by History, and those of our own Nation, how he had
increased his Authority here. Which, truly, I did not well see how to deny,
farther than that we might by one particular conclude of an other; As if the
Church or State had a right of denying any Clark going without License beyond
Seas, it must follow, it might bar them from going, or Appealing to Rome: If
none might be acknowledged for Pope without the Kings approbation, it could not
be denied but the necessity of being in union with the true Pope (at least in
time of Schism) did wholly depend on the King. And so of some other.

2. As for the other point of Monasteries, I told him, I would not take upon me
to defend all that had been done in demolishing of them; I knew they had
nourished men of Piety and good Learning, to whom the present Age was not a
little beholding; for, what do we know of any thing past but by their labors?
That diverse well affected to the Reformation, and yet persons of integrity, are
of opinion their standing might have continued to the advancement of
Literature, the increase of Piety, and Relief of the Poor. That the King when
he took them down was the greatest looser by it himself. Whose opinions I would
not contradict, yet it could not be denied, they were so far streyed from their
first institution, as they retained little other than the name of what they
first were.

3. Upon this I began to cast with my self how I could Historically make good
that I had thus asserted, which in general I held most true, yet had not at
hand punctually every circumstance, Law, and History that did conduce unto it;
in reading therefore I began to note apart what might serve for proof any way
concerning it: But that Gentleman with whom I had this speech being not long
after taken away, I made no great progress in it, till some years after, I was
constreined to abide in London (sequestered, not only from public, but even
the private business of my Estate) I had often no other way of spending my
time but the company a book did afford; insomuch as I again began to turn over
our ancient Laws and Histories, both printed and written, whereof I had the
perusal of diverse of good worth, whence I collected many notes, and began
farther to observe the question between us and the Church of Rome in that
point, not to be whether our Ancestors did acknowledge the Pope successor of
St. Peter, but what that acknowledgment did extend to: Not whether he were
Vicar of Christ, had a power from him to teach the Word of God, administer the
Sacraments, direct people in the spiritual ways of heaven (for so had every
Bishop, amongst which he was ever held by them the first, Pater maximus in
ecclesia, as one to whom Emperors and Christians had not only allowed a
primacy, but had left behind them why they did it, Sedis Apostolicae primatum
sancti Petri meritum, qui princeps est Episcopalis coronae Romanae dignitas
civitatis sacrae etia^ Synodi firmarit auctoritas, says Valentinian Novel 24.
i^ fi^. cod. Theod.
Valentinian 445. On which grounds, if he will accept it, I know no reason to
deny his being prime) but whether they conceived his commission from Christ did
extend so far as to give him an absolute authority over the Church and Clergy
in England, to redress, reform, correct, amend all things in it, not by advice,
but as having power over it, with or against their own liking, and farther to
remove, translate, silence, suspend all Bishops, and others of the
Spirituality. In short, to exercise all Ecclesiastique authority within this
Church above any whatsoever, so as all in Holy Orders (one of the three Estates
of the Kingdom) solely and supreamly depended on him, and he on none but
Christ; and whether our Forefathers did ever admit him with this liberty of
disposing in the English Church.

4. To wade through which question there was an eye to be cast on all the times
since Christ was heard of in England, and therefore to be considered how
Christianity stood upon the conversion of the Britans, the Saxons, and since
the irruption of the Normans, under the first of these we have but little,
under the second somewhat, yet not much, under the third the Papacy swelled to
that height, some parts have been constrained to cast it off, and England
without his assent in that point so to reform it self, as to declare Stat. 25.
Hen. 8. cap. 14.
no manner of speaking, doing, communication, or holding against the Bishop of
Rome, or his pretensed power or authority, made or given by humane Laws, shall
be deemed to be Heresy. By which it seems those Episcopal Functions he did
exercise common with other Bishops (as Baptizing, conferring Holy Orders, etc.)
it did not deny to be good and valid of his administration.

5. But what those particulars were humane Laws had conferred upon the Papacy,
and by what constitutions or Canons those preheminences were given him, was the
thing in question, and not so easy to be found, because indeed gained by
little and little, I cannot but hold Truth more ancient than Error, every
thing to be firmest upon its own bottom, and all novelties in the Church to be
best confuted by showing how far they cause it to deviate from the first
original, I no way doubt but the Religion exercised by the Britans before
Augustine came, to have been very pure and holy: nor that planted after from S.
Gregory, though perhaps with more ceremonies and commands, juris positivi which
this Church embraced rejected or varyed from, as occasion served to be other,
but in the foundation most sound, most orthodox; that holy man never intending
such a superiority over this Church as after was claimed. The Bishops of
England in their condemnation of Wicliffs opinions, do not at all touch upon
those Apud Knighton. col. 2648, and in fasciculo zizaniorum Mss fol. 64. a col.
1. in biblio theca Archiepiscopo Armachani.
concerned the Popes supremacy, and the Council. Constant. sess. 8. Art, 41.
Council of Constance that did censure his affirming. Non est de necessitate
salutis credere Romanam Ecclesiam esse supremam inter alias Ecclesias, does it
with great limitations and as but an error: Error est si per Romanam Ecclesiam
intelligat universalem Ecclesiam, aut concilium generale, aut pro quanto
negaret primatum summi Pontificiis super alias Ecclesias particulares: I
conceive therefore the Basis of the Popes or Church of Romes authority in
England, to be no other then what being gained by custom, was admitted with
such regulations as the kingdom thought might stand with it is own convenience,
and therefore subject to those Vide concordata inter Hen. 2. and Alexandrum 3.
1172. Edwardum 3. and Gregor. 11. 1373. Henricum 5. and Martinum. 5. 1418.
stipulations, contracts with the Papacy and pragmatiques it at any time has
made or thought good to set up, in opposition of extravagancies arising thence,
in the reformation therefore of the Church of England two things seem to be
especially searched into, and a third arising from them fit to be examined.

1. Whether the Kingdom of England did ever conceive any necessity jure divino
of being under the Pope united to the Church and sea of Rome, which draws on
the consideration how his authority has been exercised in England under the
Britons, Saxons and Normans, what treasure was carried annually hence to Rome,
how it had been gained, and how stopped.

2. Whether the Prince with the advise of his Clergy was not ever understood
to be endued with authority sufficient, to cause the Church within his
Dominions be by them reformed, without using any act of power not legally
invested in him, which leads me to consider what the Royal authority in sacris
is. 1. In making laws that God may be truly honored. 2 things decently
performed in the Church. 3. Profainesse punished, questions of doubt by their
Clergy to be silenced.

3. The third how our Kings did proceed, especially Queen Elizabeth, (under
whose reformation we then lived) in this act of separation from the sea of
Rome, which carries me to show how the Church of England was reformed by Henry
the 8. Edward the 6. and Queen Elizabeth. Wherein I look upon the proceedings
abroad and at home against Heretics, the obligation to general Counsels, and
some other particulars incident to those times.

I do not in this at all take upon me the disputation, much less the
Theological determination of any controverted Tenet (but leave that as the
proper subject to Divines) this being only an historical narration how some
things came amongst us, how opposed, how removed by our ancestors, who well
understanding this Church not obliged by any foreign constitutions, but as
allowed by it self, and either finding the inconvenience in having them urged
from abroad farther then their first reception hear did warrant. Or that some
of the Clergy enforced opinions as articles of faith, were no way to be
admitted into that rank, did by the same authority they were first brought in
(leaving the body or essence (as I may say) of Christian religion untouched,)
make such a declaration in those particulars, as conserved the Royal dignity
in it is ancient splendor, without at all invading the true legal rights of
the state Ecclesiastical, yet might keep the kingdom in peace, the people
without destruction, and the Church in Unity.

CHAP. II.
Of the Britans.
1. I Shall not hear inquire who first planted Christian Religion amongst the
Britans, whether Baron. to* 1. A. 35. n, 5.
Joseph of Arimathea, Niceph. Calist. lib. 2. cap, 40.
Simon Zelotes, Metaphrastes Junii de eo vide Baron, to. 1. Ao. 60. n. 4. Bed.
l. 1. c. 4.
S. Peter or Elutherius, neither of which wants an author, yet I must confess
it has ever seemed to me by their alleging the Beda lib. 3. cap. 25. confer.
Eusebius. hist. lib. 5. cap. kd'.
Asian forms in celebrating Easter, their differing from the rites of Rome In
multis nostr^ consuetudini, -- contraria geritis apud Bed. lib. 2. cap. 2.
August, Britonibus:
in several particulars, of which those of most note were, that of Easter, and
baptizing after another manner, then the Romans used, their often journeying to
Palestina, that they received the first principles of Religion from Asia. And
if afterward Caelestinus the Pope did send (according to Prosper. in Chronico
Ann. 432.
Prosper) Germanus vice sua to reclaim them from Pelagianisme, certainly the
inhabitants did not look on it, as an action of one had authority, though he
might have a fatherly care of them as of the same profession with him, as a
Beda lib. 1. cap. 17.
Synod in France likewise had, to whom in their distress they address
themselves, to which Beda attributes the help they received by Germanius and
Lupus.

2. After this as the Britans are not read to have yielded any subjection to
the Papacy, so neither is Rome noted to have taken notice of them, Vide cap. 2.
n. 2.
for Gregory the great about 590. being told certain children were de Britannia
insula did not know whether the Country were Christian or Pagan, Ioh. Diac. l.
1. cap. 21. vita Gregor. Beda lib, 2, cap, 1.
and when Augustine came hither Council. Spelm. p. 108.
and demanded their obedience to the Church of Rome; the Abbot of Bancor
returned him answer: That they were obedient to the Church of God, to the Pope
of Rome, and to every godly Christian, to love every one in his degree in
charity, to help them in word and deed to be the children of God, and other*
obedience then this they did not know due to him, whom he named to be Pope nor
to be father of fathers.

3. The Abbots name that gave this reply to Augustine seems to have been
Dinooth and is in effect no other then what Galfrid Monumeten ubi agit de
Augustino prope finem.
Geffry Monmouth has remembered of him, that being miro modo liber alibus
artibus eruditus Augustino p^tenti ab episcopis Britonum subjectionem diversis
monstravit argument ationibus ipsos ei nullam debere subjectionem, to which I
may add by the testimony of Lib. 2. cap. 2
Beda their not only denying his propositions, sed neque illum pro
Archiepiscopo habiturum respondebant. And it appears Giral I^in. Camb. lib. 2.
cap. 1.
by Gyraldus Cambrensis, this distance between the two Churches continued long
even till Henry the first, induced their submission by force, before which
Episcopi Walliae a Menevensi Antistite sunt consecrati, and ipse similiter ab
aliis tanquam suffraganeis est consecratus, nulla penitus alii Ecclesiae facta
professione vel subjectione: the generality of which words must be construed to
have reference as well to Rome as Canterbury; for, a little after, he shows
that though Augustine called them to council, as a legate of the Apostolic
sea, yet returned, they did proclaim they would not acknowledge him an
Archbishop, but did contemn both himself and what he had established.

4. Neither were the Scots in this difference any whit behind the Britans, as
we may perceive by the letter of Laurentius Iustus, and Mellitus, to the
Bishops and Abbots through Scotland; in which they remember the strange
perverseness of one Dagamus a Scottish Bishop, who upon occasion coming to
them did not only abstain eating with them, but would not take his meat in the
same house they abode, yet they salute them with the honorable titles of their
dearest lords and brethren. A certain sign of a wide distance between the
opinions of Rome then, and now, when men are taught not so much as Baronius
Paraenesis ad Rempub, Venetam p, 52. atque his tandem sinisesto, sed doleo
vehementer quod absque valete. Johannes enim Apostolus id vetat and ^um eo
omnis simul Ecclesia quod indignos salu^atio^e just judice^ qui non
communicantes Romanae Ecclesiae omnis penitus sunt salutis expertes (2. Johan.)
bid them farewell do not submitunto it, sure our first Bishops know no such
rule, who placed in their Calendar for Saints and holy men, as well Hilda,
Aydon, and Colman, the opposers of Rome, as Wilfred, Agilbertus, and others who
stood for it.

CHAP. III.
Of the increase of the Papal power in England under the Saxons and Normans,
and what oppositions it met with.
AFter the planting of Christian religion amongst the Saxons, the Archbishop of
Canterbury became a person so eminent, all England was reputed his Eadmer. p.
12, 29. p. 137, 1. G^rvas. Dorobern, col, 1661, 54.
Diocese, in the college of Bishops Lyndwood de poenis. cap. Tanquam.
London his Dean, whose office it was to Gervas. Dorobern. col. 1566, 10.
summon Councels, Winchester his Chancellor, Sic Lynd. ubi supra, at Ger.
Dorobern. col. 1382, 61. col. 1429, 23
Salisbury or (as some) Winchester his Prec^tor, or that begun the service by
singing, Sic Lyndwood, at Ger. Dorobern. col. 1382, 61. col. 1429, 23. Rof. at
1565. 1. Wigor.
Worcester or rather Rochester his Chaplain, and the other the carrier of his
Cross: Malms. fol. 121. a and Diceto col. 437, 64.
expected no less obedience from York, then himself yielded to Rome Rodulph.
Arch. Epist. inter script. x. Angliae, etc. col. 1736, 17.
, voluntate and beneficio, it being the opinion of the Church of England, it
was but equal Malms. fol. 121; a, 8.
ut ab eo loco mutuentur vivendi disciplinam, a cujus fomite rapuerunt credendi
slammam. The dependence therefore of the Clergy in England being thus wholly
upon the Archbishop, it will not be amiss to take a little view both of what
esteem he was in the Church, and how it came to be taken off, and by degrees
transferred to a foreign power.

2. Upon the conversion of the Saxons here by the preaching of Augustine and
his companions, and a quiet peace settled under Theodore, Beda lib. 4. cap. 2.
to whom all the English submitted, Lib. MS. in aula Tri^itatis Cantabrig.
Parochial Churches by his encouragement began to be erected, and the Bishop
of Rome greatly reverenced in this nation, as being the successor of Saint
Peter the first bishop of the world, Patriark of the West, that resided in a
town Hall 20. Hen. 8. f. 179.
held to nourish the best Clerks in Christendom, and the seat of the Empire:
insomuch, as the devout Britan (who seems (as I said) to have received his
first conversion from Asia) Divisus ab orb nostro Britannus, si in religione
processerit, quaerit locum fama sibi tantu^ and scripturarum relatione
cognitum. Epist. Paulae and Eustochii de commigrat. Bethlchem, inter opera
Hieronymi Script. circa Ann. 386.
did go to Judea as a place of greatest sanctity, so lib. 4. ^. 23. Beda.
amongst the Saxons Romam adire magnae virtutis aestimabatur. But as this was
of their part, no other then as to a great Doctor or Prelate, by whose
solicitude they understood the way to heaven, and to a place in which religion
and piety did most flourish; so the instructions thence were not as coming from
one had dominion over their faith, the one side not at all giving, nor the
other assuming other then that respect is fit to be rendered from a puisne or
less skillful to more ancient and learned Teachers. As of late times when
certain divines at Frankford 1554. differed about the Common Prayer used in
England, Knox and Whittingham appealed to Calvin for his opinion; and receiving
his 200. Epistle, Troubles at Frankford page xxxvi. Edit. 1575.
it so wrought in the hearts of many, that they were not so stout to maintain
all the parts of the Book, as they were then against it. And Doctor Cox and
some other, who stood for the use of the said Book, wrote unto him, ibid. page
^1.
excusing themselves that they put order in their Church without his counsel
asked. Which honor they showed him, not as esteeming him ibid. page ^xlvii.
to have any auctority of Office over them; but in respect of his learning and
merits.

3. As these therefore carried much honor, and yielded great obedience to
Calvin, and the Church of Geneva by them, ibid. p. ^lix.
then held the purest reformed Church in Christendom: so it cannot be denied
but our Ancestors the Saxons attributed no less to the Pope and Church of
Rome, who yet never invaded the rights of this, as contrary to the Council.
general. edit. Romae 1608, ^o. 1. page 498. A.
council of Ephesus, and the Canons of the Church of Beda l. 4. cap. 5.
England; but left the Government of it to the English Prelates, yet giving his
best advice and assistance for increasing devotion, and maintenance of the Laws
Ecclesiastical amongst them, in which each side placed the superiority. From
whence it proceeded that however the Pope was sought to from hence, he rarely
sent hither any Legate. Council. Spelm. Ann. 787. p. 293.
In the Council of Calcuith held about 180. years after Augustine, it is
observed, a tempore Sancti Augustini Pontificis sacerdos Romanus nullus in
Britanniam m^ssus est, nisi nos. And page 58, 4^.
Eadmerus, that it was inauditum in Britannia, quemlibes hominum super se vices
Apostolicas gerere, nisi solum Archiepiscopum Cantuariae.

4. But after the Pope instead of being Cause. 2. q. 1. cap. 7, 15. q. 2. cap.
2. 3. 4. etc.
subject, began to be esteemed above the Ecclesiastic Canons, and to pretend a
power of altering, and dispensing with them, and what past by his advise and
counsel only, was said to be by his authority, he did question diverse
particulars had been formerly undoubtedly practic't in this Kingdom, he seeing
them, and not showing any dislike at it; as Ingulph. fol. 500. a. 43.
The receiving Investitures of Churches from Princes, vide literas Paschal. 2.
Hen. 1. apud. Eadme^um, page 113. page 115.
The calling Synods, The determining causes Ecclesiastical without Appeals to
Rome, The transferring Bishops, etc. but the removing these from England unto a
foreign judicature, being as well in diminution of the rights of the Crown, as
of this Church, past not with out opposition.

5. For Anselm an Italian, the first great promoter of the Papal authority with
us, pretending he ought not be barred Eadmer. page 38, 35.
of visiting the Vicar of St. Peter causa regiminis Ecclesiae, was told as well
by the Bishops as lay Lords, Eadmer. p. 39, 30.
That it was a thing unheard, and altogether against the use of the realm, for
any of the great men, especially himself to presume any such thing without the
Kings license: who affirmed, Eadmer. page 26, 1.
nequaquam fidem quam sibi debebat simul and Apostolicae sedis obedientiam
contra suam voluntatem posse servare. And the Archbishop persisting in his
journey thither, had not only his Bishopric seized into the Kings hand, but
the Pope being showed how his carriage was resented here, did not afford him
either ibid. page 52, 17.
Consilium or Auxilium, but suffered him to live an exile all that Princes time
-- Nil judicii vel subventionis per Romanum praesulem nacti. Eadmer. page 53,
28.
without any considerable support, or adjudging the cause in his favor. Which
makes it the more strange that (having found by experience what he had heard
before, that it was the King not the Pope could help or hurt him) this visit
being so little to his advantage, at his first presenting himself to Henry the
first, he should oppose Eadmer. page 56, 7.
that Prince in doing him homage, and being invested by him, a right continued
unto that time from his Ancestors, and by which himself had received Eadmer.
p. 18, 4. p. 20, 35.
the Archbishopric from his brother, and this on a suggestion that it was
prohibited in a council held at Rome: in which he went so far as to tell the
King, Ibid. page 70, 9.
quod nec pro redemptione capitis mei consentiam ei de iis quae praesens audivi
in Romano Concilio prohiberi, nisi ab eadem sede interdictorum absolutionis
prodeat, a qua constitutionis ipsorum vinculum prodiit.

6. This is the first, if not the only time that to what was acted at Rome an
obedience was required here, as not to be dispensed with but from thence: for
it is undoubted, this Kingdom never held it self tied by any thing past there,
till received here; as Eadmer. page 92, 40. vide Council. Spelm. page 166, 9.
Eadmerus rightly observes, things done there not ratified here to be of no
value. And when Hen. Knighton 1296. col. 2491. vide Mat. West. and Wm. Thorn.
VVinchelsea 1296. would have introduced the contrary, it cost him dear, the
Clergy forced to reject the command, de immunitate Eccles. cap. 3. in S^xto. Et
Tit. ^odem cap. 1. in Clement.
and the Court to quit her pretenses.

7. But the dispute, however the right stood, grew so high, the King told
Anselme Eadmer. p. 70, 5.
the Pope had not to meddle with his rights, and wrote that free letter we find
in Iorvalensis, col. 999, 30. which I have likewise seen in an old hand
recorded amongst diverse other memorialls of the Archbishops of Canterbury:
though I must needs say it seems to me by Apud Eadmer. page 59, 48.
Paschalis his answer, repeating a good part of it, not sent by those he names,
Ibid. page 56. 22.
but former messengers. In this controversy the Popes returns were so
ambiguous, that he writ so differing from their relations were sent, it was
thought fit Anselme should himself go to Rome: with whom K. Henry sent another,
Ibid. p. 73, 13.
who spoke plainly, his master nec pro amissione regni sui passurum se perdere
investituras Ecclesiarum; and (though Rome were willing to comply in other
particulars) told Anselme denying that, page 75, 27. ibid.
he could not assure him of a welcome in England, who thereupon retired to
Lions: where finding Ibid. page 79, 24.
slender comfort from Rome, he sought the King by letters, and after by the
means of Henry's Eadmer. page 80, 27.
sister made his peace; at which yet he was not permitted (such was his spirit)
to enter England, denying to communicate with them had received Bishoprics
from the King, but by the Popes dispensation. The conclusion was, Paschalis
taught by experience, neither the Court of Rome nor the Archbishop gained ought
by this contest, however he would not at first abate Ibid. p. 63 3.
praedecessoris sui sententiae rigorem, yet now admitted great limitations to
what Urban had established. So as the King Eadmer. page 91, 21.
assenting none for the future should be invested per laicam manum (which was
no more, but what he formerly did himself, he would now cause to be performed
by a Bishop) the other agreed no prelates to be barred of promotion, etiamsi
hominia Regi fecerint, Ibid. p. 87, 35.
and hoc donec per omnipotentis Domini gratiam ad hoc omittendum cor regium
molliatur, etc. which yet the King soon after, on the Popes permission of them
to the Dutch, did threaten Ibid. p. 100, 1.
sine dubio se resumpturum suas investituras, quia ille suas tenet in pace; but
for ought I find, it went no farther then their swearing fealty to the King,
which seems to have been long Gervas. Derobern. Anno 118^. col. 1503, 36. R. de
Glanvilla Abbati de Bello, etc. praecipio tibi ex part Domini Regis, per fidem
quam ei debes and per sacramentum quod ei fecisti, etc. Wm. Thorn, Ann. 1220.
col. 1873, 56. Hugo 3. Abbas S^. Augustini gratanter admissus juravit
fidelitatem D. Regi super crucem ipsius* legati.
continued.

8. The Papacy finding by this contest the difficulty of carrying any thing
here by an high hand, thought of more moderate ways for bringing the Clergy of
this nation wholly to depend on Rome; but that could not be without diminishing
the power the Archbishop held over them, and therefore must be won by
degrees: to advance which nothing could more conduce, then to have a person of
wisdom reside here, who might direct this Church according to the Papal
interest. But this was thought fit to be given out before practic't, and likely
to be doubly opposed; for the Archbishop well understood the admitting a Legate
for that end to be Mat. Paris page 440, 17. Anno 1237. Land. 1640.
in suae dignitatis praejudicium: And the King suffered none to be taken for
Pope, but whom he approved, nor any to receive so much as a Letter from Rome,
without acquainting him with it, and held it an undoubted right of the Crown,
Eadmer. page 125, 53. p. 6, 25. p. 113, 1.
ut neminem aliquando legati officio in Anglia fungi permitteret, si non ipse,
aliqua praecipua querela exigente, and quae ab Archiep^scopo Cantuariorum
caeterisque Episcopis regni terminari non posset, hoc fieri a Papa postularet,
etc.

9. Things standing thus in the year 1100. the Archbishop of Vienna coming into
England, Eadmer. page 58, 41.
reported himself to have the Legatine power of all Britain committed unto him;
which was with so much admiration of the Nation (as a thing had not been heard
of before) that (if he had any) at least he thought not fit to make use of his
Commission, but departed a nemine pro Legato susceptus, nec in aliquo Legati
officio functus.

10. Fourteen years after Eadmer. p. 113. p. 116.
Paschalis the 2. by Letters of the 30. of March and 1. of April, expostulates
with the King about several particulars; of which one is, his admitting
neither messenger nor Letter to be received, but by his leave: but see the
words; Sedis Apostolicae nuncii vel literae praeter jussum regiae majestatis
nullam in potestate tua susceptionem aut aditum promerentur, nullus inde
clamor, nullum inde judicium ad sedem Apostolicam destinantur, etc. and the
year following addressed Eadmer. page 118, 28.
Anselme (nephew to the late Archbishop, and after Abbot of St. Edmundsbury)
hither, showing by Letters he had committed unto his administration vices
Apostolicas in Anglia. This made known here (though the bearer were not
permitted to enter the Kingdom) the Clergy and Nobility gathered in council at
London concluded the Archbishop should go to the King in Normandy, make known
unto him the ancient custom of the Realm, and by his advice to Rome, (as
being the person was most interessed in it) ut haec nova annihilaret; from
whence he obtained the Letter, or rather declaration to the King and Clergy the
same author has page 120.
recorded. So by this care the matter was again stopped.

11. The King 1119. Ordericus Vitalis page 857, d. page 858, a.
sent his Bishops to a Council held by Calixtus the 2. at Reims, at their
departing gave them these instructions: Not to complain of each other, because
himself would right each of them at home; That he paid that rent his
predecessors had formerly done, and enjoyed likewise those privileges had been
formerly permitted them; That they should salute the Pope from him, hear his
precepts, but bring no superfluities into his Kingdom: but see the words; Rex
Anglorum praelatis regni sui ad Synodum ire permisit; sed omnino ne alicujus
modi querimoniam alterutrum facerent, prohibuit: Dixit, omni plenariam
rectitudinem conquerenti faciam in terra mea: redditus ab anterioribus
constitutos Romanae Ecclesiae singulis annis errogo, and privilegia nihilominus
ab antiquis temporibus pari modo mihi concessa teneo. Ite, dominum Papam de
part mea salutate, and Apostolica tantum praecepta humiliter audite, sed
superfluas adinventiones regne meo infer nolite, etc. Certainly this prince
did hold, the Pope with the advice of a Council might labor to introduce
superfluous inventions, which the English were not tied to receive, the
disputes of his Bishops be by him ended at home without carrying their
complaints beyond Seas, according to the Assize cap. 8.
of Clarendoun; the King in nothing obliged to Rome, but in the payment of
Peter Pence, as his father had before Baron. to. 11. anno 1079. n. 25. and
Lanfranci Epist. 7.
expressed himself.

12. In November following the Pope and King had a Eadmer. p. 125, 51.
meeting at Gisors in Normandy, where Calixtus confirmed unto him the usages
his father had practic't in England and Normandy, and in especial that of
sending no Legate hither, but on the Princes desire. Yet notwithstanding the
same Eadmer. page 137, 46. page 138, 21.
Pope not fully two years after addressed another Legate to these parts: but he by
the Kings wisdom was so diverted, ut qui Legati officio fungi in tota
Britannia venerat, immunis ab omni officio tali via qua venerat extra Angliam a
Rege missus est, etc.

13. But here by the way the reader may take notice, these words, Eadmer. page
116, 23.
Collata, Ibid. p. 125. 21.
Impetrata, Concessa, Permissa, used by our best authors in speaking of the
Rights of the Crown in points of this nature, do not import as if it had only
a delegatory power from the Pope by some grant of his, as is fancied by those
Answer to Sr. Ed. Cook, de jure Regis Ecclesiast c. 9. ^* 8. p. 200.
would have it so; for we read of no such concessions from him, unless that of
Nicholas the 2. of which in the next: But that they were continually exercised,
the Pope seeing, and either approving, or at least making no such show of his
disliking them, as barred their practice, which by comparing the said authors
is plain. Eadmerus, p. 125, 53, 54. speaks as if these customs were concessa,
fungi permissa from Rome; which page 118, 33, 40. he calls antiqua Angliae
consuetudo, libertas Regni, etc. So page 116, 22. he terms them privilegia
Patri and Fratri suo, sibique a Romana Ecclesia jam olim collata, etc. about
which yet it is manifest, even Eadmer. p. 6, 23. and lib. 2. per totum. p. 113,
1. etc. p. 115.
by him, the Court of Rome was ever in contest with our Kings, about them, who
maintained them as their Royalties against it, and challenged by Henry the 1.
by no other title then Hen. 1. Epist. apud Jorval. col. 999, 46, 49.
dignitates, usus, and consuetudines, quas Pater ejus in regno habuit, etc.
which the Pope Eadmer. p. 59, 50.
calls honores quos antecessorum nostrorum tempore Pater tuus habuer at, and
affirms to be grata in superficie, -- interius requisita and Legati vocibus
exposita, gravia and vehementissima paruerunt: so far have Popes been from
conferring the least unto them. see cap. 3. n. 19.

14. It is true, things done by Princes as of their own vide cap. 5. n. 4.
Right, Popes finding not means to stop, would in former ages as later, by
privilege continue unto them. Nicholaus Papa hoc Domino meo privilegium, quod
ex paterno jure susceperat, praebuit, Baron. 11. Ann. 1059. n. 23.
said the Emperors Advocate. And the same Pope finding our Kings to express
one part of their Office to be regere populum Domini, and Ecclesiam ejus, wrote
to Edward the Confessor, Vobis and posteris vestris regibus Angliae committimus
advocationem ejusdem loci, and omnium totius Angliae Ecclesiarum, and vice
nostra cum Concilio Episcoporum and Abbatum constituatis ubique quae justa
sunt. As a few years since, Maurocen. Hist. Ven. Ann. 1 Cor. p. 629. c. Ann.
1609. p. 687. b. Card. Ossat. Epist. Romae 17. Sept. 1601.
the Republic of Venice not assenting to send their Patriarch to an
examination at Rome, according to a Decree of Clement the 8th, Paulus Quintus
declared that imposterum Venetiarum Antistites Clementis decreto eximerentur:
so that now that State does by an exemption what they did before as Sovereign
Princes. Besides, Kings did many times as graunts ask those things of the Pope,
they well understood themselves to have power of doing without him. Narrantur
haec p. 56. 57. in vita Henrici Chichley ab Arthuro Duck edit. 1617.
Henry the 5th. demanded of Martin the 5. five particulars: to which his
Ambassadors finding him not so ready to assent, told him se in mandatis habere,
ut coram eo profiteantur, Regem in iis singulis jure suo usurum, utpote quae
non necessitatis, sed honoris causa petat, and ut publicam de ea re coram
universo Cardinalium coetu protestationem interponant. And to the same purpose
there are sundry examples yet remaining on record, where Ro^. Parl. 17. Ed. 3.
n. 59. in sine. 25. Ed. 3. Oct. puri^. n. 13. 7. H. 4. n. 114. 3. H. 6. n. 38.
^ee cap. 4. n. 20.
the King on the petition of the Commons for redress of some things (of
Ecclesiastic cognizance) amiss, first chooses to write to the Pope; but on his
delay, or failing to give satisfaction, does either himself by statute redress
the inconvenience, or command the Archbishop to see it done.

15. But here before I proceed any farther, because it cannot be denied, in
former times there was often intercourse between the Church of England and
Rome, and such as were sent from thence hither are by some styled Nuncii, by
others Legati; I think it not amiss to consider what the cause was one side so
much opposed the sending a Legate, and the other so labored to gain it.

16. After the erection of Canterbury into an Archbishopric, the Bishops of
that See were held quasi alteri^s orbis Papae, as Urban the 2. Malms. de l
ontis. l. 1. in Anselm. fol. 127. 15. Gervas. Dorobern. col. 1527, 58.
styled them, did only exercise Eadmer. p. 58, 44.
vices Apostolicas in Anglia, that is used the same power within this Island
the Pope did in other parts; the one Ibid. p. 115, 17.
claiming, because Europe had been converted by disciples sent from Rome; the
other, that he had sent Diceto col. 437, 64.
preachers through England. And is therefore called frequently in our writers
Eadmer. page 27, 34. principi vestro Anselmo.
princeps Episcoporum Angliae, Ibid. p. 107, 33. page 113, 47.
Pontif^x summus, Gervas. Dorobern. col. 1663, 55.
Patriarcha, Eadmer. p. 30, 9.
Primas, and his seat Eadmer. page 113, 47. continuatio Florent. Wigorn. Ann.
1136. page 513.
Cathedra Patriarchatus Anglorum; and this not in civility only, but they were
as well Gervas. Dorobern. col. 1663, 55.
sic habiti as nominati. It is true, the correspondency between it and the
Roman was so great, they were rather held one then two Churches: yet if any
question did arise, the determination was in a council or convocation here; as
Florent. Wigorn. Ann. 1070.
the deposing Stygand, post, n. 18, 10, 60.
the settling the precedence between Canterbury and York, supra n. 11.
the instructions I mentioned of Hen. 1. to his Bishops, vid. Mat. Paris Ann.
1246. p. 699, 10. vide post n. 38. in textu and in margin.
the right of the Kingdom that none should be drawn out of it auctoritate
Apostolica, do enough assure us; if recourse were had to Rome, it was only
Malms, fol. 152, b. 12. see n. 8.
ut majori Concilio decidatur quod terminari non p^tuit, as to the more learned
divines, to the elder Church, of greatest note in Europe, by whom these were
converted, and therefore more reverenced by this, as that was most sollicitous
of their well-doing, and most respected for their wisdom. All which is
manifest by that humble Letter Ibid. de Regibus lib. 1. fol. 16.
Kenulphus and others of Mercia wrote about 797. to Leo the 3. wherein it
plainly appears, he seeks to that See for direction, because the conversion of
the Nation first came from thence, and there resided in it men of sound
learning, whom he does therefore desire as quibus a Deo merito sapientiae
clavis collata est, ut super hac causa (which was the placing an
Archiepiscopall chair at Litchfield,) cum sapientibus vestris quaeratis, and
quicquid vobis videatur nobis postea rescribere dignemini. By which it is clear
his inquisition was as unto persons of profound literature, (had the key of
knowledge conferred on them) not as to those had auctority over this Church.

17. As for acts of Ecclesiastic auctority, what proceeded not from the King,
did from the Archbishop, who was not at all commanded by any, Gervas. Dorobern.
col. 1663, 55.
nullius unquam legati ditioni addictus, but Ibid. col. 1485, 63.
preceded them all. Non est a^te haec tempora Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi talis
illata injuria, ut in Provincia ejusdem archiepiscopi, immo and in Ecclesia, ut
de cruce sileam, Legatus aliquis mitratus incederet. Gervas. Dorobern. Ann.
1186. col. 1485, 63.
None did were a Miter within his Province, or had the Crosier carried, nor
laid any excommunication; and when he did, the Ger. Dorobern. Ann. 1187. col.
1531, 38.
Clergy of the place did teach, both from the King and Archbishop, not to value
it, on this ground, that in Dioecesi Archiepiscopi Apostolicam non tenere
sententiam.

18. As for Counsels, it is certain none from Rome did, till 1125. call any
here: if they did come to any, as to Calcuith, the King upon the Advice of the
Archbishop Council. Spelman. page 293.
statuit diem concilii. So when William the first held one at Winchester 1070.
for deposing Stygand, though there came to it three sent from Alexander the
second, yet it was held Florent. Wigorn. Ann. 1070, page 434.
jubente and present Rege, who was Vita Lanfranci cap. 7. p. 7. col. 1. d.
president of it. The difference touching precedence between the Sees of
Canterbury and York having been before the same Pope, and by him sent back for
a determination at home, it is observable, that in a Council said therefore to
be called ^x praecepto Alexandri Papae annuente Rege, the Popes Legate
subscribed the 16th. after all the English Bishops: as is truly Note, you must
(...) these subscriptions in the London edition 1572. for in that of Hanau
1605. they are for the most, (I know not on what warrant,) omitted.
recorded in the Antiquitat. Britannicae Ecclesiae p. 95, 40. agreeing with a
very ancient Ms. copy I have seen of the said Council; as Diceto and others do
Diceto col. 485, 24.
rank him after the King, Canterbury, and York. If any shall ask whether I have
met no copies in which he was placed otherwise, I must confess I have seen
some books wherein he was above the English Bishops, next after the Queen; but
they were only late Transcripts, not of any Antiquity, as in a in ^ibliotheca
Cotton fol. lxxiiii.
book of Crouland writ since the beginning of Henry the 7.

19. The Pope for many years now past, for being a Spiritual Pastor, and
Patriarch of the West, has been treated with more reverence than any Bishop,
and for being a potent temporal Prince, with more observance then merely a
Ghostly Father. A Mat. Paris hist. minor. Ann. 1107.
grave writer notes, Henry the first having gone through the troubles were on
him with his brother, and likewise Anselm, subjugatis omnibus inimicis securus
erat, nec aliquem ut primitus formidabat praeter Papam, and hoc non propter
spiritualem, sed temporalem potestatem. Which as it is recorded of that Prince,
so no question is true of many others.

20. By which we may see, when Rome did in former times Apostolica authoritate
praecipere, it was to Bishops (whom he styled his brothers,) no other then such
fraternall commands the elder may and does ordinarily lay upon the younger
brother, of whom he is sollicitous; such as St. Paul's were ^ Thessalonians. iii. 12.
to the Thessalonians, Philem. 8.
Philemon, etc. No other then of late Calvin's were to Knox, who being chosen by
certain of Franckford to be Preacher unto them, Knox Hist. Church of Scotland
p. 93* edit. 1644.
their vocation he ob^yed, albeit unwillingly, at the commandment of that
notable servant of God John Calvin, etc. And a little after the Lords of
Scotland sending for him home, Ibid. p. 110
did accompany their letters to him with others to Mr. Calvin, craving of him,
that by his auctority he would command the said John once again to visit them,
etc. And truly whosoever will without partiality seriously consider the whole
contexture of our Laws and Histories, weighing one circumstance with another,
must conclude the Popes commanding to have been volentibus, not nolentibus, (as
Epitaph. Nepotiani ad Heliodorum to. 1.
St. Hierom says those of a Bishop ought to be) for if disliked, his precepts
were Eadmer. page 92, 40. p. 125, 29.
questioned, Gervas. Dorobern. col. 1315, 66. 1316, 8. and 1318, 39. 1359, 41,
59. Wmus Thorn 1802, 26. 1848, 28. and these may serve in lieu of many others
may be alleged.
opposed, Ger. Dorobern. col. 1558, 54.
those he sent not permitted to meddle with that they came for, their
prohibitions that others should not, neglected: The English having ever
esteemed the Church of Canterbury in Spiritualls, that is quae sunt ordinis;
without any intervening superior Ibid. col. 1663, 24. col. 1615, 62.
omnium nostrum matter communis sub sponsi sui Jesus Christi dispositione; in
other things, as points of Government, the ordering that of right and custom
ever to have belonged to the King assisted Si Episcopi tramitem justitiae in
aliquo transgrederentur, non esse Regis, (viz. alone,) sed c^^onum judicium,
sine publico and Ecclesias^ico Concilio illos nulla possessione privari
debuisse; Regem id non rectitudinis zelo, sed commodi sui compendio fecisse.
Malms. fol. 103. a. 18. reports this saying of a Legate. see n. 24.
with his council of Bishops, and others of the Clergy, who was therefore
called Vicarius Christi, etc. as I shall show hereafter more at large. Contra
Crescon. Gramm^att. l. 3. cap. 51. to. 7.
The Church of England holding that of S^. Augustine an undoubted truth, In hoc
Reges, sicut eis divinitus praecipitur, Deo serviunt in quantum Reges sunt, si
in suo reg no bona jubeant, mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad
humanam societatem, verum etiam quae ad divinam religionem: and accordingly our
Kings, so far as any Laws or Records of their actions are extant, from
Ethelbert by the Saxons to the Conquest, and from the Normans to these later
times, have upon occasion exercised a power, showing such titles were not in
vain conferred on them. Neither did any decision, though never so punctually
had in Rome, unless the parties agreed, stint the strife, till the King
concurred with it; as the frequent determinations on the behalf of Canterbury
in point of superiority above York, found in Malms. de Pont. lib. 1. fol. 118,
a. to fol. 120, b.
Malmsbury and others, may teach us, which yet never received a final end,
till Edward the 3. under the great seal set a Antiquit. Britan. Ecclesiae, in
Simone ^slep. p. 269, 15.
period to that long controversy.

21. But after the Pope began to think (or rather to say) himself had only De
auctoritate and usu Pallii cap. 4.
plenitudo Ecclesiasticae potestatis, De Electione and electi potestate c. 4.
that no Council could give Laws to him, but all receive strength from him,
and the Canonists flattery extended to declare him Lyndwood de temp. ordinand.
cap. 2. ad verbum express.
supra jura, and in ^o sufficit pro ratione voluntas; his missives ran in an
higher tone then formerly, and his commands, which were at first according to
Philip. iiii. 3.
the example of St. Paul joined with exhortations, entreaties, and the like, to
carry Wm. Thorn. col. 1801, 53.
Apostolica auctoritate comprimere; and to the Archbishop demurring in the
execution of them, Ibid. 1814, 34.
tuum candelabrum concutiemus, and tantam praesumptionem cum gravibus usuris
exigemus; and, Gervas. Dorobern. Ann. 1193. col. 1602, 64.
si mandatum nostrum neglexeris vel distuleris adimplere, quia justum est ut ei
obedientia subtrahatur qui sedi Apostolicae neglexerit obedire, venerabilibus
fratribus suffraganeis tuis per scripta nostra mandavimus, ut tibi reverentiam
non impendant. Quod si etc. tibi feceris exhiberi, s^ias te tunc ab Episcopali
dignitate suspensum, etc. phrases and manners of writing denoting much more of
auctority then was used by Popes in elder times. By which is manifest, the
point in difference between the Archbishop and the Pope to have been not the
sending a Legate hither, but of one with a power above him, to command the
English Clergy, that is to remove their dependency from him to Rome as a
superior over him.

22. To his gaining which these usages of the Archbishops were great stops,
drawing so near an equality, and so pregnant testimonies of his no-divine right
to meddle here, not easy to be removed, unless some from the Pope were
admitted into the Kingdom, that might at least give an essay to the guiding
the English Church after the papal interest: but that, how earnestly soever
pressed, came to no effect till 1125. Johannes Cr^mensis, a person well
understanding (as Ordericus Vitalis page 862.
appears by his carriage six years before at Reims) the designs of Rome,
Simeon Dunelmensis Ann. 1125, col. 251, 61.
came to the King in Normandy; where after some stay, his journey hither was
permitted; with what qualifications I find not; but coming with Letters to
Canterbury at Easter, performed the Office of the day in a more eminent chair
as an Archbishop, for so I English loco summi Pontificis, according to the
Eadmer. page 107. 33. page 113, 4. Ger. Dorobern. col. 1663, 55.
phrase of those times, and, though a Cardinal priest, used insigniis
Pontisicalibus the habit of a Bishop: which being Inusuata novitas. Dorobern.
Ibid.
an unusual novelty, past not without scandal. But in a council which he
held and presided in at London, the Kingdom took more offense: I shall deliver
it in my authors own words; Ger. Dorobern. Acta ^ont. ibid. col. 1663, 42.
Totam Angliam in non modicam commovit indignationem: Videres enim rem eatenus
regno Anglorum inauditam, Clericum scilicet Presbiterii tantum gradu
perfunctum, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, totiusque regni nobilibus qui
confluxerant, in sublimi solio praesidere; illos autem deorsum sedentes, ad
nutum ejus vultu and auribus animum suspen sum habentes. From whence we may
conclude it a thing before not heard of, for any Legate, though a Cardinal, to
precede Bishops, (the first Council in which they preceded Archbishops I take
to have been the Council of Vienna 1311. where the Archbishop of York is noted
to have been placed Thomas Stubs, Act. Pont. Ebor. col. 1730, 30.
primus and praecipuus post Cardinales, and post Trevirensem Archiepiscopum;)
or be seated in a more eminent place over them; (I have Supran 18.
showed they did not subscribe in English Counsels above them;) that these
mutations were scandalous to the nation.

23. As this is the first Ecclesiastic Synod called and managed by any Legate
from Rome; so before his credentiall Apud Sim. Dunelm. col. 252. 22.
Letters from Honorius the 2. as well to the Lay as Clergy, I have not met with
the Text John xxi. 15, 16, 17.
Pasce oves meas used to prove him the general Pastor of all the World: it is
true, Paschalis the 2. Apud Eadmer. page 115, 9. (...). 1115.
ten years before uses it to prove his auctority over Ecclesiarum praepositi.
Bishops; but neither does Eadmer. page 27, 37.
Anselme 1095. produce it, neither does this Cardinal at Ordericus Vitalis
page 862,. omnes.
Reims 1119. mention it, though either of them did allege as many places of
Scripture as were then common to prove the extent of his power; and Petrus
Blesensis, that lived a little after, Petr. Blesens. Epist. 148.
interprets it as spoken to all Bishops, and to import no other then
Evangelizare: a certain sign, if that exposition were hatched before, it was
not common, which afterward approved by De consideratione ad Eugen. lib. 2.
cap. 8.
St. Bernard, and inserted into Ext. Com. de Majoritat. and obedient, c, 1.
the Canon Law by Boniface the 8. about the year 1300. is now stood upon as the
Basis of papal greatness. But to return to that we were on.

24. The Archbishop sensible of these indignities, proceeds not as his
predecessor, by joint Council of the Bishops, Abbots and Nobility, but has
himself recourse to Rome (who already knew Malms. de Pont. lib. 1. fol. 131. b.
39.
se convertere ad oratorum versutias, dummodo consulat suis profectibus) where
the Pope, (which was Honorius the 2.) committed unto him Gervas. Dorobern. col.
1663, 64.
vices suas in Anglia and Scotia, and Apostolicae sedis Legatum constituit: So
that he who before was Eadmer. page 14, 13. page 30, 9. page 93, 3.
Primas Angliae, Scotiae and Hiberniae, necne adjacentium insularum, that none
else Ibid. 58, 43.
gerebat vices Apostolicas in Britannia, and this of his own right, without any
delegatory power, might now doing the same be said to do it by a power derived
from Rome. An invention highly advantageous to the Papacy: for before the King
and Archbishop, or rather the Archbishop by the Kings will and appointment, had
ever taken cognizance of all matters of Episcopacy; as the erection of
Bishoprics, disposing and translating Bishops, etc. So Paschalis the 2.
expostulates with Hen. the 1. Apud Eadmer. p. 115. 48. and
that praeter auctoritatem nostram Episcoporum translationes praesumitis, etc.
and the page 129, 52. seen. 20.
deposing of them to have been in a Synod See Bed. lib. 4. cap. 2, 6^ Gervas.
Dorobern. col. 1638, 37.
Historians of all times before assure us, even unto Lanfrank, who Mat. Pa^^^
1095, page 20. 46. Ailredus col. 406, 10.
attempted it upon small grounds against Wolstan. As for dividing Bishoprics,
and erecting new where none were, Flor. Wigor. page 55^.
Theodore did five in Mercia cum consensu Regum and principum, (without ever
sending to Rome) as he did others Beda lib. 3. cap. 7. lib. 4. cap. 6, 12. li.
5. cap. 19.
elsewhere. And Henry the 1. long after placed Episcopal Chaires at Ely and
Carlisle, without acquainting the Popes with it. It is true, Anselme an
Italian, either not knowing the rights of the Kingdom, or rather out of a
desire to interest the Pope in every thing, writes to him of Ely, that Eadmer.
page 95, 50.
de vestrae pendet auctoritate prudentiae to add strength to Ecclesiastic
ordinances of this nature; yet it is clear by his very Letter, the King,
Bishops and Nobility had already concluded on it, with whom he had concurred,
asking Paschalis assent after the deed done: which shows rather he did it in
civility, then of necessity, ne a posteris ulla praesumptione violetur, that no
cavilling might arise in the future to the disturbance of an action well
settled, that past by so great advice, as not only the English Church, but the
first Bishop of the world and Patriarch of the West joined in seeing the
needfulnesse of it. And it is here not unworthy the remembering, that Q. Mary,
how much so ever addicted to Rome, yet admitted the Gloce^^^^ and Chester in
Parliamen^ 1 Mar. 2. April 1554. Parl. 2. item Parl. the 3. 12 November 1554.
^. and ^ Ph. and Mar. Iournall des Seigneurs: yet the Act of reconciling this
Kingdom to Rome, and confirming those Bishoprics by the Pope, past not till
the 30. of November after, however they were reputed lawful Bishoprics before.
Bishops of those Sees her Father had erected during the schism (as they called
it) to sit in Parliament, before any confirmation of them by the Pope.

25. Of these and the like, though cases proper for the Cause. 3. quaest. 6.
cap. 7. and de (...), Epist. cap. 2. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Eccles. cap. 8..
Ratio, etc.
Papacy alone, yet being without scruple exercised in the Church of England,
and no control from Rome* it would not be easy to dispossess the Archbishop
of meddling with, by strong hand, especially on an essay made before in the case
of Wilfred, it being affirmed, Apud Malmsb. fol. 152, a. 34.
quod esset contra rationem, homini jam bis a tota Anglorum Ecclesia damnato,
propter quaelibet Apostolica scripta communicare: the way therefore of making
him the Popes Legate was invented, by which those particulars he did before
without interruption of his own right, he (whom it was not easy to bar of
doing them) might be said to act as his agent: which was about 1127.
this time first committed unto him of any Archbishop of Canterbury; though
Baron. tom. 8. Ann. 676. n. 10.
Baronius, not finding how the very same past before, fancies Theodore to have
done them, cui totius Angliae a Romano Pontifice veluti Apostolicae sedis
Legato cura credita erat; who certainly if he were his Legate, was very
immorigerous in the case of Wilfred. But to leave that as a Chimaera not to be
assented to, mentioned by no ancient author, it is true, not long after he
conferred the title of Legatus natus on the Archbishop, n. 40. p. 3^
of which hereafter.

26. To return to the Archbishop, who came home with this Legatine power 1127.
Florent. Wigorn. Annis 1126. 1127. and alii.
crowns the King at Windsor, and in May following holds a Council at
Westminster, cui praesedit ipse, sicut Apostolicae sedis legatus; which is the
first Council any Archbishop is noted to have held as a Papal Legate; and
during his life, which was seven years, England did not see any other.

27. After his death the Sea of Canterbury lay two years vacant, so a fit time
for the Pope to look this way, especially K. Stephen making it part of his
title, that he was Apud Malmsbur. fol. 101. Johannes Ha^ulstad. col. 259, 9.
Richardus Hagulstad. col. 314, 18. vid. col. 313, 32.
confirmed by him in his Kingdom: therefore 1138. Innocentius the second sent
hither Albericus Bishop of Hostia, the second stranger I find exercising the
Legatine auctority in England; yet he was not at first received for one, but
Gervas. Dorobern. col. 1344, ^.
vix tandem pro reverenti^ Domini Papae. He indeed went farther then ever any
had, for he not only called the Clergy Apostolica auctoritate (as our
Historians term it) to a Synod, (I confess he avoyds the word in his letters
of summons, styling it Gervas. Dorobern. col. 1346, 58.
colloquium, perhaps not to enter into dispute with the King, who then took
himself to be the only Eadmer. p. 6, 29. p. 24. 11.
caller of them, and the allower of what they did) but did farther command the
Prior and Convent of Canterbury, etc. Ger. Dor. ibid. lin. 65.
to choose such an Archbishop, cui sacrorum canonum auctoritas in nullo valcat
obviare, cui comprovinciales Episcopi pariter debeant assentire, and cui
Dominus Rex nec possit nec debet assensum suum just denegare: but farther not
at all intromitting himself. And in the Council he held, amongst other
particulars, he ordained, that if any injured an Ecclesiastic person, Cap. 9.
apud Gervas. Dorob. 1348. and Richard. Hagust. 328.
Nisi tertio admonitus satisfecerit, anathemate feriatur, neque quisquam ei
praeter Romanum Pontificem, nisi mortis urgente periculo, modum poenitentiae
finalis injungat. This is the first that by Canon, ought done in England was
referred to Rome, as having a greater power then the English Bishops to
absolve: (of the Laws of Hen. the 1. I shall speak n. 30.
hereafter.) But whether it were not here much regarded, or the excesses used
by King Stephen against certain Bishops, and the prohibiting a Council held
(...) Winchester to send to Rome, as Malms. fol. 103. a. 1. b. 54, 55.
against the dignity of the realm, or that he freed of imprisonment desired to
make so potent a party, as the Clergy then was, more of his side, I cannot say;
but assuredly it was again renewed in a H. Hunt. fol. 225. a ^6. Ann. 1142, 8.
Steph.
Council at London about some four years after.

28. The same Pope 1139. conferred upon Henry, K. Stephens Brother, and the
potent Bishop of Winchester, this Legatine power, which was by him published in
a Council at Winchester, where his faculties were read Malms. fol. 103. a. 31.
bearing date the 1. March; and being as well Ger. Dorobern. col. 1343, 44.
Angliae Dominus by reason of the power he held wi^h Stephen, as Apostolicae
sedis Legatus, he called thither the Archbishop that had then some contest with
the Monks of St. Augustines, (whom the Pope generally favored against him)
referred to his decision from Rome, so that he caused both parties the Wm.
Thorn col. 1853, 32.
second time to appear there before him 1143. as Legate, and by compromise ended
the business. Yet this calling of the Archbishop Gervas. Dorobern. col. 1665,
24. indignatus Theobald*
unto him was not taken well: and the same year 1143. he did by Apostolic
command restore Jeremy, removed by Theobald, (notwithstanding his appeal to
Rome) to be Prior of Canterbury: which restitution the said Prior did not think
fit to stand by, but for avoiding trouble took an 100. marks to pay his debts,
and placed himself in St. Augustines. By these carriages there grew great
distasts between these two great Prelates: the one as Archbishop prohibited
Winchester Johan. Hagulstad, col. 275, 42. interdixit Episcopo, Episcopale and
sacerdotale officium.
all Ecclesiastic functions, however the Popes Legate; and both apply
themselves to the Pope; from whence our Historians do fetch the use of Appeals
to Rome; as indeed there could not well be any cause of them before: for as the
one case is the first ever any Archbishop was called out of his Diocese to make
answer to any Legate as his Superior; so I believe it will be hard to give an
example of ought done by the Archbishop in his own Bishopric till now altered
by a foreign auctority. And here, having mentioned the introducing of Appeals,
the reader will give me leave to digress a little, both to show what is meant
by them, and the manner of prosecution of them; and then Number. 40.
to return, and observe the event of the Archbishops and Legates in the Court of
Rome.

29. It cannot be denied, the word Appeal to have been used in former times
with reference to the Papacy. Malmsb. f. 149, a. 50.
Cum praesul sedem Apostolicam appellasset, says Malmsbury of VVilfred; and a
Council held in Italy concerning him, Bed. lib. 5. cap. 20. and in Iugulpho
MS. se^ addi^ionibus eius, in Biblio^^^^a Cotton*
Apostolicam sedem de sua causa appellans* and of some others. Yet nothing is
more certain then those in whose time this was did not at all hold the Pope to
have any power of righting him, other then by intercession; not as a superior
Court, by sentencing in his favor, to undo what had past Theodore; ( Stubs de
Archiepisc, Ebor. col. 1691. 10.
without whose assent the King could not have deprived him of his seat,) for
when the Popes Malm. fol. 150, a, 43.
Letters were brought hither for his restitution, Egfrid, with the advise of
his Bishops, not only refused, but clapped VVilfred in prison; and after his
death the Ibid. fol. 152. a* 32, 34,
Pope sending others vita graves and aspectu honorabiles, Alfrith though he
received the men with great reverence, yet would by no means admit the
restoration they came about, but affirmed it against reason to do it (he
having been twice condemned) proper quaelibet Apostolica scripta. And as this
was in a time when Christianity most flourished in this Nation, having in
general Beda lib. 4. cap. 2.
fortissimos Christianosque Reges; so of the Kings that did it, of Egfrid Apud
Malmsbu^. f. 10. b, 23, 36^
Beda left, that he was piissimus and Deo dilectissimus: neither can he find
any other thing to blame in Alfrith worthily, and the Bishops that did Stubs de
Archiepisc. Ebor. in Wilfrido col. 1691, 10.
concur in the action were Bed. lib. 4* cap. 2. cap. 9. lib. 5. cap. 20.
holy men, well seen in divine and secular learning; so that it is not
imaginable any thing past them not warranted by the Doctrine and rules of this
Church.

30. For the understanding of which, we are to know the word Appeal is taken
several ways; sometimes Blasius Dasium de proditione appellabat. Live. lib.
26. such were those Appeals in Parliament, the 11. and 21. of Ric. the 2. which
might be otherwise called accusations.
to accuse, sometimes for referring our selves to some one for his judgment;
such was that of VVilfreds appealing to Rome, as to a great spiritual Doctor
and Church whose judgment was very venerable in the World, as of late John
Calvin's and the Church of Geneva was to them of Scotland and Frankford, etc.
another way we take it for removing a cause from an inferior to a superior
Court or Judge, that has power of disannulling whatsoever the former did; and
this is that our Historians affirm not to have been in use till after 1140. It
is certain, long after VVilfred Eadmer. page 39, 21, 30.
the Bishops and Nobility did assure Anselme, that for any of the great ones,
especially him, to have recourse to Rome without the Kings leave, to be
inauditum and usibus ejus omnino contrarium; and therefore required of him an
Oath, quod nunquam amplius sedem Sancti Petri, vel ejus vicarium, pro quavis
quae tibi ingeri queat causa appelles. I know Anselm, an Italian, where the
opinion of the Papal absoluteness had now begun to root, did maintain this
was Petrum abjurare, and that Christum abjurare, and is the first of our
Bishops spoke any thing in that sort; with whose sense the Kingdom did not
concur in it. For it is manifest, in those days and after, Appeals to Rome
were not common. In the year 1115. Apud Hadmer. p. 113, 3.
Paschalis the 2. expostulates with Henry the 1. that Nullus inde clamor,
nullum judicium ad sedem Apostolicam destinatur: and again, Ibid. p. 115. 33.
vos oppressis Apostolicae sedis appellationem subtrahitis. And Anselme himself
speaking of the proceeding of the King in a case by him esteemed only of
Ecclesiastic cognizance, lays down the manner to be, that it should be only
page 85, 41.
ad singulos Episcopos per suas parochias, aut si ipsi Episcopi in hoc
negligentes fuerint, ad Archiepiscopum and primatem; adding nothing of carrying
it to Rome, of which I know no other reason, but that it was not then usual to
remove causes from the Primate thither. Yet after this, either the importunity
of the Pope prevailed with the Henry the 1st.
King, or the passage was inserted after his days into the Laws carry his
name; (as some other in the same chapter may seem to have been) but certain in
them though he give for a rule that of Pope Fabiani Epist. 3. and Sixti 3. tom.
1. Council. and apud Gratian. c. 3. q. 6. cap. 1. Leg. Hen. 1. cap. 5. p. 178.
28.
Fabian or Sixtus 3. ibi semper causa agatur ubi crimen admittitur, yet a
Bishop erring in faith, and on admonition appearing incorrigible, Leg. Hen. 1.
page 179, 9.
ad summos Pontifices (the Archbishops) vel sedem Apostolicam accusetur. This
is the only case wherein I find any English Law approve a foreign judicature.

31. But whether from the countenance of this Law, or the great oppressions
used by the Legate King Stephens Brother, or the frequency of them, it is
certain, 1151. Appeals were held a Hunt. fol. 227. b. 7. and alii.
cruel intrusion on the Churches Liberty; so as in the Assize at Clarendoun
1164. collected by the body of the Realm, Gervas. Dorobern. col. 1387.
the 8. Chapter is solely spent in showing the right of the Kingdom in that
particular: which Epist. 159. page 254.
Johannes Sarisburiensis interprets, quod non appellaretur pro causa aliqua ad
sedem Apostolicam, nisi Regis and Officialium suorum venia impetra^a. Upon
which the Bishop of London moved Alexander the third, Beckets cause might be
determined Gervas. Dorobern. col. 1396.
appellatione remota: at which the Pope seems to be moved, and told him, haec
est gloria mea quam alteri non dabo. And though it seems by a Apud Hoveden,
Ann. 1166. fo. 287. b. 44. apud Dicet. Ann. 1168.
Letter of the same Prelat, the King would have restrained his power only to
such as had first made trial of receiving justice at home, claiming ex antiqua
regni institutione, ob civilem causam nullus clericorum regni sui fines exeat,
etc. and that too, if amiss, would have corrected by the advise of the English
Church: yet while the Archbishop lived, that would not be hearkened to; but
after his death, at the peace which 1172. ensued between him and the Church of
Rome, it was only concluded, the King not to hinder Appeals thither in
Ecclesiastic causes, yet so as a party suspected before his going was to give
security not to endeavor malum suum nec regni. But the Kingdom meeting in
Parliament at Northampton 1176. not fully four years after, would not quit
their interest, but did again renew the Assize of Clarendoun, using in this
particular somewhat a more close expression: Apud Hoved. fol. 314. b. 3.
Iusticiae faciant quaerere per consuetudinem terrae illos qui a regno
recesserunt, and nisi redire voluerint infra terminum nominatum, and stare in
curia Domini Regis, utlagentur, etc. in effect the same as Gervasius
Dorobernensis well understood, who tells us, Gervas. Dorobern. Ann. 1176, col.
1433, 19.
Rex Angliae Henricus convocatis regni primoribus apud Northamptoniam,
renovavit assisam de Clarendonia, eamque praecepit observari; pro cujus
execrandis institutis beatus martyr Thomas Cantuariensis usque in septennium
exulavit, and tandem glorioso martyrio coronatus est.

32. After which the going to Rome remained during this Kings and his Son
Richard's time, only according to their pleasures, the Clergy lying under the
penalty of this Law, if they did attempt farther then the Princes liking: of
which we have a very pregnant example in the case of Geffrey Archbishop of
York, K. Richards Brother, who accused to Coelestinus 3us that he did not only
Epist. Coelestini apud Hoveden. Ann. 1195. fol. 426. b. 26.
refuse Appeals to Rome, but imprisoned those who made them; upon it the Pope
Eadem Epist.
commits the cause to be heard by the Bishop of Lincoln and others, who
thereupon Idem, f. 427. a. 26. lin. 38.
transfer themselves to York, where hearing the Testimonies of those appeared
before them, assigned him a time to make his defense to the Pope. But the
Archbishop being then well with his Brother, pretended he could not present
himself in Rome Hoveden, Ann. 1195, fol. 427. a. 48.
for the Kings prohibition, and the indisposition of the air. Not long after
the King and he fell so at odds, Ibid. f. 428. a. 42.
quod praecepit illum dissaisiri de Archiepiscopatu suo, etc. Coelestinus upon
this takes an opportunity to declare a suspension to be notifyed through all
the Churches of his Diocese, injoyning, what the King had before, the Lay as
well as the Clergy, Hoved. Ann. 1196. fol. 434. a. 23.
ne ipsi Archiepiscopo vel officialibus ejus in tempor alibus respondere
praesumant, donec de ipso Archiepiscopo aliud duxerimus statuendum. The offense
with his Brother still remaining, the Bishop expecting now no help at home,
goes upon this to Rome, makes his peace with the Pope, and returns: but the
King Ibid. fol. 435. b. 52.
committed the ^are even of the Spiritualls of his Archbishopric to others,
without permitting him or his Agents to meddle with ought, till about two years
after he Ibid. fol. 442. b. 19.
reconciled himself to the Crown; after which he gave Innocentius 3us occasion
to write, Hoveden, Ann. 1^01. fol. 465. a. 21
Non excusare te potes ut debes, quod illud privilegium ignoraris, per quod
omnibus injuste gravatis facultas patet ad sedem Apostolicam appellandi, cum
and iu ipse aliquando ad nostram audientiam appellaris; and a little after, Nec
auctoritatem nostram attendis, nec factam tibi gratiam recognoscis, nec
appellationibus defers quae interponuntur ad sedem Apostolicam, etc. And about
the same time Hoveden, Ann. 1195. fol. 430. b. 37.
Robert Abbot of Thorney, deposed by Hubert the Archbishop, was laid in prison
a year and half without any regard had of the Appeal by him made to the Pope:
and this to have been the practice during King Richards time, the continued
quarrels of Popes for not admitting men to appeal unto them does fully assure
as.

33. But Innocentius 3us having prevailed against King John, and the Clergy
great instruments in obtaining Magna Charta from that Prince, either in favor
of them, or for some other reason, there was inserted, Magna Charta apud Mat.
Paris page 258, 53. Land. 1640.
Liceat unicuique de caetero exire de regno nostro and redire salvo and secure
per terram and per aquam, salva fide nostra, nisi in tempore guerrae per
aliquod breve tempus: which clause seems likewise to have been in that of Henry
the 3. to his Fathers Mat. Paris Ann. 1224. page 323, 28.
in nullo dissimilis: after which it is scarce imaginable how every petty cause
was by Appeals removed to Rome, and the Archbshop forced to appear before any
had the least auctority from thence.

The Popes themselves wise men saw the inconvenience, that these carriages must
end either in rendering the Archbishop contemptible, by taking all power out of
his hands, or the Realm resume its ancient right, and prohibit the carrying
ought beyond seas, or admitting any Legate into the Kingdom; thought of the way
of granting several privileges to the Archbishopric, which first began about
the time of Innocentius the 2. whom others followed.

34. Gregory the ninth therefore moved by one of them (which seems to be St.
Edmund) writes thus unto him: Bulla Gregor. ix. in antiquo MS. dat. Interamnae
27. Iunii, 1236.
Vt cum appellationis remedium non ad defensionem malignantium, sed ad
oppressorum subsidium sit inventum, yet the Archbishop attempting sometimes
excessus corrigere subditorum, quidam eorum, ut correctionem effugiant,
appellationes frustratorias interponunt, quibus si cite pro reverentia sedis
Apostolicae humiliter deferatur, illi ex impunitate deteriores effecti pejora
praesumunt, and alii eorum exemplo redduntur ad vitia proniores; unde humiliter
postulastis, etc. -- ut providere super haec solita diligentia deberemus: ut
igitur auctoritati tuae in rectis dispositionibus nihil tali praetextu deesse
contingat, fraternitati tuae praesentium auctoritate concedimus, ut, non
obstante Frivola Appellatio quae dicitur, vide Lindwood cap. 2. verbo frivole,
de Appellationibus. scil. quae vana and inanis -- vel quando nulla causa est
expressa, vel non legitima, dato quod sit vera, vel licet sit legitima, est
tamen manifest falsa. Et vide ibid. verbo Pallietut.
frivolae appellationis objectu, libere valeas in corrigendis subditorum tuorum
excessibus officii tui debitum exercere.

35. At Viterbo 4. Martii, 1235.
And for that his Agents here in their citations of the Archbishop did not use
that respect unto him which was fit, but as Gervasius Dorobernensis observes of
one of them, Col. 1665, 23.
Legati privilegium plusquam deceret extenderet in immensum, suumque
Archiepiscopum and Episcopos Angliae ut sibi occurrerent quolibet evocaret; the
same Pope did therefore declare, that, cum nimis indecens videatur, ut per
literas Apostolicas tacito Sic MS. sed legendum tuae.
tuo nomine dignitatis inter privatas personas stare judicio compellaris, nos
fraternitatis tuae precibus inclinati, auctoritate tibi praesentium indulgemus,
ut per literas a sede Apostolica impetratas quaede dignitate tua non fecerint
mentionem respondere minime teneris; etc. Dat. Viterbii 4. Non. Martii, Pontif.
nono.

36. At Perusium 6 Maii 1235.
And because the Archbishop had on many slight occasions been drawn beyond
seas, to the great impoverishing the Episcopacy, the same Pope two months after
writes, Ea propter, venerabilis in Christo frater, tuis supplicationibus
inclinati, fraternitati tuae auctoritate praesentium indulgemus, ut per literas
Apostolicas extra Angliam invitus non valeas conveniri, nisi de indulgentia
hujusmodi fecerint eaeliterae mentionem, aut per te aliquod factum fuerit per
quod sit indulgentiae huic derogatum. Dat. Perusii 4. Non. Maii, Pontificat.
nono.

Innocentius 4. At Lions the 19 September
ut nullus sine speciali Apostolicae sedis licentia, praeter Legatos ipsius ab
ejus latere destinatos, in personam tuam praesumat excommunicationis sententiam
promulgare. Lugduni 13. Kalend. October. Pontif. 4.

37. It would be tedious to repeat all the bulls found in the said old MS. and
other books since 1130. (for before it seems there was none in this kind) to
conserve some power in the Archbishopric, yet so as it might ever depend on
Rome; and how much the Papacy gained by these, every man sees.

I. The right of the Archbishopric was, none by appeal might remove any
Ecclesiastic cause from his judicatory: the Pope grants, he shall proceed
notwithstanding a frivolous Appeal.

II. The right was, See before n. 17.
he was not at all under any Legate: the grant is, he should not be tied to
answer, if they did not mention his dignity in their citations.

III. The right was, he should not be drawn beyond the seas (of which in the
next:) the grant is, he should not be compelled to go, unless mention were
made of that Bull.

IIII. The question was, Cap. 2. n. 17*
whether the Pope might excommunicate any within the Diocese of Canterbury: the
grant is, None but a Legate de latere should the Archbishop.

Yet certainly Popes did what they well could, retaining to themselves that
vast power they then pretended, to conserve in the Archbishopric some
auctority.

38. But the frequent citing him and others out of the Realm, and the carrying
their causes to Rome, did not at all satisfy the subject; whereupon the body of
the Kingdom, Apud Mat. Paris p. (...).
in their querulous letter devised and sent by them to Innocentius 4tus. 1245,
(or rather to the Council at Lions) claim as an especial privilege, That no
Legate ought to come here, but on the Kings desire, Note, this is omitted in the
copy of this letter in Mat. Paris which is found in other MS. copies of the
same, as in one my learned friend Mr. Wm. Dugdale helped me to the sight of,
the Book it self belonging to Mr. Roper of Lin^olus Inn, in which it is fol.
117, b. and ought to be in all; for in the Gravamina Angliae sent to the same
Pope 1246. one is, quod Anglici extra regnum in causis auctoritate Apostolica
trahuntur. Mat. Paris page 699, 10.
and ne quis extra regnum trahatur in causam: and at the revising of Magna
Charta by Edward the first, the former clause was left out, since when none of
the Clergy might go beyond seas but with the Kings leave, as the Regist. 193,
b. Cook, Instit. 3. page 179.
writs in the Register, and the Parl. at Cambridge 12. Ric. 2. cap. 15. apud
Henricum Knighton col. 2734, 40. 5. Ric. 2. cap. 2.
Acts of Parliament assure us; and what is more, if any were in the Court of
Rome, the King called them Hen. Knighton col. 2601, 44.
home, not permitting any to go or abide there longer then his pleasure. Yet I
do not say these times do not furnish examples of Appeals or recourse thither,
or receiving commands from thence; I know the contrary: but it was only
between those, and in such cases, as the King (holding good correspondency with
the Pope) and State did either tacitly connive at, as in matters of small
moment, or expressly give allowance unto: for if otherwise, no person was so
great, but he was forced to gain his pardon for the offense. To which purpose
the example of the Henry Beaufort.
rich Bishop of Winchester may not be unfitly remembered, who being a Cardinal
of the Kings blood, was employed by Martyn the 5. as general against the
Bohemians, and to that end erected the Cross 1429. 8. Hen. 6. but two years
after caused a petition to be exhibited in Parliament, Rot. Parl. 10. Hen. 6.
n. 16.
That he the said Cardinal nor none other should be poursued, vexed, impleded,
or grieved by the King, his heirs or successors, nor by any other person, for
cause of any Provision, or offense, or misprision done by the said Cardinal
against any statute of Provisions, or per cause of any exemption, receipt,
acceptance, admission or execution of any Bulls Papal to him in any manner
made: Which was granted, and shows that without it he had been liable to
punishment for his accepting and receiving of them. And here it is not unworthy
the remembering, that this was the first Cardinal England ever saw a Privy
Councellor. He having sometimes sought that dignity in Henry the 5ths time,
upon the news, the Archbishop of Cant. gave the King notice of it, in a letter
yet extant; which did so affect that Prince, as he was sometimes heard to say,
Halle 20. Hen. 6. The complaint made by the Duke of Gloucester against the said
Cardinal, Art. 2.
that he had as lieve set his crown beside him, as see him wear a Cardinals
hat. But he being soon after taken away, and the honor conferred on this
Prelate in June 1426. by Martin the 5. Rot. Parl. 8. Hen. 6. n. 17.
at his coming into England, the Lords of his Maties Council caused him to
make a Protestation for his comportment in the future; and the 8th of Hen. the
6. it was agreed by the Lords in Parliament, he should be on the Kings part
required to attend his Maties Counsels, sub protestatione tamen subsequente,
quod quotiens aliqua, materiae, causae, vel negotia ipsum Dominum Regem aut
regna seu dominia sua ex part una, ac sedem Apostolicam ex part altera
concernentia, hujus concilii regiis communicanda and tractanda fuerint, idem
Cardinalis se ab hujusmodi consilio absentet, and communicationi earundem
causarum, materiarum, and negotiorum non intersit quovis modo, etc. and yet his
former engagement made to the Council to be firm and inviolable. Upon which
the said Cardinal the 18. of December 8. H. 6. Ann. 1429. after his thanks to
the King and Lords, and his admitting the said Protestations tanquam rationi
consonas, was received for one of the Council. But I return to that I was
treating of.

39. The truth of this barring Appeals is so constantly averred by all the
ancient monuments of this Nation, as one not finding how to deny it, falls upon
another way, Philip Scot of Schism of England page* 174.
that if the right of Appeals were abrogated, it concludes not the Sea of Rome
had no jurisdiction over this Church, except one should be so senseless as to
imagine the Prefect of the Pretorian Court were not subject to the Emperors
auctority, because it was not lawful full to appeal from them, according to
the Law in the ff. de officio Prefect. Iraetor. leg. unica. Vide Cassiodor.
lib. 6. rariar. 3.
Digests. To which I answer, that if it be granted (which is very disputable)
this Law is to be extended to the Emperor, yet it proceeded from himself, who
might limit his own power: but he is desired to consider, this canon of Appeals
did not from any Pope; for the Africans did, and the Church of England does
maintain it as an inherent right of their own, to give Laws in that particular,
and ever had strong contests with the Papacy about it, which held it an honor
not to be parted with; and they opposing him in it, must of necessity have held
that superintendency he exercised over them not to be jure divino, for then no
man could have exempted himself from having recourse unto him. In France there
are several Courts of Parliament from which no Appeal lies, who receiving that
privilege from the King, it cannot be said to be in diminution of his Royalty,
because that they have, he gave: but if ever any of them should claim this as
of their own right, denying the King to have at any time a power of
intermedling with them, I shall leave the objector to draw what consequence he
will from it; for my part I can no other, but that they esteemed themselves
very little his subjects.

40. The reader will pardon this digression, which I have the longerstood upon,
to give him the more full satisfaction how Appeals were first brought in, and
how pursued; I shall now, in what manner the Legate and Archbishop prosecuted
theirs: who being Wm. Thorn col. 1804, 44.
both before Lucius the 2. 1144. the Bishop of Winchester was Johan. Hagulstad.
col. 273, 61. Ann. 1145.
dismissed his legatine commission; and the Pope finding with how great
difficulty the Ecclesiastic affairs of this Kingdom could be managed by any
Legate without the Archbishop of Canterbury, thought of a very subtle invention
to conserve his own auctority, and not have any crossing with that Prelat,
which was to create him and his successors Legatinati; by which, such things as
he did before, and had a face of enterfeering with the Papal plenitude, and
were not so easy to divest the Archbishop of exercising, he might be said to do
by a Legatine power: of which it was not long before the Pope made use, as is
to be seen in his De Officio Legati cap. 1.
Decretalls; where Alexander the 3. resolves he could not hear jure
metropolitico matters Episcopal that came not unto him per appellationem,
(that is in a legal way) but jure Legationis he might such as were brought
unto him only per quaerimoniam: an invention Vide ^ochell. Decreta Eccles.
Galsican. page 918. Council. Trident. sess. 5. cap. 1. 2. and multis aliis locis.
often practic't afterward, and highly advantageous to the Court of Rome, as
what made Bishops but his Deputies.

41. The In Theobaldo p. 115, 47. edit. 1572.
Antiquitates Britannicae Eccles. and from him Seculo xii. p. 328, 15.
Harpsfield, speak as if this honor were first bestowed on Theobald; which it
seems to me could not be, till the taking it away from Winchester by Lucius the
3. after the death of Innocentius 2. Ann. 1195. col. 679, 7.
Diceto says, Caelestinus 3. (about some ten years after Lucius) bestowed on
Hubert plenitudinem potestatis in officio Legationis inauditam a seculis. I
confess I do not well understand in what it did consist, that had not been
formerly heard of, to whom the Pope had committed Ger. Dorobern. col. 1663, 64.
Vices suas in Anglia and Scotia; but it fully proyes that power derived from
The Bishop of Ely 1191. says Rich. the 1. acquired him that honor. Ger.
Dorobern. col. 1565, 46. and the King himself expostulates in Hoveden with the
Bishop of Hostia, that it cost 1500. marks. Hoved. Ann. 1190. col. 380. b. 14.
So that the Court of Rome knew how to turn this, notwithstanding all
opposition, to its no small advantage.
Rome was then looked on as a thing newly crept in. But whosoever did first
confer it, the matter is not great: certain it is, by it the Papal auctority
was not a little in time increas't, there being none of the Clergy almost to
question ought-came from Rome, the Archbishop, on whom the rest depended,
himself operating but as a Delegate from thence.

42. To which purpose it may not unfitly be observed, that when the Papacy did
first attempt the exempting some great monasteries from the jurisdiction of
their Ordinary, it was Eadmer* 62, 34* Malms. f* 137. a, 5,
salva primatis reverentia, or, as Malmsbury explains it, Archiepiscopi tantum
nutum in legitimis spectaturus. But however thus carefully penned not to thwart
with the Archbishop, being brought hither was taken away by Lanfrank, not
permitted to be made use of, the Abbot finding no other way to regain it but
Eadmer. ibid. lin. 37.
multorum preces. Yet afterward the Pope without scruple exempted them not
only from their Diocesan, but even such as were under the Archbishops nose,
with all pertaining to them, were taken out of his own jurisdiction; and he who
at first preserved others rights, had those houses now at an Vide Petri
Blesens. Epist. 68.
easy rate removed from his own. A fact of infinite advantage to the Papacy, by
which it had persons of learning in all parts, who depending wholly on it,
defended what was done to be by one had a power of doing it; and he who at
first did solely Eadmer. page 58, 44.
agere vices Apostolicas in Anglia, was G. Dorob. col. 1663, 55.
under no Legate, permitted no Bull from Rome to be made use of in England, but
by his approbation, was so far now from taking them away from the bearers, as
Vide bull. Johan. 22. apud Gulielm. Thorn, col. 2041, 1.
private Clerks by deputation from thence did sit his superiors in determining
differences between him, and others who by strength were taken from his
jurisdiction.

43. After which, Popes having gained an entrance, found means to reduce the
grant of Legatus natus to no more then stood with their own liking, by
inventing a new sort of Legate styled Legatus a latere ( De Officio Legati cap.
9. Gloss. ad verbum Commissam.
by reason of his near dependence on the Popes person) who employed in matters
of concernment, at his being here the power of the former slept: Vide Ger.
Dorobern. Ann. 1188. col. 1532, 55. and 1533, 8.
which distinction of Legates seems to me to have had its birth after 1180.
first applied by any of our writers to Hoveden, Ann. 1189. fol. 377. a. 10.
Johannes Anagninus Cardinalis 1189. by Hoveden; which style yet Diceto col.
649, 42. Ger. Dorob.
others who then lived do not give him. Of this Legate it is that Habetur in
vita Henrici Chichley ab Arthuro Duck edita. 1617.
Henry Chichley in a letter, yet extant under his own hand, wrote to Henry the
5. that Be inspection of Laws and Chronicles was there never no Legate a latere
sent in to no land, and specially in to your rengme of Yngland, witoute great
and notable cause. And they when they came, after they had done her legacy
abiden but litul wyle, not over a yer, and sum a quarter or ij. months as
the needs requeryd: And yet over that he was tretyd with or he came in to the
land, whon he schold have exercise of his power and how myche schold be put in
execution: An aventure after he had be reseyved he would have used it to
largely to greet oppression of your people: as indeed if he stayed long, he
sometimes gained the censure of being M. Paris Ann. 1240. page 524. 43.
occultus inimicus regni; but this was not till the Popes had brought the
Archbishops much under, by laying a necessity on them of receiving the Pall
from Rome, and at the taking of it of making profession de fidelitate and
canonica obedientia, that is, had obliged them by Oath to defend regalia Sancti
Petri. Of which, because I find the introducing (not much touched by our
writers) a great means to advance this foreign power, it will not be amiss to
say somewhat; and first of the Pall.

44. The Pallium (from whence our English word Pall) was a garment with which
the Professors of Arts, as Grammar, Rhetoric, Music, might cloth themselves
(as it seems to me by De Pallio cap. 6.
Tertullian they did); yet was held most proper for such as professed
Philosophy: And therefore when a Aul. Gellius Noct. At^ic. lib. 9. cap. 2.
begging fellow came to a noble Roman palliatus and crinitus, being asked what
he was, the man half angry replied he was a Philosopher, and mirari cur
quaerendum putasset quod videret: to which the Gentleman returned, Barbam and
Pallium, Philosophum nondum video. From whence I gather, it was for the most
peculiar to them. So Eusebius. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 13. Graec. k.
Eusebius shows on Heraclas, (...) taking the habit of a Philosopher,
notwithstanding his being a Christian, retained it: and lib. 8. cap. 21. at the
martyrdom of Porphyrius a disciple of Pamphilus, he describes that (...) to be
a short cloak or Pall covering the shoulders.

45. But it seems the primitive Christians in wearing of it did attribute some
Sanctity to the garment; for Tertul. de Pallio cap. 6.
grande pallii beneficium est (says Tertullian) sub cujus recogitatu impii
mores vel erubescunt: whereupon the Council Gangrense circa Ann. 350. can. 12.
Council of Gangra, not an 100. years after, pronounced him Anathema used the
Pallium quasi per hoc habere se justitiam credens, etc. Now from the danger of
superstition of the one side, and the being especially worn by Philosophers of
the other, I am apt to think it became in the end proper only to some Bishops,
who might challenge it as learned Philosophers, yet not at all likely to
attribute more to the Robe then reasonable; and in time, either by collation of
Emperors, or otherwise, appropriated to some particular Churches, who having
that mark, were after the seats of Archbishops for the most part. For though
Pallium nihil aliud est nisi discretio inter Archiepiscopum and ejus
suffraganeos. Alcuinus de Divinis Officiis cap. quid significent vestimenta.
Alcuinus be of opinion the Pall is nothing but a distinction between an
Archbishop and his suffraganes: yet, underfavour, I conceive that must be taken
of the acception of the word in the time he lived; not as used in St. Gregory's
days, who gives Gregor. lib. 12. Epist. 15.
Augustine at the bestowing the Pall upon him the title of Archbishop no more
then he does Greg. lib. 7. Epist. 112.
Syagrius Bishop of Austun in Burgundy; which Town, notwithstanding that gift
by St. Gregory, was never reputed to have other then an Episcopal chair, and
suffragan to the Archbishop of Lions to this day. So that certainly, at first,
all that had the Pall were not eo nomine Archbishops, to whom it became
especially proper after the Emperor relinquisht it to the Popes disposing, who
at first no question had a good part in the conferring of it himself.

46. The deed is yet extant by which Valentinian bestowed it on the Church of
Ravenna, about the year 430. I know Hieron. Rubeus Hist. Ravennae. Italia
Sacra, to. 2 col. 331. and 332.
some, who find not how to deny it, hold this an honorable vestment, such as
Emperors themselves wore; which opinion to. 5. Ann. 432. n. 93.
Baronius justly confutes, and rather thinks it forged: yet he, Baron. to. 7.
Ann. 536. n. 17.
citing out of Brevic. Liberat. cap. 21. to. 2. council.
Liberatus, that Anthemius expelled the Church of Constantinople, Pallium quod
habuit, imperatoribus reddidit, and discessit, gives no gloss how he could
return to the Emperor his Pall and depart, if he had nothing to do with it: and
it is manifest, in Gregory the greats days, that Church did not only
prescribe for the use of the Pall, but for doing it contrary to the will and
opinion of that Father. And the same Doctor elsewhere Lib. 1. Epist. 27.
says, he had dealt apud piissimos dominos, the Emperors, to send him
Anastasius, concesso usu Pallii: and afterward being desired by Brunichilda to
grant it to Syagrius, (of whom before) he shows his readiness, Greg. lib. 6.
Epist. 5. Indict. 1.
propter quod and serenissimi Domini Imperatoris prona voluntas est, and
concedi haec omnino desider at. So that certainly, at the beginning, if Princes
did not bestow it, yet it was not done against their wills; which aftertimes
did in Europe solely appropriate to the Pope: who yet gave it not against their
liking; as Diceto Ann. 1142. col. 508.
Lucius the 2. sending it to the Bishop of Winchester, who yet never made use
of it, teaches us.

47. But what this Pall imported, or what the receiver had of advantage by it,
writers I think do not always agree. Lib. 1. Epist. 136. apud Baron. to. 2.
Ann. 216. n. 15. and to. 7. Ann. 553. n. 7.
Isidorus Pelusiota, who writ about the year 430, is of opinion, the Bishop, as
a type of Christ, wears that cloak of wool, to show himself imitator of the
great shepherd that will bear the strayed sheep on his shoulders. Lib. 7.
Epist. 129. Indic. 2.
St. Gregory says, it signifies humility, justice, etc. I have showed before
Alcuinus his opinion of it. But what soever signification it was at first
thought to carry, certainly, the necessity of fetching it from Rome was not so
urgent, as in these later the Papal interest made it esteemed. We do not read
that ever Laurentius or Mellitus received thence the Pall; yet no man doubts of
their being as lawful Archbishops as Augustine was. Itin. Cambr. lib. 2. cap.
1. Hoved. Ann. 1199. fol. 453. b
Giraldus Cambrensis and Hoveden agree, the Bishops of St. David's in Wales did
use the Pall, till Samson, about the time of the Saxons, flying from an
infection, carried it with him; yet neither of them report him to have fetched
it from Rome: nor after the wanting it, did the rest of the Bishops there
either refuse his consecration, deny obedience to the Sea, or make profession
to any other, before Henry the first induced them by force. But to come to the
Saxons: after Paulinus, there are five in the Catalogue of York expressly
Thom. Stubbs invit. Archiepiscop. Ebor. col. 1697. 2.
said to have wanted it, (amongst which Wilfred, that Bed. lib. 5. cap. 20.
Vide lib. 4. cap. 12.
ruled all the North as his Bishopric) yet are reputed both Archbishops and
Saints; and of others in that series it will not be easy to prove they ever
used it. Albertus the 8. Bishop about 767. had it not till the seventh year
Sim. Dune^m. Epist. ad Hugonem col. 78, 49. and T. Stubs, col. 1697, 15.
accepti Episcopatus: nor Ibid. col. 79, 25. and col. School, 57.
Adilbaldus or Ethelbaldus the 14. Anno 895. till the fourth year postquam
acceper at Episcopatum. An undoubted argument that Canon of Pelagius, recorded
both by Part. 5. can. 136.
Ivo and Did. 100. cap. 1.
Gratian, that no Metropolitan should defer above three months sending for it
to Rome, was never received in this Church. Lib. 7. Epist. 5.
Gregory the great says, it ought not to be given, nisi fortiter postulanti:
and the same Lib. 4. Epist. 44. Ind. 13.
Father with a Council at Rome Anno 595. decreed, pro pallio omnino aliquid
dare prohibeo. So that in those times the one side perhaps did not much urge
the taking of it, nor the other greatly seek after a thing brought small
advantage, and was so far to be fetched.

48. But after the Court of Rome began to raise to it self a revenue from other
Churches, this Pallium, that was no other then a distinctive ornament, not to
be paid for, began to be set at so immense a rate, that Florent Wigorn. page
^95. and Ingulph. fol. 508. a. 53. Malms. f. 41. b. 39.
Canutus going to Rome 1031. did mediate with John the 19 that it might be more
easy to his prelates: in which though he had a favorable answer, yet in Hen.
the 1. his time it was so much, the Archbishop of York could not pay the money,
without an Graviter mutuatam, Eadmer. page 98, 30.
heavy debt. Mat. Paris page 274, 4.
Mat. Paris does intimate as if Walter Gray, translated from Worcester to that
See 1215, had not his Pall at less then ten thousand pounds: accepto pallio
(says he) Episcopus memoratus rediit in Angliam, obligatus in curia Romana de
december millibus librarum estirlingorum; which was about the silver of 30000l.
now, Coin being then after the rate of 20d. the ounce. But after times,
according to the Bishop In Catalog. Episc. in five Archiepise. tam Cant. quam
Ebor.
of Landaffe, reduced it to the certainty, that each Bishop paid 5000. ducats
for it, every one of the value of 4s. 6d. our money: which yet I do not see how
to make agree with the Autiq. Britan. Land. page 382, 32. Hannoviae page 327,
48.
Antiquit. Brit. Ecclesiae, that speaks only of 900. aureos ducatos paid by
Cranmer.

49. But to omit the gain came by the garment; that certainly was a means of
drawing a great obligation from all Archbishops to the Papacy: for about 1002.
a new oath de fidelitate and canonica obedientia was devised, to be tendered
every Archbishop at the reception of it. For the more full understanding of
which, we are to know, William the first, after he had settled the Kingdom in
quiet, wholly possessed of it, would not in any Vide Baron* to. 11. Ann. 1071. n.
21, 25. and inter Lanfranci Epist. 7. page 304.
kind acknowledge a farther obedience to Rome then his predecessors had; but
maintained the rights of the Kingdom in every thing, against the liking of
that Court in many particulars, barring all men for taking any for Pope, but
whom he designed; insomuch as after Eadmer. page 25, 40. Vide Lanfranci Epist.
59. page 329. col. 1.. Nonlando.
Gregory the 7. 1084. till 1095. about 11. years, there was no Pope
acknowledged in England; denying any to receive letters from thence, but
acquainting him with them, and many more; of which elsewhere: all which being
exercised by him, were never questioned during his time, nor while Lanfrank
lived after him, (though he has been ever reputed an holy man.) But Anselme
succeeding in his seat, great contentions arose between him and William the
second: The Eadmer. page 38. p. 39. peri^^.
King with the Nobility pressing him, as the usage of the Realm, not to depend
on Rome as of necessity: he, on the other side, Ibid. p. 40, 5. 32.
deciating all such customs to be contrary to Divinity, right, etc. chose
rather to live an exile all that Kings time, then any way submit to those
customs, had been practis't, never disputed or questioned by any Archbishop
here before.

50. But, that Prince being soon after taken away, and Paschalis the 2.
succeeding almost at the same time, (considering, as it seems, by what weak
bands foreign Bishops were tied to the Papacy, how easy it was for them to
fall from it; that Lanfranc. Epist. 8. page 305. col. 1.
Gregory the 7th. was not satisfied even with Lanfranks carriage in Episcopali
honor positus, who restrained his obedience to canonum praecepta; that Anselme
alone had opposed the whole body of the Kingdom; that every Prelat might be
neither of his temper or opinions,) framed an oath, the effect of which you may
see in Diceto col. 663, 6.
Ann. 1191. and in Mat. Paris and others, the Note, where you read in the lives
of the Abbots p. 140, 22. regalem, and in his Hist. p. 414, 22. regalis, both
should be regalia, for so we find it at the end of the Council of Vienna, 10.
4. council. genesis Romae 1608. and 1612. agreeing with an old Copy of that oath I
have seen in the Exchequer, which the Decretalls de jure jurando cap. 4. read
thus: Papatum Romanae Ecclesiae and regulas Sanctorum Patrum adjutor er^, etc.
but Ordericus Raynaldus 10. 13. Ann. 1233. n. 65. citing out of the records in
the Vatican the oath St. Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury took, reads it rightly
regalia.
full which every Archbishop at the reception of the Pall was to render. At the
tendering this, one in Sicily made a scruple of taking it, as that Nec ab
Apostolis post Dominum, nec in conciliis inveniri posse statutum; the like did
some Baron. 10. 12. Ann. 1102. n. 6, 7, 8.
in Polonia: to whom the Pope answers, as in cap. De electione and electi
potes^ate cap. 4.
significasti, objurgatorily, quasi Romanae Ecclesiae legem concilia ulla
praefixerint. And going on with the design, whereas at the assuming of this
Pall by Anselme 1095. it was no otherwise then thus, Eadmer. p. 34, 33.
Pallium super altar delatum ab Anselmo assumptum est, atque ab omnibus pro
reverentia Sancti Petri suppliciter deosculatum, etc. at the taking of it by
Raulf 1115. his immediate successor, we find it with this addition, Eadmer. p.
113, 43.
Sicque delatum super Altar salvatoris pallium est, and a Pontifice inde
susceptum, facta prius de fidelitate and canonica obedientia professione.
Dei^de pro reverentia beati Petri ab omnibus deosculatur, etc. Which profession
being never met with as made by any Archbishop of Cant. before, but frequently
after by such as were his near successors, as Diceto col. 534, 8. Ger. Dorober.
col. 1307. 2.
Tho. Becket, Baldwine, etc. we must conclude him to have been the first from
whom it has ever been required. I know De Romans Pont. lib. 3. cap. 11..
Iuramentum.
Bellarmine interprets a Bishops returning out of schism 602. and voluntarily
by oath promising to live in communion with the Pope, to be a swearing of
obedience to that chair: but certain there is a difference between obeying and
living in communion; (of which see cap. 7. n. 4.) between an oath enforced, and
one voluntarily taken. After this; as ways to augment the Court, many
privileges were annexed to it; De Elect. and Elect. potest. cap. 28.. 2. verbo
praeterea.
as that none before his receiving that ornament might convocate counsels,
make Chrisme, dedicate Churches, ordain Clerks, consecrate^Bishops, that being
De auctor. and usu Pallii cap. 3. Vid. council. Lateranense sub Innocentio 30.
cap. 3.
Pontificalis officii plenitudo, till he had it, none to be styled an
Archbishop; things added after men's holding a necessity of seeking it, did so
much contribute to the Papal advantage, both in point of honor and profit.
For it is manifest, Lanfrank, Anselme and Raulf did dedicate Eadmer. page 22,
19.
Churches, Ibid. page 6, 46. page 23, 31. page 111, 6, 18, 32.
consecrate Bishops and Abbots, were called Ibid. page 23, 42. p. 111, 32. and
passim apud Historicos.
Archbishops, whilst they wanted it.

51. Now the ice broken, this Oath (at first required only of Archbishops when
they took the Pall) was by De jurejurando cap. 4.
Gregory the 9, mutatis mutandis, imposed on Abbots and Bishops. About 1235.
came into England Mat. Paris Vit. Abbat. page 140, 31.
occulta clausa sub bulla, the Mat. Paris Hist. major. page 410, 39.
like to which had not been seen, was proffered to John 23. Abbot of St. Albans
unacquainted with it, when he could not Vit. Abbat. page 140, 39.
ab illa obligatione resilire; who is therefore noted, that Ibid. page 141, 49.
primo invitus and dolens Romanorum jugum subiit servitutis, and that Ibid.
page 142, 1.
prae omnibus Romanorum oppressionibus novis and inauditis coepit molestari,
etc. The thing I find of greatest exception is, the obligation injoyning them
to visit Rome, which being in pursuance of the 26. chapter of the Council of
Lateran, held only 20. years before, is censured Mat. Par. Vit. Abbat. page
133, 23. page 141, 52, 56.
Damnum, gravamen, praejudicium, injuria, jactura, as that which altered the
nature of the Church, which had been from the foundation libera and ingenua,
and was thus brought to serve the ends of the Court of Rome. Truly after this I
cannot see how there can be said to have been a free Papal Council in Europe,
when such as it consists of (being, for the most, Bishops and Abbots) come with
so high an obligation as an oath to defend the usages of Rome, under the title
of Regaliae Sancti Petri. In pursuance of which the Sess. 25. cap. 2.
Council of Trent did expressly charge all Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops,
and other, who in future should meet in Provincial Synods, that veram
obedientiam summo Romano Pontifici spondeant, and profiteantur. I wish it had
expressed what that had been.

52. To return to that I was treating of. This visiting the Roman Court,
however much pressed on this Monastery of St. Albans, yet was ever-excused till
1290. John the 3. and 25. Abbot was forced to go thither for his confirmation:
but because the book is not printed, I will give you my Vitae Abbat. St. Albani
MS. in Iohanne 3. Abbate 25.
Auctors own words. Johannes de Berkamsted, vir religiosus and honestae
conversationis, Hic in crastino conceptionis beatae and gloriosae virginis
Mariae, scilieet quinto idus Decembris, anno Domini MCC. nonagesimo, per viam
compromissi de gremio Ecclesiae concorditer electus, ad curiam Romanam primus
omnium abbatum hujus Ecclesiae, pro confirmatione electionis suae obtinenda,
personaliter accessit, ibique confirmatus est a summo Pontifice Nicholao; and a
venerabili L. Ostiensi Episcopo and Cardinali apud urbem veterem munus accepit
benedictionis; and sic data maxima pecunia Papae, and Cardinalibus, and aliis
de curia, quam de mercatoribus Papae duris conditionibus ex mutuo recepit, ab
illa insatiabili curia ^vasit, expletisque negotiis domum redire festinavit,
etc. By which we may see who of this house went on this occasion first thither,
and why it was so earnestly urged from thence. As for the Monastery of St.
Augustins, by reason of the often contentions with the Archbishop, the Monks
there were much more prone to yield obedience to Rome (who maintained them for
the most against him) then these other were: yet the first of them I find to
have Wmus Thorn, col. 1899, 22.
took this oath was Roger the 2. elected Abbot 1253. For though the Ibid. col.
1880, 3.
benediction of Robertus de Bello 1224. were at Rome, where he gained the
Abbacy; yet there being no mention of any oath presented to him then, we must
think it came in afterward. But for the fuller understanding how this visiting
the Roman Church came in, the Reader will give me leave a little to digress.

53. Christians in all ages have esteemed it a point of singular piety and
devotion, for any Ghostly Father or Doctor to have a care of those to whom they
have the relation of being a Spiritual Superior, either by planting Christian
Religion amongst them, reducing them out of error, or otherwise some engagement
on them. Saint Paul sent for the Elders of Ephesus to come unto him at Miletus,
from whom they received those wholesome instructions we read in the Acts xx.
17, to the end.
Acts of the Apostles; and according to this example there are diverse
exhortations in the writings and Epistles of the Fathers. Before the year 517.
a Cap. 5. tom. 1. Council.
Council held at Tarragona in Spain did ordain, that every Bishop, impletis
duobus mensibus, se Metropolitani sui repraesentet aspectibus, ut ab illo
monitis Ecclesiasticis instructus, before quid observare debeat recognoscat:
quod si forte hoc implere neglexerit, in Synodo increpatus a fratribus
corrigatur. Agreeing to which, Novel. 123. cap. 10.
Justinian in the year 541. did establish by Law, that for the better
observance of the Ecclesiastic rules, every Archbishop, Patriarch, and
Metropolitan, Sanctissimos Episcopos sub se constitutos in eadem Provincia
semel aut secundo per singulos annos ad se convocare. And Pope Baron. to. 9.
Ann. 743. n. 19.
Zachary Ann. 743. in a Council at Rome, Omnes Episcopi qui hujus Apostolicae
sedis ordinationi subjacebunt, qui propinqui sunt, annue idibus mensis Maii
sanctorum Principis Apostolorum Petri and Pauli liminibus praesententur,
omnioccasione seposita, etc. Capit. Car. etc. lib. vii. cap. 108, 109.
After which Charles the Great did by law ordain, ut unusquisque presbyter per
singulos annos Episcopo suo rationem ministerii sui reddat, tam de fide
Catholica, quam de Baptismo, atque de omni or dine ministerii sui.

54. About which time Boniface an Englishman, the Popes Legate in Germany, and
Archbishop of Mentz, in a Council held in Germany (the decrees whereof he sent
to Cutbert then in the seat of Canterbury) Council. Spelm. page 237, 238.
declaring how great the care of the Metropolitan ought to be of those under
him, shows how every Presbyter should once a year in Lent give an account to
his Bishop, who was to instruct him, and with such things as he could not
correct himself, to acquaint the Archbishop in a Synod; Vt si Sacerdotes vel
plebes a lege dei deviasse viderim, and corrigere non potuerim, fideliter
semper sedi Apostolicae and vicario Sancti Petri ad emendandum indicaverim: Sic
enim, ni fallor, omnes Episcopi debent Metropolitano, and ipse Romano
Pontifici, si quid de corrigendis populis apud eos impossible est, notum
facere, and sic alieni fient a sanguine animarum perditarum. Cutbert, according
to this advise, does appoint the proceedings of the Bishop to be to the
Archbishop, in the same words he had received it from Boniface; but Confer
Council. Spelm p. 238,. ut Episcopi, and p. 251, cap. 25.
passes no farther to the Pope: an undoubted argument, it was not then usual
in England. I have touched before, the Conqueror did suffer no other
correspondency with Rome then what he liked; Paschalis the 2. quarreled with
Hen. the Eadmer. page 113, 2.
first, that Nullus inde clamor: to prevent which, this visiting Rome was at
the very first inserted into the oath of an Archbishop, who being head of the
Province, all the rest might have the same dependence.

55. But because this did not reach such houses and persons as were exempt from
the jurisdiction of the Ordinary, acknowledging no superior but the Pope; the
Council of Lateran under Innocentius 3. 1215. tom. 4. Council. genesis Romans
provided, such as pertained immediately to his rule should present themselves
before him for confirmation, si commode potest fieri; which was here misliked*
But this Council speaking not home, in that it tolerated the sending cap. 26.
Council. Lateran.
personas idoneas, per quas diligens inquisitio super electionis processu and
electis possit haberi, etc. to make the excuse, (and being it self (as I shall
show hereafter) not much regarded till Gregory the 9, nephew to Innocentius,
inserted it for the most into the Decretalls, and framed, as I have said, an
oath too, for the stricter obligation unto him;) it was again urged by
Alexander the 4. Mat. Paris Ann. 1257. page 951. 41, 44.
ut quilibet qui in Abbatem exemptum extun^ eligeretur, Romanam curiam adiret
confirmandus and benedicendus: which the same author styles page 956, 7.
Statutum enorme and cruentissimum. And whereas some, finding the burden of
running to Rome, had obtained as a privilege from thence, Reynald. Annal.
Eccles. to. 14. Ann. 1257. n. 50.
ut non teneantur sedem Apostolicam usque ad certa tempora visitare, contra
formam praestiti juramenti, ex quo illud evenit inconveniens, quod Apostolicae
sedis dignitas rarius visitatur, in derogationem reverentiae quae ab omnibus
debetur eidem, etc. the same Pope therefore revokes all manner of such
concessions to whomsoever formerly granted. In which year, or perhaps 1258,
Simon (elected Abbot of St. Edmundsbury) confirmed by Alexander the 4. the 22
October, is Monasticon Anglicanum page 296. col. 1.
noted to have been primus exemptorum in Anglia ad curiam Romanam pro sua
confirmatione vocatus.

56. Yet the Court of Rome, however thus earnest at first, (either perceiving
it ill relisht abroad, and that forcing sudden mutations in Religion not to be
of so good consequence) in her prosecution was more moderate. Vitae Abbat. MS.
On Roger the xxiiii Abbot of St. Albons 1263. I do not find at all pressed; his
successor John the xxv, I have showed, was the first went thither for it. So
likewise Mat. Paris page 972, 51.
Philip Abbot of Westminster 1258. obtained the favor to stay at home, and
Richard Ware his successor fetched his consecration first thence. But after the
Court was fully in possession of what turned so much to her advantage, an
excuse was Wm Thorn, col. 2185. and sequent. col. 2153, 46.
hardlier admitted; and if any did obtain the favor to stay at home, he paid
a good round sum for it. It is remembered, Michael Abbot of St. Augustins,
elected 1375, did give Papae and Cardinalibus ut possit benedici in Anglia
183l-02s-06d. and accordingly some other. The Papacy having by these ways
abated the power of the Archbishop, found it easy, his let removed, to bring
the rest of the Clergy wholly to depend upon it, by raising whom it liked to
oppose that Prelat, who were bound to maintain the Papal auctority which
supported them in what they did, and wringing the Investitures (so far as lay
in their power) out of the hands of Princes, to interest the Pope and his party
in several particulars, under the notion of being matters Ecclesiastical; by
which he brought the elections of Bishops solely to the Convent, excluding both
King and others, and became as Patron of most Spiritual promotions in England:
which card. Ossat. Epist. 296. Romans 22 Decembr. 1601.
form he yet labored in the end to break too, by reducing all to his own
gift. For the understanding of which, as not impertinent to that I treat of, it
will be necessary to look a little higher.

57. When any place became destitute of a Bishop, it is certain, in the
primitive Church, the Lay as well as the Clergy did concur in nominating who
were to succeed in the charge; that he who was to have the inspection of all,
might not be brought into it with the repugnancy of any. And this custom was
so general, as Cypr. Epist. 68. n. 4. edit. Pamelii.
St. Cyprian and 36. Bishops more, meeting in Council about the year 255.
writing to certain in Spain, spoke as if it did descend de divina auctoritate.
It is not to be doubted but this course gave sometime opportunity to ambitious
and contentious spirits (as Epist. 110.
St. Augustine calls them) of troubling the Churches peace: and therefore Cap.
13.
the Council of Laodicea before the year 360. did appoint the elections to
Priesthood not to be turbis. and apud Gratianum, Did. 63, cap. 6.
by multitudes; and diverse holy Bishops desiring peace might continue after
them in their flock, were careful or ever they dyed to know the person was to
succeed in their chair. Severus Bishop of Milevis.
Mela in Africa had expressed to the Clergy only, whom he thought fit to have
been admitted after him to his Episcopacy. This was likely to have bred some
stir, in respect the people were not acquainted with it; had not August. Epist.
110.
St. Augustine by his pains and wisdom allayed the dispute: to avoid which,
that good man nominated one Eradius for his successor, whom the people with
loud acclamations approved.

58. This concurrence or joining of the Lay with the Clergy (that qui
praefuturus est omnibus ab omnibus eligatur, as Leo Epist. 89, cap. 5.
Leo speaks) in choice of Bishops, I do no way question to have continued in
the Church till after Charles the Great, in whose Capitulars we find, Caroli
Magni Capit. lib. 1. cap. 84.
Episcopi per electionem cleri and populi eligantur; and to have been sent
hither by Gregory the Great, who in Lib. 2. Epist. 26. Ind. 10. Epist. 22, 26.
Ind. 11. and alibi.
his Epistles makes often mention of it, as we do find Vide continuat. Flor.
Wigorn. Ann. 1128. p. 506. Ann. 1139. page 532.
steps of it in our own Historians. Yet certainly, however there might be some
formalities of the people, the chief of elections here ever depended on the
Prince; as may be gathered by that Speech of Wolstan to the Confessors tomb,
Ailred de miraculis Edwardi, col. 406. 37.
that he had compelled him to take the pastoral staff. And Edward the 3.
wrote to Clement the 6. Epist. Edwardi 3. apud Walsingh. page 151. 42. Ann.
1343.
Cathedrales -- Ecclesias progenitores nostri dudum singulis vacationibns
earundem personis idoneis jure suo regio libere conferebant, and postmodum, ad
rogatum and ad instantiam dictae sedis, sub certis modis and conditionibus
concesserunt; quod electiones fierent in dictis Ecclesiis per capitula
earundem, etc. So likewise in the Parliament the 50. Ed. 3. the Commons show,
the King and great men were formerly in peaceable possession of giving
preferments in holy Church. But I will give the words themselves, because I
will not err in the Translation. Rot. Parl. 50. Ed. 3. n. 94.
Le Roy and les grandes -- feurent en peisible possession de doner les
Esvesches and les benefices de seint Esglise, come le fest le Roy St. Edward,
qe dona l' Evesche de Worcestre a seint Wolston; and puts par devotion des Roys
fust, and par la Court de Rome conferme, qe les Cathedralx Esglises averoient
frank election de lour Prelatz, solonc la ley de Dieu and de seint Esglise, ent
ordeigne perpetuelment a durer, etc. and a little Ibid. n. 111.
after, Les Roys d'Engleterre soleient doner Eveschez and autres grantz
dignites trestouz, come il fait aujourdui Esglises parochiels, and le Pape ne
se medlast de doner null benefice deinz le Royalme tanqez deinz brief temps
pass, etc.

59. And this to have been likewise the custom in France, the complaint of the
French Ambassador to Innocentius 4tus assures us. Additament. Mat. Paris MS. in
Bibliotheca Cotton. fol. 135, a. cui initium Dicturus, etc. of which hereafter.
Non est multum temporis (says he) quod Reges Francorum conferebant omnes
Episcopatus in camera sua, etc. and our writers do wholly look upon the placing
Lanfrank in Canterbury as A Willielmo Lanfrancus electus est. Malms. fol. 116,
b. 38. Rex constituit Lanfrancum Archiepiscopum Cant. Florent. Wigor p. 436.
Ann. 1070. Sim. Dunelm. col. 202, 6.
the Kings act, though it were not Eadme^. p. 6, 41.
without the advise of Alexander the 2. Neither did Vide ibid. p. 16, 48. p.
17, 18.
Anselme ever make scruple of refusing the Archbishopric, because he was not
chosen by the Monks of Canterbury: and in that letter of them to Paschalis the
2. 1114. though they write Raulf in praesentia gloriosi Regis Henrici electus a
nobis and clero and populo; yet whosoever will note the Ibid. p. 109, 40. etc.
series of that election, cannot see it to have been other then the Kings act;
insomuch as our Hunt lib. 7. fol. 219, a. 1.
writers use often no other phrase then the King gave such preferments, etc.
And whilst things stood thus, there was never any interposing from Rome, no
question who was lawfully chosen: the Popes therefore did labor to draw this
from the Princes meddling with, as much as was possible. Some essay might be
1108. at the settling Investitures, for then Anselme Apud Eadmer. page 93, 42.
writ to Paschalis, Rex ipse in personis eligendis nullatenus propria utitur
voluntate, sed religiosorum se penitus committit consilio. But this, as the
practice proved afterward, was no more but that he would take the advice of
his Bishops, or other of the Clergy: for, as Ann. 1175, col. 587, 21.
Diceto well observes, our King did in such sort follow the Ecclesiastic
Canons, as they had a care to conserve their own rights. The ^ittest way
therefore for the Pope to get in was, if there should happen any dissensions
amongst themselves, that he, as a moderator, a judge, or an Arbitrator, might
step in.

60. About the Conquest, an opportunity was offered on the contentions between
the two Archbishops for primacy; in which Canterbury stood on Vide eas apud
Malmsburiensem fol. 118, a. 32.
the bulls (true or false) of former Popes, that had as a great Patriarch made
honorable mention of them. When they were both 1071. Lanfranc. Epist. 3. page
301.
with Alexander the 2. by his advise it was referred to a determination in
England; and accordingly 1072. Wm. the first with his Bishops made some
settlement, which by them of York was ever stumbled at, pretending the King
Stubs de Arch. Ebor. col. 1706, 31*
out of reason of State sided with Canterbury. But this brake into no public
contest till 1116. Thurstan elected to York, Eadmer. p. 118, 5, 15.
endeavored at Rome to divert the making any profession of subjection to Cant.
but failing in the attempt (that Court not liking to fall into a contest it was
not probable to carry) resigned his Archbishopric, Spondens Regi and
Arch^epi^copo, se dum viveret non reclamaturum: yet after the Eadmer. p. 120,
50. p. 121, 6.
Clergy of York sued to the Pope for his restitution, which produced that
letter from Paschalis the 2. in his behalf to Hen. the 1. is in Eadmerus;
wherein he desires, if there were any difference between the two Sees, it might
be discust in his presence. Which was not hearkened to; but Calixtus the 2.
Eadmer. page 125.
in a Council by him held 1119. at Reimes (of which before) (the English
Bishops not arrived, the Kings Agent protesting against it, the Archdeacon of
Cant. telling the Pope that jure he could not do it) consecrated him Archbishop
of York: upon which Henry prohibits him all return into his dominions. And in
the enterview soon after at Gisors, though Calixtus earnestly labored the
admitting him to his See, the King would by no means hearken to it. So the Pope
left the business as he found it, and Thurstan to prove other ways to gain
the Archbishopric.

61. Who thereupon became an actor in the peace about that time treated between
England and France: in which his comportments were such, that Sim. Dunelm. Ann.
1120. col. 242, 25.
proniorem ad sese recipiendum Regis animum inflexit; so as upon the Popes
letters he was afterward restored, Eadmer. page 136, 43.
ea dispositione, ut nullatenus extra provinciam Eboracensem divinum officium
celebraret, donec Ecclesiae Cantuariensi, etc. satisfaceret. This I take to be
the first matter of Episcopacy that ever the Pope (as having a power elsewhere
of altering what had been here settled) did meddle with in England. It is true,
whilst they were raw in Christianity, he did sometimes recommend Pastors to
this Church; so Beda, lib. 4. cap. 1.
Vitalian did Theodore: and farther showed himself sollicitous of it, by giving
his fatherly instructions to the English Bishops to have a care of it; so did
Formosus or some other by his letters 904. Note, Malmsbury fol. 26. a. ^3. says
this was Ann. 904. but that agrees not with Formosus his Popedom: Baronius
therefore corrects it to. 10. and makes Ann. 894. n. 11. but at that time
Edward was not King.
upon which Edward the elder congregated a Synod, wherein five new Bishops were
constituted, by which an inundation of Paganism ready to break in on the West
for want of Pastors was stopped. But it is apparent, this was done not as having
dominion over them; for he so left the care of managing the matter to their
discretion, as he did no way interesse himself in it farther then advise.

62. A meeting of English Bishops 1107. at Canterbury, or (as Florentius
Wigorniensis styles it) a Council restored the Abbot of Ramsey deposed 1102.
Flor. Wigorn. p. 47^.
jussu Apostolico, or, as Eadmerus, Eadmer. page 92, 14.
juxta mandatum Domini Papae. It is manifest, this command from Rome to be of
the same nature those I mentioned of supra n. 20.
Calvin's, or at the most no other then the intercession of the Patriarch of a
more noble See, to an inferior, that by his means had been converted: For his
restitution (after the reception of the Papal letters) seems to have been a
Hoc per literas olini mandaverat. Eadmer.
good while deferred; so that what past at Rome did not disannull his
deprivation here, till made good in England, as at a time when nothing thence
was put in execution but by the Regal approbation; as the Pope himself Eadmer.
page 113. page 115.
complained to the King. But after the Church of Rome, with the assistance of
the English Clergy, had obtained all elections to be by the Chapters of the
Cathedralls, upon every Scruple she interposed herself.

63. The greatest part of the Convent of London 1136. Diceto col. 506, 507.
chose Anselme Abbot of St. Edmundsbury for their Bishop, contrary to the Deans
opinion and some few of the Chanons, who appealed to Rome; where the election
1138 was disannulled, the Bishopric by the Pope recommended to Winchester, his
then, or rather soon after, Legate; which so remained till 1141. This is the
first example of any Bishop chosen, received and in possession of a Church in
this Kingdom, whose election was after quash't at Rome, and the sentence
obeyed here; as it is likewise of any Commendam on Papal command in the Church
of England: all which seems to have past with the Kings concurrence.

64. For to Vide Johan. Hagulstad. ab Ann. 1142. ad Ann. 1152.
deprive William elected some whatafter Archbishop of York, where he did not
join, was not so easy: This man chosen 1142 by the greater part of the Chapter,
after five years suit in the Court of Rome, Bernard. Epist. 106* 234, 235, 237,
238.
St. Bernard opposing him, had in the end his election annulled by Eugenius 3.
in a Council held at Reims; the Chanons of York exhorted to choose another;
some of which made choice of Henry Murdack, then as it seems with the Pope: who
coming as Archbishop into England, was not suffered to enter on his
Archbishopric, and excommunicating Hugh de Puzat, a person preferred by
William, was himself by him excommunicated, no intermission of divine service
in the City admitted; and Henry's means to gain his See was by drawing the
Bishop of Duresme, Carlisle, the King of Scots, and, by the Popes advise, this
very Hugh by sweetness to his party, and in the end by the Kings Son (whom it
seems he promised to get advanced to the Crown by the power of Rome) making his
peace with Stephen, who soon after employed him thither on that errand. And
this I take to be the second English election was ever here annulled by Papal
auctority.

65. Here I may observe, that at first, when ever the Pope made void an
election, he did not take upon him to appoint another in the place vacant: but
either sent to the Clergy of the same Church to choose another, as those to whom
it appertained; so did Eugenius 3. to York when this Johan. Hagulst. col. 276,
8.
H. Murdack was chosen, Innocentius 3. when Mat. Paris Ann. 1207. page 222, 40.
Stephen Langton; or else the Bishopric lay vacant, as Diceto col. 507, 53.
and 508, 20.
London after Anselme from 1139. to 1141. But elections being with much
struggling settled wholly in the Clergy, and Innocentius 3. having Mat. Paris
Ann. 1206, p. 214, 44.
by definitive sentence excluded the English Bishops from having any part in
that of the Archbishop of Canterbury, they becoming wholly appropriated to the
Chapters of Cathedralls, the Pope began to creep in, and Tulla Gregor. 9. apud
Mat. Paris Ann. 1229. page 355, 46.
ex concessa plenitudine Ecclesiasticae potestatis, as he speaks, without any
formality of choice, to confer not only Bishoprics, but other Ecclesiastic
promotions, within the precincts of others Dioceses, and by that means to fill
the fat benefices of the Nation. The first Archbishop of Canterbury promoted by
this absolute power of the Church of Rome seems to have been Richard 1229. Mat.
Paris page 355, 44.
non electo, sed dato ad Archiepiscopatum.

66. The Additament. Mat. Paris MS. in Bibliotheca Cotton. sol. 135. cui
initium, Dicturus quod injunctum est mihi
French Agent, in his Remonstrance to Innocentius 4tus, attributes the
beginning of these collations to Innocent the 3d. and I have not read that
either Paschalis the second, Gelasius, Calixtus, or Innocent 2. though forced
to live sometimes out of Rome, did ever exercise auctority that way. But I will
give it in his own words.

Certe non multum temporis clapsum est, ex quo Dominus Papa Alexander,
persecutionis cogente incommodo, venit in Franciam, confugiens ad subsidium
inclytae recordationis Regis Ludovici patris Regis Philippi; a quo benign
susceptus est, and stetit ibi diu; and forte vivunt aliqui qui viderunt eum:
ipse tamen in nullo gravavit Ecclesiam Gallicanam, ut nec unam solam praebendam
aut aliud beneficium ipse Papa dederit ibi, sed nec aliquis praedecessor suus,
nec multietiam de successoribus dederunt in sua auctoritate beneficium aliquid,
usque ad tempora Domini Innocentii 3. qui primus assumpsit sibi jus istud in
tempore suo: Revera dedit multas praebendas, and similiter post ipsum Dominus
Honorius and Dominus Gregorius simili modo fecerunt; sed omnes praedecessores
vestri, ut public dicitur, non dederunt tot beneficia ut vos solus dedistis,
etc.

67. In what year the Ambassador from France made this complaint, is not set
down: But Mat. Paris Hist. minor. Ann. 1252. page 287. fol. 143. b. col. 1. MS.
in Bibliotheca Regia Westmonast.
Mat. Paris in his Historia minori makes mention of it as done in or about 1252.

Diebus sub eisdem, Episcopo Lincolniens^ computante, compertum and probatum
est quod iste Papa, scilicet Innocentius quartus, plures redditus extortos ad
suam contulit voluntatem, quam omnes ejus praedecessores; prout manifest patet
in lugubri querimonia quam reposuerunt Franci coram Papa pro suis
intolerabilibus oppressionibus, quae redacta est in scriptum Epistolae admodum
prolixae, quae sic incipit, Dicturus quod injunctum est mihi, etc. quaere
Epistolam, etc. By which it appears, that great liberty the Papacy took in
conferring Ecclesiastic preferments within the Dioceses of others, took its
rise from Pope Innocent, and, as it seems to me, not at the very beginning of
his time; for 1199. Roger, Hoved. fol. 453. b. 39. 454. b. 2. Gervas. Dorobern.
col. 1682, 27. in vita Huber.
Gelardus Archdeacon of St. David's coming from Rome, quia idem G. Menevensis
Ecclesiae in curia Romana se dicebat electum, hoc ipsum cassavit
Archiepiscopus, and alium-sacravit canonice electum; though he after bestowed
on him a Church of 25. marks: and this in a case the Pope had so earnestly
espoused, as he wrote to the Bishops of Lincoln, Duresme and Ely, si
Archiepiscopus Cantuariae saepe dictum Gilardum consecrare differret, ipsi
Apostolica authoritate freti illum consecrare non differrent: which yet the
Archbishop, as against the English liberty, did not doubt to oppose, and
disannul.

68. But thus it continued not long; for In antiquo MS. Bullarum Romanorum.
Pontificum Archiepisc, Cant. Pulla (...). Honor. 3.
Honorius, the immediate successor to Innocentius 3us, showing such as served
the Apostolic see, and resided with it, were worthy congruis beneficiis
honorari, and were therefore possessed of diverse both in England and other parts,
which they did administer with so great care, quod non minus beneficiantibus
quam beneficiatis utiliter est provisum; unde, quia nonnunquam beneficiatis
hujusmodi decedentibus, beneficia quae obtinuerant, inconsultis hiis ad quos
eorum donatio pertinebat* aliis successive collata, perpetuo illis ad quos
pertinent videbantur amitti, propter quod etiam murmurabant plurimi, and alii
se difficiliores ad conferendum talibus beneficia exhibebant: Nos volentes
super hoc congruum remedium adhibere, ne cuiquam sua liberalitas sit dampnosa,
per quam potius meruit gratiam and favorem, statuimus, ut clericis Ecclesiae
Romanae, vel aliis Ytalicis, qui praebendas vel Ecclesias, seu alia
Ecclesiastica beneficia in Anglia obtinent vel obtinuerint a modo decedentibus,
Praebend^e vel Ecclesiae, seu alia beneficia nequaquam a nobis vel alio illa
vice alicui conferantur, sed ad illos libere redeant ad quos illorum donatio
dinoscitur pertinere, etc. Dat. Lateran. 26. Febr. 12^1.
quarto Kalend. Martii, Pontificatus nostri anno quinto.

69. Yet neither this, nor the renewing of it by Gregory the 9. with a special
indulgence In eodem* MS. Gregor. 9. Bulla 3.
directed venerabilibus fratribus universis Archiepiscopis and Episcopis, a^
dilectis fill* is Abbatibus, and aliis Ecclesiarum Praelatis per Angliam
constitutis -- ut si quando ad vos literae Apostolicae pro beneficiandis
hujusmodi de caetero emanarunt, ad provisionem ipsorum inviti non teneamur,
nisi de hac indul gentia plenam fecerint mentionem. Dat. Lateran. April. 17:
Ann. 1230.
15. Kalend. Maii, Pontificatus nostri anno 4to., etc. could quiet the English,
or keep them from that confederation in Mat. Paris 1231. beginning, Mat. Pariss
p. 371, 18.
Tali Episcopo and tali capitulo, Vniversitas eorum qui magis volunt mori quam
a Romany confundi, etc. Which the Popes, by wisdom, and joining the Regal
auctority with their spiritual, sound means to bring to naught; and pursuing
the Papal interest without regarding what had past from them, gave the
Kingdom occasion 1241. to Mat: Paris* Ann* 1241. p^. 549, 18, 22^, etc.
observe, that in only three years Otho had remained Legate here, he bestowed
more then 300. spiritual promotions, ad fuam vel Papae voluntatem; the Pope
having Idem Ann^. 1240, p. 5329, 43.
contracted (as the report went) with the Romans, to confer to none but their
Children and Allies the rich benefices here, especially of Religious houses,
(as those perhaps he had most power over) and to that effect had writ to the
Bishops of Canterbury and Salisbury, ut trecentis Romany in primis beneficiis
vacantibus providerent. So that in the Council at Lions 1245. they complain of
these exorbitances, Apud Mat. Paris p. 6^7, 36.
and show the revenues the Italians received in England not to be less then 60
thousand marks; of which more cap. 4. n. 17.
hereafter: and in the year following 1246. reiterated their griefs to
Innocentius 4tus. Mat. Paris Ann. 1246. page 6^9, 9.
quod Italicus Italico succedit. Which yet was with little success: for the
Popes having (as we have heard) first settled all elections in the
Ecclesiastics, and after upon several occasions, on the submitting of the
English to his desires, bestowed the benefices in this and other Kingdoms on
his dependents, Cardinal. Ossat. Epist. 296. d^t. Rom, 1601. Decembr. 2^.
John the 22. (or, as Rot. Parl. 3. R. 2. n. 37.
some seem to think, Clement the 5. his immediate predecessor) endeavored the
breaking of elections by Cathedralls and Convents, reserving the free donation
of all preferments to himself alone.

70. From whence proceeded the reiterated complaints ^ against Papal
Provisions, in the Parliaments of Edward the 3. and Ric. the 2. for this
Kingdom never received his attempts in that kind: to which purpose the History
Wm Thorn 2082, 2. and sequent, vide Walsingham Ann. 1374. page 184, 1. Thorn,
Ann. 1373. col. 2187, 57. See the History of Nicholaus de Spyna resigning the
Abbey of St. Augustins, and on his nominating him, Thomas Fyndon preferred to be
Abbot thereby Martin the 4. who on the receipt of the Papal Bulls, acquainted
Edward the 1. with what had past at Rome himself being in England; yet by
command the house was seized into the Kings hand, and he at the Parliament held
at Acton Burnell fined at 400. marks, pro eo quod sic fuerat creatus in
Abbatem, licentia Domini Regis minime petita. Thorn, Col. 1939, 1. and 1934.
of John Devenish is remarkable. The Abbot of St. Augustines dying 1346. the
20. Ed. 3. the Convent by the Kings leave chose VVm. Kenington; but Clement the
6. by Provision bestowed the Abbacy on John Devenish, whom the King did not
approve of, yet came thither armed with Papal auctority. The Prior and Convent
upon command absolutely denied him entrance, ingressum monasterii in capite
denegando; who thereupon returned to Avignon. The business lying two years in
agitation, the King in the end, for avoiding expenses and other inconveniences,
Fide varias lectiones ad col. 2117. 54. quae vero ibi debent interseri
pertinent ad Hist. de qua hic agitur col. 2082.
ex abundanti concessit ut, si idem Johannes posset obtinere a summo Pontifice
quod posset mutare stylum suae creationis ^ive provisionis, scilicet non
promoveri Abbatia praedicta ratione donation^s vel provisionis Apostolicae, sed
ratione electionis capituli hujus loci, illa vice annueret, and suis
temporalibus gaudere permitteret: sed quidem hujusmodi causa coram ipso summo
Pontifice proposita, concludendo dixit, se malle cedere Pontificio, quam suum
decretum taliter revocare, etc. Which so afflicted the poor man, as the grief
killed him on St. John Baptists Eve 1348. without ever entering the Abbey; and
the dispute still continuing, the Pope 1349. wrote to the King, Hen. Knighton
col. 2601. 37, 49.
Ne Rex impediret, aut impediri permitteret promotos a curia per bullas
acceptare beneficia sibi taliter incumbentia. To which his Mary answered. Quod
Rex been acceptaret provisos clericos qui esse^t bonae conditionis, and qui
digni essent promoveri, and alios non.

71. But the year following 1350. the 25. Ed. 3. the Rot. Parl. octav. P^rif.
25. Ed. 3. n. 13. See the words of the peition, cap. 4. n. 15.
Commons meeting in Parliament complain with great resentment of these Papal
grants, showing the Court of Rome had reserved to it self both the collation of
Abbeys, Priories, etc. as of late in general all the dignities of England, and
Prebends in Cathedral Churches, etc. Upon which the statute of Provisors was
in that Parliament enacted; which was the leader to those other statutes, 27,
and 38. Ed. 3. Walsing. hist. 1374. page 184, 6. Rot. parl. 1. R. 2. n. 66.
Thorn, 1373. col. 2187, 58.
The 48. Ed. 3. 1374. the treaty between Ed. the 3. and Gregory the XI, was
concluded after two years agitation, wherein it was expressly agreed, quod
Papa de caetero reservationibus beneficiorum minime uteretur, etc.
Notwithstanding which, the Commons the next Parliament preferred a petition,
showing Rot. Parl. 50. Ed. 3. n. 110, 115.
all the benefices of England would not suffice the Cardinals then in being,
the Gregory 11.
Pope having by the addition of XII. new ones raised the number to XXX. which
was usually not above XII. in all; and therefore they desire it may be ordained
and proclaimed, that neither the Pope nor Cardinals have any Procurator or
Collector in England, sur peine de vie and de membre, etc. Yet the
inconveniences still continuing, 3. Ric. 2. produced that ^. Ric. 2. cap. 3. 7.
Ric. 2. cap. 12.
statute is in the print: I shall not here repeat otherwise, then that the
Commons in the Roll, seem to lay the beginning of these excesses no higher then
Clement the 5.

72. By these arts, degrees and accessions, the Church of Rome grew by little
and little to that immensenesse of opinion and power it had in our nation;
which might in some measure (whilst it was exercised by connivence only, upon
the good correspondency the Papacy held with our Kings and Church,) be
tolerated, and the Kingdom at any time by good Laws redress the
inconveniences it sustained. But that which has made the disputes never to be
ended, the parties not to be reconciled, is an affirmation that Christ
commanding Peter to feed his sheep, did with that give him so absolute a power
in the Church, (and derived the like to his successors Bishops of Rome,) as
without his assent no particular Church or Kingdom could reform it self: and
for that he as a Bishop cannot be denied to have as much power as others from
Christ, and may therefore in some sense be said to be Christi vicarii
sacerdotes sunt qui vice Christi legatione funguntur in Ecclesia. Eusebii Papae
Epist. 3. to. 1. Council. Electum a Fratribus Christi Vicari^m suscipiant,
(scil. in Abbatem:) Hydensium leges ab ^dgaro cap. 15. Council. Spelm. page 440.
quis locus poterit esse tutus, si rabies sancta sanctorum cruentat? and
Vicarios Christi, alumnos Ecclesiae dilacerat? Epist. Wi, Senonensis, apud
Hoved, Ann. 1171. fol. 299. b. 32. de marie Thomae Archiepiscopi.
Christ's Vicar, to appropriate it only to the Pope, and draw thence a
conclusion that jure divino he might and did command in all particulars Vice
Christi. And though no other Church in the Christian World does agree with the
Roman in this interpretation; though Historians of unquestioned sincerity have,
as we have (in some measure) heard, in their own ages delivered when and how
these additions crept in, and by what oppositions gained; that our Princes
have, with the advise of the Lay and Clergy, ever here moderated the
exorbitances of the Papacy in some particular or other, and likewise reformed
this Church; though the stipulations between our Kings and Rome have not been
perpetual, but temporary, not absolute, but conditional, as is to be seen in
that past between Alexander the 3. and Hen. the 2. viz. Gervas. Dorobern. col.
1422, 18. Hoved fol. 303. a. 1. Ann. 1172.
juravit quod ab Alexandro summo Pontifice, and ab Catholicis ejus
successoribus non recederet, quamdiu ipsum sicut Regem Catholicum habuerint;
that the English Bishops being excommunicated by the Pope Johan. Sarisbur.
Epist. 279. p. 483.
might not take an oath of obedience to his commands, quia regni consuetudines
impugnabat; though he did never exercise any authority here, but according to
such stipulations, contracts and agreements with our Princes, as the Laws
permitted; and therefore when he sent hither a Legate a Latere, Epist. Hen
Chichly in vita ejus, page 79.
he was tretyd with or he came in to the land, whon he schold have exercise of
his power, and how myche schold be put in execution: An aventure after he had
be reseyved, he whold have used it to largely, to greet oppression of your
people, etc. as the Archbishop wrote to Hen. 5. as I have showed numb. 53.

73. Though the Lawyers of the Kingdom do Fitz. Excommengement, 4, 6, 10.
constantly affirm, as the Law and Custom of the Realm, the Kings Courts never
to have carried regard to any foreign excommunication, and if any such came
from Rome, ^ide Hoveden. fol. 284. b. 23.
not to be put in execution, but by allowance first had: to which effect it is
remembered, the Bishops of London and Norwich having published in their Dioceses
the Popes excommunication of Hugh Earl (as it seems) of Chester, without the
privity of Hen. the 2. or his Chief Iusticiar, the Kings writ issued out in
this manner; Ex antiquo MS.
Londoniensis and Norwicensis Episcopi sint in misericordia Regis, and
summoneantur per Ficecomites and Bedellos, ut sint ^oram. Hoveden.
contra Iusticias Regis, ad rectum faciendum Regi and Iusticiis ejus de eo
quod, contra statuta de Clarendone, interdixerunt ex mandato Papae terram
comitis Hugonis, and excommunicationem quam Dominus Papa in ipsum fecerat per
suas parochias divulgaverunt sine licentia regis. This however contracted in
Hoveden 1165. and in page 103, 43.
Paris 1164. yet the difference is such as may deserve a remembrance. It seems
to me, what our Kings claimed, not to be altogether unlike the Girolamo Catena
vita di Pio 5to. page 96, 97. 98, 100. in 8vo. Romae 1587. and Adriani Hist.
lib. 19. page 1378. A.
Exequatur of Naples, observed to this day in that Kingdom, notwithstanding
all contests from Rome.

74. Neither did the Crown ever relinquish this right, not at the peace after
Beckets death, when Ger. Dorobern. col. 1422, 50.
Henry the 2. assented to quit no other then Consuetudines quae introductae
sunt tempore suo; which it is manifest this was not, as appears by page 6.
Eadmerus. It is farther observable, that by the common Laws (that is 2. H. 4.
Accion sur le case. 25. Fitz.
the common Custom of this Realm) the 31. Ed. 3. Excommengement. 6.
sentence of the Archbishop is valid in England, and to be allowed in the Kings
Courts, though controuled by the Pope: and to show our Princes had no regard to
anything of this nature from thence, other then such a complying with a
reverend Prelat as I have formerly mentioned did admit, it may not here be
unfitly inserted what Froissard. to. 1, cap. 47. page 58. Gall.
Froissard writes of Edward the third, with whom the Flemings joined against
the French; upon which, (but I shall deliver it in his own words) Adonc le Roy
de Frances' en complaignit au Pape Benedictus xii. Iacobus Meierus An^al.
Flandr. Ann. 1* 40. fol. 141, a.
Clement sixieme, qui getta une sentence d' excommuniement si horible, qu'il n'
estoit null prestre qui asast celebrer le divin service: De quoy les Flamens
envoyerent grande complainte au Roy d' Engleterre; lequel pour les appaiser,
leur manda, que la primiere fois qu'il rappasseroit la mer, il leur ammeneroit
des Prestres de son pais qui leur chanteroient la Mess, vousist le Pape ou non
^ar il estoit bien privilegie de ce fair: and par ce moyen s' appaiserent les
Flamens, etc. As for the privilege here spoken of, that can be no other then
the obligation all Kings owe unto God, for seeing his word sincerely taught
them live under their protection, without the disturbance of any.

75. In which kind ours have been so far from yieldding obedience to the Papal
attempts, as Edward the first could not be induced to spare the life of one
brought a Assise lib. 30. placit. 19.
Bull from the Pope, might have made some disturbance, but by his abjuring the
Realm; as his grandchild Edward the 3. did Walsingham Hist. Ann. 1358. page
165, 48.
cause some to suffer for the same offense. And on occasions our Kings have
prohibited all intercourse with Rome; Vide Hoved. fol 284. b. 13. Rot. Parl.
16. March, 3. H. 5.* n, 11, see the 9. 11. 4. 11. 37.
denied their Bishops going thither so much as for confirmation, but the
Metropolitans, if need were, should by the Kings writ be charged to confirm
them; Gervas. Dorobe^. col. 1552, 51.
commanded their subjects not to rely on any should come from thence,
affirming, quod in regnum nostrum nec propter negotium nostrum nec vestrum
ullatenus intrabit ad terram nostram destruendam. Yet notwithstanding so
notorious a truth, backed with so many circumstances, grounded upon
unquestioned monuments of antiquity, has not been received; but the bare
affirmation, Christ by pasceoves meas intended Peter, and by consequence the
Pope, to be the general Pastor of the world, and the meaning of those words to
be, that he should Bellarm. Recognit. page 21. Edit. Ingolstat. 1608.
regio more imperare, has so far prevailed with some, as to esteem the
standing for the rights of the Kingdom, the Laws and Customs of the Nation,
to be a departing from the Church Catholic; and to esteem no less then
Heretics those, who defending that which is their own from the invasion of
another, will not suffer themselves to be led hood-winkt, to think the
preservation of their proper liberty is a leaving Christ, his Church, or the
Catholic faith.

76. I dare boldly say, whoever will without partiality look back, shall find
the reverence yielded from this Church to Rome for more then a thousand years
after Christ, to have been no other then the respect of love, not of duty, and
Popes rather to consulere then imperare; their dictats to have been of the same
nature Tacit. de moribus Germanorum. Vide Lanfranci Epist. 8. p. 305.
the German Princes were of old, auctoritat^ suadendi magis quam jubendi
potestate; never requiring a necessity of obedience eo nomine that they came
from Rome, but for that they were just and reasonable: neither did the Pope
send any Agent hither to see them put in execution; but the Archbishop,
according to the exigent of times, receiving his wholesome advises, caused such
as he held of them did conduce to the good of the English Church to be
observed. So Theodore Beda lib. 4. cap. 17.
received those of Pope Martin, but Malmsbur. fol, 150, etc.
did not them concerning Wilfred, from Agatho. When Alexander the 2. had
exempted the Vide Eadmer. page 62, 36. Lanfranci Epist. 20. page 311.
Abbot of St. Edmunds-bury from the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Norwich,
Lanfrank took the Act from the Abbot: and Gregory the 7. is so far from using
commands in the cause, as he only earnestly entreats the Archbishop he would
stop the Bishop of Norwich from molesting the said Abbot; yet himself as it
seems did not restore the Bull of immunity to him during that Popes life. (but
of this before.) In the year 1070. on the Kings desire in a Council at
Windsor, Florent, Wigorn. Ann. 1070. page 435. and 436. Sim Dunelm. col. 29^.
Age^^icus Bishop of the South Saxons is degraded, and his Bishopric conferred
on Stigandus: Alexander the 2. not approving what had past, Baron. 10. 11. Anno
1071. n. 11.
writes to the King, this cause seemed to him non ad plenum tractata, ideoque
sicut in canonibus cautum est, in pristinum locum debere restitui judicavimus;
Deinde, causam ejus, juxta censuram canonicae traditionis diligenter
retractandam and definiendam, praedicto fratri nostro Archiepiscopo Lanfranco
commisimus. It is certain (however some writers might upon this or for ^ other
causes think his degradation to have been non canonice) those times did not
interpret this (though writ with so great earnestness) for other then advise
or intercession, not as of a person had an absolute power of commanding in the
business; for we never read of any proceedings upon it, not Lanfrank at all
ever to meddle in the case, that he ever esteemed Lanfranci Epist. 27, 28. and
apud Eadmer. page 13.
Stigand a lawful Bishop Epist. 27, 28. who in the year 1075. Malms. de
pontif. lib. 1. fol. 121. b. 27. Vita Lanfranci cap. 12. page* 13. C. col. 1.
being in a Council at London, according to the Decrees of it, removed his
Episcopal Chair from Selsey to Chichester, of which he Florent. Wigorn. Ann.
10^7. page 449.
died Bishop 1087. without being at all, for what appears, questioned or
disturbed after the first grant of it. Diverse examples of the like nature occur
too long to be repeated, where the King or Vide Gervas. Do^obern. Ann. 1087.
col. 1503, 38.
his chief Justice prohibit the Papal precepts from being put in execution:
and it is agreed by Lawyers, that not the command, but the constant obedience,
is it which denotes a right of commanding; and in cases of this nature
prohibentis potior est condito, one example in the negative, when the thing is
stood upon, being of more weight then twenty by compliance in the affirmative.

77. It is probable, neither the King nor the Bishops would introduce any new
matter of great concernment into this Church, without the privity of so great a
Doctor, Patriarch of a See, from which their ancestors had received the first
principles of Christian Religion; but it is manifest, what past, (if he were
acquainted with it) was by their own auctority, not his. When Off a intended
the erecting of Litchfield into an Archbishopric, he did it by a Council at
Calcuith: Lambertus (as what he approved not) producing Malms. de regibus lib.
1. fol. 15. b. 34.
crebra sedis Apostolicae and vetera and nova edicta against it, yet the thing
proceeded. Lucius the 2 Diceto Ann. 1142. Mat. West.
went so far in his intentions to raise Winchester to an Archiepiscopall Chair,
as he sent the pall to the Bishop: yet it being not approved here (as the event
shows) that Town never yet had the honor. Henry the first having in his Leg.
Hen. 1. cap. 73. page 204, 29,
Laws appointed how a Bishop, Presbyter, Monk, Deacon, etc. should suffer,
committing homicide, concludes, Si quis ordinatum occidat, velproximum suum,
exeat de patria sua, and Romam adeat, and Papam, and consilium ejus faciat; de
adulterio, vel fornicatione, vel Legendum Nunnae cum MS. London. Seld. and
nostro, non nimio, ut MS. Schachar.
Nunnae concubitu similiter poeniteat. Where it is observable, the King ordains
the Penance, permits the delinquents peregrination to Rome, to receive from the
Pope (as from a great Doctor of the Church) spiritual counsel, which else he
was not admitted to seek; for Leg. Hon. 1. cap. 31. p. 187. 29.
peregrina judicia modis omnibus submovemus; and again, Ibid. cap. 5. page 17^,
28.
ibi semper causa agatur, ubi crimen admittitur.

78. William the first (who began his expedition against Harald by the
counsel of Alexander the 2. and received a Ingulph. sol. 522, a. 6.
banner from him) minding the deposition of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
procured the Pope to send certain Ecclesiastics hither to join in the action,
as likewise soon after for determining the question of precedence between
Canterbury and York; upon which there grew an opinion, Eadmer. page 29, 23.
Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem a nullo hominum, nisi a solo Papa, judicari posse
vel damnari, nec ab aliquo cogi pro quavis calumnia cu^quam, eo excepto, contra
suum velle respondere. This no doubt was promoted by the Archbishops, as what
exempted them from all home jurisdiction, the Bishops in general did after
think in some sort to introduce; and thereupon put in this petition in
Parliament Ro^. Parl. 18. Ed. 3. n. 23. 24. pet. 1. du Clergy.
18. Ed. 3. qe pleise a Roy, en maintenance del estat de seint Esglise,
graunter and ordeiner en cest Parliament, qe null Ercevesque ou Evesque ^oit
desormez, arreynez, ne empes^hez devaunt ses Iusticos, en cause criminele, par
quecunque voye, de si come sur tiele cause nulle alme ne les poet juger, si
noun le Pape seulement. But to this the answer is no other then, Il est avis,
qe en cause de crime, null Ercevesque ou Evesque soit empesche devant les
Justices, si le Roy ne le command especialment tant qe autre remedy soit
ordeinez: which he did likewise confirm by Charter there registered, and as
Walsing. Hist. Ann. 1344. p. 155, 1.
Walsingham has truly recorded.

79. This opinion, though Protinus in tellexerunt quod prius n^n
animadverterunt. Eadmer. p. 29, 21.
new to the English, questionless encouraged Anselme to oppose the King in
many particulars, and Popes to go farther; as to claim Princes should not
confer Investitures, nor define matters of Episcopacy, etc. then to bestow
preferments within this Kingdom, at first by consent, and with the limitation
no Italian to succeed another, then to reserve to themselves the collation of
all benefices; of which before. To conclude this; whosoever will without
prejudice weigh the reformation of England by Hen. the 8. Edward the 6. and
more especially Queen Elizabeth in the point of supremacy, must grant these
Princes did not assume to themselves any thing, but such particulars as the
Court of Rome had in a long series of time incroached in on the Crown and
English Princeps Episcoporum, it was in no other sense then they did* St. Peter
Princeps Apostolorum; by which what principality they intended him, we cannot
better understand then by the Saxon, who renders it Beda Latin-Saxon edit.
1644. lib. 2. cap 6 p. 123. lib. 4. cap. 18. p. 302. and a. libi.
(...) Apostola, the Elder of the Apostles. If they successor or Vicarius
Pet^i, they were not alone appropriated to him, for Epist. 113, 148. Vide*
Stubs de Archiepisc. Ebor. in Aldredo col. 1703, 37. 1704, 13. vide supr. c. 2.
n 72.
Petrus Blesensis and others give the Bishop of York the same titles; and the
Bish. of Bath, who had a Church dedicated to St. Peter, he bids remember quia
Petri Vicarius estis. So did they likewise in some sense call Kings ^eg.
Edwardi Confessoris cap. 17. Seldeni Notae ad Eadmer. p. 155, 12, etc.
Christ's Vicars, as well as Bishops. Rot. Parl. at Glocest. n. 7^. in ^ounullis
libris impressis cap. 6, and 7.
head of the Church, it was, as being the first Bishop, he was held to be, as
St. Bernard tells us, Bernard. de consideratione lib. 3. cap. 3.
in beneficam causam; as they Rot. Parl. 1. Iien. 6. n. 43.
termed Oxford the fountain and mother of our Christian faith. I cannot
therefore but with a Philip Scot his treatise of Schism, p. 165.
late writer, that says England had a known subjection to Rome acknowledged
even by our Laws, ever from the conversion of our Country under St. Gregory,
had expressed in what particulars that subjection did consist, what those Laws
are, and where to be found. The truth is, as there is no doubt our Ancestors
in former times would not have joined with the Synod of Gap, in causing so I
will not undertake to maintain that the Pope is Antichrist, professing my
weakness and ignorance of those prophetical Scriptures to be so great, that I
dare not be confident in my interpretations of them, Paxter his Christian
concords Explication, p. 69.
disputable ambiguous a question as that the Pope is Antichrist to have been
taught as the faith of the English Church; so there is no question, but it has
been ever the Tenet of it, Pontificem Romanum majorem aliquam jurisdictionem
non habere sibi a Deo collatam in Sacra Scriptura in hoc regno Angliae, quam
alium quemvis externum Episcopum: Which our Diceto, Ann. 607. and 608. col.
437, 23.
Historians do mention as what proceeded from the constitutions of the Church
and assent of Emperors, not as of a thing in it self juris divini: insomuch as,

80. That proposition, Antiquit. Britan. Eccles. page 384, 37. edit. London,
1573.
when it was propounded 1534. in Henry the 8ths time in convocation, all the
Bishops without exception, (and of others only one doubted, and four placed
all Ecclesiastic power in the Pope,) both the Universities, and most of the
Monasteries and Collegiat Churches of England, approved and avowed as the
undoubted opinion of the Church of this Nation in all ages. Neither can I see
how it can be otherwise: for if the Church of Canterbury Ger. Dorobern. col.
1663, 24. col. 1615, 60, 63.
were omnium nostrum matter communis sub sponsi sui Jesus Christi dispositione,
if it were Matter omnium Anglicanarum Ecclesiarum, and suo post Deum proprio
laetatur pastore; that is, if the Archbishop had no mediate spiritual superior
but Christ and God; if the power the Pope exercised over him within this Realm
were Epist. Radulph. Archiepisc. Calixto 2. col. 1736. 1.
volu^tate and beneficio, gained, as I have showed, by little and little,
voluntarily submitted unto; it could be no other then jure humano: and then it
must be granted, the Church of England could not hold any necessity of being in
subjection to the Sea or Church of Rome jure divino; as it is manifest they did
not, in that they Eadmer. page 25, 40.
sometimes acknowleded no Pope, Mat. Paris, Ann. 116^. page 107, 45. page 111,
24. Vide Epist. Gilberti Londonensis Episc. apud Hoveden. fol. 288, 34. 38.
Ann. 1166.
otherwhiles showed an intent of departing from his union, and the Bishops as
well as Lay Lords advised Anselm, Eadmer. p. 28, 23.
Vrbani obedientiam abijcere, subjectionis jugum excutere, etc. Neither could
the Church of England be any way possible guilty of Schism, adhering to their
Ghostly Superior next and immediate under Christ Jesus.

As for the temporal profits the Court of Rome received hence, though the
denying them can be no just cause of such a spiritual imputation, especially
on private men; yet certainly who will examine their beginning, as he shall find
it to have been by the bounty or permission of our Princes, so upon search he
will perceive the Kingdom went no farther then the Common Law, the precedent
of former times, and such an exigency did force them to: of which therefore I
shall add a word or two.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Payments to the Papacy from England.
THe vast sums the Court of Rome did of late years upon several occasions
export out of this Kingdom, mentioned in the 25. Hen. 8. cap. 21.
statute of the 25. Hen. the 8. are spoken of by several of our writers: and
though some Apud Mat. Paris Epist. universitat. Angli^e, Anno 1245. p. 667. 38.
have in general expressed how much the Nation suffered in that kind; yet
none, that I know, in one tract did ever show by what degrees the Papacy gained
so great a revenue, as the Commons in Edward the thirds days had cause to
complain, it did turn Rot. Parl. octav. Purific. 25. Ed. 3. n. 13. of which
hereafter n. 15.
a plus grand destruction du Royaume qe toute la guerre nostre Seigneur le Roy.
I have thought therefore that it will not be amiss to set down, how the Pope
came to have so great an influence over the treasure of the Clergy in this
Land, by seeking out how and when the greatest of the paiments made to him
began, what interruptions or oppositions were met with, either at the beginning
or in the continuance of them.

2. The first payment, that I have read of, which gave the Pope an entrance as
it were in to it, was that bounty of our Princes known to this day by the name
of Peter Pence: and this as it was given for an Vide Epist. Wm^. 1. apud Baron.
to. 11. Ann. 1079. and inter Lanfranci Epist* 7.
Alms by our Kings, so was it no otherwise received by the Court of Rome;
Epist. Henrico 1. apud Eadmer. page 113, 27.
Eleemosyna beati Petri, prout audivimus, ita perpera^^ doloseque collecta est,
ut neque mediam ejus partem hactenus Ecclesia Romana susceperit, says
Paschalis the 2. So that no question Hist. lib. 4. p. 89, 40, 43.
Polidore Virgil very inconsiderately terms it vectigal, and others, who by
that gift contend the Kingdom became Notae in Lanfranci Epist. 7. p. 347. col.
2. d.
tributarium feudatarium Sto. Petro ejusque successoribus: for though the word
tributum may perhaps be met with in elder Malmsbur. sol. 128. b. 25.
writers, yet never did any understand the Pope by it to become a Superior Lord
of the Lay fee, but used the word metaphorically; as we do to this day term a
constant rent a kind of tribute, and to those who pay it, and over whom we have
in some sort a command, we give the title of subjects; not as being Princes
over them, but in that particular being under us, they are for it styled our
inferiors.

3. What Saxon King first conferred them, whether Ina, as Polychronic. lib. 5.
cap. 24. See Brompton col. 802, 23.
Ranulphus Cestrensis says report carried, or Offa, as Col. 7^6, 37.
Iorvalensis, I will not here enquire, as not greatly material. Lib. 4. p. 89,
44.
Polidore Virgil tells, some write Ethelwolphus continued it: with whom
Brompton seems to concur. It is true, our Historians remember he caused
Florent. Wigorn. Ann. 855. page 300. and Sim. Dunelm.
300. mancusas denariorum ( De Regibus lib 2. cap. 2. fol. 22. a. 27.
Malmsbury renders it trecentas auri marcas (which was ten times the value of
silver) as Iorvalensis col. 802, 27.
another trecenta talenta) to be carried every year from hence to Rome; which
could be no other then the just application of Peter Pence: for amongst sundry
complaints long after from This appears by the Epistle of William the 1. to
Paschalis the 2. before cited, and so to Henry the 1.
Rome, we find the omission of no payment instanced in, but of that duty only;
neither do the body of the Kingdom in their Apud Mat. Paris p. 698, 51.
Remonstrance to Innocentius 4. 1246. mention any other as due from hence to
Rome.

4. This therefore thus conferred by our Kings, was for the generality continued
to the Papacy; yet (to show, as it were, that it proceeded only from the
liberality of our Princes,) not without some stops. Of those in the times of
William the first and Henry his Son I have Cap. 3. n. 11. cap. 4. n. 2.
spoke, Henry the 2. during the dispute with Becket and Alexander the 3.
commanded the Sheriffs through England, that Apud Mat. Paris Anno 1164. p. 103,
45. and Hoveden Anno 1165, so. 284. b. 26.
Denariibeati Petri colligantur, and serventur, quousque inde Deminus Rex
voluntatem suam praeceperit. During the Reign of Edward the 3. the Popes
abiding at Avignon, many of them French, their partiality to that side, and the
many Victories obtained by the English begat the proverb, Hen. Knighton col.
2615, 41.
Ore est le Pape devenu Franceis, and Jesus devenu Angleis, etc. about which
time our Historians observe, the King gave command Caxton. Continuat.
Polychronic. ca^. 2. Stow Ann. 1365.
no Peter Pence should be gathered or paid to Rome. And this restraint, it
seems, continued all that Princes time; for Richard the 2. his successor at his
beginning caused John Wickliffe, esteemed the most Hen. Knighton c^l. 2664, 66,
and 2644, 31.
knowing man of those times, to consider the right of stopping them; whose
determination in that particular yet remains, entitled In fasciculo ziz^niorum
MS. in Bibliotheca Antistitis Arm^chani, fol. 59, b. col. 2.
Responsio Magistri Iohannis Wicliff ad dubium infrascriptum, quaesitum ab eo
per Dominum Regem Angliae Richardum secundum and magnum Concilium, anno regni
sui primo: then the question follows, Dubium est, utrum regnum Angliae possit
legitime, imminente necessitate suae defensionis, thesaurum Regnidetinere, ne
deferatur ad exteros, etiam Domino Papa sub poena censurarum and virtute
obedientiae hoc petente; and relicto viris peritis quid dici debet in ista
materia, secundum jus canon^cum, secundum jus Angliae velcivile solum restat
suadere partem affirmativam dubii, secundum principia legis Christi: then
shows, those paiments being no other then Alms, the Kingdom was not obliged
to continue them longer then stood with its own convenience, and not to its
detriment or ruin; agreeing therein with that of Divines, extra casus
necessitatis and superfluitatis Eleemosyna non est in praecepto.

5. But in the Parliament held the same year, the question was concluded: for
there this petition being preferred, Rot. Parl. 1 Ric. 2. n. 84.
que y puisse estre declaree en cest present Parliament, si la charge de la
denir Seint Pierre, appelle Rome penny, seraleve des dites Commes, and pay al
Collector nostre Seint Perele Pape ou noun; the answer was, soit fait come
devant ad este usee: By which the use of them being again returned, did so
remain till Henry the 8ths. time. For though in a Walsing. Hist. Anno 1408. p.
420, ^.
council held at London 1408, it was treated de censu and obedientia Papae
subtrahendis vel non subtrahendis; yet that it past farther then words I have
not observed. But King 25. Hen. 8. cap. 21.
Henry 1533/4 took them so absolutely away, as though Queen Mary repealed that
Act, and Paulus Quartus dealt earnestly with her Hist. Council. Trident. lib. 5.
Agents in Rome for restoring the use of them; yet I cannot find they were ever
gathered, and sent thither during her time: but where some Monasteries did
answer them to the Pope, and did therefore collect the tax, that in process
of time became as by custom paid to that house; which being after derived to
the Crown, and from thence by grant to others, with as ample profits as the
Religious persons did possess them, I conceive they are to this day paid as
an appendant to the said Manors, by the name of Smoak-mony.

6. Before I pass from this, one thing is not to be omitted: that however the
Pope had this as a due, and for that end his Collector did abide in England;
yet he might not raise the ancient accustomed proportion of the Tax, nor in
any kind alter the manner of taking it: for when Rigandus from the Pope
endeavored that, he was straightly prohibited by Edward the 2. The Fox Acts
Monuments in Edw. 2.
Act it self is printed.

As for the value these Peter Pence did amount to, I have seen in an old MS.
belonging to the Church of Chichester, a Bull said to be of Vide Council. Spelm.
p. 313.
Gregory 5ths. that did proportion them after this manner.

Episcop. Episcop. l. s. d. l. s. d. Cant. 07 18 00 Exoniensis 09 05 00 London.
10 10 00 Wigorniensis 10 05 00 Roffensis 05 10 00 Herefordens. 06 00 00
Norwicensis 21 00 00 Bathon. 12 00 00 Eliensis 05 00 00 Sarisbur. 17 00 00
Lincolniensis 42 00 00 Coventrensis 10 00 00 Cicestrensis 08 00 00 Eborac. 11
10 00 Winton. 17 06 08

Dat. apud Vrbem Veterem x. Kalend. Maii, Pontificatus nostri anno secundo.

But this could not be the Bull of Gregory the 5. who dyed about 997. before
Florent. Wigorn. Ann. 1109. p. 482. and alii.
Ely was erected, or Episcopal chaires placed in Remigius circum Ann. 1080.
tr^nslulit sedem Episcopalem de Dorkecestra Lincoln. and Herebertus circa 1086.
de Thetfordia, Norwi^ch. Malmsbur. de Pont.
Lincoln or Norwich.

7. The last article in the oath prescribed the Clergy from the Pope, of
obedience to him, was, not any way to alienate the possessions of their houses
inconsulto Romano Pontifice. Whether this clause were inserted when 1115, it
was first required of Cap. 3. n. 50.
Raulf the Archbishop of Cant. I have not been able to certify my self; and am
apt to believe it was not: for though we find it in Vitae Abbat. p. 140, 27.
Hist, major. page 414, 26.
Math. Paris, when it was first imposed on Abbots and Bishops, yet that was
after the Court of Rome had tasted the sweetness of taxing other Churches;
neither is it in any of those conditions mentioned by Ann. 1191. col. 663. 6.
Diceto. But when ever it came in, it implying a right of alienating the
possessions of Religious houses and Churches, with the Papal license, bred an
opinion, that without his assent there could be no good sale made of their
estates, by any temporal or spiritual power whatsoever, though with their own
concurrence: and the Court of Rome grew to maintain, Mat. Paris Ann. 1226. page
328, 13.
That being a Mother, she ought to be relieved by her Children. Ordericus
Vitalis page 846. c.
Gelasius the second in his distress 1118, is said to have desired a
Normannica Ecclesia subsidium orationum, and magis pecuniarum: yet certainly
the Norman Church did not then at all condescend to any; for the French Agent
in the Mat. Paris Additament. MS. ubi supra, cap. 3. n. 66.
Lugubri querimonia (of which before) mentions him amongst diverse others who,
expelled Italy, fled into France for succor, yet, non in aliquo gravaverunt
Ecclesiam Gallicanam, nec dando beneficta, nec petendo subsidium pecuniae vel
armorum, sed spiritualibus armis, scilicet lacrymis and orationibus, quae sunt
arma ministrorum Christi, maluerunt esse contenti, etc. So that certainly if
any collection were made for Gelasius, it was so private, public notice was
not taken of it.

8. The first extraordinary contribution raised by allowance for the Popes use
in this Kingdom, I take not to have been before 1183. when Lucius 3us. at odds
with the Citizens of Rome, not any ways able to resist their fury, sent to
Henry the 2. postulans ab eo and a clericatu Angliae auxilium. The thing was
taken into consideration, and for the precedent, it was not thought fit any
thing should be given as from the Clergy, but that they might raise a supply
amongst themselves for the King, without permitting a foreign Agent to
intermeddle; and his Majesty might with that relieve the Pope as he should see
occasion. But take in the Historian his own words. Hoveden Ann. 1183. fol. 354.
b. 43.
Consuluit Rex Episcopos suos and clerum Angliae de petitione summi Pontificis:
cui Episcopus and Clerus consuluerunt, ut ipse secundum voluntatem suam and
honorem faceret auxilium Domino Papae, tam pro se quam illis; quia tolerabilius
esset, and plus placeret eis, quod Dominus Rex, si vellet, accepisset ab eis
recompensationem auxilii illius, quam si permisisset nuncios Domini Papae in
Angliam venire, ad capiendum de iis auxilium; quia si aliter fiere^, posset
verti in consuetudinem, ad detrimentum regni. Adqu^^vit Rex consilio little, and
fecit auxilium magnum Domino Papae in auro and argento. The judicious reader
may observe hence things very remarkable: as, that the King did in points
concerned the Pope consult with the English Church, and followed their advise;
the great care the Clergy took to avoid any sinister consequence in future, and
therefore did themselves give to the Prince, as to whom it was due from them,
and not to the Pope, who by custom might come to claim it: as indeed he did
after step so far, as to prohibit their giving the King at all, without De
immunitate Ecclesiae in Sexto cap. 3. vid. Knig^ton col. 2489, 37.
his license, endeavoring the gaining a supremacy over them as well in
Temporalls as Spiritualls, who hitherto had not meddled with collections of
that nature.

For the Gervas. Dorobern. Ann. 1166. col. 1399* 7.
same Henry, about 17 years before, (after the example of the French) did cause
a supply be made for the relief of the Eastern Church; but I do not find it to
have been either upon any motion from Rome, or any part of what was so levied
to have been converted that way.

9. But the former granted 1183. passing with so great circumspection,
persuaded the Popes not to think fit suddenly (as it seems) of attempting the
like; yet that the Church of England might not be unaccustomed to paiments,
they sometimes exhorted Christians to the subvention of the Holy Land, and
thereupon did distribute Spiritual Indulgences (which cost them ^ot a
farthing) and procured Princes to impose on their Subjects for that end: so did
Newbrigensis lib. 3. cap. 21, 22, 23, etc. Hoved. Ann. 1187. fol. 363. b. and
sequentibus. Ger. Dorobern. c. 1522. 11.
Clement the 3. or rather Gregory the 8th. about 1187. stir up Hen. the 2. and
Philip Augustus, Mat. Paris Ann. 1201. page 206, 54. Ann. 1292, page 20^. 12.
Innocentius 3. King John: and, as a general Superintendent over the Clergy,
did then intromit himself and his Agents in the raising of it, and so did
convert some good proportion to his own use; insomuch as Johannes Ferentinus,
sent hither 1206. from the same Innocentius 3us, Mat. Paris Ann. 1206. page
214, 33.
carried hence a good quantity; upon which King John writ unto the Pope 1207.
Mat. Paris p. 224, 25.
quod uberiores sibi fructus proveniant de regno Angliae, quam de omnibus
regionibus citra Alps constitutis, etc. Yet truly, to raise any considerable
sum of money from the whole body of the Clergy, for support of the Papal
designs, I do not find any great attempt before Gregory the ix. 1229. Mat.
Paris page 361, 2, 49. page 362, 9.
demanded a tenth of the movables, of both Lay and Ecclesiastics: to which
the Temporal Lords would not at all assent, Nolentes Baronias vel laicas
possessiones Romanae Ecclesiae obligare; and the Clergy were unwillingly
induced to the contribution. The Pope thus entered, meddled no more with the
Lay, but of Mat. Paris Ann. 1240. page 526, 20.
the Clergy eleven years after he demanded by his Legate a fifth part of their
goods. Many meetings were had about it: Page 534, 8, 39.
they showed the King, they held their Baronies of him, and could not without
his assent charge them; that having formerly given a tenth, this of a fifth
might create a custom: and at a meeting in Barksh^re exhibited sundry solid
reasons (too long to be here repeated) against the contribution. But nothing
would serve; the King made for it, and the Archbishop out of private ends
paying it, they were in the end forced to yield such a supply, as at his
departure the year following it was said, Mat. Paris Ann. 1241. page 549, 2^.
there did not remain so much treasure in the Kingdom, as he had in three
years extorted from it (the vessels and ornaments of Churches excepted.)

10. But neither the paying it with so great reluctance, nor the Apud Mat.
Paris p. 666, 51.
Remonstrance preferred in the Council of Lions 1245. from the body of the
Kingdom, of the several exactions the Nation lay under from Rome, and
likewise Apud Mat. Paris Anno 1246, p. 698, 40, 51, etc.
to the Pope himself the year following, could any way stop the proceedings;
but Innocentius 4tus. 1246, Ibid. page 701, 56. page 707, ^0. page 708.
invented a new way, to charge every Religious house with finding and paying a
quantity of soldiers for his service in the wars for one year: which being
required from both the English and French, produced here those prohibitions in
the same Author against raising any Tallagium or auxilium. But the French
caused their Agent to use a serious expostulation in the business; which,
because it is not printed, I shall deliver at large as I In Lugubri querimoni^
Additament. Mat. Paris MS. de qua supra, cap. 3. n. 59, 67.
find it. Nuncii de novo accesserunt, nova gravamina addentes supradictis:
Nuper enim mandavistis Ecclesiis, ut quia persecutor vester ad parts istas
venturus est, mittant vobis militiam munitam ad resistendum ei, quia non est
concilium cedere venienti; super quo satis excusabiles sunt Ecclesiae, quia non
habent militiam, nec est in part eorum mittere quod non habent, quos etiamsi
haberent and mitterent, non est tutum confid^re de ipsis. Nec scitur etiam de
illis, utrum venturus sit, quia etiamsi veniret, praeferendum esset (ut
videretur) concilio humano concilium Domini, qui dicit, Si persecuti fuerint
vos in unam civitatem, fugite in aliam, etc. And in the same year he Mat. Paris
Ann. 1246. page 707, 2. ut si clericus ex tunc decederet intestatus, ejusdem
bona in usus Domini Papae converterentur.
attempted the making himself heir to any Clerk that should die intestate; and
the year Mat. Paris p. 730, 16.
following received from the Clergy eleven thousand marks, exceptis exemptis
and tribus clericis, as an addition to six thousand he had received the Ibid.
Ann. 1246. p. 715, 16.
year before.

11. I shall not here take upon me to repeat all the times and ways by which
the subject had his purse thus drained, the labor would be too great, and the
profit too little: it shall suffice to note, the Court of Rome, by much
struggling, overcame in the end all difficulties, and did arrive to that height,
the Rot. Parl. 50. Ed. 3. n. 107.
Commons were forced in Parliament 1376. to prefer this petition: Si tossed come
le Pape voet avoir monoie pur maintenir ses guerres de Lombardy, ou ailleurs
pur despendere, ou pur raunson auscuns de ses amys prisoners Fraunceys prises
par Englois, il voet avoir subsidy de Clergy d' Engleterre; and tantost celuy
est grantez par les Prelates, a cause qe les Evesqes n'osent luy contrestere,
and est leve de Clergy sans lour assent ent avoir devant: Et les Seculers
Seigneurs my preignent guard, ne ne font face coment le Clergy est destruict,
and la monoye de Royalme malement emporte.

12. And indeed the Kingdom had great reason thus to complain: see one of many
examples that may be alleged. In the year 1343, the 17. Ed. 3. Clement the 6.
sent hither to provide for two Cardinal Priests, one out of the Province of
York, the other Canterbury, in spiritual livings, to the value of 1000. marks
a piece, Rot. Parl. 17. Ed. 3. n. 59.
sur une si generale and coverte maniere, qe la sum passer a dix mill marqes
avaunt qe le down soit accept. But the State would not endure this, Walsing.
Hist. p. 150, 30.
but chasing their Agents out of the Kingdom, the King sent through every
County, Hen. Knighton. col. 25^3, 50.
Ne quis ab eo tempore and deinceps admitteretur per bullam, sine speciali
licentia Regis: And a little after, the Parliament held the 20. of Ed. 3. 1346.
the Commons yet more plainly, Rot. Parl. 20. Ed. 3. n. 33. ^. 35*
Nous ne voulons soeffrer qe payement soit fait as Cardinalx, pour lour demoere
en France de treter, etc. And soon after they represent this very particular of
2000. marks to be N. 35.
en anientissement de la terre, and encrese de nos enemies; and therefore
qu'^ls ne soient en null maniere so^fferts, etc. In both which his Matie. gives
them content.

13. Neither did the Papacy, having gained the possession (as I may term it) of
taxing, impose these payments for one year only upon foreign Churches, as at
first, but for six successively one after the other. So did Wmus Thorn col.
1926, 27.
John the 21. in the year 1277. and Wasing. Hist. p. 73, 3.
Clement the 5. in the Council of Vienna 1311. pretending an employment
against the Infidells; but procuring Princes to join with them in the
collecting, that it might be paid with more facility, (and therefore gave them
either the Vide Mat. Paris Anno 1252. p. 849, 12.
whole, or part of what was so raised; from whence no doubt grew that proverb
so full of infamy, Ibid. Anno 12^5. p. 917. 39.
That the King and Pope were the Lion and Wolf) did in the end (as we have
heard) convert the treasure to the ransoming their friends, the maintenance of
their wars, and such like mundane ends. The Chronicon de Regibus Francorum ad
finem Pauli Aemilii, Ann. 1326. and du Tillet in Chronico.
French affirm, the first of their Kings who shared with Rome in these levies,
to have been Charles le Bell, about 1326. which if it were, our Kings were before
them; but such as succeeded knew there as well as elsewhere, how to apply what
was thus gathered wholly to themselves, wiping the Popes clean out: and
notwithstanding all Vide Hist. del Council. Trident. in 4to, lib. 5. p. 408.
complaints in that kind from Rome, De beneficiis lib. 7. c. 1. in fine.
Duarenus observes the Crown of France to have none more certain or speedy
revenue, then that is thus raised of the Ecclesiastics.

14. But these exactions grew so burdensome, Martin the 5th. at Council.
Constant. Sess. 43. de Decimis and aliis oneribus: concii. genesis Romae, page
279. and page 297.
the Council of Constance 1417. was constrained to establish, Nullatenus
imponantur generaliter super totum clerum, nisi ex magna and ardua causa, and
utilitate universalem, Ecclesiam concernente, and de consilio and consensu and
subscriptione fratrum nostrorum, sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinalium and
Praelatorum, quorum consilium commode haberi poterit; nec specialiter in aliquo
regno vel provincia, inconsultis praelatis ipsius regni vel provinciae, etc.
Upon which Decree a supply of the Tenth being Herbert. Hist. Hen. 8. page 57.
p. 59* and ^ullae sive Epistolae Leonis de eadem re, quas vidi manuser.
twice demanded, viz. 1515, and 1518. by Leo the xth. against the Turk, the
English Clergy denied them both times. Thus the Papacy by little and little
gained in England the power of sometimes laying that Tax on Churchmen, is to
this day known by the name of a Tenth, which became limited, as we have seen;
and after by 26. Hen. 8. ^ap. 3.
statute the 26. Hen. 8th. transferred to the King to be paid annually unto
him; as were likewise the First fruits or profits of one year, commonly called
Annats, (for I take them to be the same) of all spiritual livings: of which a
word.

15. The first raising of them seems to have been, that when the Court of
Rome did confer on Clerks and Chaplains residing with them, benefices in the
Dioceses of others, they who thus obtained from that Chair not only the
Spiritual, of Ordination, but likewise the Temporal of Profit, did at first,
either to show their gratitude, or for that the Pope would have it so,
voluntarily give the whole, or some part of the first years revenue to the
Court, by whose favor they received all: and the Papacy perceiving the gain
did thus accrue, labored to extend it farther; was in some sort imitated by
other Bishops; and for avoiding the show of Simony, covered what was thus took
with the names of Annates, Vacantiae, Minuta servitia were small paiments, such
as had any expedition in the Court of Rome were liable unto, as fees to certain
Officers or servants of the Pope, called therefore familiares Dui. Papae: as of
late, such as renewed leases of the Archbishop of Cant. did to his Secretaries,
and others of ^is retinue. 1389. there was paid 4 of these to the ^ope, and
one to the dependents on the Cardina^ls. Thorn col. 2194, 31. the rest have no
difficulty.
Minuta servitia Scripturae, and such like. But as St. Gregory Lib. 4. Epist.
44. Indict. 13.
tolerating only a liberality to be given after the reception of the Pall, his
successors knew how to turn it to a revenue; so these, however at first begun,
did afterward become an^ually a profit. What others did in this kind, is not
necessary to that I treat of; but upon the practice of the Church of Rome, the
25. Ed. 3. the Commons Rot. Parl. Octav. Purif. 25. Ed. 3. n. 13.
exhibit this petition to the King: Pry sa Commune, etc. de veer and regarder,
etc. Coment le Pape ne soloit avaunt ces heures fair reservations de null
benefice de seint Esglise, si'l ne fust de benefice de ses Chapleyns, ou de ses
Clerks qe moreront en la Court de Rome; and ore tard and de novel pur covetise
d'avoir les primers fruicts, and les autres profitz qe endependent, ad'
reservee and reserve de jour en autre a sa collation generalement and
especialment, si bien Abb^ies and Priories, come toutz les autres grantz
beneficez d'Engleterre qe sont de Patronag^ espiritel, and generalementil ad'
reservee ore tard toutes les dignites d'Engleterre, and Provendres en Esglises
Cathedralles, and les done si bien as Aliens come as Denezeins, and issint ad
le Pape toutz les primers fruicts des dits benefices. By which it appears, the
Papacy, that formerly took the first fruits of only such livings as men dyed
possessed of in the Court of Rome, had an intent of extending them to all were de
Patronage espiritel: but whether an active King stopped upon this the endeavors
of that See, or the Popes, wise men, thought it not ^it to make too sudden an
irruption into the profits of other Churches, is not greatly material; ^ot.
Parl. 50. Ed, 3. n. 1^9.
but 25. years after, the Commons again represent the Popes Collector, Ore de
novel cest an and nele pressed unqes devant al oeps du Pape les primiers fruitz
de ches^un benefice, don't il fait provision ou collation, except de graces
grantez aux povres, ou il ne soleit prendre nulles fruictes ^orsqe soulement
des beneficez vacantz en la Court de Rome.

16. But in whose time these first fruits began to be taken, there seems to me
some difference amongst writers. Theodoricus a Niem (who lived in the Court of
Rome, Secretary as some write to Gregory the xi. or rather, as it seems to me,
of Urban the vi.) De schismate^ inter Vrban^m 6. etc. lib. 2. (...).
says, Boniface the ix. circa decimum annum sui regiminis, viz. 1399. primos
fructus unius anni omnium Ecclesiarum Cathedralium and Abbatiarum vacantium
suae camerae reservavit, it a quod quicunque extunc per eum promoveri voluit,
ante omnia cogebatur solvere primos fructus ecclesiae, vel monasterii cui
praefici voluit, etc. With whom Platina in Vita Ponifucii ix.
Platina agrees; Annatarum usum primus imposuit, (Bonifacius ix.) hac
condition, ut qui beneficium consequeretur, dimidum annui proventus fisco
Apostolico persolverent: sunt tamen qui hoc inventum Iohanni xxii. ascribunt,
etc. The same likewise De invent. rerum lib. 8. cap. 2.
Polidore Virgil affirms, though he speak as if some thought them of an higher
time, which under favor I do not credit; for Tract, de Annatis non solvend's,
in fasciculo rerum expetend. and fugiend. fol. 18. 9. E^ interopera ejus page
82. col. 2.
Nicholaus Clemanges, in the treatise he writ concerning them, says, that when
such reservations fell into consideration in the Council of Constance (he
lived whilst it ^ate) no beginning could be assigned before John the xxii.
began them, pro certo passagio ultramarino, and quibusdam aliis necessitatibus
suis. To which I may add the opinion of the wise and learned Epist. 296. Romae
22 Decembr. 1601.
Cardinal d'Ossat: I^han xxii. Francois de nation, don't il me deplaist, fust
le primier que outre les taxes and Annates qu'il inventa, etc. And Ranulphus
Cestrensis, one of that time, Polychron. lib. 7. cap. 42. apud Hen. Knighton
col. 2534, 8.
says of him, Beneficiorum per mortem seu resignationem vacantium, sive per
translationem, primos fructus reservavit, ita ut Rector iustitutus taxationem
beneficii sui aut residuum taxationis acceptaret: ex qua cautela innumerabiles
thesauri ad manus Papae devenerunt, etc. and Knighton himself, col. 2565, 47.
reservavit curiae omnes primos fructus vacantium Ecclesiarum, sive per mortem
sive per resignationem, etc. Hist. Anno 1316. p. 84, 45.
Walsingham 1316. Summus Pontifex reservavit camerae suae primos fructus
beneficiorum omnium in Anglia per trienntum vacantium: which not occurring of
any Pope before, I cannot ascribe other to have begun them then he; who though,
in a De praebendis and dignitatibus cap. 11. extravagant. Commun.
bull dated the 5. January 4. Pontificatus, he mention Fructus redditus,
proventus, primi anni beneficiorum, yet by the doubts he there resolves, shows
the practice of them then newly brought into the Church. But whereas the
Clemanges, Platina, Polidor.
writers before-named agree, the English, of all Nations, never received in
this the full extent of the Papal commands, I conceive it to arise from the
good Laws they made against them: of which before, and after.

17. It is hardly credible how great a mass of treasure was by these ways
sent hence into Italy. Mat. Paris Ann. 1245. page 658, 49. page 667, 36.
The revenues the Italians were possessed of in England 1245. are accounted not
less then 60. thousand Marks; Ibid. page 859, 48.
1252. it was thought they did amount to 70. thousand (all which for the most
drained thither:) and in Rot. Parl. Octav. purif. 25. Ed. 3. n. 13. tent. Ann.
1351.
the Parliament held about an hundred years after, the Commons show, what went
hence to the Court of Rome, turn a plus grand destruction du Royalme qe toute
la guerre nostre Seigr. le Roy: yet, notwithstanding so many statutes as were
made by that Prince, for moderating the excesses in this kind, the 50th. they
complain, (I shall give it contractedly) Rot. ^arl. 50. Ed. 3. n. 105. 10^
the Popes collect^r here held a receipt equal to a Prince or Duke; sent
annually to Rome from the Clergy, for Procuration of Albeys, Priories,
First Fruits, etc. xx. thousand Marks, some years more others less, and to
Cardinals and other Clerks beneficed in England as much, besides what was
conveyed to English Clerks remaining there to solicit the affairs of the
Nation: upon which they desire his Ma^y, no collector of the Pope may reside in
England.

18. But the King, as it seems, not greatly complying with their desires, the
Rot. ^arl. 51. Ed. 3. n. 78, 79.
year following they again instance, that certain Cardinals, notorious
enemies, had procured a clause d'anteferri to certain benefices, within the
Provinces of Canterbury and York; that the Popes Collector was as very an enemy
to this State as the French themselves; that his housekeeping here at the
Clergies cost was not less then 300l. by the year; that he sent annually from
hence beyond Seas a la foitz xx. Mill. mares; a la foitz xx. Mill. lib.
at one time 20 thousand marks, sometimes 20. thousand pounds; and what was
worse, espied the secrets of the Kingdom, vacations of benefices, and so daily
made the certainty known to the said Court; did now raise for the Pope the
first fruits of all dignities and other smaller promotions, causing by oath to
pay the true value of them, surmounting the rate they were formerly taxed at:
which now in the very beginning ought to be crushed, etc. Upon which
considerations they desire, all strang^rs, Clerks and others (excepting
Knights, Esquires, Merchants, Artificers) might suddenly avoid the Kingdom; no
subjects, without the Kings express license, to be Proctors, Aturneys, F^rmors
to any such Alyen, under the pain, after Proclamation made, of life, member,
loss of lands and goods, and to be dealt with as thieves and robbers; no money
during the wars to be transported out of the Kingdom by exchange or otherwise,
on the forfeiture of it. But to this the answer only was, Setiegnent les
estatutz and ordonances ent faites. Whereupon the Rot. Parl. 1. Ric. 2. n. 66,
6^. 68.
next Parliament the Commons preferred again three Petitions, touching I. The
payment of What each Bishop paid to the Sea of Rome at his entrance for
First Fruits, vide Godwin. Catal. in fine unius cujusque Episcopatus.
First Fruits taken come due a la chamber nostre seint Pere, yet not used in
the Realm before these times, was contrary to former treaties with the Pope,
etc. II. Reservations of benefi^es. III. By that way bestowing them on Alyens,
who sundry times employed the profits of them toward the raunsoming or araying
their friends, enemies to the King. Of all which they desire his Maty. to
provide remedy; as also that the Petitions the two last Parliaments (of which
before) might be considered, and convenient remedy ordained. To which the
answer is, Les Seigrs. du grand conseil ordeigneront due remedy sur les
matires comprises en^estes trois bills precedentes. And here I take the grand
Council to be the Privy Council, not the Lords in or out of Parliament;
called the grand Council for the greatness of the affairs fell within their
cognizance, and Rot. Parl. 5. Hen. 4. n. 37. vide 10. Ric. 2. n. 20. 13. Ric.
2. n. 6. 7. Hen. 4. n. 31. 11. Hen. 4. n. 39.
named the 5. of Hen. the 4. to consist only of six Bishops, one Duke, two
Earls, and other in all to the number of 22.

19. What order they established, I have not met with; it is manifest not to
have been such as gave the satisfaction hoped for, by the Commons Rot. Parl. 3.
Ric. 2 n. 37. and cap. 3. and Crast. animarum. 5. R. 2. n. 90, 91.
renewing in effect both 3o. and 5to. Ric. 2. the same suites: and the
inconveniences still continuing, Wm. Thorn col. 2184, and sequent.
in the year 1386/7. 10. Ric. 2. William Weld was chosen Abbot of S. Augustins
(in the place of Michael newly dead,) who troubled with a quartan ague, the
French and Dutch on the seas, the King inhibited his going to Rome for
confirmation, etc. He thereupon employs William Thorn, (from whose pen we have
the relation) hoping to be excused himself of the journey; who col. 2187, 62.
showing the sufferings of the house, the miserable state he must leave it in,
that he would expose it irrecuperabili casui and ruinae, that the King had
commanded his stay, was in the end told by the Pope (after all means he could
use) col. 2186, 40.
Rex tuus praecipit quod non veniat electus ille, Ego volo quod compareat and
examini se subjiciat: and again, after yet more earnest solicitation, quia
audivimus turbationem inter Regem and Barons suos, (the fittest time to
contest with a prince) and multa sinistra de persona electi, and quod cederet
Romanae ecclesiae in cap. 3. n. 13, 14.
praejudicium, absque personali comparitione non intendimus ipsum confirmare,
ne daretur posteris in exemplum. The cause hanging three years in suspense, the
Abbot in fine was forced to appear in Rome for his benediction, and returned
with it not to his house till about the end of March 1389. the 12. Ric. 2.
After which, the next 13. Ric. 2. cap. 2. and 3. stat. 2.
Parliament obtained the statute of Praemunire, against the Popes conferring any
Benefice within the said Kingdom from the 29 of January then ensuing; and no
person to send or bring any summons, or sentence of excommunication against any
for the execution of the same law, on the pain of being arrested, put in
prison, forfeiture of his lands, tenements etc. and incurring the pain of life,
member, etc. The intent of which law In Ric. 2. hist. lib. 20. page 417, 32.
Polidor Virgil rightly interprets to have been, a confining the Papal
auctority within the Ocean, and for the frequent exactions of Rome, ut nulli
mortalium deinceps liceret pro quavis causa agere apud Romanum Pontificem; ut
quispiam in Anglia ejus autoritate impius religionisque hostis public
declararetur, neve exequi tale mandatum si quod ab illo haberet, etc. To which
law three years after some other 16. Ric. 2. cap. 5.
additions were made: and none of these were ever repealed by Queen Mary, who
though she did admit a union with the Church of Rome, yet in restoring the
Popes Supremacy the State used so 1. and 2. P. and M. c. 8. see Cook Just. 3.
page 127.
great caution, as it ever seemed to me rather a verbal then real admission
of his auctority; which it seems her Majesty well understood, in that she would
never permit Peito to appear before her in the quality of either Cardinal,
Bishop, or Legate, to all which he was preferred by Paulus 4. But where
Catholic Divine his answer to Sr. Ed. Cook, cap. 12. n. 37. 49. page 305, 311.
some would excuse these and such like laws, as past by consent and toleration
from Rome, or at least by the importunity of the Lay; that I have said does
enough show the Papal care, in suffering nothing, they could stop, might any
way prejudice that See. And for the Bishops passing the 16 Ric. 2. pressed by
the Temporalty, it is so much otherwise, as that Statute is enrolled on the
desire of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Rot. Parl. 16. Ric. 2. numero 20. in
fine.

20. In the same Parliament, the Commons, as it seems, much exasperated against
the Popes collectour, do yet farther Rot. Parl. 13. Ric. 2. n. 43.
petition, he may have the warning of forty days given him to be gone out of
the kingdom, sur peine d'estre pris come enemy du Roy and ranceone; and qe
desore en avaunt* null collectour soit demoerant deinz le Royalme d' Engleterre,
s'ilne soit lige du Roy, and qe mesme cestui face null rien a contraire de
l'estatute de Provisors fait en cest present Parliament, sur peine de vie and de
membre, sanz perdon, considerant les meschiefs and damages qe les Collectours
estranges ount faitz deinz le Royalme devant ces heures. But to this the answer
only is, Le Roys' advisera.

21. After these petitions and laws, however they sufficiently barred the Court
of Rome from meddling with this Church, and enough showed the right of the
Kingdom in reforming of it self, and redressing all inconveniences came unto
it from beyond sea; yet the King having a power of dispensing with those
statutes, this mischief ensued: diverse who easily obtained letters of provision
to a good benefice from the Papacy, sued to the King (who held fair
correspondency with the Popes) that they might put his bulls in execution; who
delayed his concessions sometimes a year or longer, after the vacation of the
living, during which the Ordinary had admitted some able person into the place,
who then began to be disturbed: for prevention of which, the 7 Hen. 4. cap. 8.
3 Hen. 5. cap. 4.
statutes of 7. Hen. 4. and 3. Hen. 5. were made, that no license should be
available against any possessed of a living at the day of the date thereof, and
farther to make void all so granted. After Concordata inter Martinum 5. and
Ecclesiam Anglicanam in Actis publicis Archiepisc. and in Bibliotheca Cotton.
Manuser.
which the contract, too long to be here inserted, between Martin the 5. and
the English Church, for settling several disputes of Ecclesiastic cognizance,
as of uniting benefices, consolidations, etc. was concluded; in which the
Papacy seems to permit such particulars to the English Clergy, as they would
not be restrained in, though formerly claimed not to be exercised but by his
auctority. Yet the 8. Hen. 5. n. 10. the Commons petition, qe null person, de
quel estate ou condition qu'il soit, ne amesne etc. horse du Royalme d'
Engleterre -- or ne argent pour merchandise de seinte Esglise, ou autre grace
ou privilege d'seinte Esglise avoir, ne pour autre cause queconque, etc.

22. It would be here tedious, and not greatly pertinent, to repeat all the
provisions made in this kind, for the well-governing the Clergy of this
Kingdom, and preserving of them free of destruction from abroad; which yet
were never such, but the Pope and his officers did export a great quantity of
treasure from them. William Thorn has recorded the disbursements to the Court
of Rome at the election of Michael Abbot of Saint Augustine 1375. not to have
been less then 428l. -- 17s. -- 10d. beside the expense of such as were sent,
and what was paid for the loan of money to make these payments, viz. 130l. --
18s. -- 2d. Our Historians Antiquitat. eccles. Britann. in vita Cranmeri page
381. 2. edit. 1572. Hall 24. Hen. 8. fol. cciii. a. Herb. in Hen. 8. p. 330.
observe, in the Parliament held 1532. 23 Hen. 8. it was computed, the Papacy
had received out of England for only the Investitures of Bishoprics, in the
forty years last past, an hundred and sixty thousand pound sterling, which is
four thousand pound by the year: an incredible sum, considering the poverty
of the Realm for lack of silver, the weight of the money then current, and the
strict laws of former Princes against such like transportations.

23. Thus having showed the beginning of the Papal auctority with us, and how
from the general power all Bishops received from Christ, and the fatherly care
such as were isntrumental in the conversion of a people did carry to them as
their spiritual children, and the obedience they likewise yielded to their
ghostly fathers, the Pope began by steps (as I may say) to exercise a dominion
over the Clergy here, and not stopping there, upon various pretenses, by
several ways, and (as it appears) degrees, to become so far lord of their
Temporalls, that they might not dispose of them, well, contrary to his liking,
because he had the sole rule of all committed to him from Christ: the first
point I conceive sufficiently proved, viz. that what was gained thus by great
industry, at sundry times, by several means, could no way speak his
superintendency over this Church jure divino.

The second point remains, whether our Princes, by the advice of their Clergy,
had not auctority to cause them reform this Church, without any new assumption
of power, not formerly invested in the Crown: which leads me to show what the
Regal power in sacris was here held to be, before Hen. the 8. and Rome divided
each from other.

CHAP. V.
How far the Regal power did extend it self in matters ecclesiastical.
1. BEfore I enter into the dispute of the right the kings of England did
exercise in the regiment of this Church, I hold it not unnecessary to see, in
what Divines hold ecclesiastic auctority does consist. De Roman^ Pontif. lib.
4. cap. 22.. 1.
Bellarmine, Sum Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 93, 96.
Turrecremata and others divide spiritual power into Ordinis, which they refer
to the administration of the Sacraments; and Iurisdictionis, which they hold
double, internal, where the Divine by persuasions, wholesome instructions,
ghostly counsel, and the like, so convinces the inward conscience, as it is
wholly obedient to his dictates, such as those of St. Peter were Acts ii. 37.
and external, where the Church in foro exteriori compells the Christians
obedience. Now for the first and second of these, the King did not take upon
him at all to meddle: for he neither assumed to himself a power of preaching,
teaching, binding, or loosing in foro animae, administering the holy Sacraments,
conferring Orders, nor to any particular is properly annexed to them; only to
such things as are of the outward policy of the Church, as that God may be
truly served, such as transgress the received lawful constitutions even of
the Church, fitly punished, by the right of his Crown, the continued practice
of his Ancestors, he could not doubt but he might deal in, causing all others,
be they Clerks or other, that offend, to suffer condign punishment.

2. For the better understanding how far the ecclesiastic rule of our Princes
did extend, we are to know, they were never doubted to have the same within
their dominions, Constantine had in the Empire; and our Bishops to have that
St. Peter had in the Church. Ego Constantini, vos Petri gladium habetis in
manibus, said King Edgar to his Clergy, in that his speech so apud Ailredum
col. 361, 16. Bea^o Petro cujus vicem Episcopi gerunt. Capitul. Carol. and
Ludovic. lib. 5. cap. 163.
recommended to posterity. And therefore, as after the Christian magistrate
began to have government, affairs of most concernment in the Church (as is
Socrat. prolog. ad lib. 5. Hist.
said) had their dependence on the Emperor, the greatest Synods called by him,
and the holy men of those times did not doubt the continuing to him the title
of Pontifex maximus, as tom. 3. Anno 312. n. 100.
Baronius notes, sine ulla Christianitatis labe; and as Eusebius. de vita
Constantini lib. 4. cap. 24.
Constantine did esteem the Ecclesiastics (...), but himself (...), them for
things within, but himself for matters without by God appointed a Bishop: so
the same King Edgar, Flor. Wigorn. Anno 974. p. 360.
no less to be remembered by the English then Charles the Great by the French,
was Regularis concordia etc. notis Seldeni ad Eadmer. page 146, 16. and 155, 6,
15. and Council. Spelm. page 437. cap. 7. page 438. cap. 8. vide leg. Edwardi
cap. 17.
solicitous of the Church of his Kingdom, veluti Domini sedulus Agricola, and
Pastorum Pastor, was reputed and writ himself the Vicar of Christ, and by his
Council. Spelm. a page 444, ad page 476.
laws and Canons assured the world he did not in vain assume those titles, and
yet sine ulla Christianitatis labe, so far as antiquity ever noted.

3. What particulars those were the Emperors did hold (...), to be without the
Church, belonging as I may say to their Episcopacy, nothing can better teach us
then their commands yet remaining in the laws they published; as in Cod.
Theodos. de feriis, de nuptiis, etc. de fide catholica, de Episcopis eccleis.
and Clericis, de Monachis, de Haereticis, de Apostatis, de religione, de
episcopali judicio, etc. Cod. Just. lib. 1. Tit. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and passim in
eo: and in the Novells, Novel. 6. Quomodo oporteat episcopos and caeteros
clericos ad ordinationes perduci. Novel. 137. de ordinatione Episcoporum and
Clericorum. The prefaces to which two laws are remarkable: the first showing
the Priestly office is Divinis ministrare, and the Princely, maximam habere
sollicitudinem circa vera D. idogmata, and circa sacerdotum honestatem, etc.
the other beginning thus, Si civibus leges, quarum potestatem nobis Deus pro
sua in homines benignitate credidit, firm as ab omnibus custodiri ad
obedientium securitatem studemus, quanto plus studii adhibere debemus circa
sacrorum Canonum and divinarum legum custodiam? And accordingly Novel. 123. in
43 chapters he did establish many particulars pertaining to the government of
the Church and Churchmen; and Novel. 131. not only cap. 1.
appointed the observance of the four first general Councels, but cap. 2, 3, 4.
decrees the place or precedence of the Pope of Rome and Archbishop of
Constantinople should be according to their definitions above all other seats,
and how far the Dioceses of some Chairs by him newly erected should extend,
besides other points in several chapters to the number of 15, See Novel. 146.
treating of particulars solely held now of ecclesiastic cognizance; as did
likewise Charles the Great, and Ludovicus Pius in their capitulars in very many
places. But with these I have not took upon me farther here to meddle, then by
naming some, to show, they having been practiced by Emperors, the Kings of
England, endowed from above with the same auctority in ecclesiasticis, might
very lawfully within their dominions exercise the like: the question therefore
will be, what they did understand their power in the Church to be, and
accordingly how far they did extend it in use.

4. As for the first, nothing can speak more clear then what themselves
published on mature and sad deliberation, yet remaining in their laws; in which
we find the Regal office thus Leg. Edw. Confess. cap. 17. page 142.
described: Rex, quia vicarius sammi Regis est, ad hoc est constitutus, ut
regnum terrenum, and populum Domini, and, super omnia, sanctam veneretur
ecclesiam ejus, and regat, and ab injuriosis d^fendat: and a little after,
Debet Rex Deum timere super omnia, and diligere, and mandata ejus per totum
regnum suum servare; debet etiam sanctam ecclesiam regni sui, cum omni
integritate and liberate, juxta constitutiones patrum and praedecessorum,
servare, fovere, manutenere, regere, and contra inimicos defendere, ita ut Deus
prae caeteris honoretur, and prae oculis semper habeatur, etc.

Canutus, Leg. Canut. cap. 11. page 109. Iorval. capite 31. col. 923. vide cap.
25. page 106. Iorval. cap. 23.
Nobis omni open atque opera enitendum erit, qua potissimum ratione ea
exquiramus consilia, quae ad Reipublicae pertinent utilitatem, pietatem
confirment Christianam, atque omnem funditus injustitiam evertant, etc.
Iorvalensis renders it, quomodo possit -- recta Christianitas propensius erigi.

Ina, Leg. Inae in praefat. page 1. apud Iorval. col. 761, 41.
In magna servorum Dei frequentia religiose stud bam, tum ^apla Saxon.
animorum nostrorum saluti, tum communi regni nostri conservationi; which
Iorvalensis reads, sollicitus de salute animarum nostrarum and de statu regni,
showing the care both of his subjects souls and bodies, however after a
differing way, did in some measure pertain unto him.

5. Neither did these expressions pass only from the worst of our Kings; but
from Ina, Rex maxim pius, as tom. 9. Anno 740. n. 14. See Hunt, fol. 194, 30,
42.
Baronius styles him; from Canutus, who not only himself 1031. went in devotion
to Rome, but was acknowledged Fubbert, Carnotensis epist. 97. fol. 93. a. edit.
Paris. 1608.
erga ecclesias atque Dei servos benignissimus largitor; Edward the Confessor,
a canonized Saint; famous for being the best Kings and holiest men: who did not
only leave us in their laws the Kings part, but what they conceived likewise
the Bishops was, viz. to be Leg. Canut. cap. 26. page 106. apud Iorval. cap.
24. col. 922, 17.
Dei praecones, divini juris interpretes, that they were rerum divinarum
commoda praedicare palam, that for and to the people they should vigilare,
excubare, proclamare, etc. as those that Sequor in reliquis Iorvalensem.
contra spirituales nequitias debent populo praevidere, by letting them know,
qui Dei praeceptis obedire negl^xerit, hic cum ipso Deo commune non habeat. And
this is that sword of St. Peter mentioned by King Edgar, which when the holy
Bishops of the primitive times did only put in execution, they neither found
Princes backward in supporting their designs, nor people refractory to their
exhortations. Thus we see, as they declared the office of a King, they were not
silent in that of a Bishop, showing how either labored in his way the reducing
people to piety, and a virtuous life; the one by making good laws for
compelling the wicked, the other by giving such instructions as convinced the
inward man.

6. So that we often meet with the Prince extending his commands to the same
things the Priest did his persuasions: as

I. In point of Sacraments, Jorval. cap. 2. col. 761.
That children should be baptized within 30 days after birth. Leg. Inae cap. 2.
page 1.

II. And, because it seems some Priests were negligent performers of that duty,
Iorval. leg. Aluredi cap. 5. col. 830.
That such as were not prepared, or denied the baptizing of them, should be
punished. Leg. Ed. and Guthruni cap. 3. page 42. excerptiones Egberti cap. 10,
11, 12. in council. Spelm. page 259. where you may observe the Kings precept to
impose on the transgressor the payment of 12 What Ora was, see Mr. Sumners
Glossary.
ora, but the Bishops to be only persuasive.

III. No person to be admitted to the Eucharist, be a Godfather, receive
confirmation from a Bishop, not knowing the Pater Noster and Belief. Canones
dati sub Edgaro and legibus ejus annexi, cap. 17. 22. p. 67. and Iorval. cap.
23. col. 921. 57.
Leg. Canuti cap. 22. p. 105. Spelm. Council. cap. 22. page 599.

IV. That persons instructed should receive the Communion thrice every year.
Jorvalensis cap. 21. col. 921. 57.
Leg. Canut. cap. 19. p. 104.

V. Restrained by their laws matrimony to the 6th degree of consanguinity. Apud
Iorval. cap. 11 co. 919
Leg. Canut. cap. 7. p. 101.

VI. Reserved to themselves a liberty of dispensing with the marriage even of
Nuns. Iorval. cap. 9. col. 823.
Leg. Alured. cap. 8. p. 25. And it is not to be forgot, in that particular,
Lanfrank joins the Kings advise (as a person of equal power) with his own,
Lanfranc. Epist. 32.
and hoc est, says he, consilium Regis and nostrum.

VII. Commanded the observance of Lent principali auctoritate. Beda lib. 3.
cap. 8.

VIII. Appointed certain days to be held festival by the better sort, but
allowed the servant and labourer to work in them. Iorvalensis cap. 50. col.
826, 60.
Leg. Aluredi cap. 39. page 33. which the laws of Canutus seem after to take
away. Iorval. cap. 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, col. 927. vide ibidem col. 920. cap.
17, 18, 19, 20. Thorn col. 2197, 15.
Leg. Canut. cap. 42, 43. page 118. See there page 103. cap. 14, 16, 17. which
was likewise exercised 1393. by Richard the 2.

I omit here their edicts for the observation of the Lords day, payment of
Tithes, Incontinency, and such like, (held now merely of Ecclesiastic
cognizance) for the multiplicity of them.

IX. Divided old, and erected new Bishoprics. Beda lib. 3. cap. 7. lib. 4.
cap. 12. lib. 5. cap. 19.

And yet this is that de eccles. lib. 4. cap. 8.. Nota tertio.
Cardinal Bellarmine holds a point of so high concernment, no man can do it
without auctority obtained from Rome: which yet we never read to have been
asked, Florent. Wigor. p. 559.
though Theodore 679 erected five ( consensu Regis) at one time; and some other
altogether without the Popes liking, as those in the North, after the expulsion
of Wilfrid. Confer Beda lib. 4. cap. 12. cum libro 5. cap. 20. But of this
before.

X. Caused the Clergy of their Kingdom to meet in councels. Malms. fol. 26. a.
38. and sometimes presided themselves in them, though the Popes Legate were
present. Council. Spelm. page 292, 293. page 189, and passim ibid. Vita
Lanfranci cap. 6. col. 1. page 7. Vide Florent. Wigorn. An. 1070. page 434.

7. Of the Crowns commanding in these particulars, it is apparent to have been
in possession, the Pope seeing and not interrupting any whit, whilst the Saxon
and Dane bare here the sway; when, to speak truth, it seems to me not so much
to have been insisted on, by whose auctority the thing commanded was done, as a
care taken of all sides nothing should be required but just, and pious; which
made each precept, without dispute, from what author soever it proceeded, be
readily yielded unto: and so the Normans found it, under whom the first
contentions (concerning jurisdiction) with the Sea of Rome began. For before
William the first possessed himself of this Crown, it is certain, the English
Bishops had no ordinary Courts distinguished from the Lay, but both secular and
ecclesiastic Magistrate fate and judged together, what pertained ad
observantiam religiouis locis suis, and a suae diaoeceseos synodis; as was
likewise the custom Carol. and Ludovic. cap. lib. 6. cap. cxi.
in France.

8. This were enough manifest, in that we find the Lay not only present, but
subscribers to many of our ancient in council. Spelman. passim.
Councels; did not the laws of apud Iorval. col. 845, 36.
Ethelstan, cap. 5. p. 64. Iorval. page 872, 13. cap. 10.
Edgar, cap. 17. page 3. Iorval. cap. 38. page 924.
Canutus farther assure us. It is probable, inferior judicatures did refer
matters of doubt to the greater Courts or scy^egemor, to be held twice a year,
as the former edicts and Council. Calcuith, apud Spelman. cap. 3. page 293.
some Councels did establish: which produced that care in the Council of pud
Spelman. council. p. 3^0. cap. 9.
Celichyth 816. the Bishop should transcribe judgments given in qualicunque
synodo of what pertained to his diocese, and he to keep one copy, and the party
whom it concerned another of such determination (which I take to be those laws
mentioned by Ead^erus apud Gervasium Dorobernensem, col. 1292, 18.
Eadmerus, which as they were reposed in some parts of the Church, so were the
pleas (as it seems) usually Apud Gervas and Sim. Dunelm. five Turgot. de
Du^elmensi ecclesia lib. 3. cap. 10 col. 35. 6.
there held.) But the Conqueror, finding these proceedings to be non been,
neque secundum sanctorum canonum praecepta, etc. did by his Charter make a
distinction of the Courts, that such as were convented by the Bishop should
answer non secundum Hundred, sed secundum canones and episcopales leges etc.
The Charter to Remigius Bishop of Lincoln is upon record, See it in Sr. Ed.
Cook Inst. 4. cap. 53. p. 259.
published by many, and was certainly by the Conqueror directed to every
Diocese through the Kingdom: for I have seen in an hand of in antiquo Manusur.
Edward the first one for London, testifying it was then found in the
Episcopal register there.

9. When this past the King, whether at the Popes Legates being here for
deposing Stygand 1070. (about which time Historians remember he made some
beginning for settling the English laws, and is therefore likely to have then
past this) or when they were here for settling the dispute between York and
Canterbury, or at what other time, is uncertain. Yet I cannot deny, it seems
to me to have given the occasion of those expressions in apud Baron. tom. 2.
Anu. 1071. n. 9.
Alexander the 2. his letter to him, that the world, in maligno positus, plus
solito pravis incumbat studiis; tamen inter mundi principes and rectores
egregiam vestrae religionis famam intelligimus, and quantum honoris sanctae
Ecclesiae tum Simoniacae vires opprimendo, (which is apparently spoken of
Stygand) tum catholicae libertatis usus and officia (by which questionless he
points at this charter) confirmando, vestra virtus impendat, non dubia
relatione cognoscimus, etc. Now certainly, if he did grant it during the life
of the Pope, it must not have been after 1073. in which year he died. I
confess, I have not met with any clear example of the practice of it during
the reigns of that King, or either of his children: For though Anselme about
1106. writes to Henry the first, (who had punished certain Clerks not observing
the decrees of a Council held at Westminster 1102) Eadmer. p. 85, 40.
quod hactenus inauditum and inusitatum in ecclesia Dei de ullo Rege and de
aliquo principe; non enim pertinet secundum legem Dei hujusmodi culpam
vindicare, nisi ad singulos episcopos per suas parochias: yet I conceive this
is to be interpreted of the King doing it alone without the Bishop, not when
they both joined together after the manner then in use, which himself elsewhere
apud Ead^er. page 24, ^8.
advises Rufus unto; Conemur una, tu regia potestate and ego Pontificali
authoritate, quatenus tale quid inde statuatur, quod cum per totum fuerit
regnum divulgatum, solo etiam auditu, quicunque illius fautor est paveat and
deprimatur. I can take this for no other, but that in the laws of Apud I
orvalensem, col. 845, 36.
Ethclstan, Debent episcopicum seculi judicibus interesse judiciis, ne
permittant, si possint, ut aliqua pravitatum germina pullulaverint. And the
laws of Leg. Hen. 1. cap. 7. p. 180. 30.
Henry the first are express, the use to have continued in his days; for they
approve the ancient institution, That generalia Comitatuum placita certis locis
and vicibus convenire debere, That the Judges in those Courts were Episcopi,
Comites, Vicedomini, etc. The causes they dealt in, and order of proceeding,
agantur primo debita verae Christianitatis jura, secundo Regis placita,
postremo causae singulorum, etc. And why may not certa loca here be what
Anselme calls Parochia, the Conqueror Hundred?

10. But good laws are not always suddenly put in execution; Leges
instituuntur cum promulgantur, firmantur cum moribus utentium approbantur.
Did. 4. cap. 3.
and this of the Conqueror we may take to have slept, till toward the
beginning of King Stephen's time it had got some strength, for then we meet
with plain precedents of the Ecclesiastic Courts being severed from the Lay.
Theobald of Canterbury molesting the monastery of St. Augustines concerning
certain Privileges granted from the Papacy, the Abbot obtained a bull from
Innocentius 2. of the 20 November 1139. in his houses favor, in which the Pope
expostulates with the Archbishop, Habetur haec bulla in splendido Ms. reposito
in aula Stae. Trinitatis Cantabr. ante 200. annos exarato, and in alio Ms.
optime notae ante quadringentos annos scripto in Scachario. fol. 49. b.
quod occasion privilegii nostri, idem monasterium vehementer infestas, and
ecclesias eidem coenobio pertinentes eundem abbatem ordinare non sines, quin
potius violent a dominatione ecclesias eorum firmatas diceris infregisse, and
presbyteros tous, invito Abbate, and ejusdem loci fratribus, contra Romanae
ecclesiae privilegia, quibus idem coenobium est munitum, in eis ponere
praesumpsisse: nec his contentus, abbatem ipsum, and homines ejus, ad
placitandum super hoc in curiam tuam, prout asserunt, praesumptuose traxisti,
eisque ob eam rem poeuam molieris infligere, etc.

11. William Thorn, who Col. 1800. 46.
mentions this 1139. 4. Steph. observes (which is warranted by the bull it
self) quod iste Theobaldus primo Abbatem and conventum ad causas trahere
conatus est, and is the first I have noted in which the Ecclesiastics alone
did force men to plead in their Courts; which, as it does prove they then had
them, so we may conclude them not long to have been possessed of that power: for
it is altogether improbable, if that act of King William had been in his and
his sonns time generally practic't, but some Archbishop, in above fifty years,
might have attempted as much, if not to the Abbot, at least to some other; as
after this the examples are frequent, of which one in the 122 epistle of
Johannes Sarisburiensis is not unworthy the remembering. Symphorian a Clergyman
of York, accused one Osbert, Archdeacon of the same Church, before king
Stephen, the Bishops and Lords, 1154. for making away William the late
Archbishop of that See by poison. A question grew, to whether Court this cause
belonged. The King affirmed it to belong to the temporal, for the heynousness
of the fact, and because it was first entered upon in his presence. But before
the decision Stephen dyed, and Henry the 2. succeeded; de cujus manibus (says
my Author) vix cum summa difficultate, in manu valida, cum indignatione Regis
and omnium procerum, jam dictam causam ad examen ecclesiasticum revocavimus;
from whence it was by Appeal carried to Rome.

12. But what this manus valida should be, that took the case from the King, I
cannot imagine: for it is undoubted, in all disputes of this nature, the Kings
Courts have been ever Judges to what Court the cause did belong. Bracton speaks
very clearly; Lib. 5. de exceptionibus cap. 15.. 3. fol. 412. a.
Iudex ecclesiasticus cum prohibitionem a Rege susceperit, supersedere debet in
omnicasu, saltem donec constiterit in curia Regis ad quem pertineatat
jurisdictio: quia si Iudex Ecclesiasticus aestimare possit an sua esset
jurisdictio, in omni casu indifferenter procederet non obstante regia
prohibitione, etc. and 1080 William the first, in a Council. Illebon. cap. 47.
apud Ordericum Vitalem p. 552, 554.
Council at Illebon in Normandy, by the advise of both estates, Ecclesiastic
and Secular, did settle many particulars to belong to the cognizance of the
spiritual Judge; and concludes, that if any thing were further claimed by
them, they should not enter upon it, donec in curia Regis monstrent quod habere
debeant. Neither were the Lay to molest them in the exercise of ought there
mentioned, Donec in curia Regis monstrent quod Episcopi inde habere non
debeant. So in both reserving the decision to his own Courts, of what pertained
to each: in so much as, what that strong hand should be, did thus take this
from the King, I must prosesse not to understand. And that our Kings had ever
an inspection over those Courts, is not to be doubted, by the Charge against
Becket, in which Henry the 2. urges, Apud Ger. Dorobern. col. 1389, 37. An^
1164. see Rot. Parl. at Leicester, 2. Hen. 5. pet. des Coes. 5.
quod cuidam Iohanni coram ipso litiganti plenam justitiam non exhibuit, and
super hoc ad Regis praesentiam vocatus, venire contempsit. To which the
Archbishop answered, praefato Iohanni condignam non defuisse justitiam, and
Iohannem non legaliter curiam suam infamasse, qui non super evangelium, ut
moris est, sed super veterem cantuum codicillum, quem secum tuler at, voluerit
pejer are, etc. and for his not attending the King, to give him satisfaction in
the point, pleaded the excuse of sickness; yet for that contempt was adjudged
to loose his movables.

By which it is evident, the Archbishop did then Gervas. Dorobern. col. 1389,
42. Hoveden, An. 1165. fol. 283, a. ^2.
exact oaths of such as were called into his Court, that he was to give an
account to the King of his carriage in it, who by his constitutions has ever
directed the manner of proceedings in it. See Mat. Paris Anno 1247. page 727,
29. Anno 1246. page 716. 1. But of this n. 17.. xvii.
more hereafter.

13. The Conqueror, though he did show so much compliance with the Romanist, as
not to deny any thing former Kings had acknowledged to the Papacy as due, yet
farther then Wmu^. Cregor. 7. inter Lanfrance. ep. 7. p. 304. and apud Baron.
tom. 11. An. 1079. n. 25.
they had gone would in nothing submit unto it: and as they had by their edicts
guided the ecclesiastic affairs of this kingdom, so he proceeded in his
laws, Hoveden, fol. 343. a. 19.
a l gibus sanctae matris Ecclesiae sumens exordium, as did his son Leg. Hen.
1. cap. 5, 7. and p^ssim ibidem.
Henry the 1. How far they did conceive this their power to extend in those to
matters, nothing can better teach us then the laws they and such as came after
them (princes against whom no exceptions can lie) established, and usages they
maintained as the rights of the Kingdom, in opposition of all encroachments
whatsoever.

14. To enumerate all these Privileges (I conceive them with our ancestors
better called Rights) I hold impossible, the foundation or ground upon which
they are built being that power the divine wisdom has invested the secular
Magistrate with, for preservation of his Church and people in peace, against
all emergencies from whomsoever proceeding; as the Bishops of the Province of
Canterbury writ to Thomas Becket 1167. Apud Hoved fol. 292. b. 5.
Rex a Domino constitutus paci providet subjectorum per omnia; ut hanc
conservet Ecclesiis, and commissis sibi populis, dignitates Regibus ante se
debitas and exhibitas sibi vult exhiberi. And this issuing from so great
auctority, as in effect the body of all the Clergy of the realm, cannot be
imagined to be other then the constant opinion of the English Church. In what
these Rights have been put in practice in opposition to Rome (of which I now
treat) may in some sort be told: but to say these they are, and no other, is
that I mean cannot be. So that we may say the affirmative, these they are, but
not the negative, others they are not. Therefore Eadmerus will have it of the
Conqueror, that Eadmer. p. 6. 21.
Cuncta divina simul and humana ejus nutum expectabant, that is in foro
exteriori; insomuch as, when the Clergy 1530. gave the King the title of Head
of the Church, they intended no other then their forefathers, when they called
him the Mat Paris An. 1241. page 555. 15.
Defender, Patron, governor, Epist. Vniversu. Angliae ibid. An. 1245. page 667.
38. ibidem.
Tutor of it.

15. Which the French do attribute to their Kings with more hard expressions;
Claude Fauchet en les libertes de l' Esglise Gallicane in 4to. a Paris 1612.
avec Privilege, p. 234. and 1639. p. 179.
Ce que monstre (says one) que les evesques de ce temps la, estimerent le Roy,
assiste de son conseil d' estat, estre apres Dieu Chef terrien de l' Esglise de
son Royaume, and non pas le Pape, in the negative: Which another Charles le
Faye ibid. page 287. in edit. 1639. p. 230.
explains thus, Ce n'est point pour cela que je vueille dire, ce que aucuns
ount trop indistinctement profere, que les dits Roys and Princes Souveraignes
soient en leurs estats privativement a tous autres, Chefs uniques and absolus
de l' Esglise, and de tous les minister d' icelle; car pour lereguard de ce que
concern le maniement des chooses purement sacrees, come l' administration de la
parole de Dieu, and des Sacrements, and la puissance de lier ou delier, voire
de regler en particulier le dedans de chacune Esglise, la surintendance en
appartient aux Evesques, and autres Chefs de la Hierarchy Ecclesiastique, a
chascun selon leur rang and degr^. Then showing by a comparison, that as the
head-Architect leaves to his inferior Agents the use of such instruments as are
proper for their undertakings; so, il n' appartient point au Roy de manier les
chooses sacrees, ny supporter comme l' on dit l' arche d' alliance, ils doivent
laisser cela a ceux de la vocation; mais ils peuvent voire so^^ tenuz devant
Dieu, veiller sans cesse, and avoir l' oeil ouvert a ce que ceux de cest order
and profession principale, aussi bien que ceux des autres moindres, apportent
enloyaute and sain conscience tout soin, diligence, purete, and sincerite, au
maniement des charges a eux commises, conformement a leur loix, regles and
canons; lesquels au cas qu' ils serroient negligez, and ^ffacez par la rouille
de l' antiquite, ou que par la malice des hommes il fust besoign d' enfaire des
noveaux, ils sont tenu user de leur puissance, pourn y sapporter des remedes,
soit par leur Ordonances and pragmatiques, soit par leurs jugements, arrests,
and executions d' iceux. e'est ce qu'en France nos predecesseurs ont tousjours
appelle, la police exterieure sur l' Esglise, de la quelle les Empereurs, Roys
and Princes ont use and jouy sans contredit, tant que l' esglise s'est
conservee en sapurete, and qu' aucuns d' icelle ne se sont ingerez, sortants de
leurs bornes and l. miles d' usurper les functions Royales. Insomuch as Benign
Miletot does not only affirm their Kings to be du delict commun p. 528.
edi^^onis 16, 9.
Chess, Protecteurs, and Conservateurs de leur esglise Gallicane; but page 657.
recites a speech of the Archbishop of Vienna made to Henry the 4. 1605. in
which he did affirm, que le Roy estcit le Coeur and la Test de l. ur corpse.

16. And other Headship then this I do not know to have been ever attributed to
any of our Princes: Certainly they did never take on them the exercise of any
thing purely sacred, but as supreme 26. Hen. 8. cap. 1. 1. Eliz. cap. 1.
Head, Rulers or Governors, under God, by their Commissioners (of which such
as bare most sway were ever the Spirituality) to visit, reform, redress etc.
all errors, Heresies, schisms, abuses, etc. And for that the rust of antiquity
(as that author styles it) had much overspread the Canons of the Church,
Stat. 3. and 4. Ed. 6. cap. 11. see before. 25. lien. 8. cap. 19. 27. Hen. 8.
cap. 15. 35. Hen. 8. cap. 16.
to assign sixteen of the Clergy, whereof four to be Bishops, and as many of
the Lay, of which four to be learned in the Common laws of this realm, to
peruse and examineth' ecclesiastical laws of long time here used, and to
gather, order and compile such laws ecclesiastical, as shall be thought to his
Majesty, his said Council.
Counsel, and them or the more part of them, to be practiced and set forth
within this realm. In pursuance of which, the 11. November 5to of Edward the
6. he nominated two Bishops, two Divines, two Doctors of the Law, two
Esquires, to supervise the ecclesiastic laws of this Kingdom, and to compile
such a body as were fit to be put in practice within his Dominions; whose
intendments (for it past no further) were after printed by John Day 1571. and
are no other then what the French (for the manner of doing) maintain their King
might do: neither does the Inquisition of Spain publish any thing of that
nature, without the allowance of their King, as I shall show cap 7. n. 12.
hereafter.

17. So that, in my opinion, the question cannot be, whether Princes are not
capable of such a Right; but whether it were invested in the Crown formerly,
and made good by such a continued practice, as might authorize ours to take
that title (when offered by the Clergy 1530.) as well as the French Kings have,
without incroaching on that power the ecclesiastics had, and by our laws ought
to exercise in England. Now, certain, our Kings did in many things go along
with the French in causes ecclesiastical: Mat. Paris Anno 1247. p. 727, 26.
Rex Anglorum, exemplum accipiens ab illis Baronibus qui sua statuta sanxerunt
in Francia, quibus and Dominus Francorum favorem jam praebuit, and sigillum
apposuit, etc. Clement the 7. being held prisoner 1527. by the Emperor, the
18th. of August Cardinal Woolsy made an agreement with the French, for settling
^h' ecclesiastic government of each Kingdom during the Popes captivity. For
the French, I shall remit the reader to the Preuves des libertes de l' esglise
Callicane, cap. 20 n. 33, p. 529.
Deed which is printed; but the English were to be such as should be agreed to,
praelatis accitis de mandato and auctoritate praedicti invictissimi Angliae
Regis, whose determinations were to be consensu ejusde invictissimi Angliae
Regis. But where Hist. Hen. 8. p. 219.
my Lord Herbert conceivs this to have been the first taste our King took in
governing the Clergy, I can no way be of his opinion; for, without
peradventure, the Cardinal neither did nor durst have moved one step in making
the Ecclesiastics less depend on the Papacy, then the Common law or custom
of the realm warranted, knowing he must without that back have lost not only
Clement the 7. but all Popes and the Court of Rome, which must and had been his
support, on the declining favor of so heady and dangerous a Prince as Henry
the 8th, had he not cast off both the Cardinal and his obedience to that See
almost together. But how much he had the Clergy before this under his
government, the History of See Hall 6. Hen. 8.
Richard Hunne is witness sufficient: and the rights the Conqueror and his
successors were ever in contest with the Papacy about, and maintained as the
laws and customs of the Realm, enough show they did not command the
Ecclesiastics here according to the will of any foreign potentate, nor were
mere lookers on, whilst another governed the English Church: some of which I
shall therefore here set down.

I. They Eadmer* p. 6, 26, ride epist. Hen. ^^ic^ley in vita ejus, edit. 1617.
p. 77, 78.
admitted none to be taken for Pope but by the Kings appointment.

II. Eadmer. ibid. and page 113, 1. Thorn, col. 2152, 1. and 2194, 18. and
alibi. Cook Inst. 3. p. 127.
None to receive letters from him without showing them to the King, who caused
all words prejudicial to him or his crown to be renounced by the bringers, or
receivers of them.

III. Eadmer. p. 24. 5. 11.
Permitted no councels, but by their liking, to assemble; which gained the name
of convocations; as that Stat. 25. Hen. 8. cap. 19.
always has been and ought to be assembled by the Kings writ.

IV. Mat. Paris Anno 1237. p. 447, 51.
Caused some to sit in them might supervise the actions, and legato ex part
Regis and regni inhiberent, ne ibi contra Regiam coronam and dignitatem aliquid
statuere attentaret: and when any did otherwise, he was forced to retract that
he had done, as Vide Seld. de Synedriis part. 1. p. 373.
did Peckham; or were Lyndwood de ^oro competenti, cap. 1. Gloss. 1.
in paucis servatae, as those of Boniface.

V. Eadmer. p. 6, 29.
Suffered no Synodicall deree to be of force, but by their allowance and
confirmation. Flor. Wigorn. Anno 1127. p. 505.
Rex auditis concilii gestis, consensum praebuit, auctoritate regia and
potestate concessit and confirmavit statuta concilii a Gulielmo, Cantuariensi
Archiepiscopo, and sanctae Romanae ecclesiae legato, apud Westmonasterium
celebratt. Gervas. Dorobern. Anno 1175. col. 1429, 18.
In hoc concilio, ademendationem ecclesiae Anglicanae, assensu Domini Regis and
primorum omnium regni, haec subscripta promulgata sunt capitula, etc.

VI. Permitted no Bishop to Eadmer. p. 6. 31.
excommunicate, or inflict any ecclesiastic censure on any Baron or Officer,
nisi ejus praecepto.

VII. M. Paris Additament. p. 200 number. 7. See Articuli cleri 9. Ed. 2. cap* 7.
Caused the Bishops appear in their Courts, to give account why they
excommunicated the subject.

VIII. ibid. n. 10.
Caused such as were imprisoned, after forty days standing excommunicate, to
be freed by writ, without the assent of the Prelat, or satisfaction giving;
ibid. n. 12.
the King and his Judges communicating with them tam in divinis quam profanis,
ibid. n. 13.
and commanding none to shun them, though by the Ordinary denounced
excommunicate.

IX. Eadmer. p. 58, 40. p. 113, 1 p. 118, 28.
Suffered no Legate enter England but with their leave; of which before.

X. Eadmer. p. 115, 23, 31.
Determined matters of Episcopacy, inconsulto Romano Pontifice.

XI. Permitted no Appeal to Rome; of which before.

XII. Flor. Wigorn. Anno 1070. p. 536. Hunt. fol. 219. a. 1.
Bestowed Bishoprics on such as they liked, and Eadmer. p. 95. Flor. Wigorn.
Anno 1109.
translated Bishops from one See to another.

XIII. Erected new Bishoprics: so did Hen. the 1. 1109. Ely, taking it out of
Lincoln, Johannes Hagulstad. col. 257, 48.
Carlisle 1133. out of York or rather Duresme: but of this before.

XIV. Vide Cook Instit. 2. p. 625.
Commanded by writ their Bishops to residency.

XV. Rot. Parl. 16. March 3. Hen. 5. n. 11. Anno 1414. Io^n 23. ^ope.
Commanded their Bishops, by reason of Schism, vacancie of the Popedom, etc.
not to seek confirmation from Rome, but the Metropolitan to be charged by the
Kings writ to bestow it on the elected.

XVI. Mat. Paris Additament, p. 200. n. 6.
Placed by a lay hand Clerks in Prebendary or Parochial Churches, Ordinariis
penitus irrequisitis. And it is not here unworthy the remembering, that VVm
Lyndwood, a very learned Canonist, who writ about an 100. years before Henry
the 8ths difference with Clement the 7. finding the Crown in possession of this
particular not agreeing with the rules of the Canon law, is so perplexed, as in
the end he finds no way to make the act valid, De cohabitatione Clericorum and
Mulierum, cap. 1. ad verbum Beneficiati, fol. 64. b.
but that he does it by Papal privilege: For if by prescription, Episcopo
s^iente and tolerante, it could not be good; for though the King might confer
the temporalls of the Church, non tamen potest dare jure suo potestatem circa
spiritualia, viz. circa ea quae pertinent ad regimen ecclesiasticum, and
ministrationem sacramentorum and sacramentalium, nec non circa ecclesiasticae
jurisdictionis exercitium, and hujusmodi, quae jure spiritualia sunt; nec in
hoc casu potest sibi prodesse praescriptio etiam longissimi temporis, quia
talia spiritualia non possunt per regem possideri, and, per consequens, nec ut
transeant sub sua potestate possunt praescribi, nec consuetudine introduci,
etc. In which he will havean hard contest with diverse French and Italians, who
maintain, Considerationi di ^adre ^aolo Venet. 1606. fol 31. a. vide Fulgentio
in difesa d'essi, p. 312. and sequent.
Che tutte le raggioni che si possono acquistare per dispensa del Papa, si
possono acquistar anco per consuetudine, la quale sopravenga contraria alla
leg: that a prince may prescribe for such acts as he can acquire by the Popes
dispensation.

XVII. Mat. Paris Additament. p. 200, n 9. and in historia majori p. 716, 7.
vide Seldom. de Synedriis part. 1. c. 10. p. 383.
Prohibited the Lay yielding obedience, or answering by Oath to their
Ecclesiastic superior inquiring de peccatis subditorum: which I take to have
been in cases not properly of their cognizance, not of witnesses either in
causes Matrimonial or Testamentary.

XVIII. I shall conclude these particulars with one observation in Mat. Paris;
where the Ecclesiastics, having enumerated several cases in which they held
themselves hardly dealt with, add, Mat. Paris Additament. p. 202. n. 30.
That in all of them, if the spiritual Judge proceeded contrary to the Kings
prohibition, he was attached, and, appearing before the Justices, constrained
to produce his proceedings, that they might determine to which court the cause
belonged: and if found to pertain to the secular, the spiritual Judges were
blamed, and, on confession they had proceeded after the prohibition, were
amerced; but denying it, were compelled to make it good by the testimony of two
Vilissimi ribaldi.
vile Varlets, but refusing such purgation, were imprisoned, till by oath they
freed themselves to the Justices; that being cleared even by the Lay, they had
no satisfaction for their expense and trouble. By which, by the way, it is
manifest how much the Kings Courts had the superintendency over the
Ecclesiastic.

18. These, and many other particulars of the like nature, daily exercised,
notwithstanding the clamor of some Ecclesiastics, more affecting their own
party then the rights of the Crown, make there can be no scruple, but the
English did ever understand the outward policy of this Church, or government of
it in foro exteriori, to have much depended on the King; and therefore the
writs for summoning Parliaments, express the cause of his calling them to be,
pro quibusdam arduis, urgentibus negotiis, nos, statum, and defensionem regni
nostri Angliae and ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, Evesque d' Exce^re
Chanceller. Rot. Parl. 20. Ric. 2. n. 1.
or, as our Bishops have sometimes expressed it in the Rolls of Parliament, a l'
onour and reverence de Dieu and de seinte esglise, and al salvation and
amendment de son roialme, etc. Likewise the Commons, that their gift of the
9th sheaf, etc. to Edw. the 3. to have been for his defense of the Kingdom,
and de seinte esglise d' Engleterre: Rot. Parliament. 15. Ed. 3. n. 25.
According to which our Kings joined both together, professing their care for
amending the Church to be equal with that of the Commonwealth. Rot. Parl. at
Leicester 2. Hen. 5. ^. 10.
Item fait assavoir, que nostre tressoveraigne seignr le Roy, eiantz grande
volunte and desir de l'estate de son esglise, and de son Royalme, en les chooses
ou mesteir est d' amendment, al honor de Dieu, and pur la pees and la commune
profit de seinte esglise d' Engleterre, come de tout son Royalme, d' el' advis
and assent des seigrs esperituells, etc. ad fait, etc. In pursuance of which
interest residing in the Crown, the Lords and Commons under Rich. the 2.
fearing the opinions called Lollardy might prevail, Hen. Knighton col. 2708.
40. Anno 1387.
petierunt a Rege de istis remedium apponi, ne forte archa totius fidei
ecclesiae talibus impulsionibus in illius temporibus, pro defectu gubernaculi,
irremediabiliter quateretur. Upon whose desires, he commanded the Archbishop of
Cant. and his other Bishops, ut officium suum singuli i^ suis dioe cesibus
secundum jura canonica acrius and ferventius exercerent, delinquentes
castigarent, librosque eorum Anglicos before examinarent, errata
exterminarent, populumque in unitatem fidei orthodoxae reducere studerent,
ecclesiamque urticis, [and] vepribus destoratam liliis and rosis ornarent, etc.
After which, the said author records a Commission, by which his Majesty, as
Defender of the Catholic Faith, did empower certain to seize upon heretical
books, and bring them before his council: and such as after proclamation shall
be found to hold such opinions, being called and examined before two
Commissioners (who were of the Clergy) and lawfully convicted thereof, to be by
his Majesty's ministers committed to the next prison. R^^. Parl. 2. Hen. 4. n.
47.
Fourteen years after which, the Commons show Hen. the 4th the Parliament might
be compared to a Mass, in which the Archbishop of Cant. began the office,
reading the Epistle and expounding the Gospel, (which, it seems, they took to
be the part of the Ecclesiastic, as did the cap. hoc, n. 6.
Saxons before) and a la mesne qe feust la sacrifice d' estre offeriz a Dieux
pur touz Christiens, le Roy mesmes a cest Parliament, pour accomplir cellemesne,
plusieurs foitz avoit declarez pleinement a toutz ses lieges, coment sa volunte
feust, qe la foy de seint esglise feust governez en maniere come il' ad este en
temps de ses nobles progenitors, and come il est affirm par seint esglise, par
les seints Doctors, and par seint Escriture, etc. and a little after, showing
they the Commons were only to say, Deo gratias, which they were obliged to do
for three reasons, the second of which is, pur c^o qe la ou la Foy de seint
esglise, par malvaise doctrine, feust en point d' avoir este anientz, en grand
subversion du Roy and du Royalme, mesme nostre Seigr le Roy ent ad fait and
ordeignez bon and joust remede, en destruction de tiel doctrine, and de la sect
d' ycel, peront ilz sont ensement tenuz de dire cel parole Deo gratias. By all
these it must be granted, they did hold the chief care of the English Church to
have depended (in the outward policy of it) on the prince; or else that they
did speak and do very unadyisedly in attributing so much unto his care of it,
and providing that he might be supplied to defend it, without at all mentioning
any other to whose care it belonged.

19. Neither did these expressions and petitions pass the Commons only, or
the Clergy overruled by the numbers of the temporality; but the Bishops by
themselves acknowledged how much it stood in his Mtios care to provide against
any novelties creeping into the English Church, and that it might enjoy the
rights and liberties belonging to it: and therefore, when the said doctrine of
Lollardy continued increasing, they, in the names Praelatorum and cleri regni
Angliae, petition Rot. Parl. 2. H. 4. n. 48.
Henry the 4th. Quatenus -- inclitissimorum progenitorum and antecessorum
vestrorum laudabilia vestigia graciose considerantes, dignetur vestra regia
celsitudo pro conservatione dictae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, ad Dei laudem,
vestrique meritum, and totius regni praedicti prosperitatem and honorem, and
pro hujusmodi dissentionibus, divisionibus, dampnis and periculis evit indis,
super novitatibus and excessibus praedictis in praesenti Parliamento providere
de remedio opportuno etc. Did not these then hold it the office of the King, as
that his progenitors had ever done; to provide, no dissensions, scandalls,
divisions might arise in the Church, the Catholic faith might be truly
conserved and sustained? and what other did any of our Princes ever challenge
or assume?

20. When the Clergy likewise went at any time beyond their bounds, or were
negligent performers of their duties, the subject upon all occasions had
recourse unto his Mty, as to whose care the seeing what was amiss redrest did
especially belong: as Rot. Parl. 50. Ed. 3. n. 84. 1 R. 2. n. 108.
when the Ecclesiastic Courts were grievous for the fees, Rot. Parl. Octav.
Purif. 25. Ed. ^. n. 35.
or their pecuniary pennances too heavy, when they were oppressed by Papal
provisions (of which before) when through the absence of their Curat they were
not so well taught etc. Rot. Parl. Octav. Purif. 25. Ed. 3. n* 31.
when the frequency of the writ de excommunicato capiendo* made it burdensome,
Rot. Parl. at Lecester 2. Hen. 5. pet. des Co^es. 5. vide Rot. Parl. 46. Ed. 3.
n. 36, 37. n. 41, 42.
when men were cited by them on causes neither Matrimonial nor Testamentary,
and appearing were not allowed a copy of the libell against them. In which case
the Kings answer is not unworthy the repeating, showing clearly, he directed
how they should proceed; le Roy voet que a quel heure la copy de le libel est
grantable par la ley, q'^l soit grant and livere a la party, sanz
d^fficulee. It is true, Kings would refer matters of that nature to their
Bishops, unto whose care under them it did especially belong: so Richard the 2.
being Rot. Parl. 17. Ric. 2. n. 43.
petitioned in point of Residency, answered, Il appartient aux offices des
Evesques, and le Roy voet qu' ils facent lour office and devoirs etc. Rot.
Parl. 7. H. 4. n. 114.
His successor being again pressed in the same kind, gives his command thus,
Facent les Ordinaires lour office and devoirs: and per cause qe les pluralites
q' ont este grantees devant ces heures sont and ount este la greindre cause de
l' absence des tiels curats, y plest au Roy nostre Seigr. de l' advis and
assent des Seigrs* en Parliament, es^rire par ses honourables lettres a nostre
seint pier le Pape, de revoker and repeller toutes les pluralites generalement,
and qe d' es ore en avaunt nulle pluralite soit grant a ascuny en temps a
venir. But the Pope, it seems, giving no satisfaction in the particular, the
Rot. Parl. 11 Hen. 4. n* ^0.
11. Hen. 4. the Commons again petition, That the riches of the kingdom being
in the hands of Churchmen, those livings upon which the incumbent of common
right ought to reside, half of the true value should remain to himself, but the
other to the King. To which the answer is, Geste matiere appertient a seinte
Esglise, and quant a la residence, remede ent fust purveuz en la darrain
Convocation. Yet this matter of non-residence still molesting the Commonwealth,
3. Hen. 6. the King tells them, by the advise of the Lords of Parliament, Rot.
Parl. 3. Hen. 6. n. ^37, 38. vide 4. Hen. 6. n. 31.
He had delivered their bill to my Lord of Canterbury, charging him to pourvey
of remedy for his Province, and semblably shall write to the Church of York for
that Province. By which we may see the King, Archbishop, and Convocation did
conceive themselves to have a power of redressing things in this Church, which
yet in civility they thought ^it See cap. 3. n. 14, 19.
first to acquaint the Pope with, as a spiritual Doctor or Patriarch, however
of great esteem, yet not endued with a power of commanding in this Church
otherwise then the laws of the Kingdom, the contracts with the Papacy did
bear.

21. Now it cannot be doubted that all these petitions of the Commons, and
sundry more which may be produced, had been by them vainly preferred, had they
not taken the King to have been vested with a power of redressing things
blameable in the government of the Church. But when we say the Prince, as the
principal, without whom nothing is done, may be rightly termed Head in the act
of reformation; our meaning is not, that he will deal in points of
Ecclesiastic cognizance without the advice of his Bishops, and other learned
of the Clergy: we know, in things proper Numbers xxvii. 21.
Iosuah is to take counsel of Eleazer, and the Kings of this nation have ever
done so.

22. When Edgar intended the advancing Christi gloriam, he chose him three
Bishops to be his Council. Spelm p. 433.
patres spirituales and consiliarios. But to speak of later times: Hall 23.
Hen. 8. fol. 202. b. 24. Hen. 8. fol. 205. a. Herbert p. 329. 153.
when the Commons endeavored a reformation of some things in the Church, Hen.
the 8th. would not answer their desires, till he had first acquainted the
Spirituality. When he intended to publish a Stat. 32. H. 8. cap. 26.
book of the principal articles and points of our faith, with the declaration.
-- of other expedient points, and also for the lawful rites and ceremonies to
be observed within this realm, he ordained it to be by the Archbishops and
sundry Bishops of both Provinces, and also a great number of the best learned,
honestest, and most virtuous sort of Doctors of Divinity, men of discretion,
judgment, and good disposition, etc. And Edward the sixth minding a farther
reformation of some usages in the administration of the Eucharist, he caused it
to be Fox Acts and Monuments, tom. 2. p. 6, 8. col. 1. and page 659. col. 2.
made by the most grave and learned of his realm, for that purpose by his
directions assembled at Windfor; who afterward, Statut. 2. and 3. Ed. 6. cap.
1.
for taking away diverse and sundry differing forms and fashions had formerly
been used in sundry Churches of England and Wales, appointed the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and certain of the most learned and discreet Bishops, and other
learned men of the realm, to consider of the premises, who, by the aid of the
Holy Ghost, with one uniform agreement concluded on and set forth the book of
Common prayer etc. Upon which the two houses of Parliament, considering as well
the most godly travel of the Kings highness, -- in gathering and collecting
the said Archbishops, Bishops and learned men together, as etc. do give to his
Highness most hearty and lowly thanks etc. So that it is apparent, the King,
in composing this book, did not assume to himself, or the Parliament attribute
unto him any other then assembling of the Bishops and other learned men
together, to take their consultations.

23. And they observing the great Preface to the book of Ed. the 6. 1549.
diversity in saying and singing in several Churches, the difficulty of
finding what was proper for each day, (apt to breed confusion) reduced the
public service of the Church to one form more facile and of better
edification, following therein the examples of diverse holy Bishops and others:
for if Mat. Paris vi^. Abba^. S* Albani, p. 101, 17, 19. p. 123, 28.
Guarinus Abbot of St Albans, in the Office used in his Church about 1190,
might superflua resecare, to reduce the prayers there to one form, if Agobardi
opera, Paris, 1605 p. 392.
Agobardus in France might amputare superflua vel levia etc. if Harpsfield Hist
Anglican. Eccles. sect. xi. cap. 19 p. 251, 48.
Osmund Bishop of Salisbury in England, quoniam singulae fere Dioeceses in
statis and precariis horis dicendis variabant, ad hanc varietatem tollendam,
and ut quasi absolutum quoddam precandi, quo omnes uti possent, exemplar
exstaret, eas in eum fere ordinem and commodam rationem, quam hodie omnes prope
Angliae, Cambriae, and Hiberniae (viz. the Course of Salisbury) Ecclesiae
sequuntur, magno and prudenti rerum ex sacris scripturis, and probatis
Ecclesiae historiis delectu, distribuit and digessit; if these, I say, might do
it on their own motion, there is no question, such of the Clergy as were
appointed by the King, might on his desire take it into consideration, and
remove matters offensive, or less to edification.

24. Neither did Queen Elizabeth at the beginning of her reign Camden. Annals
Eliz.
alter some passages in it, but by the opinions of Divines eruditis and
moderatis; to whom was added a learned Knight Sr Thomas Smith, to whose care
the supervising of it had by the house of Commons been committed the second of
Edward the sixth, and therefore knew better then any other to give an account
of that book.

Nor did her self, or the house of Lords use differing ways, Iourn. des Co^es
23. Eliz. March 3. and 7. and 27. Eliz. Februar. 25.
when the Commons at other times have sought some change in the Ecclesiastic
government; as the 23. and 27. of her reign, where though the Lord Treasurer
made a short beginning, yet he left the satisfactory answers to be given them
by the Archbishop of York.

Insomuch as we may safely conclude, when the Clergy in Convocation styled
Henry the 8th Ecclesiae Anglicanae protectorem unicum, and supremum dominum,
and, quantum per Christi leges licet, supremum caput, they added nothing new
unto him but a title; for he and his successors after it, did never exercise
any auctority in causes Ecclesiastic, not warranted by the practice of former
Kings of the nation.

By all which the second question remains sufficiently proved, that our Kings
were originally endued with auctority to cause the English Church be reformed
by the advice of their Bishops, and other of the Clergy, as agreeing with the
practice of all ages. For who introduced the opinion of Transubstantiation?
made it an article of Faith? barred the Lay of the Cup? Priests of marriage?
who restored the Mass in Queen Mary's days before any reconciliation made with
Rome? but the Ecclesiastics of this Kingdom under the Prince for the
timebeing, who commanded or connived at it.

CHAP. VI.
How the Kings of England proceeded in their separation from Rome.
1 IT being by what is already said undoubted, the Clergy called together by
the Prince, or meeting by his allowance, have ever had a power of reforming
this Church, commanding things juris positivi in it, and likewise dispensing
with them, and that the statute 24. Hen. 8. cap. 12. that says in effect as
much, is no other then a declaration of the Common law, that is the custom of
the realm; the next enquiry will be, for acquitting the Church of England in
point of schism, how this separation from Rome was made.

2. Henry the 8th having long pursued a cause Matrimonial with Clement the 7.
who showed so much compliance to determine it in his favor, as he sent
Cardinal Campeius hither to join with Wolsey the Kings creature in the
business, and upon the Emperors success in Italy, the cause, after many
delays, being revoked to Rome, the King, upon the opinions of many foreign
Divines of the invalidity of his marriage with Queen Katharine, caused the case
to be determined by the English Church: which judgment yet he would have in
some measure submitted to the Court of Rome, so as he might have given the
persons to whom it was delegated by the Pope full information, and the
Cardinals of the Imperial faction excluded having any part in the decision.
But Clement hearing what had past in England, with more then ordinary have
determins the cause against him: which how much it would irritate any Prince of
so great power, and so high a spirit as our Henry, I shall leave others to
judge. And here I might allege many foreign examples, of those who upon less
indignities have stopped all intercourse with Rome, as Whose coin is yet extant,
having on one side his picture, and an inscription showing him to be King of
France and Naples, on the other the arms of France, and these words, Perdam
Babylonis nomen. Thuanus lib. 1. p. 11. c.
Lewis the 12. and Henry the 2. of France, if I had undertook to write an
apology for him.

3. The King, upon the advertisement of these proceedings by the Pope, which
was at the beginning of the year 1534, falls first to those courses his
ancestors had formerly done, when they had occasion to know how they ought to
comport themselves in any thing toward Rome, which was to have the advice of
the English Church; and thereupon wrote to the Universities, great Monasteries
and Churches of the Kingdom, and the 18. May 1534. to the University of
Oxford, In archivis Oxon. ad Annum 1534. p. 127, etc.
requiring them, like men of virtue and profound literature, to diligently
entreat, examine, and discuss a certain question, viz. An Romanus Episcopus
habeat majorem aliquam jurisdictionem sibi collatam in sacra Scriptura in hoc
regno Angliae, quam alius quivis externus Episcopus; and to return their
opinion in writing under their common seal, according to the mere and sincere
truth of the same, etc. To which, after mature deliberation, and examination
not only of the places of holy Scripture, but of the best interpreters, for
many days, they returned answer the 27. June 1534. (without all peradventure
according to the ancient tenet of the English) Romanum Episcopum majorem
aliquam jurisdictionem non habere sibi a Deo collatam in sacra Scriptura in hoc
regno Angliae, quam alium quemvis externum* Episcopum. Of this answer I have
thought fit to make particular mention, (though assented to by all the English
Clergy) because Oxford has been ever Mat. Paris Anno 1252. p. 859, 3. and Anno
1257. p. 945, 28.
held aemula Parisiensis, Ecclesiae fundamentum, Rot. Parl. 1. Hen. 6. n. 43.
fountain and Mere de nostre foy Chrestiene, as I formerly touched: whose
opinion the English Church has therefore highly esteemed, and sought on all
occasions of this nature; of which to give some examples.

4. Upon the election of Urban the 6. France, Scotland, Flanders, and diverse
other parts adhering to Clement, who resided at Avignon, Hen. Knighton col.
2671, 24. col. 2742, 23.
the French King 1395. caused a meeting of the Clergy of his dominions, to
search whether had the better right to the Papacy: whose judgment was for
Clement; which under the seal of the University of Paris was sent to Richard
the 2. who thereupon fecit convocationem Oxoniae de peritioribus Theologis tam
regentibus quam non regentibus totius regni, and they on the contrary judged
Urban to have the better title; whose opinion under the seal of the University
of Oxford returned to the King was by him transmitted into France. 1408,
Walsing. Hist. Anno 1408. p. 420, 1.
in Concilio Cleri celebrato Londoniis, assistentibus doctoribus Vniversitatum
Cantabrigiae and Oxoniae, tractatum est de censu and obedientia Papae
subtrahendis vel non subtrahendis: about which time twelve of the University of
Oxford, on the Archbishops desire, in the name of the rest, examined the books
and Doctrines of Wickliffe, and sent their resolutions to a Synod at London in
an epistle yet In fascie^lo zizaniorum Ms. in bibliotheca Archiepiscopi
Armachani.
extant. By all which it is manifest, how much their opinions were esteemed in
this Kingdom. And I hold it undoubted, a Prince following so great advise,
chalked out to him by the practice of his ancestors, could not be guilty of so
heinous a crime as schism, arising only from disobedience to any spiritual
superior whatsoever. Circa maleriam excommunicationum resolutio, considerat.
11. to. 2. col. 349. a. Ed. Paris 1606.
Gerson says, a private person runs into no contempt of the Keys in diverse
cases by him enumerated; as one, dum dicit aliquis juristarum vel theologorum
juxta conscientiam suam, quod hujusmodi sententiae non sunt timendae vel
tenendae, and hoc praesertim si observetur informatio seu ca^tela debita, ne
sequatur scandalum pusillorum, qui aestimant Papam esse unum Deum: And Navar,
the greatest Canonist of his time, N^var. cap. cum contingat de Rescript.
remed. 2. n. 30. to. 2. editionis Colon. Anno 1616. p. 59. col. 1. (...)*
qui unius doctoris eruditione ac animi pietate celebris auctoritate ductus
fecerit, aliquid excusatur, etiamsi forte id non esset justum, and alii
contrarium tenerent. And to this purpose many more Doctors may be alleged.

5. This as it was done by him, so he was led unto it by the example of his
predecessors, as I have partly touched before; and shall therefore allege no
other, but that in the disputes between Becket and Henry the 2. the Archbishop
endeavoring to interesse Alexander the 3. in the difference, that Prince
Hoveden Anno 1166, fol. 287. b. 48.
caused it to be written unto him, Si juri vestro vel honori praejudicatur in
aliquo, id se totius Ecclesiae regni sui consilio correcturum in proximo
pollicetur: and a little after, Ibid. fol. 288* ^.
Dominus Rex plurimum sibi justificare videtur, cum in omnibus quae dicta sunt,
Ecclesiae regni sui consilio simul and judicio se pariturum pollicetur. And
this the often repeating of it, not only in a particular letter of the Bishop
of London, but of all the Bishops of the Province of Canterbury, both to the
Apud Hoveden fol. 292. b. 11. 49. 293. a. 33.
Pope and Becket, enough assure us how undoubted it was in those days, that
our Kings following the advice of the English Church, did proceed on safe
grounds for their justification in such quarrels.

6. Neither was the opinion returned by these Divines so differing from the
writings of other learned men, as might make them any way guilty of schism.
Gerson de vita spiritual animae corol. 7. to. 3. col. 183. b. c.
Gerson speaking of the several degrees of Divine truths, places for the first
such as are express in Scripture, secondly those that are by evident
consequence deduced from thence, thirdly such as being delivered by Christ,
have been by the constant tradition of the Church derived to us, of which he
holds this proposition, Vniversalis Ecclesia Pontifici Romano subjecta sit; and
adds, non enim posset evidenter aut per consequentiam pure de fide ex legibus
primi generis humana deductione fulciri, etc. and Cont. de potestate Pontificis
ad Nicholaum Teupolum.
Contarenus, in a small tract de potestate Pontificis, of that question says,
An Auctoritas illa and potestas, qua Pontifex maximus fungitur, sit ei consensu
quodam hominis tributa, an potius divinitus tradita; qua de re hisce temporibus
maximos tumultus excitatos esse perspicimus, nec etiam veriti sint viri in omni
disciplinarum genere celebres, ac in Christianae Theologiae studio illustres,
in magno hominum conventu asserere, hoc jus Pontificis humanume esse; and then
adds that he ab horum hominum sententia maxim dissentire, ac prope compertum
habere, divinitus concessum esse Pontifici jus illud etc. So that this learned
Cardinal was not altogether resolved in the point, but as a disputable
question had it prope compertum. The truth of which I leave him to dispute with
the Oriental Christians. It is manifest, Sleidan* lib. 9. prope finem.
Francis the first was of the contrary judgment; and our Countryman Staplet.
de principiis fidei lib. 13. cap. 15. Dixeram.
Stapleton delivers it as a Catholic tenet of former times, (undoubtedly
agreeing with that of the English Church) non divino, sed humano jure, and
positivis ecclesiae decretis primatum Romani Pontificis niti etc.

7. But I return to our Hen the viii.
King, who now fortifyed by the opinion of the Universities, public
disputations in the convocation, and several precedents of former Princes his
predecessors, in his rights, whereas the Parliament before in some particulars
restrained the profits of Rome, as in the payments of Annates, Peter Pence,
making Appeals to it, whose beginnings with us I have formerly noted, did Stat.
26. Hen. 8. cap. 1. begun the 3. November and ended the 18. December 1533.
the 26. Hen. 8. 1533, declare his Maty, his heirs and successors, Kings of
this realm, shall have full power and auctority from time to time to visit,
repress, redress, etc. all such errors, heresies, abuses, etc. which by any
manner spiritual authority or jurisdiction may be lawfully reformed,
repressed, ordered, redressed, etc. This the Court of Rome interpreted a
falling off from the Church, and the English no other then a declaration of
that right had ever resided in the Crown, and which I believe it will be a
difficult task to disprove them in.

8. For those two articles Bulla Pauli 3. in Bullar^o dat. 17. Ianuar. 1538.
Paulus 3. accuses the King of, as Heretical and schismatic, viz. quod
Romanus Pontifex caput ecclesiae and Christi vicarius non erat, and quod ipse
in Anglica ecclesia supremum caput existebat etc. for the first, I never heard
it affirmed by the King in that generality the words import; for the Pope is a
temporal prince, as well as a spiritual father; and so far as I know he never
denied him to be the head of the Church of his own dominions, nor of France and
Spain etc. if those Kingdoms will admit him to so great a preeminence: the
thing he only stood upon is, that he was not so instituted by Christ
Universal Bishop, and had alone from him such an omnipotency of power, as made
him absolute Monarch in effect of the universal Church, and was so in England.
For his being vicar of Christ in that sense other Bishops may be said to be his
vicegerents, (as Cap. 3. n. 72. (...)
before) I do not see how it can be well denied him; but that this Vicarship
did import the giving him that power he did then exercise here, is what the
Church of England has ever constantly denied. As for the Kings being Head of
Church, I have before showed he neither took it, nor the Parliament gave it, in
other sense then the French have always attributed it to their Princes:
neither for ought I find was it so much sought by King Henry, as pressed on him
by the Clergy, of which the Bishop of Rochester was one that subscrib^d to it;
and his Ancestors did the same things before, he did after, under the names of
Protectors, Tutors, Council. Spelm. p. 437* cap. 7, 8. Seld. notis ad ^^dmer. p.
175. ^* 17.
Christi vicarii, Domini Agricolae, etc.

9. For the other particulars mentioned in the Bull, as his beheading the
Bishop or Cardinal of Rochester, the burning of Beckets bones, the taking the
treasure and ornaments at his Shrine, to which may be added the suppressing,
and converting into Lay hands the Monasteries of the Kingdom, I shall not say
much, having not taken on me to defend that Princes actions. Yet for the taking
off the head of Rochester (if he were convict of treason) I must give the
answer Rot. Parl. sest. S. Hillair 25. Ed. 3. n. 60. petitions de Clergy.
of Edward the 3. to the Clergy in that kind, en droict de Clerks convictz de
treason; purceo qe le Roy, and toutz ses progenitors ount este seisis tut temps
de fair jugement and execution de Clercz convictz de treson devers* le Roy and
sa Royale Mageste, come de droict de la corone, si est avis au Roy, qe la ley
en tien cas ne se poet changer: and then he cannot be said to have dyed other
wise then by law. As for the goods and ornaments of Churches by him laid hold
on, it is certain, his predecessors in their extremities had showed him the
way; as the Flor. Wigorn. Anno 1070.
Conqueror, who took all the ready money was found in Religious houses;
Neubrigensis lib. 4. cap. 38.
Richard the first, who took all, to the very Chalices of Churches, and yet the
Archbishop afterward Hoveden. Anno 1198. fol. 444. a 8.
regio munimine septus -- universos monachorum (to wit, of Christ Church)
redditus and oblationes tumbae beati martyris Thomae fecit saisiari in manu
Regis; Walsingh. anno 1296. p. 29, 24.
and Edward the first 1296, fecit omnia regni monasteria perscrutari, and
pecuniam inventam Londonias apportari, fecitque lanas and corias arrestari,
etc. And in those days Bishops did tell Kings, Gervas. Dorobern. ^el. 1554. 44.
The saurus ecclesiae vester est, nec absque vestra conscientia debuit amoveri:
to which the King, verum est, The saurus noster est ad defensionem terrae
contra hosts peregrinos etc. And perhaps it would be no hard labor to show,
all Princes, not only here, but elsewhere, to have had (how justly I will not
determine) a like persuasion. And he then being excommunicated by Paulus 3. for
maintaining what the Crown had ever been in possession of, can no way be said
to have departed from the Church; but the Pope to have injuriously proceeded
against him, who maintained only the just rights and liberties of his
kingdom, according to his coronation oath.

10. And this is the case, and fully answers (so far as it appears to me)
whatsoever can be objected against the reformation begun by him, or made more
perfect by Edward the 6. for the manner of doing it, viz. that they, as supreme
Princes of this Kingdom, had a right to call together their own Clergy, and
with their advise, to see the Church reformed by them. And if otherwise, I
should desire to know how the Mass without any intermission was restored by
Queen Mary: for it is manifest, she returned the use of it immediately after
her brothers death, and yet Cardinal Pool reconciled not this Kingdom to Rome
till the 30th of November above a year after, and then too Stat. 1. 2. P. and
Mar. cap. 8.
on such conditions only as the Parliament approved; during which space, she
as Queen gave See Fox, vol. 3. p. 38.
directions to the Ordinaries how they should carry themselves in several
particulars; which as it is probable she did by the advice of her Bishops, so
there is no reason to condemn the like proceedings in Edward the 6.

11. I have before showed how far the royal power went in compiling the book of
Common prayer: for a Catechism published by the same Prince, it being composed
by a learned person, presented to his Maty, and by him committed to the
scrutiny of certain Bishops and other learned men, quorum judicium (says
Literae aute Catechismum directae omnibus Ludimagistris, and iis qui scholas
grammaticas aperiunt, dat. 20. Maii anno regni 7.
his Maty) magnam apud nos authoritatem habet, after their allowance it was by
him recommended to be publicly taught in Schools. Likewise the Articles for
taking away diversity of opinions in points of religion, were agreed upon in a
Synod at London by the Bishops and other learned men, and Regia authoritate in
lucem editi. The King in framing them taking no farther on himself, then he had
in the book of Common prayer. And Queen Mary, though she quitted the title of
head of the Church (which yet she did not so suddenly as Saunders intimates)
did in effect as much. So that hitherto there is no way of fixing any schism on
the English Church, for neglect of obedience, it having been eversubject to the
Archbishop of Canterbury and others its lawful superiors, restoring to him the
ancient right belonged to his chair, of being their spiritual pastor Cap. 3.
n. 80.
next and immediately under Christ Jesus. But the Kingdom being reunited to
the Sea of Rome by Queen Mary, though what I have said does in a good part free
it of schism, yet in respect the reformation I only took upon me to defend was
made by Queen Elizabeth, and continued since, it will be necessary to make some
more particular mention how it did pass.

CHAP. VII.
How the reformation was made under Queen Elizabeth.
1. ELizabeth, the daughter of Henry the 8th by Queen Anne Bolen, being
received by all the estates of the Kingdom, (assembled in Parliament) and
proclaimed Queen, caused her sisters Ambassador, Sr Edward Kerne, then residing
at Rome, to give an account of this her being called to the Crown to Paulus
4tus the Pope; who being in union with France, and out with the house of
Austria then strictly joined with England, and both at odds with the French,
told him, either persuaded by them, or upon his own heady disposition, Hist.
Council of Trent Ital. lib. 5. Anno 1558. p. 399. edit. Land. 1619. and Genevae
p. 420.
England was a Fee of the Church of Rome; That she could not succeed, as
illegitimate; That he could not go against the declarations of Clement the 7.
and Paulus 3ius; That her assuming the name and government without him, was so
great an audacity, she deserved not to be hearkened to: But he being willing to
proceed paternally, if she would renounce her pretensions, and freely remit her
self to his arbitrament, he would do what lay in his power with the dignity of
the Apostolic See. A strange reply to a civil message, were it not derived to
us by an unquestionable hand, and that it came from Paulus 4ius, to whom it was
not an unusual saying, Ibid. paulo ante eodem libro.
that he would have no Prince his compagnion, but all subjects under his foot.
Upon this unwillingnesse to acknowledge her Queen at Rome, the Archbishop of
York (who had before His speech at the making known Queen Mary's death to the
Commons, in Camden, Holinshead, Grafton, and aliis
affirmed no man could doubt of the justness of her title) and the rest of the
Bishops refused to Crown her. As for that The defense of the Catholics against
the book styled The Execution of Justice in England, page 51.
some write, it was because they had evident probabilities she intended either
not to take, or not to keep the oath was then to be administered unto her,
especially in the particular of not maintaining holy Churches laws, in respect
she had showed an averseness to some ceremonies, as commanding the Bish* of
Carlisle not to elevate the consecrated Host. (who stoutly refused her) and out
of fear she would refuse in the time of her sacre the solemn divine ceremony of
Unction; these are certainly without any color, and framed since. For as for
the last, the ceremony of anointing, she had it performed; as had King James
who succeeded her, who See Spotswood's History of the Church of Scotland, p 381.
would not have his Queen crowned in Scotland without it. For the other, it is
altogether improbable that he to whom the command was by her given, would of
all the rest have assented to crown her, had he conceived that a cause why it
might have been denied: neither indeed did she alter any thing material in the
service of the Church, till after the conference at Westminister. 1559. the 31.
March, and the Parliament ended.

2. To pass therefore by these, as excuses found out after the deed done, the
true reason being (no question) something came from the Pope, in pursuance of
that answer he had given her Agent; the Queen seeing she could expect nothing
from the Papacy, labored to make all safe at home, or, to use her own phrase,
to take care of her own house; and therefore (as she had reason) desired to be
assured of her subjects fidelity, by propounding an oath to certain of them,
(which is seldom a tie to other then honest minds.) But the way (men's minds
distracted in points of religion, the Stat. 28. Hen. the 8. cap. 10.
law of Henry the 8. (extinguishing the auctority of the Bishop of Rome) being
very severe, for securing himself, in bringing such as did but extol the said
auctority, for the first offense, within the compass of a praemunire, and that
refused to take it, of treason,) was not easy to be pitched upon: besides
styling the King head of the Church, which many made a scruple at; to Iourn.
des C^es 1. Eliz.
which effect a bill being presented to the house of Commons the 9. of
February, after many arguments had upon it, the 13. of February upon the second
reading it was absolutely dashed, and upon great consideration taken the 14.
Febr. a Committee appointed to draw a new Bill, in which an especial care was
taken for restoring only the ancient jurisdiction of the Crown, and the Queen
neither styled supreme Head, nor the penalty of refusing the Oath other, then
the being excluded from such places of honor and profit as they held in the
Commonwealth: yet with this proviso, that he who had an estate of inheritance
in a temporal Office, and refused to take the said oath, did after upon better
persuasion conform himself, should be restored unto the said estate; and that
such as should maintain or defend the auctority, preeminence, power or
jurisdiction, spiritual or ecclesiastical, of any foreign Prince, Prelate,
Person, State or Potentate whatsoever (not naming the Pope, as her father had
done) should be three times convict before he suffered the pains of death.

3. This Bill, which no doubt the Popes carriage drew on, being expedited in
the house of Commons, received reformation by the Lords, committed the 13.
March to the Lord Marquess of Winchester, Lord Treasurer, the Duke of Norfolk,
the Earls of Westmorland, Shrewsbury, Rutland, Sussex, Penbrook, viscount
Mountague; Bishops, Exeter, Carlisle; Barons, Clynton Admiral, Morley, Rich,
Willoughby, North, no one of them then noted for Protestantisme; the 18. March
past the Lords, none dissenting but 8. Bishops, the Earl of Shrewsbury,
Viscount Mountague, and the Abbot of Westminster: and the same day sent to the
house of Commons, who upon perusal found again what to amend it in; so as it
had not it is perfection in both Houses till Saturday the 6th of May (when the
Parliament ended the Monday following) at which time only Viscount Mountague
and the interessed Clergy opposed it. By which it cannot be questioned, but the
generality of the Lords did interpret that law, no other then, as indeed it
was, a restoring the Crown to it is ancient rights; for if otherwise, without
doubt there would have been as great an opposition at least made against it, as
some other statutes which past that Parliament met with, that the Marquess of
Winchester, the Lords Morley, Stafford, Dudley, Wharton, Rich, North, joined
with the Earls of Shrewsbury, Viscount Mountague, and the Prelates, to have
stopped.

4. But whereas some were induced to think by the generality of the words, that
affirm her Highness to be supreme governor as well in all spiritual or
ecclesiastical causes as temporal, as if it had been an usurping upon the
sacred function in the interior (as I may say) of the Church, properly
belonging to them in holy Orders, her Maty the same year The Admonition in
Injunctions 1 Eliz.
did declare, She did not challenge any other auctority then was challenged and
lately used by King Henry the 8th and Edw. 6. which is, and was of ancient time
due to the imperial crown of this Realm; that is, under God to have the
Sovereignty and rule over all manner of persons born within these her realms,
etc. And that to be the only sense of the Oath she caused to be confirmed the
next 5 Eliz. cap. 1.
Parliament; at which time a Synod being held, for avoiding diversity of
opinions, and establishing of consent touching true religion etc. it did
expressly declare, Art. 37.
they did not give to our Princes the ministering either of Gods Word or the
Sacraments, -- But that only prerogative is given in holy Scripture by God
himself, that is, that they should rule all estates and degrees committed to
their charge by God, whether they be ecclesiastical or temporal, and restrain
with the civil sword the stubborn and evildoers, etc. And these articles were
likewise confirmed by Parliament 13. Eliz. cap. 12. so that no man can doubt
this to have been other then an acknowledgement, what Princes had done formerly
in all ages might be justly continued; not an introductory of a new law, but
the assertion of the old right of our Kings.

5. Another matter of great weight then likewise expedited was, the settling
the public service of the Church in one uniform way. King Edward the 6.
intending such a reformation as might serve for edification, caused certain
pious and learned men to meet together, who (as it seems) taking for their
pattern the practice of the primitive times, casting out of the Liturgies then
used such particulars as were any way offensive, showed their scope to be, what
they pretended, to reform, not make a new Church or Service; and thereupon had,
by the aid of the holy Ghost, ( Stat. 2. and 3. Ed. 6. cap. 1.
as the Act of Parliament speaks) concluded on, and published the book of Common
prayer, with a form of administration of the holy Communion, commonly called
the Mass. But nothing humane is perfect at first: this Book some few years
after received in his time alteration, and the word Mass (I know not why more
offensive in it then the Cap. de Missa. Relinetur Missa apud nos, and summa
reverentia celebratur.
Augustane Confession) expunged, with some other phrases in it.

6. But for the better understanding how Queen Elizabeth found this Church, it
will not be amiss to look a little back. Henry the 8. dying in January 154 6/7,
leaving the Roman Service, with some alterations not greatly considerable in
it, the wisdom of the State (however intending a farther reformation) was not
immediately to abolish it; so as the Lords meeting in Parlnt. 1547. November
the 4. though they had the Mass sung in English, yet the Liturgy of the Church
was not common in that language till after Easter 1548. This Session continuing
till December 23. restored the Communion in both kinds, upon which certain
learned men by appointment met at Windsor, to consider of a decent Form for
the administration of it; which in March his Maty gave out backed with a
Proclamation, so as at Easter it began (without compulsion of any,) to be put
in practice, and after Easter, several parochial Churches to celebrate divine
Service in English, which at VVhitsuntide was by command introduced into
Paul's; but hitherto no book of Common prayer extant, only the manner of
administering the holy Eucharist somewhat altered.

7. During this while, the Archbishop of Cant. 6. Bishops, 3. Deans Doctors,
and 3. other only Doctors, were busied in reforming the public Liturgy of the
Church, John Calvin of Geneva, a person then of high esteem, advertised of it,
thereupon wrote to the Duke of Somerset the 22. October 1548, giving his
judgment in these Johan. Calvin. Epist. 87.
words [quod ad formulam precum and rituum ecclesiasticorum, valde probo ut
certa illa extet, a qua pastoribus discedere in functione sua non liceat, tam
ut consulatur quorundam simplicitati and imperitiae, quam ut certius ita
conslet omnium inter se ecclesiarum consensus, postremo etiam ut obviam eatur
desultoriae quorundam levitati qui novationes quasdam affectant.] and taking
notice of the form already had for celebrating the Communion, adds this, Audio
recitari isthic in Coenae celebratione orationem pro defunctis, neque vero hoc
ad purgatorii Papistici approbationem referri satis s^io, neque etiam me latet
proferri posse antiquum ritum mentionis defunctorum faciendae, ut eo modo
communio fidelium omnium in unum corpus conjunctorum declaretur; sed obstat
invictum illud argumentum, nempe Coenam Domini adeo sacrosanctam esse, ut ullis
hominum additamentis eam conspurcare sit nefas.

8. This Letter received about the Note, the printed book of statutes is, as if
their meeting were the 4. November: which I conceive ^rroueous, as not at all
agreeing with the Iournall.
beginning of the Parliament, which met the 24. of November 1548. may have been
the cause of deferring the exhibition of it to the House of Commons till the
19. December 1548. when the consideration of it was referred to Sr Thomas
Smith, his Maties Secretary, and a very learned Knight, who returned it back
again the 19. January, having kept it by him a full month; after which it was
expedited and printed in March following, and the 6th of April 1549. the Mass
by Proclamation removed. But this book was not so perfect, as it yielded no
exceptions, whether just or not I shall not hear examine, I know learned men
have judged variously: it shall suffice me to say, it was again revised by
Bucer (a great patron of Discipline, and Martyr, both in England,) and
reprinted 1552. and to ought in or of this second edition during King Edwards
reign I have not heard any Protestant did ever except.

9. In Queen Mary's time diverse learned men retired from the heat of
Persecution, and by the favor of the Magistrate permitted a Church 1554. at
Frankford, labored to retain this Liturgy; whom Knox, VVhittingham, and some
others opposed so far, as one Haddon desired to be their Pastor, excused
himself, and Mr. Chambers coming for that end from Zurick, finding it would not
be allowed, retired back again, and xvi. learned men then at Strasburgh
(amongst which this Haddon, Sandis afterward Archbishop of York, Grindall of
Canterbury, Christopher Goodman famous for his book of Obedience) remonstrated
unto them, Troubles at Frankford p. xxii.
That by much altering the said book they should seem to condemn the framers,
now ready with the price of their blood to confirm it, should give their
adversaries occasion to accuse their doctrine of imperfection, themselves of
mutability, and the Godly to doubt of what they had been persuaded; that the
use of it permitted they would join with them by the first of February: their
Letter bearing date the 23. of November 1554.

10. But nothing could move them to be like Saint Paul, all things to all that
he might gain some, 1 Corinthians. ix. 22.
or relent any thing of their former rigor; only a Type of it drawn into
Latin was sent to Calvin for his judgment, who returned an answer the 18.
January 1554/5. Epist. 200.
somewhat resembling the Delphick oracles, That the book did not contein the
purity was to be wished; that there were in it ineptias, yet tolerabiles; that
as he would not have them be ultra modum rigidos, so he did admonish others ne
sibi in sua inscitia nimis placeant, etc. And here I cannot deny to have
sometime wondered, why in these disputes the opinion of Peter Martyr, then at
Strasburgh, a person for learning no less eminent, was never required: but I
have since heard him to have been always a professed patron of it, as one by
whose care and privity it had been reformed.

11. Whilst matters went thus in Germany, certain learned men at Geneva were
composing a Form for the use of the English Church there, which 1556. was
printed by Crispin, with this title,

Ratio and forma public orandi Deum atque administrandi Sacramenta etc. in
Anglorum ecclesiam, quae Genevae colligitur, recepta, cum judicio and
comprobatione D. Iohannis Calvini.

But this did not satisfy all, for Mr. Lever coming to Frankford to be their
Minister, requested they would trust him to use such an order as should be
godly, yet without any respect to the book of Geneva or any other. But his
endeavors were soon rejected, as not fit for a right reformed Church, and the
book it self has received since sundry changes from that first type.

12. In this posture Queen Elizabeth found the Church, the Protestant party
abroad opposing the book of Common prayer, few, varying in judgment, not at
unity with themselves, nor well agreeing what they would submit unto: She
hereupon caused it to be again revised by certain moderate and learned men, who
took a great care for removing all things really liable to exception; and
therefore where Henry the 8. had caused to be inserted into the Letany, to be
delivered from the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome and all his detestable
enormities, which remained all King Edwards time, this, as what might give
offense to that party, was thought fit to be struck out; and where in the
delivery of the Eucharist the first book of Ed. the 6. had only this clause,
The first book of Ed. 6. sol. 130. b.
The body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee preserve thy body
and soul unto everlasting life, and at the giving of the Cup no other then The
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which was shed for thee preserve thy body and
soul unto everlasting life, and the second book which was in force at his death
had removed those two clauses, and instead of them inserted Take and eat this
in remembrance that Christ dyed for thee, and feed on him in thy heart by faith
with thanksgiving, and accordingly at the delivery of the Cup, from whence some
might, and perhaps did infer the faithful Receiver not to have a real
communication of Christ's body, in taking the Sacrament, but only a remembrance
of his sufferings; it was now thought fit both expressions should be retained,
that no man might have any just cause of scandal: for be Christ's presence
never so real, even by Transubstantiation, in the holy Sacrament, we may upon
1 Cor. xi. (...), 25 ^
Saint Paul's warrant do it in remembrance of him.

Thus at the first of her reign matters in religion past with so great
moderation, as it is not to be denied very few, or none, of the Romish
inclination (if they did at any time go to Mass,) refused to be present in our
Churches during the time of Divine Service.

But of another thing that likewise past at the same time, it will be necessary
to make some more particular mention.

CHAP. VIII.
How Queen Elizabeth settled in this Kingdom the proceeding against Heretics.
1 ANother particular, no small argument of the Queens disposition, fell into
consideration this Parliament. Her 1. 2. P. M. cap. 6.
Sister had revived all the laws of former Princes against Heretics, even that
2. Hen. 4. cap. 15. repealed. 25. H. 8. cap. 14.
of Hen. the 4. which her Father had on weighty considerations repealed, and
all proceedings against them, till they came to their very execution,
pertaining to the Ecclesiastic: how to find a means to preserve her subjects,
and yet not leave a license to every old heresy, new invention, fanatic
spirit, to ruffle the Church and trouble the world, was a matter of no small
difficulty. But for the better understanding of what then past, it will be
requisite to consider, how the condemning of Heresy and proceeding against
Heretics has been, both here and elsewhere, how her Maty found it abroad in
the Christian world, and at home, how thereupon she settled it.

2. The words Heresy and Heretic were in the primitive Church not always of
so ill a sound as these later Ages have made them. De Haereticis cap. 63.
St Augustine does name some opinions for heretical have small affinity with
Divinity; and who shall read To. 4. bibliothec. patrum. cap. 54. 82.
Philastrius of Heresies, must needs approve De Scriptoribus.
Cardinal Bellarmin's censure of him, that he accounts amongst them many are
not properly Heresies, as the word is now taken. The first Council Council.
Genesis Romans to. 1. p. 88. cap. 6.
of Constantinople held 381. expressly affirms by the name of Heretic to
understand such as professing the same faith, yet did make a separation from
those canonical Bishops were of their communion. But the construction what
opinion was heretical, did ever, so far as I have observed, belong to the
spiritual Magistrate, who, after the pattern held out in Acts xv.
holy Writ, if any new erroneous opinion did peep, the neighbor Bishops and
Clergy taking notice of it, did assemble, condemn it, and by their letters gave
notice of what had past them to absent Churches: if the case were difficult,
the presence of any famous Clerk was desired, who for settling peace (as who
would not?) was easily drawn out of his own home; so was Eusebius. lib. 6. cap.
lz'. al. 30.
Origin sent for into Arabia, And that this form continued in condemning Heresy
till Constantine, seems to be very plain by the Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. kz'. etc.
ad cap. l'. al. cap. 22, 23, 24.
proceedings against Paulus Samosatenus and diverse others, remaining yet in
history, and the writings of the fathers. But for the prosecution of an
Heretic farther then to avoid him, I know no example, till after God having
given peace to his people under Christian Emperors, they Eusebius. lib. 10. cap.
7. Socrat. prooem. lib. 5. vide epist. Theodosii Cyrillo apud Baron. to. 5.
Anno 430. n. 64.
finding, if the Church were in trouble, the State to be seldom otherwise, did
provide as well for the calling of Bishops to Counsels that might condemn
Heresies, as by laws to punish Heretics.

3. The Council of Nice therefore having in the year 325. censured the
opinions of Arius for heretical, the Emperor that had formerly granted
privileges to Christians 326, declared Codex Theodos. lib. 16. de
Haereticisleg. 1. Vide Eusebius. de vita Constantini cap. 61, 62. lib. 3.
haereticos atque schismaticos his privilegiis alienos etc. and that no man
might be deceived by the ambiguity of the word Heretic, Cod. Theod. lib. 16.
de Fide Catholica leg. 2.
Gratian and Theodosius in the year 380. did declare who only were to be so
reputed, viz. all who secundum Apostolicam disciplinam evangelic amque
doctrinam patris and filii and spiritus sancti unam deitatem sub parili
majestate and sub pia trinitate credamus, hane legem sequentes, Christianorum
Catholicorum nomen jubemus amplecti, reliquos vero dementes vesanosque
judicantes haeretici dogmatis infamiam sustinere: and the year following did
not only in January Ibid. de Haeretic. leg. 6.
renew the said Edict, but in July Ibid. de fide Catholica leg. 3. and^ 2.
commanded all Churches to be delivered those Bishops who held that profession,
nihil dissonum profana divisione facientes, sed Trinitatis ordinem, personarum
adsertionem, divinitatis ordinem etc. and for the more assurance, as a mark of
their being orthodox, Ibid. leg. 2, 3. Annis 380, 381. and ibid. de his qui
religione contendunt, leg. 6.
did hold communion with the Catholic Bishops of any one seat there remembered,
as Damasus of Rome, Nectarius of Constantinople, Pelagius of Laodicea, Diodorus
of Tarsus, Optimus of Antioch, etc. omnes autem qui abeorum quos commemoratio
specialis expressit fide communionis dissentiunt, ut manifestos haereticos ab
ecclesits expelli. Which note Novel. Constii. 109. in praesat.
Justinian likewise in the year 541. having prescribed, goes farther, that
sacram communionem in Catholica ecclesia non percipientes a Deo amabilibus
sacerdotibus, haereticos just vocamus.

4. Before these laws, it is not to be wondered if every one desired to be
joined in communion with some one of those seats, whose Bishops were so
recommended, for conserving the Apostolic faith, for the sanctity of their
manners, and for keeping schism out of the Church; which being usually joined
with sedition in the Common wealth, Cod. Theodos. lib. 16. de his qui religione
contendunt, leg. 6. 3.
Princes seem to have an especial eye how it might be avoided, but after these
Edicts they certainly did it much more: and there being in the world no Bishop
more famous then the Roman, nor any other named in these parts of Europe then
he, every one endeavored to live united to that Church, whose form the
Council of Nice 325. (for before that, Aeneae Silvii Epist. 301. in edit.
Lugduni 1505. ^ Bellarmino epist. 288.
ad Romanam ecclesiam parvus habebatur respectus, as Pius secundus writes)
approving in distribution of the ecelesiastick government, and Emperors now in
point of belief, the Roman Chair became so eminent, as, for to show themselves
orthodox, many, especially of the Latins, did hold it enough to live in the
communion of that See, and the Fathers in that Age to give high expressions of
being in union with it. Ambros. oration de obitu fra^ris.
S. Ambrose showing the devotion of his brother Satyrus in a tempest, adds yet
farther as a mark of it, Advocavit ad se Episcopum -- percontatus. que ex eo
est utrumnam cum episcopis catholicis, hoc est cum Romana ecclesia, conveniret:
and S. Hieron. ad Damasum epist.
Hierom, a person very superlative in praising and reprehending, writing about
the same time to Damasus, Ego nullum primum nisi Christum sequens, Beatitudini
tuae, id est cathedrae Petri communione consocior etc. and in the year 602. a
certain Bishop returning out of schism spontanea voluntate did swear, Gregor.
lib. 10. epist. 31.
he in unitate sanctae ecclesiae catholicae, and communione Romani Pontificis,
per omnia permansurum etc. All which in time bred an opinion, that Chair could
not entertain an error, and the beginning of the mark absolutely inverted; for
those men who at first were, as others, sought unto Cod. Theodos. lib. 16. de
fide Catholica leg. 2.
because they did conserve the religion S. Peter had planted in Rome, must in
afterages be only held to maintain the same doctrine because they are in that
See; so that the Doctrine did not commend the person, but the being in that
seat, and recommended from thence, be it what it will, it ought to be received:
insomuch as De Romano Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 5.. Quod autem.
Cardinal Bellarmine doubts not to write, Si Papa erraret praecipiendo vitia
vel prohibendo virtutes, teneretur ecclesia credere vitia esse bona and
virtutes malas, nisi vellet contra conscientiam peccare: for which he was
Recognit. page 19. edit. 1608. Ingolstat.
afterward forced to an Apology; yet is not in my opinion so absurd as the
Regul. 13.
rule left by certain religious persons 1606. to their confidents at Padoua,
containing ut ipsi Ecclesiae catholicae (understanding the Pope) omnino
unanimes conformesque simus: si, quod oculis nostris apparet album, nigrum illa
esse definierit, debemus itidem quod nigrum sit pronuntiare etc.

5. But to return whence I have a little digress't: it being plain by these
laws, the Emperors restrained points of Heresy to the Catholic Doctrine of
the Father, Son and holy Ghost, the ground of the four first general Councils;
and others not to be esteemed heretics: in which sense I conceive sundry of
the ancients take the word; as Hier. in Ierem. 19.
S. Hierome, when he says all Heretics leave God; and Socrates, when he
agrees such as (...). Socrates lib. 6. cap. (...) al. 12.
condemned Origin, finding not to blame his opinion of the holy Trinity, must
confess he held the right faith: and Leo the first, when in an epistle about
449. he exhorts the Emperor Theodosius to consider the glory of S. Peter, the
Crowns of the Apostles, cunctorumque Martyrum palmas, quibus alia non fuit
causa patiendi, nisi confessio verae divinitatis, and verae humanitatis in
Christo, does intimate the true faith to be contained in that profession. After
these restrictions in the declaration of Heresy, it is likely diverse Sects grew
very audacious, either conceiving themselves without the compass of law, or
trusting in their friends and numbers; insomuch as Arcadius, Theodosius and
Valentinian, in the year 395. were forced to declare, Cod. Theodos. lib. 16.
leg. 28. de Haeret.
Haereticorum nomine continentur, and latis adversus eos sanctionibus debent
subcumbere, qui vellevi argumento judicio Catholicae religionis and tramite
detecti fuerint deviare: which August. in Psa^. 57. to. 8.
St. Augustine explains, eos utique haereticos appellant, qui non sunt
communionis eorum, as the Council of Constantinople had before, taking the
word in a larger sense then others had done. Upon which the Donatists, that
were the most Ibid. leg. 38. vide August. epist. 68. and to. 7. contra lit.
Petil. cap. 83.
furious, so as neither the persons nor goods of Catholics that dwelt amongst
them were safe, are more Cod. Theodos. de Haeret. lib. 16. leg. 37, 38, 39, 40*
52, 54, 65.
severely censured in them, then others, whose opinions were certainly more
dangerous, yet whom Emperors did think worthy of more favor.

6. But whilst Princes did thus by their laws only correct Heretics, and the
temporal Magistrate execute their commands, they did rarely think fit to
proceed I cannot but with the learned Wesembechius (in Cod. lib. 1. Tit. 5. de
Haereticis etc.) understand those words, Manichaeos de civitatibus pellendis
and ultimo supplicio tradendis, not to be meant of taking away their lives;
though I am not ignorant Celsus the lawyer so interprets ul imum supplicium ff.
de poenis leg. 21. for to what use were the banishing them the City, if they
were to be instantly executed? and that law being taken out of Cod. Theodos.
leg. 65. de Haeret. where those words are altogether omitted, I conceive
Justinian intended by them no other but those Capitales poenae that were morti
proximae, as metalli coercitio, in insulam deportatio, etc. ff. de poenis leg.
28. The like may serve for answer to those other Rescripis in Cod. Theodos. de
Haeret. leg. 9. 36. It is manifest by many places of S. Augustine, as to. 7.
contra lit. Petiliani, lib. 2. cap. 86. that there was no law during his time
against the life of an heretic; and Bellarmine himself confesses as much, de
laicis cap. 21. Augustinus. But however the matter is not great, being only
against some particular heretics, whose deportments may be thought to have
been seditious as well as their Conscience erroneous
to blood, unless perhaps De Haeret. leg. 8. Cod. Justin.
against some seditious preacher; and the holy men of those times used earnest
persuasions to deter any inclined to that severity, as not esteeming it to
agree with the entire charity of a Christian. S. Augustine, whose labors no
man equalled to preserve the Church from that contagion, when Donatus the
Proconsul of Africa went farther then that holy man liked in that kind, Epist.
127. and Retract. lib. 2. cap. 5.
professes he had rather be himself slain by them, then by detecting the
Donatists be any cause they should undergo the punishment of death. St. Prosper
Prosper in Chronico An. 392.
remembers four Bishops to have been excommunicated 392. for being accusers of
Priscilian (the first I have read of had his opinions confuted not by
Syllogisms but steel.) From whence To. 4. Anno 386. n. 23. Vide Johan. Royas
singular. 107. n. 6. Directorium Inquisitor. 2. part. cap. 27. p. 131. col. 1.
par. 3. quaest. 102. p. 702. col. 2. edit. Romae 1585. vide formulas etc. ad
finem praxis judiciariae Inquisit. p. 524. and p. 526.
Baronius conceives it proceeds, that such as deliver an Heretic to the
Secular for execution, to this day, effectually intercede he may not be punished
with death; yet, as it were to mock God and delude the world, if the Lay having
him in his power, shall defer the doing it more then ordinary, Direct. part. 3.
in quaest. 36. Franc. Pegn. comment. 85. p. 608. col. 2. Johan a Royas
singular. 107. n. 2. vide part. 2. n. 450.
it is the constant tenet of the Canonists, relying on a Bull of Alexander the
4. 1260. he is to be compelled unto it by spiritual censures, yet may not take
any congnizance of the cause at all.

7. It being then the course in the primitive times, that in the proceeding
against Heretics, the Ecclesiastic did conclude what Statute at Leicester 2.
H 5. cap. 7. Here I cannot but observe, Possidonius in the life of St.
Augustine cap. 18. no^ing the manner used then in the Catholic Church in
condemnation of Heretics, conformable to what is here specifyed, adds, Et hoc
tale de illis Ecclesiae Dei catholicae prolatum. judicium etiam piissimus
Imperator Honorius audiens ac sequens, s^^ it cos legibus damnatos, inter
haereticos haberi debere constituit. against which some had added in: the
margin, Caesar pronuntiat haereticos: but that showing too apparent, the
custom of those times might perhaps (when the place it self was not) be
regarded. The Inquisitors therefore of Spain in their Index at Madrid 1612. p.
37. col. 1. appoint i^ to be blotted out. But this edict against the Pelagians,
of whom that Father speaks, is not now found either in the Codex of Theodos. or
Justinian. But see Baronius ^om. 5. anno 419. n. 57, 58.
Tenets were Heresy, and the Temporal whether the party accused were guilty of
the imputation, and likewise of his punishment (as is manifest by imperial
constitutions, the writings of the ancient Doctors, the custom of the
Catholic Church, that never prayed against Heretics, but Heresy,) did so
remain at least 800. years after Christ: but about that time the division of
the Empire falling out, and Episcopal Consistories established through Europe,
Bishops did begin to claim as matters ecclesiastical, and only proper for
their Courts, the acting in those causes; which in some sort might be, so far
as the determination what is Heresy did extend. And about the year 1000, the
Christian world (as branches not bearing fruit in Christ, and therefore to be
cast into the fire, John XV. 6.) began to take that way of punishing
Miscreants; so in Baron. to. 10. Anno 1000. n. 4.
Italy Ibid. to. 11. Anno 1017. n. 4.
and France, jussu Regis and universae plebis consensu, some were thus
destroyed: and in imitation of Emperors, who had by their edicts prohibited all
compliance with Heresy Cod. Theod. de Haeret. leg. 12, 21, 34, 36. etc.
so far, as to punish any lending for that end places to resort unto, Hoved.
fol. 334. a. 42. and apud Neubrigens. lib. 2. cap. 15. canon. 6.
Alexander the 3. 1163. in a Council held at Tours, and in another at Rome
1179. making very strict canons against Heretics, declared, eos and defensores
eoru^ and receptores anathemati decernimus subjacere, and sub anathemate
prohibemus ne quis ipsos in domo vel in terra sua tenere velfovere, vel
negotiationem cum eis exercere praesumat. Of which the later being De
Haereticis cap. 8.
registered in the Canon law, is the first ecclesiastic constitution in it I
have observed to condemn rather Heretics then Heresy. Soon after which Roger
Hoveden, Anno 1182. fol. 352. b. 29. in fine anni.
Publicani comburebantur in pluribus locis per regnum Franciae, quod Rex
Angliae nullo modo permisit in terra sua, licet ibi essent perplurimi.

8. Yet the pious men of those times seem not to approve of this rigor. St.
Bernard, one of the most devout persons of that Age (vir plane Apostolicus
says De scriptor.
Bellarmine) following the doctrine of one much more Apostolic, Bernard. in
Cant. sermon. 6^. to. 1. col. 987. k. edit. 1586.
explaining Cantic. ii. 15. Take us the little foxes that spoil the vines,
writes, si juxta allegoriam ecclesias vineas, vulpes haereses, vel potius
haereticos ipsos intelligamus, simplex est sensus, ut haeretici capiantur
potius quam effugentur; capientur dico, non armis, sed argumentis, quibus
refellantur errores eorum, ipsi vero si fieri potest reconcilientur Catholicae,
revocentur ad veram fidem -- hoc denique velle se per hibet, qui non
simpliciter capite vulpes, sed capite nobis, inquit, vulpes parvulas; sibi ergo
and sponsae suae, id est Catholicae, jubet acquiri has vulpes, cum ait capite
eas nobis. and a little after, Quod si Haereticus reverti noluerit, nec
convictus post primam jam and secundam admonitionem -- erit devitandus. Thus
the holy men of the Age in which they stopped first men's mouths not with
arguments but arms, did judge of it: and indeed we have not many examples of
any suffered merely for conscience till after 1216.

9. In which year, as some write, Innocentius 3us. Paramo de origin Inquisit.
lib. 2. Tit. 1. cap. 1. n. 7. p. 90. Simanca Cathol. Institut. Tit. 25. n. 4.
p. 182. Romae 1575.
on the ignorance or remissness of Bishops in prosecution of Heretics, did
give beginning to the Paramo de origin Inquisit.
erection of a new Court, called since the Inquisition: of whose institution
and use, because it has highly served to the raising the Papacy, it will be
necessary to say something. He therefore at that time appointing Dominicus a
Spaniard, founder of the Dominican Order, by a Commission delegated from him,
his Inquisitor against the Albigenses in France, (without abrogating the power
of Episcopacy in that kind) gave to him, only a private Friar, such a power,
as caused diverse of them to be destroyed by that auctority in another Princes
Dominions. Though such as Franciscus Pegna, Ludovicus a Paramo, Famianus Strada
de bello Belgico lib. 2. p. 41. in foi. Romae 1640.
I have seen do conclude the auctority he exercised to have been from
Innocentius 3us. yet of the time when it was granted they do somewhat disagree.
Franciscus Pegna, a Spanish Doctor, who published his annotations on the
Directorium Inquisitorum at Rome 1585. yet it seems Ossat. Epist. 59. Romae 5.
Iun. 1596.
could not secure himself from them, In Director. part. 3. comment. 32. p. 495.
col. 1. b.
holds it to have been first committed unto him about 1200. on the otherside
Paramo of the same nation, that was himself an Inquisitor in Sicily, and
expressly writes of that subject, is De origin Inquisit. lib. 2. Tit. 1. cap.
1. n. 13. cap. 2. n. 3. p. 96. col. ^.
clearly of an opinion it could not be before the conclusion of the Council of
Lateran; and for proof gives in my judgment a very probable reason, viz. That
no Papal Decretall, or History preceding, did ever name any such Inquisitor,
that very Cap. 6, 7, 8.
Council when it treats of Heresy speaks of no other Judge then the Bishop:
now it ending about Easter 1216. ( Cap. 8. n. 36.
as I shall show hereafter) if granted by Innocentius, it must be at some time
between March and the 16. July 1216. when that Urspergenlis p. 321. obiit apud
Perusium 1216. 16. Calend. August.
Pope dyed. Yet I cannot omit that Edit. Romae 1579. p. 149. concilio absoluto
Bernardus presbyter cardinal. ipsum legationis officiumobtinuit, qui
praedecessorum exemplo B. Dominicum Inquisitorem similiter instituit.
Camillus Campegius, in his additions to Zanchinus, speaks as if after that
Council Friar Dominick had not his auctority from the Papacy immediately, but
from one Bertram or Bertrand a Cardinal Priest: but who that Bertram was, I
confess I have not been able to satisfy my self. Alphonsus. Ciaconius de
Cardinalibus, Romae 1630. p. 650. col. 1. and page 663. ol. 1.
Ciaconius remembers one of the name employed against the Albigenses, promoted
to that honor by Innocentius 3us. 1212. but he styles him only a Cardinal
Deacon; as he has another so called that was a Priest, but he was no
Cardinal, till Honorius 3us in December 1216 preferred him to the honor, so
was not capable of serving Pope Innocent in that degree.

10. But whosoever first began it, Frederick the 2d. certainly much augmented
their power, Vide Bull. Innocent. 4. da^. 11. Kalend. Iunii Pontific. anno 11.
1254. in. Bullario a Francisco Pegna edit. ad calcem Directorii, p. 16. and
Alexandri 4. ibid. p. ^4. ^ ^lementis 4^i. ibid. p. 57. etc.
publishing the 22. of February 1224. three laws at Padua, by which he did
constitute the Dominicans Inquisitors through the Empire, yet taking all others
under his protection; and appointing such as should be convict of Heresy, ut
vivi in conspectu hominum combur antur, flammarum commissi judicio, etc. That
these edicts were published at the only instance of Honorius 3us. is very
probable, in that they are not any way In sexto de haereticis cap. 18. Glossa
ad leges quasdam.
recorded but in papal bulls quoad verba, ( n. 18.
as I shall show hereafter.) After which, several persons in diverse parts
proceeded against them by commission from Rome: so as the Bishop, who was the
ordinary detector of Heresy, had little to do, and became daily to have less
and less; that although his power be not in those cases absolutely taken off,
yet it is so impaired, as it gives place to the Inquisitor; insomuch as if one
suspected of Heresy be cited by him and the Bishop Paramo de potestate
delegatae lib. 3. Quaest. 2. n. 109. p. 536. col. 1.
at the same time, his appearance must first be in the Inquisition: and the
reason given is, because they have a power by a delegated commission from the
Pope, Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 2. n. 11. p. 133. col. 1.
whereas to the other jure divino haec cura incumbit in haereticos inquirere;
and Instit. Cathol. Tit. 25. n. 5.
Simanca yet more plain, Cum Episcopi non habeant secretum car^erem, nec
ministros idoneos ad procedendum adversus haereticos, non possunt servare
ordinem illum qui praefinitus est Inquisitoribus: quam ob remusque eo tantum
procedere debent, ut in haereticos vel suspectos inquirant, and summariam
probationem Inquisitoribus secreto mittere debent. So that what power the
Bishop has in this kind from Christ, he is now become little other then agent
or substitute to the Inquisitor in point of Heresy.

11. But these Commissioners exercising their auctority with Fire, Tortures,
and the like, in short time found themselves infinitely mistaken, in expecting
by such violence to render that peace in the Church, and obedience in the
world, the primitive Fathers by the truth of their Dictats, evidence of reason,
and piety of their lives, drew men unto: for in some places they were Vide
additiones ad Lambertum Schasnaburgensem anno 1232. Tritem. Chronic. Hirsaug.
anno 1214. p. 223. and anno 1233. p. 235. Mat. Paris Anno 1236. p. 429. anno
1238. p. 482. Munsteri Cosmograph. p. 477.
expelled by the peoples fury, hardly any where continued but by strong hand;
their carriage being so full of Scandal, as Clement the 5. in the Council of
Vienna could not but acknowledge they had so exceeded the power committed to
them by the Apostolic See, In Clement. de Haereticis, cap. 1.
ut quod in augmentum fidei per circumspectam ejusdem sedis vigilantiam
salubriter est provisum, (dum sub pietatis specie gravantur innoxii) cedat in
fidelium detrimentum. For these men took upon them under the Pope, not only to
construe what was heresy, or complying with it, but on those imputations to
imprison, fine, confiscate men's goods, to the destruction of honest people, and
families; which forced some States Vide Giovanni Villani lib. 12. cap. 57.
to limit their proceedings, bar them of prisons proper to themselves, and
the wise Venetian appoint three Senators to supervise their actions: insomuch
as this delegated power did so decline, as notwithstanding the many
constitutions of Innocentius 4tus, Alexander the fourth, and several other
popes yet extant for regulating of it, out of Italy it was little taken notice
of; Paramo de origin Inquisit. lib. 2. Tit. 2. cap. 2. n. 13. p. 133. and cap.
3. n. 5. p. 136.
in Spain it remained obscurum debilitatumque, till Ferdinand and Isabella
1479. by agreement with Xistus 4. or, as Francis. Pegna in Director. part. 3.
com. 32. p. 49^. col. 1.
others, 1484. with Innocentius 8, did so renew it, as Cathol. Instit. Tit. 34.
n. 5. See Pegna ubi supra,
Simanca doubts not to write, they did introduce it into that Kingdom: which I
conceive to be in respect of the alterations in the proceedings now used to
those were formerly; for that tribunal, in preceding times committed from the
Papacy to Friars regulars (who most depended on Rome,) and therefore said to be
the Popes Court, is since by this concord become in effect no other then the
Kings, being recommended to the care of Clerks secular and Lawyers, the
Dominicans who formerly governed it altogether excluded, unless where the
Inquisitors require their counsel.

12. The style or manner there used being, that his Maty Vide Paramo de origin
Inquisit. lib. 2. Tit. 2. cap. 4. per totum: and Simanca ubi supra, Tit. 34. n.
6, 7.
names an Inquisitor general, whom the Pope approves, and after is not at all
admitted to interpose; for that Inquisitor nominates a Council, of which
himself is President, for number and persons as the King likes (as sometimes
five to which Philip the 2. added two more,) and these be of the gravest
divines of Spain, ever residing at or near the Court, who compose all
differences arising in particular Courts, receive all appeals, punish the
defect of agents, and relates to none but the King. Of this Council, as I
said, the Inquisitor general is President, whose auctority is very ample; for
he nominates all provincial Inquisitors and their Officers, (who yet enter not
on their charges but by the Kings allowance) whom on occasion he removes and
punishes, releases all penances, appoints visitors over particular Courts, and
though he be directed by the rule of the Canon Law and papal bulls, yet on
occasion varies from them, as is manifest by Instruct. Hispal. cap. 28. ut
citatur a Paramo p. 146. col. 2. n. 4.
these Instructions, Relinquendum est arbitrio and prudentiae Inquisitorum, ut
procedant juxta juris dispositionem in his quae hic non express d^clarantur,
is answerable to none but the King, admitting the Pope either very little or
not at all: insomuch as Adriani Hist. lib. 19. p. 1341. and ibid. lib. 18. p.
1^73. ^^escas Hist. Pont. Madriti 1606. lib. 6. in Pio 4. fol. 342. a. col. 2.
Pius 4tus. 1565. sending the Cardinal Buon compagno into Spain, upon the
cause of the Archbishop of Toledo, committed by the Inquisition there six
years before on an imputation of heresy, the Kings counsel liked not he
should alone examine that Prelate, without joining two Spaniards both in the
process and sentence. Neither did that State receive the Council of Trent
1564. by other auctority then the Kings only, who by his edict of the 12. of
July commanded the Cardinals and others of his Clergy to observe it, without
making any mention of the Pope. So that in that Kingdom this Catholic Prince
does not take on him much less over Ecclesiastic Courts and causes then the
King of England, however he do not style himself Head of the Church. And
therefore Cathol. Instit. Tit. 34. n. 5.
Simanca speaking of this Inquisition, plainly says, Ferdinand and Isabella
judicii ordinem quo etiam hodie utimur magna ex part instituerunt. Insomuch as
if we meet it at any time termed the Popes Court there, it is, no question, but
a nominall appellation, of that is neither subject to his rules, nor to follow
his commands, but as another will.

13. But this Court in Spain, and other places conforming themselves much to
the papal interest, is become very infamous, things being carried in it, as we
read in Hist. lib. 3. p. 81. Anno 1547.
Monst de Thous excellent history, praepostera judictorum forma, contra
naturalem aequitatem, and omnem legitimum ordinem, -- tum etiam immanitas
tormentorum, quibus plerumque contra veritatem, quicquid delegatis judicibus
libebat, a miseris and innocentibus reis, ut se cruciatibus eximerent,
torquebatur. And indeed the directions Popes have set them, do not agree I
think with the practice of any standing Court of Justice the world ever saw: as
that of Apud Eymericum Director. Inquisit. par. 2. p. 145.
Innocentius 4us and Bulla ^^ii 4. cui initium cum sicut. a Francisco Pegna
post Directorinm edita p. 162.
Pius 4us, that no man shall know the names either of his accuser or that
testifies against him, which Constanter asserere a^^ deo, q^od nec ipsis
peritis tot s process^s integraliter c^m nominib^s and circ^mstantiis
publicandus est, etc. Additiones ad cap. 14. Zanchini p. 104. Romae 1579. edit.
Camillus Campegius will not have communicated to those learned men the
Inquisitors shall call to their assistance in judgment. Another Bulla pii 5ti,
cui initium Inter multiplices curas. dat. Romae 21. December. 1566. ubi supra,
p. 169.
of Pius 5tus, that no declaratory or definitive sentence in favor of the
accused, though after a canonical purgation, posse facere transitum in rem
judicatam, but that they may again proceed tam de antiquis quam noviter super
eisdem articulis: which in effect is no other, but that a man once accused
before them can never be freed. Of a third of the Bulla Pii 5ti, cui initium Si
de protegendis, dat. Romae 1. April. 1569. ibid. p. 174.
same Pope, that whosoever should strike or terrify any belonging to the said
Office, (even a Notary or servant) should assi^t any to escape, imbezzle any
writings of that Court, besides the being by that Bull declared Anathema,
should be guilty of treason, and suffer according as men found culpable in
primo capite dictaelegis, their children subject to the paternall infamy, to be
not only incapable of succeeding in the fathers inheritance, but of receiving
any legacy from friend or stranger, or attaining any place of dignity
whatsoever; and others of the like nature, too long to be insisted on.

14. Certain it will not be easy (at least to my understanding) to prove these
proceedings of a Court Christian to agree with those rules and examples Christ
himself has left us in holy Scripture: but the pursuing these Maxims, and the
like, has brought a great obloquy upon this Court, so as it is held an
undoubted truth, the Inquisition under the Spaniard has an eye rather to
Adriani lib. 17. p. 1258. c. Hist. Council. di Trent. lib. 8. p. 776.
empty the purse, and is upholden more for temporal ends, then to cure the
conscience. And to this purpose it may not be here unfitly remembered, that a
Spanish Inquisitor, employed by Philip the 2. into Sicily, writes, it is found
amongst the records of that Kingdom, Paramo de origin Inquisit. lib. 2. cap.
11. n. 17. p. 203.
quod quando in anno 1535. fuit limitata seu suspensa jurisdictio temporalis
hujus sancti officii in aliquibus casibus per invictissimum Carolum 5tum
faelicis memoriae, jurisdictio spiritualis causarum fidei fuit in suspenso, and
quasi mortua: which I take no other then a confession, the Church, which it
maintains, without the temporal power would fail and come to naught; as indeed
Risposta ad fol. 22. Apolog. del Padre Paolo p. 85.
Cardinal Bellarmine somewhere in effect confesses, that to restrain
ecclesiastic jurisdiction to spiritualls, that pertain to the soul, is to
reduce it to nothing.

15. But because I am here entered upon this fining or confiscation of the goods
of a Lay person by a spiritual judge, on the conviction (or rather imputation)
of Heresy, it will not be amiss to see how the Ecclesiastics have gained that
addition to the power left them by Christ; which is so necessary, as without
it, that only was committed to them from him, which the ancient Fathers
practis't, would be as it were dead. It cannot be denied, Princes did in former
times by their edicts impose pecuniary penalties on some actions concerned
religion; so did Cod. Theod. de Haeret. leg. 21.
Theodosius 392. on such as did ordain or were ordained in Haereticis
erroribus; which law a Council. Afric. cap. 60. and Baron. to. 5. Anno 404. 11.
123.
Council held in Africa about 404. (provoked by the inhumanity of the
Donatists) did petition the Emperor Honorius might be of force against them:
but never any holy Bishop of those times took upon him to confiscate any man's
estate for his opinions, much less to damnify the son for the fathers tenets;
and the lawyers do expressly resolve, ff de poenis leg. 20.
si poena alicui trrogatur -- ne ad haeredes transeat, and give this reason,
Ibid. and leg. 26,
Poena constituitur in emendationem hominum, quae, mortuo eo in quem constitui
videtur, desinit; again, no man is alieni criminis successor: and accordingly,
many Cod. Theod. de Haereticis leg. 40. lata Anno 407. in Cod. Just. tit. eodem
leg. 4. 19. lata Anno 530. and in Authenticis Novel. 115. cap. 3.. 14. lata
Anno 541. etc.
imperial constitutions do expressly provide, the Catholic children of
heretical parents (though the father were deprived of them) should succeed in
their paternall goods; and thus it stood for ought I know for above a 1000
years, the Christian world thinking it hard the son should suffer for an
erroneous persuasion of the father, neither did ever any holy Bishop for that
space (unless as Deputy to some Prince) take upon him that way of punishing,
and if any did, it was not approved in him.

16. In the year 1148. Vide Gervas. Dorobern. col. 1363, 1364, 1366. 1. 1666.
20. Willielmus Thorn col. 1807. 52. etc
the Archbishop of Canterbury called by Eugenius 3us to a Council at Reims,
the King denied him passage; yet he stole thither; for which on his return he
was expelled England: into which notwithstanding he got, shrouding himself, as
it seems, in those tempestuous times, and to make himself the more formidable,
interdicted divine service through the Kingdom (which is the first experience
the nation ever had of that censure.) To this the Prior of S. Augustines
refused to yield obedience: and the Archbishop having now made his peace with
Stephen, got the sentence confirmed from Rome; upon which Thorn, col. 180^, 63.
omnes seculares in hoc monasterio servientes, praeter censuram ecclesiasticam,
ad gravem pecuniae redemptionem, contra juris aequitatem and sanctorum patrum
decreta, cocgit. On this complaint being made to the Pope, he writ unto him,
Thorn, 1809, 55.
Sicut nobis significatum est, homines ejusdem monaster^i, pro participatione
excommunicatorum, praeter ecclesiasticam poenam fuerunt ad redemptionem coacti;
and thereupon commands him, quatenus omnia quae hac occasion sunt eis ablata
sine vexatione restitui facias, nolumus enim ut nova in vestra ecclesia
inducantur etc. so that certainly it did but then begin to bud: and after 1160,
Alexander the 3. De poenis, cap. 3.
condemns the use of the Archdeacons of Coventry, who pro corrigendis
excess^bus and criminibus puniendis, a clericis and laicis poenam pecuniariam
exigunt, affirming it seemed to proceed de radice cupiditatis and avaritiae:
yet the same Pope in a Apud Rogerum Hoveden fol. 334 B. 3. and council. general.
Romae cap. 3. p. 33. col. 2.
Council at Rome 1179. appoints the goods of heretics to be confiscated, but
gives not at all any auctority to the spiritual judge in the execution of it;
and at the compiling of the Decretalls by Gregory the 9. De Haereticis cap 8.
that particular is omitted.

17. But not long after Innocentius 3, that vere stupor mundi and immutator
seculi, as Hist. minor. Anno 1217.
Matthew Paris styles him, about the year 1200 De Haeret. cap. 10 and Regist.
Innocent. 3. lib. 3. epist. 1.
appointed the goods of Heretics under his jurisdiction should be confiscated,
and out of it the like to be done by the secular magistrate, upon pain of
Ecclesiastic censures; adding from certain Cod. Theod. de sicariis leg. 3. and
Cod. Just. ad legem Iuliam Majestatis leg. 5.. Filii.
imperial constitutions, that it being only an act of mercy, that the
children of such as commit treason have their lives spared, when they loose
their goods, and the crime far greater to offend God then man, that the
severity should not give scandal to the faithful, in seeing children exposed
to misery for the parents offense, there being many cases wherein according to
the divine justice sons may be punished for the fathers fault, which he leaves
the Canonists to justify by the examples of Chanaan, the children in Sodom, of
Achan etc. as I do the reader to Alphonsus a Castro de just ^ haereticorum
punitione, lib. 2. cap. 11. Simancas Instit. Cathol. Tit. 9. n. 5. 6. Johan.
Royas singular. 66. n. 5, 6. Vide St. August. lib. 6. Quaestion. 8. super Ios.
10. 4.
seek in them. But it seems to mean hard gloss, from prophetic speeches of the
primitive times, or extraordinary examples, when God himself directed what he
would have done, for us now to conclude a practice lawful contrary to express
precept, Deuteronomy. xxiv, 20. ler. xxxi, 30. Ezech. xviii, 20. made good likewise by
the ordinary 2 Kings xiv, 6. 2 Chronicles. xxv, 6.
use of those times. Besides, I am not satisfied with the reason, that
temporal Lords punishing treason with the heirs loss of Estate, Heresy being
an offense of the same or a worse nature against the Divine Majesty, children
ought so to suffer: For doubtless all treason against a Prince presupposes
malice to his person or government, (and therefore we do not read that for
merely casual misfortunes, such as Tirrells in England, or Mongomeries in
France, men have been so punished) and for that they take away the offenders
life upon the first fact, which the Ecclesiastic De Haeret. cap. 9.
pardons: now questionless Heresy is out of an erroneous opinion the holder
has of pleasing God.

18. This of Innocentius 3us I take to be the first papal constitution in the
kind; yet some 16. years before it, diverse of several qualities being
discovered in that part of the Netherlands was then within the province of
Reims, the Archbishop and Earl of Flanders joined in an edict, Chronicon
Aquicinctinu^ a Miraeo 1608. editum ad calcem Sigeberti Gemblacensis and
aliorum, p. 236. anno 1183.
ut deprehensi incendio trader entur, substantiae vero eorum sacerdoti and
principi resignarentur. After this in Council. Lat. cap. 3. and de Haeretic.
cap. 13.
the Council of Lateran 1215. under the same Pope it was again established, bon
a damnatorum [de haeresi] si laici fuerint, confiscentur; si vero Clerici,
applicentur eccles^is a quibus stipendia perceperunt etc.

Nine years after which Fredericus 2dus published those laws at Padoua, of
which before, in which he did especially establish the confiscation of their
goods, and is the first imperial constitution of that kind; which remain no
where now entire save in some Eduntur a Francisco Pegna, ad finem Directorii.
papal bulls, as of Innocentius 4. Alexander the 4. and Clement the 4. as is
noted in Gloss. de Haeret. cap. 18. in sexto ad verb. leges quasdam: yet some
part of them are now inserted into De Episcopali audientia, cap. Statuimus, and
de Haeret. Manichaeis, cap. Gazaros etc.
the Codex of Justinian, under the titles of Authenticae or nova constitutio
Frederici 2. de statu and consuetud. etc. as I have touched before.

19. But these laws, though they confiscated the goods of Heretics, did not
appoint how they should be employed; insomuch as the same Emperor, being that
very year 1224. at Palermo in Sicily, Apud Paramum de origin Inquisit. lib. 2.
tit. 2. cap. 11. n. 8. p. 198.
expressed his intent to all his Officers through the Empire, but more
especially in that Kingdom, that whereas formerly his Exchequer did receive
the benefit of those confiscations, they should be divided into three parts,
viz. one third Fisco, another Apostolicae sedi, and the other third eisdem
Inquisitoribus. After which Bull. Innoc. 4. dat. idibus Maii 9. Pontif. cui
initium Ad extirpanda etc. in bullario. et a Francisco Pegna ad finem
Directorii, p. 11.. Teneantur.
Innocentius 4us 1252. did appoint a distribution in some sort imitating him,
as did likewise Ibid. p. 37.. Teneatur. dat. Anagniae 2. Kalend. December. 1259.
Alexander the 4th, including as liable to the same punishment such as were
receivers of Heretics: to Ibid. p. 65.. Teneatur. bulla Clem. 4. dat. Perusti
3. Non. November. 1. Po^tificat.
which Clement the 4. 1265. added, that the houses in which Heretics were
found, to be destroyed without hope of reedifying, the materials sold, and a
threefold division made, etc. These deprivations confined hitherto to Italy
only, Boniface the 8. 1295, or rather Annal. ecclesiast. Renaldi to 14. Anno
1297. n. 41.
1297, publishing the sixth book of the Decretalls, made general, decreeing,
De haereticis in sento cap. 19. vide cap. 17, 18.
bona Haereticorum ipso jure decernimus confiscata: whereupon, and some other
by him then inserted into the Canon law, Bishops labored to draw from the
lnquisitors part of the profits thus distributed; but Extrav. commun. cap. 1.
Benedict the 11. 1303. did absolutely prohibit that, tanquam juri absonum.
After which, because (as it seems) the Clergy were not free from prosecuting
men only for their estates, Clement the 5th in the Council of Vienna 1311.
strictly In Clem. de Haereticis cap. 2.
enjoined, ne praetextu officii Inquisitionis, quibusvis modis illicitis ab
aliquibus pecuniam extorqueant; and likewise, ne scienter attentent ecclesiarum
bona, ob clericorum delictum, praedicti occasion officii fisco etiam ecclesiae
applicare; changing what the Council of Lateran had before established.

20. Yet notwithstanding this grave admonition of the Pope, their Agents did
not carry themselves without scandal in this kind, by reason of an Giovanni
Villani lib. 12. cap. 57.
outrage arising from a Franciscan Inquisitor 1346. in Florence; a Scrutiny was
had of his actions, and found he had raised from the Citizens 7000 florens of
gold in two years, as compositions, or fines, upon the imputation of Heresy,
yet never less in the town; but any erroneous or less cautelous word was
censured as criminal. This drew the Florentine to conform themselves to the
usages of Perugia, Spain, and other parts, in making a law, no Inquisitor
should condemn any Citizen or borderer pecuniarily, but if an heretic, send
him to the fire. By which we may gather, these bulls were not generally
received in the world; for then in Spain the Ecclesiastic did not fine men,
and now the King there has the benefit of those confiscations. In Arrest de la
court de Parliament a Paris 27. Iun. 1542. habetur in libro des preuves des
libertes del' esglise Gallicane cap. 38. n. 9. p. 1082.
France they do not to this day impose on the Laics amends pecuniares, but
only on the Clergy, which must be expended en aumosnes and ouvres pitoiables,
not to the enriching themselves, etc. Neither does the wise Venetian permit
confiscating of estates to arise from any sentence of theirs, but that is to
devolve to the next heir. I do not here mention the constitutions of Boniface
Archbish. of Cant. 1260. nor of Stratford 1343. in this kind; because of the
first little reckoning was made, and the second did only refer to commutation
of penance, which the law allows: he that would may find them in Lyndwood lib.
3. de immunitate ecclesiae cap. Accidit, and lib. 5. de poenis cap. Evenit.

21. If any ask a cause, why the ancient Fathers did proceed with so great
lenity against blasphemous heretics, as the Arrians, Nestorians, etc. why,
when the August. Epist. 68.
Emperor would have punished the furious Donatists with a pecuniary mulct, the
holy men of those times so earnestly interceded as to procure the remission,
and did requite their fury with such love and meekness, August, contra literas
Petiliani Don^t, lib. 2. cap. 83.
as to be able to say, no one of them had paid what the imperial edicts might
challenge* when of late years men have been brought to the fire, children
exposed to misery by the loss of their parents estates, even by Bishops and
other of the Clergy, whose opinions were neither so blasphemous as the Arrians,
nor their comportments so inhumane as the Donatists: why they preached, men
(...) Socrates de Chrysostomo lib. 6. cap. ka', lat. 19.
relapsed, even to a thousand times, might yet live reconciled to the Church;
when as now such as have renounced an opinion Rome calls heresy, being after
found to hold it, is De H^reticis cap. 9. and tit. eodem cap. 4. in Sexto.
Simanca Instit. Cathol. Tit. 57. n. 10.
seculari judicio sine ulla penitus audientia relinquendus; which yet is not
observed if he be a Prince, as was Henry the 4. or perhaps a private man out of
their power:

22. To these demands I can give no other answer, but, that their offenses
being against the holy Trinity, the pious Bishops of those times, as men who
watched for souls, did content themselves to denounce what was heresy, but
having done that, finding it not received, to leave the punishment to him who
assures it shall go worse with Sodom and Gomorrah then those refused their
instructions, and under him to the Secular magistrate; did likewise follow his
precept, in forgiving even to Mat. xvlii, 22.
seventy times seven times: when on the other side, the opinions of these later
heretics (as they call them) be rather against men and their Institutes, then
God, as that Aeneas Sylvius histor. Bohemica cap. 35.
Romanum praesulem reliquis episcopis paremesse, Purgatorium ignem non
inventri, Celebritates sanctorum rejiciendas, Iejuntis ab ecclesia institutis
mhil inesse meriti etc. and a persuasion gained, none but the Ecclesiastic can
Cognitio haeresis and ipsius punitio pertinet ad episcopos. Lyndwood de
H^reticis cap. Item quia, verbo Ordinarii.
punish Heresy, who judge the opposer by the law of man, howbeit they style it
Christian, yet how it agrees with divinity Iremit to the Canonists decision. In
the mean time I cannot but observe, Cathol. Instit. Tit. 57.
Simanca finds nothing out of holy writ, but only in divine Plato lib. 10. de
legibus, to maintain the position that semel tantum haereticis poenitentibus
parcitur etc.

23. This being then the proceeding against Heretics in general, it will be
necessary to see how it was formerly in England, and how the Queen found it.
First, it will not be unfit to premise, Neubrigensis lib. 2. cap. 13.
that from the Conversion of the Saxons to the year 1166. no heresy was ever
known to have been in England; insomuch as we may safely conclude, whatever
doctrine we meet with in the public homilies of the Church, or other writers
of elder times, must be esteemed catholic, however it now stand censured: but
in that year about XXX Dutch came hither, that detested baptism, the Eucharist
etc. who being convict by Scripture in an episcopal council called by the
King at Oxford, were remitted to his disposition, that caused them to be whipped,
and burnt in the face, and a command given none should either receive or
relieve them, so that they miserably perished: which severity his Maty did not
think fit afterward to extend to those were then called Publicani, as I have
before n. 7.
showed, though there were many in his dominions.

24. For the punishment of Heretics, it cannot be doubted by the common Law
(that is the custom of the Realm) of England to have been here, as in other
parts of the world, by consuming them by fire. De script. Brit. Cent. 3. cap.
65. in Appendice.
Balaeus, from the testimony of a chronicle of London, reports one of the
Albigenses to have been so made away there 1210. to which the Apparat. Elizab.
learned Camden seems to allude, when he says more dyed in Queen Mary's time,
then this nation had seen ex quo regnante Iohanne Christiani in Christianos
apud nos flammis saevire coeperunt. The same Paramo says is made good by an
epistle of Tho. Waldensis to Martin the 5. but I have not seen it; I am sure in
that Waldensis I use it is not found. But of the truth of the thing there is
no question; for Lib. 3. de corona cap. 9. n. 2. fol. 124. a. Britton cap. 9.
Bracton writes of an Apostate Deacon, that in a Council held at Oxford 1222.
by Stephen Langton was first degraded, and then by the Lay committed to the
fire: with whom for the thing agrees Lib. 1. cap. 29. in fine, p. 46.
Fleta; yet, by the way, where you read in him per manum comburentur
clericalem, it is to be Laicalem, for so is Bracton, out of whom he transcribed
it, agreeing with the continual practice both of this and other nations; for
the Clergy meddles not with execution.

25. In Edward the 3ds days, about the year 1347. Hist. Angl. lib. 19. p. 382,
39.
Polydore Virgil testifyes two Franciscans to have been burnt, quod de
religione male sentirent. Neither did William Sautry, a relapsed priest, dye
by any statute law 2. H. 4. but convicted in a provincial council of the
Archbishop of Cant. the writ de haeretico comburendo, bearing date the 26.
February was by the advice of the Lords Temporal sent to the Major of London
to cause him be executed, Rot. Parl. 2. Hen. 4. n. 29.
attendentes, says it, hujusmodi haereticos, sic convictos and damnatos, juxta
legem divinam, humanam, canonica instituta, and in hac part consuetudinaria,
ignis incendio comburi debere etc. But where Ypodigma Neustriae anno 1401. p.
158, 9
Walsingham speaks as if he dyed during the sitting of the Parliament, by
virtue of 2. Hen. 4. cap. 15.
the law then made against heretics, the historian is without peradventure
mistaken; for that Parliament, begun about the 20. January, ended the 10. March
following, did expressly provide, on the petition of the Commons, Rot. Parl. 2.
Hen. 4. n. 116.
qe touz les estatutz and ordenances faitz ou affair en cest Parliament qe
sont penalz, ne tiegnent lieu ne force devant le feste de Peatecoste prochin
venant, les queles en le mesme temps puissent estre proclamez: to which the
answer is, le Royle voet. So that certainly he could not dye by that law, which
was not to take effect till so long after.

26. But I confess I did a little doubt of two particulars: The one, whether
by the common Law a Lay man could be sent to the fire for any conviction by the
Ecclesiastic; for all the undoubted precedents I have met with (unless that
of the Albigenses were otherwise) were of some Clearks, within the pale of the
Church, that were so punished; and Bracton and Fleta both agree, Clerici
Apostatae comburantur; whose words being penal, I conceived stricti juris not
to be construed by equity. But indeed Fleta elsewhere speaks more generally,
Christiani Apostatae I read it detrectari, not, a^ the print, detractari.
detrectari debent and comburi; and Cap. 9. fol. 16. b.
Britton of Miscreants so to be served, without distinction of the quality;
with whom Sr. Edward Cook concurs. Another thing I questioned, whether any
Bishop within his Diocese alone could convict one of heresy before 2. Hen. 4.
cap. 15. (of which hereafter:) for whatever the power of the Ordinary was,
there is very little example of his putting it in exercise before the times of
VVickliff.

27. Who began to be taken notice of about the end of Edward the 3. or rather
the beginning of Rich. the 2. in whose doctrine, at least that they fathered on
him, though there were good Corn, yet was it not without Tares. But when it
grew common, and to be hearkened unto, the Prelates labored to procure 5. Ric.
2. cap. 5. stat. 2.
a law, his Maties Commissions should be directed to the Sheriffs and other his
Ministers, to arrest all preachers, their fautors etc. to hold them in prison,
till they will justifi themselves according to reason, and the laws of the
holy Church. How this past I should be glad to learn; for not only 5. Ric. 2.
cap. 1.
the printed statutes, but Rot. Parl. lendemain Iehan port Latin. 5. Ric. 2. n.
13.
the Roll of Parlnt expressly mentions the Commons agreeing to those Acts, yet
the Rot. Parl. Octaves St. Michel. 6. Ric. 2. n. 52,
next meeting they do disclaim to have given any assent unto it, quiel ne fust
unques assentu ne grante parles coe^s, mes ce qe fust parle de ce fust sanz
assent, de lour qe celuy estatut soit anntenti: to which the Kings answer is, y
plest au Roy. How it fell out this latter was not counted an Act, Cook Inst. 3.
p. 41.
Sr. Edward Cook has showed, which tells us why it past again without
opposition in 1 and 2. P. and M. cap. 6.
Queen Mary's days. I wish that learned Gentleman had given his opinion how
the record came to be so faulty, as to affirm a concurrence of the lower House
to that they never assented.

28. In King Hen. the 4ths time his successor, that 2 Hen. 4. cap. 15.
law past, which greatly increased the power of the Ordinary, allowing him to
imprison, fine, determine all causes of heresy, according to the canonical
Decrees, within three months: on which words Canonical Sanctions the Bishops
so behaved themselves, 25 Hen. 8. cap. 14.
That the most learned man of the realm, diligently lying in wait upon himself,
could not eschew and avoid the same act and Canonical Sanctions, if he should
be examined upon such captious interrogatories as is and has been accustomed
to be ministered by the Ordinaries of this realm, in cases where they will
suspect of heresy etc. Upon which, if any did refuse obedience to his Diocesan
in ought, Cook Instit. 3. cap. 5. p. 42.
as paying a legacy etc. there would be means found to bring him within the
suspicion of heresy. And certainly the proceeding of some Diocesans upon this
statute gave quickly scandal: for only nine years after, we find the Commons
petition, Rot. Parl. 11. Hen. 4. n. 29.
qe please a nre sovereign Seigr le Roy grantier, qe si ascun soit ou serra
arreste par force de l' estatute fait l' an de vostre regne second, al
request des Prelates and Clergy de vostre Royalme d' Engleterre, q' il purra
estre less a mainprise, and fair sa purgation franchement sanz destourbance
d' ascun en mesme le Conteou il est arrestu, and qe tieles arrestes soient
desore en avaunt faitz en due form de ley, par les Viscount, Mairs, Baillifs ou
Conestables nostre Seignr le Roy, sanz violent affray, our force and arms, en
depredation de leur biens, ou autre extortion ou injurye queconcque en celle
affair. But to this, le Roy se voet ent aviser is all the answer given. But
whereas Walsing. Anno 1410. p. 422.
Walsingham speaks of this Parlnt. as insected with Lollardy, certainly to me
there is no such thing appears in the Roll, but rather the contrary. But I
confess I did think before that law of H. 4. no Bishop in his Diocese, without
a Provincial Council, could have convicted any man of heresy, so as to have
caused him been burnt; for man's life being a point of so high concernment in
the law, and heresy laying so great an imputation on the party, it seemed not
to me probable, every angry Bishop in his Court should alone have power of
determining what was by the canonical Sanctions so esteemed, and whose words
or writings could admit no other sense then heretical: and with this it seemed
to me the practice did concur, for the Deacon burnt at Oxford suffered after
conviction in a Provincial Synod; and the conviction of William Sautry shows
plainly to have been after the same manner, Rot. Parl. 2. Hen. 4. n. 29.
the Writ running, Cum vener abilis pater Thomas etc. de consensu and assensu,
ac consilio coepiscoporum, ac confratrum suffragancorum suorum, nec non totius
cler^ Provinciae suae, in concilio suo provinci ili congregato, juris ordine in
hac part requisito in omnthus observato etc. intimating (as it seemed to me)
if otherwise, the Order of law had not been observed. And I did ever conceive
this Law had increased the Power of the Ordinary, as well in permitting him
singly to pursue the canonical Sanctions in convicting an heretic, as in
sining and imprisoning of him; especially the statute 1 and 2. P. and M. cap. 6.
of Q. Mary, that gave it life after the repeal of Hen. the 8, affirming,
before such revivall the Ordinary did want auctority to proceed against those
that were infected with Heresy. But I have since found, Cook Inst. 3. cap. 5.
p. 39.
better opinion it was otherwise.

29. After this 2. Hen. 5. Stat. 2. Hen. 5. cap. 7.
a Parliament at Leicester enacted, The Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices of the
peace, Sheriffs, etc. should take an Oath for destroying all manner of
Heresies, commonly called Lollardries, to be assistant to the Ordinary therein;
Persons convict of Heresy to loose their fee-simple land; Justices of the Kings
Bench, of the Peace and of Assize, to enquire of all holding any errors or
heresies as Lollards, their maintainers, receivers, fautors, etc. and for that
end a clause to be put into the Commissions of Justice of the Peace: yet
forasmuch as the cognizance of heresy, errors, and Lollardries belonged to
Judges of holy Church, and not to the secular, the indictment taken by them not
to be evidence, but for information before the spiritual Judge, into whose
hands the person suspected to be delivered within ten days after his
enditement; every man empanell'd in the Enquest for the trial of them to have
in England 5 pounds, in Wales forty shillings in land by the year etc. Which
three laws were each repealed by Hen. the 8th or Ed. the 6. and again restored
by Q. Mary, under whom, by virtue of them, had in less then three years been
spoiled for religion more Christian blood of her subjects, then in any Princes
reign since Lucius.

30. Things standing thus when Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, the
Ecclesiastic auctority exercised at home and abroad with rigor and austerity,
rather then Christian mildness; still to permit that, was the continuing a
fire to consume her people, and yet for every one to think and do without
control what him list, was to let loose all reins of government, to leave
open a door for sedition to disquiet her Kingdom, and the Commonwealth perhaps
not to be ever in peace: her Maty therefore took a middle way to agree with the
primitive times, and yet not let every profane humor disturb the Church, by
Stat. 1. Eliz. cap. 1.
erecting a Court with power to visit, reform, redress order, correct and
amend all such errors, heresies, schisms etc. which by any spiritual or
ecclesiastical power, authority, or jurisdiction can or may lawfully be
reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained or amended; yet restraining
them from adjudging any thing to be heresy, that had not been heretofore
adjudged such by the plain words of the canonical Scriptures, or by any one of
the first four general Counsels, or by any other general Council, wherein
the same was declared heresy by the express and plain words of the canonical
scripture, or that should hereafter by the Parliament with the assent of the
Convocation etc.

From whence arises a question of some intricacie, how it came to pass those
times spoke with so great submission to the four first general Counsels, and
yet so restrained the other, without expressing which they were, nor any other
particular concerning them. For the solution of which, we are to know, those
have been ever looked on by the Catholic Church with more reverence then any
other that ever yet were held. The Novel, 131. cap. 1. and in Cod. de summa
trinitate and side Catholica leg. 9.
Emperor Justinian 541. declared which they were, and that he did receive
earum dogmata sicut sanctas scripturas, and regulas sicut leges observamus; who
made not the like mention of the fifth, though Council. genesis Romae, to. 2. p.
524, col. 1. E.
called by him, and held in his time. Neither did Gregory the great, who did
reverence them, Gregor. lib. 1. epist. 24.
sicut sancti Evangelii quatuor libros, make the same esteem of the fifth; for
having made honorable mention of it in a letter to a Queen of Lombardy, sent
by a Bishop of Milan, the Bishop gave it her not, on an opinion she might be
scandalized at his naming of it: upon which Gregor. lib. 3. epist. 37.
St. Gregory sent him word he did well, and in that altered his epistle. And
the year following, viz. 596, Lib. 5. ^ndict. 14. epist. 2.
the People of Ravenna opposing one Maximianus in being their Bishop, as not of
sound belief, in that he did not carry so great veneration to the Council of
Chalcedon, hodoth assure them of the contrary, that he did receive those four
Counsels, but makes no mention of the fifth. I do not deny but Beda lib. 4.
cap. 17. Council. Calcuth. cap. 1. apud Spelm. p. 293.
the faith of the fifth and sixth were by this Church approved, yet never any
of them had that great reverence yielded their dictats the first four had,
which are therefore said to have been Canones Aelsrici ad Wulfinum apud
Spelman. Council. Can. 33. p. 581. vide Egberti Archiepise. de sacerdotali
jurecap. 4. ibid. p. 278.
Synodi firmissimae by Elfrick, in his Canons to VVulfin.

32. But these, however of this high esteem, yet had not the name of general
appropriated unto them till long after; for certainly that distinction was not
suddenly brought into the Church, at least in that sense it is now taken, many
Synods by our writers being styled general, to which yet the obligation was
never of that nature, as if they did not or could not err. p. 24, 7.
Eadmerus writes, Anselm told William the 2, generale concilium Episcoporum ex
quo Rex factus fuisti non fuit in Anglia celebratum: and the like phrase is
used very frequently for English counsels not only in him, but in our other
eldest and best historians, as Anno 1044. p. 405.
Flor. VVigorniensis, Anno eod. fol. 180, 23.
Simeon Dunelmensis, Hunt. fol. 226. b. 3.
Huntington, Ger. Dor. col. 1369, 62.
Gervas. Dorobernensis, Hoved. Anno 1044. fol. 252, a. 35. Anno 1200. fol. 458,
b. 18.
Hoveden, etc. Hist. minori and majori, p. 131. 19.
Mat. Paris speaking of a council held at Westminster 1175. calls it
Concilium generale, which in Diceto col. 585, 63.
Diceto is changed to Concilium Regionale, and in the margin added (out of the
Mss. copy sometimes belonging to St. Albans, and now at Saint James's, (the
best and fairest I ever saw) and which I conceive Mat. Paris himself used)
solius Papae est concilium generale, Romanae ecclesiae and Constantinopolitanae
est concilium universale: which I know not how he will make good, having To. 1.
Council. Con. Carth. 3. cap. 7. council. 4. in prooem.
the 3d and 4th Council of Carthage, Ibid. Honor. Augusto and ^umorido C^ss.
and one held there 403. the Council Tom. 2. Council. Crab. c. 20.
of Matiscon and others to contest with, which being no other then particular,
as we now esteem them, have in their acts the titles of being universal
Counsels. So the 4th Council Ibid. in proaemio.
of Toledo is said to have been general; as by Eymericus a Director. par. 2.
quaest. 5. 6. in sine p.
Council in Tarragona.

33. Now of such as have been so called, it is manifest the value set on them
is altogether vanished, and was so long since. De vit. Pont. in Anselmo. fol.
129, b. 30.
Malmsbury records, the Counsels held by Anselm were in his time become
obsoleta, their credit lost: and so we may say of the rest, for De poenis, cap.
ad haec, verbo minime admittantur.
Lyndwood is very clear no English Counsels oblige this Church, before 1222.
Stephen Langton held one at Oxford. As for those which the Popes called as
Patriarchs of the West, which Diceto conceives were properly general, the rite
of former times was, never to send hence more then four Bishops unto them;
which when it came in question 1179. Hoveden fol. 332. a. 55.
Episcopi Angliae constanter asseruerunt, quod ad generale concilium Dom. Papae
quatuor Episcopi de Anglia tantum Romam mittendi sunt: which is so full a
testimony of his having no absolute power over our Bishops, not so much as to
cause them meet in council, as there cannot well be a greater; and therefore
when he imposed the oath (of Cap. 3. n. 50, 51.
which before) on them, one clause was, Vocatus ad Synodum veniam, nisi
praepeditus fuero canonica praepeditione. Yet in after Ages the going thither
did only remain at the Princes pleasure, Vide Seld. ad Eadmer. p. 214. ex.
Archivis potestatem commissam Ambasciatoribus ad interessend. concilio
Basisiliensi.
who gave them auctority consentiendi, and, si opus fuerit, dissentiendi his
quae juxta deliberationem dicti concilii inibi statui and ordinari contigerit.
All which I have spoke of general Counsels, that the Reader may know, when he
meets that phrase in any author, he is not necessarily to conclude him to have
conceived an obligation of following whatever they said, nor that he held it to
have been void of Error; for it is unquestionable, they and we give the name
to such Synods as were esteemed full of imperfections, far from that freedom
ought to be in General Counsels, to whose Canons they did not hold themselves
tied.

34. But because in these cases examples of former times do more convince men's
judgments, then present affirmations, to give some instances, not of other
then of such as have been 1608 and 1612. Romans
lately printed, and with that title, at Rome; as the Council of Vienna 1311.
Which by Gualterus Hemingford Gisburnensis.
Gisburnensis, who lived about that time, is noted to have been nothing less
then a free Council: the book is not printed, I will give you the whole
therefore as I find it in him.

Dominus Papa Clemens tennit concilium suum Viennae Anno Dom. Mccexi. primo die
mensis Octobris: in quo quidem conciliotres fecit sessiones.

I. In prima sessione, facto sermon, exposuit Clero tres artioulos super
quibus erat principaliter tractandum, and consulendum; super negotio terrae
sanctae, quomodo posset recuperari and tueri, and super ordine Templariorum,
qui pro nullo habebatur; praecepitque omnibus Praelatis, and singulis qui
convenerant, quod super praemissis articulis usque ad secundam sessionem
deliberarent.

II. In secunda sessione facta est long a disputatio de ordine Templariorum,
utrum stare posset, vel deleri de jure deberet. Et erant pro ordine
Templariorum praelati quasi omnes, praeter praelatos Franciae, qui propter
timorem Regis Franciae (per quem, ut dicebatur, totum illud scandalum fuerat)
aliud facere non audebant. Erant in toto Concilio (quod Concilium dici non
merebatur, quia ex capite proprio omnia fecit Dominus Papa, non respondente
neque consentiente sacro Concilio) baculi pastorales circa cxxx.

III. In tertia sessione Dominus Papa [sedit] pro tribunali, and ab uno latere
Rex Franciae, ab altero Rex Naverniae filius ejus: surrexit que quidem
Clericus, and inhibuit sub poena excommunicationis majoris, ne aliquis
loqueretur verbum in concilio, nisi licentiatus vel requisitus a Papa.
Recitatoque processu Templariorum, adjecit Papa, Quod licet ex processu
praehabito ipsum Ordinem de jure delere non posset, tamen ex plenitudine
potestatis Ordinem delevit, nomen and habitum, terras eorum and possessiones
Hospitalariis conferendo, aggregando, and uniendo.

35. The like may be said of the Council of Lateran under Innocentius 3. in
which there was only recitata (as what the Pope had before concluded on)
capitula Sic Mat. Paris Anno 1215. p. 272, 26. lege tamen capitula lxx.
lx, quae aliis placabilia, aliis videbantur onerosa, etc. Which with the great
extortion then exercised on the prelates appeared in it, the little credit it
gained in England, might justly cause p. 151, 19. edit. Land.
the Antiquitates Britannicae Ecclesiae write it to end in risum and scomma:
which words are none of Mat. Paris, but of the auctors; though the marginall
note against them in p. 158, 47.
the edition of Hanaw 1605. has given an occasion of mistake, which should
have been placed five lines lower, as it is in that p. 151, 23.
of London 1572. for that he there speaks of the prelates borrowing to satisfy
the papal avarice, is as Archbishop Parker, or whosoever else composed those
lives, thus delivered in Mat. Paris. hist. minor. Ms. p. 172. and fol. 86. sive
89. col. 2. Anno 1216. Vide Abbatum vitas page 117, 39, 43.
Historia minori; Tunc autem temporis solutum est concilium generale: Papa vero
praelatis petentibus licentiam repatriandi minime concessit, immo a singulis
auxilium in pecunia postulavit, quam recessurt cum viaticis cogebantur a
Mercatoribus curiae Romanae duris conditionibus mutuare, and sic cum
benedictione papali ad propria remearunt -- per idem tempus instante festo
Paschali, etc.

36. This I have the rather transcribed, because some are of opinion that
Council ended 1215; which certainly it did not till toward Easter the year
following; and then too abruptly, the Pope called away on a sudden for
appeasing the wars growing in Italy, the 16 July 1216. dyed: which makes it
without either time when it began or ended, nothing being fully concluded but
the expedition against the Sarazins, for the recovery of the Holy land. Of this
I have made the more particular mention, for that having given advertisement of
it to Doctor Wats (who has with great sincerity and judgment put out Mat.
Paris,) that he might clear the Archbishop in his Adversariis, I know not by
what fate he applies his note to page 138, 5. which referrs to the Council
held there by Alexander the 3. 1179. when it should have been to page 272. or
page 274. 6. and thinks he called the lives of the Abbots the Historia minor;
who I am persuaded See the praeface to Mat. West. page 5.
never saw that book, but did write heartily what he found in Historia minori.

37. But that this Council was never received generally here is manifest, in
that diverse Canons in it were not of force in England, as the 3, the 41, the
46, to which I may add the very first; for though Lyndwood, de summa Trinitate
and fide Catholic a, cap. Altissimus.
Peckham 66 years after did make a constitution in that point; yet he did, to
my understanding, not speak of Christ's presence in the Eucharist so grossly,
nor determine it to be by Transubstantiation, as the first chapter of the other
does: but of that hereafter. And whosoever shall pursue ibid. de poeuitentiis
and remissionibus.
Simon Sudburies constitions 1378 touching confession, will find so much
variation from the 21 chapter of that Synod, as he cannot think he took that
for a rule not to be varied from. To which I may add, that De custodia
Eucharist. cap. 2.
Peckham provides the punishment of the negligent conserver of the holy
Sacrament to be secundum regulam concilii generalis, meaning the 20th chapter
of this I speak of; which had it been of force otherwise, he had no doubt
commanded the due observance of it, not by his command added strength to the
rule there given. It is true, Stephen Langton, to ingratiate himself with Rome
(whom he had so much displeased, as Mat. Paris Hist. minor. Anno 1216. Barons,
p. 172. col. 2.
the Pope intended to remove him from his Archbishopric on the Kings desire,
but stopped on the intercession of the Court, and his being a Cardinal) did at
the end of his Synod at Oxford 1222 enjoin the Council Which Council of
Lateran this was, is uncertain, whether that under Innocentius 2. or this by
Innocentius 3. but most likely that under Innocent 3. at which himself was
present.
of Lateran held under Pope Innocent, in the paying of Tithes and other
litigious Binius reads, and aliis capitulis, thereby adding strength to every
chapter of that Council: when certain the reading should be, according to
ancient copies, in praestatione Decimarum and aliis causis, referring only to
what past there touching Tithes, and the payment of them by the Cistertiam
order, for land acquired after that time, which several Acts of Parl.
confirmed afterward. As for the other constitutions there propounded, he after
gives the rule with what caution they were to be expounded and recited, as they
should be held expedient, and not otherwise.
causes, to be observed, and in Synodis episcopalibus constitutiones illius
concilii, una cum istis, prout videbitur expedire, [exponi volumus and
recitari:] which last words Binius has changed, I know not on what auctority,
to volumus observari, when questionless the English took them for advise, not
a precept: and their little regard of them appears by the particulars
mentioned. Neither does Lyndwood make any mention of this part, though he have,
I think, all the rest were agreed there: and is it self altogether omitted in
some old copies of that Council I have seen; one of which is joined with the
Mss. Annals of Burton Abbey in Sr Thomas Cottons Library. But the Acts of this
Council being, with diverse others, printed at the end of the constitutions of
Otho and Othobon at Paris 1504, and since by Binius transferred into his third
tome the second part, this is alleged by some men, as if what past at Lateran
had been of undoubted validity with us; when no question, what was done there
has never been taken here as the decrees of a general Council, like that of
Nice or etc. but of Innocentius 3us, as they stand in the Decretalls (compiled
by Gregory the 9th his Nephew) with this title, Innocentius 3. in Concilio
Lateranensi, as those by him propounded, but not fully concluded in council,
according to Plantina, and from which this Church varied as occasion served.
Yet if any shall insist this conclusion of 1222. to have been of greater
validity then I speak, I must add, that if it really were made with such an
intent by the Ecclesiastics, it cannot be thought to have obliged us more then
that declaration of the Bishops 1615 did the French; who Preuves des libertes
de l' Esglise de France p. 325.
having meurement delibere sur la publication du concile de Trente, ont
unaniment recognu and declare, and recognoissent and declarent, estre obligez
par leur devoir, and conscience, a recevoir, come de fait ils ont receu and
recoivent, le dit concile, and promettent l'observer entant qu' ils peuvent par
leurs fonctions, and auctorite spirituele, and pastorele, and caused the same
to be printed. Yet that of Trent had never validity in France, nor the other in
England, notwithstanding what thus past the Clergy.

38. Neither was that other Council of Lateran under Innocentius 2. ever
received here: though the Pope there Ordericus Vitalis lib. 13. p. 919. B.
insignem sacrorum Decretorum textum congessit, yet nimis abundans per
universum orbem nequitia terrigenarum corda contra ecclesiastica scita
obduravit: from whence it proceeded, that when they were divulged they did no
good, quoniam a principibus and optimatibus regnorum, cum subjectis plebibus,
parvi pensa sunt. Now that it was never received here appears, (besides this
testimony) in that the marriage of a professed Nun was Regist. Islep. fol. 166.
b.
adjudged valid, contrary to the 7. Canon of it, and that too after it was
registered in the Apud Gratian. cause. 27. q. 1. cap. 40.
Canon Law: which shows, this Church did neither admit the Canons of foreign
Counsels, nor the Canon Law it self to alter their ancient customs; as is
farther manifest by the statute of Merton cap. 9. Neither was the Council of
Sardis ever allowed in England, as is manifest by what before of Appeals, which
yet by the Capitulars of Carol. and Lud. Capit. lib. 7. cap. 323.
Charles the great and Ludovicus Pius was even in that particular in France;
which made Bern. de consideratione ed Eugenium, lib. 3. cap. 2.
St. Bernard write of them, in multas posse eas devenire perniciem, si non
summo [moderamine actitentur: Appellatur de toto mundo ad te] id quidem etc.
for so the place is to be read, as I have seen in two very good Mss, and one
late printed, not as in the former editions of him, as at Paris 1586. By these
precedents the Reader may judge how necessary it was for the Parliament to make
a distinction of Counsels. Now in these, with sundry of as doubtful credit,
being of late Council. genesis Romae, 1608, 1612.
printed at Rome, as if they were of equal value with the first, I have
thought fit to instance. And here having made mention of receiving Counsels,
as if that added strength unto them, it will be necessary to say something of
that too, for the fuller clearing of this Church.

39. The Apostles as they showed a pattern for Acts the xy.
holding Counsels to settle disputes amongst Christians; so Paul and Silas in
their travells delivering the Acts xvi, 4.
Decrees by them ordained to be kept by several Churches, showed it to be
reasonable, such as were absent should receive what was done in any Synod,
before they were obliged by it; and accordingly, in the primitive times, those
were not present at the holding a synod, had the results sent or brought unto
them after the conclusion taken, who did in their own Churches subscribe
(finding them just and pious) what the others had in Council agreed upon, and
then reposed them amongst their Records, called by St Hierom Hieron. adversus
Luciferianos to. 2. fol. 52. a. Paris 1534.
Scrinia publica, Ecclesiarum arcae etc. So Con. 6. Carthag. cap. 9.
Cecilian, being present at Nice, brought to Carthage the Decrees there
concluded, who submitted unto them; and Epist. ad Aphto; interpret Petro
Nannio. Paris 1572. col. 537. c.
S. Athanasius of that Council says, Huic Concilio universus orbis assensum
praebuit; and quanquam multae habitae sunt Synodi, hujus tamen omnes sunt
memores, tumper Dalmatiam, Dardaniam, aliasque insulas, Siciliam, etc. and
plerique in Arabia hanc agnoverunt, and subscriptione approbarunt, etc. And of
the Council. genesis p. 64. c.
Council at Sardis it is recorded, (...) which I English thus; Osius the
Bishop subscribed, and so did the rest. These things being copied out, the
Synod^n Sardis sent to those could not be present, who were of the same mind
with what had been determined of those subscrib^d in the Synod; and of the
other Bishops these are the names.

40. After which Epist. ad Aegyp. ios etc. col. 424. a. b.
Athanasius (from whom this epistle is taken) adds, qui igitur decretis (...)
sunt isti -- in universum 344. Hence it grew, that though some Counsels had
but few at the holding of them, yet the subscriptions were numerous. Tom. 5.
ann^ 419. ^. 59.
Baronius observes the 5th Council of Carthage to have been held by 22 only,
(I conceive it should be 72.) yet had 217. subscribers, which was after the
ending of it, by Bishops in their own Churches, when they admitted of it. So
the Council. Antioth. to. 1. Council. in pro^^in.
Synod of Antioch about 341. sending their conclusions to absent Churches, writ
unto them, they did believe they would assent to what they had done, et ca quae
visa sunt recta roborantes cum consensu sancti Spiritus consignabitis. It is of
no use to dispute here, whether this were an Arrian or a Catholic Council: be
it either, it still denotes the manner then used; as does the Council. Tolet.
3.. Consuemur. to^. council. 2.
third Council of Toledo held Anno 589. which speaks thus, Constitutiones
sanctorum conciliorum, Niceni, Ephesini, Constantinopolitani vel
Chalcedonensis, quas gratissima aure audivimus, and consensione nostra veras
esse probavimus, de toto cord and de tota anima and de tota mento nostra
subscripsimus: and another held there, having received with the letters of Pope
Leo the 2. the sixth general Council, invited all the Prelates Baron to. 8.
Anno 685. n. 25.
of Spain, ut praedicta synodalia instituta quae miserat, nostri etiam vigoris
manerent auctoritate suffulta, omnibusque per nos sub regno Hispaniae
consistentibus patescerent divulganda.

41. By all this it is plain, the manner of former times was to disperse the
Decrees of Counsels to absent Churches, who by subscriptions were said to have
confirmed, and, so far as lay in them, by suffrage, to have given strength to
that such meetings had agreed unto. And as Popes did thus confirm what other
Bishops had concluded in their Synods, so did they in like manner his. In the
year 1095. Urban the 2. held a Council at Clermont in Auvergne, at which were
present several Prelates of Normandy, who at their return brought letters from
the Synod, upon which William Archbishop of Roan caused the Norman Bishops to
meet there, Ordericus Vitali^ lib. 9. p. 721. ^.
who capitula Synodi quae apud Clarum-montem facta est unanimiter contemplati
sunt, scita quoque Apostolica confirmaverunt. It is true, the Pope being the
Patriarch of most note in the world, and of greatest dignity in the West,
usually the Acts of foreign Counsels were directed unto him, Vide Eu^eb.
^ediolanens. post epist. 52. Leon^s.
which he dispersed through Italy and other parts of Europe; but his
approbation was not enough to oblige other Churches, till what came from him
was by themselves allowed: neither was this dispersing so appropriated to his
Papacy, as if there were never any other divulging of them; the second Council
of Nice held 787, or 788 as Di^eto accounts, was sent from Constantinople to
Charles the great, then only Rex Francorum, and by him 792. hither, where it
was rejected.

42. From hence it proceeded, that part of the Acts of one Council did not
bind some Churches, which did others; as some parts of the Council of
Chalcedon and Ephesus seem not to have been received in Rome in Gregor, lib. 6.
epist. 31. and lib. 7. epist. 47. Indict. 2.
S. Gregory's time, to which may be added some General. Council Rom^, tom. 3. p.
684, 685. in margin.
Canons of the 7th Council. But I believe it will be hardly showed from the
ancients, that any Church, neither intervening in Council by proxy, nor that
did after admit of it, were ever held concluded by any, though never so
numerous. Certainly none was ever held of greater esteem amongst Catholics
then the Council of Nice; yet ^ontra Maximinum Arrianorum epist. lib. 3. cap.
14. to. 6. vide etiam de unitate Eccles. cap. 16. to. 7.
S. Augustine, in his dispute with an Arrian, confesses neither the Council of
Nice ought to prejudice the Arrian, not that held at Ariminum him, sed utrisque
communibus testibus, res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione concertet.
And De Synodis advers (...) Arrianos prope finein. p. 243.
St. Hilary, comparing two Counsels, one of 80. Bishops which refused the word
(...), with that of Nice which received it, says, si contraria invicem
senserunt, debemus quasi judices probare meliora: so not only taking from them
all infallibility, but allowing others to judge of their doings, before they
submitted unto their determinations.

And this has been the so constant observance in all times, as no age ever
held the Latin obliged by the Grecian Synods which they have not received;
neither does the Greek Church to this day hold themselves tied by the
determinations of Florence, or to the many other of the Latin touching the
procession of the holy Ghost, and other points in difference, to which they
have not submitted.

43. But for that the Acts of Counsels, without temporal auctority to enforce
the observance of them, were no other then persuasive, Princes (either on the
incitation of their Bishops, or convinced of the justness and piety of what
had past in those Ecclesiastic Assemblies) did often by their letters exhort,
or by their laws command the observance of what resulted from them. So
Constantine, after the Council of Nice, wrote that letter remains recorded in
Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 6. Theodor. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Socrates and Theodoret to some absent Churches, for their admitting the
resolutions of it: in which he tells them he had undertook that what the Romans
had already, (...), that their judgment would willingly receive. Cod. Theodos.
de fide Cathol. leg. 3. and de Haeret. leg. 6.
And Gratian, Valentinian, Theodosius did in the year 381. by their rescripts
establish the same Council, as n. 31.
Justinian by the law before mentioned did all the fourfirst; which I take to
be the same To. 8. in Psalm. 57.
St Augustine calls inserting them actis proconsularibus.

44. Of later times Popes, having by several arts acquired the greatest part
of Episcopal power to be devolved to them, have likewise claimed it as a right
belonging to the Papacy, not only to call Councels, but to determine which are
general, who are to vote in them; and therefore Bellarm. de council. lib. 1.
cap. 15.. At Catholicorum.
though properly, or dinarie, none but Bishops have there (say they) jus
suffragii, yet ex privilegio and consuetudine Cardinals, Abbats, and Generals
of Orders are to be allowed voice; and that there needs no other then the Popes
confirmation in Rome, to oblige all Christians to the observance of any he
shall hold out for such, as Pius 4tus by his bull of the 18 July 1564.
declared, all in the Council of Trent juris positivi did the world from the
first of May before, etc. And though all History agree, and the very Counsels
themselves assure us, the causing the East and West to meet in those
assemblies, to have been ever done by Emperors, and that Princes on occasions
have called the Clergy within their estates together for composing disputes in
religion; yet the bare affirmation, without any real proof, has so far
prevailed with some men, as to esteem him little other then an heretic shall
maintain the contrary.

45. But Kings have not so easily parted with these rights: for the State of
France, notwithstanding the many solicitations of Pope^ from abroad, and their
Clergy at home, has no hitherto been induced to approve what was determined at
Trent; however you shall hardly meet with any of the Roman party, but he will
tell you that the points of faith there agreed upon, are received in France,
but not of manners, and government: which is in a kind true, yet contains a
notable fallacy; for the Ecclesiastics of that kingdom finding the difficulty
of procuring that Council to pass, have in their provincial Synods,
Bochellius (...) operis ratio.
conspiratione quadam, venia in quaque Dioecesi cogendi Synodos impetrata,
inserted the greatest part of the doctrinall points of it into those Counsels;
so that it is truth, they are indeed there received, yet not for that they were
concluded upon in Trent, but because Episcopal Counsels have each in their
Dioceses established what they could persuade nec regibus, nec supremis
Parlamentorum curiis, ut Synodi istius Canones in acta sua referrent, and
observandos publicarent. Neither has the Council of Florence under Eugenius
4tus, or of Lateran held by Julius the 2. and Leo the 10, been hitherto allowed
by France, or England, where the most zealously affected to Rome, as Sr Thomas
Moore, have See his letter to Cromwell at the end of his works, and the
original in Sr Thom. Cottons Library.
maintained the superiority of a general Council above the Pope Council.
Florent. Sess. 25. Council. genesis Romae. tom. 4. p. 584. ibid. Council. Later. sub
Iulio 2. and Leone 10. Sess. 11. p. 175. col. 2.
in opposition to either of them; though Bellar. de council. lib. 2. cap. 17..
(...).
that be a point rather of faith then manners. Upon which grounds, those
Counsels before spoken of did not bind here, farther then what was in them
has been made good by provincial Synods within the Nation.

By all which it being certain, neither this Church nor Kingdom has ever been
tied by the Acts of any foreign council not admitted here, and being perhaps
a thing of some intricacy, what determinations the Realm had received after the
four first general Counsels, her Majesty took the way of receiving them as
absolutely necessary, but others with such limitations as are in 1 Eliz. cap. 1.
the statute, and for the future, nothing to be heresy, but what should be
determined to be such by the Parliament, with the assent of the Convocation.

CHAP. IX.
Of the farther proceeding of Queen Elizabeth in the Reformation.
1. THings thus settled in 1o Eliz. the Parliament ended, the Liturgy of the
Church, commonly called the book of Common prayer, reformed, and published, the
Queen, Canones dati sub Eadgaro and legibus ejus annexi. p. 67. Leg. Canut.
cap. 22. p. 105. See before cap. 4. n. 6.. iij.
following the examples of her predecessors, and relying on the ancient Symbols
as the doctrine of the Catholic Church, gave command the Creed, the
Paternoster and ten Commandments (as the grounds for a Christian to believe,
and frame his life after) should be taught her subjects, and none to presume to
come to the Lords table before they could perfectly say them in English.

2. Hitherto to my understanding her Majesty had not done any thing not
warranted by the practice of her predecessors, not that could be justly
interpreted a departing from the Apostolic faith, or indeed from Rome it self;
where she kept an Agent. Camden. Annal. Anno 1559.
till Paulus 4^s during the Parliament commanded him to relinquish the title of
Ambassador, and not to stir out of Rome. So that if there were any departure,
it must needs be the Pope made it, not the English; (who was so incensed, he
would not at first acknowledge her Queen, nor after permit any from her in the
quality of Ambassador to reside with him, though she had not done any thing but
according to the ancient rights of the Kingdom, and the usages of former
Princes.) But suppose (which will never be proved) her Matie to have gone
farther then was fit for a Christian Prince in settling Religion, certainly she
had just cause to conceive she might do it, having so many precedents of her
ancestors in the case. Yet Paulus 4tus breaks off all intercourse: some of his
party first would not Crown her, then spoke of excommunicating of her;
indignities no Prince but must be sensible of.

3. Yet it seems, the first heat past, the Queens moderation was better
received at Rome then at home: where the Pope, however a violent heady man,
considering no doubt his own loss in breaking off all commerce with so potent a
Kingdom, Tortura Tor^i, p. 142.
began to hearken to terms of accommodation, and was content things should
stand as they are, the Queen acknowledging his primacy, and the reformation
from him. But his death ensuing the 18 August 1559. left the design to be
prosecuted by his successor Pius 4tus, who by letters (sent by Vincentius
Parpalia, a person of great experience, employed by Cardinal Poole in his
former negotiations, and of late in that hither,) of the 5th of May 1560.
directed charisimae in Christo filiae Elizabethae Reginae Angliae, did assure
her, In Camdeni Annal. Anno 1560.
omnia de nobis tibi polliceare, quae non modo ad animae tuae salutem
conservandam, sed etiam ad dignitatem regiam stabiliendam and confirmandam, pro
authoritate, pro loco acmunere quod nobis a Deo commissum fuit, a nobis
desiderares, etc. Upon this, and their relations who then lived, and had part
in the action, the English affirm Pius 4tus would have confirmed the liturgy of
the Church of England: and indeed how can any imagine other? for doubtless
nothing could have been more to her dishonor, then so suddenly to have
changed what she had with so great consideration established; and the Pope
assuring her, she might promise her self from him all he could do, I know not
what less or other he could expect she would ask. But where Sr Edward Cook, in
his charge at Norwich, as it is now printed, says this offer came from Pius
5tu^, I conceive it a mistake, and should have been Pius 4tus, (as in another
place he names Clement the 9. who yet never was, for Clement the 8.) and the
rest of the narration there not to be without absurdities, and to be one of
those deserves the authors censure, when he says, Praesut. lib. 7. relat.
there is no one period in the whole expressed in the sort and sense that he
delivered it; for certainly Pius 5tus from his coming to the Popedom 1566,
rather sought by raising against her foreign power abroad, and domestic
commotions at home, to force her to his obedience, then by such civil ways as
we now speak of to allure her; though the thing it self is no question true,
how ever the person that offered it be mistaken in some circumstances.

4. They Parallel. Torti and Tortoris, p. 241.
that make a difficulty in believing this, object it to have been first
divulged 1606. 46 years after the profer of it. That Sr Edward Cook averred to
have received it from the Queen her self, not then alive to contradict him. But
for my part I confess I find no seruple in it, for I have ever observed the
wisdom of that Court, to give what it could neither sell nor keep; as Paulus
4tus did the Kingdom of Ireland to Queen Mary, admitted the five Bishoprics
erected by her father, approved the dissolution of the Monasteries made by him,
etc. of which nature no question this was. For the being first mentioned 46
years after, that is not so long a time but many might remember; and I my self
have received it from such as I cannot doubt of it, they having had it from
persons of nigh relation unto them who were actors in the managing of the
business. Besides, the thing itself was in effect printed many years before;
for he Servi fidelis subdito in^ide li responsio, apud Iohannem Dayum 1573.
that made the answer to Saunders his seventh book de visibili monarchia, p.
121.
who it seems had been very careful to gather the beginnings of Queen
Elizabeth, that there might be an exact history of her, tandem aliquando, qui
omnia act a diligenter observavit, qui summis Re^p^blicae negotiis consulto
interfuit, Ibid. p. 70. 71. the book is not printed with pages, but they are
added with a pen.
relates it thus.

5. That a nobleman of this Country being about the beginning of the Queens
reign at Rome, Pius 4tus asked him of her Maties casting his auctority out of
England, who made answer that she did it being persuaded by testimonies of
Scripture, and the laws of the realm, nullam illius esse in terra aliena
jurisdictionem. Which the Pope seemed not to believe, her Majesty being wise
and learned, but did rather think the sentence of that Court against her
mothers marriage to be the true cause; which he did promise not only to
retract, sed inejus gratiam quaecunque possum praeterea facturum, dum illa ad
nostram Ecclesiam se recipiat, and debitum mihi primatus titulum reddat. and
then adds, extant apud nos articuli Abbatis Sancti Salvatoris Camden Anno 1560.
calls him. who in the year 1562. seems to have been employed by the said Pope
into France. Hist. Council. Trid. lib. 6. p. 501. and of whom mention is made in
the life of Cardinal Poole.
Sanctae salutis manu conscripti, extant Cardinalis Moronae literae, quibus
nobilem illum vehementer hortabatur, ut eam rem nervis omnibus apud reginam
nostram sollicitaret. Extant hodie nobilium nostrorum aliquot, quibus Papa
multa aureorum millia pollicitus est, ut istius amicitiae atque foederis inter
Romanam cathedram and Elizabetham serenissimam authors essent. This I have
cited the more at large, for that Camden seems to think, what the Abbot of St.
Savior propounded was not in writing, and because it being printed seven years
before the Cardinal Moronas death, by whose privity (as Protector of the
English) this negotiation past, without any contradiction from Rome, there can
no doubt be made of the truth of it. And assuredly, some who have convenience
and leisure may find more of it then has been yet divulged: for I no way
believe the Bishop of Winchester would have been induced to write, it did
constare of Paulus 4tus; nor the Queen her self, and diverse others of those
times, persons of honor and worth, (with some of which I my self have spoken)
have affirmed it for an undoubted truth, did not somewhat more remain (or at
least had formerly been) then a single letter of Pius 4tus, which apparently
had reference to matters then of greater privacy. And here I hold it not
unworthy a place, that I my self talking sometime with an Ital^an gentleman
(verst in public affairs) of this offer from the Pope, he made much scruple of
believing it; but it being in a place where books were at hand, I showed him on
what ground I spoke, and asked him if he thought men could be Devils, to write
such an odious lie, had it not been so. Well (says he) if this were heard in
Rome amongst religious men, it would never gain credit; but with such as have
in their hands the Maneggi della corte, (for that was his expression) it may be
held true.

6. Indeed, the former author does not express, (as perhaps then not so fit to
be published) the particulars those articles did contain were writ with the
Abbots own hand; (which later pens have divulged) but that, in general, it
should be any thing lay in the Popes power, on her acknowledging his primacy:
and certain no other could by him have been propounded to her, nor by her with
honor accepted, then that of his allowing the English Liturgy: so that they
who agree he did by his Agent (according to his letter) make propositions unto
her, must instance in some particulars, not dishonorable to her self and
Kingdom to accept, or allow what these writers affirm to have been them. And I
have seen and heard weighty considerations, why her Majesty could not admit her
own reformation from Rome; some with reference to this Church at home, as that
it had been a tacit acknowledgment it could not have reformed it self, which
had been contrary to all former precedents; others to the State of Christendom
as it then stood in Scotland, Germany, and France: but with this I have not
took upon me to meddle here.

7. Yet what the Queen did upon this message, seems to have given no very ill
satisfaction; for Hist. Council. Trident. Ann^ 1560. p. 446.
Sr Edw. Carne, then in Rome, advised the Pope the same year to invite her to
the Council of Trent, promising him half the Kingdom with her own liking would
receive his messenger; which yet was found otherwise: the reasons why, are some
touched by Historians, and may more at large be seen in Sr Nicholas Throgmortons
negotiations, then her Ambassador in France. Certainly Ib. p. 522. p. 528.
the French were not altogether out of an opinion (or at least would have it
thought so) of her sending to the Synod; which the Pope however he invited her,
was not a little troubled at. But the great combination of the Popish party,
supported by France against England, made her see she could expect no good
where they were predominant: upon which she caused the divines of her Kingdom
in council to consider of a just and lawful reformation; who meeting 1562,
reviving the Acts of a Synod held at London ten years before under Ed. the 6th,
and explaining some few expressions, and omitting some points rather of dispute
then faith, did conclude on 39 articles so just, so moderate, so fully agreeing
with the doctrine of the primitive fathers, and with the ancient tenets and
practice of this very Church in the times of the Britons and Saxons, as if any
shall say no Clergy in any age or place have held out a more exact rule, he may
be easilyer contradicted, then justly blamed, or confuted.

8. For having laid their ground, that Art. 6.
holy Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation, so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an article of Faith, etc.
they do upon that Basis establish the doctrine of the three Creeds, the Nicen,
Athanasian, and Apostles, heretofore ever held to contain Ecclesiarum omnium
fidem, and that the Art. 22*
Romish doctrine of Purga- of Purgatory, Pardons, worshipping and adoration of
Images, relics, Invocation of Saints, etc. is not warranted by Scripture, that
is, are no articles of faith: and then proceed to settle such other things as
are juris positivi, with so just a moderation, as is hardly elsewhere to be
found; changing nothing for the general, but where the practice of their own
ancestors did justify their doings, without at all extending themselves to any
thing where they had not antiquity their warrant.

9. Following which, they restored the cup, having the Council of Clermont
under Urban the 2, that Apud Ordericum Vitalem Anno 1095. p. 720. a.
Corpus Dominicum and sanguis singulatim accipiantur, the command of Apud
Baron. to. 12. Anno 1118. n. 2. in nonnullis in Appendice.
Paschalis the 2. and the practice of the English Church, where sickly people,
women as well as men, were to be provided of a pipe to receive it by; as was
Statu^a Gilbertinorum Ms. de canonicis cap. 33. vide adversaria Doctoris Watsii
ad Mat. Paris p. 9. lin. 6.
expressly enjoined the order of the Gilbertines about ^200. The thing being
already printed, I need here repeat no more, but only add, that this
permission of theirs was no other but a restoring to minores ecclesias, that is
Parochial or Country Churches, that liberty Peckham had deprived them of not
300 years before. For I do not find any prohibition, but the Lay might ever
have been partakers of it with us in majoribus, that is Cathedral Churches;
for De summa Trinita^e and fide Catholica, cap. Altissimus, verbo minoribus
^cclesiis.
Lyndwood in his gloss upon the English constitutions about 1430, propounds
this question, Sed numquid in istis ecclesiis Cathedralibus, and aliis
majoribus, liceat non celebrantibus dum communicant recipere sanguinem
Christiin specie vini? videtur ex hac litera, quod sic, argumento sumpto a
contrario sensu, quod est in jure fortissimum, ut etc. -- and hoc been putarem
verum; saltem quoad ministrantes sacerdoti ministranti etc.

10. For the permitting of Matrimony to the Clergy, it is undoubted all here
had the liberty of marrying, before Antiquit. Britan. p. 98, 10. in Lanfran^i
vita.
Lanfrank in a Council at Worcester 1076. did rather advise then command the
contrary; which Huntington (who was himself the Hunt. fol. 217, b. 26. and a.
10.
son of one in holy orders) says was first prohibited by Anselm 1102. But
Eadmer, p. 94, 48.
multi presbyterorum statuta Concilii Londoniensis -- post. ponentes, suas
soeminas retinebant, aut certe duxerant quas prius non habebant etc. so that
his constitutions came quickly neglected, Priests both marrying, and retaining
their wives. At which though the King were Eadmer. p. 105, 27.
somewhat displeased, yet soon after Hunt. fol. 220, a. 26. Saxon. Chron.
Petroburg. Ms.
he took a piece of money of them for it, and they kept them by his leave.
Diverse constitutions were after made by several Archbishops and Legates in the
point, as by Steph. Langton at Oxford 1222, registered by De cohabitatione
^leric, and mulierum, and de Clericis conjugatis.
Lyndwood: Constit. Otho^is cap. Innotuit.
yet it is manifest they did secretly contract marriage, which some are of
opinion they continued till toward the end of Edward the 3ds reign. This I am
the rather induced to believe out of that in Col. 2584, 7. Clericus apud
Leicestri^m.
Knighton, that Quaere whither this were not the Priest of the town that was
thus inhabiting there.
John de Alithwerl Clerk was slain by his wife and servant in his own house at
Leicester 1344. for which fact she was burnt, and he hanged. Now I conceive,
had she been only his concubine, not his servant, she had not suffered by the
judgment of burning for the murder, but hanging only: neither can I
interpret the word Clericus for other then one in holy Orders, prohibited
marriage by the Canons of Rome; though I know, large loquendo, as our De locato
and conducto, cap. Vendentes, verbo Si quis Clericus..
Lyndwood has it, omnes in Ecclesia ad divinum officium ordinati are sometimes
so styled, Lynd. de clericis conjugalis, cap. 1. Vide Monasticum Anglicanum, p.
899. and p. ^00.
of which such as were infra subdiaconatum might retain their wives, but those
were in subdiaconatu or above were to quit them. But the Canons yet remaining
made at sundry times, from Lanfrank even to Chichly, by the space of more then
300 years, enough assure us this point of Celibat was not easily imposed on
the English Clergy, and assures us such* as laid it might take it off again.

11. For Images, if the Saxons had any use at all of them in their Churches
(for ornament, for history, Greg* lib. 7. epist. 109. and lib. 9. epist. 9^.
to which end S. Gregory holds they might be permitted, for memorialls of holy
men departed, (as we have of late seen) and they being only thus applied, I
conceive, Reply to Harding* Art. 14. in principi^.
with the Bishop of Salisbury, the weight of the question not so great,) yet it
was a thing voluntary, no command of the Churches injoyning it, till after the
Conquest. And here the question is not, whether Augustine might or did bring
the picture of our Saviors Cross in his banner, as most Protestants yet
retain it; but whether he placed them in the Church, with an intent to have
worship of any kind attributed unto them: for which purpose, I confess, I have
not heard of them till many years after; for the vision of Egwinus, and the
Council of London setting up of Images being made good (so far as I know) by
no author of any antiquity, I cannot but take it To. ^. anno 714. ^. 2.
with Baronius for a meerfigment.

12. It is certain, Simeon D^nelm. col. 111, 50. Hoyeden fol. 232. b. 3. Mat.
West. Anno 793. p. 283.
792 the Bishops of England declared their dissent from the second Council of
Nice in point of Images, held only 4 years before, according to Anno 788. At
Baron. anno 787. tom. 9. ^. 1^. 38.
Diceto: and where some interpret that they did only condemn the worship the
Greeks call (...), by using the Latin word adorare; it cannot be denied but
they did reject that Council. genesis Romans Synod. 7. p. 661, lin. ult.
(...) the Oriental Bishops had established, in which sense they used the word
adorare, which is often, as well in holy writ as by humane authors, taken for
that reverence is given a creature, as for the religious duty we only owe to
the Divine Majesty: see Genesis xxiii. 7, 12. Ingulphus, a writer not long after,
Ingulph. fol. 514. a. 17.
Constantinopolim pervenimus, ubi Alexim imper atorem ador antes etc. So
Arundell in his constitutions, Lyndwood de Haeret. cap. Nullus quoque.
adorationem crucis gloriosae.

13. To this narrative Seculo 8. cap. 5. p. 126. 9.
Harpsfield gives the title of commentitia and insulsa fabula, and thinks it
not writ by Sim. Dunelmensis or Mat. Westminster (he might have added Hoveden,
the Ms. I^ bibliotheca Cotton.
history of Rochester,) but that it was anciently inserted into them. For
answer to which, he would be desired to produce any one old copy without it,
not mangled, so as it does prodere furtum by wanting it: I have seen diverse of
Hoveden Mss. some of Math. West. but never did one wherein it was not found,
not in the margin but in the text it self, and so it is in Dunelmensis his Ms.
at Bennet College in Cambridge. For my part, I do not know how any thing we
mislike in History, may not after this manner be rejected, if a relation
gathered from monuments of an elder date, which are perished, yet cited by one
who lived not so long after the time he speaks of, but they might well come to
his hands, whom we find very sincere in such citations as yet remain out of
more old authors then himself, ever esteemed of good credit in the Church of
God, and in his narration followed ad verbum by those who writing of the same
matter succeeded him, I confess, I say, if this may be cast away, as a lying
and foolish fable, I know not what shall gain credit. But what will men not lay
hold on in a desperate shipwreck? I remember To. 10. anno 963. 2, 3. Anno 968,
10.
Baronius pressed with the testimony of Luitprandus in the deposition of John the
12. by imperial auctority, makes no question of denying the five last chapters
of his 6. book to have been written by him, though never doubted for more then
600 years since he lived.

14. Another Richard Smith Archiepisc. Chalcedon. Flores* hist. Anglic. lib. 2.
cap. 7. p. 134.
Doctor, I confess, seems to give a more difficult objection; that De Divinis
officiis, die Pa^rasce^.
Al^uinus, who is said to have writ against the second Nioen Council in the
point of Images, does in his book de divinis officiis say, prosternimur corpore
ante crucem, mente ante Deum; veneramur crucem per quam redempti sumus etc. and
this from an author had written against Images, he would have imply a
veneration of them (even in his time who opposed them) by the English Church.
But what has the reverence of the Cross to do with the worship of Images? It
is not to be denied but Christians, in their talk and writings, did extol and
magnify the Cross, forced thereunto by the Gentiles, who spoke ignominiously
of him that dyed upon it; yet I believe it will be difficult to show any Law or
Canon before the Conquest, injoyning the use, much less that attributed any
religious worship unto Images.

15. It is true, the Council. Spelm. cap. 2. p. 328.
Council of Celicuith 816. did charge unicuique Episcopo, ut habeat depictam
in pariete oratorii, aut in tabula, vel etiam in altaribus, quibus sanctis sint
utr aque dedicata, etc. which was clearly for memorial and ornament; as it
has been very common, in some Churches, to have on the wall the Image of Queen
Elizabeth, and such as have built an Isle or window, to have their statue or
picture set up in it, which in some parts perhaps remain to his present; yet no
man ever held any religious duty fit to be given them, nor any man compelled to
set them up. Now that there was no precept of the Church commanding their use,
I speak Institutiones Mss. beati Gilber^i and successorum ejus per capitula
generalia institutae; de exordio, ordinatione, institutione ordinis
Canonicorum, Sanctimonialium, fratrum and sororum laicarum ordinis de
Sempringham. de ^anonicis cap. 15. Sculp^urae.
from the rules of Sempringham about 1148. that doubtless did not vary from
the general practice of Christians here, yet has this express statute;
Sculpturae vel picturae superfluae in Ecclesiis nostris seu in officinis
aliquibus Monasterii ne fiant interdicimus, qui^ dum talibus intenditur,
utilitas bonae meditationis vel disciplina religiosae gravitatis saepe
negligitur: cruces tamen pictas quae sunt ligneae habemus. So that it seems to
me they did account all pictures so superfluous as not to have them, but only
painted crosses: and this was one of the first foundation. And in another De
fratribus cap. 13.
place, which I take to be somewhat after, the buying of them and silk, as
things indifferent, are alike interdicted; yet a direction how to bestow any
thing of that nature should be left them: but see the words; Nihil de serico
ematur a nostris vel de nostro ad nostrorum opus, vel ad aliquid religioni
contrarium, and seculi vanitatibus amminiculum, ^nec etiam ad quodlibet
sacerdotale indumentum, nisi constet esse necessarium: Si vero datur, secundum
arbitrium Prioris omnium communi utilitati and usui mancipetur. hoc idem de
Yconiis vel aliis sculptilibus dicimus, quae adbeatae Mariae Virginis vel
aliorum sanctorum sunt fabricata memoriam; quae tamen gratis Sic Mss. sed lege
gratis data, as it is in other places (as you will see here after) repeated.
grata, prout de serico praediximus, ad sororum altar, vel hospitium, vel alio
apto loco honest ponenda decernimus. So that it is apparent then their use was
esteemed no other then that of silk; and these two articles seem to have been
resolved on nigh the first foundation (being in an hand differing from some
other I shall mention) by the Founder himself.

16. In the year 1200 the house of Sixle or Sixhill in Lincolnshire was visited
by the Abbat of Wardon or Wardun was a monastery of the Cist^rtian Order in
Bedfordshire.
Waredune, as Commissioner of Quaere whether this were that Otho was after
Cardinal, viz. in September, 1227.
Otho the Popes Legate; where about 20 articles were concluded for the
government of the Order: the fifth of which, though it gave some more liberty
then the former, yet was not without restraint: but take it from an hand of
those times. Anno gratiae MCC in visitatione facta de Sixl' per Abbatem de
Wardu^n auctoritate Domini Otonis Legati, statuta sunt haec firmiter
observanda. Inprimis, etc. cap. 5. Item inhibetur ne picturarum vary tas aut
superflu^tas sculpturarum de caetero fieri permittatur, nec liceat alicubi
yconias haberi, nec imagines, praeter ymaginem Salvatoris, and y. beatae
Mariae, and Sancti Johannis Evangelistae. Hitherto questionless, the Church of
England following the doctrine of Lib. 9. Epist. 9. Indict. 4.
St Gregory, had been taught by testimonies of holy writ, that omne manufactum
^ adorare non liceat; and though they might be lawfully made, yet by all means
to avoid the worship of them: but see the progress.

17. Sixty eight years after this, Othobon, being the Popes Legate in England,
did in his own person visit the chiefhouse of this Order, and committed the
others to Rodulphus de Huntedune, the said Cardinals Chaplain, and
penitentiary; who associating to himself one Richard Gen^rali e^^sdem ordinis
de Semplingham scrutatore.
general inquisitor of the Order of Semplingham, did in the year 1268.
conclude upon 74 or 75. heads or chapters for the government of them; the 54 of
which, under the title de ymaginibus habendis, is this:

Item, cum secundum Johannem Damascenum, ymaginis honor ad prototypum, id est,
ad eum cujus est ymago pertineat, ad instantiam Monialium, and earum devotionem
ferventius excit andam, conceduntur eis ymagines crucifixi and beatae Mariae
and sancti Johannis Evangelistae, and quod possint habere in quolibet altari
dedicato ymaginem ipsius sancti in cujus honor altar dedicatum est. Sitamen
gratis detur eisdem, sicut beatus Gilber^us.
G. de serico and de ymaginibus duxit statuendum, and celebretur ipso die
festivitatis illius sancti, and die dedicationis ejusdem altaris, missa ad
dicta altaria, etiamsi sint infra clausuram monial^um. Thus they.

18. By which it is manifest, this Kingdom had not then received Council. Nicen.
2.
the 7th Council; for if they had, there can be no thought they would have
built their Article upon Damascens opinion only. But by all these we may see,
Images were brought into this Church by degrees, by little and little: First
they were to have none, only wooden crosses were tolerated; then they might
not buy any, but being given they might accept the image of our Lady and other
Saints; then an inhibition of all Saints, except our Savior, the Blessed
Virgin, and St John the Evangelist, to which was added the image of that Saint
their Altars were dedicated unto, and these only by concession, not bought,
but given. So that it is plain, they were then taken for things only
indifferent, as silk, which they might use or be without, no processions,
bowings, kissing, etc. of them prescribed; but how the practice was afterward,
that chapter of Arundell registered by Lyndwood may tell you, which because it
is long, I shall not farther repeat, it being printed, then to add that it is
in him, lib. 5. de Magistris, cap. Nullus quoque: and in another place he
propounds this question, Lyndwood de Ecclesiis ^dificandis cap. ut parochiani,
verbo Imaginis.
Numquid ymago Christi sit ador anda cultu latriae? and resolves, si
consideretur ut ymago, tunc quia idem motus est in ymagiginem in quantum est
ymago and ymaginatum, unus honor debetur ymagini and ymaginato; and ideo cum
Christus latria adoretur, ejus imago debet similiter latria adorari. Nec obstat
Exodus xxvi. ubi dicitur, non facies tibi ymaginem nec sculptam similitudinem;
quia illud pro eo tempore erat prohibitum quo Deus humanam naturam non
assumpserat, etc.

19. The Synod at Westminster finding things in this posture, and their
retention in many parts to have been joined with a great abuse, if not impiety,
took a middle course; first to condemn all manner of adoration or worship of
them, (and therefore every Sculptile had been removed out of Churches) but
whereas some use might be made of them for remembrance of histories past, to
retain in sundry parts such windows and pictures, as might without offense
instruct the ignorant in several passages not unworthily preserved: which if
any man have since been offended at, it must be on other grounds then I
understand.

20. As they proceeded with this circumspection, not to depart from the
primitive Church in matters juris positivi, so did they take no less care in
points of opinion; for having declared which were the books of holy Scripture,
they did not absolutely reject the use of the other, though they had been
Johan. Sarisb, Epist. 172. p. 281. 285. Waldensis tom. 1. lib. 2. Art. 2. cap.
23. n. 2. ^ol. 203. a. col. 2. edit. Venet. 1571.
taught by the doctrine Prae^at. in proverb. Salomonis to. 3. sol. 9. c.
of St Hierom and S. Gregor. Moral. lib. 19. cap. 17.
St Gregory, not to repute them in Canone, but to admit them quia fidem and
religionem aedificant, or, as they Art. 6.
say, for example of life, and instruction of manners.

21. For praying to Saints, however the Saxons might honor holy men departed,
^o cultu dilectionis and societatis quo and in hac vita coluntur homines, as
Contra Fa^^slum Manichaeum lib. 20. cap. 21. to. 6.
S. Augustine speaks, (which what it is he explains elsewhere) yet I am hardly
persuaded to think they did admit any public praying to them in the Church;
for I have seen and perused three ancient Saxon Psalters full of prayers, but
no one petition to any Saint whatsoever. Lib. 2. p. 48, ^.
Eadmerus says the report went of VV^ the second, that crederet, and publica
voce assereret, nullum sanctorum cuiquam apud Deum posse prodesse; and ideo nec
se velle, neo aliquem sapientem debere beatum Petrum interpellare: yet he does
not censure this as heretical, but only mentis elatio. In Canon. Missae lect.
3. D.
Gabriel Biel long after confesses in his time, some Christians as well as
Heretics were deceived, in thinking Saints departed nobis auxiliari nec
meritis possunt nec precibus. The Church of England therefore, following
August, de vera religione cap. 55. to. 1.
S. Augustine, condemns all religious invocation of them, as those were non
adorandi propter religionem; yet in respect they were honorandi propter
imitationem, to retain their commemoration, by appointing a set service for the
days on which it celebrated their memorialls; thereby to provoke us to
imitation of their piety, and to thank God that left such lights, who by their
doctrine instructed us, and whose lives were examples for us to follow: and in
respect there are sundry Saints for whom there is no proper office, to retain
one day to praise God for the generality of all, and beg of him that we may
follow their pattern in all virtuous and godly living. This if any mislike, I
entreat him to pardon me if I join not with him; and if he will add more, to
give me leave to think he attributes to them (by what name so ever he style it)
that is only due to the Divine Majesty.

22. For Purgatory, however it might be held a private opinion, yet certainly
as an Article of Faith it could not be; for the Greeks, who have ever Errores
Graecorum in fasciculo Zizaniorum Mss. per Thomam Waldens. fol. 156. b. col. 1.
in bibliotheca Archiepisc. Armach.
constantly denied it, were in communion with the Church of Rome till Mat.
Paris hist. minor. Ms. Ann. 1237. and 1238. Vide Hist. major. Anno 1237, p.
457, 16. p. 465, 22.
1238. after which only they began to be accounted schismatics, not so much
for their opinions, as denying subjection to the Sea of Rome; for some of them
coming to Rome 1254 Mat. Paris. Hist. major. p. 892, 28.
de articulis fidei and sacramentis fidei satis toler abiliter responderunt: so
that questionless the Historian could not then hold Purgatory an Article of
Faith, when those who did affirm Nullum Purgatorium est, did give a tolerable
account of their Faith. Our Divines therefore charge these opinions Art. 22.
only as fond inventions, grounded on no warrant of Scripture, but rather
repugnant to the word of God; that is, as I have said before, they deny them to
be Articles of faith.

23. In like manner, having first Art. 28.
declared the bread we break in the holy Communion to be a partaking of the
body of Christ, and the cup of blessing of his blood, they censure
Transubstantiation, or the change of the substance of bread and wine, as Vide
Bellarmin. de Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 23.. secundo dicit.
what is not proved by holy writ, and therefore no Article of faith etc. And
indeed how could they say less of so doubtful a tenet, so newly crept in,
that had burnt so many, was so contrary to the ancient doctrine even of the
English Church, as the Saxon Homily yet remaining in an old Mss, with this
title, Liber Cath^licorum sermonum per annu^^ recitandus. p. 355.
A book of Catholic sermons to be repeated each year, does undoubtedly assure
us? It is true, some of late have strove to give an answer to it; as he that
styled himself Flor. Hist. Eccles. etc. lib. 1. cap. 24. p. 91.
Bish. of Chalcedon will have the author perhaps to have been an heretic; but
that the time and title confutes, all Ab hac and aliis pestibus Haereticis
immunis semper exstitit Anglia, -- ubi hanc insulam expulsi^ Britonibus natio
possedit Anglorum, ut non jam Pritannia sed Anglia diceretur, nullius unquam ex
ca pestis haereticae virus cbullivit: sed nec in eum aliunde usque ad tempora
Regis Henrici secundi -- introivit. Newbrigensis lib. 2. cap. 13. Vide Pitseum
de scrip. Anno 1159. p. 220.
writers agreeing England to have been free from any heresy after S. Gregory,
till about the year 1166. If that therefore will not do, he has another, viz.
the Sermon to make more for Transubstantiation then what the Protetestants cite
does against it; yet is silent both where the words are in it, and who are the
citers of them. For my part, to speak once for all, take the whole Homily as it
lies, not one piece torn from the other, and if the doctrine of it be such as
he can digest, I know not why we differ. As for those two miracles, which some
dislike so far as to think them infarced into the work, I confess them not to
displease me at all; for if they were inserted to prove the verity of Christ's
body in the Sacrament, against those who held it bare bread, yet it must be
after such a ghostly and spiritual manner as is there represented, without any
other change in the substance of the bread and wine then is in the water of
Baptism, Editionis Iohannis Dayi^ in octavo, ^
p. 33. not bodily but ghostly page 38. 36. a remembrance of Christ's body
offered for us on the Cross. p. 46.

24. And this may serve for answer to that his Achilles, by which his doctrine
of Transubstantiation p. 90. vide Malms. de pont. lib. 1. in vita Odonis fol.
114, b. 36.
manifestius patebit, of Odo Archbishop of Canterbury about 940. converting
miraculously the Eucharist in formam carnis, ad convincendum quosdam, qui suo
tempore coeperunt de ea dubitare: to which I shall first remember, that when De
unitate Eccles. cap. 16. tom. 7.
St Augustine was pressed with certain miracles of Donatus and Pontius, which the
Donatists urged to prove the truth of their doctrine, he gives this answer,
Removeantur ista vel figmenta mendacium hominum, vel portenta fallacium
spirituum; aut enim non sunt vera quae dicuntur, aut si haereticorum aliqua
mira facta sunt, magis cavere debemus; and after a learned discourse, he tells
of some in the Catholic Church had happened in the time of St Ambrose at
Milan, upon which he gives this grave censure, Quaecunque talia in catholica
fiunt, ideo sunt approbanda, quia in catholica fiunt; non ideo ipsa
manifestatur catholica, quia haec in ea fiunt. Ipse Dominus Jesus cum
resurrexisset a mortuis, and discipulorum oculis videndum manibusque tangendum
corpus suum offerret, ne quid tamen fallaciae se pati arbitrarentur, magis eos
testimoniis Legis and Prophetarum and Psalmorum confirmandos esse judicavit,
ostendens ea de se impleta, quae fuerant tanto ante praedicta, etc. and a
little after, Hoc in Lege and Prophetis and Psalmis testatus est, hoc ejus ore
commendatum tenemus, Haec sunt causae nostrae documenta, haec fundamenta, haec
firmamenta.

25. To apply this to our case; the Church Catholic has ever held a true
fruition of the true Body of Christ in the Eucharist, and not of a sign,
figure, or remembrance only, but as the French confession, Vide Chamier. de
Sacramentis lib. 10. cap. 1. 2.
que par la virtue secret and incomprehensible de son Esprit, il nous nourrit
and vivifie de la substance de son corpse and de son sang, etc. and therefore we
can agree to these verses: Christ was the Word that spoke it,
He took the Bread and brake it:
And as that Word did make it,
So I believe and take it.
Here is then a Catholic Sermon, commanded to be read in the Church many years
before the word Transubstantiation was heard, as the doctrine of it, teaching
me this participation with Christ, however true, yet is not fleshly, but
spiritual: if therefore this miracle were not to convince those held the
communicating of Christ in the Sacrament, to have been no other then
fantastical, and the bread to have been, and conveyed no other to us then bare
bread, must not I, according to St Augustine, avoid it as the fancies of lying
men, or the operation of deceiving spirits? etc. And this as it may serve in
general for all miracles, so in particular for that of late divulged, of a
poor man's leg cut off in Spain and buried, yet four years after restored:
which if it be not some imposture, as the golden tooth in Silesia, or of Arnald
Tilly (taken in Francis the 2ds time not only by others, but by the very wife
of Martin Guerre, for her husband, and which held the Parliament of Tholous so
much perplexed to resolve) we must not (according to this holy man's doctrine)
believe for that or any of the like nature, farther then is proved by the Law
and the Prophets, etc. Yet there is one thing in my opinion very considerable;
what the Apostles did, were such, and in those places, no man could deny them:
but these the Church of Rome holds out for confirmation of their religion, are
either in corners, as Garnets Face in the Ear, with so dark proofs, as when
they are looked into, res tota cum contemptu dimissa est; or else done in
Italy, or Spain, where the Inquisition will suffer none but themselves to
examine the fact: whereas if they followed the Apostles example, they should be
in England or Germany, that the Protestants might say, indeed a notable miracle
has been done by our Lady, is manifest to all, and we cannot deny it. Acts
iiij. 16.

26. I. R. his spectacles to Sr Humfrey Lynde, p. 135.. 4.
Another will have that homily, at least what he takes on him to confute, to
contain no other then Catholic doctrine; and then falls upon the Archbishop of
Armach, whom he conceives to have ill translated it out of the Latin, in which
language there is not now found any ancient copy of it; p. 143. cap. 9.. 10.
insisting, that though it were printed at London 1623. it was not to be heard
of when he writ, which was about 1631. insinuating as if more might be said, if
he could see the author himself. For the first of these, it must be said to
contain Catholic Doctrine on the grounds N. 23.
before; but if it be that the Church of Rome admits for such, I am glad to
understand that from him. For the Primat of Ireland's translating the Latin to
the disadvantage of the Romish, I shall give no answer, but that his English
are indeed some parts of that sermon, but the Latin pieces of Bertram so
agreeing with them, as they were undoubtedly taken out of him, (by which he
gives a far elder testimony to that author then Oecolampadius) who was, no
question a Catholic Doctor; but being so why is he prohibited Index cerrorum
auctorum. Romae.
by the Roman Index? why if at all permitted, must it be excogitato commento?
For the other, that it could not be had in London only eight years after it was
printed, I can say nothing, but some men will not hear that they mislike: for
that Homily, of which (if he say any thing) he speaks, first set out by John
Day, with the subscription of 15 Bishops attesting the truth of the Copy, after
1623 reprinted by Henry Seal, always in the book of Acts and monuments etc.
Tom. 2. p. 450.
in the life of Hen. the 8, and of late by Mr. VVhelock put into Latin, and
taken without any intervening transcription from the original Saxon, (that he
might not vary in a tittle) was with his translation of it printed at Cambridge
1644. p. 462.
amongst diverse other excellent notes of that learned man upon Beda, that such
as understand not the language, may in that point see the doctrine of our
forefathers.

27. A third Malon his Reply to the Archbishop of Armach, p. 320.
Doctor, who cannot deny but it makes directly against Transubstantiation,
gives an answer I could not have expected, yet in my opinion more ingenuous;
That it is unreasonable to produce the forcelesse auctority of these Saxon
Homilies, which have no warrant of truth from any other but from our selves;
and the margin, These Homilies were never heard of, but now of late amongst
Protestants, only framed and printed by themselves, without the warrant of any
one indifferent witness. This is, I say, what I could not have looked for. Can
any man imagine two Archbishops, thirteen Bishops, besides diverse other
personages of honor and credit, could have been induced to subscribe so
palpable a lie? as it must be, if this and the other passages, by them there
testified to be found in the ancient monuments of this Church, were lately
framed. But the old books that yet In bibliotheca publica Cant.
remain, writ above five hundred years since, do enough vindicate the
Protestants, in that which I dare say no one of them who allege it do in their
hearts believe, not to have been extant in them, as the Archbishop first sent
them to the Press.

28. Of the little credit the Council of Lateran in this point gained here, I
have Chap. 7. n. 37.
touched before: neither did Peckham's constitution, sub panis specie simul
dari corpus etc. speak home, nor was the thing ever absolutely determined with
us till 1382: so that the opinion of Transubstantiation, that brought so many
to the stake, had not with us 140 years prescription before Martin Luther
began; for in that year VVickliff having propounded, In fasciculo zizaniorum
Mss. per Thom. Waldens. and Hen. Knighton, qui tunc vixit scripsitque, col.
2648, 8. and 2654, 44.
quod substantia panis materialis aut vini manet post consecrationem etc. the
Archbishop taking it into Knight, col. 2649, 31.
consideration, did not think fit to condemn the Tenet, without farther advice
with the University of Oxford, Col. 2650, 49.
where libratis singulis, every saying weighed, (and in especial, as it seems,
those Col. 2654.
concerned the Eucharist) he did condemn some as heretical, others as only
erroneous, and farther, singulos defensores eorum imposterum sententia
excommunicationis innodatos fore, and gave command, 2652, 67.
ne quis de caetero cujuscunque status etc. -- haereses seu errores praedictos
vel little aliquem teneat, doceat, praedicet seu defendat. The Col. 2653.
Chancellor likewise of the Academy repeating VVickliffs opinions touching the
holy communion, shows they had been diligently discuss't by Doctors in
Divinity, and professors in the Canon Law, ac tandem finaliter est compertum
atque judicio omnium declaratum, ipsas esse erroneas, fidei orthodoxae
contrarias, and determinationibus Ecclesiae repugnantes: and then after all
this search, delivers the doctrine of Transubstantiation as the conclusion
agreed to be held, Quod per verba sacramentalia a sacerdote prolata, panis and
vtnum in altari in verum corpus Christi and sanguinem transubstantiantur, seu
substantialiter convertuntur sic, quod post consecrationem non remanent in illo
venerabili sacramento panis materialis and vinum secundum suas substantias, sed
secundum species earundem. And this I take to have been the first plenary
determination of the Church of England in the case, which yet how well it will
be liked by such as hold the manner of conversion to be by a Vide Bellar. de
Eucharistia lib. 4. cap. 24.. ult.
succession of Christ's body to the substance of the bread, I leave others to
dispute. But certainly the Archbishop not Noluit Arch. plenarie procedere.
adventuring to proceed in it alone, nor by his own council, by Imposterum, de
caetero teneat.
his extending what he did only to the future, both for punishment and Tenet,
and after Tandem ^inaliter.
long enquiry concluding the truth of it, enough proves it not to have been in
former times fully resolved on in this Church; so that we may say of our
Ancestors, as A sparing discourse page 13. writ by a secular Priest against
the Jesuits Anno 1601.
the Jesuits here about some 60 years since did of the Fathers, rem
Transubstantiationis ne attigerunt. And it may not here unfitly have a place
that In Confess. contra Wickliff. in bibliotheca Archiepisc. Armach. Mss.
John Tissington a Franciscan, whom Pitseus (from Baleus, not Leland, as he
would have us think) affirms to have been an assistant in this dispute at
Oxford 1382, or as some 1381. cannot deny the truth of the assertion, quod
panis and vinum remanent post consecrationem in naturis suis, adhuc servatur
Laicis, and antiquitus servabatur. And here it is not unworthy the remembering,
that by the law of the 6 Articles 31. Hen. 8. cap. 14. (containing in effect
the body of Popery) no man was to dye as an Heretic but he who denied this
Tenet; all others only as felons, or men endangering the peace of the
Kingdom, by teaching contrary to what was publicly received. By which it
likewise appears, in fixing the imputation of Heresy, the English looked on
their home Determinations, not those of any foreign Church.

29. But I do not take upon me to dispute matters controversall, which I leave
as the proper subject to Divines; it shall suffice only to remember, the
Church of England having with this great deliberation reformed it self in a
lawful Synod, with a care as much as was possible of reducing all things to
the pattern of the first and best times, was interpreted (by such as would have
it so) to depart from the Church Catholic; though for the manner, they did
nothing but warranted by the continual practice of their predecessors, and in
the things amended had antiquity to justify their actions: and therefore the
Archbishop of Canterbury, in a provincial Synod begun in S. Paul's the 3 of
April 1571, and all other Bishops of the same Province, gave especially in
charge to all preachers, to The book of Canons of the same Synod printed by
John Day 1571.
chiefly take heed, that they teach nothing in their preaching, which they
would have the people religiously to observe and believe, but that which is
agreeable to the doctrine of the old Testament and the new, and that which the
Catholic Fathers and ancient Bishops have gathered out of that doctrine. So
that nothing is farther off truth, then to say, such as reformed this Church
made a New religion; they having retained only that which is truly old and
Catholic, as Articles of their faith.

30. Thus was Religion reformed, and thus by the Queen established in England,
without either motion, or seeking any new way not practiced by our Ancestors,
but using the same courses had been formerly traced out unto them, for stopping
profaneness and impiety, when ever they peeped in the Church. And certainly, to
my understanding, there can be none that will with indifferency look upon those
times, but he must (however he mislike the thing done) approve the manner of
doing it. Yet the favorers of Rome ceased not to proclaim all had thus past to
have been heretical (without instancing any particular, as to say such a
carriage was after the manne^ of Heretics, ever condemned by the Catholic
Church, and by orthodox writers in former times, or such a Tenet in your
confession was held heresy from this place of Scripture anciently, by such holy
Fathers met in general Council) and to raise stirs and commotions in the
Commonwealth, Bulla Pii 5ti March 28. 1569.
to excommunicate the Queen as flagitiorum serva, free her subjects of their
allegiance, to give out we had Harding his confutation of the Apol. part 6.
a Parliament-religion, Parliament-Gospell, Parliament-Faith, and this before
ever the 39 Articles, one main pillar of the English reformation, were
confirmed by Parliament.

31. Upon the whole, it is so absolutely false that the Church of England made
a departure from the Church, which is the ground and pillar of truth, as I am
persuaded it is impossible to prove she did make the separation from the Roman
it self; but that having declared in a lawful Synod certain opinions, held by
some in her communion, to be no articles of faith, and according to the
precedent of former times, and the power God and nature had placed in her self,
redressed particular abuses crept into her, the Pope and his adherents, without
ever examining what was the right of the Kingdom in such like cases, that had
from all antiquity done the same, would needs interpret this a departing from
the Church, because he resolved to maintain as articles of faith, and thrust on
others as such, some ambiguous disputable questions the English did not think
fit to admit into that number. To make a departure from Christ's Church is
certainly a very heinous offense, she never commanding ought but what is
conformable to his will, nor Bellarm. de justif. lib. 3. cap. 8.. prima ratio.
and ibid. lib. 1. cap. 10.. prima ratio.
requiring her children to believe any thing as matter of faith, but what is
immediately contained in the word of God, or by evident consequence drawn from
it: and as she excludes no Christians from being her children, who by their own
demerits deserve not to be out of the divine favor; so in opposing those who
endeavor to procure some tenets to be admitted for hers, which cannot be
deduced from that ground, we do not depart from her, but gainsay humane
errors, and conceits, which they would infer to be her commands who
acknowledges them not. But as St Augustine in a dispute with a Donatist,
Contraliteras l'etiliani lib. 2. cap. 85. tom. 7.
utrum schismatici nos simus an vos, non ego, nec tu, sed Christus
interrogetur, ut judicet Ecclesiam suam: so may I, whether we are the
schismatics or the Church of Rome, Christ himself be the Judge. But whether
divided from the other, being matter of fact, let the histories of former
times, the extraordinary proceedings of the Sea of Rome of late against the
Queen and this Commonwealth be compared, and I am confident the judgment may be
referred to any indifferent person (though of that belief) who made the
separation, and whether this Kingdom on so high provocations, did any thing
would not have been paralleled by former times, had they met with the like
attempts.

32. Neither can the Crown in this reformation be any way said to have
enterprised on the papal primacy, which (for ought I know) it might have
acknowledged so far as is expressed or deduced from holy Scripture, or laid down
in the ancient sacred Counsels, or the constant writings of the orthodox
primitive Fathers, and yet done what it did;) but to have exercised that
auctority always resided in it, for conserving the people under it in unity
and peace, without being destroyed by the Canons and constitutions of others;
not suffering a foreign power ruin them to whom it owed protection. In which
it did not trench upon the rights of any, but conserved its own; imitating
therein the Imperial edicts of several Princes, and of those were in
possession of this very diadem, conformable to their Coronation oath.

33. And from hence may be answered that which Rome brings as her Achilles,
touching the succession and visibility of the Protestants Church and doctrine
in all ages since Christ: for if theirs have been, it is impossible to say the
others have not; the former adding only more articles for a Christian to
believe, which the latter will not embrace as needful: so that if theirs (as
they so much glory) have had the continuance from the Apostles, these needs
must, which only denies some part of that they hold. Fortress of faith, at
the end of Bedas Hist. fol. 47. b.
Protestants (says Stapleton) have many things less then Papists, they have
taken away many things which Papists had, they have added nothing. And here to
my understanding the Romanists require of us what lies on their part to prove;
for we denying in the succession of Bishops from Cranmer, Warehom, even to
Augustine, and so of the Britons, ever any one to have held the points we
differ in to have been points of faith, in that degree of necessity they are
now required, and for proof cite not only the Apostles, Nicen, Athanasian
Creeds, but even that of Peckham, which we find so to differ from the late one
set out by Pius 4tus, as we cannot but say it is unjust in them to press us to
a profession in religion farther then our ancestors were; they on the contrary
affirming all those holy Bishops preceding, not only believed them as these
now do, but did require them of others with the like necessity they now are;
ought certainly to prove what they thus boldly affirm, which when they have
done, truly for my part I shall think fit to yield: but till they do it, let
them cease from proclaiming us heretics, who hold no other then the ancient
faith at first delivered unto us.

But this as a point rather dogmaticall for Divines, then historical, the
subject I undertook, I shall not here farther wade into.

FINIS.
Errata. correct. P. 1. lin. 1. more than read almost 10 Christian Christians
5 15 genenerale generale 7 18 they address they did address 9 1 know knew
Cap. 3. 7. Precetor precentor 47 1 prius de fidelitate and prius Romano
Pontifiel de fidelitate and 52 4 find at all find it at all 67 10 suffer for
suffer death for 79 13 Episcopus and clerus Episcopi and clerus 81. in margin
ad lit. f. Cap. 23. cap. 3. 141 2 whethe whither 151 3 Glass Gloss 157 4
Albigenses Albigensi^ 31 qui el que il. 39 Assent, de lour. auferatur comma 173
2 of Pope of the Pope


