OF All those weighty parcells of Gospel truth, which the Arminians have
chosen to oppose, there is not any about which they so much delight to try and
exercise the strength of fleshly reasonings, as that of Gods eternal decree of
Reprobation: partly because the Scripture does not so abound in the delivery of
this Doctrine, as of some others, lying in a more immediate subserviency to the
obedience and consolation of the Saints, (though it be sufficiently revealed in
them, to the quieting of their spirits who have learned to captivate their
understandings to the obedience of Faith) and partly because they apprehend the
Truth thereof, to be more exposed to the riotous opposition of men's tumultating
carnal Affections, whose help and assistance they by all means court and
solicit in their contests against it. Thus the Author of the Book entitled (
Gods love to Mankind) being desired to render a reason of the change his Faith,
in passing over to the Tents of the Arminians, he draws forth only this one
point to make show of, for the hinge of his alteration. Many Learned men know
with what applause that Book of his was received and divulged, by that whole
Generation which had then wrapped up the ball of the Errors promoted by it, in
the gilded covering of Preferment, and carried it away before them. They being
by providence removed from that station and conjunction unto Power, whence they
had their effectual influence on the Earth, God foresaw (if he may be allowed
to foresee) what reinforcement upon other hands their Abominations would
receive, and therefore in his tender love made provision for his Church before
hand, as by others, so in especial by the renowned Author of this Treatise,
whose pains herein, intended by him for the conviction of them, with whom
after much forbearance God intended to take another course, are now seasonably
brought to light, to stop the mouths of another Generation risen up in their
steed, (enemies of Gods Soverainty and Grace) until He shall be pleased to
deal otherwise with them. God is not mo^^ed, that which men sow they shall
reap. It is well known what sphere this Learned Author moved in; how far
elevated above any possibility of my reaching the least esteem to him or his
labors: This (being desi^ed by my worthy and Learned friend the Publisher, to
express my th^ughts upon its perusal) I shall take the boldness to say, that
this Trea^ise of our Author, comes not any whit behind the choycest of thos^
other eminent Works of his, wherein in this cause of God, he faithfull^ served
his Generation. I doubt not but it will appear to the Reade^, that he has
dealt with the Adversaries of the Truth, in their chiefest ^olds, advantages
and strengths, putting them to shame in the calumnyes and lies which they make
their refuge.

JOHN OWEN Vicecan. Oxon.

The Riches of Gods Love unto the Vessels of Mercy, CONSISTENT WITH His
Absolute Hatred or Reprobation Of the Vessels of Wrath. OR AN ANSWER UNTO A
BOOK ENTITLED Gods Love unto Mankind, Manifested by Disproving His Absolute
Decree for their Damnation. IN TWO BOOKS The First being a Refutation of the
said Book, As it was Presented in Manuscript by Mr HORD unto Sir NATH: RICH.
The Second being an Examination of certain Passages inserted into M. HORDS
Discourse, (formerly Answered) by an Author that conceales his Name, but was
supposed to be Mr MASON, Rector of Andrews-Undershaft in London.

By that Great and Famous Light of Gods Church, WILLIAM TWISSE D. D. And
Prolocutor of the late Assembly of DIVINES.

Whereunto are annexed Two Tractates of the same Author in Answer unto D. H.
The one concerning Gods Decrees Definite or Indefinite. The other about the
object of Predestination. TOGETHER WITH A Vindication of D. TWISSE from the
exceptions of Mr JOHN GOODWIN In his Redemption Redeemed. By HENRY JEANES
Minister of God's Word In CHEDZOY.

Romans 9. 20. O Man, who art thou that reply against God, shall the thing
formed, say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?

v. 21. Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same Lump to make one
vessel to honor, and another unto dishonor.

OXFORD, Printed by L. L. and H. H. Printers to the University, for Tho:
Robinson. Anno Salutis M. DC. LIII.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL, And his Honored Uncle, MICHAEL OLDISWORTH Esquire, And a
Member of the PARLIAMENT Of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
SIR,
I Have often heard you profess a deep dislike of the unnatural vanity of the
English Nation, in preferring strangers in all callings above such of their own
Country men, as far surpassed them. And of this unjust partiality, no
profession has tasted in a greater measure, than that of Divinity; for of our
Ministers, such whom God has best fitted with parts and Learning for the
discussing of controversies, have been so undervalued in comparison of some
Foreign Divines, whose Learning was little better than systematicall; as that
they languished in their private studies, and had dyed in obscurity, unless
the fame of their great abilities had been echoed over unto us by the general
applause of all Christendom. Nay this sometimes has not awakened us unto a
due estimation of them. Dr Ames was looked upon abroad, as one that amongst
Protestant writers had few, either superiors, or equals, for subtilty in
Logic, and Scholasticall Divinity; and yet he dyed an exile from his Native
Soil, so that his Tomb might have had that inscription upon it, which Scipio
by his will appointed to be on his; Ingrata Patria ne ossa mea quidem habes,
Unthankful Country, thou have not so much as my Bones. Of how great reputation
this our Author was beyond the Seas, I had rather you should hear from the
able and judicious Rivet, than by me, who am censured by some (who I am sure
much overvalue their own judgments) to have too high and admiring thoughts of
him. Rivet (in his Epistle prefixed unto a late Book of D. Twisses against
Arminius and Corvinus etc.) will assure you that De auctore, ejus Methodo,
Scholastica disputandi forma, acumine and accuratione, judicium lectoribus
relinquo; quibus praeiverunt Doctissimi ex toto orb Christiano viri, etiam ex
iis qui in contraria sunt part, fatentes, nihil acuratius, nihil exactius and
before in hoc argumento hactenus proditum fuisse.
The most Learned men in the whole Christian World, even those who are of the
adverse party, do confess that there was nothing yet extant more accurate,
exact, and full, touching the Arminian Controversies, than what was written by
D. Twisse. Hoc saltem omnibus piis placere debet, quod usque and ubique in
bonam causam fuerit intentus; camque, si quisquam aljus, ab absurdis objectis,
and adversariorum calumniis, ita vindicavit, ut ex illius labor habeant non
docti tantum, sed etiam minus exercitati, quo se possine extricare laqueis
adversantium. ibid.
As also That he (if any one) has so cleared and vindicated the Orthodoxe
cause from objected absurdities, and the calumnies of adversaries, as that out
of his labors, not only the Learned, but also those who are least versed in
controversies, may find enough whereby to disentangle themselves from the
snares of Opposites. Indeed there is none almost that has Written against
Arminianisme since the Publishing of any thing of Dr Twisses on that Subject,
but have made very honorable mention of him, and have acknowledged him to be
the mightiest man in these Controversies, that this Age has afforded. And yet
this Worthy and able Combatant for the Truth and Cause of God, was here at home
designed unto Ruin, as I have found in a Manuscript under his own Hand. This
I grant was by the Canterburian Faction, but withal I could tell strange
Stories of the neglects that were heaped upon him by some, who were (I believe)
Zealous (I am sure forward) Sticklers for a Reformation. These Men (me think)
should blush at the ingenuous Testimony, which Bishop Hall (though dissenting
from him about Church Government) gave of his eminent worth in a Letter of his
to Mr W. S. by way of Approbation of a small piece of Dr Twisses Entitled, The
doubting Conscience Resolved etc. The Doctor ever declined conference by word
of Mouth, as out of modesty, so because he thought the more deliberate way of
the Pen, to be quieter, and fitter too, for the bolting out of the Truth: And
hereupon he spoke not much in the late Assembly of Divines at Westminster.
This, some (who talked their shares) interpreted as an Argument of the former
weakness, or at least present decay of his intellectualls. But as Cicero de
Senectute.
Sophocles, when his Sons brought him into question for Dotage, is reported
to have recited a Tragedy of Oedipus Coloneus, which he had last written, and
had in his Hands, and to have demanded whether that seemed the Verse of a
Dotard, or no. So our Doctor could have stopped the Mouths of these bold
censurers by Publishing very Masculine and Vigorous pieces that he Penned in
even his most declining Age. I may wish but I do not expect, to Live so long,
as to see any thing Published touching this Argument more convincing the
adversary, than this Elaborate and Weighty Discourse; and yet some, who are
Perk'd up into places, unto which their parts and gifts bare no proportion,
have very lately bespattered it as lame, imperfect, and I know not what. But
the best of it is, this their detracting from it, is not likely to be any
disadvantage to it; for it was so far from working that mischievous effect,
which it seems they intended, as that it begat in those who heard it, and unto
whom it was afterward reported, only an admiration, and a serious indignation
at the immodest impudence of such raw young men, who are no better skilled in
Polemicall Divinity, then the mock Heylins Geography and Torshells Hypocrite.
Council of the Great Duke of Muscovie are in State affairs, which is made up
of the gravest and seem lie men of all Musco, and the adjoining Cities,
richly apparrelled out of the Wardrope; which to sorrainers, not knowing this
fraud, appear so many Princes, and Noble men; but indeed are mean and
unqualified persons, and of no more ability, than so many pictures in a
fairewrought hanging, that serve only to cover a Wall. But I appeal from the
rash and unrighteous censures of these presumptuous Novices, unto your more
knowing and candid judgment, who as you highly reverenced this our Author
whilst living, so have you ever since his death borne a zeal unto his memory,
and therefore I am assured that this Book of his will find with you, not only a
favorable, but also a grateful acceptance; and the same confidence I have
concerning all rational, Learned, and Orthodoxe men, unto whose reading I
commend it, and that unto the blessing of the Almighty; and so I rest,

Your deeply Obliged, And most Humbly devoted Nephew, HENRY JEANES.

TO THE READER.
IN the days of our Henry the 8th the whole Convocation offered unto Sr Thomas
Moore the sum of four thousand pounds at the least, thereby to recompense, in
part, the pains, and travailes he had taken, in writing for the defense of the
Romish faith; which my Author miscalls the true Catholic Faith. Now the
undertakings of Sr Thomas Moore for the Popish cause, are not worthy to be
named the same day with the performances of Doctor Twisse against the enemies
of God's grace, both Jesuits, and Arminians; I was therefore (I confess)
transported with a just both sorrow and indignation, when I could not prevail
with any (though I solicited diverse) to adventure upon the Printing of this
following Work of his, without a large supply toward the the charge thereof.
a His Latin Rivet. Inde factum est ut Guilielmus Twissus, vir doctissimus, and
in controversiis illis exercitatissimus, causam illam Dei, contra renascentem
Pelagianismum, tanquam alter Bradwardinus, iterum defendendum sumpserit, and
Librum illum Arminii tam decantatum non esse invincibilem, accurato and
luculento scripto probaverit, nihil omittendo quod non excusserit, usque ad
minutissima. Quod opus quam fuerit acceptum, ex eo colligi potest, quod.
quamvis sit magnae molis, duabus editionibus distractis tertia nuper prodiit
apud eundem Typographum, qui primam curaverat. Hoc labor notus and celebris
factus Author in transmarinis regionibus, etc.
Works have rendered him so renowned in foreign Churches, as that they have
looked upon him as the Bradwardine of the Age. The States of West-Friezland,
unto whom he was no otherwise known, than by his Answer to Arminius his Book
against Perkins, offered him the greatest preferment that a Minister in that
Country is capable of, viz. the place of a Professor of Divinity in the
University of Franeker, and took order for defraying the charges of his
journey, and transportation of his family; and were this Book, that I now
present unto thy view (unto which there is not in the English Tongue any peer
for solidity, and accuratenesse in Scholasticall Divinity) translated into
Latin, I am persuaded that Outlandish Divines would have such an estimate of
it, as St Jerome had of certain Books of the Martyr Lucian written with his
own hand, which he valued as a precious jewel; or as Clerks Lives.
Beza had of a Commentary of Mr Rollocke upon the Romans and Ephesians;
concerning which he wrote unto a friend, that he had gotten a treasure of
incomparable value. It was therefore very strange unto me, that there should be
any knowing and sober persons who should either despair or doubt of the
acceptance thereof; But my wonder would have been swallowed up of a greater
amazement, if I had known that, of which I was since by a good hand informed,
that this active, unwearied, and victorious Champion of Gods grace, lived in
great want even whilst he was Prolocutor of the late Assembly of Divines. Nay
which is stranger yet, that he was slighted by some of his own calling; who,
if they had not much forgotten themselves, would (seeing they swam in all
plenty) have imitated (in some degree at least) that forementioned example of
the grateful munificence of a Popish Convocation unto S t Thomas Moore. D r
Ames, in his Preface to the Diocesans Trial of that Worthy Divine M r Paul
Baine, tells us, that the said M r Baine, was all his life after his silencing
pressed with want, not having, as he often complained unto his Friends, a place
to rest his Head in, which me thought (says D r Ames) was an upbraiding of the
Age and place where he lived with base Regardlesnesse of piety and learning. If
I should apply the like censure unto those that neglected this our Author (the
Glory of his Age, and Ornament of his Nation) I should not be over bitter, He
is now above any recompense to be made unto him in his own Person by us; but
we may express a grateful Memory of him, as unto his Children, so unto the
Issue of his mind, His Books. I speak not only for the entertainment of
those that are Extant; but for bringing into the light those Pieces, that lie
in the Hands of his Children; which are likely to be Buried in Dust, and
Perpetual Oblivion. If I had but half that Interest in great Personages,
which diverse of my Brethren in both the Universities, and in the City of
London have, I should apply my self with an undeniable importunity, to
persuade them unto so good, and great a Work, which will Purchase them a
precious Memory with the Godly and Learned in all future Ages of the Church. I
have but one thing more to say of the Book, before I take my leave of Thee: If
any Arminian whatsoever will give a Just, Full, and Scholasticall Answer unto
It, I shall by God's help return him a Reply; For it is De Causa Dei (as
Bradwardine Entitles his Book) And in defense of God's Cause I shall fear no
Colors. But if the Ignorant Paper-blurrers of the Time shall Snarle, and Snap
only at some few Passages, they are not to expect, that so much as any serious
notice should be taken of them.

Thine, In all the obligations of Charity and Truth HENRY JEANES.

THE FIRST BOOK IN TWO PARTS: WHEREOF, THE FIRST Contains a Consideration of
those Reasons for Which Mr HORD (as he pretended) First questioned the truth of
Absolute Reprobation. THE SECOND Examineth those Arguments against the
Absoluteness of Divine Reprobation, which M. HORD took to be of a Convincing
Nature.



OXFORD, Printed by LEON: LICHFIELD, for THO: ROBINSON.

Anno Salutis M. DC. LIII.

A Table of the Principal Matters contained in this Treatise, wherein the
Answer unto Mr. Mason's Additions is referred in such order, as that it is made
aptly to cohere with the refutation of M. HORDS DISCOUERSE.
AN examination of the Epistle to the Reader. lib. 2. p. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

The maine (...) or Question in these Controversies propounded and stated,
together with the different opinions of Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants,
both Supralapsarians, and Sublapsarians concerning it, examined. lib. 1. page
1, 2, 3. etc. usque ad p. 14, and p. 32, 33. usque ad p. 40. l. 2. p. 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12.

The absolute decree cleared from Mr Hord's reasons both inducing, and
convincing.

1. And first to begin with those, for which (as he pretended) he first
questioned the truth of absolute Reprobation, where the absolute decree is
vindicated from the charge.

1. Of Novelty, lib. 1. p. 40. etc. usque ad p. 60. l. 2. p. 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19.

2. Of Unwillingnesse to abide the trial lib. 1. a p. 59. ad 84. l. 2. p. 19.
20. 21. 22.

3. Of Infamy. lib. 1. a p. 83. ad p. 91. l. 2. p. 22. 23, 24.

4. Of Affinity with the old and exploded errors of the Stoics, and Manichees
lib. 1. p. 92, 93. etc. usque ad p. 102.

2. Those arguments against the absolutenes of Divine Reprobation according to
both the upper and lower way, which Mr Hord took to be of a convincing nature,
are examined.

1. Mr Hord's or Mr Mason's arguments against the upper or Supralapsarian way
are answered. lib. 2. p. 25. etc.

Where,

1. The upper or Supralapsarian way is vindicated from the dishonouring of God
in two particulars.

1. It does not charge him with man's destruction. lib. 2. a p. 25. ad p. 51.

2. It does not charge him with men's sins. lib. 1. a p. 14. ad 28 l, 2. a p.
51. ad 116.

2. The upper or Supralapsarian way is cleared from the overthrow of Religion,
and holy Life, and that in four particulars.

1. It makes not sin to be no sin. lib, 1. p. 10, 28, 29. l. 2. a p 110.
ad 121.

2. It takes not away the conscience of sin. lib. 1. p. 29, 30, l. 2. p.
117, 121, 122.

3. It takes not away the desert and guilt of sin. lib. 1. p. 10, 30, 31,
32. l. 2. p, 122, 123 etc. usque ad p. 131.

4. It makes not the whole circle of man's Life a mere destiny. lib. 2. p.
127, 128, 130, 131, 132, 133.

2. Those pretended convictive arguments against absolute Reprobation which
proceed as it is stated according to the Sublapsarian or lower way. lib. 1. p.
103. etc.

And it is fully and clearly evinced that the Sublapsarian Doctrine is not
repugnant unto. 1. Testimonies of Scripture. 2. Attributes of God. 3. End of
the Word, and Sacrament, with other excellent gifts of God to men. 4. Holy and
Pious endeavors. 5. The Grounds of comfort, whereby distressed consciences are
to be relieved.

1. The Sublapsarian Doctrine concerning absolute reprobation is not repugnant
to Scripture. lib. 1. p. 103, 104. etc.

Particularly, not to Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live says the Lord God, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and
live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye dye o House of
Israel. lib. 1. p. 103 etc.

Nor to Ezekiel. 18. 32. I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says
the Lord God; wherefore turn your selves and live ye. lib. 1. p. 103, 104,
105, 106.

Not to Romans 11. 32. For God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he
might have mercy upon all. lib. 1. p. 107, 108.

Not to John. 3. 16. God so loved the world that he gave his only-begotten Son
etc. lib. 1. p. 108, 109, 110.

Not to 1. Tim. 2. 4. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the
knowledge of the Truth. lib. p. 111, 112, 113, 114, 115.

Not to 2 Peter 3. 9. -- not willing that any should perish but that all should
come to Repentance. lib. 1. p. 115, 116, 117.

Not to those conditional speeches which are in 1 Cron. 28. 9. And 2 Cron. 15.
2.

And Genesis 4. 7. And Heb. 10. 38. lib. 1. p. 117, 118, 119, 120.

2. The Sublapsarian Doctrine etc. is not contrary unto Gods Attributes; to the
clearing of which, a discourse premised concerning Gods Atributes in general
is refuted. lib. 1. p. 121, 122, etc. unto p. 128.

This done, our Author comes to show in special, how that the Sublapsarian
Doctrine does not oppugn.

1. God's Holiness. lib. 2. p. 133, 134, etc. unto p. 147. 2. God's Mercy.
lib. 1. p. 128, etc. unto p. 145. l. 2. p. 147, 148. 3. God's Justice. lib. 1.
a p. 145. ad 171. l. 2. a p. 149. ad 156. 4. God's truth or sincerity. lib. 1.
a p. 171. ad 187. l. 2. a p. 156. ad p. 167.
3. The Sublapsarian doctrine not contrary to the use and end of God's gifts to
men. lib. a p. 187. ad 222. l. 2. p. 166. 167.

4. The Sublapsarian Doctrine not prejudicial to piety and a Godly life. lib.
1. a p. 221. ad 255. l. 2. p. 167, 168, 169 170.

5. The Sublapsarian Doctrine no enemy to true comfort. lib. 1. p. 255, 256
etc. usque ad finem.

By this Table (Reader) thou may correct the mistitleing of pages, as lib. 1.
p. 86, 87, 88, 89. 90. and lib. 20. p. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. and p. 52, 53,
58, 59. and a p. 133 ad p. 147.

READER
I would advise thee to begin with the examination of those Arguments against
the absoluteness of Divine Reprobation (which Mr Mason and Mr Hord took to be
of a convincing nature) by which Method in Reading thou will the sooner meet
with that abundant satisfaction, which this work will yield, as touching this
controversy, unto all that are capable or desirous thereof.

THE FIRST PART. CONTAINING A CONSIDERATION of those Reasons, for which Mr HORD
(as he pretended) first Questioned THE TRUTH OF ABSOLVTE REPROBATION.



OXFORD, Printed by L. L. Printer to the University, for T. R. Anno 1653.

THIS TREATISE DIVIDES IT SELF INTO TWO PARTS, Viz. 1. An Introduction. 2. A
Discourse.

I. The Introduction.
SECTION I.
SIR,
I Have sent you here the Reasons, which have moved me to change my Opipion in
some Controversies, of late debated between the Remonstrants and their
Opposites, I do the rather present them unto you,

1. That I may show the due respect, which I bear your Worship, with my
forwardnes to answer your desires, as I can, with regard to Conscience.

2. That you may see, I dissent not without cause, but have Reason on my side.

3. That if I can be convinced, that my Grounds are weak and insufficient, I
may think better of my Opinion, which I have forsaken, then I can for the
present.

In the delivery of my Motives, I shall proceed in this Order,

1 I will state the Opinion which I dislike.

2 I will lay down my reasons against it.

Touching the first your Worship knows these two things very well;

1 That the main (...), and Question in these Controversies, and that on which
all the rest hang, is, What the decrees of God are, touching the everlasting
condition of men, and how they are Ordered.

2. That the Men which have disputed these things may be reduced to two sorts
or sides.

The first side affirms, that there is such an absolute decree, proceeding
from the good pleasure of God alone, without the consideration of men's final
Unbelief and Impenitency, as, by which he casts men off from Grace and
Glory, and shuts up the far greater part of men (even of those that are called
by the Preaching of the Gospel to Repentance and Salvation) under invincible
and unavoydable sin and damnation.

The other side, disavowing any such decree, say, that the Decree of God to
cast off men for ever, is grounded upon the foresight of their continuance in
sin and unbelief, both avoydable by Grace, and consequently inferring no man's
damnation necessary.

TWISSE. Consideration.
WOrthy Sir, according to your desire to take into Consideration this writing
directed unto you, at length I have gotten some leisure from other employments,
to address my self to give you satisfaction in this particular.

1 That I may show my self answerable to that respect which you have deserved
at my hands; and not so only, but to my zeal of Gods truth, which has
deserved much more at the hands of us both.

2 That you may the better discern which of us two, whom you put to confer,
does maintain the cause of Gods truth, and has the best reasons on his side.

As for the change of Opinion here mentioned, such Professions are nothing
strange. But whether such a Profession be in truth, or in pretense, and rather
liberty taken to manifest that Opinion, which formerly has been cherished: as
also with what conscience void of all carnal respects, such a change or
manifestation is made, it belongs not unto us to judge, but to leave that unto
God, who tries the hearts and reins. Sure we are, the heart of man is full of
deceitfulness, both to deceive others, yea and to deceive our selves, the more
need there is to be jealous over our selves, and to carry a watchful eye over
our own souls, and whether we have changed a former way, or at the first chose
one or other way, and continue to embrace that, whereof we have been at first
informed; not to despise, but in the fear of God, to practice that 2 Cor. 13.
5.
holy counsel of the Apostle given to the Corinthians, a famous Church, and
such as were destitute of no spiritual gift. Prove your selves, whether you
are in the Faith, examine your selves: know ye not your own selves, that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates? as also to consider how
indifferently we carry our selves, in using means to inform our selves in the
way of truth, and whether they be not such as do discover our chief care has
been to bring our judgments about, to the embracing 1 Cor. 11. 19. 2 These. 2.
10, 11.
of that way (whether Truth or Error) which formerly we did effect. Certain
it is, that Heresies must be, and that to this end, that they that are approved
may be made manifest. And Illusions shall have their course, when the truth of
God is not embraced with love, whatsoever be the pretense of our disaffecting
it, whether harshnes to affections, or discrepancy to carnal reason. And when
such judgments have their course, Who are privileged from being seduced? Let
our Savior speak in this, Matthew. 24. 24.
So that if it were possible men should deceive the very elect. Upon what may
we be assured to stand firm in time of such temptation? Let the Apostle answer
us in this, 2 These. 2. 13.
when after the effectual working of Satan in them that perish, he comes near
to them to whom he writes in the way of comfort thus, But we ought to give
thanks always to God, for you Brethren beloved of the Lord, because that God
has from the beginning chosen you unto salvation through sanctification of the
spirit and faith of the truth. Like as before he did conclude unto himself
their election, from observation of the work of their Faith, the labor of
their Love, and the patience of their Hope. And the greater is the comfort
which hereby is ministered unto us, the greater should be our care, to inform
our selves aright, in the doctrine thereof, and especially to have an eye unto
it, that we do not shape it in such a manner, that like as it is impossible we
should have any assurance thereof, so it will prove equally impossible we
should draw any comfort from thence.

1. But is it so, as here it is put upon you, that you knew very well indeed,
that the main (...), and Question in these Controversies, and that on which all
the rest hang, is, What the decrees of God are, touching the everlasting
condition of men, and how they are ordered?

I assure you, if you knew this, you know more then I do. I had thought rather
that the resolution of the Point concerning Predestination, had depended upon
the resolution of the Point touching Grace efficacious, then the contrary. As
namely, if Faith be confessed to be the gift of God, and that not with respect
to any thing in man, it follows herehence, that Predestination unto faith,
and reprobation from faith, must proceed mecrely upon the good pleasure of God,
and not upon foresight of ought in man.

There was a time when Austin thought, that God elected some to bestow the Holy
Ghost upon August. de Praed. Sanctc. 3. Fidem elegit Deus in praescientia ut
quem crediturum esse praescivit, ipsum eligeret cui Sp. sanctum daret ut bona
operando vitam aeternam consequeretur. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 23.
them, that by working that which is good, they might obtain everlasting life:
and who were those whom he thus elected? namely such as whom he foresaw would
believe: and what was his reason for it? surely this; Quod ergo credimus
nostrum est, quod autem bona operamur, Illius est, qui Credentibus dat Spiritum
Sanctum; quod profecio non dicerem, si jam scirem, etiam ipsam fidem inter dei
munera reperiri quae dantur in eodem spiritu. Mark I pray the manner of his
Retractation, I would not have said (so) if at that time I had known Faith to
have been amongst the gifts of God, which are given in the same spirit. So then
as soon as Austin came to acknowledge, that Faith it self was the gift of God,
he therewithal came off from affirming, that Quem sibi crediturum esse
praescivit, ipsum elegit, cui Spiritum Sanctum daret ut bona operando etiam
vitam aeternam consequeretur. And like as before he maintained, that God
elected some (to wit, Believers) to bestow the Holy spirit upon them, that by
working good works, they might obtain also everlasting life; so now having
found that Faith also, is the gift of God, he was accordingly to maintain, that
God elected some to bestow the Holy spirit upon them, that both by believing,
and working good works, they might obtain everlasting life: so that no longer
was the foresight of Faith, to precede election in Austins opinion, to wit,
after once he knew Faith to be the gift of God. And accordingly in his Book De
Praedestin. Sanctorum, addressing himself to the rectifying of the
Massilienses in the point of Predestination, wherein they did not as yet
discern the truth of God: Adhuc in quaestione caligant de Praedestinatione
sanctorum. Cap. 1. And again, Si quid de Praedestinatione Sanctorum aliter
sapiunt (Deus) illis hoc quoque revelabit. Ibid. Mark I pray you what course
he takes to rectify them herein. cap. 2. Prius itaque fidem qua Christiani
sumus donum dei esse debemus ostendere: and whereas he had performed this task
very sufficiently before, manifesting by diverse pregnant passages of holy
Scripture, that Faith was the gift of God, and the Massilienses did elude them
by such a distinction as this, Faith may be considered two ways, either as
touching Initium, the first beginning of it; or as touching Incrementum the
augmentation thereof; and accommodating this distinction said, The passages of
Scripture alleged by Austin proceeded as touching the Augmentation of it,
which they willingly granted to be the work of God; but not as touching the
initiation of it, which they still maintained to be the work of man. Therefore
Austin addresseth himself in that discourse of his, to prove that the very
Initiation of Faith, is the work of God, and not the Augmentation only. His
words are these, Sed nunc iis respondendum esse video, qui divina testimonia,
quae de hac re adhibuimus, ad hoc dicunt valere, ut noverimus ex nobis quidem
nos habere ipsam fidem, sed incrementum ejus ex Deo: tanquam fides non ab ipso
donetur nobis, sed ab ipso tantum augeatur in nobis ex merito quo coepit a
nobis. And likewise in the 19. cap. of the same Book, having propounded the
opinion of the Pelagians, namely that because God foresaw that we would be holy
and unblameable before him in love, therefore he elected and predestined us
in Christ, before the foundation of the World; and showed how this opinion,
contradicts that of the Apostle Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. where it is said, that, God
elected us in Christ, and predestined us before the foundation of the World,
that we should be holy and unblameable before him in love: and perceiving
withal how the Massilians did avoid this as nothing contrary to their Tenent
(though contrary to the Pelagian Tenent) forasmuch as they maintained not, that
God foresaw any thing but our Faith, and therefore God elected us before the
foundation of the World, that we should be holy and unblameable before him in
love, (for these were their words) Nos autem dicimus nostram Deum non
praescisse nisi fidem and ideo nos elegisse -- ut etiam sancti and immaculati
gratia atque opere ejus essemus; what course does Austin take to beat them off
but this, namely to prove, that, Like as Holiness so Faith also, and that as
touching the Initiation thereof, is the work of God. thus: Sed audiant ipsi in
hoc testimonio, ubi dicit, sortem consecuti simus, praedestinati secundum
propositum qui universa operatur. Ipse ergo ut credere incipiamus operatur qui
universa operatur. So that it is clear in the opinion of Austin, that to take
both himself and others off from premising the foresight of Faith unto Gods
election, it is sufficient to prove that Faith is the gift of God, the work of
God both touching the augmentation, and touching the first introduction
thereof. And thus evincing the condition of Predestination, as excluding all
foresight of Faith, from the condition of Predestination, as being throughout
the work of God in man, rather then taking a contrary course, as if the main
(...) were, what is the condition of Gods decree of Predestination, as here it
is pretended and supposed. And albeit it is commonly received of all sides (as
if it were without question) that Faith is the gift of God: yet we find
practices on foot, for the working of a manifest innovation herein. For not to
speak of their interpretations of their own meanings, as, in what sense they
say God works Faith in us; it is apparent the Remonstrants now a days, do as
good as profess, that Faith is not bestowed upon us for Christ's sake, in as
much as they deny that Christ merited Faith for us. For when the Author of the
Censure passed upon the Remonstrants Confession, disputes thus, At si hoc
tantum meritus est Christus tum Christus nobis non est meritus fidem nec
regenerationem: the Remonstrants in the Answer hereunto, forthwith confess it
in these Apol. pro Confess. Remonst. Fol. 95. p. 1.
words, Sane ita est. Nihil ineptius, nihil vanius est quam hoc Christi merito
tribuere. Si enim Christus nobis meritus dicatur fidem and regenerationem, tum
fides conditio esse non poterit, quam a peccatoribus Deus sub comminatione
mortis aeternae exigeret. And by the way mark, I pray, that not any difference
is put between Faith and Regeneration; manifestly signifying thereby, that as
they grant it to be the work of man to believe, so we are commanded to make our
selves a new heart. Ezech. 18. 31


And as for ordering of the decrees, which here is added to complete the main
(...), as here is pretended that in my opinion, is so far off from being the
main (...), as that it is not to be accounted any (...) at all Theological,
but merely Logical. Let the condition of the decrees be rightly explicated
according to Divinity, and we shall have no need at all of Divinity for the
right ordering of them. A mere Logical faculty by light of nature, will serve
for this. For the decrees whereof we treat, are merely Intentiones rerum
gerendarum. Now for the ordering of these in what kind soever, we have received
Rules of the Schools, never yet that I know contradicted by any; namely, that
they are to be ordered according to the condition of the things intended, which
are but two, to wit, the end and the means; and all do attribute priority to
the intention of the end, and posteriority to the intention of the means. It is
true, men may err, in designing the right end, as also, in designing the right
means, and these errors are to be discovered, and the truth cleared by that
science, whereunto the consideration of the end and means belong, and not by
Logic. But agreement being made concerning the end and means, there is no
doubt to be made, but that according to the most received Rules of Schools,
the end must be acknowledged both first in intention, and last in execution,
and contrarily the means last in intention and first in execution.

2. But come we to the Decrees themselves, and the different opinions
thereabouts, which follow in the next place. Now here I looked for different
opinions about decrees, in the plural number, but I find the relation extends
no farther then to one decree, and that of Reprobation. So at the first
entrance reasons are promised, even in this writing, to be exhibited of chang
of opinion in certain controversies in the plural number, when in the issue,
all comes but to one controversy, and that about Reprobation. Yet the Scripture
speaks fully of Election, sparingly of Reprobation in most places, leaving us
to judge thereof, by consequence from the doctrine of Election Yet some
passages we have (I confess) that give light and evidence to both alike. For
like as it is said Acts 2. last. that God added daily to the Church such as
should be saved. so 2 Cor. 4. 3. it is said, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid
to them that are lost, and as it is signified Math. 24 24. that It Is impossible
seducers should prevail over the elect. so 2 These. 2. both as much is
signified ver. 13. and also expressed ver. 10. 11. that they shall prevail
among them that perish: and the 1 Cor. 1. 18. we are given to understand
jointly, that the preaching of the Cross is to them that perish foolishness:
but unto us which are saved it is the power of God. and Romans 9. 18. that as God
has mercy on whom he will, so also he hardneth whom he will. And like as Acts
13. 48. we read that, as many believed as were ordained to eternal life; which
phrase of ordaining to eternal life, I conceive (under correction) to be all
one with the phrase of Writing our names in Heaven. Luke 10. 20. and writing us
in heaven. Hebr. 12. 23. and this phrase I take to be all one with the writing
of us in the Book of life. So on the other side we read, that Whose names were
not written in the Book of Life from the foundation of the World should wonder
when they beheld the Be^st, and not so only but Revel. 17. 8. Revel. 13. 8.
worship him also. But give we every vessel leave to vent that liquor whereof
it is full.

I come to the consideration of the different opinions here proposed,
concerning the decree of Reprobation; and herein, I will endeavor to open a
clear way to the right understanding of the truth, that your judgment may have
the more free course in discerning it, and withal, to represent unto you, the
unreasonable carriage of our Adversaries in the setting down of our Tenent,
whereby you may guess, what you are to expect from them prosecuting against
it. And herein I will insist upon these particulars. The first shall be the
Things Decreed. The second the Cause of this decree. The third, the Persons on
whom this Decree does pass. The fourth shall be that claw of Unavoydable Sin,
and Damnation.

1. The Things Decreed are here said to be, The casting off from grace and
glory, and the shutting of men up under Damnation.

Now I pray observe here in the first place, that, by casting off from grace
and glory, we mean no other thing, then the not giving of grace and glory; and
by grace, we mean the grace of Faith and Repentance, the grace of Regeneration.
For like as in Election God purposes (we say) to give this grace unto some,
which is the same with showing mercy on them. Romans 9. 18. as we suppose; so on
the other side, God purposes to deny this grace unto others, which in
Scripture phrase is to harden them, that being made opposite to Gods showing
mercy. Romans 9. 18. And for the farther clearing of the terms we say, that God
by giving Faith and Repentance, does cure that infidelity and impenitency,
which is natural unto all, as being borne in sin: and by not giving this grace
of Faith and Repentance unto others, God leaves their natural infidelity and
impenitency uncured. And if this Author means ought else by shutting up under
sin, then the not curing of their natural infidelity and impenitency, he does
us wrong, and what he means thereby I know not. As for shutting up under
damnation, that is not our phrase, but we love to speak in plain terms, and
say, that God does purpose to inflict damnation on them whom he Reprobates.

Thus much for the clearing of the terms, as touching the things Decreed.

Secondly, observe I pray, which is of principal consideration, that here we
have no cause at all specified, why he refuses to give them grace; cunningly
leaving it to an improvident Reader to conceive, that the cause of the decree,
which is here specified, to be the mere pleasure of Gods will, is indifferently
applyable to the not giving of grace and glory, and to the shutting up under
damnation as the cause thereof, which is a notorious imposture, yet I do not
think this Author guilty of it, but others rather, who abuse their wits by
cunning courses, to deceive the hearts of the simple. Amongst the Fallacies
observed by Aristotle, there is one called Fallacia plurium interrogationum, as
when many things are put together, and an answer is required to be made, either
affirmatively or negatively to them all, as if they were but one; when indeed
the answer cannot be made aright, without distinction of the things demanded,
the one whereof perhaps requires an answer affirmative, the other negative. As
for example, to instance as touching one of the Controversies here declined: We
are often demanded, whether every one that hears the Gospel, be not bound to
believe that Christ died for him? Now I say this phrase Christ died for me
includes many things, as the benefits which arise unto me by the death of
Christ, may be conceived to be many. But let these benefits be distinguished,
and we shall readily answer to the question made, and that perhaps differently,
as namely, affirmatively to some, negatively to others; as thus. Do you speak
of Christ's dying for me, that is, for the pardon of my sins, and for the
salvation of my soul: I answer affirmatively and say, I am bound to believe
that Christ died for the procuring of these benefits unto me in such manner, as
God has ordained, to wit, not absolutely but conditionally, to wit, in case I
do believe and repent. For God has not otherwise ordained, that I should reap
the benefit of pardon and salvation, by virtue of Christ's Death and Passion,
unless I believe in him and repent. But if question be made, whether I am
bound to believe that Christ died for me, to procure faith and repentance unto
me; I do not say, that I am bound, or that every one who hears the Gospel, is
bound to believe this.

Nay the Remonstrants now a days, deny in express terms, that Christ
merited Censura Censurae.
this for any at all. I am not of their opinion in this; but I see clearly a
reason manifesting, that Christ merited not this for all, no not for all and
every one, that hears the Gospel. For if he had, then either he has merited it
for them absolutely or conditionally. Not absolutely, for then all and every
one of them should believe de facto, which is untrue; for the Apostle says,
Fides non est Omnium: Nor conditionally, for 2 These. 3.
what condition I pray can be devised, upon the performance whereof, God for
Christ's sake should give us faith, and repentance? In like sort, if I am
demanded whether God did decree, of the mere pleasure of his will, to refuse to
give grace and glory unto some, and to inflict upon them damnation. To this I
cannot answer at once, there being a Fallacy in the demand. But distinguish
them, I answer and say, that, as touching the point of denying grace, God does
that of his mere pleasure; but as touching the denial of glory, and the
inflicting of damnation, he does not decree to do these of mere pleasure, but
rather merely for sin, to wit, for their infidelity and impenitency, and all
the bitter fruits that shall proceed from them. So that Reprobation according
to our Tenent rightly stated, is the decree of God partly to deny unto some,
and that of his mere pleasure, the grace of Faith and Repentance, for the
curing of that infidelity and hardness of heart, which is natural unto all, and
partly to deprive them of glory, and to inflict damnation upon them, not of his
mere pleasure, but merely for their final continuance in sin, to wit, in
infidelity and impenitency, and all the fruits that proceed therehence.

2. Now as for the cause of this decree, as likewise of all the decrees of God,
when any of our Divines say, that it is the mere pleasure of God, as in some
places it is expressed of some decrees, let them be understood aright; not as
if they distinguished between the decree of God, and the good pleasure of his
will; for we know full well, that the decree of God is the good pleasure of his
Will, what decree soever it be: but hereby we only exclude, all causes from
without, moving God to make any such decree; like as when it is said, Deuteron.
7. 7. The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were
more in number then any people, but because the Lord loved you, as much as to
say, The Lord loved you, because he loved you. Where we cannot soberly devise
any distinction between love and love, as between the cause and the effect;
only hereby is excluded all cause from without. Now we are ready with open face
to profess, that of the Will and decree of God, there neither is, nor can be
any cause from without: all things from without being temporal, and the Will
of God being eternal, and the Will of God quoad actum Volentis, being the very
Essence of God; For God is a pure Act and that indivisibly One, whereby he is
said to Be whatsoever he is, as we do conceive variety of perfections in
God, yet all these are but one indivisible Act in God; and by this one
indivisible Act, he both knows all that he knows, and wills and decrees
all that he wills and decrees. Man when he wills any thing, as likewise an
Angel when he wills ought, they produce an act of willing passing upon this
or that object: but it is not so with God, in whom there is no accident. And
therefore Aquinas was bold to profess, that never any man was so mad, as to
Aquin. 1. q. 23. art. 5. Nullus fuit ita insanae mentis ut diceret merita esse
causam Divinae Praedestinationis ex part actus Praedestinantis.
profess that merits were the cause of Predestination, as touching the act of
God predestinating: and why so? why surely upon this ground, because
predestination is the will of God: and like as nothing can be the cause of the
will of God, as touching the act of willing, so nothing can be the cause of
divine predestination, as touching the act of God predestinating. His words are
these in the same place; Sic inquirenda est ratio praedestinationis, sicut
inquiritur ratio divinae voluntatis. dictum est autem supra, quod non est
assignare causam divinae voluntatis ex part actus volendi. But because like as
the love of God is sometime taken for the good thing which God bestows, like
as Jansenius interprets that place John. 14. 21. He that loves me shall be
beloved of my Father, to wit, of the effect of the Fathers love; and we
commonly say, that Passions are attributed unto God not quoad Affectum, but
quoad Effectum: in like sort the Will of God is taken for the thing willed, as
1 These. 4. 3. This is the will of God, even your sanctification, that is, this
is willed by him. Therefore Aquinas distinguishes a double consideration in
the will of God, one quoad actum volentis, and so it has no cause from
without; another quoad res volitas, and so it may have a cause. So likewise in
predestination as considering it either quoad actum Praedestinantis, and so it
has no cause, or quoad effectum Praedestinationis, and so it may have a cause,
as there he professes, both touching the will of God in general, and touching
Predestination in special. Of the will of God in general, thus; Non est
assignare causam voluntatis divinae ex part actus volendi, sed potest
assignari ratio ex part volitorum, in quantum scilicet Deus vult esse aliquid
propter aliud. And of predestination in special, thus; Sed hoc sub quaestione
vertitur, utrum ex part effectus praedestinatio habeat aliquam causam; and hoc
est quaerere utrum Deus praeordinaverit se daturum effectum praedestinationis
alicui propter aliqua merita. Now thus we acknowledge of predestination, both
in the way of a meritorious cause on Christ's part, and in the way of a
disposing cause on our part. For God we say, has predestined to bestow upon
us, both grace and glory for Christ's sake; where Christ is made a meritorious
cause of grace and glory, but not of the act of predestination. And farther we
say, that God has predestined to bestow glory upon us, as a reward of grace,
as a reward of faith, repentance, and good works: and to this purpose it is
said that God by his grace, does make us meet partakers of the inheritance of
the Saints in light, Coloss. 1. 12. But as for the bestowing of grace on any,
we say there is no cause thereof on man's part, For he has mercy on whom he
will. Romans 9. 18. and he has called us with an holy calling not according to
our works, but according to his own purpose and grace. 2 Timoth. 1. 9.

Now let us apply this to reprobation, which is the will of God, as well as
predestination, and if there can be no cause of predestination quoad actum
Praedestinantis, because there can be no cause of the will of God quoad actum
volentis; Who sees not, that by the same reason, there can be no cause of
reprobation quoad actum reprobantis? And if it be a mad thing to maintain that
merits are the cause of predestination quoad actum praedestinantis; it must be
as mad a thing to maintain, that any merits of the creature, can be the cause
of reprobation quoad actum reprobantis. And this doctrine Aquinas applies
expressly to Reprobation it self, upon the 9. Romans Lect. 2da, at the end of
these words Praescientia peccatorum potest esse aliqua ratio reprobationis: but
how? ex part actus reprobantis? nothing less, but rather ex part effectus;
and what effect? not the denying of grace, but only as touching the inflicting
of punishment: thus, Praescientia peccatorum potest esse aliqua ratio
reprobationis, ex part paenae quae praeparatur reprobatis, in quantum scilicet
Deus proponit se puniturum malos propter peccata quae a seipsis habent non a
Deo.

And farther we prove this, both by clear evidence of Scripture, and clear
evidence of reason, and thirdly by as clear a representation of their
infatuation that oppose this doctrine, and particularly of the Author of this
discourse.

First by clear evidence of Scripture. Romans 9. 11. Where the Apostle proves,
that Election stands not of good works, by an argument drawn from the
circumstance of the time, when that Oracle, The elder shall serve the younger,
was delivered; together with the present condition of Jacob and Esau,
answerable to that time; thus, Before the children were borne, or had done good
or evil, it was said to Rebecca, The Elder shall serve the Younger, Therefore
the purpose of God according to Election stands not of good works. Now look by
what strength of reason the Apostle concludes this of Election, by the same
strength of argumentation may I conclude of reprobation, in proportion, thus,
Before the Children were borne, or had done Good or Evil, it was said to
Rebecca The Elder shall serve the Younger; therefore the purpose of God
according to reprobation, stands not of evil works: that is, like as good
works are not the cause of Election, so evil works are not the cause of
Reprobation, to wit, quoad actum reprobantis, as touching the very act and
eternal decree of God it self.

Secondly, observe, I pray, whether my reason be not as clear; If God upon the
foresight of sin, does ordain a man unto damnation; (thus I am content to
propose it in the most rigorous manner) then this is done either by necessity
of nature, or by the constitution of God: Not by necessity of nature, as it is
confessed; and the cause is evident, for undoubtedly he could annihilate them,
and so he can the holiest creature that lives, as all sides confess. Therefore
it must be by the constitution of God: but neither can this hold. For if so,
then God did constitute, that is ordain, that upon the foresight of sin, he
would ordain men unto damnation. Where observe that the act of divine
ordination, is made the object of divine ordination: as much as to say, he did
ordain to ordain, or he did decree to decree: Whereas the objects of Gods
decrees are always things temporal; as for example, We say well, God did
decree to create the world, to make man out of the earth, to send Christ into
the World, to preserve us, to redeem us, sanctify us, save us. But Gods
ordination or decree is an act eternal, and cannot be the object of his decree
or ordination. I challenge all the Powers of darkness to answer this, and to
vindicate the Tenent, which I impugn, from that absurdity, which I charge upon
it, if they can.

O but some will say, it is very harsh to say, that God of his mere pleasure
does ordain men unto damnation.

I am content to do my endeavor, to remove this scandal out of the way of
honest hearts, yea and out of the way of others also.

First therefore consider, is it fit to resist the evidence of divine truth,
because it is harsh to men's affections?

Secondly, Wherein consists this harshnesse? Is it in this, that nothing is the
cause of Gods decree? and will nothing temper the harshnes of it, unles a thing
temporal as sin, be made the cause of Gods will, which is eternal and even
God himself? But let us deal plainly, and tell me in truth, whether the
harshnes does not consist in this, That the mere pleasure of Gods will, seems
to be made the cause, not of Gods decree only, but of damnation also; as if God
did damn men, not for sin, but of his mere pleasure. And this I confess is
wondrous harsh, and yet no more harsh then it is untrue, though in this juggling
world, things are so carried by some, who will both shuffle, and cut, and
deal themselves, as if we made God of mere pleasure to damn men, and not for
sin, which is a thing utterly impossible: damnation being such a notion, as
has essential reference unto sin. But if God damn no man but for sin, and
decreed to damn no man but for sin, what if the mere pleasure of God be the
cause of this decree; what harshnes I say is this? As for example, Zimri or
Cosby perished in their incestuous act, and gave up both lust and ghost
together, so going as it were quick to Hell, never fearing the judgments of
God, until they felt them. If we say, God decreed they should be cut off in
this sin of theirs, and be damned for it, What hatshnes I pray in this, though
God made this decree of mere pleasure? For is it not manifest he did? For could
he not if it had pleased him, have caused them to outlive this sin of theirs,
and given them space for repentance, and not space only, but grace also for
repentance, seeing as Austin says, Quantamlibet praebuerit Contr. Julian.
Pelag. lib. 5. cap. 4.
Patientiam, nisi Deus dederit, quis aget Paenitentiam.

Now I pray, what is become of the harshnes of this our Tenent as is pretended?
And the truth is, the harshnes lies not here, though our Adversaries would
feign draw it hither, but rather on the other part of reprobation, as it
denotes Gods purpose for the denying of grace, to wit, the grace of
Regeneration, the grace of faith and repentance: but on this part, they are not
very forward to cry out upon our Tenent, as savouring of harshnes, but
themselves rather driven to such straites, as either to deny faith and
repentaince to be the gift of God (wherein the Remonstrants now a days, are
come so far as clearly to profess, that Christ merited not faith and
Regeneration for any; whence it follows, that if God does give faith and
repentance unto any, yet it is not for Christ's sake that he gives it,) Or being
demanded how it comes to pass, that God gives it not to all, if his mere
pleasure be not the cause of this difference, as namely in showing mercy unto
some, when he hardens others, they are put upon this shift to say, that if they
would believe, God would give them faith, if they would repent God would give
them repentance* and one that I have had to deal with, on this very argument,
spares not to profess that God does work in man (...) Velle, credere, and
resipiscere, mode Velit.

One thing I had almost pretermitted, and that was, to represent the infatuate
condition of this declaration, to wit, as touching the Authors Tenet in
opposition to ours, as in saying, that Gods decree to cast off men for ever, is
grounded upon the foresight of their continuance in sin and unbelief; For this
continuance must be understood of final continuance therein, least otherwise
the contradiction to our Tenent be not duly expressed. Now the foresight
hereof is made to precede Gods casting men off for ever: but from what? surely
from grace and glory, in contradiction to our Tenent as here it is shaped; and
consequently in election, the foresight of final perseverance in faith and
repentance, must be shaped to precede Gods giving grace, to wit, in another
world, as if the other world were appointed for the giving of grace to some,
and denying it another; and that the giving of the grace of faith and
repentance, and denying it unto others, was after the one has persevered in
faith and repentance, and the other in infidelity and impenitency unto the end
in this World. For this is it we mean by grace, when we say, God in Election
destinates it to one, and in Reprobation decrees to deny it unto the other; and
in contradicting us it is fit they should use our terms in our meaning, unles
they express the contrary, and give a reason of it.

3. As for the Persons on whom this decree passes, and the aggravation there
mentioned, namely of shutting up the greater part of men, even of those that
are called, under sin and damnation, This is confessed on all hands, That the
greatest part of men are reprobated, even of those that are called; and our
Savior has expressly given us to understand, That many are called but few are
chosen. And it is without question, that if it be lawful for God to deal thus
with one, it is as lawful to deal so with the greatest part, yea with all.
And experience justifies that the greatest part of them that are called do
not perform true faith and repentance: and if they did and dye therein, then
the greatest part of them that are called, should be chosen. Whereby it is
manifest, that God does not give Faith and Repentance unto the greatest part of
them that are called; and consequently, it is nothing strange, that he shuts up
the greatest part of them that are called under Damnation. So that in true
account there is no weight at all of aggravation in this. Like as you have read
in News from Parnassus, that when the French and the Spaniard weighed their
powers in the balance, and the French being found to weigh 25 Millions, and
the Spaniard but 20: He thinking to help the matter, and to make himself as
weighty as the French, clapped into the scale the Kingdom of Naples and the
Dukedom of Millan; but beyond his expectation, the scale proved never a whit
the more weighty then before, but lighter rather.

4. As for the last claw, to help the matter with a couple of Epethetes of
invincible sin and unavoidable damnation; one of these might have sufficed to
be expressed, seeing undoubtedly Damnation is no otherwise avoidable by man,
then by avoiding sin the cause thereof. For it is undeniable that man dying in
sin, his damnation is unavoydable by the whole power of nature.

But as for the avoydablenes of sin, the Author of this Discourse acknowledges
it no otherwise then by grace; and we willingly profess, that all sin is
avoydable by grace. But by the way it is implied, that such a grace is afforded
unto all reprobates, whereby they may avoid that infidelity and impenitency for
which they are damned. But this we deny. For if this were true then all
Reprobates were enabled to believe, to repent, to please God, to discern the
things of God, to be subject to the Law of God; but to say this, is directly to
contradict the Word of God, which professes of some, that They could not
believe Ioh. 12. 39. of others that They cannot repent, Romans 2. 5. Of all
natural men, that They cannot discern the things of God, as which seem
foolishness unto them, 1 Cor. 2. 14. of them that are in the flesh, that They
cannot please God, Romans 8. 8. of (...) the affection of the flesh, that it is
enmity against God, and it is not subject to the Law of God, nor can be, Romans
8. 7. And of the Israelites in the Wilderness for forty years together, God
had not given them eyes to see, nor ears to hear, nor an heart to perceive,
Deutron. 29. 4.

INTRODUCTION. SECT. II.
THE first side is divided; for

1. Some of them present man to God, in the decree of Reprobation, considered
and looked upon out of, or above the Fall, and make the Will of God, without
any consideration of sin in man Original or Actual, to be the cause of his
eternal Rejection, that so he might show his absolute and unlimited power and
dominion over him, in appointing to heaven or hell, whom he pleased: and this
way go Calvin, Beza, Zanchius, Piscator, Gomarus.

That way seems to charge God very deeply, and to make him the prime and
principal cause of men's everlasting ruin, and the author also, not only of
the first sin that entered into the world, but of all other sins likewise, that
are successively committed therein, as means to bring men by a course and
color of justice, to those lamentable ends to which he had from eternity
appointed them: and so by good consequence, it makes the pure and holy God, to
be unholy, and ascribes unto him, far greater cruelty, then can be found in
the most bloody and barbarous Tyrant in the World. Suetonius in the life of
Tiberius (one of the veryest Butchers of all the Roman Sueton. Edit. Lugd.
1532. page 171.
Emperors) reports of him, that having a mind to put the two sons of
Germanicus (Diusus and Nero) to death, Varia fraud induxit ut concitarentur ad
convitia, and concitati perderentur; He used cunning contrivances to draw them
to reproach him, that so he might cover his cruelty in their death, under a
pretext of justice. And a little after he says of the same Emperor, that
(because it was not lawful among the Romans to strangle Virgins) he caused
certain little maids to be deflowred by the Hangman, Ibid. p. 175.
that so they might afterward be strangled. This cruelty of Tiberius, exceeded
the bounds of humanity, and yet it comes as short of that, which this way lays
to the charge of God, as a temporal death comes short of an eternal, and the
power of man in drawing men to offend, comes short of that irresistible power,
which the Almighty is able to use, in the producing of sin.

Besides, it takes from men all conscience of sin, and makes sin to be no sin.
We use to say, Necessitas non habet legem, Necessity has no law. Actions in
themselves evil, if an absolute necessity bear sway in them, are
transgressions of no law, and consequently are no sin (for sin is a
transgression of the law) and men when they do them, they have no reason to be
forry for them. The Tragoedian could see this, where he says, Fati ista culpa
est, Nemo fit fato nocens, when one evil action is done, the doer is not in
fault, but the decree that necessitates him to do it.

It takes away likewise from good and evil actions, that defect which they
naturally carry with them of Rewards and Punishments, as Saint Hierome tells
us, Liberi arbitrii nos condidit Deus, nec ad L. 2. contra Iovin.
virtutes nec ad vitia necessitate tranimur, alioqui ubi necessit as est nec
damnatio nec corona est. Where necessity domineers, there is no place for
retribution; and therefore none are drawn by the adamantine chains of necessity
to virtues or vices, but left free to the choice of their own wills. When Zeno
his servant was punished by him for a fault that he had done, he told his
Master out of his own grounds that he was unjustly beaten, because he was Fato
coactus peccare, constrained so to do by his undeclinable destiny; and
certainly, if malefactors could not choose but play their rude prankes, they
could not be justly punished for them. For all just punishments suppose a
possibility of avoiding those offenses, of which they are the punishments.

TWISSE. Consideration.
THis Authors pretense being only to oppose that Tenent, which maintains that
the decree of denying grace and glory, and of inflicting damnation does not
presuppose the foresight of final perseverance in sin, you may well marvel to
what purpose this comes in about the different condition of man, considered by
God either as before the Fall, or after the Fall in Adam, it being a question
of another nature and merely Logical, to wit, about the ordering of Gods
decrees of Creation, Permission of the fall of Adam, giving or denying Grace,
Salvation or Damnation. The resolution whereof, depends upon the right
distinction of these decrees, in reference to the end, and to the means tending
to that end. For this being Resolved according to the rules of Divinity, the
order between them, must consequently be determined, according to the rules
generally received in the Schools, namely thus, The intention of the end is
first, then the intention of the means: so that if Salvation be the end, and
Creation and Permission of Adams Fall and Raising therehence by Faith and
Repentance to be the means, it must be confessed, that the decree of Salvation
must be first, then the decree of Creation, permission of sin, and of raising
out of sin. So if the damnation of any be the end that God intends, and
creation and permission of sin, and of final perseverance therein be the
means; it must be acknowledged, that the decree of damnation, was before the
decree of creation, etc. But if salvation and damnation be no ends intended by
God, but means rather, as well as creation, and permission of all to sin in
Adam, together with the raising of some therehence, and leaving some therein,
tending to some farther end, namely, the Manifestation of Gods glory in a
certain kind, as the Scripture together with manifest reason does justify. For
God being the supreme efficient, must necessarily be the last end. And even
there where the word of God does testify, that God created the wicked against
the day of evil, it does therewithal give to understand, that what is
signified by, To the day of evil, does not denote the end of Gods actions
(that before being expressed to be God himself, God made all things for
himself, not for acquiring ought unto himself, for he is so perfect, that
nothing can be added unto him) but for the manifesting of his own most glorious
nature: so that if God be pleased to manifest his glorious beneficence on man
in the highest degree, and that in the way of mercy mixed with justice; this end
requires and bespeaks both creation (no glory at all being manifestable without
this) and permission of sin (otherwise it could not be manifested in the way of
mercy) and satisfaction for sin (otherwise this mercy could not be mixed with
justice exactly) and faith and repentance (otherwise the good which God intends
could not be bestowed by way of reward) and last of all Salvation, under which
we comprehend, the highest and most blessed condition that the nature of man,
continuing a mere man, is capable of. And herehence we conclude, that in case
the end is such as has been specified, and all these actions following,
congruous means tending to that end, therefore the decree of manifesting Gods
glory, as above specified, is first with God, and secondly the decree of the
means; which means although they are many materially, yet they come all under
one formal notion of means tending to a certain end, which according to the
several parts thereof bespeaks them all; and consequently they are all to be
considered, as making up the object of one formal decree, called the decree of
the means: and the intention of none of them is before another, but all
intended at once, as means tending to that end which is first intended. In like
manner if God shall be pleased to intend the manifestation of his glory in Man
or Angel, in the way of justice vindicative, the means necessarily required
hereunto are, Creation, Permission of sin, and Damnation unto punishment, and
all three makes up the object of one formal decree, which is to be called the
decree of the means. So that like as God does not intend the creatures
creation, before he intends his damnation, in the same respect he cannot be
said to intend his damnation, before he intends his creation, or the permission
of his sin.

And this rightly considered, sets an end unto all quarrel about the different
consideration of Man in election and reprobation, which yet is about a School
point only, touching the right stateing of the end and the means, and the right
ordering of Gods decrees concerning them. And does it not set an end also, to
all aspersions of cruelty cast upon the holy providence of God, from the guilt
of which kind of blasphemies, nothing can free them; but confidence in their
own way, as if it were the way of truth, and that by convincing evidence of
holy Scripture? Whereas it appears how little direction they take from the Word
of God throughout, for the shaping of their Tenent in this. Yet neither is any
such confidence, able to free them from the guilt of such blasphemies which
they utter: well it may free them from the conscience of it, yet if it do,
that is more than I know. And only to these two ends does this aliene discourse
of our different opinions thereabouts tend, as I conceive; namely, to show the
difference of our Divines, and to give vent to those aspersions of blasphemy on
the first way, as also to make way for a third in part, which comes to be
considered in the next Section, in the manner how they fall upon the relation
of the second way.

Yet Arminius in his Conference with Junius, might have informed him of three
opinions concerning the object of Predestination, dividing the fruit of these
into two. The condition of man before the Fall, being considerable two ways,
either as before the Fall, but after Creation, which they call the Mass
created, but not yet corrupted; or as not before the Fall only, but before the
creation also, which we commonly call the Mass not yet created, or Mankind not
yet created. As touching the most harsh way of these three, upon examination of
Arminius his twenty arguments against it, I find nothing worth the speaking of,
but mere suggestion of flesh and blood, which yet being duly pondered, do
discover most shameful nakedness.

His arguments against the making of Mankind not yet created, the object of
predestination, I have proposed and answered in my Vindiciae gratiae Dei, lib.
1. De Praedestin. digress. 5. if this Author has any mind to be doing with
them, I shall be ready to consider what he says, as God shall give opportunity.

And in Junius you shall find, how he labors to reconcile them, but very
obscurely. Piscator also sets hand to the same work, and carries himself
therein (as his manner is) very clearly, by distinguishing three acts in
Predestination. The first whereof he will have to presuppose Mankind not
created; for it is the decree of creating man to different ends. The second, he
will have to presuppose Mankind created, but not corrupted: for it is the
decree of permitting Adam to fall, and all Mankind in him. The third and last
he will have to presuppose Mankind both created and corrupted; for it is the
decree of raising some out of sin, wherein they are conceived and borne, and
leaving some therein. As for the Angels it is without question, that election
and reprobation divine had course concerning them, as well as concerning
mankind, and as certain it is, that no corrupt Mass could be the object of
divine Predestination in their election and reprobation.

As for Arminius his ordering of Gods decrees in opposition to these ways
taken by our Divines, that he has communicated unto us, in the Declaration of
his opinion before the States, page 47. where leaving out the decree of creating
mankind in Adam, and the decree of permitting all mankind to fall in Adam, he
takes into consideration only, the divine decrees of saving sinful man.

1. The first whereof is, Whereby he decreed to make his Son Christ a
Mediator, Redeemer, Savior, Priest and King, by his death to abolish sin, by
his obedience to obtain Salvation (formerly lost) and by his power to
communicate it. And this decree he says is absolute.

2. The second is, Whereby he decreed to receive into grace such as believe and
repent, and those persevering unto the end, to save in Christ, for and by
Christ: but such as believe and repent not, to leave under sin and wrath, and
to damn as aliene from Christ. Where observe, 1. This decree of saving such as
believe and repent, he calls a decree absolute, yet this decree passes upon
no particular persons: such a decree is reserved for the last place. 2. God
(with him) receives none into grace and favor, unles they believe and repent:
Whereby it is manifest, that with him faith and repentance are no fruits of
Gods grace and favor: for they must be performed before they are received into
Gods grace and favor.

3. The third is, Where by he decreed sufficiently and efficaciously to
administer the means which are necessary to faith and repentance. This decree
whether he conceives it to be absolute or no, he does not specify; nor whether
he decreed to administer them unto all, nor by whom, whether by men only, or by
men or Angels, nor whether by means he understands the Gospel only, and we
have cause to doubt thereof. And lastly, which is most obscure, he does not
explicate what he means, by sufficient and efficacious administration. Only he
adds, that in this administration, he carries himself according, 1. To his
Wisdom, which shows what becomes his mercy andseverity, and 2ly to his
Justice, whereby he is ready to follow the prescript of his Wisdom.

4. The fourth and last is, Whereby he decreed to save and damn certain
particular persons. Now whereas our Divines generally, what way soever they
took, had a care out of their Logic and Philosophy which they had by light of
nature, to order the decrees divine, according to the common Rules of Art
concerning intentions, as they are found to be either of some end, or of some
means tending to an end, this seems to have been no part of Arminius his care.
This order of his, I have ransaked in my Vindiciae. lib. 3. digress. 2. And if
this Author think good, he may answer thereunto, and do his best to qualify
the absurdities wherewith I charge that order of his.

But as touching the embracers of this first way, whose names he expresses, he
had need to prove it. For diverse think otherwise of Calvin, and they represent
their reasons for it, out of his own words such as these, De aeterna Dei
Praedestinatione. page 970. speaking of Pighius. Augustinum ridet (says he)
ejusque similes hoc est pios emnes, qui deum imaginantur postquam universalem
Generis humani Ruinam in persona Adae praesciverit, alios ad vitam, alios ad
interitum destinasse, and page 710. Cum de praedestinatione sermo habetur, inde
exordiendum esse constanter semper docui atque hodie doceo, jure in more
relinqui omnes reprobos, qui in Adam mortui sunt atque damnati.

As for Beza, I know full well he maintained, that man not created is the
object of Predestination, but can this Author represent unto us, any place out
of Beza, wherein he should affirm, that God does decree to damn any man but
for sin; or that damnation is the end that God intends in the decree of
Predestination to death? In his Questions and Answers he professes the
contrary. page 111. Postremo non dixi exitium istorum (he speaks of Reprobates)
esse finem deo decernenti propositum, sed gloriam ipsius. Neque etiam
simpliciter dixi istos esse exitio destinatos, sed justo exitio destinatos
dixi. And in his Book De aeterna Dei Praedestinatione contra Sebastian.
Castle: ad argument. Castle. 2. page 346. Quamobrem etiam illud quoque
probavimus, nos ita loqui non solere, and quanquam a Deo simpliciter conditum
dicamus ad perditionem, sed idcirco ut ipsius justa condemnatione Dominus
justitiam suam patefaciat.

As for Zanchy; Peter Baro, that caused such perturbation in Cambridge about
this very argument, he denies this to have been the opinion of Zanchy, In summa
trium de Praedestinatione sententiarum; his words are these, Altera sententia
est Augustini, posterior etiam Sohnii Heydelbergensis Theologiae Professoris,
and aliorum quorundam Protestantium, ut Zanchii, atque etiam Bellarmini, qui
omnes priorem illam improbant, in hoc inter se consentientes, ut sit
praedestinatio ab Adami tantum lapsu accipienda.

And as touching Piscator, he handles the question about the object of
Predestination in a small Treatise, annexed to an answer of his to Hemingius,
De Universali Gratia; and inquires whether the object thereof be Humanum genus
nondum conditum, or conditum, but nondum corruptum, or both conditum and
corruptum; and his resolution is, that in the decree of Predestination, there
is place for all these considerations, according to three several acts
comprised therein, which I have formerly mentioned, and so draws into one all
three opinious.

As touching Gomarus in the last place, I have seen little or nothing of his;
but when Lubbertus in his Book Ad 99 Errores Conradi Vorstii page 807. had
professed, Massam consideratam esse a Deo, non ut integram, sed ut corruptam;
and was charged by Vostius as delivering that which was contrary to the
doctrine of Calvin, Beza, and Gomarus, he replies that herein he does not
contradict them, but says he, Illorum dict a quae quibusdam asperiuscula
videntur, lenio, and in commodissimum sensum interpretor.

But be it so, that all of them made Humanum genus, not corruptum, no nor
integrum, but nondum conditum the object of reprobation. I am of their mind
that do so; and was not Dr Whitaker also, whom very wisely this Author
conceales? This renowned Professor in the University of Cambridge, in a
Public exercise, his Concio ad Clerum, professes, what Paul speaks De luto
and sigulo non posse melius exponi quam de Massa incorrupta: and that Bucer
understands it thus, Bucerus per Massam intelligit primam humani ganeris
originem ex qua homo conditus a Deo and fabricatus est. And he disputes at
large, that there is no cause of reprobation, and that neither sin actual, nor
sin original is the cause thereof, and professes this to be the Opinion of
the Church of England. And though now a days we be upbraided, as if we had
learned it of Papists and School Divines, this great light of Cambridge,
spares not to make honorable mention of Schoolemens sollid discourse on this
point, saying, Hanc sententiam Scholastici si ullam egregie solideque
pertractarum praeserum qui insigniores sanioresque habiti sunt. Lombardus ait,
ut praedestinationis nulla merita sunt, ita nec reprobationis. Now the doctrine
which he says the Schoolmen handle so solidly as none more, is the very
doctrine which this Author seems here to impugn, as when he says, some make
the will of God without any consideration of sin in men, original, or actual,
to be the cause of their eternal Rejection; for Dr Whitaker expresses it
thus, His igitur isto modo explicatis, sequitur tertiam opinionem solummodo and
necessario veram esse, aeque reprobationis ac praedestinationis causam esse dei
voluntatem, quandoquidem providentiae divinae munus est omnia ad fines istos
certa ratione certisque mediis ordinare. Only as touching the end here
mentioned, That so he might show his absolute and unlimited power and dominion
over them, in appointing to heaven or hell whom he pleases, that I find not in
Dr Whitaker. He says plainly that God predestined unto death, whom he would,
and because he would: Deus igitur ad mortem praedestinavit quos voluit, and
quia voluit: (which phrase I willingly confess I like not so well) but that
the end thereof is to manifest his absolute and unlimited dominion and power,
he says not; and Beza in the places before mentioned, referres it to the
manifestation of Gods justice, as the end thereof. And like as he says,
certissimum est damnationem nunquam nisi propter Peccatum infligi; so I should
think it nothing less certain, that God does not ordain any man to be damned,
but for sin, especially cosidering that damnation in the notion thereof, has
an essential reference to sin.

Now since I have found such a Champion as Dr Whitaker for the maintenance of
this Tenent, have I cause to fear the sharp censures of any professors in the
Country? Were he alive, I presume he would be nothing skarred with the
imputation of making God, the Prime and Principal cause of men's everlasting
ruin; he would I think require a little more learning in the Criminator, then
to express himself so crudely. For without all question, God is the prime and
principal cause, nay the sole cause of man's everlasting ruin in genere causae
efficient is, though this excludes not a meritorious cause of his own damnation
on the creatures part, as Dr Whitaker professes in the words formerly
alleging, acknowledged, Damnationem infligi propter Peccatum.

And farther I am apt to conceive, and have undertaken to justify, and that to
the view of the World, that albeit mankind not created, be the only object of
predestination and reprobation, yet no man's reprobation is made by God, citra
considerationem Peccati, in as much as I hold that the decrees of creation,
permission of sin, and of final perseverance therein, and lastly of damnation
for sin, are not decrees subordinate, but coordinate and simultaneous, as being
decrees concerning means tending to the same end, which is the manifestation of
Gods glory, in the way of vindicative justice.

And whereas it is farther urged, that hereby God is made the author of the
first sin and of all sins; As I find by Dr Whitakers discourse in his Cygnaea
Concio, that were he alive he would answer hereunto, That this Author takes his
aim much amiss, considering, that the effect of Reprobation is not sin, but
the permission of sin, and Gods means to the end intended by him, to wit, the
manifestation of his glory in the way of vindicative justice, is not sin, but
the Permission of sin; according to that of Aquinas, alleged by the foresaid
Doctor thus, Sicut Praedestinatio includit voluntatem conferendi gratiam and
gloriam, ita Reprobatio includit voluntatem permittendi cadere in culpam and
inferendi damnationis poenam pro culpa. And as I discern no unholinesse in Gods
permitting of sin, so neither do I discern any cruelty therein. But Dr
Whitaker well perceived that this course of Gods counsels, would seem
injurious; and therefore after he had proposed his last argument drawn from
that of the Apostle, Romans 11. o altitudo! thus, Vltimo illa Apostoli
exclamatio, o altitudo, hanc sententiam confirmat. Neque enim tantae
altitudinis est ut penetrari nequeat, Deum odisse homines propter peccatum,
etiam antequam nati sunt; immo rationi convenientissimum est ut Deus far
nequeat, quod est naturae suae contrarium. But mark wherein the depth the
Apostle speaks of, consists in his judgment; Ib i demum infinitum (...) and
Abyssus est divinae discretionis, quando sine peccati ratione quidam
reprobantur and alii qui nihilo erant amore digniores ad vitam and faelicitatem
praedestinantur, ut omnis ratio discretionis ad solam dei voluntatem referatur.
And because he knew full well that this mysterious depth of Gods counsel,
would seem very harsh to carnal affections, as savouring of cruel and
injurious proceedings, therefore he takes express notice of it, and that in
Austins language, saying, Iniquum videtur (Augustinus ait) ut sine ullis
bonorum malorumque operum meritis unum Deus diligat, odiatque alterum; whence
he concludes according to Austin thus, Deus igitur hunc diligit, illumque odit
sine meritis ullis operum aut bonorum aut malorum. Hoc videri possit alicui
iniquum, sed est aequissimum, quia sic Deo visum est. Neque Augustinus
affirmare veritus est, eos Apostoli verbum evacuare qui judicium divinae
discretionis ad opera reducunt praevisa aut praeterita; and so concludes the
main point he insists on, thus, Non est igitur peccatum originale causa
aeternae reprobationis, nedum actuale. So that both Austin and Dr Whitaker, and
all our Divines, knew full well in how harsh an accent this truth sounds in the
ears of men; yet because the word of God does testify this truth unto us, it
becomes all Christian hearts to submit, and to acknowledge the equity of it,
though we are not able to comprehend the reason of it: Though I know full well,
some are so violently carried with the zeal of their own way, that they spare
not to profess, that they will sooner deny that there is a God, then yield to
that which the Contra-Remonstrants teach; which for ought I know, is no other
then this which Dr Whitaker taught and Preached publicly in the University of
Cambridge, being at that time Professor Regius. And seeing we acknowledge the
seeming harshnes of it, as well as our Adversaries, yet because we find it
revealed in Gods word, we hold it our duty to embrace it, and therehence
conclude that it is aequissimum. Does it become any one to take the course this
Author takes, and by a Parallel between this course of God, and the courses of
Tiberius, as also by a saying of Zeno's servant, to cry it down as
iniquissimum, and thence to conclude hand over head, that the word of God does
not teach it? Is this a Christian course? is this Theological? is this
Scholasticall? Yet in my judgment the harshnes lies not here, to wit, in the
point of Gods purpose to inflict damnation; considering that not one of our
divines, that I know, does maintain that God did ever purpose to inflict
damnation, but for sin. Or if there be any harshnes therein, that is to be
found in the kind and degree of punishment and everlastingnesse thereof, God
holding them everlastingly as it were upon the rack and in quick sense of
torment. And yet we maintain without contradiction amongst Christians, that it
is just with God to do so for one act of drunkenness or adultery, or the like
unrepented of; which kind of punishment, never any Tyrant in the world was
known to take, or could take. But the harshnes in my opinion, is most pregnant
to bring forth distaste on the other part of reprobation, which is the purpose
of God to deny grace, this being denied to whom he will, and that of mere
pleasure; for like as he shows mercy on whom he will, so the Scripture
testifies, that he hardens whom he will. And not only Austin and Dr Whitaker
and our Divines generally do take notice, how unsavory this doctrine is in
the judgment of flesh and blood, especially in comparing it with Gods ordinary
course of complaining of men for their disobedience, even of those whom
himself has hardened, but the holy Apostle also Romans 9. 19. Thou will say
then, and is it so, does God harden whom he will? Why then does he yet
complain? For who has resisted his will? Now in this case, how does the
Apostle stop the mouths of such, but thus; O man, who art thou that disputest
with God? shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it, Why have thou made
me thus? Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one
vessel unto honor and another unto dishonor?

But let us come to the consideration of the Parallel here made between the
counsels of Tiberius and the counsels of God. This consists of two parts,
according to a double story of Tiberius taken out of Suetonius.

The first is his dealing with Drusus and Nero, the two sons of Germanicus,
these varia fraud induxit ut concitarentur ad convitia and concitati
perderentur, he used cunning contrivances to draw them to reproach him, that so
he might cover his cruelty in their death, under a pretext of justice. What
these cunning contrivances are, it is specified by Suetonius; but I hope this
Author will acknowledge, that it stands him upon, to represent what those
cunning contrivances are, which our doctrine imputes unto God, to draw them to
sin against God. Our Divines commonly teach, that God as he is able to keep
any man from sin (as he did the Angels that stood, when their fellows
became Apostates, the cause whereof Austin resolves into amplius Adjutorium
given by God, either in their creation or after: De Civit. Dei. lib. 12. cap.
9. Isti aut minorem acceperunt amoris divini gratiam quam illi qui in eadem
perstiterunt, aut si utrique boni aequaliter creati sunt, istis mala voluntate
cadentibus, illi amplius adjuti ad eam beatitudinis plenitudinem, unde se
nunquam casuros certissimi fierent, pervenerunt,) so likewise that Gods
permission is enough to prostitute any man unto sin. And not our Divines
only, but Arminius also and others. Arminius Exam. page 152. Quoties voluntas
permittitur a Deo ut faciat aliquid, necesse est ut nullo argumentorum genere
persuadeatur ad nolendum, secus permissio non fieret. And Page 157. thus he
defines the permission of sin, Permissio peccati est suspensio omnium
impedimentorum quibus positis peccatum non fieret. Now let any sober man judge,
whether herehence it it follows not necessarily necessitate consequenti^ and
suppositionis, that sin shall be, to wit, upon the removing of all those
impediments upon the position whereof sin could not be; considering that an
impediment of sin in this case and in Arminius his phrase is every thing quo
posito peccatum non fuerit. Vorstius in like manner, in Amicitia duplicatione
Page 213. Fateor quidem permissione jam posita in actu necessario etiam poni
rem aliquam permittendam, idque ob necessariam talium relatorum ad se invicem
habitudinem, atque in arguendo mutuam quandam (...) quae far non potest ut
unum sine altero reipsa sit, nedum ut alterum extra se quidquam vere agat,
altero ne quidem adhuc existente, nedum vere patiente, aut contra. Navarettus
in 1. Quest. 19. Art. 9.. 2. maintains, Posita permissione infallibiliter
sequi quod permittitur. Austin himself supposes as much where he says, Ad
omnipotentissimam suam bonitatem pertinere, potius bona ex malis elicere, quam
mala esse non sinere. For hereby he gives to understand, that God permits sin
with a purpose to work good out of evil. Now this manifestly implies, that
upon Gods permission of sin, sin shall exist. Nay how can this be avoided,
unless we deny that God alone, is he that keeps us from running into sin,
and maintain that man can do this of himself, without that special grace of
God, whereby he keeps us from sin: yet in the Council of Palestine, it was
concluded, that Gods grace was required to every act, and Pelagius himself was
driven to subscribe thereunto, and to anathematize those that denied. Now let
us examine what this grace of God is, which is necessarily required to every
good act, whether God does not work the will thereunto, according to that, I
will cause them to walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments and do them:
Ezech. 36. 28. or whether it be only such a Cooperate grace, as some now a
days blush not to profess as whereby God works in us, (...) Velle bonum modo
Velimus, this I can show under the hand of a zealous Partizan for Arminius. Now
I hope there is no such cunning contrivance in the permission of sin.

Farther, there are certain occasions and opportunities offered for the
committing of sin in the course of the World: We willingly ascribe unto God the
administration of these, and so does Arminius; and that not of Occasions only,
but of Arguments also inciting unto sin, Disput. Pub. These. 9. De Iustitia and
Efficacia providentiae Dei in malo. Number. 6. Efficientia Dei circa peccatum
concernit tum actum ipsum tum vitiositatem ejus. Efficientia quae circa initium
consideratur vel impeditio vel permissio est; cui addimus administrationem
argumentorum and occasionum ad peccatum incitantium.

Yet there is a greater power of provocation unto sin then all these, and that
is by the practices of Satan, who goes about like a roaring Lion seeking who^
he may devour. How coms he to have such liberty? Has not God power to bind
Satan for a thousand years and more if it please him? The Devils sometime
besought our Savior, that he would not send them into the deep; surely they
acknowledged thereby his power to send them thither; yet he did not, though he
was not ignorant, that their going about was like so many roaring lions, to
devour the souls of men by provoking unto sin. As for those that Tiberius set
about Drusus and Nero to provoke them, what were they comparable to the Devil
and his Angels for the practicing of provoking courses? But Tiberius bid his
servants to provoke Drusus and Nero and not to spare: but can any say truly
that we maintain that God bids the Devil to provoke this Author, or any such
Arminian spirit to make such parallels as these? Yet 1 Kings 22. we read when a
wicked spirit offers his service to God to entice Ahab that he might go and
fall at Ramoth-Gilead, and that by becoming a lying spirit in the mouth of all
his Prophets, the Lord not only accepts it, saying, Go forth and do so; but
also tells him, thou shall entice him, and shall also prevail. That was a
great deal more then was in the power of Tiberius, or his instigators, or the
Devils themselves. And did not Ahab deserve as much at the hands of God? And
why might not this Author and his fellows, have deserved so much at the hands
of God, as to have a lying spirit put in the mouths of them, on whom they
depend for resolution in points of Divinity, and that they prevail with them
also? And why may not he also be thus given over to illusions to believe lies?
Nay, what do we talk of desert in this? Did not the Devil provoke Eve and
Adam to sin against God in Paradise? Could not God have kept the Devil off?
Why did he not? Cur non intercessit and circumscriptorem colubrum cohibuit? to
speak in Tertullians phrase. Does it not manifestly appear, that it was Gods
will to have them tempted, to have them provoked unto sin? and why not? Is it
lawful for a man to lay a bait of gold and silver in his servants way to try
his fidelity, and whether such a provocation will make a breach upon his
honesty; and shall not such a course be lawful unto God? for this nothing
hinders their liberty of transgressing. And to serve God while we are not
tempted to sin against him, is a poor commendation: If thou faint in the day of
adversity thy strength is small, says Solomon. Job. 1. 11. Prove. 24. 10.
Stretch out now thine hand and touch all that he has, and see if he will not
blaspheme thee to thy face; as much as to say, Let but Job be in this manner
provoked, and see whether he will not blaspheame. What is the Lords answer?
Lo, all that he has is in thine hand, only upon himself shall thou not
stretch out thine hand. Hereupon Satan goes to his work. One messenger comes
and brings tidings, saying, The Oxen were plowing, and the Asses feeding in
their places, and the Sabeans came violently and took them, yea, they have
slain thy servants with the edge of the sword, and I only am escaped alone to
tell thee: Upon the neck of him comes another, saying, The fire of God is
fallen from heaven, and has burnt up thy sheep and thy servants, and devoured
them, and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. Upon the back of him comes a
third saying, The Caldeans set out three bands, and fell upon the Camells and
have taken them and slain thy servants with the edge of the sword, and I only
am escaped alone to tell thee. After all these coms a fourth, saying, Thy
sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brothers
house, and behold there came a great wind from beyond the wilderness, and
smote the four corners of the house which fell upon thy children and they are
dead, and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. Here are provocations enough,
and can it be denied, but that God would have Job's uprightness thus to be
tried? And has not God power thus to try any other nothing so upright as Job
(whatsoever be the consequents thereof) unto transgression, though it be even
to the cursing of their King and their God? as Is. 8. 21. He that is afflicted
and famished, shall go to and fro in it, and when he shall be hungry he shall
even fret himself and curse his King and his gods and shall look upward: and
Revelations 16. 21. There fell a great hail like talents out of heaven upon
the men, and men blaspheamed God because of the Plague of the hail, for the
plague thereof was exceeding great. Yet Job continued in his uprightness, his
wicked Wife perceived it, though she her self was enraged, and betrayed the
corruption of her heart within, but he was no more effectually brought thereby
to sin against God, then Joseph was by the temptation of his wanton Mistress:
though David fell fowlly and shamefully, provoked thereunto by the sight of
Bathsheba, and did not God by his providence bring him to the sight of
Bathsheba, as he brought Shimei and David after this together, as Arminius and
his accomplices confess, when Shimei railed on him? A great provocation to so
great a Person as David, if not to bid, yet at least to suffer Abishai to cut
off that dogs head, as he called him; yet David would not suffer him, and why?
Let David himself answer; The Lord, says he, has bidden him to curse David.
It may be the Lord will render unto me good, for his cursing this day. He fell
not foul upon God, though acknowledging his just providence herein. And to
make a Parallele between the courses of God, and the courses of Tiberius that
monster of men, in taking a course with Drusus and Nero to provoke them to the
reproaching of him, that he might destroy them: Thus David was not corrupted
with the provocations of his Subject, as Drusus and Nero were by a fellow
Subject to convitiate their Prince. Neither did he fare the worse for this, but
no doubt found cause to bless God for his grace, in restraining him from
breaking forth into any intemperancy of tongue or spirit, like as formerly he
blessed God for the good counsel of Abigal, whereby he was restrained from
shedding blood, and that his own hand did not save him. And if it be not
lawful for us to provoke another unto sin, will it follow forthwith, that it
is not lawful for God to provoke? One is provoked by prosperity to corrupt his
ways, another by adversity is provoked to break forth into impatience and
blasphemy? What then? shall not God be acknowledged to be the Author both of
prosperity and adversity? Nay, what does the Lord long before profess what
should be his providence toward the Jews? and that in this very kind of
provoking them. Deutron. 32. 21. They have moved me to jealousy with that which
is not good, they have provoked me to anger with their vanities: and I will
move them to jealousy with those that are no people, I will provoke them to
anger with a foolish Nation.

But let us consider more distinctly, what this act of provocation is, and
wherein it consists, that we may be the better able to judge in what case we
may safely attribute it unto God, and in what case not, that so we may neither
ascribe that unto him which does not become him, nor deny that unto him which
does become him, both these courses being equally blasphemous, and so reputed
among School Divines.

Now Provocation in the most usual phrase of Scripture is by way of
exasperation, and it is an incitation unto wrath; and never otherwise taken
when man is said to provoke God. And in the same sense it is delivered in the
particular fact of Tiberius here mentioned. But when a resemblance is here made
between the particular course of Tiberius and the courses of God, Gods
provocation of man is not to wrath only, but meant of incitation to any kind of
sin, whether it be by way of exasperation, or by way of alluring and enticing,
according to the several passions and affections of man, which are apt to be
moved several ways to sin, amongst which the passion anger is but one. And as
it is said of the wrath of man, that it works not the righteousness of God;
so it is verified of every other inordinate affection. In the 1 Chronicles. 24. 1.
it is said that Satan provoked David to number Israel. That was not by way of
exasperation and moving in him the passion of anger, by the working upon some
other passion, whether pride or curiosity: and therefore though it be rendered
by the word, Provoked, yet in the Original the word used signifies properly
to tempt. But consider we provocation according to the propriety thereof in the
first place, by way of exasperation.

Now consider, I pray, whether the Ministers of Tiberius did more exasperate
Drusus and Nero, then God exasperated Jonah. Jonah. 4. 7. For having prepared a
Gourd and made it to come up over Jonah, that it might he a shadow over his
head, and deliver him from his grief; and Jonah being exceeding glad of the
Gourd, God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day and it smote the
Gourd that it withered. And God proceeded farther then this. For when the Sun
did arise, God prepared also a fervent east wind, and the Sun heat upon the
head of Jonah, that he fainted and wished in his heart to dye, and said it is
better for me to dye then to live. And not only so, but justified himself in
this his impatience. For when the Lord said unto him, do thou well to be
angry for the Gourd? Jonah stoutly answered, I do well to be angry to the
death. It Is true, Jonah brake not forth into blasphemies against God, as it
seems Drusus and Nero did against Tiberius. Jonah was better brought up under
the wings of God then so. Gods grace preserved him from such excess, but that
the Ministers Tiberius set about them, did more provoke them by exasperating
courses, then God did in like manner provoke Jonah, it does not appear: but
had Jonah hereupon broken forth into blasphemies, had Ionah's sin been
excusable or Gods course blameable? Revel. 16. 21. we read of a great hayle
that fell upon the men like Talents out of heaven, and men blaspheamed God
because of the plague of the hayle, for the plague thereof was exceeding great.
And Isai 8. 21. The Lord prophecyeth, that, He that is afflicted and famished,
shall go to and fro, and when he shall be hungry, he shall even fret himself,
and curse his King and his Gods and look upward. such plagues are the work of
God, for there is no evil in the city but the Lord has done it. Amos 3. But
let them look unto it, that thereupon take occasion to blaspheme. And Tentatio
probationis was never yet that I know denied unto God, to try whether they will
blaspheme God or no. To this end Satan desired to have an hand on Job, yet not
so much to try whether he would blaspheme or no, but being confident he should
bring him to blaspheme. Job. 1. 11. stretch out now thine hand and touch all
that he has, and he will curse thee to thy face. The Lord gave him leave, and
Job acknowledges the Lords hand in all that Satan did, saying, The Lord gave
and the Lord takes away, yet in all this Job sinned not nor charged God
foolishly. Satan desires yet farther liberty, saying skin for skin, yea all
that a man has will he give for his life. But put forth thy hand now and touch
his bone, and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face. And the Lord said
unto Satan, Behold he is in thy hand, but save his life. So went Satan forth
from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job with sore boyles from the sole of
his foot unto his crown, and he took him a potshard to scrape himself
withal, and he sat down among the ashes, Then said his Wife unto him, Do
thou yet continue in thy integrity? Curse God and dye. She manifested the
inward corruption of her irreligious heart. Job might have brought her to a
form of godliness by his pious courses in his family, but little power of
godliness does appear upon her. For as Solomon says, If thou faint in the
day of adversity thy strength is small. It seems her heart was sowred with
Atheism, thinking the world was governed by chance, rather then by divine
providence, and consequently it was all one, whether a man did bless God, or
curse God, and a madness to make a conscience of walking in integrity, and
that in Jobs case at this time, whether he did bless God he must dye, or
whether he did curse God he could but dye, and better it was for him thus
impoverished, thus afflicted, to dye then to live; as for the powers of the
world to come, it seems she never had but a taste of them, and that taste never
produced any true faith in her concerning them. Here was a sore temptation, the
very gates of hell playing upon him with their greatest Ordinance to batter (if
it were possible) his shield of faith. But what is Jobs answer. Thou speak
as one of the foolish women speaks. What shall we receive good at the hand of
God and shall we not receive evil? In all this did not Job sin with his lips.
The work of Satan in the impoverishing of Jobs estate, and afflicting his
person, cannot be denied to be Gods work. As for the work of his wife, why
might not that be the work of God, as well as the work of Satan? For did not
Satan sin in all this? As our Savior says that he was a murderer from the
beginning, and as St Peter says, The devil goes about like a roaring Lion
seeking whom he may devour; so who can make doubt but these courses practiced
against Job, were fruits of his murdering and devouring disposition? And all
sides now a days confess, that the act of the most flagitious sin committed
by man or Angel, is the work of God in the way of a principal efficient
cause, as well as it is the work of the creature. And as for the sinfulness of
the act, either of the Devil or his Wife, that was not it which did or could
hurt Job: but the works wrought by Satan, the temptation atheistical proposed
by his Wife, this was the greatest danger in the consideration thereof to
corrupt his soul, for that is it alone that works upon the will to incline
it. And as for their sinning herein, that proceeded from the want of Gods
fear, according to that of Abraham. Genes. 20. 10. I said surely the fear of
God is not in this place, therefore they will slay me for my Wives sake. And
albeit God engages himself toward some, for the putting of his fear in
their hearts, that they shall never depart away from him. Ierim. 36. 40. yet he
has not engaged himself thus far toward all. For the Apostle plainly
professes, that, He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth
Romans 9. 18. and hardening we know is denying the fear of God, either as
touching the habitual infusion thereof, or as touching the actual excitation
thereof after it is infused. Yet I deny not but obduration and excaecation are
sometimes promiscuously used, the one for the other, because of the strict
conjunction that is betwixt them. And as touching the particular act of
Convitiation, Austin spares not to profess, that even when it is committed by
man, it is brought forth by God out of his secret providence lib. 9. Confess.
cap. 8. Quid egisti Deus meus? unde curasti? unde sanasti? nonne protulisti
durum and acutum ex altera anima convitium tanquam medicinale ferrum ex
occultis provisionibus tuis and uno ictu putredinem illam praecidisti? And
whereas Bellarmine endeavors to blast the evidence of this place giving
testimony unto Gods secret providence in evil, I have endeavored to show the
vanity of his discourse in my Vind. Great. Dei lib. 2. Crim. 3. digress. 2. cap.
13. And in what congruity can it be said, that God bid Shimei to curse David,
but that in the same analogy of faith, it may be said, that God bid Iobes Wife
in this manner to tempt him? And which of the two was the greatest provocation,
Tiberius his Ministers Provocation of Drusus and Nero; or Shimei's provocation
of David railing on him to his face, the Subject blaspheaming his Prince?
undoubtedly the provocation was nothing inferior, only here was the difference;
Tiberius gave such commandment to his Ministers so to provoke Drusus and Nero,
God gave no such commandment (in proper speech) unto Shimei, but rather
commanded the contrary in his law, Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of
thy people. But Gods secret providence, whereby he makes use of all his
creatures in what condition soever he finds them, even of Devils and wicked
men, to serve his turn by them, either in the way of judgment, or in the way
of mercy, and sometimes for trial of the faith and patience of his children,
is in Scripture phrase called Gods bidding or commanding. And indeed it is
far more effectual then his commandment. And Austin by pregnant passages of
holy Scripture convicted of this truth, spares not to profess as much in
these words, His and talibus testimoniis divinorum eloquiorum quae omnia
commemorare nimis longum est, satis quantum existimo manifestatur operari Deum
in cordibus hominum ad inclinandas eorum voluntates quocunque voluerit sive ad
bona pro sua misericordia, sive ad mala pro meritis eorum, judicio utique suo,
aliquando aperto, aliquando occulto, semper autem justo. De Great. and lib.
Arbitr. cap. 21. And touching this particular case of Shimei, inquiring about
the interpretation of it, see I pray, how he resolves concerning it. Quomodo
dixerit dominus huic homini maledicere David, Quis sapiens and intelliget. Non
enim jubendo dixit, ubi obedientia laudaretur, sed quod ejus voluntatem proprio
vitio suo malam in hoc peccatum judicio suo justo and occulto inclinavit. Ideo
dictum est, dixit ei dominus. Nam si jubenti obtemper asset Deo, laudandus
potius quam puniendus esset, sicut ex hoc peccato postea novimus esse punitum.
And he proceeds farther to show the reason of this divine providence. Nec causa
tacita est, cur ei Deus justo modo dixerit maledicere David, hoc est, De Great.
and lib. arbit. cap. 20.
Cor ejus malum in hoc peccatum miserit vel dimiserit ut videat (inquit)
dominus humilitatem meam and retribuat mihi bona pro maledictio ejus in die
isto. And hereupon concludes. Ecce quomodo probatur Deum uti cordibus etiam
malorum ad laudem atque adjumentum bonorum. Sic usus est Judah tradente
Christum. Sic usus est Iudaeis crucifigentibus Christum, and quanta inde bona
praestitit populis credituris? Qui and ipso utitur diabolo pessimo, sed optime
ad excercendam and probandam fidem and pietatem bonorum non sibi, quia omnia
scit antequam fiant, sed nobis quibus erat necessarium, ut eo modo ageretur
nobiscum.

But let us proceed to provocations unto other sins, not in the way of
exasperation, but in the way of allurements. Achan was a covetous person, at
the sacking of Jericho, it was his hap to light among the spoil, upon a goodly
Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekells of silver, and a wedge of gold of
fifty shekells weight. Was not so fair a prey, a sore temptation to a covetous
person? How was Demosthenes taken with a rich bowl that was showed him by
Harpalus, but there was great danger in it, I confess, yet if desire of prey
does sometimes overrun the sent, may it not as well overcome the fear of
danger, especially considering the opportunity of secrecy to convey it closely
into his Tent and hide it there? I saw, says he, and I coveted them and took
them, and behold they lie hid in the earth in the midst of my Tent, and the
silver under it. Now can it be denied, but that God by his providence brought
him into this temptation, and consequently into this provocation, for to tempt
is to provoke 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. And is it not just with God, to bring any man
into such temptations of what kind, or in what degree soever (seeing no
temptation or provocation in this kind or degree, bereaves a man of the liberty
of his will) If not, what meant our Savior to teach his Disciples, and in them
us, to pray unto God that He will not lead us into temptation? And what cause
has Achan to complain of this temptation? We do not read he did; was it not
the condition of many others as well as himself? Was this prey that he ceazed
on, the only spoil of that great City? Were there no Babylonish garments but
that one, no more silver or wedges of gold, but that Achan lighted on? Yet they
refrained, some out of the fear of God, that restrained them in a gracious
manner, and kept them from sinning against him: others though not out out of a
fear of God, yet out of the fear of punishment, were moved to beware how they
transgressed. For albeit, Libertas sine gratia non est libertas, sed
contumacia, as * Austin Epist: 28.
writes, yet fear of punishment oftimes restraines from committing capital
crimes, though this restraint be not gracious; and considerations of less
force then these do prevail many times with carnal men, both to abstain from
evil, and to do that which is good, though not in a gracious manner. As we
read in the Gospel of a wicked Judge, that neither feared God nor reverenced
man, yet he would do the Widow justice to ease himself of her importunate
solicitations where with she molested him.

Come we to provocations unto sin of another nature, in satisfying the
concupiscence of the flesh. David arising out of his bed at eventide, and
walking upon the roof of the Kings Palace, from the roof he saw a Woman
washing her self: and the Woman was very beautiful to look upon: we know what
followed hereupon. Now was it not God that lead him into this temptation, into
this provocation? Surely if this were not just with God, it were in vain for
us to pray, that God will not lead us into temptation; for we need not fear
any such temptation, which cannot befall us without violation of Gods justice
in the course of his providence. Paul the Apostle, least he should be exalted
out of measure, through the abundance of revelations (made unto him, which were
very dangerous to puff a man up, and make him swell in the conceit of his own
worthiness being admitted into the secrets of God) was sometimes exercised
with a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan sent to buffet him. But the
fear of God was alive in him, and stirred up his faith to pray unto God three
times that it might depart from him: and the Lord made him a gracious answer,
not as yet to deliver him, but to support him in this conflict, and give him
the victory over it. For the Lord said unto him, my grace is sufficient for
thee, for my power is made perfect in thy weakness. This answer put heart into
Paul; Therefore, says he, will I very gladly rejoice rather in mine
infirmities that the power of Christ may dwell in me. Mark I pray, Rahter, in
mine infirmities. He would not blame God for thus exercising him, but rather
rejoice to be thus exercised, for as much as this same should do him no harm;
for by virtue of Christ's power dwelling in him he should have the victory.
Secondly, it should do him good in preserving him from being exalted out of
measure through the abundance of revelations. Therefore, says he, I take
pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
anguishes for Christ's sake; for when I am weak then am I strong. And had not
Joseph as good cause to conceive that it was the will of God, that he by the
unchaste motions of his wanton Mistress, should be provoked unto unclean courses,
as David had to persuade himself, that it was Gods will by the railing of
Shimei he should be provoked unto revenge; that so by the power of his grace,
strengthening them against such provocations, they might come forth of their
several temptations, as gold out of fire, more bright more resplendent then
before? Joseph was a fair person and well favored Genes. 39. 6. Now this was
a sore provocation to a lustful eye. Beauty is said to be of a dangerous
nature, as that which makes a man either Praedonem alienae castitatis or
Praedam suae. But Joseph had a gracious and a chaste heart, his beauty gave him
no encouragement to prey upon others chastity, but being a congruous bait to
the lustful appetite of his Mistress, it was in danger to expose his own
chastity to be preyed upon. And as Austin said of Gods providence concerning
Shimei, ejus voluntatem proprio vitio suo malam in hoc peccatum judicio suo
justo and occulto inclinavit. Who sees not, that the like may be said of Gods
dealing with Ioseph's Mistress? and that without all aspersion of unholinesse
unto God. For if he gives Men or Women over unto their lusts, what will be the
issue but uncleanness: Romans 1. 24, 26. When God gave them up to vile
affections, what followed but this? even their Women did change their natural
use into that which was against nature, verse. 27. and likewise also the Men
left their natural use of the Women, and burned in their lust one toward
another; and Man with Man wrought filthiness, and received in themselves such
recompense of their error as was meet. Here we have a strange course of Gods
providence in punishing sin with sin. For these Gentiles in defiling themselves
one with another, in a most unnatural and abominable manner, are said to
receive such recompense for their error as was meet. In few words, what is
meant by provocation unto any sin? Is it to do that whereupon man may take
just cause or occasion to do that which he does without blame? like as the
Corinthians provoked Paul, as a fool to loast himself, as himself expresses
it, for he adds, ye have compelled me. But this cannot be affirmed of Tiberius
his ministers in provoking Drusus and Nero. For no provocation could be
sufficient to make them unblameable in convitiating their Prince, much less
can it be said, that God provokes any man in this manner: neither do I think
that any of our adversaries (as malevolent as they are) dares impute any such
crimination unto us, as if we attributed any such discourse unto providence
divine. What then is it to provoke unto sin? Is it to do somewhat upon the
consideration whereof, men's passions being moved, they cannot but sin. But this
in like sort is equally as untrue, as the former, even of those provocations
which were made upon Drusus and Nero by the practices of Tiberius. Or is it the
doing of somewhat, whereupon occasion is taken to sin, to blaspheme? this
has no color of truth in it. For even man without all transgression may do
many things, whereupon occasion is taken of doing evil, and therefore we
distinguish of Scandalum datum and Acceptum. Nay, though man knows offense
will be taken upon the doing of some things, yet if the doing thereof be
commanded by God, he must do them, what occasion soever is thereby taken to
offend. Indeed if they are things indifferent, I must abstain from the doing
of them, in case I know offense will be taken thereat, and that thereby I shall
lay a stumbling block in the way of my Brother. For Paul professes that if
meat would offend his Brother, he would never eat meat rather then offend his
Brother. But no such obligation lies upon God. For he knows full well how
some will abuse his mercies, others grow worse and worse by his judgments,
breaking forth into blasphemy thereupon: yet no wise man will say that God is
the more unholy in the showing of mercy, and in the execution of judgment. He
professes in plain terms, that to them who fear him he will be a sanctuary,
but as a stumbling block, and as a rock to fall upon to both the houses of
Israel, and as a snare, and as a net, to both the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
Isai. 8. 14.

As for the last clause of this odious Parallel, concerning the end of Tiberius
his course in this, namely that so he might cover his cruelty in their death
under pretext of justice. Undoubtedly I should think the putting of them to
death was just in case they did convitiate their Prince whatsoever their
provocations were. For hereby they deserved death, yea everlasting death and
damnation. His sin was in causing them to be provoked hereunto, and so also it
might be in the manner of their execution. For it is written of him that fame
necavit, he famished them. I know Tiberius was cruel enough, but by the story
it seems, that policy, wicked policy moved him unto this; first to intend their
deaths because he saw the affections of the people toward them, belike for
Germanicus his sake, a worthy man according to those times. For when he found
that in the beginning of the year, vows were made on their behalf, to wit,
for their preservation he dealt with the Senate, that such rewards ought not to
be tendered, but toward such who were of experience and of ripeness of age:
and that hereupon the inward character of his affection toward them being
discovered, he laid them open to every man's criminations, variaque fraud
inductos ut and concitarentur ad convitia and concitati perderentur, accusavit
per literas, amarissime congestis etiam probris, and judicatos hosts fame
necavit. And anon after, the same Author discovers the reason of all this, to
wit, that seeing Germanicus was but his adopted Son, and one Drusus by name
was his natural son, and his own son Drusus being dead, leaving a son
Tiberius behind him, he desired to make him as his natural son his successor
in the Empire. Aelium Sejanum ad summam potentiam non tam benevolentia provexer
at quam ut esset cujus ministerio ac fraudibus liberos Germanici circumveniret:
Nepotemque suum ex Druso filium naturalem ad successionem Imperii confirmaret.
Sure we are God has no need of any such politic courses; neither has he
need of any pretext of justice to take a man's life from him. It is confessed
now of all hands, that God can annihilate the holiest Angel by power absolute.
And if it be in the power of God to keep any man from sin, as I think no wise
man will deny, surely it is in his power to refuse to keep any reasonable
creature from sin. For certainly though Adam were created in innocence, yet he
preserved him not in innocence, but left him to himself, having exposed him to
Satan's temptations. The Angels had no Satan to tempt them; God preserved the
elect Angels from sinning, and how? let Austin speak in this particular;
either by giving them majorem amoris divini mensuram in their creation then
their fellows; or by giving them amplius adjutorium after their creation. And
in particular concerning Adam, the same Author professes that God gave him,
Posse si voluit, but he gave him not, Velle quod potuit. And dares any man deny
that it is in the power of God by the denial of his efficacious grace, to make
way for the entering of sin into the World, and that wonderful work of the
incarnation of the son of God, and the redemption of the World by him; as
also for the manifestation of his own glory, both in the way mercy by the
pardoning of sin, and in the way of justice by the punishing of sin. Let
Arminius be heard in this, Who confesses that God in the storehouse of his
wisdom and power, has not only sufficient impediments of sin, but efficacious
also, by the use whereof, sin would certainly and infallibly be hindered. His
words are these, Praeter illa sufficientia, impedimenta etiam efficacia habet
in suo sapientiae and potentiae thesauro, quibus productis certo and
infallibiliter peccatum impediretur. Exam p. 157.
Which if it be true, certainly it was as true, as touching the hindering of
the sin of Adam, as of hindering any man's sin else from the time of Adams
fall. And as certain it is that God would not make use of any of these
impediments, though it is apparent these impediments Arminius speaks of, are
of such a nature as whereby sin would be hindered without any prejudice to
the freedom of man's will, as appears by all his instances following of this
kind, showing how God did efficaciously hinder the sins of many. And indeed
it is evident in reason and such as cannot be denied, unless a man will say,
that whatsoever course had been taken by God to preserve him from sin,
without prejudice to the freedom of his will, yet nevertheless he would have
sinned: which is in so high a degree absurd, as manifestly to contradict the
very light of nature. For seeing Adam in the state of innocence was naturally
indifferent, as well to stand, as to fall; and morally more inclined to stand
then to fall; (for as much as God had made him good) even in respect of this
indifferency it cannot be said, that upon every occasion or temptation unto
sin, he would have yielded thereunto. For such a condition is not an
indifferent condition. Nay Philosophers ackowledge that of three sorts of
contingents, one sort is of such which they call, Contingentia aequaliter, that
is, such as fall out as often one way as another. And what Zabarel. lib. 1.
Post. Analyt. 182.
are these? surely all such and none but such as are subject to a man's free
will. And even of Esau borne in sin (so was not Adam) Austin thinks it strange,
that any man should deny, but that there was a course to have called him as
effectually, as he called Lib. 1. ad Simpli. quest. 2.
Jacob, had he been pleased to have used it. Now hereby it manifestly appears,
that God has no need of any provoking courses, exasperating courses to draw
them unto sin, let him but withold those efficacious impediments of sin,
which are in the storehouse of his wisdom and power, as Arminius
acknowledges, and sin hereupon shall enter. For the permission of sin (by
Arminius his distinction of it) is the suspension of that efficiency whereupon
it would be avoided. And if it were a safe course to Exam. p. 157. and 166.
judge of what becomes God by that which becomes man, we should conclude even
of permission of sin, that like as it becomes not us to permit sin if it
lies in our power to hinder it, in the same manner it becomes not God to
permit any sin, seeing it lies in his power to hinder it. Sed judicia ejus
(says Austin) multa abyssus. Nos certe, si eos in quos nobis potestas est ante
oculos nostros perpetrare scelera permittamus, rei cum ipsis Contr. Julian.
Pelag. l. 5. cap. 4.
erimus: quam vero innumerabilia ille permittit fieri ante oculos suos, quae
utique si voluisset nulla ratione permitteret. In the 2 Kings 2. 26, 27. we
read of a desperate course of the King of Moab, that finding the battle to be
sore against him, first tried with 700 men to break through to the King of
Edom, but when he could not, he took his eldest son that should have reigned
in his steed, and offered him for a burnt offering upon the wall; the sight of
which barbarous part of his struck grief into the hearts of the children of
Israel, so that they departed from him, and returned into their country. What,
therefore shall we condemn God, for sending Abraham to sacrifice his son,
his only son, his son Isaac? In the 16 Judge. we read a strange story of
Sampson whose faith is commended Hebr. 11. For there we read how he dies, his
heart flaming with desire of revenge, and yet with great devotion prays unto
God to assist him, that he might be avenged of the Philistines for his two eyes.
O Lord God I pray thee think upon me, O God I beseech thee strengthen me at
this time only, that I may be at once avenged of the Philistines for my two
eyes. And again, Let me loose my life with the Philistines: and he bowed
himself with all his might, and the house fell upon the Princes, and upon the
people that were therein; so that the men that he slew at his death, were more
then they which he had slain in his life. For both the house it self was
full, and upon the roof of it there were about 3000 men and women. Here is a
strange massacre wrought by Sampson an Israelite upon the Philistines, at that
time when the Israelites were in subjection to the Philistines who were their
Lords, as sometimes Pharaoh was. For the men of Judah admonished him when they
came up to the rock Etam to bind Sampson. Know thou not (say they) that the
Philistines are rulers over us? Wherefore then have thou done thus unto us? to
wit, in taking such courses as might well provoke the Philistines to root out
the Israelites. Yet nevertheless he comes sparkling with zeal to destroy many
thousands of them, yea the Princes with the rest, and well pleased to destroy
himself with them, to be avenged of them for his two eyes. And how could this
be done by him without some special and prophetical instigation and animation
received from the spirit of God, we know not. And who doubts, but that God
animating him hereunto, all this was lawful? which without Gods warrant, could
be no less then abominable and most damnable sins. Yet undoubtedly God did not
animate Herod, and Pontius Pilate, together with the Gentiles, and people of
Israel to do what they did against our Savior, but rather left them to be
ordered by his Law, wherein such things are prohibited. And nevertheless the
Apostles in their pious meditation with one voice profess, that, All these
were gathered together against the holy Son of God, to do those things which
Gods hand, and Gods council had predestined to be done: and why the like is
not to be acknowledged of the most barbarous facts committed by Tiberius, or
any other monster of nature, I know no reason. And as touching shameful
courses, no less abominable in the kind of acts flagitious, as these here
mentioned of Tiberius were, in the kind of acts facinorous; The Apostle
professes both that God gave them up to vile affections, and to the lusts of
their own hearts, to the committing of such abominations, and also that herein
they received such recompense of their error as was meet; and the error which
God avenged in this manner what was it, but such wherein Tiberius was as deep,
as those whom the Apostle speaks of, namely, in changing the glory of the
incorruptible God, to the similitude of the image of a corruptible man, and of
birds, and of four footed beasts, and of creeping things. And they were but
(...) into which God delivered up Tiberius, and to such God delivered up them
of whom the Apostle speaks; and his actions as well as theirs, were equally the
fruits of (...), into which God gave them up, that so they might receive that
recompense of their error as was meet.

I come to the second instance here made of Tiberius his cruelty, which he
compares to those courses, which we out of holy Scripture have learned, to be
attributed unto God himself. Now this has long ago been objected by Bertius,
in his Preface to the Conference of Arminius with Iunius; I say objected by him
unto Piscator, and thereunto Piscator also has answered long ago. And whereas
Bertius has replied and allowed Piscator a year for putting in his answer
thereunto, whereof had he failed, he would interpret it as a confession of his
insufficiency, to make good the cause maintained by him. Piscator answers, that
he had no need of so long a time as he prescribed him, for after he had read
over his book, in the space of two or three days he addressed himself to an
answer thereunto, and within a month finished it. Now if the Author of this
discourse were ignorant hereof, his ignorance might excuse him, if otherwise he
might have, with more credit, occupied himself in the answering, at the least,
of some chief particulars, whereupon Piscator stands, for the justifying of his
doctrine delivered by him, not of his own brain, but according to the word of
God, then hand over head, to hold up the crimination without taking notice of
the dilution thereof, many years a go proposed and set forth to the judgment
of the world. But I am content to take into consideration, how Scholastically
and judiciously he carries himself in this crimination, as well as in the
former: and the rather, because it may be that this odious comparison he makes
more account of (for the preparation of his Auditors to entertain that which
follows with the more propitious affection) then he does of the strength of
ought that follows, whatsoever he does or may pretend to the contrary to the
point the^.

Tiberius commanded the Virgins to be defloured, that they might be strangled.
Now is there any carriage of God taught by us like unto this? If God were
disposed to strangle any, certainly he has no need to have the^ defloured
first. For it is now a days confessed even by Arminius himself, that God can
lawfully annihilate the holiest creature that lives, and that without all
respect to sin, or the vitiation of them. And annihilation I think is much more
then strangulation; this causing only a dissolution between the body and soul,
but annihilation, setting an utter end to body and soul by turning them both
into nothing. And farther, had Tiberius only permitted the deflouring of them,
when he might have hindered it, though this were a foul part in him, yet I
hope no Christian will say, it is a foul part in God, to permit any act never
so flagitious, or facinorous when he is able to hinder it; especially when he
may hinder it without any prejudice to the liberty of man's will: and that this
is in Gods power Arminius acknowledges and supposes at large in his Examen
and Treatise there De Permissione. But Tiberius commanded the Hangman to
defloure them. But is this our doctrine, that God commanded the ravishing of
any, the murdering of any, or any other sin whatsoever? Do we not all teach
rather, that God forbids it, and that under penalty of everlasting death? yet
it is true, the word of God expressly professes out of the mouth of David,
that God bad Shimei to curse David, and that he bid the evil spirit to seduce
Ahab, that he might go up to Ramoth-Gilead, and that not to be strangled I
confess, but, which was nothing better to him, that he might fall, and be
slain there. But this is a figurative speech, and signifies not properly any
command of God, but rather denotes the secret operation of Gods providence in
the hearts of men, even of wicked men; for those as well as Devils, God knows
how to make use of, to serve his own turn. And Austin professes, Deum operari
in cordibus hominum ad inclinandas eorum De Great. and lib. Arbitr. c. 21.
voluntates quocunque voluerit, sive ad bona, pro sua misericordia, sive ad
mala pro meritis eorum judicio utique suo, aliquando aperto, aliquando occulto,
semper autem justo: And, touching the particular of Shimei, writes thus, ejus
voluntatem proprio suo vitio malam, in hoc peccatum judicio suo justo, and
occulto inclinavit. As for Tiberius his causing the little maids to be
defloured, that might be done without their sin, they might be ravished, and
in that case, that might be their sorrow but not their sin. And as for the
hangmans fault, in this, he was not excusable by Tiberius his causing him to
defloure them; For Tiberius his causation herein extended no farther then to
command them. And I hope it was no just excuse for the people of Israel in
their Idolatrous courses, that therein they did but keep the statutes of Omri,
and all the manner of the house of Ahab, Mic. 6. Yet neither does God command
any man to do that which his Law forbids, or to sin against him. And farther
we acknowledge with Austin, that sin has no efficient cause, but deficient.
And it is enough with God to expose any man to sin, by not working him to that
which is good; it being his office to work us to every thing that is pleasing
in his sight. Heb. 13. 20. to cause us to walk in his statutes, and judgments,
and to do them, Ezech. 36. 28. yea, to keep us from presumptious sins, and
that they get not the dominion over us. Psalm. 19. 14. yea, to deliver us from
every evil work, 2 Timoth. 4. 18.

But perhaps some may say; Our doctrine is that God wills sin to be committed
for which men may and shall be punished; like as Tiberius would the Virgins
should be defloured, that they might be strangled.

And I answer, that Arminius himself professes that, Deus voluit Achabum
mensuram scelerum suorum implere, God would have Ahab fill up the measure of
his sin, that he might be condignely punished. And why may we not say as
well, that God would have Tiberius to fill up the measure of his sins? And
yet like as Tiberius would have the Virgins to be defloured that they might be
strangled; so Ahab would have Naboth accused of blasphemy, that he might be
condemned for it, and so put to death and stoned; and all these things were
done under color of Religion. Yet Arminius in reference to these very courses,
spares not to profess, that God would have Ahab to fill up the measure of his
sins, yet does not Bertius upbraid him for defaming God, with imputing
cruelty unto him. Again, the same Arminius professes that in their
ignominious handling of Christ, God would have the Jews, progredi quousque
progressi sunt, proceed so far as they did proceed. And was it not Gods will
in like manner, that the Gentiles should proceed as far as they did in the
same business? Now we know full well by the story Evangelical, how far they
went in their mischievous courses against the Son of God. For Judas betrayed
him, and the high Priests both hired Judas hereunto, and suborned false
witnesses against him; and both the Herodians and Soldiers mocked him, and the
people urged Pilate to crucify him, and to dismiss (...), and Pilate yielded
to the peoples desire, took order to have him first scourged, then crucified.
And if it may be truly and piously said, that in these ignominious usages of
the Son of God, they went as far as God would have them to go; why may it
not, with as great truth and piety be avouched, that Tiberius also in these his
barbarous courses, went as far as God would have him? Neither does Arminius
give himself to qualify the harshnesse of these his affirmations. We say that
whatsoever comes to pass, it is Gods will it should come to pass, as Austin
expressly professes, Enchir. cap. 95. Nec aliquid fit nisi Omnipotens fieri
velit, and the Articles of Ireland, Artic. 11. profess the same. But withal
we explicate it as Austin dothin the words following, by adding the different
manner, how they shall come to pass by the will of God, according to the
different condition of things that come to pass, namely good or evil; thus,
Vult fieri, but how? vel sinendo ut fiat (to wit in case they are evil) vel
ipse faciendo (to wit, in case they are good. So then good things God will have
come to pass by his effection, evil things only by his permission. And
Bellarmine opposing our Divines to the uttermost of his power in this
particular, being convicted in conscience by the evidence of truth is driven to
confess; Bonum esse ut malum fiat Deo permittente, It is good that evil
should come to pass by Gods permission, or Gods permitting it. Tiberius willed
that the Virgins should be defloured and impiously he willed it. God willed
that David's Concubines should be defloured, and holily he willed it; neither is
he delighted with impurity. For the Scripture attributes this unto God, I will
give thy Wives unto thy Neighbor, and he shall lie with them in the sight of
all Israel and before the sun. And this constupration of David's Concubines
served for the chastising of David, as Arminius professes, Inserviit
castigando Davidi; and omnes paenae habent Deum authorem, All punishments have
God for their author; they are the words of the same Arminius. It was impiety
and cruelty in Tiberius to cause the Virgins to be defloured and strangled But
what Christian dares to impute impiety or cruelty unto God for causing the
Children of the Sodomites, some in their Mothers womb, some hanging upon their
Mothers breasts, to be consumed with fire and brimstone. It was impiety and
cruelty in Tiberius, to will the deflouring of those Virgins, that they might
be strangled. But Arminius thought it neither impiety nor cruelty for God to
will, that Ahab should fill up the measure of his sin, that so he might
accumulate unto himself wrath in the day of wrath; for if he had I presume, he
would not have ascribed any such will unto God, as he does in express terms.
Although he well knew the vast difference between the power of man, and the
power of God in executing vengeance; the ones power extending only to the
execution of vengeance temporal, but Gods power extends to the execution of
vengeance eternal. Now I find a story immediately following this very story
alleged by this Author out of Suetonius expressing the cruelty of Tiberius in
a farther degree, as not contented with the death of them whom he would
destroy, and therefore he would keep them alive to torment them: Mori
volentibus vis adhibita vivendi, when they desired to dye, he caused them to
live by force; Nam mortem adeo leve supplicium putabat ut cum audisset unum e
reis anticipasse eam, exclamaverit Carnutius me evasit, For he accounted death
so light a punishment that when he heard one of the condemned persons to have
anticipated it, he cried out Carnutius has escaped me; for that was the
condemned persons name. And when he took notice of them that were inward, when
one desired to suffer betimes, he answered him, Nondum tecum in gratiam redii.
I do not as yet bear these so much good will. Now, why may not some
Atheistical person track the steps of this Author, and in this particular
exaggerate the heinousness of Gods holy courses as savouring of cruelty beyond
all example, beyond the cruelty of Tiberius, because he holds delinquent
creatures upon the rack of eternal torment in hell fire? For certain
vindicative courses in Tiberius inferior unto these are accounted abominable,
cruel, and impious; how much more (if this Authors argumentation be of force)
those courses which the word of God has informed us to be the courses divine,
infinitely beyond the courses of Tiberius in the way of severity and rigor? As
for the power of God in producing sin, we acknowledge none. Above 1200 years
ago it was delivered by Austin, that sin has no efficient cause, but
deficient only. But when the creature sins, he sins in doing that he
ought not to do; or in doing what he does, not in that manner he ought to do;
or in not doing what he ought to do, or not in what manner he ought to do it;
not one of all which is incident unto God. All efficiency both divine and
humane is found only about the act substrate unto sin; and all sides now a
days acknowledge, that God is the author thereof as well as man by an
effective concourse, though difference there is about the manner of the
concourse: and particularly these; Arminius will have Gods concourse to an
evil act, to be every way as much as his concourse to a good, and that he
concurres to the working of a good act, no more then to the working of an evil
act. Which we utterly deny, requiring a double concourse to every good act that
is not supernatural, as touching the substance of the act; One to the
producing of the substance of the act, another to the producing the goodness
thereof, that is, the gracious manner of performing it: For even a natural man
may abstain from lying, stealing, whoring, blaspheaming; but no natural man
can abstain from these in a gracious manner, that is, out of the love of God
and that such a love as is, Amor Dei usque ad contemptum sui, the love of God
to the contempt of himself: For this manner of performing it is supernatural.

Secondly, as touching the matter of divine concourse, to the substance of any
natural act. We say God moves the will to the doing of it, as it becomes the
first cause to move the second, but how? agreeable to the nature of it, that
is, like as he moves natural agents to do that which they do, necessarily;
so he moves all rational agents to do that which they do, contingently and
freely. What is the Arminian tenent to the contrary, namely this, that God
works in man (...) Velle modo velit, as absurd an assertion as ever any man
breathed. It is true, many times our Divines in speaking of the secret
providence of God in evil, do express themselves in phrases of a very harsh
accent in the judgment of flesh and blood, but herein they do nothing exceed
sobriety, forasmuch as usually they contemper themselves to Scripture phrase
rather within the compass thereof, then beyond it. Yet Blasphemy is usually
imputed unto them without all fear or wit; not considering, that herein they
impute blasphemy to the language of the Holy Ghost. As for example.

What an horrible sin is it for Kings and Princes to employ their power and
authority, not for the supporting of the Kingdom of Christ, by whom Kings
reign, but for the supporting and establishing of the kingdom of Antichrist,
as in the Martyrdom of Gods Saints, delivered over to the secular power, to
that end, and that by censures Ecclesiastical? Now if we should say that it is
God that works thus in the hearts of Kings, thus to employ their power for the
supporting of Antichrist, we should be censured for blasphemers. Yet the Holy
Ghost spares not to profess, that God has put into their hearts to fulfill
his will, and to agree and give their Kingdom to the Beast, until the words
of God be fulfilled.

In like sort, from the first Preaching of the Gospel unto this day, many
there have been, and at this day are, who are disobedient unto it, and stumble
at it either in the whole or in part. If we should say that they who thus
disobey, and stumble at the word of God, are ordained thereunto, such as this
Author and his Accomplices, are ready to cry out upon us as Blaspheamers, and to
profess that they will rather deny that there is a God, then hold with the
Contra-Remonstrants. Yet S. Peter budgeth not 1 Pet. 2. 8.
to profess, that Christ is a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, even
to them which stumble at the word of God, being disobedient, whereunto also
they were ordained.

When we profess that not any thing in the world comes to pass but Deo
volente, God willing it, We are censured as Blasphemers, in professing that God
does will that which is evil, and sin; yet not only the Articles of Ireland,
Artic. 11. profess as much, and Austin Enchir. 95. Non aliquid fit nisi
Omnipotens fieri velit: but the Apostles with one voice (as touching the
contumelious usages of the Son of God, both by Jews and Gentiles, Herod and
Pilate) in their picus meditation poured forth before the face of God,
profess, that, Both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and People of
Israel, were gathered together against the holy Son of God, to do that which
Gods hand and Gods council had before determined to be done.

In like sort, when we speak of Gods giving men over to illusions to believe
lies, others to vile affections, and to uncleanness through the lusts of their
own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves, which consisted
in this, that, The Women did change their natural use into that which is
against nature; and likewise the men, leaving the natural use of the Women,
burned in their lusts one toward another, men with men working that which is
unseemely, and receiving in themselves the recompense of their error which was
meet: and observe herehence, that it is just with God to punish sin with
sin. And as it has been observed before us, from the days of Austin, who
when Julian the Pelagian said, this was done, deserendo, replies, taking him at
his word, who could not but profess that God does thus, the Scripture expressly
testifying as much; and touching the manner mentioned by him, adds, whether
God does this, deserendo, or alio modo sive explicabili, sive inexplicabili, it
matters not. An Arminian spirit spares not to join himself with Julian the
Pelagian in affronting Austin thus discoursing out of the word of God, and to
profess, that that doctrine of Gods punishing sin with sin is a common
error; whereas the Apostle professes in express terms, that, Herein they
received such recompense of their error as was meet: and what is recompense
here but punishment? and wherein consisted it, but in defiling themselves
contrary to nature, as the Scripture plainly testifies, saying, Men with men
working that which is unseemely, and receiving in themselves such recompense of
their error, as was meet. And Arminius spares not to profess, that, Omnis
paena Deum authorem habet. Wherein yet we concur not with Arminius. We deny
that Omnis paena habet Deum authorem. It is true that Paena positiva, not of
all punishment that consists in privation, such as sin is; For Malum, as
Austin long ago pronounced, non habet causam efficientem but deficientem. Yet
we confess that God could keep any man from any sin, but if he will not,
this is not sufficient to make him the author of it. It is only a culpable
defect that makes one the author of sin; that is, when he fails of doing
that which he ought to do. But God is bound to none to preserve him from
sin, any otherwise then his own free will does bind him; for he has mercy on
whom he will: and so also on the other side, He hardneth whom he will.

Yet I have given no instances in any passages of the Old Testament, which give
plentiful testimony of Gods secret providence of evil; the evidence whereof
did wring from Austin this confession. Contra Julian. Pelag. lib. 5. cap. 3. Et
multa alia commemorare possemus, in quibus aliquando appareat occulto judicio
Dei fieri perversitatem cordis ut non audiatur quod verum dicitur, and inde
peccetur, and si^ ipsum peccatum praecedentis paena peccati. Nam credere
mendacio and non credere veritati utique peccatum est. Venit tamen ab ea
caecitate cordis, quae occulto judicio Dei, sed tamen justo, etiam paena
peccati monstratur. And in his Book De Great and lib. arbitr. cap. 20. inquiring
how it is said that the Lord bid Shimei to curse David; Quomodo dixit Dominus
huic homini maledicere David? Quis sapiens and intelligit? How did God bid this
man curse David? Who is wise and he shall understand? Non enim jubendo dixit,
ubi obedientia laudaretur, sed quod ejus voluntatem proprio vitio suo malum in
hoc peccatum judicio suo justo and occulto inclinavit. Ideo dictum est, dixit
ei dominus. Nam si jubenti obtemperasset Deo, laudandus potius quam puniendus
esset, sicut ex hoc peccato postea novimus esse punitum. Neither says he, is
the cause concealed, why God thus dealt with Shimei, Hoc est cor ejus malum in
hoc peccatum miserit vel dimiserit (I express it rather in Austins words then
mine own, because the adversaries of Gods truth, think it enough to pass the
censure of blasphemy upon ought that we deliver herein.) Now the cause was, Ut
videat Dominus, inquit, humilitatem meam and retribuat mihi bona pro delicto
ejus in die isto, That God may see my humility says David, and recompense me
good for his cursing this day. Ecce quomodo probatur (thus Austin goes on) Deum
uti cordibus etiam malorum ad laudem atque adjumentum honorum. Thus, (says he)
he used Judas betraying Christ, thus he used the Jews crucifying Christ: and
how great good things did he thereby procure to all that should at any time
believe? Who also uses the Devil himself, though most wicked, yet he uses
him optime most holily, for the exercising and proving of the faith and Piety
of the righteous, not to himself who knows all things before they come to
pass, but to us, who had need that after such manner God should proceed with
us. The adding hereunto, how God wrought in the heart of Absalom to confound
the counsel of Achitophel, he breaks forth into this exclamation in the
beginning of the next chapter. Who would not tremble at the consideration of
these judgments divine, whereby God works even in the hearts of wicked men
what he will, yet rendering unto them according to their deserts. Then making
mention of Rehoboam his despising the counsel of the Ancients, as also that 2 Chronicles. 1. how God stirred up the spirit of the Philistines and Arabians against
Ioram, and they came up upon the land of Judah and laid it wast. Here, says
Austin, it is manifest that God does raise up enemies to lay such countries
wast, whom he judges worthy of such punishments. But yet, says he, will you
say they came not up by their own will, or did they so come up by their own
will, as to make that untrue which the Scripture says, namely, that God
stirred them up? Nay rather both are true, for both they came up by their own
will, and yet God stirred up their spirits to come; which also, says he, may
be delivered in this manner, namely, that both God stirred up their spirit, and
also they came up by their own will. Agit enim Omnipotens in cordibus hominum
etiam motum voluntatis eorum: For the Almighty does work in the hearts of men,
the very motion of their will, that he may work by them that which he thinks
good to work by them, even he who knows not how to work any thing unjustly.
Unto these he adds variety of other testimonies all drawn out of the Word,
and concludes, His and talibus testimoniis divinorum eloquiorum quae omnia
commemorare nimis longum est, quantum existimo minifestetur, Operari Deum in
cordibus hominum ad inclinandas eorum voluntates quocunque voluerit sive ad
bona pro sua misericordia, sive ad mala pro meritis eorum, judicio utique suo
aliquando aperto, aliquando occulto, semper autem justo.

INTRODUCTION. SECT. III.
BEsides it takes from men all conscience of sin, and makes sin to be no
sin; we use to say, Necessitas non habet legem, Necessity has no law, etc.
ut est in superiori Sectione, usque ad finem Sectionis.

TWISSE Consideration.
THis Motive, as this Author calls it, has the first place in the 16th
reason of Arminius; whereby he labors to disprove their opinion, who
conceive the object of Predestination to be the Mass of mankind not created;
as appears, in the declaration of his opinion made before the States of
Holland, etc. and it is the first particular of six, mentioned in that
sixteenth reason of his. And why should he divide it from the rest, and not
clap them together, into this rank of motives, to prepare him to the
renouncing of that Tenent, which here he impugneth, and add Arminius his other
ninteen reasons hereunto to the same purpose; if himself be privy to the cause
thereof, I am not? But as it lies I will consider it. Now it proceeds upon
supposition, that such a necessity of sinning is brought upon man by this
decree, as stands in opposition unto liberty. Whereunto I answer.

1. That this decree in reference to the act of denying grace, brings no
necessity at all of sinning upon man; it being only the divine decree of not
cureing by the grace of regeneration (that is by the grace of faith and
repentance) that natural infidelity and impenitency wherein every man is
borne; all men being conjecti in necessitatem peccandi, through the sin of
Adam, as Corvinus confesses, they being his own words. Now let every sober man
judge, whether to leave that infidelity and impenitency which God finds in a
man uncured, be to bring a necessity of sinning upon him.

2. Secondly, we answer, that notwithstanding that necessity of sinning
whereupon all are cast, as Cornivus speaks, yet there is no sin committed
by a natural and carnal man, which is not committed by him freely: The act of
lying, the act of blaspheaming, the act of whoring, the act of drunkenness,
gluttony, railing, and in general, every sinful act being freely committed,
by every one by whom it is committed, as is apparent by this, that there is not
one of these sinful acts, but is forborne by diverse natural and carnal men,
and therein they do abstain from the committing of it freely. And yet we say,
that even in abstaining from these acts, they do not abstain from sin, for
as much as they do not abstain from them in a gracious manner, and all by
reason of that original corruption which remains uncured in them, until such
time as God, who has mercy on whom he will, is pleased to cure it by the grace
of regeneration.

3. But because I imagine this Author lets fly at random, and keeps not
himself to the precise genius of the Tenent by him impugned, but rather aims
at our doctrine concerning providence divine, and the decree of God; according
whereunto we willing profess with Austin that, Non aliquid fit nisi Omnipotens
fieri velit, Enchir. 95. Therefore I answer in the third Place, That the
necessity following upon this will of God, is nothing prejudicial to the
liberty or contingency of second agents in their several operations. Although
I am not ignorant, that now a days it is the common and glorious course of our
Adversaries, very confidently to presume and presuppose, that upon the will of
God, passing upon the action of the creature, there follows a necessity,
standing in flat opposition to the liberty of rational agents; and no marvail,
for sic factitavit Hercules, Arminius the great Champion of their cause, his
learning served him to do so before them. As if the contumelious usages of our
Savior by Herod and Pontius Pilate, together with the Gentiles and people of
Israel, were not performed freely, but by mere necessity opposite to liberty.
For it cannot be denied, but that all these were gathered together against the
holy son of God, to do what Gods hand and Gods counsel had predestined to
be done. Acts 4. 28. And in like sort, they that through disobedience stumbled
at the word of God, did not freely disobey the Word, because Peter professes
of them in express terms, that Hereunto they were ordained. And after the
same manner it is to be conceived of the Kings, that gave their Kingdoms to
the Beast, namely that they did it not freely in as much as the Holy Ghost
says, that God put into their hearts to fulfill his will, and to consent and
give their Kingdom to the Beast.

Yet the Church of Ireland in their Articles set forth by as good Authority, as
the Articles of the Church of England, Art. 11. having professed that, God from
all eternity, did by his unchangeable counsel ordain whatsoever in time should
come to pass; to prevent such like objections as this Author fashioneth,
forthwith add, Yet so as thereby no violence is offered to the wills of
reasonable creatures, and neither the liberty nor the contingency of second
causes is taken away, but established rather. And Austin in his Book De Great.
and Liber. Arbitr. where he speaks as freely of Gods effectual Providence
working in evil, as no where more, in so much as our Adversaries take great
exceptions against his speeches (such as formerly delivered) and that in
express terms: His main drift notwithstanding, and scope in that Book is to
prove, that notwithstanding the divine operation, in working the motion of the
creature as he thinks good, yet is the creature never a whit the less free in
its own operation. And indeed where grace is wanting, there is too much will
rather then too little, unto that which is evil; according to that he writes
also elsewhere, Libertas sine gratia non est libertas sed contumacia. And if
Gods operation prejudiceth not the liberty of the creature, much less the will
of God. For though not Epist. 28.
any thing comes to pass unless God wills it, whether it be good or evil,
yet with this difference as Austin in the same place professes, He will have
that which is good come Enchirid. cap. 95.
to pass by the effecting of it, but evil only by his permitting of it. Non
aliquid fit nisi Omnipotens fieri velit, vel sinendo ut fiat vel ipse faciendo.

But though Austin and the Church of Ireland, yea and the Word of God teaches
this; yet the Tragaedian, as this Author says, could see the contrary, that
is, perceive the evidence of the contrary, which none of these saw. And is not
this a pretty Comaedy, that a Tragaedian and Zeno's servant must be brought in,
and that in a confidentiary supposition to out face, not Divines only both
ancient and late, but the very word of God? For it is as clear forsooth, that
what comes to pass by the will of God, and by the effectual operation of God,
does not come to pass freely; and consequently, that the doctrine (which
maintains that evil comes to pass by the will of God, as the crucifying of
Christ by the predestination of God, or by the operation of God; as the Rent of
the ten Tribes from the two, and the hardening of Pharaoh's heart, so as not to
let Israel go, God professes to be his work) takes away all conscience of
sin? All this I say is as clear (if we believe this Author) as that Seneca's
Tragaedies are the Oracles of God. And I pray consider, must it not take away
as well all conscience of righteousness, whether of faith, or of repentance,
or of obedience; unless we deny faith to be the gift of God, repentance to be
the gift of God; unles we deny that God is he, Who makes us perfect to every
good work, working in us that which is pleasing in his sight, that God is he
that puts his own spirit in us, and causes Ephesians. 5. 8. 2 Timoth. 2. Acts
11. 18. Heb. 13. 20. Ezech. 30. 28
us to walk in his statutes, and to keep his judgments and do them?

Yet what does Seneca speak of the divine will, or divine operation? Did the
Tragaedian under the term of Fate, denote the divine decree, or the divine
administration of things, which is plentifully revealed to us in the word of
God? Austin I am sure thought otherwise in more places then one, in Psalm. 31.
on these words, Pronunciabo adversum me, He blames those who when they are
found in their sins say, Fatum mihi fecit, stellae meae fecerunt, But says
he, Quid est fatum? Quae sunt stellae? certe istae quas in Coelo conspicimus;
and Qui eas fecit? Deus. Quis eas ordinavit? Deus, ergo vides quod voluisti
dicere, Deus fecit ut peccarem: Then he tells of others, who said that Mars
facit Homicidam, Venus Adulterum. So that Fatum with them were second causes,
which we all know in their operations, do both work by necessity of nature,
and have no power to maintain the free will of man; and in Psalm. 91. Quaeris
ab illo quid sit Fatum, and dicit stellae malae. Quaeris ab illo, quis fecit
stellas, quis ordinavit stellas; non habet quid tibi respondeat nisi Deus. It Is
true indeed, the Pelagians did object the Stoicall Fate unto Austin, as if his
doctrine favored of it; and what does he answer thereunto? Nec sub nomine
gratiae Fatum asserimus, quia nullis hominum meritis dicimus Dei gratiam
antecedi. Si autem quibusdam omnipotentis Dei voluntatem placet Fati nomine
nuncupari, profanas quidem verborum novitates evitamus, sed de verbis
contendere non amamus.

Yet because we are to give the Devil his right; With what conscience could
this Author profess of this Fatum of the Heathens, that their faith thereof
did take away all conscience of sin, seeing it did not take away the
conscience of sin in her, who is made by the Poet to utter this; as appears
in the same Author within a few lines after. For there she professes, that if
God the creator of all, should make his wrath break forth against her, and
strike her with a thunderbolt from heaven, yet this were no sufficient
punishment for her sins. Queen Iocastas word are these.

Non si ipse mundum concitans divum sator
Corusca saeva teia jaculetur manu
Unquam rependam sceleribus paenas pares.
She justifies God and condemns her self, notwithstanding her former words
used only as it seems, to pacify the furious mood of her Son and Husband
Oaedipus. Will not such one day, rise up in judgment against many Christians,
who unless themselves may be exempted from that providence divine, whereby he
moves all things agreeable to their natures, are so apt to condemn God of
injustice, and justify themselves, as needing not to have any conscience of
sin? And which is most strange, they acknowledge Fate in this case to be
such, as that it necessitated even God himself; as appears by the last Chorus.

Fatis agimur, cedite Fatis,
Non sollicitae possunt curae
Mutare rati stamina fusi.
Quicquid patimur mortale Genus,
Quicquid facimus venit ex alto:
Servatque sua decreta colus
Lachesis dura revoluta manu.
Omnia certo tramite vadunt;
Primusque dies dedit extremum
Non illa Deo vertisse licet,
Quae nexa suis currunt causis
It cuique ratus prece non ulla
Mobilis ordo, multis ipsum
Timuisse nocet, multi ad fatum
Venere suum dum fata timent.
But as I said before, whatsoever they conceived of Fate, and howsoever they
fashioned it, their opinion thereof did not expectorate all conscience of sin
in them, or urge them to justify or excuse themselves in their courses. For it
appears both of Oaedipus and Iocasta, that they not only condemned themselves,
but became self executioners of punishment upon themselves for their foul
crimes: the one pulling out his own eyes, judging himself unworthy to see the
light; and the other destroying herself. Though whatsoever they or the Poets
that set them forth conceived of Fate, in this case of theirs, it was only the
Oracles of the Devils, and his illusions that abused them; God giving them
over thereunto, and that no doubt most justly; when in a wicked curiosity they
desire to know, what shall become of them and their children: the Devil gives
forth his Oracles as he thinks good, afterward sets his wits on work to
accomplish them thereby, to gain the greater credit and reputation to himself,
and so much the more forcibly holds them in his snares.

But to proceed. This argument or motive is not yet at an end, but like as this
doctrine, is pretended to take away all conscience of sin, which is as much
as to say, all desert of sin on the one side; so it may be extended to show,
how it takes away all conscience of obedience, and all desert thereupon, on the
other side; to wit, in good actions. And indeed were it true, that the doctrine
did bereave a man of all free will, it were true, as Hierome says, that where
such necessity is, nec damnatio, nec Corona est But Austin has spent an whole
Book in proof of this, namely; that grace consists with freedom of will, unto
that which is good; and want of grace together with God's efficacious
operation, even in the worst of things, does consist also with freedom of will
unto that which is evil. But that in the state of nature man has no free will
to that which is good, but is a servant unto sin, I know no man that does or
can deny, unless withal he deny Original sin with the Pelagians; like as
indeed it is written of Grevincovius that great Arminian, that, Grevincovius
negavit peccatum Originale, quod and testibus convinci potest. And indeed this
Authors discourse bears strongly this way, whatsoever Protestation in show of
words he makes hereafter to the contrary. For it is apparent, that in this
place, the face of his discourse stands for freedom of will in all, as well
unto that which is good, as unto that which is evil. And albeit there is so
little difference between this and his former motive (touching the conscience
of sin) that it seems to be added only to make way for this sentence of
Hierome, which yet is nothing to the purpose, unless he can prove, that Gods
decrees do bereave men of liberty of their wills: yet very unhappily does he
carry himself herein and in far different manner from Hierom's expression,
though he places Corona in opposition to damnation; one whereof, to wit,
damnation, implies the merit of sin preceding: but the other, to wit, Corona,
no way implies any meritorious nature of obedience precedanious thereunto. But
this Author sticks not to apply a meritorious condition to good actions on the
one side, as well as to evil actions on the other. And if good actions were as
meritorious, and that naturally too, of the crown of righteousness, as evil
actions are of damnation. And withal he will have no more to decree, or work
the faith, and repentance, and obedience of one, then he does the infidelity,
and impenitency, and disobedience of another, least this his will and
operation, prove an adamantine chain, of necessity to draw them to faith, and
repentance, and obedience, whereas his wisdom thinks it fit, they should be
left to their own choice, whetherthey will believe and repent, yea or no. For
he does very considently presume, that every man has power to believe and
repent, and do any good work; which is as good, as in express terms to
profess, that there is no original sin at all; Notwithstanding so many
express testimonies of holy writ to the contrary, namely, John 12. of some
that, They could not believe. Romans 2. of others that, They could not repent.
Romans 8. of all that are in the flesh, that, They cannot please God. 1 Cor. 2.
of the natural man that, He neither perceives the things of God nor can know
them; of the Israelites in the Wilderness, that, God had not given them an
heart to perceive, nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear unto that day. Deutr.
29. 4. But these passages of holy Scripture, seem to have no place in this
Authors consideration, if so be they have in his Creed. This bed is something
too short for him to stretch himself thereon; and therefore he desires to
change his lodging, and to pass from the desert of good actions, to the desert
of evil actions, which he formerly insisted upon, and he tells a story of
Zeno's servant most suitable to his Iambick taken out of Seneca, though he
quotes the place of neither.

Well, Zeno's servant, he says, when he was punished by his Master for a fault
that he had done, told his Master out of his own grounds, that he was unjustly
beaten, because he was, Fato coactus peccare: and hereupon making his reckoning
without his host, concludes that, Certainly if Malefactors could not choose but
play their rude prankes, they could not be justly punished for them: Wherein he
tells us what the servant said; but what the Master answered, thereof he says
just nothing. Nay does he truly relate what the Servant said? Nothing less,
but shapes it, as he thinks good, that making his own bed, he may lie thereon
more softly. If we may believe Diogenes Laertius who reports the story, the
Servants answer was not Fato coactus sum peccare, but Fatale mihi erat furari.
For he took his ser^^^^ laying the thief, and though the servant took
advantage from his Masters do^^^^ of Fate, to frame an Apology for himself,
yet would not Zeno permit him to (...) thereby any privilege from stripes.
For, servum in furto deprehensum verberavit. A manifest evidence that even in
his opinion, the destiny he maintained was no just excuse for sin. And to
meet him in his own plea, when he said. Fatale mihi erat furari, and caedi
inquit: this was the answer he made to his servant, which answer of his this
Author either conceales, or was not privy to his own ignorance. And indeed
Chrysippus the Stoic, though an eager maintainer of Fate Stoicall, yet denied
not the liberty of men's wills, as appears in Cicero de Fato, though in his
opinion this doctrine of theirs did cohere. And Plutarch likewise in his book
De Fato professes as much. Fatum omnia continet, sicut etiam videtur, neque
tamen propterea omnia necessario eveniunt, sed unumquodque suo naturae modo.
Neither did Zeno conceive hereby all place to be taken away for persuasion, as
appears by his answer to Crates, when he took him by the cloak to draw him
away from Stilpo, saying, O Crates, commodissime auribus Philosophum teneas.
Cum igitur persuaseris, tum illum trahe. Nam si per vim egeris, corpus quidem
apud te, sed animus apud Stilponem erit. Neither were any Philosophers more
studious of Morality then the Stoics, They wrote De Bonis and Malis, de
Affectibus, de Virtute, de Fine, deque prima aestimatione, and de Actibus ac de
Officiis, de Adhortationibus and dehortationibus, as Diogenes writes in the
life of Zeno. And Austin de Civit. Dei cap. 9. professes of the Stoics, that,
though Omnia Fato fieri contenderent, yet, Non omnia necessitate fieri
dicerent. And more then this, whereas the Stoics were so jealous of
maintaining the liberty of men's wills, that they denied them of all other
things to be subject to necessity. Austin professes that their fear, of
subjecting the wills of men unto necessity, in this respect was a causeless
fear. Ibid. cap. 10. Unde nec illa necessitas formidanda est, quam formidando
Stoici laboraverunt, causas rerum ita distinguere ut quasdam subtraherent
necessitati, quasdam subderent; atque in his quas esse sub necessitate
noluerunt, posuerunt etiam nostras voluntates, ne videlicet non essent liberae,
si subderentur necessitati. And then proceeds to show, that there is a certain
necessity nothing prejudicial to the will, albeit the will be acknowledged in
subjection thereunto. And that necessity he describes to be this, as when we
say, that, Necesse est ut ita sit aliquid vel ita fiat; his words are these; Si
autem illa definitur esse necessitas, secundum quam dicimus necesse est, ut ita
sit aliquid, vel ita fiat, nescio cur eam timemus ne nobis libertatem auferat
voluntatis. Herein Austin professes to go beyond the Stoics, in
acknowledging a necessity whereunto the will of man is subject, and that
without detriment to the liberty thereof. Yet in my judgment, it would better
become a Christian Divine, to inform both himself and others out of the Word
of God, and rest thereon for the discovery of the nature of Providence and
Predestination divine, then to go a forraging among Poets and Stoics, for the
justification of his own, in point of Christian faith, and for the redargution
of the way of his Opposites.

INTRODUCTION. SECT. IV.
THese absurdities following too evidently from the upper Way, Others of the
same side wiling to decline them as rocks and precipices, do leave that Way,
and present man to God in his decree of reprobation, lying in the fault and
under the guilt of Original sin; and say, That God looking upon miserable
mankind lying in Adams sin, did decree the greatest part of them to eternal
torments in hell without remedy, for the manifestation of his severe Justice.

But notwithstanding this difference among themselves, they agree well enough
together. For this little jarre is not (in their judgments) enough to make a
breach between them, as we may see in the Conference at the Hague, and in the
Synod at Dort. In the Conference at the Hague the Contra-Remonstrants have
these words. Quoad sententiarum diversitatem in hoc argumento, quod Deus
hominem respexit Collat. Hag. Brand. p. 37.
in hoc decreto nondum creatum, vel creatum and lapsum, quia hoc ad fundamentum
hujus doctrinae non pertinet libenter alii alios aequitate Christiana
toleramus. After this in the Synod of Dort, they permitted Gomarus to go the
Supralapsarian way; and the Delegates of South Holland were very indifferent
which way they took. For these are their words, An Deus in eligendo
consideravit homines ut lapsos, an etiam ut nondum lapsos, existimant (viz. the
Delegates aforesaid) non esse necessarium ut definiatur, modo statuatur Act.
Synodal. page 3. and 48.
Deum in eligendo considerasse omnes homines in pari statu. And to say the
truth there is no reason why they should quarrel about circumstances, seeing
they agree in the substance. For they both say.

1. That the moving cause of reprobation is the alone will of God, and not the
sin of man original, or actual.

2. That the final impenitency and damnation of reprobates, are necessary and
unavoidable by Gods absolute decree.

These two things are the maxima gravamina that the other side stick at. So
that these two paths meet at last in the same way. But because this last is
chosen by the most, and latest maintainers of the absolute decree, as the more
moderate of the two, and the easyer to be defended, I will set down the
conclusion which I dislike in their way and words.

God has absolutely purposed from eternity, of his mere will and pleasure
without any consideration of actual continuance in sin and unbelief,
utterly to cast off from grace and glory, Millions of men considered in the
fall (even those whom he calls to repentance and solvation by the Preaching of
the Gospel) for the manifestation of his severity and Justice.

That all mankind is involved in the first sin and the fruits thereof, which
are corruption of nature, and the guilt of eternal death, I confidently
believe. But that God did absolutely intend to leave men in that woeful state
for ever, and upon this only sin, to build a peremptory decree of the
unavoidable damnation of the far greater part of mankind, I cannot yet be
persuaded.

Having thus plainly laid down the position, which I deem to be false, I come
now in the next place to deliver my reasons against it, which are of two sorts:

1. Such as first made me to question the truth of it. 2. Such as do for the
present convince me that it cannot be a truth.
TWISSE Consideration.
HEre breaks out the main reason, that moved this Author to represent the
different opinions of our Divines about the object of Predestination, that so a
way might be opened unto him at pleasure, to charge the former opinion with
what he thought good; and as for the proof of his criminations, he might the
better ease himself of the burden thereof, by showing the dissent of other
Devines of the same profession from the former in this particular, making
choice rather to shape the object of Predestination and reprobation, under the
notion of mankind, lying in the mass corrupt by the fall of Adam. For surely
it is to be presupposed, that they did not dissent from their former friends
without some reason, and this Author makes bold to insinuate, that these
absurdities mentioned by him were the reasons: As when he says, These
absurdities following too evidently from the upper way; Others of the same side
willing to decline them, as rocks and precipices do leave that way. But that
these were the motives whereby they were induced to decline the former opinion,
and to embrace the latter, he proves not, nor so much as adventureth upon the
proof thereof, but leaves unto his credulous reader to supply that by his
forwardness, to take it upon trust; as if this discourser by his moral
carriage, might win the opinion of so much worthiness, as to be a man with
whom you may well play at Put-finger in the dark, quicum in tenebris mices.
And yet Arminius might have taught him, that there is a middle opinion between
these; namely, of those who make the object of predestination the mass of
mankind created, but not yet corrupted. And he puts this opinion upon Junius,
and appeals to his Theses, as giving evident testimony thereunto. Now there is
no show or color of reason, why, to avoid the absurdities premised by this
Author, any man should decline the first way, and embrace the second, which is
the way of Junius. And this I conceive to be the main reason, why this second
way is altogether dissembled by this Author, or by the spirit that guided him.
For albeit it was for this advantage (who hankes after every sorry
consideration to serve his turn in the way of motive, learning to represent
the multiplicity of opinions hereabouts amongst our Divines:) yet it being a
matter of greater moment, to gain the justification of his absurdities charged
upon the first way, from the mouths or practice of our Divines, at least in
appearance: and some color hereof he finds by declining the first way and
falling upon the third; but no color at all by declining the first way and
falling upon the second. Therefore he thought it a part of his wisdom
altogether to dissemble the second, and to represent the opinion of those
Divines who decline the first (yea and second too) and fall upon the third. But
suppose Iunius had preferred the third way and not the second, Had he done it
out of a desire to decline the absurdities here mentioned? It is apparent by
that his conference with Arminius (which yet he set not forth, but the Arminian
party after his death) that he maintains all these considerations to have
their place in Predestination, and therefore makes Hominem communiter
consideratum the object of predestination, which as it is a notion abstract
from all the three special notions of nondum conditum, or conditum, but nondum
corruptum, or denique corruptum, so it is indifferently applyable unto them
all. And indeed Piscator resolves the question about the object of
Predestination, namely, that as Predestination includes the decree of creating
men unto different ends, so the object must necessarily be mankind not yet
created; as it includes the decree of permitting all to fall in Adam, so the
object (as he thinks) must be mankind created, but not yet corrupted; and
lastly as it includes the decree of choosing some out of that corrupt mass, and
refusing others or leaving them in it. so the object of his judgment must be
mankind both created and corrupted. And Arminius himself professes, that the
twenty reasons wherewith he disputes against the first way, may also be
accommodated against the other ways. And albeit the followers of the second
and third way do think that they can better maintain their Tenent, and free it
from the absurdities wherewith the other ways are charged; yet it follows
not herehence, that therefore they did justify them, the contrary whereunto
appears in the particular of Iunius, as before I mentioned. Moulin indeed
disputes against the first, but does he, to decline that, subsist in the third,
as touching the making of the corrupt Mass the object of reprobation? it is
apparent he does not. But as reprobation denotes Gods decree of damnation, he
premiseth thereunto, the foresight of final impenitency. Of this opinion of
his, this Author takes no notice. Yet is Moulin sound throughout in the
doctrine of election; wherein if this Author did concur with him, we should
nothing trouble our selves to take him off from his concurrence with Moulin in
that particular of reprobation. And we of the first way are willing to
profess, that God neither damnes nor decrees to damn any man, but for sin
and final perseverance therein; nor so only, but in plain terms to pronounce,
that in no moment of nature does Gods intention of damnation precede the
consideration of sin, and final impenitency; though we do not make the
consideration of sin to precede the intention of damnation, as Moulin does.
And to my understanding, other reasons there are, which cast Divines upon the
third way, then the declining of these absurdities mentioned by this Author; as
namely, that the very notions of election and reprobation, the one being
conceived to be an act of mercy, the other an act of justice, do presuppose
sin. And whereas Arminius in his conference with Iunius, produces five
reasons against the first way, no less then four of them proceed on this
manner; The first thus, Praedestinatio est voluntas Dei de illustranda sua
gloria per misericordia^ and justitia^: At illa voluntas locum non habet in
nondum condito ceu condendo. The third thus, Praedestinatio est pars
providentiae administrantis and guberna^tis humanu^ genus; ergo posterior
natura actu creationis vel proposito creandi. Si posterior actu creationis vel
propositio creandi homine^, jam homo praedestinationis objectum non est
consideratus, ut nondu^ conditus. His 4th argument is this, Predestinatio est
praeparatio supernaturalium bonoru^; ergo praecedit communicatio naturaliu^,
and propterea creatio in natura sive actu, sive in decreto Dei. His last reason
is of the same nature thus, Illustratio sapientiae Dei per creatione^ prior est
illustratione sapientiae Dei quae est administratio praedestinationis, 1 Cor.
1. 21. Ergo creatio prior est praedestinatione. To all which reasons of his, I
have answered in my Vindic. Great. Dei. lib. 1. part. 1. De Praedestin. digress.
5. in several chapters. Only the second argument of Arminius insisteth upon
Gods ordination of man's fall. And to be freed from the trouble of answering
this argument, is the only thing that I know we gain, by leaving the first and
second way, and embarking our selves in the third. But how freed? surely only
so far, as that the doctrine of election and reprobation, supposing Adams
fall, does not engage us to inquire into divine providence concerning Adams
fall. But nevertheless it cannot be denied, but that had not God permitted
Adam to fall, he had never fallen. And we that take the first way, acknowledge
no other Providence divine concerning the ingresse of sin, as sin, into the
world, but in the way of permission. Sin as sin admitting no cause
efficient, but deficient only. And it is utterly impossible, that God, either
in doing what he does, or in forbearing to do what he does not, should in any
culpable, or justly blameable manner be deficient. And if it be farther
demanded, whether upon Gods permission it follows, August. de Civit. Dei. l.
12. c. 7.
that sin shall be committed by the creature; We readily profess it does.
This Vorstius acknowledges a favorite of the Arminians. Nay does not Arminius
himself deliver it expressly, where he says, That when God permits the
willing of ought, Necesse est ut nullo argumentorum genere persuadeatur ad
nolendum? This he delivers without all qualification of the necessity
mentioned, which we do not. And this also Navarettus a Papist professes, and
though he be a Dominican, yet I know no Jesuit that opposes him in this. And
if any man infer herehence, that then God determining to permit sin, did
determine that sin should enter into the World. We willingly grant that God
did so ordain namely, that sin should come to pass by his permission. Non
aliquid fit (says Austin) nisi Omnipotens fieri velit, vel sinendo ut fiat,
vel ipse Lib. 2. de Amiss. great. and statis peccati. c. 14.
faciendo. And Bellarmine professes, that, Bonum est mala fieri Deo
permittente: so that herein God does not will evil, but that which is good in
the acknowledgement of Bellarmine; and that in the heat of his opposition
against our Divines in this particular. And Arminius is express in saying,
Voluit Deus Achabum mensuram scelerum implere. And what is this but, Peccata
peccatis cumulare? And though the Jesuits and Arminians do Exam. p. 162.
with all their force resist, yet it evidently follows from the notion of
efficacious grace embraced by the one, and by the notion of an efficacious
impediment of sin, dictated by Arminius himself. For efficacious grace with
the Jesuits, consists in the congruity thereof, and the congruity thereof
consists in this, that God foreseeth that upon the confession thereof sin
will be avoided. Now what is the reason why God grants such a grace, whereupon
he sees sin will not be avoided; and denies such a grace, upon the granting
whereof, he knows full well that sin would be avoided; but because his
pleasure is, that sin shall be committed by his permission, and not be
avoided, although he has given them grace sufficient to avoid it, as they say,
and it was most true of Adam in the state of innocence. In like sort does
Arminius distinguish of, Peceati impedimentum sufficiens and efficax,
Efficacious hinderance of sin, is that whereby God sees sin will be
avoided; sufficient is only that whereby a man may avoid it if he will. But
withal he confesses, that God in the Promptuary of his wisdom, has not only
such impediments as are sufficient to the avoiding of any sin, but such also,
as whereby any sin would indeed be avoided, were he pleased Armin. Exam. p.
157.
to grant them. But yet as often as he thinks good to permit sin, he does not
grant such impediments. And is not this a manifest evidence, that it is Gods
will, that sin shall come to pass (to wit, as often as it does come to
pass) by his permission? But suppose all our Divines that embrace the third
way, do imagine the absurdities here spoken of, to be justly chargeable upon
the first way. Yet as he thinks them in an error, while they conceive they can
with ease avoid these absurdities by their third way, let him be pleased to
conceive, they may as well be in an error, in thinking them justly chargeable
upon the first way; and consequently their opinion is nothing sufficient to
justify, that they are unremoveable by them that embrace the first way.

It is true there is no cause of breach either of Unity or Amity between our
Divines upon this difference, as I showed in my digressions De Praedestinatione
Digress. 1. seeing neither of them derogate either from the prerogative of Gods
grace, or of his sovereignty over his creatures, to give grace to whom he will,
and to deny it to whom he will, and consequently, to make whom he will vessels
of mercy, and whom he will vessels of wrath; but equally they stand for the
divine prerogative in each. And as for the ordering of Gods decrees of
creation, permission of the fall of Adam, giving grace of faith and repentance
unto some, and denying it to others, and finally saving some and damning
others, whereupon only arise the different opinions, as touching the object of
predestination and reprobation, it is merely Apex Logicus, a point of Logic.
And were it not a mere madness, to make a breach of unity or charity in the
Church of God, merely upon a point of Logic? Thus have I justified the
improbability and utter unlikelihood, that ever any schism will be made in the
Church of God, upon these nice and mere Logical differences, in my Vindic.
Great. Dei, which this Author is acquainted with as appears by a passage that
hereafter he represents therehence, and that farther into the Book then these
my digressions are upon the point of predestination, but is content to take no
notice thereof, least it might hinder the course of his Scene, whereunto it is
fit he should be serviceable. And as for the two Articles here mentioned,
wherein they are said unanimously to agree, and which he calls maxima
gravamina. It is true they do agree herein, but it may be in a far other
sense, then he is willing should be taken notice of. For as for the first,

1. That the moving cause of reprobation, is the alone will of God, and not the
sin of man original or actual.

1. This is true in proportion to election, that like as no good work of man is
the moving cause of election, but only the will of God; so no sin or evil
work of man is the cause of reprobation, but only the will of God.

1. That so it is of election, the Apostle both

1. Says, Election is not of Works but of him that calls.

2. And proves thus, Before Esau and Jacob were borne, or had done good or
evil, it was said, The Elder shall serve the Younger; therefore Election is
not of Works (that is of good works) but of him that calls.

2. That so it is of reprobation, I prove by the same argument of the Apostle,
thus, Before Esau and Jacob were borne, or had done good or evil, it was said
the Elder shall serve the Younger; therefore reprobation stands not of works
(that is of evil works) but of the mere pleasure of God.

1. And like as this is farther evident by Gods course of calling in the point
of Election, as the Apostle intimates, for as much as God calls effectually
whom he will in bestowing faith and repentance upon them. For as the Apostle
afterward professes, He has mercy on whom he will.

2. So it is as evident in the point of reprobation, in as much as God refuses
to call whom he will, by denying faith and repentance unto them, as afterward
the same Apostle professes, saying, that God hardneth whom he will.

2. And this doctrine we do explicate by distinguishing that which our
Adversaries desire to confound, least their cheating carriage should be
discovered, as formerly I have showed.

For Predestination and Reprobation, may be considered either quoad
Praedestinantis and Reprobantis actum; or quoad Praedestinationis and
Reprobationis terminum, as much as to say, quoad res praedestinatione and
reprobatione praeparatas, that is, either as touching the act of Predestination
and Reprobation, or as touching the things decreed by Predestination or
Reprobation. Now as touching the act of Predestination never any man (says
Aquinas) was so mad as to say that the merits of man are the cause of
predestination. And why so? Because the act of predestination is the act of
Gods will, and formerly (says he) I have showed, that there can be no cause of
the will of God, as touching the act of God willing, but only as touching the
things willed by God. Now apply this to reprobation. For is not reprobation as
touching the act of God reprobating, the very act also of Gods will? This
cannot be denied: and herehence it follows, that like as there can be no cause
of Gods will, as touching the act of God willing, so there can be no cause of
reprobation, as touching the act of God reprobating. And like as it was a mad
thing in Aquinas his judgment to say, that merits were the cause of
predestination, as touching the act of God predestinating; so it is no less
madness in his judgment, to maintain that either sin original or actual,
can be the meritorious cause of reprobation, as touching the act of God
reprobating.

And what are the reasons hereof in School Divinity? Why surely these. 1.
Predestination and Reprobation are eternal, but good works and evil works
of the creature are temporal; but impossible it is, that a thing temporal,
can be the cause of that which is eternal. 2. The act of Predestination and
Reprobation is the act of Gods will, and the act of Gods will, like as the act
of his knowledge, is the very essence of God even God himself; and therefore
to introduce a cause of Gods will, is to bring in a cause of God himself. 3.
If works or faith foreseen be any moving cause of Divine election, then either
they are so of their own nature, or by the mere constitution of God. Not of
their own nature, as it is apparent; therefore by the constitution of God: but
this cannot stand neither. For if by the constitution of God, then it would
follow, that God did constitute, that upon foresight of man's faith he would
elect him, that is, ordain him to salvation. And what I pray is to constitute?
Is it any other then to ordain? And herehence it follows, God did ordain
that upon foresight of man's faith, he would ordain him unto salvation: Whereby
the eternal ordination of God, is made the object of his eternal ordination;
whereas it is well known, and generally received, that nothing, but that which
is temporal, can be the object of divine ordination which is eternal. In like
sort I dispute of reprobation: if sin be the cause thereof, then either of
its own nature it is the cause thereof, or by the ordinance of God: Not of its
own nature as all are ready to confess: if you say by the ordinance of God,
then it follows God did ordain, that upon the foresight of man's sin, he
would ordain him unto damnation. For reprobation is Gods ordaining a man unto
damnation, as touching one part of the things decreed thereby; which we come to
consider in the next place, and that both in election and in reprobation,
having hitherto considered them as touching the act of God electing or
reprobating, and showed that thus they can have no cause.

But as touching the things decreed, thereby they may have a cause as Aquinas
professes and we profess with him. As for example to begin with election.

The things decreed or destinated to a man in election are two, Grace and
Glory. Now both these may have a cause: For both Grace is the cause of glory;
and Christ's merits are the cause both of grace and glory. But let grace be
rightly understood. For in the confuse notion of grace many are apt to lurk,
thereby to shut their eyes against the evidence of truth. For no marvail if men
be in love with their own errors; and in proportion to the love of error,
such is their hatred of Divine truth opposite thereunto. Now by grace, we
understand the grace of regeneration, whereby that natural corruption of mind
and will (commonly called blindness of mind and hardness of heart) which we
all bring into the world with us through original sin, is in part cured. More
distinctly we call this grace, the grace of faith and repentance, whereby our
natural infidelity and impenitency is cured. Now this grace we say God
bestows on whom he will, finding all equal in infidelity and impenitency. For
so the Apostle tells us, that, God has mercy on whom he will. And as God
bestows it on Romans 9. 18.
whom he will, not finding any cause in man any way moving him, either in its
own nature, or by divine constitution, moving him to bestow this grace on any.
So the Apostle 2 Timoth. 1. 9. God has saved us, and called us with an holy
calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
grace. And indeed we being all found dead in sin, what could be found in one
to move God to bestow the life of faith and repentance upon him, more then upon
another? And if any such thing were found in man moving God hereunto, then
should grace be bestowed according unto works, that is in the Fathers phraise
(as Bellarmine acknowledges) according unto merits; which was condemned 1200
years ago, in the Synod of Palestine: and Pelagius himself was driven to
subscribe unto it, otherwise they had condemned him also.

But as touching the conferring of glory, God does not bestow this on whom he
will, finding men equal without any moving cause thereunto, even in man; For
though there be no moving cause hereunto in man of its own nature, yet there is
to be found, a moving cause in man by constitution divine, whereby God is as it
were moved to bestow solvation on some, and not on others. For God has made a
gracious promise, that whosoever believes and repents, and continues in
faith and repentance unto death shall be saved, and whosoever believes not and
repents not shall be damned. So then though men are equal in original
sin, and in natural corruption, and God bestows faith and repentance on
whom of them he will, curing their corruption in whom he will: yet when, he
comes to the conferring of glory, men are not found equal in moral condition;
and accordingly God cannot be said on like manner, to bestow glory and
solvation on who^ he will; For he has tied himself by his own constitution to
bestow solvation on none, but such as dye in thestate of grace. Yet, I confess,
some say that God bestows solvation on whom he will, in as much as he is the
author of their faith and repentance, and bestows these graces on who^ he will,
yet certainly there is a different manner in the use of this phraise of
bestowing this or that on whom he will. For when God bestows faith and
repentance, he finds them on whom he will bestow it, no better then others:
But when he comes to the bestowing of glory he finds them, on whom he bestows
that, far better them others.

Now we come to the things decreed in reprobation, and these are two.

1. The denial of the grace of regeneration, that is, of the grace of faith
and repentance, whereby man's natural infidelity and impenitency is cured.

2. The denial of glory, and the inflicting of damnation. The first of these,
to wit, the denial of grace mentioned, is made to whom he will. And it must
needs be so, in ease God gives this grace to whom he will. And the Apostle
professes, that as God has mercy on whom he will, so he hardneth whom he
will. And as God denies this grace to whom he will, so did he decree to deny it
to whom he will: Yet there is a difference considerable: For albeit God
hardneth whom he will, by denying unto them the grace of faith and repentance;
yet notwithstanding, like as it is just with God to inflict damnation upon
them, for that sin whether original or actual, wherein he finds them, when
the ministry of the word is afforded them: so likewise it cannot be denied to
be just with God, to leave their infidelity and impenitency wherein he finds
them uncured. But yet because God has not made any such constitution, namely,
that whosoever is found in infidelity and impenitency, shall be so left and
abandoned by him: therefore he is properly said, as to cure it in whom he will,
so to leave it uncured in whom he will, finding them all equal in original
sin, and consequently lying equally in this their natural infidelity and
impenitencv. So we may justly say, there is no cause at all in man of this
difference, to wit, why God cures infidelity and impenitency in one and not in
another, but it is the mere pleasure of God that is the cause of this
difference. And if any list to contend hereabouts, we shall be willing to
entertain him, and confer our strength of argumentation on this point.

2. But as touching the denial of glory and inflicting of damnation, which is
the second thing decreed in reprobation, there is always found a cause motive,
yea and meritorious hereof, to wit, both of the denial of the one and
inflicting of the other: And God does not proceed herein according to the mere
pleasure of his will, and that by reason of his own constitution, having
ordained that whosoever continues finally in infidelity, in profane courses,
and impenitency shall be damned. And albeit on the other side it may be said in
some sense (as formerly I have showed) that God saves whom he will, in as much
as he is the author of faith, which he bestows on whom he will; yet in no
congruous sense can he be said to damn whom he will, for as much as he is not
the author of sin, as he is the author of faith. For every good thing he
works, but sin and the evil thereof he only permits, not causes it. And
lastly, as God does not damn whom he will, but those only whom he finds
finally to have persevered in sin without repentance: so neither did he
decree to damn, or reprobate to damnation whom he will, but only those who
should be found finally to persevere in sin without repentance.

Now let us apply this to the Article we have in hand, which is this; The
moving cause of reprobation is the only will of God, and not the sin of man
original or actual: and for the explication hereof, according to that which
has been formerly delivered, We say that reprobation does signify, either a
purpose of denying grace, as above mentioned, or a purpose of inflicting
damnation. And each may be considered, either as touching the act of Gods
decree, or as touching the things decreed. We show how the Article holds or
holds not, being differently accommodated.

1. As touching the things decreed,

1. As touching the denial of grace, We say, That God decreed of his mere
good pleasure to deny unto some the grace of faith and repentance, for the
curing of that natural infidelity and impenitency which is found in all,
without any motive cause hereunto found in one more then in another.

2. As touching the inflicting of Damnation, We say, That God decreed to
inflict damnation on some, not of his mere pleasure, but merely for their
final perseverance in sin without repentance.

2. As touching the very act of Gods decree, We say, Nothing in man could be
the cause hereof, but the mere pleasure of God, as Aquinas professes it a mad
thing to devise in man a cause of divine predestination, as touching the act of
God predestinating, and as I have showed, because both are eternal and the act
of Gods will, which is God himself: and withal to devise a cause hereof, is
to cast our selves upon an unavoydable absurdity, as namely to say, That God
did ordain that upon the foresight of this or that in men, he would ordain
some of them to solvation, and others unto damnation. And indeed the harshnesse
of the Tenent, consists chiefly in confounding these different considerations,
whereby a color is cast, as if we maintained that God did decree to damn men
of his mere pleasure and not for sin.

2. As touching the second which is this, That the final impenitency and
damnation of reprobates are necessary, and unavoydable by Gods absolute decree.
Here as it were to make weight, impenitency and damnation are clapped together,
as unavoydable by Gods absolute decree; whereas it is without all question,
that supposing impenitency to be final, damnation is unavoydable by the Law of
God, as who has ordained, that whosoever dies in impenitency shall be damned.
And as for impenitency, does this Author, or any Arminian deny it to be a fruit
of that original corruption wherein all are borne? I persuade my self they
do not. Corvinus professes of all, That by the sin of Adam, they are,
conjecti in necessitatem peccandi. Then again does he maintain Defens. Armin.
page 394.
that any is able to cure this but God. It seems he does not by that which
follows, where he signifies that God (in his opinion) did not absolutely
intend to leave men to that woeful estate wherein they were borne. What then?
Will he have God bound to cure it in all? If so, then certainly he does cure it
in all. For it were impossible God should not do that, whereunto he is obliged
in the way of justice. But nothing more manifest, then that God does not cure
it in all: therefore certainly he is not bound to cure it in all. But I imagine
he conceives that God is ready to cure it in all, and it is man's fault that he
does not cure it in any. As much as to say, if man would do somewhat which he
may do, then God would give him repentance. Here is good stuff toward; and
undoubtedly, this is the critical point as touching the nature of efficacious
grace. Yet this I know full well, how careful the greatest Rabbis amongst the
Arminians are to decline. And will it not manifestly follow herehence, that the
grace of repentance is given secundum merita, according to some good work of
man that went before? Which was condemned in the Synod of Palestine above 1200
years ago; Nay what will you say, if their doctrine hereabouts in the issue
thereof comes to this, namely that God does work in man, (...) Velle credere;
modo Velit, (...) Velle resipiscere, modo Velit, as I can show it under the
hand of one? and I have cause to suspect that it comes also from another manner
of hand, then his, with whom I have had to deal with. And in this case it
shall not be true that God shows mercy on whom he will, in giving faith and
repentance, but rather he shall show mercy on whom man will. And like as when a
question is made, why such a man is rewarded by the Magistrate, no wise man
will answer because it is the pleasure of the Magistrate so to reward him, but
rather represent the cause on man's part, why he was reward: so if God shows
mercy in giving repentance according to some preparation found in one man,
rather then in another, it shall not be said, that God has mercy on whom he
will, but rather the reason on man's part is to be represented, why God does
give him repentance. Yet these Petitions he calls maxima gravamina on the part
of Reprobation.

And will he not give us leave to propose in proportion hereunto, our maxima
gravamina, as touching their opinion in point of election? namely. 1. That it
is not the mere pleasure of God, but the faith and repentance of a man
foreseen, that is the moving cause of divine election. 2. And that every man
has power to believe and repent, and no man has more cause to be thankful
unto God; for giving him any more grace to believe and repent (in the way of
grace preventing) then he gives to reprobates. I speak of reprobate men, but
for ought I yet know to the contrary, I may as well deliver it of the reprobate
Angels. And as touching that which they call grace subsequent, which is only
Gods concurrence, seeing God affords that to any sinful act, they may thank
themselves, rather then God for that, like as for Gods concurrence unto any act
of sin. These doctrines are no gravamina to the tender consciences of our
Adversaries.

The doctrine opposite to this which here he dislikes must needs be this, God
has not absolutely purposed from eternity of his mere will and pleasure, but
upon consideration of actual continuance in sin and unbelief, to cast off
men from grace and glory. Now this actual continuance in unbelief I presume
must be final; and upon the consideration hereof, God casts them off from
grace: but I pray from what grace? surely from the grace of faith; otherwise it
stands not in any contradiction to our Tenent. So that their doctrine in the
issue comes to this, Whom God foresees that they will not believe unto death,
he decrees that they shall not believe unto death: and applied unto repentance,
thus; Whom God foresees that they will not repent unto death, he decrees that
they shall not repent unto death. This is the sober and savoury doctrine of
these impugners of the grace of God: and yet they perceive not what a spirit of
giddiness possesses them in this.

It is without question (I think) that God leaves many in that woeful estate
which here is called corruption of nature (no more, without any specification
wherein it consists) the guilt whereof is eternal death; and seeing that if he
so leaves them, it cannot be denied, but that God intended so to leave them.
All the question is, Whether God did absolutely intend to leave them. Now had
this Author, as he professes his dislike of Gods absolve intention hereof, so
dealt clearly, and showed how he did intend so to leave some, as namely upon
what condition, or upon foresight whereof, and withal given some proof of his
assertion, his ingenuity had been commendable. Yet we say, that God did not at
all intend to leave men in this state. For the term, men in this place being
indefinite, it is capable of truth either way. And this Author defines not
whether he speaks of some or of all. We willingly grant, he does not leave his
elect in that woeful state, but brings them out of it by faith and repentance;
which are expressly called the gifts of God, in holy Scripture. But as for
Reprobates, I do not find he gives either faith or repentance unto them. And
Austin lib. 5. contra Julian. Pelag. cap. 4. speaking of the Non praedestinati:
Illorum neminem (says he) adducit Deus ad salubrem spiritualemque
paenitentiam, qua homo reconciliatur Deo in Christo, sive illis ampliorem
patientiam, sive non imparem praebeat: and if not unto repentance, then
certainly neither does he bring any of them unto faith. Then again, it were
worth the knowing of this Author, whether any Infants of Turks and Saracens
departing this life in their infancy, are left in this woeful estate. If none
are left but all are saved, is it not a pretty guilt of eternal death, for
which not any suffers? And you may guess by this whether this Authors Pretense
of acknowledgement of natural corruption be not only from the teeth outward:
If any heathen Infants dying in their infancy, are left in this woeful estate,
and suffer eternal death for that natural corruption, let this Author answer,
whether God intended to leave them in this woeful estate absolutely or no. For
I profess willingly, I cannot imagine how God should intend this concerning
such Infants and not absolutely, seeing before they come to the use of reason,
there is no place for Divine foresight of any thing in them, to put a
difference between some and others.

II. The Discourse it self, consisting of 1. Motives inducing, 2. Arguments
convincing.

1. Motives inducing.
DISCOURSE. SECT. I.
THe Reasons of the first sort are these four which follow.

1. The Novelty of it. I can not find absolute and inevitable reprobation to
have any footing in Antiquity. The upper way was never taught or approved by
any of the Fathers The first Motive.
(even the stourest defenders of grace among them against the Pelagians) for
the space of 600 years after Christ: nor the Lower way till the time of S.
Austin, which was above 400 years after him.

They did all generally agree upon the contrary Conclusion, and taught men in
their times, That it was possible for them to be saved, which in the event were
not saved, and to have repented which repented not, and that there was no
decree of God, which did lay a necessity of perishing upon any son of Adam.

This that I say M. Calvin himself does ingeniously acknowledge, speaking of
election, and reprobation, according to Gods foreknowledge, Neque haec vulgo
recepta opinio solius vulgi est, habuit enim saeculis Lib. 3. Instit. c. 22.
sect. 1.
omnibu magnes Authors; The Opinion of a conditional decree has had great
Authors in all ages.

Reverend Beza speaking likewise of the same opinion, speaks to the same effect
in these words; In quem errorem sane turpissimum. Origenes Veteres plerosque
tum Graecos, tum Latinos adegit, Into which most Beza in Romans 11. v. 37.
Prosper in epist. ad August.
foul error Origin drew many of the Ancients both Greeks and Latins. But
Prosper amongst the rest S. Austins Scholar does very clearly witness it, Pen
e omnium (says he) parem inveniri and unam sententiam qua propositum est,
Praedestinationem Dei secundum praescientiam receperunt, ut ob hoc Deus alia
vasa contumeliae; alios honor is vasa fecerit, quia finem uniuscujusque
praeviderit, and sub ipso gratiae adjutorio in qua futurus esset voluntate and
action praescierit. All did grant with one consent, that God decreed men's ends
according to his foresight of their actions, not otherwise.

To these Testimonies let me add two or three particular instances for the
farther clearing of the newness of it.

Minutius Faelix brings in the Pagans objecting to the Christians, that they
hold an inevitable event of things, and did feign and frame to themselves an
unjust God, who did punish in men their unavoidable destinies, and not their
ill choyces in these words. Quicquid agitis ut alii Fato, ita vos Deo additis:
Iniquum igitur Deum fingitis, qui sortem in hominibus puniat, non voluntatem.
The objection he thus answers. Illud Fatum est quod de unoquoque Deus fatus
est. Christians hold no other Fates then Gods decrees, Qui cum universam
praescit materiam pro meritis and qualitatibus singulorum etiam fata
determinat; and ita in nobis non genitura plectitur, sed ingenii natura
punitur. God that foreknew all men and their actions did accordingly determine
their retributions.

S. Hierome an eager opposer of the Pelagians in many places of his writings
has the same thing: Ex praescientia dei evenit ut quem justum futurum scit
prius diligat quam oriatur ex utero and quem peccatorem Hier. ad Gal. cap. 1.
15. Idem ad cap. 1 Mal. Id. lib. 3. contr. Pelag.
aderit antequam peccet. To the same purpose he speaks in another place,
Dilectio and Odium Dei vel ex praescientia nascitur futurorum, vel ex operibus,
alioqui novimus quod omnia Deus diligat, nec quicquam eorum oderit, quae
creavit. And in his Book against Pelagius he says, Elegit Deus quem bonum
cernit. The sum of all which speaks is but this, that there is no decree of
damning or of saving men, but what is built upon Gods foreknowledge of the
evil and good actions of men.

I will shut up my instances with the judgment of the Council of Arles
against the Pelagians in Synod. Arelat. 3a. contra Lucedum. Bin. Tom. 2. part.
2. fol. 639.
the year 490. or thereabout. This Council subscribed to the Letter which was
written by Faustus against Lucidus the Praedestinarian, and made the Anathema's
and curses which he therein denounces against him and such like, to be their
own; some of which were these, Anathema illi qui dixerit, illum qui peri it non
accepisse ut salvus esse possit, and again, Anathema illi qui dixerit, quod
vas contumliae non possit assurgere ut sit vas in honerem.

By this and the like speeches which I have met with in the Ancients being
convinced, that the doctrine of absolute reprobation (and election too) was
unknown unto them, I begin to call it into question. For albeit I make not the
decisions and determinations of the Fathers or Counsels the rules of my Faith
(because they are but men and therefore subject unto error) yet I honor their
gray hairs, and their grave assemblies, and do vehemently mistrust those
doctrines which they never approved or taught, but disliked and condemned.

TWISSE Consideration.
AS touching the pretense of Antiquity; I find many are very apt to make
plausible use of this, when either indeed, or at least in their imagination, it
seems to serve their turns. And because I am put upon it, I will speak
somewhat of it in general, and then proceed to consider it as it is appyable
to the present occasion.

As concerning the first, I find no small equivocation in the word Ancient: For
if we compare an ancient man with a younger, in all probability the ancient is
likely to be more wise then the other; because he has more experience, by
reason of the length of his days, according to that of Job. 12. 12. Amongst
the ancient is wisdom, and in length of days is understanding. But this holds
not of that which is ancient, as it signifies that which goes before another.
For it is well known, that youth goes before old age; yet no man will say,
that the opinions of men in their youth, are more likely to be sound, then the
opinions of riper age. Neither does any man call or account youth Antiquity.
Yet our Fathers we call our Ancients, because they have gone before us, but
little reason there is in my judgment, to count their faith the more sound by
reason of such Antiquity; no more then why the opinions of man in his youth,
should be reputed more sound, then the opinions of his age. For as there is a
youth in man; so there is to be acknowledged a youth of the world; and so
likewise of the Christian World, even of the Church of God. The Holy Ghost
speaks in this language. For even they who were the great Ancestors of the Jews
in the days of Jeremy, are called the youth of Israel, as the youth of Gods
Church. Jerem. 2. 2. I remember thee with the kindness of thy youth, and the
love of thy marriage, when thou wentst after me in the wilderness, in a land
that was not sown. Israel was as a thing hallowed unto the Lord, etc Ezech.
16. 60. I will remember my Covenant made with thee in the days of thy youth.
In like sort the Ancients counting them immediately from the Apostles days,
are the very youth of the Church Christian. Now like as it is not to be
exspected that a man should have as great perfection of knowledge in his youth,
as in his age; so neither is it to be supposed, that the Church of Christ
should have as great perfection of knowledge in her youth as in her age. This
is to be understood caeteris paribus; otherwise there lies a double exception
against it: the One in the way of Gods extraordinary mercy, the Other in the
way of Gods extraordinary judgment. For God may extraordinarily inspire a
young man with the spirit of Prophecy, and so make him wiser then the aged.
Such was the condition of Gods exuberant grace in the days of the Apostles,
enduing them with power from on high, not only to instruct them with all
spiritual wisdom and understanding in the mysteries of the Gospel, but
enabling them also to express it in diverse languages, that so they might be
able Ministers of Christ, to carry the glad tidings of salvation over all the
World. On the other side, the sins of the Christian world not embracing Gods
Truth with love, may deserve at the hands of God, that he should give them over
to illusions to believe lies. Then no marvel if our former light set in
obscure darkness, and degenerate days come in place of better and more noble
times; which may more easily come to pass, considering that the light of the
Gospel is a spiritual light of faith, no natural light of reason; though
even this natural light of reason comes to be amended and perfected by that
light of grace.

But it may be said, that They who lived near the Apostles days, are like to
be better acquainted with the truth of God then we. I have found some to
please themselves in this conceit, and it runns smooth and glibb, and it seems
very plausible to win approbation. But as Austin says of some things, that
acutule sonant, but discussa reperiuntur obtusa: so many times it falls out,
that reasons plausible at first, when exploration comes, prove very unsound;
like the fruit Solinus writes of, which grew about Sodom, Fair to the eye,
but being crushed in cineres abeunt and vanam fuliginem. And for the
discovering of the emptiness of this reason, I proceed thus.

When you say of those Ancients, that they were near to the Apostles. I demand
whether the meaning be, they were near to the times of the Apostles, or near to
the Persons of the Apostles, or near to the word of the Apostles. The former
two, do nothing at all conduce to the perfection of Christian knowledge, or
soundness of faith. For certainly both Jews and Heathens professed enemies to
the cross of Christ were as near to their Times and Persons as believing
Christians, but they were not so familiarly acquainted with their word. But as
touching familiar acquaintance with the word of the Apostles; as also the
embracing of it by faith: Nothing I trust hinders us from being as near to
the Apostles, as the Ancients were. Nay it is well known, that as touching
diverse pieces of the books of the New Testament, we receive them for
Canonical, which many of the Ancients doubted of. And as touching diverse books
concerning the times of the Old Testament, they are discovered unto us to be
Apocryphal, which to many of the Ancients were not.

But it may be said, that these Ancients to whom they pretend so much reverence
(which indeed is but reverence to themselves, and to serve their own turns)
were so near to the Apostles, that they not only were partakers of their
writings, but of their Preaching also by word of mouth? To this I answer.

1. That it is a very rare thing to meet with any such now adays, unless it
be some counterfeit Author: neither do I find any such alleged by any, least
of all by any Arminian, who yet upon my knowledge do discourse after this
manner, as touching their neernesse to the Apostles.

2. But suppose there were any such, and they should tell us what they heard
preached by the Apostles, shall we take their relations for Oracles, and make
the word of God to consist, partly of that which is written by them, and partly
of that which is not written, but delivered by word of mouth, and commended
unto us by tradition? Then farewell the doctrine of Protestants concerning the
rule of faith, that it is only the written-word; and let us with the Papists,
join thereunto traditions to make up a complete Rule of Faith.

It may be farther said, that by reason of their neernesse to the Apostles,
they may be better acquainted with the meaning of the word written.

To which I answer; if so, then either from the Apostles own mouths, or by
relation from others. Of any that report what they heard from the Apostles own
mouths, they allege none. If they did, what were this other then to bring in
Tradition to be a Rule, if not of faith, yet of interpretation of Gods word,
which is as foul every way as the former, considering that soundness of
faith, is grounded upon the soundness of interpretation of Gods word. If only
by relation from others, the same exceptions lie against this and over and
above, this must be of somewhat far less authority then the former: it being
so difficult a matter to report from another without adding somewhat of his
own, whether it be much or little, as Chaucer speaks.

Lastly, let the Commentaries of these days, be compared with the Commentaries
of the Ancients, and let the indifferent reader judge, which of them are most
true, most learned, most substantial. So that I suppose, I may be bold to
conclude, that this reason drawn from the neernesse of the Ancients to the
Apostles, how plausible soever it seems at first sight, yet indeed is of no
force.

Now to the contrary we have these reasons.

1. Like as it is fit every man should profit in the knowledge of God more and
more, as long as he lives: so in all likelihood, the Christian world does
profit more and more, as they draw nearer to the end of the world, excepting
those times of Gods judgments in giving the world over to illusions to believe
lies. Austin did profit, as in other points of Christian knowledge, so in this
as concerning Predestination, and blames the Massilienses for not profiting
with him. De Praedestin. lib. 1. cap. 4. Videtis quid tunc de fidei and
operibus sentiebam, quamvis de commendanda dei gratia labor arem; In qua
sententia istos fratres nostros esse nunc video: quia non ficut legere libros
meos, ita curaverunt proficere mecum.

2. We have more means and helps for our furtherance in Christian knowledge,
then they had, and that in diverse respects. First, because we enjoy their
labors, they enjoyed not ours, nor the like before them. So that by the
reading of their writings we soon attain to that knowledge which they had, they
communicating it unto us; and it were very strange we should add nothing
thereunto; especially considering that Veritas was wont to be accounted
temporis filia: and Aristotle accounts it an easy thing to add; Any man says
he may do that, (...), and thus, says he, Arts come to their perfection
(...). A tall man is able to discover much farther then a Dwarf, but let a
Dwarf be advanced upon the shoulders of that tall man, and he will discover
much farther then he. Let then those Ancients go for tall fellows in the
discovery of Christian truth, let the Divines of modern ages be but Dwarfes,
as the Children of Israel seemed to be, but Grasshoppers in comparison of the
Canaanites, especially to the sons of Anack; yet if by their pious labors
and industries, which they have with much ingenuity communicated unto us, they
suffer us to get upon their shoulders, shall not we though Dwarfes, be enabled
hereby to discover somewhat more then they? The Eagle is a foul of great
strength and soareth high, the highest of all Kites and Hawks, yet let her
carry a Wren along with her on her shoulders in her aeriall ascentions, when
she is weary and can fly no higher, can it seem strange, if the Wren carried
thus high by this Anakim of fowls, presumes of her own strengh to fly a little
higher then she? or is this any glory to the Wren, or disparagement to the
Eagle?

2. Secondly Have not we better helps of Art then they, especially as touching
the knowledge of the Tongues, and Logical resolutions of the Text. The Latin
Fathers most of them were little acquainted with the Greek; neither Latin nor
Greek Fathers were usually much acquainted with the Hebrew: Origin amongst the
Greek, and Hierom amongst the Latin, had not their fellows for this.

3. Lastly, the Ancients in their days were not so put unto it as the latter;
Nothing did more quicken them, or does us, then contentions with Heretics.
And therefore look how they were exercised with Heresies, so it is to be
expected they were best seen in those Articles of Faith, which were most shaken
by Heretics. This both Austin and Gregory take notice of; and Austin is most
frequent herein, some passages to this purpose I shall relate hereafter. Now
before Pelagius his days, the Fathers were much exercised in opposing the
Manichees, and accordingly gave themselves to the maintenance of Free Will, as
Aniarius observes by the relation of Sixtus Senensis. But Pelagius was the
first that opposed Gods grace; and therefore those Bibl. l. 5. annot. 101.
Fathers that contended with him, gave themselves chiefly to the maintenance
of Gods grace.

And now am I come to the treating of Ancients no longer in general, but in a
special reference to the doctrine of predestination. Now herein the Papists
themselves (who in other points labor to beat us down with nothing so much as
with the noise of Antiquity) are willing to confess that in the point of grace
and predestination we need not trouble our selves, with inquiry after the
doctrine of the Ancients before Pelagius rose, and that upon the ground before
mentioned, to wit, because they were nothing exercised hereabouts. As for
example Bellarmine, De Great. and lib. Arbitr. lib. 1. c. 14. having proposed
diverse passages of the Fathers favoring, as it seemed, the doctrine wherewith
Pelagius troubled the peace of Gods Church, makes Austin to answer for him,
Veteres Patres qui ante Pelagium floruerunt, quaestionem istam nunquam accurate
tractasse, sed incidenter solum, and quasi per transitum illam attigisse. Addit
vero (says Bellarmine) in fundamento hujus sententiae, quod est, Gratiam Dei
non praevenire ab ullo opere nostro, sed contra ab illa omnia opera nostra
praeveniri, ita ut nihil omnino boni quod attinet ad salutem sit in nobis, quod
non sit nobis ex Deo, convenire Catholicos omnes and ibidem citat Cyprianum,
Ambrosisium and Nazianzenum: yet he takes a course to reconcile them to the
truth; so does Sixtus Senensis Bibl. Sanct. lib. 6. Annota. 251. so does
Alvarez. de Auxil. lib. 5. disp. 37.

Again consider. The decrees of predestination and reprobation are secret,
neither do they appear of what condition they are, but by the manner of their
executions. Now their executions do consist partly in bestowing salvation on
some, and inflicting damnation on others; partly in bestowing the grace of
faith and repentance on some, and denying it unto others. As touching salvation
and damnation we willingly profess, that the salvation of men of ripe years,
does always presuppose Faith and perseverance therein; and the damnation of
others does always presuppose final perseverance in sin unrepented of. But
we deny that herehence it follows, that either faith precedes the decree of
salvation, or sin precedes the decree of damnation, or the prescience of
either. That faith cannot precede election, nor sin reprobation, is evident;
For as much as election and reprobation are eternal, but faith and sin are
things temporal: but that which is temporal cannot precede that which is
eternal. Neither does it follow, that because faith precedes salvation,
therefore faith precedes the decree of salvation. For it is faith existent in
time that precedes salvation; but no Divine will say that faith existent in
time, precedes Gods decree of salvation, unless it be some such as maintain
with Vorstius, that Gods decrees are not eternal. In like sort, it is sin
existent in time, that precedes damnation; but no wise Divine will say, that
sin existent in time precedes Gods decree of damnation; the former being a
thing temporal but this decree eternal. Lastly, neither will it follow that
because faith precedes salvation and sin damnation, therefore the foresight
of faith, is antecedanious to the decree of salvation, and the foresight of
sin is antecedent to the decree of damnation. For no Enthymeme of this nature
is sound, but so far forth as it is reducible into a good Categorical
Syllogism, whereof these Enthymems are incapable. For Enthymems reducible unto
good Syllogismes must agree, either in their Subjects or in their Predicates,
but these do not. Again all the terms in a good Enthymeme must be expressed
in that Syllogism whereunto it is reduced* But each of these Enthymemes
consists manifestly of four terms; as in the first, the^e, Faith, and the
Foresight of faith, Salvation and the Decree of salvation; Of the second,
these, Sin, and Foresight of sin, Damnation and the Decree of damnation;
and consequently that Syllogism whereunto either of these quaternary of terms
is clapped, cannot be good; For no Categoricall Syllogism is good that
consists of four terms. As for the reducing of them into a Syllogism
Hypotheticall, such Reductions were never heard of in the Schools of the
learned and that for just reason; because that is no course to justify the
soundness of the Enthymemes, but a mere begging of that which is in question.
As in case a man should reduce it thus; If faith be precedanious to salvation,
then the foresight of faith is precedanious to the decree of salvation; But
faith is precedanious to salvation, Therefore it is precedanious to the decree
of salvation. In this Hypotheticall Syllogism, the consequence of the Major is
the very Enthymeme which is in question, for the substance of it and
consequently no proving of it, but a mere begging of it. Yet notwithstanding
we do not deny, but that God did decree that no man should be saved, but such
as being of ripe years, should be found to persevere in faith unto death none
should be damned, but such as should be found finally to persevere in sin.
The other execution of these decrees consists (as I said) in the bestowing of
the grace of faith and repentance on some, and denying it unto others. Now the
question is, Whether God be indeed the author of faith and repentance, yea, or
no; and because the Arminians dare not professedly deny this. (though lately
they are come so far as professedly to deny that Christ merited it) therefore
let the question proceed about the manner how God bestows it, as namely,
whether he bestows it of his mere pleasure on some, denying it to others, or,
Whether the reason why God bestows it on some and not on others, be, because
God finds some good work in one, which he finds not in another. This question
being decided, it will clearly appear, whether predestination proceeds upon
the foresight of ought in man, yea or no. For if God of his mere pleasure does
bestow faith on one, and not on another, it follows undeniably, that God
predestined him hereunto absolutely, and of his mere pleasure, without
consideration of any future work of man. But if God bestows faith on man upon
consideration of some precedent work of his, which was not the work of God,
then (and not otherwise neither) it will follow, that upon the consideration of
that future work of man, God did elect him unto faith, or predestinate faith
unto him. So that if we desire sincerely and ingeniously to inquire what was
the opinion of the Ancients about the absoluteness of predestination, we
should state the question as touching Predestination unto faith, and not as
touching Predestination unto salvation. For we all confess that God
predestined no man unto salvation, but such as he foresaw, coming unto ripe
years, would believe sooner or later. And therefore the main question between
the Remonstrants and Contraremonstrants was, whether this decree were the whole
decree of Predestination, and whether there were not another decree of
Predestination besides, as namely, whether God did not decree to bestow faith
on some, and deny it unto others. And secondly to inquire, Whether this decree
of bestowing faith on some, did not proceed according to Gods good pleasure,
without consideration of any different work in man. And the most compendious
resolution hereof, is to inquire of the manner how God carries himself in the
bestowing of faith and repentance on some, and denying it unto others; as
namely, Whether on his mere pleasure he has not mercy on some, giving them
faith and repentance, and of his mere pleasure, denies the gift of faith and
repentance unto others. Now let the Fathers, (whosoever thinks good) be
admitted to bring in their suffrages on this Article, and remember what was
decreed in the first Synod that was gathered, to make peace in the Church
after Pelagius had disturbed it, namely, Gratiam non dari secundum merita, that
is, as Bellarmine acknowledges, Gratiam non dari secundum opera. Lastly, all
of us now a days consent, as De Great. and lib. Arbitr. l. 6. c. 5.
touching Gods concourse to the substance of every act of the creature whether
good or evil. Now let this Author or any other, represent unto us, what
footing he finds in Antiquity concerning this. But I come to answer
particularly, according to this Authors text.

He cannot find absolute and inevitable reprobation to have any footing in
Antiquity. Belike he can find reprobation evitable; a strange phraise either
way. These attributes applied to damnation do carry a fair sense with them,
damnation being a work of God wrought in time, and undoubtedly may be avoided,
may be incurred for the time to come. But reprobation is eternal as God
himself, and how that should be fancied to be of an avoidable condition for
the time to come, I cannot comprehend, unless this Author be of their opinion,
who desire to shape Gods decrees of a revocable nature, as being both to impute
unto him an impotent immutability, as some are pleased to phraise it.

But leave we reprobation unavoidable, take we the absolute nature of it into
consideration: this he cannot find in all Antiquity. But consider I pray, he
pretends these motives, as inducements to change his former opinion: so then
belike, he stood sometimes for reprobation absolute; but did he find any
footing in Antiquity for it, what time he embraced it? if he did formerly
embrace it, notwithstanding he found no footing in Antiquity for it, why should
he now relinquish it, for finding no footing in Antiquity for it? Belike the
older he waxes, the more he grows in love with Antiquity. Again when
formerly he did embrace the doctrine of absolute reprobation, upon what grounds
did he embrace it? was it because he was in hope he should hereafter find
Antiquity for it? or was it only for the authority of them who brought him up
in this opinion? What sorry grounds are these to build a man's faith upon? Yet
this is not our course to impose Articles of faith on any, but rather to
endoctrinate them out of the word of God. If then a man's Christian faith be
built upon the Word of God, is it a Christian course to renounce it, or to
question the integrity of it, because he finds no footing in Antiquity for it?
What then shall become of the faith of Laics, and such as are unlearned? Must
the writings of the Fathers be translated into all vulgar Languages, and the
unlearned addict themselves to the study of them, least otherwise their faith
prove a wavering faith, for want of finding Antiquity to favor it? Belike the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles, are no part of Antiquity, in this
Authors more mature judgment. But if formerly the doctrine of absolute
reprobation were received upon the evidence of Gods word, as it is fit the
faith of every Christian should be grounded thereupon, especially the faith of
a Divine called to be a Teacher of others; I should think there were no just
cause of alteration, but upon discovery of the error of those grounds,
whereupon formerly it was builded; and the discovery hereof alone, were chiefly
to the present purpose, namely to show just cause of change of mind, and
alteration of judgment, but no such course do I find taken here. These
motives and reasons here proposed, may carry a show of reason, why a man being
yet to choose his faith in these particulars, possessed with neither way, but
indifferent, might prefer one way before another, one opinion before another,
but nothing sufficient to justify a change, unless the weakness of former
grounds be laid open. For it may be that the former grounds might be such as
upon due comparison would be found to overweigh these pretenses. For upon view
that I have taken of the discourse following, I find not one argument drawn
from those places of Scripture that treat of election and reprobation; these I
find are purposely declined as so many rocks, as if the Author feared to make
shipwreck of his errors (pardon my boldness in so naming them, Austin is my
precedent in this saying, Hoc scio contra istam praedestinationem quam secundum
scripturas defendimus, neminem nisi errando disputare posse) but in the mean
time while he fears to make shipwreck of his errors, let him take heed least
he make shipwreck of a good conscience.

But proceed we with him about the inquiry what footing this doctrine finds in
Antiquity. Aug. de den. Persev. c. 19.
He says he cannot find it; but it is more then I find that ever he made any
convenient search after it, his whole discourse hereupon is of so hungry a
nature. The absoluteness of election and reprobation, we conclude in Christian
reason from Gods absolute carriage in giving and denying grace, understanding
thereby the grace of regeneration. Now the absoluteness herein, as we suppose,
consists in bestowing this grace on some, and denying it to others, according
to the mere pleasure of the Lords will. Now has not the Apostle (more ancient
then all the Antiquity he speaks of) professed in express terms, that God
has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth? What need we seek
farther amongst the Ancients for the justification Romans 9. 18.
of this? And that mercy here is meant, such a mercy in bestowing faith on
some, which is denied to others, in converting the wills of some unto good,
when others are not converted, I could prove by variety of places out of
Austin, whose authority in this case is far more worthy, then all the
authority this Author produces. Neither is this the voice of Austin only, but
of Ambrose also in that famous saying of his Quem vult religiosum, facit, so
much magnified by Austin. And not Ambrose alone, but Nazianzen De dono Persev.
19.
also, and Cyprian are alleged by him, as concurring with him in the
foundation of the doctrine of predestination, which he makes to be the freedom
of Gods grace in converting whom he will. And which is far more then this,
yea far more then all that can be produced to the contrary, by the very
Prayers of the Church every where in use, he iustifies the general concurrence
in that which he accounts the foundation of predestination. As when their
common course was to pray unto God, that he would be pleased to convert unto
the faith of Christ the hearts of Heathens; and wherein did this conversion
consist, but in giving them faith and repentance: manifestly giving us to
understand thereby, that the whole Catholic Church did concur in this
Article of Faith, that it was in the power of God according to his free grace,
to convert whom he would unto the faith of Christ, and consequently not to
convert whom he would. For if there were any cause on man's part, why he does
not convert some converting others, then there were also on man's part, a cause
why God does convert some not converting others, and consequently grace should
be given according unto works, that is in the phrase of the Ancients, Gratiam
dari secundum merita (as Bellarmine acknowledges) which was ever accounted
express Pelagianisme, Bellar. de great. and lib. arbit. l. 6. c. 5.
and was as expressly condemned in the Council of Palestina above 1200 years
ago, and Pelagius himself was driven to subscribe unto it, by shameful
dissimulation so to prevent Anathematization of his own person.

But the upper way (says this Author) was never taught or approved by any of
the Fathers for 600 years. Here breaks forth another reason of this Authors (or
his that directed him) cunning carriage in distinguishing the two ways of our
Divines in maintaining the absoluteness of election and reprobation, to wit,
that in the course of his discourse he might serve his turn with both, and
where Antiquity served not his turn against the one, yet might it serve his
turn, as he thought against the other. But the truth is, there was no such
question at all ventilated in those days, as touching the object of
predestination, no nor in Austins neither, nor many hundred years after, that I
know. And no marvel; For it concerns the ordering of Gods decree aright,
which is merely Logical, as I have showed in my Vind. Great. Dei. Its true that
St Austin does usually accommodate that of St Paul, Romans 9. 21. concerning the
Mass, unto mankind considered in Massa damnata as he commonly calls it, that
is, in the corrupt Mass; but not always, but sometimes he speaks of it, and
accommodates it clearly unto the Mass of mankind incorrupt, yea, as yet not
created, as there I have showed. And as for the right ordering of Gods decrees,
and the right stating of the object of predestination and reprobation, We
desire no better, nor other ground then that of the Apostle, God has mercy on
whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth, that is, he cures infidelity and
hardness of heart in whom he will, by bestowing faith and repentance upon them,
and leaves it uncured in whom he will by denying faith and repentance unto
them. And as for the rigor of this Tenent (as it is commonly accounted) of
making the Mass of mankind not created the object of predestination, I have
already showed the vanity of that conceit and denomination; for as much as
hereby neither is the decree of damnation made to precede the consideration of
sin, no nor of final impenitency in any moment of nature, nor in any moment
of nature is the decree of salvation made by me, to precede the consideration
of final perseverance in faith and repentance. But whereas some, who are most
rigid indeed in their discourse, make the decree of saving some and damning
others to precede the decree of creating and permitting of sin both original
and actual; others who are most dissolute, make the decree of creating and
permitting of sin, to precede the decree of saving some and damning others,
My Opinion is equally removed from these extremes, and conceives none of these
decrees to be either way subordinate, but all coordinate and simultaneous, as
being decrees only of various means, tending to one and the same end; thus God
does decree both to create some, and to permit to sin, and finally to
persevere therein, and to damn them for their sin, to the manifestation of
his glory in the way of justice vindicative. On the other side, God does decree
to create others, and permit them to sin, and raise them out of sin by
faith and repentance, and reward them with everlasting life, to the
manifestation of his glory, in the way of mercy mixed with justice.

Farther consider that as touching predestination it self, there was no
question moved thereabouts in the Church of God, before the days of Pelagius;
and what credit can they get, who consult with them in such points, wherein
they were not exercised. For we find by experience, that to contend with
Heretics has been an ordinary means in the course of Gods providence, for
the more diligent inquisition after the truth of God and happy discovery
thereof. Sancta Ecclesia (says Gregory) in Epist. lib. 7. epist. 3. De don.
Pers. cap. 20.
sua semper eruditione instruitur, dum Haereticorum quaestionibus impugnatur.
And Austin in like manner, Didiscimus, says he, singulas quasque Haereses
intulisse Ecclesiae proprias quaestiones, contra quas diligentius defenderetur
scriptura divina, quam si nulla talis necessitas cogeret. And on the other
side, before question has been moved on a point, the Fathers have delivered
themselves somewhat improvidently, whereupon Heretics have taken advantage to
countenance their errors by the writings of the Ancient. This Hierome observes
in the point of Arrianisme, proving thereby, that the Ancient Apolog: 2. adv.
Ruffin.
Writers before the Arrian Heresy arose, were no competent judges in that
point. Si me causas vitiorum (says he) in Patrum Scriptis nescire respondero
non statim illos Haereticos judicabo. Fieri enim potest ut vel simpliciter
erraverint, vel alio sensu scripserint, vel a Librariis imperitis eorum
paulatim scripta corrupta sunt, vel certe antequam in Alexandria quasi
daemonium Meridianum Arrius nasceretur. Innocenter quaedam and minus caute
locuti sunt and quae non possunt perversorum hominum calumniam declinare. Mark
it well, Before Arrius like a Devil from the South rose up, the Fathers
delivered some things innocently, yet lose warily, and such as cannot avoid the
calumny of perverse persons. Upon the same ground it is, that Austin excuses
Ticonius, and that in Aug. de doctr. Christ. l. 3. c. 33.
the same particular wherein he approached near to Pelagianisme, to wit,
before the Church of God was acquainted with that Heresy; his words are these,
Sed non erat expertus hanc Haeresin Ticonius quae nostro tempore exorta multum
nos, ut gratia Dei quae per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum est adversus eos
defenderemus, exercuit; and secundum id quod ait Apostolus, Oportet Haereses
esse ut probati manifesti fiant in vobis, multo vigilantiores diligentioresque
reddidit: ut adverteremus in scripturis Sanctis, quod istum Ticonium minus
attentum, minusque sine host sollicitum, fugit, etiam ipsam scilicet fidem
donum illius ese, qui ejus mensuram unicuique partitur. Ticonius considered not
that faith it self is the gift of God, neither was he so careful to look into
the truth of this; and why? surely because he had no enemy to put him to it, as
being not acquainted with the error of Pelagius. But this Heresy, says he,
arising in our days, has put us upon the defense of the grace of God, which
is given us through our Lord Jesus Christ, and has made us more watchful and
diligent to observe, that even faith it self is his gift, who distributes to
every one a measure thereof. Hence it is that the same Austin, when Prosper
signified that those of Marseiles would rest contented if he could make good
the opinion which he maintained in the point of predestination, out of the
Writings of the former, and more ancient Divines, returns for answer, that
there was no need hereof, considering that They living before this Heresy was
known, (to wit, of Pelagius) were not at all put upon the discussing of this
question, which surely they would have done, had they been constrained Aug. de
Praed. sanct. l. 1. cap. 14.
to make answer to any such as the Pelagians were. See his own words, Si hujus
sententiae defensionem ex divinorum eloquiorum nos praecedentibus Catholicis
tractatoribus promerem, profecto hi Fratres quibuscum nos agimus,
acquiescerent. Hoc enim significastis Literis vestris. This was Prosper's
motion; now mark Austin's answer. Quid igitur opus est ut eorum scrutemur
opuscula, qui priusquam ista Haeresis oriretur, non habueruni necessitatem in
hac difficili ad solvendum quaestione versari, quod proculdubio facerent, si
respondere talibus cogerentur. Charity did suggest unto him, this would have
been their course, had they been exercised with Pelagius, as he was. For it was
his own case. For there was a time when himself thought that albeit holiness
and good works consequent to faith together with salvation, were the work of
God, yet faith it self he conceived to be the work of man; to wit, before he
was exercised with Pelagius as appears, Liber Propositionum ex Epistola and
Romanos. Non ergo elegit Deus opera cujusque in praescientia, sed fidem elegit
in praescientia, vel quem sibi crediturum esse praescivit, ipsum elegit cui
Spiritum Sanctum daret, ut bona operando eriam vitam aeternam consequeretur.
For he professes in the words following that he then conceived, Nostrum esse
credere, to believe was a work of our own. Afterward he retracteth this,
Retract. lib. 1. cap. 25. professing, I had never said this, had I known faith
it self to be the gift of God, Si scivissem fidem ipsam inter Dei munera quae
dantur per Spiritum Sanctum reperiri. Nam quamvis credere and operari utrumque
nostrum sit propter liberum voluntatis arbitrium and quae non nisi volentibus
nobis fiunt, utrumque Dei donum est qui and credere, and velle, and perficere
subministrat. The Papists themselves, notwithstanding the great devotion they
pretend toward the Ancients, yet are driven to devise what may be said to
excuse them; as in the very point of Free Will they desire to excuse
Chrysostom. Sixtus Senensis, Biblioth^^. lib. 5. annotat. 101. Uel dicendum
est sicut etiam Annianus in Praefatione Commentariorum Chryjostomi in Math.
annotavit Chrysostomum interdum naturae nostrae vires plus aequo extulisse ex
contentione disceptandi cum Manichaeis and Gentilibus, qui hominem asserebant
vel natura malum vel fati violentia ad peccandum compelli. Nay what think we of
Vossius himself, from whose labors it is, and nothing of their own, that our
Arminians would seem to breath so much Antiquity. This Vossius professes, they
mistake him that takes him to be of any other opinion in the point of
predestination, then Austin was of. De Historicis Lat. lib. 2. cap. 17. Yet
does he acknowledge that Austin did reject the opinion of the Ancients both
Greeks and Latins who went before him, in the point of predestination. Histor.
Pelag. page 655. Patres Graeci and Latinorum illi qui ante Augustinum vixerunt,
ipseque aliquandiu Augustinus, verba Apostoli interpretari solent de electione
quorundam ad salutem secundum fidem and pietatem praevisam; and aliorum
reprobatione aeterna ob praescientiam malorum operum quae in vita acturi
essent. Sed Augustinus (here comes in the Adversative) rejecta hac opinione
existimabat Apostolorum loqui de quorundam electione ad vitam, aliorum item
praeteritione, non habita vel in his vel in illis ratione, sive bonorum, sive
etiam malorum quae personalia forent. And which is more then this, Page 653.
professes a third interpretation of that passage Romans 9. 11, 12, 13. differing
both from Austins interpretation, and from that of the Fathers Greek and
Latin that went before him, and makes it disputable, which is truest, though
this third opinion has no footstep amongst the Ancients, and thus he carries
himself, notwithstanding all the pretense of his reverence of Antiquity. And
to vindicate Austins interpretation, as well as the rest, from countenancing
absolute reprobation, he calls in to help at a dead lift, the doctrine of the
Jesuits, concerning Scientia Media. And I desire upon no better terms to
contend then this in Scholasticall Divinity, whether this doctrine be not a
most unsober invention without all ground. And whereas Vossius acknowledges
Austins opinion to be for the absoluteness of election (and he professes
himself to be of Austins opinion.) I dare appeal to any learned Divines sober
judgment, whether this doctrine of Scientia Media does not equally justify the
absoluteness of reprobation, as the absoluteness of election. Yet after all
this, I would not have any think, that I reject any of these ancient Fathers,
that seem to be most opposite to Austins opinion in the point of
predestination. I think they may be fairly and Scholastically reconciled
without acknowledging so much difference between them, as Vossius makes, and
that by such an interpretation as sometimes is admitted by Vossius himself, of
his own phraise of his own distinction, though he dreams not of the applyable
nature of the same to the will of God in predestination. His distinction is of
Voluntas Dei antecedens, and voluntas consequens; and this he makes equivalent
to that other distinction of the will of Hist. Pelag. lib. 7.
God, to wit, Absoluta and Conditionalis. Now this Conditional will of God he
interprets not quoad actum volentis, but quoad Res volitas: Like as Doctor
Jackson professes Of Providence
in express terms, that the former distinction of voluntas antecedens and
consequens, is to be interpreted, namely, quoad res volitas, and not quoad
actum volentis. Now according to this construction, there is no difference
between them and Austin, nor the least impediment to the making of the will of
God, both in predestination and reprobation to be most absolute. For though
sin be acknowledged to be the cause of the will of God in reprobation quoad
res volitas, that is, in respect of the punishment willed thereby, this hinders
not the absoluteness of reprobation quoad actum reprobantis. And unless we
understand the Fathers thus, we must necessarily charge them with such an
opinion, whereof Aquinas is bold to profess, That never any man was so mad
as to affirm, to wit, that any merits should be the cause of Predestination
quoad actum praedestinantis. And why so? to wit, because predestination is the
act of Gods will, and there can be no cause of Gods will quoad actum volentis.
Now who sees not that by the same reason there can be no cause of divine
reprobation quoad actum reprobantis; for even reprobation is the act of Gods
will, as well as predestination, and every way it must be as mad a thing to
devise a cause of reprobation quoad actum reprobantis.

They did all generally agree, says this Author, upon the contrary conclusion.
Now the contrary Conclusion to absolute and unavoidable reprobation is to
maintain conditional and avoidable reprobation; but this is not the contrary
conclusion here specified by this Author, but rather that damnation was
avoydable, such is his loose discourse; whereas there is no question at all
concerning damnation, whether it be conditional or absolute. We all
confessing, that like as salvation is not ordained to befall any man of ripe
years, but upon the performance of faith and repentance and final perseverance
therein; so damnation is not ordained to be the portion of any, but upon their
final perseverance in sin. In like sort as touching the possibility of
salvation, not one Divine of ours, that I know, denies the possibility of any
man's salvation while he lives in this World. Doctor Jackson indeed has an
opinion, that a man may proceed so far in sin in this life, that the door
of repentance may be shut upon him. We have no such opinion; We acknowledge,
that as God calls some at the first hour, so may some be called at the last
hour of the day, yea the Thief upon the Cross, yea, inter Pontem and Fontem.
In a word, We say plainly, that it is possible for any man at any time to be
saved by grace giving repentance: without repentance none can be saved; which
is, I presume, without question between us. In like sort it is possible for any
man to repent, provided that God be pleased to give him repentance, and whether
God will give him repentance or no we know not. Therefore the Apostle instructs
Timothy after this manner, The servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be
gentle toward all men, apt to teach, suffering the evil, instructing them
with meekness that be contrary minded, (...), if at any time God may give them
repentance, that they may acknowledge the truth and come to amendment out of
the snare of the Devil, of whom they are taken Prisoners to do his Will. Here
is clearly an acknowledgement of a possibility of repentance, sooner or later,
but upon the gift of God, not otherwise. The contrary opinion whereunto, this
Author seems in this passage very strongly to savor of, but alleges not
one Father for the proof of it, to give us some document of his judicious
carriage in the survey of the Fathers which here he pretends to have been made
by him, and that with very great ostentation; Yet I seem to be very well
acquainted with the spirit that breaths here; and I wonder the passages of
the Ancients to this purpose (which yet I am persuaded are nothing to the
purpose) are not collected out of Doctor Ushar's discourse In causa
Godaeschalci inscribed to Gerardus Vossius; and I doubt not but the issue will
be this, that God is ready to give all men repentance in case they perform
somewhat; and so the grace of repentance shall be given according to men's
works, which was condemned 1200 years ago in the Synod of Palestine, and ever
since accounted no better then flat Pelagianisme. And which is worse then this,
as that which stands in opposition to common sense, they will be driven to
profess, that God is ready to give a reprobate repentance, in case he will
repent, yea the very will to repent, in case he will repent. This desperate
resolution I have already found by experience, and if I be not deceived,
breathed by the very same spirit that breaths here.

At length we are like to receive an account of this Authors judicious survey
of the Ancients out of Calvin and Beza. Neque haec vulgo recepta opinio solius
vulgi est; (says Calvin) habuit enim saeculis omnibus magnos authors. To this
I answer,

1. That this is far from justifying, that absolute reprobation, and absolute
election had no footing in Antiquity, that the Upper way was never taught for
the space of 600 years, nor the Lower way till the time of St Austin. Though in
all ages it had great Authors to impugn it, yet it might also have in all ages
as great Authors to maintain it, and more too, for ought these words of Calvin
in his opinion do manifest to the contrary.

2. Albeit not some but all had maintained election and reprobation to proceed
according to foreknowledge of men's works, yet this nothing hinders the
absoluteness either of election or reprobation. For consider, it is one thing
to speak of election unto grace, another to speak of election unto glory; one
thing to speak of reprobation, as it signifies a purpose to deny grace, another
thing to speak of it, as it signifies a purpose to inflict damnation. It was
never known I think, that any maintained, that God upon the foresight of men's
faith, did elect them unto faith, or purpose to give them faith; or that God
foreseeing men would not believe, nor repent, did decree that they should
neither believe nor repent. Upon which brainsick conceit our Arminians are cast
now a days, and all the embracers of Scientia Media: But many of them
professed indeed that God did decree to bestow salvation upon them whom he
foresaw would finally persevere in faith and repentance; and to damn those
whom he foresaw would finally persevere in infidelity or impenitency. We
acknowledge as much as they, but still the way is open to enquire of the order
of these, namely, Whether the foresight of faith and repentance were before the
decree of salvation, or after it, or simultaneous with it: Whether the
foresight of infidelity and impenitency were before the decree of damnation, or
after it, or simultaneous with it; but where is any such question to be found
amongst the Ancients? We willingly profess that God did not purpose to bestow
eternal life on any of ripe years, but as a reward of their faith and
repentance and good works; that God did not purpose to inflict damnation on
any of ripe years, but as a condign punishment of their final infidelity and
impenitency; and the Ancients who maintained that God decreed to save some and
damn others, according to his prescience of the piety of the one, and impiety
of the other, had no other meaning that I know, or this Author is able to make
good, or any other, as I am persuaded.

3. But let us farther enquire what those Ancients thought concerning faith and
repentance; as whether they thought them to be the gifts of God, or no; dares
this Author or any Arminian deny, they maintained them to be the gifts of God,
the Scripture being so full and express for this? Secondly, enquire what their
opinion was concerning the manner how God gave faith to one, and not to
another, as it is manifest he did not, he does not give it to all; as namely,
whether it was of the mere pleasure of God, that he converted some, and not
others; or whether he bestowed faith on some, and not on others, because he
found those some to have prepared themselves for the receiving of faith, not so
others. If it was of the mere pleasure of God, it manifestly follows, that
election unto grace and reprobation from grace, was absolute: which is the main
thing in question in these our days. For we who are accounted most rigid
herein, do not affect to say, That God decreed to save whom he will, or to
damn whom he will; but to the contrary we say, God decreed to save none, but
such as believe and repent, and to damn none, but such as dye in infidelity or
impenitency: but we profess willingly, that God decreed to bestow faith and
repentance on whom he would, and deny it to whom he would, the Scripture being
express, that God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth.
And Austin is most frequent in this profession, and this is that Grace which he
acknowledges to be the foundation of predestination, and wherein both Cyprian,
and Nazianzene, and Ambrose did agree with him. And Ambrose in special sort he
magnifies for this profession. And Calvin hereupon observes, that whereas the
Pelagians charged him, with differing from the ancients herein. Valet Augustini
testimonium, says he, apud eos, qui libenter in Patrum authoritate
acquiescunt. Quanquam non patitur Augustinus se a reliquis disjungi, sed claris
testimoniis divortium hoc cujus invidia gravabant eum Pelagiani, ostendit
falsum esse. Citat enim ex Ambrosio (lib. de Praedestin. sanct. cap. 19.)
Christus quem dignatur vocat (here is the critical point of this question
concerning the absoluteness of election and reprobation) Item si voluisset ex
indevotis fecisset devotos. Sed Deus quos dignatur vocat, and quem vult
religiosum facit. Si ex Augustino integrum volumen contexere libeat, lectoribus
ostendere promptum esset mihi non nisi ejus verbis opus esse: sed eos
prolixitate onerare nolo. This was Calvin's judgment, as touching the judgment
of Antiquity in this.

4. Yet I confess there was a time when Austin did not conceive faith to be
amongst the gifts of Gods spirit, but being exercised with the Pelagians, he
came to acknowledge the special grace of God in this; and hereupon made faith
an effect of predestination, and not any precedent thereunto, and doubts not,
but the Fathers would have expressed as much, had they been exercised with the
Pelagians as he was; for so much he signifies unto Prosper as before I showed,
and withal shows how in the foundation of predestination they agreed with
him, in as much as they agreed in the nature of grace, acknowledging the
conversion of the heart to be the gift of God; And not they only, but the whole
Catholic Church, as appeared by their common prayers, that God would convert
the hearts of Infidells; and to say, that God does not convert the hearts of
men according to the mere pleasure of his will, but according to men's
preparations, is clearly to maintain that God gave grace according unto works,
which doctrine was generally exploded as mere Pelagianisme.

5. Suppose they did all acknowledge the decree of election and reprobation, to
be conditional, yet if they interpreted this conditionally, not quoad actum
Volentis, but quoad Res volitas, this is nothing opposite to the absoluteness
of election and reprobation quoad actum elegentis and reprobantis, but only
quoad res volitas, to wit, salvation on the one side, and damnation on the
other side. And we willingly acknowledge that God has not ordained that
salvation or damnation shall befall any man but in case they believe and
repent, or refuse to believe, or repent. Now that the Ancients did in this
manner understand voluntas conditionata in God, Vossius himself (upon whom our
Arminians do most depend as touching the authority of the Ancients) does
improvidently, and ere he is a ware, confess. Hist. Pelag. page 638. his words
are these. Aliqua absolute vult and simpliciter: quomodo creare mundum voluit
and extremo die volet resurrectionem carnis. De qua voluntate intelligi debet
illud, Psalm. 115. 3. Deus noster in coelo, quaecunque voluit facit. and Apost.
ad Romans 9. 19. Voluntati ejus quis resistit? Aliqua item vult cum condition
quae idcirco in effectum non prodeunt nisi condition impleta: quomodo omnes
homines salvari vult, sed per and propter Christum fide apprehensum. Atqui non
omnes fide aphrehendunt Christum, sed absque paenitentia ac fide plurimi de hoc
mundo decedunt. Quo respectu tales in aeternum statuit damnare. De conditionata
illa voluntate extant long plurima apud Veteres Scriptores. Aliqua hoc loco
ascribemus.

Such indeed are Beza's words upon that of the Apostle, Who has given first
unto God? Romans 11. 35. Est autem etiam hic locus (says he) diligenter
observandus adversus eos qui fidei, vel operum praevisionem faciunt electionis
causam. In quem errorem sanc turpissimum. Origenes veteres plerosque tum
Graecos tum Latinos adegit donec; tandem Dominus Augustinum per Pelagianos ad
hunc agnoscendum and corrigendum errorem excitaret. The first part this Author
conceales, it being by Beza delivered as touching election; and this Author
deals purposely on reprobation only. The latter part likewise he passes by;
for Beza confines this which he says of the Ancients to a certain time,
namely, the time preceding the troubles raised by Pelagius. But this Author had
rather it should run at random without any determination; and then again,
the mentioning of Austin raised by God upon occasion of Pelagius his doctrine,
to take notice of this error, and correct it, he well saw was like enough to
blast all the show he makes of the Ancients, especially considering how that
Pelagian faction was not by Austin only, but by the Catholic Church of those
days beaten down. And it is well known how the writings of Austin were
countenanced, and how many Counsels of those days, made decrees against the
Pelagian Heresy. And for both these passages, it seems he was beholding to
Vossius in his Pelagian History, Lib. 6. These. 8. which is this, Graeci Patres
semper, Patrum vero Latinorum illi qui ante Augustinum vixerunt, dicere solent,
eos esse praedestinatos ad vitam, quos Deus p^e recteque victuros praevidit,
sive ut alii loquuntur quos praevidit credituros, and perseveraturos, etc. Quod
ita interpretatur ut praedestinatio ad gloriam facta dicitur, secundum
praescientiam fidei and perseverantiae. And next unto some passages alleged
out of Origin he brings in these two passages of Beza and Calvin. Now it liked
not this Author to take his course to begin with Clemens Alexandrinus, and his
Scholar Origin, as Vossius does: For albeit Origin was a man for his learning
of great authority in the Church of God, in such sort that it was wont to be
said, that Origenis ingenium Ecclesiae Sacramentum, and no marvail if many
followed him, and it is usual even with Hierome in his Commentaries to follow
him. Yet after his death, his Writings were found at length to have a very ill
savor in the Catholic Church. And amongst other foul opinions found in him,
one nearly concerning this very particular we have in hand, was that which
Vossius there delivers in this manner, Veterum multorum opinio est, putasse eum
animas corporibus vel praedestinatorum, vel reproborum uniri pro iis quae been
vel male egissent ante conditum corporeum hunc mundum. Judge I pray whether
here be not a sweet nosegay for the Divill, as touching the foresight of works,
not to come, but of works past before they were borne, and thereupon their
souls united either to bodies predestined unto life, or reprobated unto
death. Yet Vossius would not have us think either Origin deceived by Clement
(which no man ever said that I know, neither does Vossius pretend any such
thing) or that Chrysostom was deceived by them, or those that followed, by
him, all this seems to be delivered only to cross Beza, who professed the
Greek and Latin Fathers were deceived by Origin. Yet it is well known of what
estimation Origin was in the Church, none of the others like him, but what is
his reason? because forsooth Ireneus lib. 4. cap. 76. professes that God did
destinate heaven to them that should believe; and to them which should not
believe, hell. But could he be ignorant that Fulgentius professes the self
same, lib. 1. ad Monimum; namely, Deum praedestinasse ad regnum quos ad se
praescivit misericordiae praevenientis auxilio redituros, and in se
misericordiae subsequentis auxilio esse mansuros. Yet this very Author in his
Preface professes that Fulgentius amongst others, albeit they maintained that
God did destinate no others to salvation, then such as whom he foresaw by the
pure gift of his grace, would have the beginnings of faith, and a good will,
and persevere in good, yet notwithstanding they withal maintained, that this
prescience divine of their faith and perseverance, did flow from Gods absolute
decree to save them. Nay Austin himself in Joan. Tract. 42. (as Hunnius and
others allege him, and I find it true) has these words of those of whom our
Savior says, Therefore you hear not, because ye are not of God; Praecogniti
erant quod non fuerant credituri ea fide qua sola possint a peccatorum
obligatione liberari; and afterward says, secundum hanc praedestinationem
loquutus est Dominus. But will it herehence follow that Austin did deny
absolute predestination? Vossius himself acknowledges the contrary of him, as
Praef. in Hist. Pelag.
well as of Fulgentius, namely, that Gods foreknowledge of perseverance in
good, proceeded from Gods absolute decree of saving them. And let every sober
reader judge whether upon the same grounds it does not follow, that Gods
foreknowledge of man's perseverance in infidelity, does not likewise follow from
Gods absolute decree of reprobating him. For what is the ground of the former,
but this, that God had absolutely decreed to give faith unto some? Now does it
not herehence follow, that God absolutely decreed to deny faith unto others?
For as Ambrose says, and as Austin alleges out of him, si voluisset ex
indevotis fecisset devotos. Yet am not I of Vossius his opinion in this. I say
rather, Gods foreknowledge of one man's faith, proceeds from his decree not of
saving him, but of giving him faith; and Gods foreknowledge of another man's
final perseverance in infidelity, proceeds from Gods decree, not of damning
him, but of denying him grace to cure his infidelity. And as for the decree of
salvation, I deny it to be in any moment of nature, before the decree of giving
grace; in like sort, I deny the decree of damnation to be in any moment of
nature before the decree of permitting man's infidelity to continue uncured unto
the end. And the critical question in this point consists in this, Whether the
granting of grace, or denial of grace, be not merely of the pleasure of God,
and not according to any different dispositions in man; by grace understanding
grace effectual to the working of faith and true repentance. And unless the
Ancients be showed to have maintained, either that faith, and repentance, are
not the gifts of God; or, that if they be the gifts of God, that God dispenses
his effectual grace for the working of them, not according to the mere
pleasure of God, but according to the different dispositions of men; all that
they talk of the Ancients in this point, is merely vain and to no purpose.

But I come to Prosper, whose relation, I doubt not, this Author takes to be of
greatest moment. Now to this I answer.

1. To say that, Pene omnium par invenitur and una sententia, qua propositum
and praedestinationem Dei secundum praescientiam receperunt, does not prove
that there is no footing amongst the Ancients for absolute predestination.
Neither does Vossius allege half so many Fathers for this opinion, as were
those Bishops who joined with Cyprian in decreeing the Rebaptization of
Heretics.

2. This seems to be related by Prosper, not so much out of his own opinion, as
by way of an objection proposed by the Massilienses, desiring Austin to show
how it is to be answered. Illud etiam (says he) qualiter dilucitur quaesumus
demonstres quod retractatis Priorum hac de re opinionibus, pene omnium
invenitur par and una sententia, etc. And this is farther evidenced by these
words of Prosper. Obstinationem suam vetustate defendunt ut ea quae de Epistola
Pauli Romany scribentis, ad manifestationem divinae gratiae praevenientis
Electorum merita proferuntur, a nullo unquam Ecclesiasticorum ita esse
intellecta ut nunc sentiuntur, affirment.

3. Observe, When Prosper urged them to expound those passages in St Paul,
after what meaning they thought best, they forthwith professed ingeniously that
they found nothing in the Fathers that gave them content: their words related
by Prosper are these, Nihil se invenisse quod placeret.

4. Bellarmine, De Great. and liber. Arbit. lib. 2. cap. 14. takes notice of
this objection drawn out of Prosper and answers it, according unto Austin in
this manner, Augustinus ipse in libr. de Bono Persev. cap. 20. dicit Veteres
Patres, qui ante Pelagium floruerunt, quaestionem istam nunquam acurate
tractasse sed incidenter solum and quasi per transitum illam attigisse. Addit
vero in fundamento hujus sententiae quod est, Gratiam Dei non praeveniri ab
ullo opere nostro; sed contra, ab illo omnia opera nostra praeveniri, ita ut
nihil omnino boni quod attinet ad salutem, sit in nobis quod non sit nobis ex
Deo, convenire Catholicos omnes; and ibidem citat Cyprianum, Ambrosium,
Nazianzenum. So that it appears hereby, that Austin did not acknowledge the
former Writers to have embraced this opinion, though the Massilienses pretended
so much. And herewithall he opens unto us, a way how to conceive aright of
their opinion in predestination; namely, that as many as acknowledge Gods grace
preventing us in every good work, they all are to be accounted to agree with
him in the doctrine of predestination. For it is apparent, that in the contrary
doctrine Pelagius grounded his opinion concerning predestination. And Austin
himself sometime thought that God, quem sibi crediturum esse praescivit, ipsum
elegit, cui spiritum sanctum daret, ut bona operando vitam aeternam
consequeretur: and why so? because forsooth he at that time conceived it to be
man's work to believe, which says he, I had never said, had I known faith it
self to have been amongst the gifts of the holy Ghost. Retract. lib. 1. cap.
25. and therefore De Praedesti. Sanct. cap. 1. in his answer to the Letter of
Hilarious, mark what course Austin takes for the justifying of his own doctrine
concerning predestination. Prius fidem qua Christiani sumus donum Dei esse
debemus ostendere. And Bellarmine in the place above cited professes, that
Austin did herehence rightly collect out of the Fathers, Gratuitae
praedestinationis sententiam and fidem in Ecclesia Catholica semper fuisse.
Neque olim (says he) defendi potest praedestinatio ex operibus praevisis, nisi
aliquid boni ponatur in homine justo, quo discernatur ab impio quod non sit
illi a Deo; quod sane (says he) Patres omnes cum summa consensione rejiciunt.
In like sort, Junius in his answer to Baro for the justifying of gratuitous
predestination, counts it sufficient to prove, Fidem esse donum praedestinantis
and miserentis Dei ex praedestinatione ipsius. And adds saying, Hoc omnes
Patres uno consensu ex Christo and Paulo agnoverunt. Ipse Justinus Martyr
Apolog. 2. and alii. Gravissime vero Clemens Alexandrinus (in hac alioqui
palestra non ita exercitatus) ut sequentia saecula. Stromat. lib. 2. Basilidis
and Valentimi dogma esse dicit, quod fides a natura sit. In my poor judgment,
the Fathers, as many as stated predestination according to the prescience of
men's works, had no other meaning but this, that God did predestinate no man to
eternal life, but such as coming to ripe years should believe in Christ and
repent; no man unto eternal death, but such as should finally persevere in
infidelity and impenitency; so making works foreseen the cause of salvation,
but not of Gods decree. And Aquinas was bold to profess that, Nemo fuit it a
insanae mentis qui diceret merita esse causam praedestinationis divinae quoad
actum praedestinantis. And it is a good rule that Gerson gives, that holy men's
Writings are not to be urged precisely according to the letter, De Vita
Spirituali animae Sect. 1. co. 11. Notet his quod Doctores etiam sancti sunt
magis reverenter glossandi in multis, quam ampliandi: quoniam non omnes semper
adverterunt, aut advertere cogitaverunt ad proprietatem locutionis.
Improprietas autem non ampliari debet, sed ad proprietatem reduci, alioquin
quid mirum si augetur deceptio.

5. We know what answer Austin himself makes unto this, De Praedestin. Sanct.
cap. 14. Quid igitur opus est ut eorum scrutemur opuscula, qui priusquam ista
Haeresis oriretur, non habuerunt necessitatem in hac difficili ad solvendum
quaestione versari, quod proculdubio facerent si respondere talibus cogerentur.

6. As before I showed, Fulgentius himself maintains predestination to be
secundum praescientiam; yet Vossius acknowledges him as well as Austin, to
have maintained the absoluteness of predestination.

7. Lastly, this passage concerns predestination alone, as it signifies the
divine decree of conferring glory; but who ever was known to maintain the
divine decree of conferring grace to have been secundum praescientiam,
according to foresight of any work in man? For this is plainly to maintain,
that grace is given according unto works, which in the Ancients phraise is all
one, as to acknowledge, that grace is given according unto merits, which is
direct Pelagianisme, and condemned 1200 years ago in the Synod of Palestine.

As for that of Minutius Foelix, We deny that God does, sortem in hominibus
punire, non voluntatem. We do not say, Genitura plectitur; we say that in
every one who is punished by God, ingenii natura punitur; We confess that
Fatum illud est quod de unoquoque Deus fatus est; and that pro meritis and
singulorum qualitatibus, etiam fata determinat. Yet the holy Ghost professes
in the mouths of all his Apostles, that both Herod, and Pontius Pilate,
together with the Gentiles, and People of Israel, were gathered together
against the holy son of God, to do that which Gods hand, and Gods council
predetermined to be done; and yet this predetermination divine, I should think,
was nothing prejudicial to the liberty of their wills.

As for Hierome, this Author says that he was an eager opposer of the
Pelagians, but no where does it appear, that the point of predestination comes
in question between them. These very passages out of Hierome are proposed by
Grotius in his Pietas Ordinum Hollandiae, and answered by Gratianus Civilis
punctually, and long before by Bellarmine Lib. 2. de Great. and lib. arb. cap.
14.

I answer, what is this any other, but that which the Fathers many of them have
professed in saying, that predestination is secundum praescientiam; And does
not Fulgentius affirm the same? Yet is he acknowledged by Vossius, a maintainer
of the absoluteness of predestination as well as Austin. Did Hierome deny
faith to be the gift of God? or granting it to be the gift of God, did he
maintain, that God gave it according unto works? If not, but according to the
mere pleasure of his will, having mercy on some, while he hardened others; the
case is clear, that he maintained absolute election unto faith. As for Gods
decree of salvation and damnation, we willingly profess, that God decreed to
save no man but upon his final perseverance in faith and piety; to damn none,
but such as finally persevere in infidelity and impenitency. Now compare we
these decrees together, the decree of giving faith, and the decree of saving;
which of these are most likely to be the foremost; it is apparent that
salvation is more likely to be the end in respect of faith, and faith the means
in respect of salvation, then the contrary. And the general and most received
rule of Schools is, that the intention of the end is before the intention of
the means. I think the glory of God in the way of mercy, mixed with justice is
the end of both; and that the decrees of giving faith and salvation are
simultaneous, as decrees of means tending to the same end, and so neither
before the other. But Hierome says, that, ex Praescientia futurorum nascitur
dilectio vel odium. I confess he does in a disjunctive manner thus, vel ex
praescientia vel ex operibus. And we know that passions such as Love and
Hatred, are commonly said to be attributed to God, not quoad affectum but quoad
effectum, and so they may fairly stand for salvation and damnation, which
proceed ex operibus in Hieroms phraise. But admit he means hereby, decretum
salvandi which rising expraescientia fidei, must presuppose the decree of
giving faith to precede. I answer then, there is to be acknowledged an
impropriety of speech, and here is place for Gersons rule, Sancti non semper
adverterunt ad proprietatem locutionis. And the rather because Hierome we never
find exercised in this Controversy. And it is against common reason, that faith
should be intended before salvation. And lastly, this were to impute unto him
to acknowledge 2 motive cause of Predestination quoad actum praedestinantis:
which Aquinas professes against, as a thing impossible; namely, that there
should be a cause of Gods will quoad actum volentis; Nay he is bold to say
that, No man was so mad to say that merits are the cause of Predestination
quoad actum praedestinantis.

The last part of this Authors performance in the point of Antiquity is the
Council of Arles, subscribing as he says, the letter which was written by
Faustus against Lucidus the Predestinarian (for so he styles him) and in his
Epistle he insists upon two Anathema's, the one this, Anathema illi qui dixerit
illum qui periit non accepisse ut salvus esse possit. The other this, Anathema
illi qui dixerit quod vas contumcliae non possit affurgere, ut sit vas in
honorem.

First, I will answer as touching the Anathema's themselves, then as touching
the credit and authority of this story.

1. As touching the Anathema's. The first proceeds as well of him that is
baptized and afterward perishes, as of him that is a Pagan and never was
baptized, and perishes in his Paganism, as the Anathema it self witnesses,
if it be repeated at full, thus, Anathema illi qui dixerit illum qui periit non
accepisse, ut salvus esse possit, id est, vel de baptizato, vel de illius
aetatis Pagano, qui credere potuit and noluit. By which latter clause it
appears, that accipere ut salvus esse possit, is no other then to receive
Possibilitatem credendi (I say Possibilitatem not Potentiam, because I find
this is Faustus his usual phraise, as it was the phraise of Pelagius before
him) and this is as much as to say, that every man has power to believe if he
will. Now observe I pray, This kind of power is merely nature, not that which
we commonly call Grace, whereby we understand something distinct from nature.
And Austin acknowledges both, De Genesis contr. Manichae. lib. 1. cap. 3, that
all men, possunt credere si velint; and that this is no more then is signified
by that natural illumination wherewith God enlightens every man, when he comes
into the world, John. 1. 9. And, De Praedest. Sanct. cap. 5. Posse habere
fidem, sicut posse habere charitatem, naturae est hominum. Fidem vero habere,
sicut and charitatem habere gratiae est fidelium. And more then this, the state
of the question between Pelagius and the Catholics of those days is so
proposed by Austin, as not at all to consist about the possibility of believing
or doing any good work, but merely about the willing and doing of it. In so
much that Austin professes, that if Pelagius would acknowledge the will and
doing of good to be from God, as he did the possibility hereof to be from God,
there should be an end of all controversy between them, and Pelagius should be
received as a good Catholic. This appears in his book, De Gratia Christi
contra Pelagium and Caelestium cap. 6. Pelagius his words were these speaking
of God Qui ipsius voluntatis and operis possibilitatem dedit. Hanc autem
possibilitatem (says Austin) in natura eum ponere de verbis ejus superioribus
clarum est. Sed, ne nihil de gratia dixisse videretur, adjunxit, quique ipsam
ipsam voluntatem gratiae suae adjuvat semper auxilio. Now this adjutorium
possibilitatis, in what sense he delivered it, Austin professes to be obscure,
both as touching the nature of it, and as touching the manner how he conceived
the nature of man to be aided thereby; but in other places, says he, where he
speaks more plainly, it appears to consist in giving a law, and affording
instruction. Now by the way mark Austins observation upon these words of
Pelagius, Quique ipsam possibilitatem gratiae suae adjuvat semper auxilio; non
ait, says Austin, ipsam voluntatem vel ipsam operationem, quod si diceret, non
abhorrere a doctrina Catholica videretur. Now, voluntatem adjuvari, in Austins
meaning, is, Voluntatem praeparari a Domino ut velit; and operationem adjuvari
is, voluntatem corroborari ne frustra velit. The one operation he calls grace
prevenient, the other subsequent, according to that, Nolentem praevenit ut
velit, volentem subsequitur ne frustra velit. And cap. 25. of the same Book,
Non solum Deus posse nostrum donavit atque adjuvat, sed etiam velle and operari
operatur in nobis, whereby it appears that Voluntatem atque operationem nostram
adjuvari a Deo, is Deum operari in nobis and velle and operari quod bonum est;
which if Pelagius had acknowledged he had been received for a Catholic. So
that he excepted not against him for acknowledging Possibilitatem volendi,
atque agendi quod bonum est.

As touching the second Anathema, I say that Vas contumeliae may be taken in a
double sense: either to signify a vessel deserving contumely, deserving wrath;
or to signify a Vessel ordained to contumely, and to the suffering of eternal
wrath. In the first sense, there is no question but a man may change from being
a vessel of contumely, or a vessel of wrath, into the condition of a vessel
of honor; but in the second sense, it is as impossible there should be any
such change, as it is impossible there should be any change in God, whereof I
think there is no question: and both Faustus and Lucidus might take the phraise
in the former sense: but if they did take it in this latter sense, dares this
Author justify them?

2. Now I come to the credit and authority of this story concerning the
Council of Arles; and

1. I say, suppose it be a truth; yet about the year 494. there was a Roman
Council wherein Gelasius and 70 Bishops with him justify the writings of
Austin, and Prosper, and condemn the writings of Cassian and Faustus, by whose
procurement it is here pretended the Bishops of Arles subscribed this Epistle
of Faustus unto Lucidus. And the Fathers of this pretended Council of Arles
are not reckoned up above sixteen.

2. The credit of this story lies wholly upon Faustus his relation and his
honesty therein, a man infamous in the Church for opposing Austin and his
doctrine of grace and predestination, as appears by the Writings of Fulgentius,
Petrus Diaconus, Alchimus Avitus and others. Ado Viennensis in Chron. ad ann.
492. writes of him thus. Faustus ex Abbate Monasterii Licinensis apud Regem
Galliae Episcopus facius, Pelagianorum dogma destruere conatus (which yet may
be made apparent to have been merely in pretense) in errorem unde qui ejus
sensus in hac part Catholicos praedicant, sicut Germadius de Viris illustribus
scribens, omnino errant. Ita enim liberum arbitrium tam Augustinus quam caeteri
Catholici in Ecclesia Dei docent ut illuminatio, virtus and salus illi a
Christo, per Christum, and in Christo sit. Faustus vero iste ita liberum
Christianorum arbitrium docere conatur, ut illuminatio, virtus and salus non a
Christo, sed a natura sit. Contra hunc scribit beatissimus Avitus Viennensis
Episcopus lucidissima fide ejus redarguens errorem; similiter and Joannes vir
eruditissimus Antiochenus Presbyter. Isidore in his Book De Viris illustribus,
testifies that Fulgentius wrote seven Books against Faustus, Qui mira
calliditate Catholicus videri volebat cum Pelagianus esset. Auctor quoque Vitae
5ti Fulgentii testatur a Sancto Fulgentio refutatos libros duos Fausti de Great.
and Liber. Arbitrio. And Petrus Diaconus in his Book De Incarnatione and Gratia
Christi cap. ultim. Anathema dicit Libris Fausti, And this Bellarmine, de
Script. Eccles. writes to admonish them, who in these Letters contend, that
Faustus was a Catholic.

Farther observe the Bishops who are pretended to have subscribed Faustus his
Epistle to Lucidus are numbered these.

Auxianus. Claudius. Euphronius. Eutropius. Faustus. Julianus. Leucadius.
Megetius. Patiens. Paulus. Pragmatius.
But the Bishops that were assembled at the Council of Arles are These.

Agricii nomine Cataphronius. Caelestinus. Caesarius. Constantini nomine
Leontius. Contumeliosius. Cyprianus. Eucherius. Florentius. Galliani nomine
Melerius. Joannis nomine Desiderius. Julianus. Maximus. Philagrius.
Praetextatus. Proitianus. Severi nomine Cataphronius.
Thus they are reckoned up on both sides by Vossius, amongst whom there is but
one name common. To help this, Vossius devises a 4th Council of Arles and that
the Bishops mentioned to have subscribed Faustus his Epistle, to be the Bishops
assembled in the 4th Council of Arles, and not those whom we read to have been
assembled at the Third. But that any such Bishops were assembled at a 4th
Council of Arles he brings no evidence, that I find; but his own conjecture is
the best ground for this. And all this pains is taken to salve Faustus his
reputation in this. And the reason that moves Vossius to conceive that this
subscription was not a mere fiction of Faustus, is this; Because forsooth if
this had been a mere fiction of Faustus, surely Maxentius in opposing him,
would not have failed to have cast this in his teeth. Binius is eager in the
defense of these Episcopal subscriptions, but withal confesses, that either
Faustus himself, or some in his name, practiced to countenance his Books also
by the authority of those Bishops. In fine (says he) hujus Commentarii and
Libelli, ipse Faustus, vel alius quis dolose addider at haec verba, In quo
quidem opusculo post Arelatinsis Concilii subscriptionem, novis erroribus
deprehensis adjici aliqua Synodus Lugdunensis exegit, ut scilicet (says
Binnius) aliquo fuco venditari posset quasi scriptum de gratia and libero
arbitrio Commentarium duae Synodi recepissent and approbassent. Now if such
were the dishonest art of Faustus in counterfeiting this, why might he not be
as dishonest in counterfeiting the former Episcopal subscriptions also? And if
Vossius his reason to salve Faustus his credit, were of force in this, why
should it not be in force in the other also? For Maxentius we do not find to
have excepted against his fidelity, more in the one then in the other? And why
might not Maxentius be ignorant of them both? And in Biblioth. Sanct. Patrum.
there is an admonition added to Faustus his Epistle to Loentius, ex Indice
Expurgat. M. Script. Pelatii, wherein though Faustus his epistle to Lucidus, is
acknowledged to have been approved by the Episcopal subscriptions in the
Council of Arles, yet as touching Faustus his mendicating authority from those
Fathers to his books, De Great. and Lib. Arbit. The Author thereof spares not in
plain terms to give Faustus the lie in these words. Neutiquam tamen ullus ob
id existimet ab utroque Concilio approbatos tres libros Fausti de Gratia, ut
ipse mendaciter innuere videtur in ea quae his subjicitur, praefatoria Epistola
ad Episcopum Leontinum etc. But can Vossius show that Maxentius did cast this
juggling course of Faustus in his teeth?

But it seems that Vossius had no great need to trouble himself in the
vindicating of Faustus his reputation in pretending the subscription of Bishops
to his Epistle written to Lucidus. For how does it appear that Faustus is the
author of any such pretense? It is true, in the Epistle it self that he wrote
to Lucidus, he professes that he kept a copy of it, to show to that assembly
of Bishops, Hujus Epistolae exemplar mecum retineo in conventu Sanctorum
Antistitum, si ita necesse fuerit, proferendum: by the way observe that this
resolution of his, was not absolute, but si ita necesse fuerit, and this
necessity he signifies wherein it did consist, namely in case Lucidus by his
silence, did give testimony of his continuance in his error, as he calls it,
His words are these, Quod si eam subscriptam transmittere nolueris, aperte
adhuc te in errore persistere ipso silentio comprobabis, ac perinde iam
necessitatem mihi facies ad personam tuam publicis conventibus exponendam. Now
as for that which follows after the end of the Epistle, Et subscripserunt
Episcopi, qui ordine subsequuntur qui in ea quoque Synodo adfuerunt.

Auxanius in Christi nomine Episcopus, Relegi and subscripsi
Faustus exemplar Epistolae meae Relegi and subscrip.
Paulus Episcopus in Christi nomine, Rel. and subscrip.
Eutropius etc.
Observe the admonition subjoyned by Henricus Canisius. These subscriptions,
says he, are not in the Manuscript. Hae subscriptiones non sunt in Manuscripto
Codice. Consider I pray the fair issue of this Authors learned pretense of
Antiquity, he honors the gray hairs of Faustus, and those grave assemblies
mentioned by him whereof we have no certainty; but how honors he the grayer
hairs of Austin, and of all the Assemblies against the Pelagians, that you may
guess, though he concealeth it. And herein his devotion to this kind of
Antiquity, where he thinks it will serve his turn, he is content you should
conceive it does exceed the devotion of Calvin and Beza, yea and of Austin
also; whose answer to Prosper he is content to pass by as not savouring so
much of piety in his judgment, but the Massilienses zeal of the Ancients
represented by Prosper unto Austin, that is suitable to his humor, he
relisheth that well, and so well that he thinks it fit vehemently to mistrust
those doctrines which they never approved, but disliked and condemned. Yet of
any condemnation other then what is implied by Faustus, a man infamous, and
whose Writings were condemned by 70 Bishops, he makes no mention. And before
Austins days, and the days of Pelagius, the Ancients were not exercised with
any controversy hereabouts. And was their non-approbation of his doctrine,
concerning absolute predestination, any motive to Austin vehemently to mistrust
the truth thereof? I think he will not say it was; and therefore I hope he will
give Calvin and Beza leave, never a whit the more for that cause, to mistrust
the same doctrine, in granting the Ancients to have conceived predestination to
proceed secundum praescientiam according unto foreknowledge, he is content to
conform himself to their judgment; but in mistrusting the contrary doctrine,
hereupon you must give him leave to follow his own, or any, rather then not
Calvin's or Beza's, but even Austins also, though never so much magnified by the
Church of God, and his writings countenanced especially against the Pelagians,
and the contrary condemned, by other manner of Counsels then Arelatense 3d,
and Lugdunense. I remember when Epicurus was demanded why, seeing he followed
Leucippus so much, he did not follow him throughout, made this answer saying, I
do as a man that is a thirst when he takes the cup to drink, for he drinks
what will serve his turn, and sets the rest by: so you must give this Author
leave to represent his devotion to gray hairs, so far as they serve his
turn, and no farther. Yet I have showed how Austin maintains, as touching the
Ancients that went before him, that they concurred with him in fundomento
praedestinationis, which he accounted the the doctrine of Free grace, and cites
to this purpose Cyprian, Ambrose, and Nazianzen, and by the common prayers of
the Church, that God would convert the unbelievers unto the faith of Christ;
that the same doctrine, which was in his judgment the foundation of
predestination, as he maintained it according to the Word of God, was generally
received in the Church of God.

Before I part from this, I think fit to add something concerning the style
here given to Lucidus, before the revocation of his pretended error; for here I
find him styled the Predestinarian. Now I presume this Author, that pretends so
great reverence to gray hairs, and so much preferres Antiquity before Novelty,
has good ground for this his denomination of him, and that out of Antiquity.
Now I desire he would be pleased to communicate unto us, his learned reading in
Antiquity for this; and the rather, because in the whole story of the business
between Faustus and Lucidus, I find no mention of any such attribute given to
his person, or to the doctrine (reputed by Faustus erroneous) maintained by
him. The term Praedestinatus qualirying a person, I find first in Arnobius
junior, and from that time I find not the Praedestinati, or Praedestinatians
mentioned till the days of Hinemarus, about the year of our Lord God 850. And
as for the story of the Predestinarian Heresy, which this Author licks his
lips at, the original whereof is referred to the year 415 by Sigibertus; it
is very strange, that in Austins days it was not known unto him, or being
known, not taken notice of by him, nor by Prosper neither after him. And
Alphonsus a Castro in his Book contra Haereses, professes that the Author of
this Heresy he found not, neither in Sigibert, nor in any other; because indeed
not one of those who wrote of Heresics makes mention of this Heresy, besides
Bernard of Lutzenburg in his Catalogue of Heretics; and he says no more of
it, then what Sigibert mentions in his Chronicle. And withal he adds, that
after this error was buried, by the space of almost a thousand years, it was
revived by John Husse the Bohemian. Whereby it appears, that Alphonsus was not
of this Authors opinion in censuring this Lucidus for a Predestinarian. And the
first that I find to intimate so much is Hincmarus about the year 850. In like
sort Prateolus acknowledges that, Quis little Dux and institutor fuerit,
nescitur. But Gerardus Vossius has herein helped us with this conjecture,
referring the original of this Heresy to the Monks of Adrumetum; and Bishop
Usher in his Historia Godescalci says, Vossius was the first that charged
those Adrumetine Monks to be the author thereof. Yet if I be not deceived, he
might be beholding to Coccius for helping him to this conceit. But this makes
the matter more strange another way, namely that Austin should not take notice
of this Predestinarian Heresy, seeing none was so well acquainted with the
opinion of those his neighbor Monks, as he, being the man, whom they consulted
about the difference that rose thereabouts, and wrote two Books thereupon and
composed all. And yet I see no reason why Vossius should refer it to the
Adrumetine Monks hand over head, when as it is clear by the relation of them,
that came over to Austin to complain thereof, and to confer with him
thereupon; that they were but few, who were carried away with that error,
whereof they complained, and that it was but one, that troubled the place of
their Monastery herein, who was as it were the Ringleader to the rest; of which
Vossius could not be ignorant. And therefore I see no cause why he should
charge them all indifferently, or that party either, who were tainted herewith,
as is pretended; seeing there was an Antesignanus who led the rest, of whom
Vossius speaks nothing at all; and I suppose he knew some good cause why.
Besides, the Predestinarian Heresy is pretended to have risen Ab Augustini
libris male intellectis. Now I find no color of evidence hitherto, that these
Monks of Adrumentum, whom Vossius makes the founders of this Heresy, were led
awry by the misunderstanding of Austins writings. Neither does Vossius any
where, that I know, take any pains to clear this. And I would gladly be
beholding to this Author, that pretends so much zeal unto, and skill in the
knowledge of Antiquity, and so boldly styles Lucidus a Predestinarian, for
communicating unto us his rare evidences concerning this point, out of his
great observations. And so much the rather, to take me off from mine error,
who since the first time that I traveled in the search after this
Predestinarian Heresy in dealing with Corvinus, which is now some three years
ago. I have been apt to conceive that this Heresy from the first, was but a
mere fiction of the Pelagians and Semi-Pelagians, cunningly to disgrace thereby
the doctrine of St Austin. And since the coming forth of Dr Ushers History in
the cause of Godescalcus, I have been confirmed herein; as wherein he gives to
understand, that whereas Tyro Prosper wrote hereof before Sigibert, although
the Printer has made him to speak as Sigibert does, namely, that Haec Haeresis
orta est ab Augustini libris male intellectis: yet that is not the language of
Tyro himself, but plainly this, Haec Haeresis ab Augustino orta est, and that
learned Bishop has showed out of two Manuscripts of Tyro, the one in Bennet
College in Cambridge, the other in our Kings Library: and this he farther
confirms by comparing the description which Gennadius makes of that, which he
calls the Predestinatian Heresy, with the doctrine of Augustine. lib. 5. cont.
Julian. Pelag. cap. 4. and de Bono Persev. cap. 15. And withal the same
learned Bishop makes it appear, that look what doctrine Sigebertus ascribes to
the Predestinatians, the same doctrine was charged upon Austin, and such as
concurred with him therein. This I say that learned Bishop proves out of the
beginning of the 6 Book Hypemnesticon. Credere nos vel praedicare sugillatis
quod Deus quosdam hominum sic praedestinet ad vitam regni caelorum, ut si
nolint or are, aut jejunare, aut in omni opere divino vigiles esse, eos omnino
perire non posse, nec prorsus sui debere esse sollicitos quos Deus quia voluit
semel jam elegendo praedestinavit ad vitam: quosdam vero sic praedestinavit in
Gehennae paenam ut etiam si credere velint, si jejuniis and or ationibus,
omnique se voluntati divinae subjicerent, in his Deum non delectari and vitam
illis aeternam in totum dari non posse, etc. Now this in effect is the very
Heresy of the Predestinatians related by Sigebert. Therefore I much desire this
Author would take the pains to prove, that this pretended Predestinarian
Heresy was indeed received to be an Heresy by the Catholic Church, and not
rather a fiction of the remnants of the Pelagians, wherewithal to reproach the
doctrine of S. Austin in the point of Predestination.

Thus have I examined this Authors pretense of the Novelty of our Tenent. I
come to the consideration of that which follows.

DISCOURSE. The Second Motive.
ITS unwillingnesse to abide the Trial. I find that the Authors and Abettors
of it, have been 2do.
very backward to bring it to the Standard, not only when they have been called
upon by their Adversaries to have been weighed, but also when they have been
entreated thereto by their chief Magistrates who might have commanded them. A
shrewd argument (me thinks) that it is too light.

In the Disputation at Mompelgard Anno 1586 held between Beza and Jacobus
Andreas with some Seconds on both sides, Beza and his company having disputed
with the Lutherans about the person of Christ, the Lords Supper etc. When they
came to this Point, did decline the sifting of it, and Beza in Col. Mompelg.
page 375. Vide etiam Osiander. Brand. Collog. Hagh. page 57.
gave this reason among others, that it could not then possibly be disputed of,
sine gravi eorum offendiculo, qui tanti mysterii capaces non sunt, without the
great scandal and hurt of the ignorant, and unacquainted with these high
mysteries.

The Contra-Remonstrants also in their Conference with their Adversaries at the
Hague in the year 1611 could not be drawn to dispute with them about this
point, but delivered a Petition to the States of Holland and Westfrizland that
they might not be urged to it, resolving rather to break off the Conference,
then to meddle with it.

In the Synod likewise of Dort, in the year 1618, and 1619. the Remonstrants
were warned by the President of the Synod ut de Electione potius quam de odiosa
Reprobations materia agerent, that they Act. Syn. p. 1. page 133.
should rather dispute of the point of Election, then the odious point of
Reprobation.

Can this Doctrine be a truth, and yet blush at the light, which makes all
thing manifest? especially considering these things.

1. That Reprobation is a principal Head of Practical divinity by the ill, or
well stating of which, the glory of God, and good of Religion is much promoted,
or hindered.

2. That there is such a necessary connection between the points of Election and
Reprobation (both being parts of predestination) that the one cannot well be
handled without the other.

3. That Reprobation was the chief cause of all the uproares in the Church at
that time.

4. That it was accused with open mouth, and challenged of falsehood, and
therefore bound in justice to purge it self of the crimination.

5. That it may easily be defended, if (as some say) it be such an apparent
truth, for Nihil est ad defendendum puritate tutius, nihil ad dicendum veritate
facilius, says S. Hierom.

The striving to lie close and hide it self, though perhaps it be not so
infallible, yet it is a very probable argument of a bad cause. Truth covets no
corners, but is willing to abide the trial, whether in men or in doctrines.
David knowing his heart to be without guile, offers himself ready to the
Psalm. 139. 23, 24, Ioh. 3. 20, 21.
Lords trial, Search me, o God, and know my heart, try me and know my
thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me. And our Savior tells us
that, Every one that does evil, hates the light and comes not to the light,
least his deeds should be reproved; but he that does truth, comes to the light,
that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. As S. Paul
says of an Heretic, he is (...) self condemned, and so may we say of Heresy
and untruth, it condemns it self, and by nothing more then by refusing the
Touchstone. He is to be thought an empty Scholar, who is loath to be opposed,
and his gold to be light and counterfeit, that will not have it touched and
weighed, and these Opinions to be but errors, which would so willingly walk in
a mist, and dwell in silence, when it concerns the peace of the Church so much
to have them examined.

TWISSE Consideration.
Who are these Authors of this Doctrine, who here are said to have been
backward to bring it to the standard? Is Beza those Authors? whereof was he the
Author? Was it the doctrine of predestination as proceeding of the mere
pleasure of God, and not upon foresight of man's faith and works? Is it not
apparent that this was the doctrine of Austin 1200 years ago, and that in
opposition to the Pelagians and Semi-Pelagians? Or was it the doctrine of
reprobation, as not proceeding upon the foresight of sin, but of the mere
pleasure of God? Is this Author so ignorant, as not to know what are the
conclusions of Alvarez in the question, Whether there be any cause of
reprobation on man's part. Lib. 10. de Auxil. disc. 110. page 866.

1. His first Conclusion is this, Reprobation whereby God decreed not to give
unto some everlasting life, and to permit their sin, is not conditionate, but
absolute: neither does it presuppose in God, foresight of the deserts of
reprobates, or of their perseverance in sin unto the last period of their
life.

2. His next Conclusion is, In the Angels that fell, there is no cause of
their reprobation on their part, as touching the whole effect thereof, but
before any foresight of their future sin, God, pro sua Voluntate, of his mere
will, did reprobate some of them, and suffered them to fall into sin.

3. The third, Infants departing in Original sin alone, there is no cause on
their part of reprobation, if they be considered in comparison with others
which are not reprobated, and the like is to be said proportionably of men of
ripe years.

4. The fourth, Not only comparatively, but absolutely there is no cause of
reprobation. Therefore neither sin actual, nor original, nor both of them
foreseen by God, was indeed the meritorious and motive cause of the reprobation
of any, as touching all the effects thereof, and the proof hereof he
prosecutes at large.

5. Reprobation as touching the last effect thereof, presupposes in signo
rationis the foresight of sin original, or actual, for which a reprobate is
damned. Mark it well, He does not say as the cause for which God decrees his
damnation, but as the cause for which a reprobate is damned. And Aquinas (whose
followers the Dominicans are) expresses this doctrine in this manner, and that
more Scholastically and accurately then Alvarez. Praescientia peccatorum potest
esse aliqua ratio reprobationis ex part paenae quae praeparatur reprobatis, in
quantum scilicet Deus proponit se puniturum malos propter peccata, etc. in Ad
Romans 9. Sect. 2. in fine, that is, Prescience of sins may be some reason of
reprobation on the part of punishment, to wit, in as much as God purposes to
punish wicked men for their sins. Where sin is evidently made the cause of
damnation, and that by virtue of Gods purpose, but by no means the cause of the
decree it self. And the same Aquinas elsewhere professes that, No man was so
mad as to affirm that merits are the cause of Predestination, as touching the
act of God Predestinating: and that it cannot be the cause thereof, he proves,
because nothing can be the cause of Gods will, as touching the act of God
willing, but as touching the things willed by God, as formerly he had proved.
The same doctrine in effect is taught by Durand in 1. did. 41. q. 2.
Bonaventure applies the same distinction to reprobation it self. Odium
aeternum, says he, implies two things, Principale significatum and connotatum
etc. and primum non est ex meritis, sed secundum. This he explicates in the
words following, Quod patet si resolvatur, quia Odium est propositum puniendi:
Propositum autem nullus meretur sed paenam, that is, Hatred (or reprobation) is
Gods purpose to punish: Of this divine purpose there is no meritorious cause,
but only of the punishment. The same was the Opinion of Gandavensis, Scotus,
Halensis, as I have showed in my Vindiciae.

Now judge I pray with how little judgment, or modesty this Author intimates
Beza to be the author of the doctrine of absolute reprobation. Perhaps he will
say his meaning is, that he was the author of the Upper-way, as touching the
making of the object of Predestination mankind not yet created. But to this I
answer, that Beza does so indeed, but he was never called to a conference
hereabouts, and consequently he never declined it. And that which was declined,
he makes to be declined by the abettors, as well as the authors; which cannot
be understood of this nice and Logical point, as touching the object of
reprobation. The main question is, whether there be any cause of reprobation,
as touching the act of God reprobating: the Negative whereof, was maintained
very generally amongst Schoole-Divines before Beza was borne. And was it ever
known, that those I have named did shrink in their heads or decline the trial
thereof? What a silly thing is it then to infer, that because Beza at such a
time, did decline the disputation hereof, and the Contra-Remonstrants at
another time, therefore it is suspectable to be an untruth? Yet let us examine
his instances.

Beza he says did decline the sifting of this doctrine (to wit, of
predestination) (for on that they were moved to dispute.) I doubt this Author
speaks by rote, and that he is nothing at all acquainted with the story hereof,
either in Osiander or in Beza, but transcribes only what another has prompted
unto him. For it is apparent by Osianders History, that they did confer
thereof. It is true he stood off at the first, and gave reasons for it, but at
length he and his fellows, condescended to the instance and importunity of
their Adversaries, and so came on to the Conference hereabout, His words are
these. Praefat. in 2. part. Respons. ad Acta Colloq. Mompelg. Quamvis quo
evasura essent reliqua satis prospiceremus, mane nihilominus mutata sententia
Illustriss. Principe salutato, in reliquam sequentem Collationem consensimus;
ea tantum condition addita, ne propter proximum Paschae Festum, ea disceptatio
longius protraheretur. Et ita demum ad audiendas D. Andreae declamationes
rursum processimus.

Was it this point alone the sifting whereof, as this Author phraseth it, Beza
declined? It is apparent they were no less then three Points. This appears by
the second part of Beza's answer Ad act. Colloq. Mompelg. as also by the answer
of Jacobus Andreae, as if he were the mouth of the Prince, namely, that if they
list not De Tribus illis confer, yet he thought it fit that Theses written by
them on those three Articles should be rehearsed in the hearing of all, which
afterward Beza and his fellows might take home with them to address an
answer to them afterward, as they thought good. And these three Articles were
concerning, Predestination, Baptism, and the putting down of Images in
Churches. Concerning all which Jacobus Andreae gives his reasons, why he
thought it fit they should entertain farther Conference; Whereunto Beza makes
answer in his Praeface to that second part of his Answer Ad Act. Colloq.
Mompelg. It is true, this reason Beza gave why he thought it not fit in that
place publicly to dispute thereof, to wit, of predestination, Quod haec
gravissima quaestio public in illo caetu allatis utrinque contrariis
sententiis disceptari absque nonnullorum offendiculo non posse videretur. For
both the mysterious nature of it is such, as few are capable of it; the
Massilienses professed as much, as appears in Prospers Epistle unto Austin, De
his taceri exigunt (says Prosper) quorum altitudinem nullus attigerit. And to
the same purpose, even they who durst not dislike Austins doctrine thereof
professed as much, as appears by the Letter of Hilarious unto Austin.
Consentientibus etiam his qui hanc definitionem improbare non audent, ut
dicant, Quid opus fuit hujusmodi disputationis incerto tot minus intelligentium
corda turbari? Then again it was in a Lutheran Assembly, and amongst many
brought up in the hatred of the doctrine which Beza maintained, who in all
likelihood would be the more exasperated. Causas verum tacendi Aug. de Den.
Persev. c. 16.
tongum est omnes quaerere (says Austin) quarum tamen est and haec una ne
priores faciamus eos qui non intelligunt. No wise man, says our Savior,
puts new wine into old bottells. Quanto minus sapit, says Beza in that
Preface of his, qui de praest antissimo vino prius in utres faecibus adhuc, and
vappa obsitos immittendo quam de repurgandis illis and apparandis cogitet.
Lastly, Beza perceives the practice of Jacobus Andreas standing upon a place
of advantage, to urge them to confer upon such a point, the truth whereof is
most harsh to carnal affections, that so he might have the better opportunity
to make them odious. And truly what Jacobus Andreas was, I know not, but Beza
sets him forth as a man of a most malevolent disposition to the French
Protestants: and our Savior has admonished us, Not to give that which is holy
unto dogs, or to cast pearl before swine. Yet Andreas to serve his turn, and
to draw them into a snare, pleads that the doctrine of Predestination, is not
so to be put over in the Schools, ut non opus sit eam rudi and imperito populo
ponere; yet Hunnius a man of the same profession, is so far different from
Iacobus Andreas, that he thinks it not fit to preach before the rude people of
prescience divine, but very sparingly; how much less would he think it fit to
Preach before them of Predestination divine? De Praedest. quest. and respons.
page 394. his words are these, Interim hoc repeto quod supra monui rudioribus
(quibus Apostolus vult lac propinari, non cibum solidum apponi) non esse multum
de praescientia Dei disputandum, hac solummodo de causa quia haud perinde
capiunt ea quae alias in Scholis in Disputationibus contra adversarios, and, ut
Paulus ait, inter perfectos utiliter and ex fundamentis eloquiorum Dei astrui
solent. Coram rudioribus ergo simplicior loquendi ratio and ipsorum captui
accommodatior est si dicamus, Deum ad haereditatem regni caelestis elegisse and
certo salvare decrevisse eos omnes qui resipiunt, and in vera fide filii Dei ex
hac vita decedunt. Its well known what order King James took in his time, in
the restraint of preaching this doctrine in the Pulpits, by any under the
degree of a Deane, and counseled the States likewise to forbid the preaching
of those controversall points amongst them. And if it were wisdom in them to
take this course, without any prejudice to the truth of the doctrine, why
should Beza's withholding from conference hereupon, be any thing prejudicial
thereto.

But were there not other causes of moment, to move him hereunto, which this
Author conceales, and which Beza proposes in the first place? as namely, that
the Prince who invited them hereunto, in his Letters Missive, alleged no other
cause of that meeting, but Infaelicem de Coena Domini controversiam, that
unhappy Controversy about the Supper of the Lord. Secondly, that their Cities
sent them over accordingly to this Conference for no other cause, but to
confer thereabours. This Iacobus Andreas acknowledges, and gives a reason
why in those Letters of the Prince, there was no mention made of those three
Articles, whereabout they were afterward urged to confer, to wit, quod illos
in istis quoque dissidere non intellexerat Princeps Illustrissimus. And
thirdly, because the Feast of Easter approached, and they desired to be at home
in their own Cities by that time.

Lastly, does if follow, that because they declined the sifting the truth of
these points (as this Author phraiseth it) after such a manner, to wit, by
public disputation; does it herehence follow, that they declined the sifting
of it? They made this offer to propose their opinion herein, and the
confirmation of it out of the Word of God, in private before the Prince: and if
Jacobus Andreas were pleased to propose any Theses against it, they would take
them along with them and upon consideration to address a convenient Answer
thereunto; This Beza sets down in that Preface: Let D. Andrews show if he can,
says Beza, hanc Christianae doctrinae partem aut a nostris sive scribendo sive
concionando praetermissam, aut a suis rectius and acuratius quam a nostris
pertractatam. And truly for my part, I no way like such conferences, being
privy to mine own imperfections, as having neither such strength of memory as
to command a present use of my knowledge in these points upon all occasions,
nor such command of my passions, as to keep them from breaking forth in such
sort as might be obnoxious to censures, not knowing how I might be provoked;
but certainly I fear not to come to the examination of any of their Writings,
or to offer mine own to be examined by any of them. One thing I had almost
omitted out of Beza, in his Preface to the First Part of his Answer to these
Acts. It was Beza's motion that all things passing between them on both sides,
might be set down in writing, under the hands of Collators; and this course I
confess I could willingly approve of, and after this manner to confer with
any. But this so fair a motion was rejected by Andreas; He would confer
rather by word of mouth then by writing. A second motion proposed by Beza was
this, that what was spoken on both sides, might be set down in writing by
Notaries chosen and appointed thereunto by common consent. But neither would
Andreas admit of this. Petivimus, says Beza, initio ut utrinque omnia scriptis
propria Collocutorum manu subsignatis agerentur. Quod cum D. Andreae non
placuisset qui verbis agi malebat (for the Auditory was very propitious to him
for the most part) postulavi ut utrinque dicta a probatis and utriusque partis
consensu delectis Notariis exciperentur, quae deinde cuique parti recognoscere
and addita subscriptione confirmare liceret. Haec enim erat profecto justa and
sincera colloquendi ratio ut sic falsationi occurreretur. Quum autem ne hoc
quidem admitteret D. Andreas, etc. Now let any indifferent person that is not
sowred with partial affections, judge whose carriage is to be thought in
equity more prejudicial to their cause, the carriage of Andreas, or the
carriage of Beza.

I come to the Contra-Remonstrants unwillingnesse to confer upon the point of
reprobation. What their reasons were I know not. But this I am sure of, the
Scripture is free in speaking of election, and express; not so of reprobation,
leaving us to take notice of the condition of reprobation by its opposition to
election. And in conformity hereunto, both Austin in his time, and Remigius in
his time, and Bradwardine in his time, speaks liberally of predestination, but
very sparingly of reprobation. And the doctrine of reprobation as it is nothing
less mysterious then that of election; so it is far more harsh to carnal
affections. And it is well known that at the time of the Hague Conference,
Barnavelt that ruled the roast amongst the States, was too great a friend to the
Arminian Party.

But, what boldness does this Author take in passing his suspicious censures
upon a doctrine, because some defenders of it, at some time have been loath to
come to entertain a public Conference thereupon? For what argument call you
this, The Contra-Remonstrants would not be brought to give their reasons on
this point; therefore the doctrine of Austin delivered 1200 years (or
thereabouts) before, concerning the absoluteness both of Predestination on the
one side, and of preterition on the other (as Vossius acknowledges) is to be
suspended of untruth? And if my readiness to come to the trial hereon does
nothing credit the cause as maintained by others; why should others
unwillingnesse to come to the same trial, be any disparagement to the same
cause, as it is maintained by me or any other? It is well known that Peter
Moulin, concurring with us in the point of absolute predestination, maintains
reprobation to proceed upon the divine foresight of final perseverance in
impenitency. If this Author differed from us no more the Mr Moulin does, and
acknowledged the mere pleasure of God, in giving grace to whom he will, and
denying it to whom he will, I do not think any friend of his would think any
whit the worse of him, or charge him with defection from the truth of God in
this. Neither can I think, that he ever was of any other opinion, considering
how many worthy Divines opposite to the Arminians, do either conceive, or at
least seem to conceive that the purpose of God to damn, does presuppose in
signo rationis the foresight of final impenitency, yet concurring with us in
this, that all are fallen in Adam and so brought forth into the world in
damnata Massa, as Austin calls it. God of his mere pleasure cures this
natural corruption (the fruits whereof are infidelity and impenitency) in
some, by regenerating them and bestowing the grace of faith and repentance upon
them, and leaves it uncured in others by refusing to regegenerate them, to
bestow faith and repentance upon them; We give the hands of Christian
fellowship, and brotherly amity one unto another, without all exception
notwithstanding some nice differences, which in the issue I hope, will prove to
be merely Logical, and nothing Theological.

Lastly, however this point of unwillingnesse in some, to come to confer in
the point of reprobation, might cast some color of suspicion to the
prejudicing of their cause; yet least of all did it become this Author to take
advantage hereof, considering that it is his own case, as who declineth not one
point only, but all the rest in this his discourse, and cleaves only to that of
reprobation, nothing answerably (I presume) to The Doctor directs his speech
unto S. Nathaniel Rich.
your expectation, who put this task upon him: and whether it be any thing
answerable to the promise he made unto you, your self are best acquainted
therewith. Yet because the Remonstrants hereupon (to wit, upon the
Contra-Remonstrants declining this Controversy) have taken liberty to oppose
the doctrine of the Contra-Remonstrants in this point, so far forth, as they
made construction of their opinion hereupon, by their doctrine concerning
election; therefore I will not spare even here, to digress so far, as to
take notice what they delivered, and to address an answer hereunto, the rather
because I find this discourse of theirs inserted in their Relation of that
Conference at Hague.

Now, whereas first, by a long deduction upon consideration of the
Contra-Remonstrants doctrine in the point of election, they do infer Colloq.
Hagh. Bertii p. 120. that like as faith is made by them a fruit of election, so
infidelity is by them to be made a fruit of reprobation: this consequence we
utterly deny. It only follows herehence, that like as faith, whereby man's
natural infidelity is cured, is by them made the fruit of election, so the
denial of faith, that is, the not curing of man's infidelity, or the leaving of
it uncured is the fruit of reprobation. And indeed considering the means must
be his work who intends the end, wherehence it follows, that look what end
God does intend in man's election, the means tending thereunto must be Gods
work, as namely, faith; in like sort, whatsoever be the end which God intends
in reprobation, the means tending thereunto, must be his work, which cannot be
infidelity or sin, but the permission of sin rather and infidelity, or the
not curing of that corruption and infidelity which is natural unto us all.
Hereupon they proceed to propose two things to be questioned, in congruity to
the doctrine of the Contra-Remonstrants. 1. Utrumne Fides in consilio and
decreto Dei de electione ad salutem, eam ipsam electionem ordine praecedat an
vero consequatur? 2, Ex altera part; An Infidelitas in eodem Consilio and
Decreto Dei de reprobatione ad exitium, eam ipsam reprobationem ordine
praecedat an sequatur? The latter of these is only pertinent to our present
purpose; yet seeing they handle them both, so far as to dispute against the
opinion of their opposites in both, and carry themselves herein
Magnificentissime, I am content to weigh their arguments, in the balance of
Scholasticall consideration, least some such as this Author, should affect to
seem judicious in suspecting my declining of them to savor of some inability
to encounter them.

Thus therefore they begin.

If faith follows election unto salvation, then also the decree of sending
Christ as a Savior into the World, must necessarily follow that election; But
this consequent is absurd, and pertains notably to the ignominy of Christ.

To this I answer. First out of mine own opinion, Thus.

Faith is supposed to follow Election unto salvation, upon no other ground then
because the intention of giving faith, is supposed to follow the intention of
giving salvation. But this I should deny, and that for this reason, because
this subordination is grounded only upon supposition, that salvation is the end
which God intends, and faith the means tending unto that end: but this I deny.
First, because the end of Gods actions, is not the salvation of man, but the
manifestation of his own glory. For he made all things for himself, Pov. 16.
4. and reason justifies it. For God being the supreme efficient, must be the
supreme end; and being Optimus as well as Maximus, he must needs be both most
lovely and most loving, of that which is most lovely, that is, of himself. But
because some may conceive that though Gods glory be the supreme end, yet man's
salvation may be the intermediate end: therefore to this I answer; First, let
such show then what is the glory of God, which salvation of the creature
sets forth, and I doubt not, but if that glory be stated right, it will
appear, that not salvation alone, but something else is required to be joined
with it; as namely, the mission of Christ, yea and faith in Christ, to complete
that means, which tend to the procurement of such an end, that is, to the
setting forth of such a glory. Secondly, the end whether supreme or
intermediate is always such as being rightly understood, does break such a
means; but salvation is not so in respect of faith; for it does not bespeak it,
as is apparent in the salvation of Angels, of Infants; as also in this, that it
was absolutely possible for God to save even sinners without Christ, as may be
demonstrated and I have demonstrated in my Vind. Great. Dei. by variety of
evident reasons.

In a word, if Gods supreme end, were the manifestation of his glory on some
considered, as merely possible in doing them good in the highest degree, and
that in the way of mercy mixed with justice, and that ex Condigno and ex
Congruo; it is apparent, that the means required hereunto, and bespoken hereby,
is a body consisting of diverse particulars, all together completing the
integrall means required hereunto. For herehence it follows, that they must
be both created, without which no glory of God at all can be manifested upon
them and permitted to sin, otherwise God could not do them good in the way
of mercy, which supposes misery, but also that a Savior must be sent, and he
no less then the Son of God, to deserve the pardon of their sin and
salvation, otherwise it could not be in the way of mercy mixed with justice de
Condigno: and faith and repentance must be bestowed on them, otherwise the good
done them, could not be by way of reward: and lastly, salvation, otherwise good
could not be done them in the highest degree. And thus in no moment of nature
is the Predestination of Christ either before or after the Predestination of
man; as our British Divines maintained at the Synod of Dort; but at once God
predestined both him to be our Head and us his Members; like as Aquinas
maintained Christ's predestination, and our predestination to be one act in God,
and consequently neither could be the cause of another.

Thus have I dispatched mine answer unto them, as touching mine own opinion.
But supposing the method of the Contra-Remonstrants sound, in making salvation
of man, to be intended by God as an end, and both man's faith in Christ, and
Christ's Mission to be intended as means. We deny this to be absurd or
ignominious unto Christ. Lets hear how they prove it, thus; If the decree of
sending Christ be posterior to the electing of singular persons unto salvation,
then the intention of man's salvation was posterior to Gods intention of
satisfaction to his justice, which say they is absurd and foolish, to wit, to
decree the salvation of sinners, unless first he decree satisfaction to his
justice. But I answer according to the form of the Contra-Remonstrants
doctrine: First, by proving their order to be sound: Secondly, by showing the
invalidity of the Remonstrants discourse.

First therefore: There was never any other order of intentions acknowledged by
the learned, then such as is found between the intention of the end, and the
intention of the means tending thereunto. And the Order most received is this;
That the intention of the end, is before the intention of the means. Now let
every man that is is his right Wits consider, which is more likely to be the
end, and which the means of these two, Man's salvation, and Christ's Mission to
satisfy for the sin of man. Was ever any man known to be so brainsick as to
affirm, that the salvation of man is a means tending to this end, namely, the
sending of Christ into the World to satisfy for the sin of man? On the other
side, how fair and plausible is it to affirm, that Christ was sent into the
world, to satisfy for man's sin, to this end, that man might be saved? whence
it follows evidently by the most approved rules of Schools, that the
intention of man's salvation is in signo rationis, before the intention of
sending Christ into the world, to make satisfaction for sin. Again, if
Christ's sending into the world to make satisfaction for sin, be first in
intention, then it should be last in execution, by rules undeniable, and such
as are manifest by the very light of nature; Whence it follows, that man
should be first saved and after that Christ sent into the World, that, by his
sufferings, Gods justice might be satisfied.

Now I come to the consideration of the Remonstrants argument. The Consequence
of the Major we grant, but the Minor we deny. And it is a vain thing for them
to cry out, that it is absurd and foolish to say, that the intention of
salvation, precedes the intention of satisfying Gods justice; for words must
not carry it: and it is well known that the most empty vessels give the
greatest sound. I have showed how absurd it is to conceive, that man was saved
to this end, that Gods justice may be satisfied, and that it is far more
probable to say, That by Christ's sufferings, Gods justice was satisfied to this
end, that man might be saved. For the salvation of man we say, was not intended
by God simply, but after a certain manner, to wit, in the way of mercy mixed
with justice; which end does not presuppose the permission of sin, as these
Remonstrants shape the matter to varnish over their consequence, with some
color of probability: but rather it bespeaks, both the permission of sin,
and satisfaction to be made for sin, to the end that so man might be saved,
not simply, but after a certain manner, to wit, in the way of mercy mixed with
justice. But suppose they were considered as sinners, Why should the
Remonstrants look strangely upon this doctrine, namely, that God should intend
the salvation of sinners in signo rationis, before he intended that his justice
should be satisfied? For do not they maintain, that God by power absolute,
can pardon sin without all satisfaction? But supposing that God will not
pardon sin without satisfaction, in this case they may contend, that God must
first intend to take a course, that such satisfaction may be made, and then
intend to save. And let them contend but in the name of reason, and not of
clamours, and content themselves, with the infatuation of themselves, with such
senseless conceits, and not spread this scab unto others also. My reason to
the contrary is still the same, namely, that if God be pleased to save sinners
in despite of sin, in the way of mercy mixed with justice, the case is
clear, that satisfaction for sin, is rather a means of man's salvation, then
man's salvation is a means tending to the procurement of satisfaction for sin,
and consequently the intention of salvation of sinners, is in reason to precede
the intention of procuring satisfaction, rather then to follow after it; as the
intention of the end, is rather to be accounted before, then after the
intention of the means. Yet say these Remonstrants, if a man will be so
obstinate, as (notwithstanding the felicity of these Remonstranticall wits in
fruitful inventions and subtle argumentations) still to deny that there is
any absurdity herein, thus over and above we prove it. For as yet they have
run themselves out of breath. If, say they, the decree of Christ a Savior,
be after the election of particular persons unto salvation, it follows that
God did decree some particular men's salvation, before he ordained Christ's
merits to procure their salvation; but this is foolish and absurd.

I answer, No more foolish and absurd then the former: and indeed every one of
these consequences for the expressing whereof, they affect to seem very
inventious, do savor of no invention at all; the Consequents do so
evidently, even every one of them appear as clearly in the Antecedent, as a
man's face in a glass, and are to be accounted rather Tautologies, then
deductions, much less do they relish of any subtilty of wit. So that all
this while, they seem to be in travel with nothing but wind, or sick of the
disease called Tenasmus, striving mightily to do somewhat, when indeed they
do nothing at all. And our former argument still has place, and here also
applied, does manifest, that seeing the merits of the son of God are the
means of man's salvation, then man's salvation is the end of Christ's merits;
therefore in all probability, the intention of man's salvation, as the intention
of the end, should precede the intention of sending Christ to merit as the
means, rather then to be subordinate unto it. And indeed if the sending of
Christ into the World to merit, should be first in intention, then should it be
last in execution; that is, All the elect should first be saved, and then
Christ should be sent into the world to merit their salvation. Therefore to
mend the matter (for who is so silly as not to perceive, that if the
consideration of Christ's obedience, as satisfactory, will not serve their
turn, surely neither will the consideration of his obedience as meritorious,
stand them in any stead) they put into this Consequence another clause, without
all art, and without all honesty, pretending, that hereby we make salvation
destinated to man, before it is decreed to man: as if we put any difference in
this case between destination and decree, or as if we make salvation destinated
to a man hereby, before it is destinated unto him; whereas we only make the end
(that is salvation) intended before the merits of Christ (which are the means
of salvation) are intended. And would any man that is in his right wits, say
this is to make salvation destinated to a man before it is destinated to him?
Farther, it is to be observed, that we may omit nothing, but take notice of the
uttermost of their strength, and the rather, because it will notably discover
either their ignorance, or which is most likely, (for as much as they do not
directly insist, as they might upon a new argument far more plausible with
the ignorant) their unconscionablenesse. For they signify that hence it will
come to pass, that the intention of salvation, being before the intention of
finding of Christ to merit, salvation shall exist, being decreed as present to
God, before Christ is considered as he that by his Cross has deserved it. Now
had they said before Christ has deserved it, I should readily have granted it.
For I hope none of the^ would deny, that the salvation of many a Prophet and
Patriarch, existed not only before God, but actually and really before Christ
was crucified. To prevent this elusion of their argument, they express it
thus, Before Christ was considered as he that has deserved it. Yet here they
fall foul upon an indecent expression. For I will be bold to deny, that Christ
was considered by God, as one that had deserved man's salvation, before he had
deserved it. For before he had deserved it by his Cross, to say, that God
considered him as one that had deserved it, is either to err or to feign,
neither of which is incident unto God. God considered him from everlasting, as
one that in the fullness of time should deserve it, by suffering upon the
Cross, not as one that had deserved it. For to conceive him after the former
manner, is to conceive aright, but to conceive him after the latter manner, is
to conceive amiss. But I will take the pains to mend this argument for them
thus. If their salvation were decreed before Christ's merits, then their
salvation did exist as present with God before Christ's merits did exist, as
present with God. But this is not to be admitted: Now I come to discover their
ignorance, which they betray in this. First, neither Gods prescience, nor Gods
decree does make things to exist, otherwise then in Esse cognito and in esse
velito; but this is not to exist. Therefore they qualify it by the addition of
the manner, ut praesens Deo; which indeed is Terminus diminuens in this case.
For it is present to God by virtue of his decree intentionally only, and not
really, which alo^e is to exist. But let this Peccadillio pass. Secondly, Who
sees not that this argument tends to the utter destruction of all distinct
intentions of end, and means in God? For if there be any such distinct
intentions in God, the one must be acknowledged to be before the other. As for
example, What was the end of creation? Lets go no farther then the
manifestation of Gods power and wisdom as the end thereof. Now hence it will
follow by the quaintness of this argumentation, that the manifestation of Gods
wisdom and power in creating the world did exist, as present with God, before
the creation. Is not here a proper argumentation. Spectatum admissi risum
teneatis amici.

Thirdly, to draw nearer to the discovery of their ignorance. I grant it shall
first exist; but how? Not in duration; We acknowledge no such priority in God,
between the intention of the end, and the intention of the means; though such a
priority in this case is found in man. What then? I Will tell you: They commonly
call it a priority of nature. But take heed you do not apply it to any of the
two kinds of priority of nature mentioned by Aristotle. For try if you please,
and you shall find that none of them can possibly serve the turn; What then is
this priority of nature so called? I answer, it is only Prioritas rationis: And
so I formerly said, that the intention of the end is in signo rationis, before
the intention of the means. You may farther demand, Wherein does this Prioritas
rationis consist? I answer out of Durand, it consists in this, that, Ratio
unius petitur a ratione alterius, and so indeed, Ratio mediorum petitur a
ratione finis. This generally holds of the intention of end, and means, as well
in God, as in the creature. For always the nature of the end duly considered,
does bespeak what shall be the condition of the means. So that this makes no
priority of existence at all, neither in duration nor in nature properly so
called, but only such a subordination between them, that the reason of the one,
that is, the nature or condition of the one, depends upon the nature and
condition of the other. Now let any sober man judge, Whether the salvation of
man be required to the procuring of Christ's merits, and not rather, Christ's
merits are required to the procuring of man's salvation; which yet is not true
of salvation considered simply, but only as to be bestowed after a certain
manner, to wit, in the way of justice, and by way of satisfaction made for
sin, that so a man may be saved by grace in despite of sin. In the close
of all they signify that this of theirs in the last place seriously considered
will make it appear, that this doctrine of their Adversaries, tends notably to
the diminution of Christ's honor, and to the annihilation of Christ's merits, to
wit, unless Christ's merits be acknowledged the end of man's salvation, and not
man's salvation the end of Christ's merits, Christ shall be dishonored, and his
merits annihilated. Here they are quite out of breath, and that which is
wanting, they leave to be supplied by the serious (they should say ignorant)
consideration of their Proselites. They presume this color of dishonor
redounding hereby to Christ, will be sufficient to blow up their Adversaries,
though it prove of no more force then a squibbe. This carriage of theirs calls
to my remembrance, a mad prank played by the English at Delfe, while they were
billeted there, which was told me merrily, by one of the number. One of the
Soldiers was billeted in an old Widows house, and another being a Goldsmith,
told him and another consort of theirs, he had a devise to put money in all
their purses, for he knew how to make a Rex-dolar of threepence sylver, and in
that Widows house they would ply their business very securely. To work they
went, and casting plates of Tin to the quantity of one of those Dolars, and
stamping them full and fair, this Goldsmiths, with the quantity of three pence
silver, sylvered them over very fairly, and, least they should seem too light,
hangs them up in the chimny in a bag, that the smoke might bring them to the
sadder hew. Thus having met with a mine of Sylver in their lodging, one is
employed as a Merchant-man to go to the Staple of Cloth, and he lays out
their coin in cloth, whereof afterward they made good silver indeed: at
length one of them paying a debt of his to a Dutchman in Delfe, in one of these
Rex-dolars, he found the Dutch to betray some suspicious gestures and
interpretations upon the coin. That was a fair warning to an intelligent man
of arms; and hereupon they get them packing ing away with all speed; and home
they come, and make themselves merry with the relation. In like sort these
Remonstrants show a great deal of Tin and trash in these argumentations, and
they have not so much as three pence silver to color it therewithal to cheat
the World, if they will be cheated. But they hope the color of some dishonor
by their adversaries doctrine redounding unto Christ, will be taken for a piece
at least of good silver. I confess, I am somewhat the more merrily disposed at
this time, For being taken off from the midst of a sentence, by the courteous
invitation of a Gentleman, to come unto him to his Inn: He was pleased to
entertain me with such good discourse, that it did not a little refresh my
spirits. His reaches were after new discoveries for the advancement of
learning; and endoctrinated me more in one half hour, then seventeen years
study in the University. For whereas I never learned there, more causes then
four, he was pleased to acquaint me with nine; which I took some pains to
learn without book, and they were these, Matter, Form, Workman, Will, Power,
Time, Finding out, Accident, End. And most courteously offered himself to
enlarge on every one of them; but having left off at a broken sentence, I was
desirous to return to my studies Theological, and to let those Philosophical
progresses alone. But I protested unto him seriously, that he had informed me
more in the number of causes in a short space, then Oxford had done in many
years; he entreated I would consider of them, and I promised I would, and
confer of them too, with all the Scholars I companied with; which he took in
very goo part; and so I took my leave. And finding my spirit not a little
elevated with this recreation, I resolved, forbearing my usual time of supper,
to follow these studies close that night, which truly fell out very happily.
For one of those causes being found out, otherwise called, Invention (as for
Judgment, I do not remember that it was admitted into the number) I made use
of it very happily in finding out, or discovery of the foppery of these
Remonstranticall argumentations.

Now I proceed to the second Question, as more seasonable to the present
occasion. And here first they begin with their former artifice, making
infidelity on the part of reprobation, answerable to faith on the part of
election, which is most untrue, as formerly I showed: Only the not curing of
infidelity by the grace of faith, is made by us subordinate to reprobation; as
the curing of natural infidelity by the grace of faith, is made by us
subordinate to election. But they go on, as in shaping our Tenent at pleasure,
so in basting it with their very liberal censures, as absurd and execrable, in
such sort, as the bare commemoration of it, they take to be sufficient to
represent the horror of it, and to confute it, and this they commit to the
judgment of all the faithful of Christ. And indeed their best strength lies
in setting forth their Adversaries doctrine in such colors, as the Devil is
painted with. And in this particular, they conceive good hope (no doubt) that
propitious Readers will conceive hereby, that the infidelity of man is made by
their Adversaries the work of God, as well as Faith; Whereas it is well known,
that there is so little need of working men to infidelity, that all being borne
in sin, and corrupted and estranged from the life of God, through the fall of
Adam, infidelity is as natural and hereditary to a man, as any other
corruption. And it is as well known and undeniable, that none can cure it but
God, by faith; but this he cures in whom he will, by giving Faith to whom he
will, and if he refuse to cure it in any, that, and that alone is enough to
make him a vessel of wrath, that so Gods glory may be manifested upon him, in
the way of justice vindicative. But come we to their Arguments.

1. The first is this. If Infidelity follows Reprobation unto destruction,
then God cannot in justice destroy Reprobates for their infidelity. For there
is no greater injustice, then to destroy a man for that, that follows
necessarily upon reprobation which is the work of God. To this I answer.

1. According to mine ordering the decrees divine. Secondly, according to the
Contra-Remonstrants Tenent in ordering them.

1. According to my ordering of the decrees divine; In no moment of nature or
reason is the decree of damnation precedent to the decree of permitting
infidelity, or leaving the infidelity of some men uncured, to wit, by denying
them faith, by denying the grace of regeneration. But the decrees of creating
all in Adam, of permitting all to fall in Adam, in bringing all men forth into
the World in the state of Original sin, of leaving this original sin
uncured in them, and last of all, of damning them for their sins; are decrees
not subordinate, but coordinate, as decrees de Mediis, tending jointly to one
supreme end, which is the manifestation of Gods glory upon them in the way of
justice vindicative; as also to show the riches of his glory upon the vessels
of mercy, whom he has prepared unto glory, to wit, by beholding Romans 9. 22.
in others that miserable condition, which through Gods mere grace and
goodness they have escaped.

2. According to the Contra-Remonstrants Tenent, I answer,

1. Many of them do not maintain that infidelity is consequent to the decree
of damnation, but in the foresight of God, precedent rather: as appears by the
British Divines their Theses De Reprobatione; and Alvarez professes the same.
The denial of grace, and so the permitting of natural infidelity to remain
uncured, they make consequent (as it seems) to a negative decree of denying
glory. And to the decree of permitting infidelity, they make the foresight of
infidelity subsequent; and this foresight of infidelity they make precedent to
reprobation, as it signifies the decree of damnation. And thus far I agree
with them, That in no moment of nature, or sign of reason did God ordain any
man to damnation, but for sin; and consequently in no moment of nature, or
sign of reason, did the decree of damnation go before the foresight of sin
or infidelity.

2. But suppose, as these Remonstrants collect and pick out their meaning, They
make the decree of reprobation, in all points proportionable to the decree of
salvation, that like as the decree of giving faith, they conceive to be
subordinate to the decree of salvation; so the decree of permitting infidelity,
or denying faith (for herein consists the just proportion, and not as they
feign it, between faith on the one side, and infidelity on the other) is with
them made subordinate to the decree of damnation. Then I answer,

1. Their Consequence should be this, If the permission of Infidelity follows
the decree of damnation, then God cannot in justice damn them for Infidelity.
Now here is no color of good Consequence.

2. If they reply, That in case infidelity follows necessarily upon Gods
permiting of it, the Consequence is as good as in case infidelity followed upon
reprobation. For even hereby it appears, that infidelity follows upon
reprobation though not immediately, but by the mediation of the divine
permission thereof; but whether it follows mediately or immediately all is
one, as touching the force of the Consequence.

Resp. Now to this I Reply, Granting that all is one, as touching the force of
the Consequence: but then consider.

1. All the force of the argument depends not upon the consequution of
infidelity, simply unto the decree of damnation, but only upon the necessary
consequution thereof. And yet no mention at all was made hereof, in the
Consequence of the Major, but it is brought afterward over and above most
illogically.

2. In this case all the force of the Consequence depends upon the necessary
consequution of sin in general, or infidelity in special, upon Gods
permitting of it.

So that whether Gods decree to permit the sin of infidelity, be antecedent
or consequent to the decree of damnation all is one. Yet these Remonstrants
make the force of their argument, to consist only in the subordinating of the
decree divine, as touching the permission of infidelity to the decree of
damnation, which yet appears by this to be of no force.

3. But if they hereupon take a new course of argumentation, and dispute thus;
If Infidelity follows necessarily upon Gods permitting of it, then God cannot
in justice damn a man for Infidelity; pretending no injustice to be greater,
then to damn a man for that which follows necessarily upon permission, which
is Gods work.

Resp. I answer.

1. That thus their former argumentation is cashierd as unprofitable.

2. We deny this Consequence; and call in no meaner name then Arminius himself
to bear us out in this our denial. Who expressly professes, That in case
God permits a man, Velle peccatum, necesse est ut nullo argumentorum genere
persuadeatur ad nolendum. Exam. page 153. I could add Vorstius also, herein
concurring with Piscator, Perkins, and Navarrettus the Dominican is as
expressly in this as any other; as also in subordinating it to the decree of
reprobation. Arminius likewise professes faith and repentance, Nisi Deo dante
haberi non posse. Exam. 57. and that both of them are denied to the reprobates
by the decree of reprobation. See his own words, At Deus statuit decreto
reprobationis reprobis fidem and paenitentiam non dare. Concedo lubens, illam
assumptionem, sed recte intellectam: He labors to charm this inconvenient
grant of his, but no charm will serve to keep this adder, from stinging and
wounding their doctrine of reprobation unto death. He says, Faith is given by
way of suasion. We say, that matters nothing; for so it be given by God
wheresoever it be found, and so it be denied to reprobates by the decree of
reprobation, we desire no more. We our selves acknowledge, that faith is not
given to the elect, but by way of swasion, the Word working faith, running in
this manner; Repent and believe the Gospel; and whosoever believes shall be
saved. For God has set forth his Son to be a Propitiation for our sins,
through faith in his blood.

3. At length he proceeds in his charming course, but most unsuccessefully, as
whereby his former saying is nothing charmed. His care rather seems to be to
eat his own words, as Satan devoured his own children. For distinguishing
suasion into that which is sufficient, and that which is effectual: this
effectual suasion, he confesses to be administered by the decree of election;
but as for that sufficient suasion, though withal he accounts it allwaies
ineffectuall, yet he says it is administered by the decree of providence, not
by the decree of reprobation. At length he confesses, that by the decree of
reprobation is denied grace effectual, that is such a grace as whereupon he
foresaw they would believe. Now herein I appeal to the judgment of every
sober man. Take we two men into consideration, the one elect as Paul, the other
reprobate as Esau. Of two sufficient graces, the Lord foreseeth which of them
will prove effectual with Paul, and which ineffectuall; and he makes choice to
give him such a grace, as he foreseeth will prove effectual. Again he
foreseeth of two sufficient graces, which of them will prove effectual with
Esau and which ineffectuall, and makes choice to afford him only that which he
knows will prove ineffectuall. Now what can be the reason hereof, but because
he purposes to show his mercy in the salvation of the one, and his justice in
the damnation of another. Before Arminius came to this resolution, as
expressly to profess, That by the decree of reprobation is denied grace
effectual, he found himself in a streit upon his distinction of grace
sufficient and effectual, and the description of each; he drew his breath very
short; and therefore to get, as it were, more liberty of air, he concluded
that discourse with, Haec ex Augustini sententia dicuntur. page 58. and in the
next page. Hisce autem ita explicatis ex mente Augustini and forte Scripturae
sensu. But, What, a mischief, does this great Doctor mean to tell us? First,
that he willingly grants that, Deus statuit decreto reprobationis reprobis
fidem and paenitentiam non dare (provided it be well understood) and after all
this explication, tells us, that all this explication of his is delivered ex
sententia and mente Augustini, and but perchance, ex Scripturae sensu,
concealing all the while what is his own Opinion. Is this to give us the right
understanding of that Assertion (Deus statuit decreto reprobationis reprobis
fidem and paenitentiam non dare) most prejudicial to his own Tenent at first
fight, and much more by the distinction following of Gratia sufficiens and
efficax; which he so well perceived, that he is content to clap it upon Austins
back to bear the burden of it; and puts it but upon adventure, that it may
prove to be the Scripture meaning. And in like sort, when, page 98. having
proposed two things to be necessarily unfolded by him. Primo, de Gratia
sufficient and efficaci. Secundo, de utriusque dispensatione,
dispensationisque Causis: He leaves off there, giving it over in plain ground.
What does this argue? but that he manifestly perceived, he was not able in any
tolerable manner, to shape this distinction in congruity to his own Tenent.
Let this Author well consider this, that talks so much of our Divines
unwillingnesse to come to trial in the point of reprobation; When Arminius
durst not adventure upon the explicating of his own opinion, touching the
distinction of grace sufficient and effectual, and in giving us the definition
of each. The like to have been the course of other Arminians, I have known,
declining the point of effectual grace, as a precipice and breakneck unto
them: And when others have been put upon it, they have placed it in the grace
subsequent, and have not been ashamed to make it consist in this, that God by
effectual grace, does work in man, (...) Velle credere, modo velit, and why
not as well, that he works in man, (...) Credere, modo Credat, (...)
Resipiscere modo Resipiscat. This that I speak, I can show under the hand of
one of them, a great stickler for the Arminian Cause; great I say in respect of
affection, not of judgment. And I have cause to conceive, that both this
Authors Discourse, and that others I have had to deal withal, is but as a
smoke, that for a great part, if not for the most of it, comes out of the same
Chimney.

4. Let the argument stand as it does, let infidelity by Gods permission follow
upon the decree of damnation, and that necessarily. Yet consider.

1. Gods permitting of it, is no other then the leaving of it uncured: not that
hereby infidelity follows, which was not before; but being in all before, as
the fruit of that natural corruption wherein all were borne, as all confess,
as many as concur against the Pelagians, in acknowledging Original sin. By
Gods permission of it, it continues to be uncured; What actual sin is there
in the World, or habitual sin arising thereupon, which God cannot cure if it
please him? If then he will not cure it in some, shall it not be lawful for
him to punish it, where he finds the continuance of it unto the end, without
breaking off by repentance?

2. Suppose all men had power to do any good thing; if God will not give them
Velle quod possunt (as Austin says he dealt with Adam in his innocence, and
gave the Angels that stood, amplius Adjutorium, then he gave the others;
whereby it came to pass, that they stood in obedience when the other fell)
what shall we say in this case, is it possible that they should Velle bonum,
if God will not work it in them, of whom the Apostle professes, that he works
in us both the Will and the Deed? Or shall we hereupon say, they do not sin
freely? What shift have they to avoid this, but either by contradicting the
Apostle, and saying God does not work in us (...) Velle, or by saying that God
does work in us (...) Velle, modo Velimus, as plain a contradiction as ever
proceeded from the mouth of any, The self same act, being made before and
after it self; for the condition is allwaies before the thing conditioned. And
is this to work in us the Will according to Gods pleasure, or according to man's
good pleasure? What is it to say, that grace is given according unto works, if
this be not?

3. We deny, that any evil act therefore comes not to pass freely, because it
comes to pass necessarily, upon supposition of Gods denial of grace, to
refrain from it. For like as good works, are not therefore not wrought freely
by us, because God by his grace works us to the performance of them; (For who
dares deny that it is in Gods power to make us work this or that freely) in
like sort, and much more, evil works are not done the less freely, because
God denies special and effectual grace to abstain from them. For, want of
grace does not take away willingness unto that which is evil, but leaves too
much rather in man of that kind. As Austin says, that Libertas sine gratia non
est libertas sed contumacia. Now where there is contumacy, there is rather too
much will then too little. For Contumacy is Wilfulness.

4. The Schools teach, that liberty of will consists only, in electione
mediorum, in the election of means to certain ends. Now when the Gospel is
preached to a carnal man, whose ends are only carnal, as the Apostle says,
Philip. 3. 20. They mind earthly things; so far forth as he shall find it
serviceable to his carnal ends, he may believe it and make profession of it,
as many times Hypocrites do, and sometimes in such sort, as it is hard to
distinguish, between a true and an Hypocritical professor. This moved the
Apostle to exhort the Corinthians, famous for their faith, to examine
themselves, and prove themselves, Whether they were in the faith, that is, in
faith unfaigned. For there is not only a gross Hypocrisy, whereunto a man's own
heart is privy, but a secret Hypocrisy whereof the man himself is nothing
conscious; yet such a faith undoubtedly is performable by a natural man. Now
when a man rejects the Gospel, the faith and profession whereof he finds
nothing serviceable to his carnal ends, does he not judiciously and
deliberately, yea and wisely too (according to the wisdom of flesh and blood)
reject it?

5. Austin professes Lib. 1. De Genesis contr. Manich. cap. 3. That all men may
believe if they will, and justifies it in his Retractations. But if the will of
man be corrupt, and averse from believing, We justly say, such a man cannot
believe; as our Savior says, How can you believe that receive honor one of
another, and seek not the honor that comes of God alone. Joh. 5. 44. yet
this is an impotency Moral only, which is to be distinguished from impotency
Natural. For notwithstanding this, it may be truly said, that, All men may
believe if they will, and herein consists the natural liberty of the will. The
Moral liberty consists, rather in a sanctified inclination unto that which is
good, whereby it is freed from the power of sin and Satan; then in a power
to do good if they will, and not otherwise. But I never find that Arminians
do distinguish these.

6. It is not sufficient for Arminians to conclude, that such a thing upon
supposition comes to pass necessarily, therefore it comes not to pass freely.

1. For upon supposition that God decreed to create the World, the creation of
the World came to pass necessarily; yet simply the World was made by God
freely.

2. In like sort, upon Gods foreknowledge that such a man will not believe it
follows necessarily, that such a one will not believe; and so the like may be
said of the most free act that is performed. But will it follow herehence, that
it is not done freely?

3. In like sort upon the denial of an effectual impediment of sin, unto a
man it follows necessarily, that such a man will sin, according to Arminius
his doctrine, and this holds applied to any particular sin whatsoever. But
will it herehence follow according to Arminius, that such a sin is not
committed freely? nonothing less.

2. The Remonstrants second argument is this.

What God cannot perform that God cannot will. But God cannot damn a man for
infidelity flowing from such a decree of Reprobation.

Resp. 1. But who says that infidelity flows from the decree of reprobation?
Not one that I know, but Piscator upon these words, Ye therefore hear not my
words, because ye are not of God. But understand him aright, it is as if he
John 8. 47.
should say, Therefore such a man goes lame, because the Physician will not
cure him: yet it is well known the cause of his lamenesse is from within, and
perhaps procured by some distemper of his own: yet in case a Surgeon could cure
him and will not, he may be said to be the cause of lamenesse; but how? per
modum non removentis. This is well known by the learned to be a kind of cause
whereof notice is taken in Natural Philosophy. And in this sense and no other,
it is well known that Piscator makes God the cause of infidelity, and that
according to the express Word of God. But in my judgment Piscator mistakes
the phrase, To be of God, which he conceives to denote election. I rather take
it to denote regeneration, as much as to say, ye therefore he are not my
words, because God has not hitherto by regeneration cured that natural
infidelity which is in you.

2. But take the argument according to the former expression, God cannot damn
a man for that infidelity which is consequent to reprobation; And then my
Answer to the former argument in every particular thereof, may be accommodated
unto this.

3. The Third follows. If Infidelity flows from reprobation, then God can
neither require Faith of reprobates, nor seriously offer salvation unto them,
but necessarily counterfeit. For it is manifest Hypocrisy, to invite those unto
faith and salvation, who are excluded from both by the decree of God.

Resp. 1. Here again Infidelity is made to flow from reprobation; whereas
nothing flows from reprobation by the doctrine of the Contra-Remonstranes, but
the not curing of man's natural infidelity, like as the curing of it by faith,
is that which flows from election.

2. I say, There is no simulation at all of God in this. For that which he
proposes is but this, that, Whosoever believes shall be saved, and Whosoever
believes not shall be damned. He sends his Ministers to Preach this, and to
Beseech them to believe, and to be reconciled unto God, yea, all they meet
with. But for whose sake? Not for the reprobates sake, but for the elects sake,
Who because they are mixed among reprobates, and God has not revealed to his
Ministers, Who are elect and who are not (as neither was it fit he should, many
of the Ministers themselves, even of those that not only prophesied in his
name, but cast out Devils, being reprobates) therefore it was fit their
Commission should be general to Preach to all. Yea, did not the Apostles
themselves take notice of this? Does not Paul profess that, He became 2 Corinthians. 6.
all things to all that he may save some? And who were those some, but the very
elect of God, as the same Apostle elsewhere professes, saying, I suffer all
things for the elects sake. And does not Austin profess that if we knew who
were reprobate, 2. Tim. 2. 10.
we would no more pray for them, then for the Devils? De Civit. Dei lib. 21.
cap. 24.

4. The Fourth and last. If Incredulity follows the decree of reprobation,
then God considered the reprobates in his counsel of reprobation, either as
creatable, or as created in the state of innocence, or as fallen into Original
sin. Sed falsa sunt haec omnia. All these things are false. And these things,
he says, are delivered, contra absurdam, detestabilem, atque abominabilem
sententiam.

Resp. Here is froth enough of words, but a very hungry discourse for substance
of argumentation throughout.

1. Yet as I said, All this nothing touches them, Who albeit they maintain
that God of his mere pleasure, has mercy on some, giving them faith and
repentance (considering all in the corrupt Mass) and of his mere pleasure
hardens others (no worse in nature then the former) by denying them faith and
repentance, yet as reprobation signifies the decree of damnation, do permit
thereunto the foresight of final perseverance in sin.

2. According to my Ordering of Gods decrees, Who conceive mankind not yet
created to be the object of all Gods decrees, they being eternal, and but one
act in God, and that act his very Essence, and all other things being
temporal. I do not maintain that the decree of damnation, is in any moment of
nature or reason, before the consideration of man's final impenitency. As
neither do I conceive it to be after this, but both simultaneous; for as much
as the decree of permitting all to fall in Adam, together with the decree of
final leaving some therein, and the decree of damning them for sin, I take
not to be subordinate, but coordinate and simultaneous.

3. Whether we take the First-way for shaping the object of predestination, or
the Second, or the Third, I Answer.

1. The difference hereabout is in my judgment merely Logical, nothing
Theological; the resolution whereof according to general rules, is easily
made by light of nature, if once it be agreed upon in Divinity, What is Gods
end both on the part of election, and on the part of reprobation, and what are
the means that tend unto those ends.

2. Which way soever we take of the Three, I never found any reason given by
Arminians of any force to take us from it, as I have justified in my Vindiciae,
as touching the First-way; And in my Examination of the Conference between
Arminius and Junius, as touching the Second-way; And in my Answer to Corvinus
against Tilenus, as touching the Third-way, and therein, I trust, routed and
profligated the 20 Reasons of Arminius, proposed against the First and
Last-way, but chiefly against the First, in the Declaration of his Opinion
before the States.

Now I return to the Author of this discourse, and to the remainder of his
second Motive, from whence I have digressed.

I was here passing over unto the third instance, to wit, of the proceedings in
the Synod of Dort; but upon my looking into the History thereof, to prepare my
self for an answer thereunto, ere I was a ware, I lighted upon the reasons of
that the Contra-Remonstrants motion to be spared, preferred unto the State. And
they utterly deny what is here cast upon them, namely, that they deprecated at
all, that they might be spared from conferring upon the point of reprobation.
But whereas the Remonstrants had encumbered the point of election and
reprobation with seven Questions, which pertained not to the state of the
Controversy concerning the first Article, and being also imperfect and
intricate for the most part, and proposed to this end, to draw their
Adversaries away from the true state of the Question; They desired to be spared
from answering unto them. And upon this Petition of theirs it pleased the
States, that leaving those thorny questions, they should come to the handling
of the Articles. This is set down in the Preface to those Acta Synodalia, set
forth by the Authority of the States. Fol. 10. page 1. For after the proposing
of these two questions to the Remonstrants, as touching the decree of
Predestination. 1. Whether the entire decree of Predestination were contained
in this Article, namely, That God did from everlasting decree to save
believers, which no man denies. 2. Whether they thought faith and perseverance
therein, did precede election, as the Causes or Conditions thereof. After the
Remonstrants had answered affirmatively unto them both; hereupon they bring in
their seven, for the most part, intricate questions. Reponebant deinde septem
alias tum de electione tum de reprobatione, questiones, ad quas a Pastoribus a
Classibus deputatis responderi volebant. Quae cum ad controversiae de primo
articulo statum non spectarent, etiam mutilae atque intricatae pleraeque
essent; eumque in finem ab illis proponerentur, ut hoc modo a praecipuo
controversiae statu rectaque agendi ratione, in ambages ad ducerent. Pastores
exposita per Libellum supplicem Illust. Ordd. iniqua hac agendi ratione, non
quidem deprecati sunt, ne de reprobatione sententiam suam manifestarent (uti
Remonstrantes improbe saepius ipsis objectarunt) sed diserte sententiam suam
quantum ad Ecclesiarum pacem atque aedificationem sufficere existimarent, non
tantum viva voce sed and scripto declararunt. Se nimirum cum aeternum
electionis singularium personarum decretum ponunt, simul quoque ponere aeternum
de reprobatione and rejectione quarundam singularium personarum decretum, quum
fieri nequeat ut sit electio, quin simul quoque sit aliqua reprobatio aut
derelictio. Difficiles omnes circa hunc articulum quaestiones temere excutere,
nihil aliud esse quam inutilibus disputationibus and nihil profuturis litibus,
Ecclesiam replere, ejusque pacem perturbare. Declarationem suam hanc Libello
supplice expressam, moderatis omnibus, pace^que amantibus ingeniis, sufficere
debere: Credi videlicet ac doceri ab ipsis, Deum neminem condemnare, imo vero
ne statuisse quidem condemnare quenquam nisi just propter propria ipsius
peccata: Placuit itaque Illust. Ordd. ut missis illis spinosis quaestionibus,
ad articulorum pertractationem deveniretur. And Page 136. and 156. I find this
objection proposed by the Remonstrants in these words. Page 156. In Collatione
Haghiensi Libello supplice Illust. Hollandiae and Westfriziae Ordinibus
exhibito, deprecati sunt Contra-Remonstrantes ne de reprobatione ageretur: and
more at large Page 195. Thus, Ipsi Contra-Remonstrantes cum in Colloquio
Haghiensi jussi essent, ad interrogata quaedam nostra de reprobatione
respondere Magistratui morem gerere gravati fuerint, usque adeo ut Collationem
caeptam abrumpere se malle profiterentur quam ut summarum Potestatum imperio se
constringi paterentur, nihil aliud conscientiae suae praetexentes quam quod
Ecclesiae aedificationi obfuturam eam agendi rationem judicarent. Now to this
Page 157. Festus Hominus, one present in that Conference, stands up and
answers, Exposuitque paucis quam non bona fide haec de illis dicerentur. Se
Libello supplice non fuisse deprecatos, ne de reprobatione ageretur: caeterum
quia Remonstrantes subdole in ipso Collationis initio, septem questionibus
spinosis ac minime necessariis non tantum ad reprobationis, sed electionis
quoque doctrinam spectantibus, a recto agendi ordine Contra-Remonstrantes in
ambages adducere conarentur. Contra-Remonstrantes Libello supplice apud
Illust-Ordd. de tam iniqua agendi ratione conquestos fuisse atque ut
Remonstrantibus mandaretur, ne extra justam agendi rationem jam inchoatam
evagarentur petiisse. De reprobatione autem Contra-Remonstrantes quantum ad
aedificationem satis erat, sententiam suam clare ibidem explicasse uti
scriptorum editorum fide probari potest. Idem etiam Reverendus and Doctissimus
vir, D. Joannes Becius qui and ipse huic interfuerat Collationi, suo praesens
comprobabat testimonio.

Now I come to the Synod of Dort.

4. This Author says the Remonstronts were there warned by the President of
the Synod, Ut de electione potius quam de odiosa reprobationis materiatagerent.
And truly at first I wondered not a little, that the President of that Synod
should account, the matter of reprobation (which is as much as to say, the
doctrine of reprobation) an odious matter, an odious doctrine. For we commonly
signify hereby, such a doctrine as deserves to be hated; but I thought withal,
that they might express rather, what is the condition of it in the event,
namely, that it is entertained with hatred, not of all neither, nor of any of
those, that submit their judgments to the word of God; but rather of those,
and of those only, who follow the judgment of flesh and blood. Yet I thought
good to enquire into the truth of the fact here mentioned; and I find it in the
page mentioned, and how the Remonstrants themselves do express this, even as
here it is expressed, thus, A Reverendo Praeside moniti sumus ut a negativis
enunciationibus abstineremus and de electione potius quam odiosa reprobationis
materia ageremus. Yet I confess this did not satisfy me; For why should this
Author make choice to express it in the Remonstrants terms, rather then in
the words of the President himself. Therefore I turn to the beginning of that
Session, being Sess. 32. There I find this particular, Submonuit and Praeses ut
potius quaestionibus illis inhaererent, quae circa suavem de electione
doctrinam versarentur, quam ut d^ odiose doctrinam de reprobatione exagitarent.
Now I find a great deal of difference between professing the matter of
reprobation, or the doctrine hereof to be odious, and admonishing to spare the
exagitation thereof after an odious manner. This indeed being their usual
course, to make it as odious as they can, like as Arminius, Doctrinam de
praedestinatione odiosam reddere conabatur, as it is professed in the Preface
to those Act. Synod. fol. 7. page 2. and fol. 8. page 2. They profess in like
manner of the Remonstrants, namely, that in their Remonstrance they
endeavored, Illust. Ordd. odiosam reddere doctrinam Ecclesiarum Reformatarum,
and that not only, de divina predestinatione, but also de Gratia Dei and
Sanctorum Perseverantia, but all this mala fide, nec sine apertis, atrocibusque
calumniis. Moreover I find, Sess. 39. page 151. this decree of the Synod
gratifying the Remonstrants, and yielding to their motion made, which was, that
they might have liberty to treat as well of reprobation as of election, thus,
Quoniam Remonstrantes aliquoties professi sunt, se per conscientiam in Synodo
subsistere ulterius non posse, nisi prius caveatur ipsis fore, ut de electione
and reprobatione, ea ratione quam in Thesibus and Scriptis suis hactenus
exhibitis proposuerunt, in posterum agatur. Synodus quo magis ipsis fiat satis,
public ac coram omnibus declarat, statuisse sese ac statuere sententiam
ipsorum, non de electione modo, verum etiam de reprobatione expendere atque
examinare. Quantum nempe in conscientia ad Dei gloriam, aedificationem and
tranquillitatem Ecclesiae, omniumque conscientiarum posse ac debere satis esse,
ipsa judicaret. Ad agendi vero modum, qui hic est servandus and ordinem quod
attinet, suum esse de eo dispicere, non autem fratrum Remonstrantium qui huc
sunt citati, quicquam praescribere, existimat. This decree being read to the
Remonstrants, they refused to give way unto it. The 40 Session contains the
altercation thereabout, between the Synod and them. They forsooth would
prescribe to the Synod de modo Agendi, the Synod must not prescribe to them.
And they profess against it Sess. 41. page 155. in this manner, Nec satisfit
nobis si dicatur Synodum permissuram, ut nostram de reprobatione sententiam
tractemus quoad illa ipsa ad gloriam Dei, aedificationem Ecclesiarum,
conscientiarum tranquillitatem fore judicabit. Nam hac ipsa restrictione, nobis
praeciditur libertas and plenaria sententiae nostrae defensio, and contrariae
Impugnatio. Praeterquam quod non levis suspicandi nobis data sit occasio,
Synodum, ubi nos de electione disserentes audiverit, nequaquam permissuram ut
Contra-Remonstrantium and eorum quos illi pro Orthodoxis habent, de
reprobatione sententiam prout necessarium judicabimus, ad incudem revocari.
Hereupon the Synod entreats the judgment of Foreign Divines; and they all
with one consent profess, Tantam Remonstrantibus libertatem ad defensionem
causae suae concessam esse, quanta ex ratione and dignitate Synodi Citatis
concedi posset. Ac proinde nullam esse causam cur Synodicum decretum mutandum
videretur, aut cur Remonstrantes querelam instituerent, vel authoritatem hujus
Synodi subterfugerent. Nihil illis esse imperatum quod ullo modo conscientias
ipsorum gravare posset. Ac proinde conscientiae velum frustra pervicaciae
obtendi. Abunde iis omnibusque modis satisfactum jam esse. Absolutam illam,
nullisque circumscriptam limitibus libertatem quam petunt, a Synodo concedi
ipsis non posse. Aequum esse ut certis sese legibus submittant, quibus, si
exorbitent, coerceantur. Nay in the next Session, which is Sess. 42. there is a
representation made of their unreasonable demand in these words. Professi sunt
sibi agendi modum a Synodo praescriptum, iniquum videri. Sibi permitti velle
non tantum primo loco, sed and circa omnes articulos and Theses, singulaque
argumenta de sententia Contra-Remonstrantium, and little quos illi pro
Orthodoxis habent, quoad reprobationem agere, quia in hoc argumento calceus
illos maxim urgeat. Hereupon the Opinions of the foreign Divines were
required, to wit, Whether it were fit to yield unto them, as to treat of
Reprobation, before they treated of Election, Qui consentientibus declarabant
suffragiis, ab omni ratione and methodo esse alienum id quod Remonstrantes
peterent, ut prius de reprobatione quam de electione agere sibi liceret. Their
judgments hereupon are here represented severally and at large; First of our
British Divines, then of the Palatine Divines, then of the Divines of the Land
of Hesse, then of the Helvetians, then of those who were of the correspondency
of Weteraw, then of those of Geneva, then of those of Breme, and lastly of
those of Emden.

5. Upon the former bald and base pretenses, as if, Conclusum esset contra
Manichaeos, the Author proceeds crowing magnificentissime, and demanding in
this manner.

Can this doctrine be a truth, and yet blush at the light which makes all
things manifest, especially considering these things?

1. That Reprobation is a principal Head of practical Divinity by the well,
or ill stating, or ordering of which, the glory of God, and good of Religion,
is much promoted or hindered.

2. That there is such a necessary connection between the points of election and
reprobation (both being parts of predestination) that the one cannot be well
handled without the other.

3. That Reprobation was the chief cause of all the uproares in the Churches
of that time.

4. That it was accused with open mouth and challenged of falsehood, and
therefore bound in justice to purge it self of the crimination.

5. That it may easily be defended, if (as some say) it be such an apparent
truth. For, Nihil est ad defendendum puritate facilius, says St Hierome.

Now albeit for the discovery of the vile vanity of this conclusion, I need
take no other pains, then to appeal to your, or any sober man's due
consideration of the premises duly examined according to my former answer; yet
I think good not to pass it over without such particular consideration as it
deserves. First, I pray consider, what is that light that makes all things
manifest? Is it the light of Conference? In the Conference of Mompelgard there
were diverse other things disputed of, besides this of predestination. Now is
the truth manifested hereby in all those particulars? If it be, I pray, let him
signify on whose side, whether on the part of Jacobus Andreas, or on the part
of Beza? To whom is it made manifest? To either side, or only to that side, on
whose side this Author conceives the truth to stand? Do you not manifestly
perceive the crudity of this conceit? Nay, who sees not, that it is not the
condition of conference, but the quality rather and ability of the conferrers,
that is apt to manifest the truth. And such men are able to manifest, as well
out of conference in their discourses, either Positive, or Controversiall, as
in conference; yea, and far better; Those discourses being more quietly
carried, and more free from altercation, then conferences; especially in case
they meet with malignant opposites. And indeed it is the Word of God alone,
which is that spiritual light, which gives manifestation to all spiritual
truth. And consequently neither are they to be censured as blushing at the
light, that prefer to write quietly of these controversies, then to confer
about them in some cases; or that prefer conference by the pen as Beza did,
before conference by word of mouth, though this better pleased the lips of
Jacobus Andreas. Yet neither Beza did refuse to yield to Andreas his own way,
neither did either the Contra-Remonstrants at the Haghe Conference, or the
Divines of Dort, refuse to treat of reprobation, as well as election, as
formerly I have showed by authentical evidences. But suppose Beza and his
fellows, whether two or three had altogether declined to confer at all, as
in my judgment they had good reason to refuse, must this be censured their
blushing at the light? Austin professes as I have formerly vouched him, that
there may be many causes of forbearing to deliver the truth at some times. He
little dreamed of exposing the truth thereby to such a censure, as if it
blushed at the light. And if some few might be justly censured as blushing at
the light, must all for their sakes, by the rules of justice, be made obnoxious
to the same censure, and not the Doctors only, but the Doctrine it self? Is it
not apparent that a true and sound doctrine, may be weakly apprehended by many,
though learned, and Veritas est temporis filia, and the accurate handling and
maintaining of the truth in plainer points then this of reprobation, comes not
to perfection, but by degrees, and after much ventilating of it in a ruder
manner. Thus I think I have cracked the crown of this conclusion; I may proceed
with the greater facility to the rest.

1. That Reprobation is an Head to any part of practical Divinity, I never
read, nor heard till now. But yet in every theoreticall point, as touching the
nature of God and his attributes, by the true doctrine thereof, the glory of
God, and good of Religion is promoted, and by the erroneous doctrine
thereabouts it is as much impaired. For like as it is blasphemy, to attribute
that unto God, which does not become him; so is it blasphemy also, to deny unto
him that which does become him. As for the entertaining or refusing conference
thereabouts, I have already spoken sufficiently; yet two particulars more I
have to deliver, which I purpose to subjoyne to the end of those five
considerations here distinguished, as remarkable ones, if my memory fails me
not.

2. A Connection I grant there is, between election and reprobation, and the
clearing of the truth in the one, does give light unto the other. But which of
these is to be handled first, that the clearing of the truth therein, may give
light to the stating of the other, I should think no sober man would make
question. Yet the Remonstrants at the Synod of Dort, were eager to begin with
Reprobation, but were therein generally censured by the consent of foreign
Divines that assisted there. But that one of them cannot be handled without the
other, is a palpable untruth, as appears by the very practice of this Author
himself, and his own carriage in this business. For he undertakes only the
point of reprobation.

3. As touching the third particular, in charging the doctrine of reprobation,
with being the chief cause of all the uproares in the Church at that time;
this author takes to himself a strange liberty of discourse. We read and hear
of no small stirs in the Church of Rome, between the Dominicans and the
Jesuits; but I never read that the Jesuits laid to the Dominicans charge, that
their Doctrine as touching the predetermination of the creatures will to every
act thereof, was the cause of any uproare in the Church of Rome: But to the
contrary rather. I read that in the contention between the Dominicans and
Jesuits in Rome it self, wherein Valentianus through some heat in disputation,
caught a fever whereof he dyed within three days after; of the relation
whereof, made by one Pet (that had been a Priest) in Oxford I was sometimes an
ear witness. The Jesuits were rather taxed for their heterodoxy in the point
de auxiliis, as Petrus Mattheus in his History reports it. And from D. Jacksons
mouth, I have heard what a Spaniard should deliver upon the mention of Molina
the Jesuit, namely, that he was the man, qui tantos tumultus excitavit, to wit,
in Spain. But as for Churches Protestant, he does well to limit his crimination
to a certain time. For the stir that was raised by Huberus in the Lutheran
Churches, was neither caused nor occasioned by our doctrine concerning
reprobation. Huberus his cause was, a pertinacious standing for an universal
Election. It seems he has relation only to the Haghe conference, and the
uproares, as he calls them, amongst the States only, and their particular, or
provincial congregations alone (as it seems) he denominates the Churches. Now
let us consider, Who made those uproares, were they the Contra-Remonstrants, or
the Remonstrants only? If he charge this upon the Contra-Remonstrants, let
him prove it, least he be justly censured for one of those wild beasts, an
Emperor was sometimes warned to beware of, they were the slanderers. If the
Remonstrants were the authors of these uproares, how does he prove that the
doctrine of reprobation, was the chief cause of them, Were not those Arminians
voluntary agents in those uproares? If they conceived their opposites doctrine
to be unsound, could they not oppose it without uproares, without violent
proceedings? Again, their opposites doctrine, was it never received or
preached 'till those days? Or was there any uproare made thereupon, 'till
Arminius his innovating? And is that the chief cause of an uproare, which has
no such consequent ensuing until it meets with some turbulent spirits, which
begin to stir as innovators in a Church or State. And yet was reprobation
that alone, whereupon they stirred? Is it not apparent, that about the five
Articles commonly so called, they conferred alike? But he says it was the
chief cause, and only says it, yet Molinaeus professing reprobation to
proceed, upon foresight of final impenitency, as in truth it cannot be denied,
but that as the Contra-Remonstrants professed, as well in that Conference at
the Hague, as in the Synod of Dort, that God did never intend to damn any man
of ripe years, but for final perseverance in infidelity and impenitency. Did
their contentions hereupon, either totally cease or in part? But such
criminations are nothing strange. We know after what manner of greeting wicked
Ahab saluted the holy Prophet Elijah. Art thou he that troubles Israel? but he
spared not to answer him, I am not he that troubles Israel, but Thou and thy
Fathers house. In the like manner were Paul and Silas entertained Act. 16. 20.
when being caught and brought before the Magistrates, heard such an accusation
made against them, These men which are Jews trouble our city: and preach
Ordinances which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe, seeing
we are Romans. And no marvel if the Devil roares, when he falls from heaven,
like lightning, and his kingdom is shaken. But because he putts us to it in
this crimination, I think it fit to give a taste of the violent proceedings in
those parts, as I find them ordered in the Preface to the Synod. Dordrac. set
forth by the authority of the States. And because uproares concern
insurrections against government in Church or State; The first particular I
observe of this nature is, Fol. 3. page 1. where after Arminius had been much
suspected, and diverse times urged to declare his opinion, upon certain points
which hitherto he had declined, saving in a false manner, his protestation in
the issue, proving directly contrary to his practice. The Rectors of particular
Churches, sowred with the leaven of his doctrine, openly refuse to subscribe
the Confession of the Catechism, though the Synod of South-Holland commanded
them. Pastores Arminii sententiam amplexi passim in Classibus recusabant
mandato Synodi de subscriptione Confession is, ac Catecheseos morem gerere.
Here we have the beginning of a manifest schism. Now consider we the progress
hereof. Hereupon a resolution was made (it being high time) by the States, for
the calling of a National Synod, in the year 1605. about November 26. the
execution whereof, was by diverse practices of the Arminian Faction, delayed,
and put off from time to time, for the space of 13 years. Fol. 5. page 2.
Arminius himself acknowledges, de Heterodoxia sua varios rumores omnes jam
ecclesias pervasisse, incendiumque a se suscitatum ipsa Ecclesiae tecta super
are dici. Fol. 8. page 1. In the mean time, Anno 1608. the States declared
their purpose was, to call a Provincial Synod in October following, and
signification hereof being made, the Rectors of particular Congregations, as
many as were addicted to Arminius, being admonished to manifest their
considerations in their several Deanaries, that so they might be fairly sent
to the Synod that approached. They put this off also. Illi vero ut antea, ita
nunc quoque singuli consuetis tergiversationibus pariter hoc detrectarunt. The
like refusal was afterward made in the Synod of South-Holland, though they
were urged by the Synod to declare themselves (for as for the Provincial
Synod, that was deferred two months longer.) Whereupon the Synod decreed, that
they should give up their considerations within a Months space, or be obnoxious
to Censure Ecclesiastical. Hereupon was means made by Utenbogard, for letters
from the States unto those Pastors, to send up unto them their considerations
sealed, that so they might reserve them to the Provincial Synod shortly to be
held. In these proceedings a man may easily smell Barnavells hand all along.
Hereupon came forth at length Arminius his Declaration before the States. In
answer whereunto Gomarus rises up, as there we may read, Fol. 6. page 2. And
amongst other courses of Arminius, makes relation of this, as how Spretis
Synodorum Classium and Prebyteriorum judiciis ac decretis ad supremi
Magistratus tribunal prima instantia prosiluisse, ibique querelas atque
accusationes suas adversus Ecclesiarum doctrinam proposuisse, artibusque
aulicis favorem sibi Ecclesiis vero odium consiliare diligenter studiisse. And
hereupon besought the States, that seeing Contentiones gliscerent, Ecclesiae
turbarentur, Civesque in parts distraherentur, the National Synod which they
had promised might be gathered together with the first; which yet by the
practice of Utenbogard and others was still delayed. Hereupon Arminius his
Faction grew so bold, as publicly to Preach against the received Doctrine, as
Bertius spared not to declare himself; but wherein? Mark I pray the Article
well, because this Author draws all to reprobation. Now the Articles whereupon
Bertius declared himself, to differ from the Doctrine received, were, De
justificatione hominis coram Deo, De Praedestinatione, De Gratia Dei, and
libero arbitrio, De Perseverantia fidelium; and upon these very points
afterward, proceeded the Conference between Arminus and Gomarus before the
States. And one Venator spared not publicly to broach Pelagian and Socinian
errors. Whereupon he was suspended by the Churches of North-Holland. In spite
of whom notwithstanding, he continued his courses of Preaching. Now whereas the
Orthodox Pastors in the Deanary of Alomar considering he was lawfully
suspended, and withal a man of impure life, refused to admit him into their
company. Hereof complaint was made to the States, and by Utenbogards practice a
Mandate obtained from them, that they should admit him. Now when the States
considering the present exigent, were easily like to condescend to a
Provincial Synod, the Arminians moved, that the Deputies to be sent thither,
should not be appointed thereunto by the Churches, according to the usual
course, but only by the States, presuming hereby, that either none, but such as
favored their cause should be sent, or at least such as were less alienated
from their Opinion. fol. 8. p. But though they could not effect this, yet by
their practice it came to pass, that the calling, not only of a Provincial
Synod, but of the yearly Synods were hindered. Shortly after this, finding
what liberty they had, they met together of their own accord privily, Sine
Magistratus Supremi authoritate magno numero. Atque ibi inter se inita per
subscriptionem nominum confaederatione seu conspiratione, manifestum in
Ecclesiis Reformatis Schisma instituunt. That year came forth the Remonstrance.
Upon this by the practice of the Remonstrants, Vorstius is brought in to be a
Professor in the place of Arminius. For as touching the exceptions taken
against him, the Remonstrants professed before the States, he had given them
good satisfaction, Fol. 10. page 2. Then follow their practices for the
removing of such Rectors from their Churches, as were their opposites, and
obtruding upon the people such as were of their own Party. At Alcmar, Adolphus
Venator, a man of impure life and faith, moved the people to Arms against the
Magistrate, whereby he was driven to relinquish his place, and others brought
in of Venator his Faction. Fol. 12. page 1. Hereupon the Elders and Deacons of
that place were removed, and two Pastors, the one having formerly executed his
Ministry amongst them for fifty years continuance. Grevincovius in like sort,
with the Magistracy of Rotterdam, to deprive his Colleague there Cornelius
Geselius of his Ministry first, and then by their Sergeants to cast him out of
the City. Utenbogard sends Remonstrants into Utrecht, and amongst others,
Jacobum quendam Taurinum hominem turbulentum and saevum. Fol. 12. page 2. In
Gelderland also the ordinary and annual Synodicall Assemblies were hindered by
the practice of Utenbogard, like as still they continued withal their art to
hinder the calling of a National Synod, so often promised by the States, and
so many years deferred. William of Nassau moved both Utenbogard on the one
side, and Festus Hommius on the other side, to consider of a course how these
stirs might be pacified. To which motion Festus Hommius makes answer, that in
case the Remonstrants differed from the Churches only in five Articles, he
could think of a course whereby some peace might be made in the interim, until
a National Synod were gathered. This is the more observeable, because this
Author lays all the cause of those uproares (as he calls them) upon
Reprobation. But he professes they had great cause to suspect the Remonstrants
differed from them in greater points of moment. And these are afterward
declared to be these, Fol. 14. page 1. De perfecta Christi pro peccatis
Satisfactione, de Justificatione hominis coram Deo, de Fide Salvifica, de
Peccato Originali, de Certitudine salutis, and de Perfectione hominis in hac
vita. And whereas, they desired the Remonstrants would deal clearly and make
known what their opinion was in those points: Utenbogard having labored to
have a hearing before the States alone, There traduceth the actions of his
Brethren in demanding the Declaration of their minds hereupon, as if this were
to bring in a new kind of Inquisition amongst them, not to be endured. And
hereupon obtaines of the States, that no such Declaration should be required at
their hands. And more then that, finding the Deputies of the Synod by their
continual solicitations with the States (as it well became them in their
places) to be most prejudicial to their proceedings, they brought it so to
pass, that like as formerly their Annual Synods were hindered, so now it was
forbidden to the Deputies themselves, thenceforth to take any such style unto
them, or perform any such office as whereabout they were then employed. And so
the Relator proceeds in setting down their insolent courses until at length
perceiving, that by the mediation of the King of Great Britain, all for the
most part, inclined to the convocation of a National Synod, they fell plainly
on, upon these desperate Counsels openly professing that the calling of a
National Council, would prove prejudicial to the Majesty and Liberty of the
Provinces, manifesting themselves hereby utterly averse from such a course;
which yet has been most in use in the Church of God, and that of ancient
times, for the pacifying of contentions arising in matter of Religion. I
profess, I nothing affect to spend time in such searches and relations, I had
rather employ it another way, but you see I am driven unto it, to represent the
unshamefased condition of this Narration.

4. And whereas he says, It was accused with open mouth, and challenged of
falsehood, it is apparent that the Remonstrants would very well have rested
contented with a mutual toleration of one another in their several ways. For
when Utenbogard and Festus Hommius were to meet together, and treat upon some
fair course of composition, Utenbogard, together with those of his side,
professed they knew no other course for settling peace, but my mutually
tolerating one the other; Festus Hommius and others with him on the other side,
professed they knew no better course then convocation of a National Synod,
and in the interim to tolerate one another, provided they would declare
themselves to differ from the received doctrine in the Church, in no other
points then in the five Articles. But how they carried themselves herein
refusing to declare themselves, I have formerly showed. And farther, in the
pursuit of this their practice to enjoy toleration, it is farther storied, by
what means they procured a Letter from King James to farther them therein, and
after that an Edict to that purpose from some of the States. And consider
farther, If any amongst us should rise up, and confederate themselves and
impugn any five Articles of the Church of England, and accuse us for
maintaining erroneous doctrine therein, and challenge us for falsehood, if they
do it with never so open mouth, shall this be sufficient to justify them and
condemn us, if we do not come to a trial with them to dispute the case,
though We are the Possessours, They the Intruders and Innovators? We
maintaining no other Doctrine then that which is by Authority established
amongst us, and They which impugn the doctrine received, are they not usually
judged amongst us, as such who are rather to be censured then disputed with?
And withal consider, that this mutua tolerantia, which the Remonstrants so
much pressed and were so glad to enjoy, was with greatest instance stood for
long after the Conference at the Hague. Lastly, how often was Arminius himself
questioned and called upon to give satisfaction for his Heterodoxies, and how
often did he decline it? When at the first, Motion was made for his surrogation
into the place of Iunius beind deceased, then the suspicions of his Heterodox
breaking forth, and they of Amsterdam not well likeing to let him go from
them, amongst whom at that time, he exercised his Ministry; and that because
they observed his luxuriant and novelizing Wit, which was like to breed
dangerous effects in an University: at length upon the great instance both of
Utenbogard and Arminius himself, way was made for him unto the Chair, upon
condition he should confer with Gomarus upon some chief heads of Doctrine,
and by a round declaration of his mind thereon, remove all suspicion of
Heterodoxy, having formerly by a solemn Protestation given his word, that in
case he had any singular opinion of his own, he would not spread it. Hereupon
he made open profession, that he condemned the chief Pelagian opinions
concerning grace natural, the strength of Free Will, Original sin, the
perfection of man in this life, and Predestination, and that he approved all
those disputes, which Austin and other Fathers had written against them; and
that in his judgment the Pelagian errors were rightly refuted by those
Fathers, and withal promised, that he would teach nothing that differed from
the received Doctrine of the Churches; and hereupon he was admitted to a
Professors place in the University. In the beginning whereof he labored by all
means to quench all suspicion of Heterodoxy in himself, and maintained the
doctrine of the Reformed Churches, De satisfactione Christi, de Fide
justificante, de justificatione per fidem, de Perseverantia vere fidelium, de
Certitudine salutis, de Perfectione hominis in hac vita etc. all which he
afterward contradicted, as also did his Followers. This I say, he then at the
first maintained publicly, contra sententiam suam (which let every man judge,
whether it be not as much as to say, against his own Conscience) and Corvinus
is alleged as in a certain Writing of his set forth in Low Dutch ingeniously
professing as much, Praefat, in Synod. Dordracen, Authoritate Ordinum Fol. 2.
p. 1. But after he had been a year or two in the place, he begins to unmaske
himself, and by his Public Lectures, and chiefly by his dealing with his
Scholars in private, his heterodoxy discovered it self. Here upon the
deputies from the Churches of South and North Holland are sent unto him, who
acquaint him with the rumors that went of him, praying him that if he disliked
ought in the doctrine received, he would sincerely declare it unto his
Brethren, to the end, either by a friendly Conference, he might receive
satisfaction, or the whole business might lawfully be put over to the
consideration of a Synod. Arminius his answer was, that he never gave any just
cause, why such rumor should be spread of him, neither was it wisdom for him
to treat with them as with Deputies, that should make relation of the whole
matter to a Synod, though as private persons, he refused not to confer with
them, provided that in case they differed, no relation hereof should be made
unto a Synod. The Church of Leyden also admonished him, that there might be a
Conference between him and his Colleagues, before the Presbytery of that
Church. To them he answered he could not yield thereto, without leave from the
Gurators of the University, and that he perceived not, that any benefit was
like to redound unto the Church by such a Conference. At another time Fol. 4.
p. 2. being entreated by the Professors and Pastors with great earnestness,
that if he had ought to say against the doctrine received in their Confession
and Catechism, he would freely and brotherly communicate it unto them,
promising their endeavors to give him full satisfaction, or if not so, yet
that he and his Colleagues under certain conditions might come to a fair
agreement, to live together in peace, and that the reconciliation being made,
nothing which passed between them should be divulged. The answer he made, was
this, It was no wise part for him to yield to their motion, neither was he
bound thereto, the present meeting being not ordained unto any such purpose,
fol. 5. p. 2. Gomarus openly tells him, how it became him to declare his
opinion, neque ejusmodi subterfugiis diutius hac in re uti, and fol. 6. p. 2.
before the States he represents his continual practice thereunto, in
concealing his Opinion, His words are these, Quibus insuper artibus opiniones
suas disseminare; Public scilicet ab Ecclesiis rogatum obtestatumque,
sententiam suam occultare, privatim vero Pastoribus quos in eam pertrahi posse
speraret, ac discipulis suis diligenter eam inculcare; argumenta Nostrorum
praecipua quibus astrui doctrina Orthodoxa soleret enervare, Jesuitarum vero
aliorumque Adversariorum, quibus doctrinam Ecclesiarum Reformatarum oppugnant
confirmare, Varias de doctrinae receptae Veritate dubitationes discipulorum
animis ingerere, eandemque cum doctrina heterodoxa prius, quasi in aequilibrio
suspendere, ac deinde prorsus rejicere, nullam hactenus sinceritatis ac
consensus in doctrina, licet saepius ab Ecclesiis amanter fraterneque rogatum
Declarationem edere voluisse. Now let any indifferent person compare the
carriage of Arminius the Innovator, with the carriage of the
Contra-Remonstrants, standing for the doctrine heretofore received, and judge
impartially which of them betrays the greater distrust of the integrity of
their Cause.

5. As for the easiness of defending it, if it be not, or were not so in their
opinion, who are here pretended to have declined the sifting of it, What is
that to the purpose? Then who are they, who say it may so easily be defended? I
never read any hitherto, who do not acknowledge a great mystery in the divine
providence. And from the days of Anselme unto this present day, it has ever
been accounted (in my observation) a very difficult point to accord
predestination divine, with the liberty of men's wills. But put the case it may
easily be defended, as of evident truth by the word of God, yet
notwithstanding, if it be found harsh to men's affections, are they likely to
admit it with such ease? I should think it ought to be put out of question,
that God has mercy on whom he will, in bestowing faith and repentance upon
them, and thereby curing their natural infidelity and hardness of heart, as
also that God hardneth whom he will, leaving their infidelity and hardness of
heart uncured; yet when flesh and blood rises up against this doctrine thus,
Why then does God complain; (to wit, of man's disobedience) for who has
resisted his will? And the Apostle addresseth hereunto no other answer but
this, O man who art thou who disputest with God? shall the thing formed say to
him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over
the clay of the same lump, to make one vessel unto honor, another unto
dishonor? Is flesh and blood, I pray, apt to rest satisfied with this?

Now as touching the two things I promised to add, they are these.

1. I pray consider whether in all this, this Author does not very judiciously
pronounce sentence against himself. For you know, your own motion you made
unto him, and the promise he made unto you; and I pray consider how answerable
hereunto has been his performance. The certain Controversies, as touching
which he professes change of Opinion, what are they, but the five Articles so
much agitated between the Remonstrants, and the Contra-Remonstrants? Do you
not perceive how he makes choice only of reprobation to grate upon? Is he not
content to lie close as touching four of them? What is this, but according to
his language, the coveting of corners? And what willingness of abideing the
trial does this manifest? Yet he pleases himself in a conceit, of being as
free from guile, as David was when he offered himself to the Lords trial, and
thereupon advances himself to the greater liberty of censuring others, such
as Beza, and Musculus, and their Fellows, together with the
Contra-Remonstrants, as too full of that guile, whereof himself, by virtue not
of his Free Will, but of a grace of God of his shapeing, is void. This is an
usual course with those of his spirit, whereof I have had plentiful
experience in this very kind. For if you believe them, all the Arminians Geese
are Swannes, and all our Swannes are Geese in comparison to them. He hopes you
will not think he hates the light, or refuses to come to the light, (in his
phrase) this is the censure he liberally bestows upon his opposites. For
though some of our Divines are willing enough to treat of the five Articles,
yet to treat of reprobation, which is a part of one of those, they are not so
willing, but this young Master in Israel, out of the plerophorious conceit of
his own integrity and sufficiency, is very willing to treat of this of
reprobation, though he leaves all the rest alone. Yet I pray make the scales
even, What instance can be given, I do not say of Beza, Musculus, or any one
of the Contra-Remonstrants, but of any one of the like condition to himself,
that being entreated by a friend (as this Author was by you) to show the
reasons, why he has changed his mind from Arminianisme, to the opposite
opinions, has carried himself, as this Author has done, to give his reasons
only on the part of one of them, and yet passes his censure so prodigally on
others for refusing trial, by the way implying, a glorious ostentation of his
own performances to the contrary, as if he had done a notable piece of service,
whereas all that he has performed hereon, by proof from testimonies of
Scripture, are little more then two Leaves, and therein also as it were
purposely, declines all those places, wherein the Scripture speaks directly
of election, predestination, and of that, which in effect, is all one with
reprobation. Such places pregnantly speaking hereof, he purposely declines, and
yet he calls the places he insists upon, pregnant testimonies; and indeed so
they are, but nothing at all to the purpose of predestination, election, or
reprobation. Yet I marvel not he is so well conceited of his achievements. I
remember the Fable of the fly, sitting on a Cart-wheele, in a dry summers day,
and saying, See what a dust I make. For, because he has discharged himself so
unworthily with you, he may be bold to conceit, that if he had to deal with
Beza, or with any of the Contra-Remonstrants, or of the Synod of Dort, he would
make it soon appear, that Heresy and untruth condemns it self (this is the
sweet accommodation he makes of that the Apostles (...)) to wit, by their
refusing the touchstone, and his readiness backed with all sufficiency to
come thereto, whereof he has given so plentiful demonstration in this he has
written unto you; as if he had been with some Oracle of late, who had not only
revealed unto him, some reasonable motives, and wise carriages of the matter,
but inspired him also with some martial spirit, fit for any encounter,
despising his Adversaries, as empty Scholars, and as if their parts were but
copper, to his gold. Therefore he may take heart to speak boldly, and show
himself in the clear day, when such as Beza make choice to walk in mistrs, and
dwell in silence. Besides his care is very Apostolical for the peace of the
Church, whereas Beza's was not at Mompelgard, nor the Contra-Remonstrants,
neither at the Hague Conference, or at the Synod of Dort. For none of these
belike, have been so forward to show themselves unto the World, and upon the
stage, for the maintenance of their doctrine (at least in the point of
reprobation) no not Beza in his Lectures upon the ninth to the Romans. Yet
neither this man nor his Oracle has done ought that I know, but in corners.
And in corners I find these spirits exceeding busy; and I have been so happy
(for so I account it, although I confess my time might be far more
profitably bestowed) as to meet with some of their Mysteries, ere I was aware.
And I find their Lions skins, do smell far more of the Fox then of ehe
Lion.

2. The second is this, Why should their carriage be any prejudice to others,
who are as willing to give an account of their faith in these particulars, as
any Arminian whatsoever. For my part, I never met with any of them, that I
declined, nor I hope never shall. I heartily wish, time might serve me for them
all. I have dealt with Arminius his Examen, his Conference with Junius,
Corvinus his answer unto Tilenus, I have entered upon Vossius his Pelagian
History. I desire I might have time and opportunity, for their Synodalia
Dordracena, but most of all with the Jesuits; while I deal with them I learn
somewhat, but nothing at all while I am occupied with the Arminians.

3. Let me add one thing more: In the Articles of our Church, the
seaventeenth is concerning Predestination and Election, not one concerning
Reprobation. If any of us, should forbear to meddle with the doctrine of
reprobation in dispute, may we not justly plead, a fair conformity to the
wisdom of the Church whereof we are members? And by the way to touch one
thing, Might not this be the reason, why this author utterly pretermits the
prosecuting his opinion concerning Predestination and election, to wit, least
thereby he should fall foul upon the doctrine of our Church, so evidently set
down in that Article concerning the point of Predestination? The Church of
Ireland content themselves, with the very form of that 17th Article of ours
concerning Predestination: Only they premise two Theses; the one whereof is
this, God from all eternity, did by his unchangeable Council ordain,
whatsoever in time should come to pass, yet so, as thereby no violence is
offered to the Wills of the reasonable creatures, and neither the liberty, nor
the contingency of the second cause is taken away, but established rather; The
other this, By the same eternal Counsel, God has Predestined some unto
life, and Reprobated some unto death, of both which there is a certain number,
known only unto God, which neither can be increased nor diminished.

DISCOURSE. The Third Motive. The Infamy of it.
IT is an Opinion (as it is maintained by the Supralapsarians) odious to the
Papists, and opens their foul mouths against our Church and Religion, and so
abhorred (maintained either Way) by all the Lutherans, that for this very
Tenent, they call us damned Calvenists, think us unworthy to be above ground,
and in their Writings protest; that they will rather unite themselves to the
Papists, then to us.

Sir Edwin Sands speaks of men, whom he commends for singular learning and
piety, (whose opinion he so sets down, as he declares it to be his own) that
they think it were no blemish for the Reformed Relat. page 194, 198.
Doctors to revive their doctrine, and to abate the rigor of certain
speculative opinions, (for so he is pleased to call them) especially touching
the eternal decrees of God, wherein some of their chief authors have run
into such an utter opposition to all the Romish doctrine, as to have
exceedingly scandalized all other Churches withal, yea, and many of their own
to rest very ill satisfied.

At the closing up of the Conference at Mompelgard, when Frederick Earl of
Wortenberg exhorted Ostand. Hist. Eccles. page 1040. Colloq. Mompelg. page 566,
567.
his Divines to acknowledge Beza and his Company for Brethren, and to declare
it by giving them their hands, they utterly refused it, saving, That they would
pray to God to open their eyes, and would do them any office of humanity and
charity, but they would not give them the right hand of Brotherhood, because
they were proved to be guilty, errorum teterimorum, of most pestilent errors,
of which they reckoned this for one. Hemingius left his own side, and joined
with us in the point of the Sacrament, but would come no nearer to us, but
maintained a distance in this.

It is a Morsel, which the greatest part of the Christian Churches cannot
swallow; and therefore I think it would not down very easily with us, and
without suspicion.

TWISSE Consideration.
HIs third Topic place, is drawn from the Infamy of this doctrine, and that
amongst Papists and Lutherans. And this is a grand motive with him to abhor
it. But I pray consider, was not the doctrine of the Gospel infamous at the
first, both amongst Jews and Gentiles? What time the Jews were the only
people of God, how does Tacitus out of his worldly wisdom brand them? Does he
not call them Gentem teterrimam, Cenus hominum invisum Diis? And as touching
Hist. l. 5.
their religious Rites, mark what censure he passes upon them, Profana illic
omnia, quae apud nos sacra, rursus concessa apud illos, quae apud nos incesta,
and comparing them with Annal.
the Rites of Bacchus, says, Liber festos, laetosque ritus posuit, Judaeorum
Mos absurdus sordidusque. And speaking of the Christians he calls them, Genus
hominum propter flagitia invisum. This censure he passes upon them in the
days of holy Paul, who forbad them to do evil that good might come thereof,
and commands every soul to be subject to the Higher Powers, even then, when
souls were at the best, and powers at worst. And see I pray what the King of
Ashurs judgment was, concerning the Religion of Samaria and Jerusalem, in
comparison to the Religions of their Nations, which were heathenish. Isa. 10.
10. Like as mine hand has found the Kingdoms of the Idols, seeing their
Idols were above Jerusalem, and above Samaria. So that of an heathenish
Religion, he had a better estimation then of the Religion of the Jews. Now if
some Rabshakeh amongst them should turn heathen (for such a tradition, as I
remember is received amongst the Rabbis, namely, that Rabshakeh was a Jew, but
turned heathen) and afterward endeavored to entice the Jews to do as he
did, and that because of the infamous nature of their Religion amongst
heathens, how deserved such a one to be entertained by them? Was he not by the
Law of God to be stoned to death? In like manner, if in the primitive days of
the Church, some Christian should turn Jew or Infidel, and practice to seduce
others from the obedience of faith, representing unto them how every where it
was contradicted, how Christ himself was counted a blaspheamer, a sorcerer,
how the Gospel was a scandal to the Jews, foolishness to the Gentiles, and
that in killing the holy Apostles, the world thought they did God very good
service. Saint Paul himself professing of himself and his fellows, That they
were made as the filth of the world, the offscouring of all things. Did this
infamy prevail with 1 Corinthians. 4. 13.
Paul, or any other holy servant of God, to remit any thing, in the maintenance
of his Christian faith? Nay, does he not profess, saying, I pass not for
these things, neither is my life dear unto me, so I may fulfill my course with
joy, and the Ministration that I have received to testify the Gospel of the
grace of God? And that in all things, They approve themselves as the Ministers
of God by honor and dishonor, by good report and evil report, as deceivers
and yet true. Act. 20 2 Cor. 6. 4, 8.


Again, Is it to be expected, that any doctrine should be well spoken of, by
such as are opposites and adversaries thereunto? Suppose a rigid Lutheran
should by Gods providence, be taken off from their ubiquitary doctrine; and in
justifying himself for the change of his Opinion, should represent unto them,
the infamous condition of that doctrine, both in the judgment of Papists, and
in the judgment of Calvinists; I pray consider, How in all likelihood would
this plea be entertained? Could he expect any better recompense hereof, then to
be cast out of their Synagogues? Suppose a Papist should have his eyes opened,
and brought to the truth of God in the point of justification, and, being
demanded the reason of this change of mind in him, should answer, that the
infamy of this doctrine, both amongst Lutherans and Calvinists is so great, and
that such a morsel, which neither Lutherans nor Calvinists can swallow, should
therefore (in his judgment) not down very easily with Papists, and without
suspicion. Now let any indifferent Reader confider, how this plea in all
probability would be received amongst papists. Yet I mean not to quiet my
self, or content my Reader with this parallel. Of that which he here delivers
of Papists, he gives us no evidence but his bare word in pawn, for the credit
of this assertion. Neither gives he any testimony of Lutherans, their calling
us damned Calvenists, and though he had, I pray, what were we the farther off
from the kingdom of God for that? And I pray consider, is it not in our power
to recompense them, and call them, damned Lutherans, if we list to recompense
malice with malice, so to serve our own turns? And all this is delivered by
him without distinction of Papists, learned and unlearned, Dominicans and
Jesuits; in like sort without all distinction of Lutherans, whether rigid or
moderate. But let us examine his crimination a part.

And first, as for Papists; not one is here named, nor any reference made to
any of of them. St Paul's prayer was, that they might be delivered from
unreasonable men. I think never Sect rose upmore unreasonable then this Sect of
Arminians. This Writing came unto my hands, before I had dispatched a large
discourse sent unto me from one of same Sect, and therein I have met with
pregnant evidences, that more heads then one, were employed thereabouts. And
there I am told to my face, that our doctrine of absolute reprobation, we have
learned from the Papists. Another with whom I had to do not long before,
professes in plain manner thus; The Jesuits ten of them for one, favor the
absolute irrespective decree, following herein as they think St Austin, but
especially their St Thomas, and Scotus, with all the rabble of rotten
Schoolmen, and the whole Tribe at this day of the Dominicans, who are buzy
zelots for the cause; of whose consent some amongst us are not ashamed to
brag. If our irrespective decree, be so jointly maintained by both Jesuits,
and Dominicans, and that as they think according to Austin, how is it possible
our doctrine herein, can be so odious to the Papists? Or what Papists does he
mean, if neither Jesuits nor Dominicans, nor any such as concur with either
of them? Or if it be so odious unto them, as one Arminian Proselite professes,
how can it be so concordantly maintained by them, as another Arminian proselite
avoucheth? And if we have learned it at the hands of Papists, what will these
Lutherans gain, by uniting with Papists rather then with us, that is, with the
Masters rather then with the Scholars. And if a Lutheran should be converted
to the embracing of our Tenent herein, and to justify himself should plead;
That we Calvinists are ready to protest, that in the doctrine of reprobation
and predestination, we had rather unite our selves with Papists then with them,
Of what moment think you, would this motive be with them, which this Author
most inconsiderately proposes, as a point of very ponderous consideration?

But as touching Papists, their dislike of us, he confines it only to the
Supralapsarian-way. And indeed that distinction of the Supralapsarian and
Sublapsarian-way. was brought in merely to get thereby some more elbow room.
For if they agree with us in the point of Gods absolute and irrespective
decrees, how improbable is it, that the doctrine of any of our Divines, in
stating the object of predestination to be humanum genus nondum conditum, will
prove odious unto them; considering this is a mere Logical difference, as I
have showed in my Vindic. Great. Dei cap. 1. page 1. De Predestinatione digress.
1. Yet as touching the Supralapsarian-way, that opinion is imputed unto Junius
by Arminius, as also to Thomas and his Followers. Collat. Armin. cum Juni. page
4. and if so, how improbable is it, that such an Opinion should be so odious to
the Papists, as this Author upon his bare word avoucheth. And Alphonsus Mendoza
spares not to profess, that supernaturalls were intended by God before
naturalls; and his discourse hereupon, was taken with admiration by his
Auditors in Spain, and he was urged as himself professes, to set it forth in
Print. And the Quatuor signa Francisci Mayronis (mentioned by Mr Perkins De
Praedest. Modo and Ordine) do manifest that he took the same way; and these
quatuor signa, Franciscus Mayro received from the doctrine of Scotus. It is
well known that in the Synod of Dort, there met Divines different in this
point, who yet neither hated one another doctrine nor persons for this
difference; like as so it is amongst us, as in the place above mentioned I have
showed. Nay it is apparent, that Junius took upon him to reconcile all three
opinions there abouts, and Piscator after him, who also has discharged his
part herein, far more clearly then Iunius. And no marvail, Iunius having
first broken the ice. But that the truth may not be carried in the clouds of
ambiguities, as they desire, who are in love with error: All the question
between these our Divines consists in this, Whether it were the will of God
that Adam should fall by his permission, so to make way for Gods glorious ends,
to wit, the manifestation of his glory, in the incarnation of the Son of God,
as also in the way of mercy, in the salvation of some; and in the way of
justice, in the condemnation of others. The Supralapsarians maintain, that
such was the will of God, least otherwise way should be made for the
manifestation of Gods glorious works by accident, rather then by Gods
providence. Other Divines that take the Sublapsarian way, had rather decline
this nice point as difficult, then oppose it as odious. But say I, the doctrine
wherein both Jesuits and Arminians do agree, will abundantly serve us to
justify us, in the positive and affirmative part of so nice a point as this.
For by their doctrine of Scientia Media, God did foresee, that upon such an
administration of his providence about Adam as was used, Adam would fall; and
more then this, that God could have brought forth other administrations of his
providence in very great variety, some whereof were such, that if God had used,
Adam would not have fallen. Now being pleased to make use of such an
administration of providence divine, upon the purpose whereof, he foresaw Adam
would fall; and not being pleased to use such a providence, upon the purpose
whereof, he had foreseen Adam would not have fallen; I call here all the
indifferent of the World to judge, whether it does not manifestly follow
herehence, that it was the will of God, Adam should fall by his permission.

Again, throughout our doctrine, nothing is more harsh then that of Gods
determining the will of the creature, to every act of his, as touching the
substance thereof. Dares this author betray such ignorance, as hand over head
to profess, that this doctrine is odious unto Papists? Whereas the most
learned in the Church of Rome, are well known to maintain it in express
terms, whereas our Divines course is, to keep themselves to the phrase of
Scriptures. And as for the Jesuits who oppose it, and in the place thereof
bring in Scientia Media, and Gratia Congrua, shaped after the genius of
Scientia Media. I can show an express acknowledgement under the hand of a
zealot for the Arminian cause, that between the Gratia praedeterminans of the
Dominicans, and Gratia congrua of the Jesuits, there is no such material
difference at all, but that the absoluteness of predestination and reprobation
does follow, as well upon the one, as upon the other.

To conclude, I would this Author would be so wise, as once more to consult
with his Oracle, and enquire, Whether Papists are more ready to join with
Lutherans, in their doctrine of Christ's Ubiquity, as touching his Manhood, then
with us in the point of Reprobation, or of Gods concourse. For suppose we held
as Suarez is pleased to state our Tenent, namely, Quod Deus omnipotenti
voluntate nobis necessitatem imponat; yet the same Suarez says, that in this
very point, we are not reprehended of them, as if we affirmed ought, Quod vel
in re ipsa contradictionem involvat, aut Dei omnipotentiam superet. I presume
no Papist is so well conceited in the Lutherans doctrine in the point of
Ubiquity.

From that which he affirms of Papists, I come to that which he affirms of
Lutherans. And what one instance has he given of any Lutheran, speaking
against our making the corrupt Mass the object of predestination or
reprobation? Surely not one, either out of Sir Edwin Sands, nor out of
Osiander; Nay what cause is there, why either Papist or Lutheran should, in
case the object thus stated (or in a more rigid form of the Mass Incorrupt)
does no way constrain us to maintain, that God does intend the damnation of
any man, in any moment of nature, before the consideration of him, as departing
out of this World, under the power of sin; no nor to maintain, that God does
intend the salvation of any man, in any moment of nature, before the
consideration of him, in final perseverance in faith and repentance, provided
God suffer him, to live until the use of reason, as I have showed, and
endeavored to justify, and make appear, in my Vindic. Great. Dei, in the
digressions concerning Predestination. For indeed not any of our Divines was, I
think, ever known to maintain, that God did intend to damn any man but for
sin; Neither do I maintain, that God intended to bestow salvation on any
man of ripe years, but by way of reward of his faith and repentance. The true
and principal, real (not verbal only) difference between us, and the
Arminians, is about Gods bestowing of faith and repentance, and his purpose
thereof. Now let any learned Lutheran deliver his mind on this, namely, upon
the foresight where of it is, that God gives faith and repentance unto some,
and denies it unto others. When Tossanus makes relation of Hunnius his
exposition of that place Acts 13. 48. Et crediderunt quotquot ordinati erant ad
vitam, thus, id est, qui sese ordinarant and disposuerant ad audiendum Dei
verbum; Et illud fide amplectendum.
Hunnius in his refutation of Tossanus his Theses, cites Tossanus to appear
before the tribunal seat of the Judge both of quick and dead, and to show in
what place of his writings, this is to be found, professing that such doctrine
is the very Pelagian Heresy, and that himself never approved it, but disproved
it rather, and most constantly impugned it. What Lutheran was ever known so
absurd, as to say, that God works in us, (...) Velle credere, modo Velimus?
Yet this doctrine I can show in express terms delivered by an Arminian. But
come to the consideration of the instances proposed by him.

The first is the Relation of Sir Edwin Sands. And I remember well to have read
in him somewhat concerning the Predestinary Pestilence, so called by some. And
I might wonder at this Authors wisdom, in pretermitting that passage; but upon
search finding it about Fol. 59. though my Book has no quotation at all of
pages, I ceased to wonder at his concealing of it. I have rather cause to
commend his wisdom therein, although it expresses that whereupon this Author
formerly touched, as concerning the Lutherans readiness to return to the
Papacy rather then to admit that Predestinary Pestilence. For predestinary
pestilence goes not here alone, but is joined with the Sacramentary
pestilence, For these two points, says he, are the ground of the quarrel; but
he adds I confess, that the Predestinary pestilence was more scandalous at
that day then the former. Yet the same Author professes Fol. 73. of the
Lutherans, that if he fetch an elle forwards one way, for an elle he loses
another way, it is only by a kind of boisterous force and violence against the
Calvinists, as in Strasborough of late. And the reason hereof he takes to be in
part the Absurdities of the Ubiquitary Chimaera. And as for the passage here
alleged, I find it about Fol. 86. Wherein I consider, First that the
speculative opinions he speaks of are not about the eternal decrees of God
only, or especially above all others, as here by cunning carriage it is
pretended. For the words run thus; It can be no blemish to them to revise
their Doctrine, and to abate the rigor of certain speculative opinions,
especially touching the eternal decrees of God, the quality of man's nature,
the use of works, wherein some of their chief Authors have come to such an
utter opposition, etc So that the points of rigorous doctrine, which were to be
qualified in this Gentleman's judgment, are many, but especially three; The
first whereof is touching the eternal decrees of God, The second concerning
the quality of man's nature, The third concerning the use of Works: So that the
doctrine of Gods eternal decrees is not the point alone, the rigor whereof
especially is to be qualified in this Authors judgment, but this especial
care of qualification, is by him referred to the three points formerly
mentioned, and that indifferently. Secondly, Whereas this Author relates, that
this is delivered, not as out of the relators judgment only, but as out of the
judgment of men whom he commends for singular learning and Piety. I find no
such matter in the Relation that I have, though I have searched after it, both
by considering what went before, and what comes after, as far as he treats of
the same matter. Whether this comes in a second Edition I know not: in mine I
find no such thing. So that the weight of this motive hitherto, lies wholly
upon the authority of this Gentleman. And surely I should think it were nothing
hard to counterballance this authority to the full. And it may be he speaks
herein no other thing then wherein he was endoctrinated by his Tutor, as lately
an ingenious and grave divine, differing from us in the point of reprobation,
most ingeniously acknowledged, that he was brought into that opinion of his by
his Tutor, who was a Lutheran: And I doubt we have too many such amongst us. Of
late I have heard, that one of good place spared not openly to profess,
saying, Call us as we ought to be called, for we are Lutherans: I would we had
not too many Popish-hearted amongst us.

Thirdly, whereas this Gentleman advises us to revise the Doctrines, and this
Author accommodates it only to Gods eternal decrees; I have already performed
this, and qualified the rigor of some men's opinions thereabouts. For whereas
some have subordinated Gods decree of permitting sin, to the decree of
damnation, I have taken another course, and do maintain, that in no moment of
nature is the decree of damnation, before the decree of permitting final
perseverance in sin. Again, I presume this Gentleman's meaning is not, that
the doctrine of the Church of England is rigorous, as touching Gods eternal
decrees. I willingly profess, I desire no better trial of the truth of the
Doctrine I maintain hereabouts, next unto the Word of God, then to be tried by
the 17th Article of the Church of England, and by the Articles of the Church of
Ireland, set forth in the days of King James Thirdly, I would it were put unto
this Gentleman, if he be living, Whether in his Opinion, God of his free grace
does bestow faith and repentance on some, thereby to cure that natural
infidelity and hardness of heart, which is originally found in all, and of his
mere pleasure, he denies it unto other: Or whether finding some moral
difference or preparation in one more then in another, is hereupon moved to
give faith and repentance unto them, and deny it unto others. If he shall
acknowledge, that God does show his mercy to whom he will, that is, of his mere
pleasure, and denies it to whom he will, I am ready to profess, that let him
state Gods eternal decrees after what manner he will, I shall willingly
subscribe thereunto; provided it be suitable unto the former ground: and as for
the unsuitable nature thereof, if in case it so fall out, let the proof and
evident demonstration thereof, lie on me. But if his opinion be, that God
bestows faith and repentance on man, moved thereunto by some moral
preparation, which he finds in one, rather then in another, I appeal to the
Lutherans themselves, whether this be not in plain terms no better then
Pelagianisme.

As for his calling their opinions in this point, speculative opinions (as this
Author would have us observe) I am willing to observe it: and withal I think,
he does it with better judgment, then this Author does in calling them
practical.

And whereas it is pretended, that our Divines have been carried into these
opinions of theirs, in opposition to Popish Doctrine, This is so out of season
in these days (notwithstanding the raw judgment of this Author) that our
Arminians spare not to profess (as formerly mentioned) and charge us to our
face, that we have learned this doctrine of ours, out of the Writings of
Papists. And Grevincovius, against Amesius, spares not to pronounce, that They
may with better credit follow the Jesuits, then We the Dominicans, considering
that the Dominicans are the great Administrators of the Inquisition in Spain.
This is delivered as touching the point of grace and Free Will: but as touching
the point of election and reprobation absolute, I can show under the hand of an
Arminian, that herein there is no material difference between the Dominicans,
and most part of the Jesuits; so little difference there is between the Gratia
Praedeterminans of the one, and the Gratia Congrua of the other. So that if
this be true, it is not probable, that hereby we scandalize the judicious and
learned Papists; and what those other Churches are which we scandalize,
excepting Churches Lutheran, either this Author knows not, or is well content
to dissemble it, to wit, the Churches of Socinians and Anabaptists. And how do
we more scandalize the Churches Lutheran herein, then they scandalize us? Was
it ever known, that by mere differing in Opinion from other Churches, Christian
men were said to scandalize them? Or if it were so, must not the scandal in
this case, be equal on both sides?

As for the leaving many of our own very ill satisfied, why should that seem
strange? What does Carryer write of many well known to him in this our Church
of England, of the same mind with himself, some Papists, some Lutherans? And
may there not be as many amongst the Lutherans, as ill satisfied with the
doctrine commonly received amongst them, save that they are far more forward,
to excommunicate all such, as soon as they appear, then We? Besides all this,
The point of scandal is brought in very unseasonably; For if it be a truth
that we maintain and profess, if any are scandalized by it, it is a scandal
taken, not given: God forbid we should grow so profane, as to account it a
scandalous thing to make profession of Gods truth; especially this truth we
maintain being so near to a clear opposition to Pelagianisme, a Heresy
condemned by the Church above 1200 years ago.

When Frederick Duke of Woortenberg exhorted his Divines to acknowledge Beza,
and his Company for Brethren, and to declare it by giving them their hands; The
answer of refusal was made by Jacobus Andreas a most bitter enemy, and one
whom Beza describes, tanquam virum sanguinarium, and his carriage throughout
was most imperious. And it becomes an Arminian spirit well, to make the rancour
of his malicious heart, a rule wherebyto cry down the doctrine which he
abhorred. With a far better grace might a Papist cry down our faith, opposite
to the doctrine of the Church of Rome, by the Popes abhorring it, and damning
of it to the pit of hell. For surely it is fit he should be of far more
authority then Jacobus Andreas; not to speak of the Anathematization of it in
the Council of Trent, nor of the common argument of Papists, in that they deny
that we can be saved, many amongst us are of opinion, that a Papist can be
saved, therefore better to be a Papist then a Protestant; yet surely it is in
the power of our corruption to requite malice with malice, and as much to
scorn with our heels their Brotherhood, as they ours. But if through the
grace of God, we do not give our selves leave to requite their malice, if that
be no scandal to themselves, there is no cause why it should be any scandal
unto us. In Sir Edwin Sands about Fol. 59. there is such a relation as this,
Though the Princes and Heads of the weaker sides in those parts both of
Palsgrave and Landsgrave, have with great wisdom and judgment (to aslack
those flames) imposed silence on that point, to the Ministers of the one Party,
hoping that the charity and discretion of the other sort, would have done the
like: yet it falls out otherwise, that Lutheran Preachers rage hitherto in
their Pulpits. Now let Arminians if they think good, conclude herehence, that
seeing there was so little charity and discretion, in the Lutheran Preachers,
it becomes them in their writings and Conclusions, to show as little charity
and discretion as they for their hearts; and that grace of God which they
fashion to themselves, will bear them out in this, it being merely the power
of their own free-wills. But this is not all I have to say in answer hereunto.

The phrase in Osiander is not, errorum teterrimorum, but haerescon
teterrimarum, of which this Author says, they reckoned this for one. And let
him speak out and tell us, what were the others. Was not the denial of
Consubstantiation another? As also the denial of the lawfulness of that
Baptism, which was administered by Women; (the practice whereof King James
reformed in our Book of Common Prayer:) As also their not concurrence with them
in opinion about the Person of Christ, which by their Ubiquitary Chimaera (as
Sir Edwin Sands call it) they do miserably deforme. These and other such like
were the errors, whereof this Author says, Beza and his Fellows were proved
to be guilty of in this Conference, for so I take his meaning, pronouncing
thereby sentence tanquam ex Cathedra Judicis; or the Lutheran Party throughout
in that Conference: which Conference was not of Predestination alone, but de
Caena Domini, de Persona Christi, de Imaginibus, de Baptismo, and last of all
de Praedestinatione.

Yet I have not done with this. For I beseech you consider, whether this
Author, or his Oracle, be not miserably deceived in all this, and that these
teterrimae Haereses are not such as Iacobus Andreas with his Lutheran party,
laid to the charge of Beza and his Brethren, but rather such as Beza and his
Brethren, laid to the charge of the Lutherans; and that not in this Conference,
but in their Writings, in Scriptis, so goes the relation. Whereas this
Conference was not by writing, but only by word of mouth; Iacobus Andreas not
enduring to give way to Beza's motion as touching the consigning of that which
they delivered in writing under their hands. For the relation in Osiander runs
thus; Ad haec D. Iacobus respondit, Woortenbergicos Theologos Deum oraturos, ut
Bezae and ipsius Collegis oculos mentis aperiat. Ut autem illis dextram
fraternitatis praebeant non ignor are illos quam horribilium errorum and
teterrimarum haereseo^ in suis Scriptis coram Fcclesia ipsos reos egerint;
Ideoque se mirari quomodo eos pro fratribus agnoscere possint aut velint, aut
little fraternitatem expetant, si pro talibus agnoscant, qui damnatas Haereses
ab Orco revocent ut Ecclesiae Dei obtendant. Now these words though at first
sight they may seem to be referred, either to the Woortenbergers as accusing
Beza and his Brethren, of such errors and heresies; yet the words following,
Ideoque se mirari quamodo eos pro fratribus agnoscere possint aut velint, aut
eorum fraternitatem expetant, si pro talibus agnoscant, qui damnatas Haereses
ex Orco revocent: these words I say do far more incline to signify, that
Beza and his Brethren, laid these horrible errors and heresies to the charge
of the Lutherans; and therefore the Lutherans wondered, how they could desire
their Brotherhood, whom they accounted such horrible Heretics; rather then
the Lutheran party, should wonder how they should affect Brotherhood with Beza,
seeing they neither did affect any such, and if they had it was not fit they
should wonder at their own actions. But that which follows puts it out of all
question; where comes in manifestly, what the Lutheran Party conceived of the
Doctrine of Beza implying thereby, what Beza and his Fellows conceived of the
Lutherans Doctrine, was formerly expressed; the words following are these,
Contra vero in quibus and quam tetris erroribus ipsi versentur (that is Beza
and his company) hac Collatione iis demonstratum esse: In quibus cum adhuc
perseverent ipsos intelligere quod eos pro fratribus agnoscere non possint. In
which words Andreas gives the reason why he and his Fellows cannot acknowledge
Beza and his fellows for brethren, because they maintained, tetros errores (as
he calls them;) for proof whereof he appeals to the present Conference. And
this being delivered on the contrary part to that which is delivered before, as
appears by the very first word, Contra vero, it follows, that in the former
part was set down, the reason why Beza and his fellows, should not desire the
fraternity of the Lutheran party, to wit, because they laid to the Lutherans
charge, that they maintained horrible errors and most pestilent Heresies, for
proof whereof, he appeals not to this present Conference, which was carried
wholly by word of mouth, but to their Writings. This being clearly the meaning
of Andreas, it is apparent, that the charge laid by Beza and his fellows, upon
the Lutherans, was of fouler crimes, by Andreas his relation, then was the
charge laid by Andreas upon Beza and his Brethren. For Andreas charged Beza
only with, errores tetros; but Beza and his are said to have charged the
Lutherans with horribiles errores, and haereses teterrimas. So that this Author
does miserably mistake his own evidences, and shamefully abuses himself
first, and others after him, if they will be abused by him. And whether he has
not taken it from some Achates of his upon trust I know not; and if it be so
that some Achates has helped him hereunto, certainly he has not proved Fidus
Achates in this.

In the close, it will not be amiss to show, how Mr Mason of St Andrews
Undershaft in London, alleges this carriage of Jacobus Andreas, as a
testimony of the Lutheran uncharitableness, in comparison with the charitable
condition of their opposites, in a small Treatise of Contentment in Gods gifts.
page 19. And shall their uncharitableness plead for the truth of their way, or
be any just argument, of the untruth of our way, in any sober and wise man's
judgment.

Of Hemingius his leaving his own side, I never heard or read before, unless
that of a Papist he became a Protestant. But the difference is well known
between the rigid and moderate Lutherans, and these are called by the other
Semi-Calviniani. And what I pray has Hemingius deserved, that his authority
should be greater then the authority of Zuinglius, Calvin, Junius; Zanchius,
Piscator. The Lutherans themselves (I suppose) will hardly think him worthy to
be remembered the same day with Martin Luther. And as for Martin Luthers
doctrine herein, to my judgment, he is far more express and resolute then
Calvin, and I find that Beza in his Conference of Mompelgard, does sometimes
twit his opposites with Luthers Doctrine, whereunto throughout that Conference,
I do not find they answer any thing at all.

When he says, It is a Morsel, which the greatest part of the Christian
Churches cannot swallow; What a wild course does he take in these his Motives.
Must we for every doctrine of ours, examine whether the most part of Christian
Churches do embrace it yea or no? Why should we not then run out in this
our search, and enquire, what is the Moscoviticall and Grecian Faith, what the
Ethiopian, and Abyssine, and so proceed in our contemplative perambulations,
all the World over, and what we have found preached unto our people also, to
their more profound, and substantial edification, if they list to believe us
upon our word. But I suppose he looked no farther then to this Western World,
secluding the new discoveries within the last hundred years or somewhat more.
And very confidently he must exclude all Popish Churches, or presume they are
for him in this. Yet as I said, the very last Arminian, I have had to deal
with, has told me to my face, that my Doctrine of absolute Reprobation, I have
learned it of the Papists; and another to this purpose, there is no material
difference between the Gratia Congrua of the Jesuits, and Cratia
praedeterminans of the Dominicans. And secluding Popish Churches, I know not
who they are, whom he calls the greatest part of the Christian Churches. Be it,
that the Lutheran Churches are a greater Party, then the Churches of the
Calvinists (which is more then I find in Sir Edwin Sands his Relation.) Now
suppose the number of the Calvinists and their power were greater then that of
the Lutherans; ask I pray any Lutheran in the World whether that were any
reasonable motive unto him to change his Religion and turn Calvinist? If it be
of no weight to persuade them, why should it be of any moment to prevail with
us?

I come now to the Fourth and last of these Motives.

DISCOURSE. The Fourth Motive. Its affinity with the old exploded and condemned
Errors of the Stoics and Manichees.
THe Opinion of the Stoics was, that all actions and events were inevitable,
and determined, either by the revolutions of the Heavens, and the qualities of
the Stars, which reign at men's births, or by the Concatenation of natural
things, and the disposition of the first matters of all things, being so put
together from eternity, that one thing must needs follow another as it does,
and the Materia Prima being so disposed, that all things cannot successively
come to pass otherwise then they do, but must of necessity be as they are,
even invito Deo, though God would have some things to be otherwise then they be.

The Manichees held, that all men's actions, good or evil, were determined too:
Good actions by a good God, who was the author of all good things created, and
of all good actions that fell out in the World: Evil actions by an Evil God,
who was the primum principium malt, the first and principal author of all
evil things that were extant in the world.

The Maintainers of the absolute decree, do say one of these two things;
either that all actions natural and moral, good and evil, and all events
likewise are absolutely necessary, or that all men's ends (at least) are
unalterable and undeterminable by the power of their wills, which is upon the
matter all one. For in vain is our freedom in the actions, if the end which
they drive at be pitched and determined, since, Omnis actio est propter finem,
All actions are done for the ends sake, that it might be obtained by them,
which without them could not.

Now in these three Opinions, we may note two things.

1. The substance and formality of them, which is an unavoidablenesse of men's
actions and ends whatsoever they be; In this all of them agree and holding that
in all things, undeclinable fates, and insuperable necessity do domineere. And
therefore Melancthon does not slack in many of his common Places, to call this
absolute decree, Fatum Stoicum, Tabulas Parcarum, and to charge the Church of
Geneva (the great defender of it) with a labor to bring in the Stoics
errors, as we may see in a certain Epistle of Melancthons to Peucer, where he
speaks thus, Scribit ad me Laetius de Stoico Fato usque adeo litem Genevae
moveri, ut quidam in carcerem conjectus sit propterea quod a Zenone differret.
O Misera Tempora! Doctrina salutis peregrinis quibusdam dubitationibus
obscuratur. And Beza too speaking of Melancthon says, Philippus de his rebus
itascribere caeperat, ut Genevenses quasi Stoicorum Fatum invehentes notare
quibusdam videatur.

2. The Circumstances or the grounds of their Opinions. The Stoics derive this
necessity from the Stars or first matter, the Manichees from duo prima
principia aeterna and coeterna, and these last from the peremptory decree of
Almighty God, so that in this they differ, but in this difference, the Stoics
and the Manichees in some respects have the better. For it is better to derive
the necessity of evil actions, or unhappy events from an evil God, or from
the course of nature, then from the decree of that God who is infinitely good.
The substance of their Opinions is all one, the ground wherein they differ is
but accidental to their error.

If it be so, for this very reason alone may this doctrine of absolute
reprobation be suspected, because these dreams of the Stoics were exploded by
the best Philosophers of all sorts: and this of the Manichees was generally
cried down by the Fathers, not only as foolish, but as impious and unworthy of
entertainment in a Christian heart, or Christian Commonwealth, not so much for
any thing circumstantiall in it, but because it made all things and events
necessary, and so plucked up the roots of virtue, planted vice, and left no
place for just rewards or punishments.

These are my Reasons of the first sort.

TWISSE Consideration.
OUR Doctrine I see is cried down, not only as infamous, but also as Stoicall,
and Manichaicall. Now I had thought the infamy of it had consisted only in the
Stoicality of it, and it is no way fit to coordinate the Genus with the
Species, in multiplying criminations. But I remember what the Poet observes to
fall out sometimes, namely, that,

Accedit fervor capiti numerusque lucernis. It calls to my remembrance a story
that Mr Bastard sometimes told my good friend D. Hoskins, it was of a neighbor
that came to him complaining of a friend of his, that had lost all his five
Senses; as for example, his sight and his seeing, and so proceeded in his
amplification: with whom Mr Bastard as it were, condoling, answered, Though he
had lost his fight, yet if he had retained his seeing, there had been some
comfort. True Sir quoth the plain fellow. In like sort, I might say, that
though our Doctrine in this point be Stoicall, yet if it were not infamous
there were some comfort in it, but the heavy crimination laid to our charge is,
that it is not only Stoicall, but infamous also. But let this be our comfort,
that nothing herein is laid to our charg, which was not laid to the charg of
Austin, many hundred years ago. This Prosper testifies after Austins death, to
have been the practice of the Pelagians. Prout sibi obnoxias aliquorum aures
opportunasque repererint, scripta ejus quibus error Pelagianorum impugnatur,
Prosp. Epist. ad Ruffin.
infamant, dicentes, eum liberum arbitrium peni^us submovere and sub gratiae
nomine necessitatem praedicare fatalem. Neither was he free from this reproach
while he lived, as appears by diverse passages; as Contr. duas Epistol.
Pelagiani. lib. 2. cap. 5. Sub nomine, inquiunt, gra^^ae ita fatum astruunt, ut
dicant, quia nisi Deus invito and reluctanti homini in^piraverit boni and
ipsius imperfecti cupiditatem, nec a malo declinare, nec bonum posset arripere.
This is the objection; His Answer follows in these words. Nec sub nomine
gratiae Fatum asserimus, quia nullis hominum meritis dicimus Dei gratiam
antecedi. Si autem quibusdam omnipotentis Dei voluntatem placet Fati nomine
nurcupari, profanas quidem verborum novitates evitamus, sed de verbis
contendere non amamus. And cap. 6. Fatum qui affirmant de syderum positione ad
tempus quo concipitur quisque vel nascitur, quas Constellationes vocant, non
solum actus and eventa, veram etiam ipsas nostras voluntates pendere
contendunt. Dei vero gratia non solum omnia sydera and omnes caelos, utrum
etiam omnes Angelos supergreditur. Deinde Fati assertores and bona and mala
hominum Fato tribuunt. Deus autem in malis hominum meritis eorum debita
retributione prosequitur; bona vero per indebitam gratiam misericordi voluntate
largitur: utrumque faciens non per stellarum temporale consortium, sed per suae
severitatis and bonitatis aeternum altumque consilium. Neutrum ergo pertinere
videmus ad Fatum. And cap. 8. Iam de Gratia and Fato quam inani alloquuntur
ostendimus. Nunc illud est quod debemus advertere, utrum invito and reluctanti
homini Deus inspiret boni cupiditatem, ut jam non sit reluctans, non sit
invitus, sed consentiens bono, and volens bonum. In like sort, the Pelagians
charged Austin with Manicheisme, De Nupt. and Concupisc. lib. 2. cap. 3. to
whom he answers thus, Quid obtendis ad fallendum communis dogmatis tegmen, ut
operias proprium crimen, unde vobis inditum est nomen, atque ut nefario
vocabulo terras imperites, dicis, ne igitur vocentur Haeretici, fiant
Manichaei. And more at large, Contr. duas Epist. Pelag. ad Bonifacium, cap. 2.
Manichaei dicunt Deum bonum non omnium natuarrum esse creatorem: Pelagiani
dicunt, Deum non esse omnium aetatum in hominibus mundatorem, salvatorem,
liberatorem. Catholica utrosque redarguit, and contra Manichaeos defendens Dei
creaturam ne ab illo instituta negetur ulla creatura; and contra Pelagianos ut
in omnibus aetatibus perdita requiratur humana natura.

2. Manichaei carnis concupiscentiam non tanquam accidens vitium, sed tanquam
naturam ab aeternitate malam vituperant: Pelagiani eam tanquam nullum vitium
sed natural sit, bonum insuper laudant. Catholica utrosque redarguit,
Manichaeis dicens non natura, sed vitium est; Pelagianis dicens, Non a Patre,
sed ex mundo est, ut eam velut malam valetudinem sanari utr^que permittant,
desinendo illi tanquam insanabilem credere, isti tanquam laudabilem praedicare.

3. Manichaei negant, homini bono ex libro arbitrio fuisse initium mali;
Pelagiani dicunt etiam hominem malum sufficienter habere liberum arbitrium ad
faciendum praeceptum bonum. Catholica utrosque redarguit, and illis dicens,
Fecit Deus hominem rectum; and istis dicens, si vos Filius liberaverit, vere
liberi eritis.

4. Manichaei dicunt, animam particulam Dei, naturae malae commixtione habere
peccatum; Pelagiani dicunt, animam justam non quidem particulam, sed creaturam
Dei, etiam in ista corruptibili vita non habere peccatum. Catholica utrosque
redarguit, Manichaeis dicens, Aut facile arborem bonam, and fructum ejus bonum,
aut facile arborem malam and fructum ejus malum; Pelagianis dicens, si
dixerimus quia non habemus peccatum, nosmetipsos seducimus. His morbis inter se
contrariis Manichaei Pelagianique confligunt dissimili voluntate, simili
vanitate, seperati opinione diversa, sed propinqui mente perversa. Iam vero
gratiam Christi simul oppugnant, Baptismum ejus simul evacuant, Carnem ejus
simul inhonorant, sed etiam hoc modis causisque diversis. Nam Manichaei meritis
naturae bonae, Pelagiani autem meritis voluntatis bonae perhibent divinitus
subveniri. Illi dicunt, debet hoc Deus laboribus membrorum suorum: Isti dicunt,
debet hoc virtutibus suorum. Utrisque ergo merces non imputatur secundum
gratiam, sed secundum debitum.

But come we to the consideration of the particulars delivered by this Author.

1. As touching the opinion of the Stoics and Manichees. 2. As touching the
Parallel he makes, between their opinion and ours, in the point of
Predestination.

1. The Chaldeans and Astrologers, did altogether place Fate, in the
influencies of the stars, and because those glorious bodies, did infatuate
the World with a show of Divinity (which the Lord Labored to prevent in the
Jews. Deutr. 4.) no marvail if the vulgar sort did acknowledge no other fate,
but that. As Austin says, De Civit. Dei lib. 5. cap. 1. Id (Fatum) homines
quando audiunt usitata loquendi confuetudine non intelligunt, nisi vim
positionis syderum, qualis est quando quis nascitur sive concipitur. But I do
not find that the Stoics did thus distinguish, but by their Series Causarum,
they comprehended all causes caelestiall or sublunary. Ramus indeed conceived
such a difference between Possidonius and Chrysippus both Stoics, but Turnebus
makes bold to tell him, that herein he erred. Quod autem Possidonium dicis
studio Astrologiae oblectatum, Fatum syderibus attribuisse in eo peccas, quod
aliam ejus quam Chrysippi sententiam putas, nec eam totam complecteris. Nam si
in simul aegrotantibus fratribus causam esse dicebat in syderum and caeli
constitutione and affectione, non tamen idcirco in aliis rebus Fatum non esse
judicabat. Nay he professes that according to all the Stoics, Fatum was God
himself and nature; and that by Fatum they understood, omnem naturae
contagionem, which was Cicero's phrase. As indeed the whole frame of nature is
knit together per contactum, which Cicero called Naturae contagionem. And he
proves as much of Possidonius out of Cicero De Divinatione. For Quintus therein
professing according to the opinion of Possidonius, that all force and course
of Divination, was derived from God, from destiny, and from nature, he
concludes therehence, that all kind of artificial and natural Divination,
were in his opinion comprehended under the notion of Fate. And out of Cicero's
second Book of Divination shows, that whereas Possidonius his opinion was, Vim
quandam sentientem and divinam quae tota confusa sit mundo, ad hostiam
deligendam ducere. He concludes thus; Satis ut opinor, significat Possidonium
non in syderibus tantum Fatum posuisse, sed per omnem mundi continuationem and
naturae conjunctionem, ordinem seriemque causarum permanare credidisse. Idem
Possidonius (says he) (...) scripserat, quod non fecisset, si in syderibus
tantum Fatum esse sensisset. And like as Possidonius did not insist only in the
stars, for the confirmation of Fate, so neither did Chrysippus in inferior
causes. Necessitatem nature acutus interpres (he taxes Ramus) ad Chrysippum
pertinere astrorum ad Possidonium credidisti; errorem errore cumulasti. Nam nec
Possidonius in solis astris Fatum ponebat sed in tota naturae contagione, ut
supra docui: and Chrysippus in eadem naturae contagione, qua etiam astra
continentur, quod non intellexisti. And that he proves out of Cicero answering
Chrysippus in this manner. Ut igitur ad quasdam res natura loci pertinet, ad
quasdam autem nihil: sie affectio astrorum valeat, sivis ad quasdam res; ad
omnes certe non valebit. Chrysippum enim alloquitur (says Turnebus) ut vel
puero notum est, ut me tui pudeat and pigeat, qui Possidonium intelligis. Thus
he disciplines Ramus, and proceed farther, saying, Chrysippum autem in astrorum
constitutione, and affectione Fatum posuisse, audi ex Cicerone; si quis, verbi
causa orient Canicula natus est, is in mari non morietur. Vigila Chrysippe
etc. Nihil istud argumentum (thus Turnebus concludes herehence) nisi etiam in
astris Fatum poneret. So that the four opinions concerning Fate, related by
Ludovicus Vives in 4. lib. August. De Civit. Dei cap. 8. and that out of Picus
Mirandula, lib. 2. Contra Astrologos; The first whereof is said to be Nature;
The second, a Series of causes necessary knit together, the Third the Stars,
the Fourth the Execution of Divine Decree. I say all these make but one Fatum
with the Stoics, yea with all the Stoics in the judgment of Turnebus. And
Austin De Civit. Dei lib. 5. cap. 8. expressly includes the will of God within
that Series of causes, which was accounted Fatum in the Opinion of the Stoics,
and upon that ground approves of it. As for necessitation by reason of
disposition of the Matter Prime, whereby things were brought to pass in
despite of God; I find no such thing, neither in Austin, nor in those that
comment upon him, Ludovicus Vives and Coqueus, nor in Ramus or Turnebus; but
rather to the contrary in Ludovicus Vives, who distinguishes out of the
opinion of Plato, as touching one God whom he made Principem Parentemque
caeterorum; the Caeteri belike were such spirits as we call Angels. And that
Maximi Dei leges were inevitabiles, and this was called Necessity, and such a
Necessity, cui ne Deos quidem (that is inferior spirits) resistere posse. Quae
vero ab Astris geruntur, talia interdum esse ut evitari sapientia, industria,
labor queant, in quo sua est Fortuna. Quae vero certis causis progrederentur
ac permanerent fixa, id dici Fatum quod tamen necessitatem non afferat
electioni.

That the Manichees maintained two supreme and coeternall causes of all things,
we read; the one the cause of Good, the other of Evil: and that every creature
was a substantial part of one or both; and that man in his nature was
compounded of both, and that his corruption was essential from the supreme
Author of evil, and not such as acrewed to him of disobedience, We read. But
of their opinion that all things were determined by them, both good, and evil,
I no where read, but in this Authors Legend. Danaeus has commented upon Austin
de Haeresibus, and to every Head of Heresy draws what he has read thereof in
other Authors. But I find no mention at all of this Article amongst 21
shameful errors of theirs which he reckons up. The 19th is this, Voluntatem
male agendi, quod vocant liberum arbitrium, nob is a natura ipsa insitam, non
rebellione nostra accersitam, vel ex inobedientia natam; Quanquam homines
propria voluntate peccant. And where Austin answers the criminations against
the Catholics made by the Pelagians, I find no mention at all of this. He
should have showed from whom he takes this, that understanding their Opinion
aright, we might the better judge of the reproachful comparison which he makes.

2 To the consideration of which comparison of his, I now address my self. He
proposes two things, one whereof he says, must needs be maintained.

The First whereof is this; That all actions natural and Moral, good and
evil, and all events likewise, are absolutely necessary.

Concerning which, I say First; I have cause to doubt that this Author
understands not aright, the very notions of absolute necessity, and necessity
not absolute. There is no greater necessity, then necessity of nature. And this
necessity is twofold; either in Essendo, in being, or in Operando, in working.
God alone is necessary in being, and his being is absolutely necessary; it
being impossible he should not be, as not only we believe, but School Divines
demonstrate, and that with great variety, of evident, and curious conclusions.
As for the other necessity, which is in respect of operation: First, this is no
way incident unto God, speaking of operation ad extra, and secluding the
mysterious emanations within the Divine Nature; such as are the Generation of
the Son by the Father, and the wonderful Procession of the Holy Ghost from
the Father and the Son. But ad extra this necessity of operation is only
found in the creature, and that only in such creatures, as by necessity of
nature are determined one way: as fire to burn; heavy things to move
downwards, and light things upwards; the Sun, Moon, and stars to give
light; and the heavens to turn round; all natural Agents in a word distinct
from rational are thus determined, to wit, to work that, whereunto they are
inclined by necessity of nature; but yet so that being finite, they are subject
to superior powers, and thereby obnoxious to impediment most of them, even to
powers create; all of them to power increate. Whence it comes pass that no
work of theirs is absolutely necessary, especially in respect of God, who can
either set an end to all when he will, or restrain their operations at his
pleasure. We know the Three Noble Children, when they came forth of the fiery
oven, had not so much as any smell of the fire upon them. And therefore Durand
professes that these things which are commonly accounted to come to pass most
necessarily, do indeed come to pass merely contingently, in respect of the
will of God.

Nevertheless we willingly profess, that upon supposition of the will of God,
that this or that shall come to pass, it follows necessarily that such a
thing shall come to pass; like as upon supposition, that God knows such a
thing shall come to pass, it follows necessarily, that such a thing shall
come to pass; but how? not necessarily: but either necessarily according as
some things are brought to pass by natural agents, working necessarily after
the manner aforesaid; or contingently and freely according as some things are
brought to pass, by rational agents, working contingently and freely. And
therefore as touching the Question of the Schools about the root of
contingency, Aquinas and Scotus concur in resolving it into the Will of God,
but with this difference; Scotus relates it into the will of God as a free
agent. Aquinas resolves it into the Will of God, as an efficacious agent. For
the will of God is so efficacious, that he can effectually procure, both that
things necessary shall be brought to pass necessarily, and things contingent,
contingently; and according he has provided congruous causes hereof, to wit,
both agents natural for the produceing of necessary things necessarily, and
agents rational for the producing of contingent things, contingently and
freely. Thus God preordained that Josias should burn the Prophets bones upon
the Altar, that Cyrus should proclaim liberty to the Jews, to return into
their Country; yet what sober Divine has made doubt, whether Josias and Cyrus
did not herein, that which they did freely. And as in doing, so in abstaining
from doing. For God ordained that Christ's bones should not be broken; as also
that when the Jews, all the Males, came up to the Lord thrice in the year to
Jerusalem, None of their neighbors should desire their land. Exodus 34. 24. Yet
what sober man should make question, whether the Soldiers did non as freely
abstain from breaking Christ's bones, as from ought else, and so likewise the
bordering Nations did as freely abstain, from invading the land of Israel. And
how often is this phrase used in Scripture, Necesse est, of some things coming
to pass, which yet came to pass as contingently and freely, as ought else.
And unless this be granted, that Gods determination is nothing prejudicial to
the freedom of the creatures will, either we must deny faith and repentance to
be the gifts of God, or that they are works produced freely, and so every
action pleasing in the sight of God. For the Scripture expressly professes,
that God it is, who works in us every thing that is pleasing in his sight.
And whatsoever God works in us, or bestows upon us in time, the same he
determined, to work in us, and to bestow upon us from everlasting. For he
works all things according to the counsel of his will Ephesians. 1. 11. and the
counsel of his Will was everlasting, it being the same with God himself.

Now I come to the second.

2. And that is this. That all men's ends are unalterable and indeterminable by
the power of their Wills; and this he says is upon the matter all one.

1. Now this is most untrue, there being a vast difference between the actions
of men, and the ends of men; The ends of men being the works of God. And what a
monster shall he be in the Church of God, that with Vorstius shall dare to
affirm, that all the works of God, were not determined from everlasting; or
being determined, they are alterable, and that in such sort, as to be otherwise
determinable by the wills of men; especially considering that the very acts of
men's wills, being wrought by God, (as all sides now a days confess) it
consequently follows that they were also determined from everlasting, by the
Will and Counsel of God. What should I allege the 11th Article of Ireland for
this? God from all eternity did by his unchangeable Counsel ordain,
whatsoever in time should come to pass: yet so as thereby no violence is
offered to the wills of the reasonable creatures, and neither the liberty nor
contingency of second causes is taken away, but established rather. There is no
Arminian that I know dares deny, either that every act of man is wrought by
God, or that, look what God does work in time, the same he did before all time
decree, and that from everlasting. I know there is a main, and a most
Atheistical difference between us on one part, but I do not find them willing
to show their horns directly therein, but carry the matter so, as if they
would obtrude upon us the acknowledgement, either of the temporal (not
eternal) condition of decrees divine, or at least of their alterable nature;
whereas themselves dare not plainly manifest themselves, to be of any such
Atheistical belief. Let us instance in particular: Let the salvation of some,
and damnation of others, be the ends this Author means. Now dare any of them
with open face profess, that the salvation of the elect, and damnation of the
reprobate was not from everlasting determined by God. Be the supreme ends of
God concerning man, the manifestation of his glory in the way of mercy on some,
in the way of vindicative justice on others. Dare any of them profess, that
any of these ends are not from everlasting determined by God; or being so
determined, dare they profess, that these divine decrees are alterable, or
possible to be undetermined by the will of the creature? What a prodigious
assertion were either of these? If they dare not say, Gods will is changeable,
What an unshamefac'd course is this, to obtrude upon us an alterable, that is,
a changeable condition of Gods decrees? But perhaps you may say, here is no
mention at all made of Gods decrees, but of man's ends. And I willingly confess
there is not. And I am persuaded, this Author dares not in plain terms
profess, that Gods decrees are alterable. But hereby you may perceive, and
have a manifest document of the illusions of Satan, and how men's carnal
affections, which are more in love with error then truth, do make them to
shut their eyes against the one, and open them unto the other. It were a very
harsh thing to say plainly, that Gods decrees are alterable, and that being
determined by him, they might be undone, or made undetermined by the wills of
men. Therefore the Devil finds a means to draw us, to entertain the same
blasphemous opinion, not barefaced, but hoodwickt as it were, and that is by
changing the phrase. For though it be uncouth to hear of an alterable
condition of Gods decrees, yet it seems nothing harsh to discourse of the
alterable condition of men's ends. But give me leave to unmask the Witch, and
make it appear how the Devil gulls us in this.

Men's ends are either so called, as intended by man himself, or as appointed
by God. If this Author speak of men's ends, as intended by man himself, we
willingly grant, that they are alterable at his pleasure; as for example, Man
intends one thing to day, he may intend another thing to morrow, he intends one
thing this hour, he may intend another thing the next, and at his pleasure
reverse his former intentions. And no marvail, considering that man partly is
of a fickle disposition in respect of his affections, studious of change, and
subject to innovation as the Moon; partly of an improvident disposition, he
knows not what a Year, what a Month, what a Day, what an hour may bring
forth. And therefore though never so wise and constant in his courses, yet may
he have just cause to change his resolutions and purposes. But of such ends of
man, to wit, as intended by man, it is manifest this Author speaks not.

But of ends appointed by God, these be the ends he will have to be alterable
and determinable anew by the wills of men, which cannot be without the
alteration and change of Gods purposes and intentions, which is as much as to
say, without the change and revocation of Gods decrees. And an end not yet
actually existing, but only in intention, can admit of no other alteration then
in intention, which this Author considering not, though perhaps he abhorres to
say Gods decrees are changeable and alterable, and shuts out so uncouth an
assertion at the fore-doore, yet as it were by a back-doore to receive it in,
and in the dark and mufled, or veyled only with a different phrase, a different
expression; Yet forthwith he takes a new course; For whereas by the word
unalterable, he did imply that Gods decrees concerning men's ends, should be of
an alterable condition; in the words following he changes his tone, and will
not have the ends of man to be determined by God at all, but left unto man to
be determined; as when he says, In vain is our freedom in the actions, if
the end which they drive at be pitched and determined. Whereby it is manifest,
he will not have the end whereunto men drive to be determined. And this end can
be no other then salvation; for that alone I take to be that whereto men drive,
and which they labor to attain, every one naturally seeking after Summum
bonum, after happiness. So that in the issue it comes to this, The salvation
of this Author is not yet determined by God, but left to be determined by his
will, and that I take to be in the way of a moving cause, and that moving cause
I guess to be, his final perseverance in faith and repentance, whereupon and
not till then, shall this man's salvation be determined by God, as much as to
say, that Gods decrees are as merely temporal as are the executions of them.
And herein this Author does exactly agree with Doctor Jackson perhaps being so
happy as to understand him, or perhaps being so happy as to light upon an
interpreter of him some one that breaths the same spirit of opposition to Gods
truth, and that after the same way. For sometimes the Doctor pleads for a
revocable condition of the divine decrees. For the Pope never binds his hands
by any Grant he makes; and why should God bind his hands by any decree he
makes? especially considering that God has more wisdom and goodness to
manage such authority then the Pope. But if it be dishonesty for a man to take
liberty to break his promises, I pray what goodness is required to the
managing thereof? Yet that Doctor keeps his course in discoursing of an
impotent immutability, and says, it is indecent to attribute any such
immutability unto God; whereas immutability is a notion which connotates no
power of doing at all, but only a power of suffering, and formally denotes the
negation thereof. And what madness is it to say, that the less power God has
of receiving change, the less power he has of working? Yet this is not all;
He has another device answerable to the latter course of this Author, and that
is, that Nothing, concerning any man's salvation or damnation, is determined by
God before he is borne, or before his death: and to that purpose he says that
God is still decreeing, as if hitherto he had not decreed ought. And would you
know of whom he learned this? Rogers in his exposition of the Articles of the
Church of England, a Book dedicated to Archbishop Bancroft, and allowed by the
lawful authority of the Church of England, writing upon the 17th Article, and
delivering his second proposition, collected therehence, in this form,
Predestination has been from everlasting; when he comes to set forth the
Adversaries of this truth, Those wrangling Sophisters, says he, are deceived,
who because God is not included within the compass of any time, but has all
things to come as present before his eyes, do say, that God he did not in the
time long ago past only, but still in the time present likewise does
Predestinate.

2. Consider we the reason he gives for so shameful an assertion, as touching
the alterable condition of Gods decrees, or as touching the ends of men, as yet
undetermined by God, In vain, says he, is freedom in the actions, if the end
which they drive at, be determined. Here, First, we have a wild phrase Freedom
in actions. For by freedom we understand an active power of working after a
certain manner, which power is found in the will, not in the actions. Secondly,
a bare avouching that unless God as yet has left the ends of men living
undetermined, or in case he has determined them, unless these determinations
of his be alterable, Freedom of Will is given in vain; as much as to say,
unless we admit of such monstrous assertions, the freedom of man's Will is in
vain. But we say this consequence is most untrue, and we give our reason for
it. For whether salvation or damnation be the ends he means, no creature is
capable of either, but only creatures rational; and the one being bestowed by
way of reward, and the other inflicted by way of punishment, each of these
presupposes freedom of Will in the parties thus proceeded with: Or whether
the ends are the manifestation of Gods vindicative and remunerative justice,
for the same reason now specified, each of these does necessarily bespeak
freedom of Will in them, who after either way are made useless on whom the
glory of God is to be manifested. When he adds saying Omnis actio is propter
sinem. This altogether concerns the ends intended, and proposed by the author
of the action, nothing concerns the ends proposed by another. And the ends of
a man proposed by himself, are either supreme or intermediate, still every
action deliberate (for so alone it holds) tends to one end or other, which man
himself intends. The supreme end of every one is his chief good; but as
touching that wherein this consists, all do not agree. Some place it in
wealth, some in pleasure, some in honor, some in virtuous life. By the light
of Grace we are taught, that as we are creatures, our end, which we should
propose unto our selves, is the glorifying of God our Creator, though there
were neither reward nor punishment. But if there be a glorious reward to be
gotten by it, and a dreadful punishment to be suffered of them, that seek the
satisfying of their own lusts, and not the glory of God, this is a double hedge
unto us, to keep us in the good ways of the Lord, and to move us to make
strait stepps unto him; but surely the end of the creature, still is the
glorifying or God that made him. God makes it his care to provide for us, let
our care be to glorify him; for seeing all things are from him, therefore all
things must be for him; and seeing we are reasonable creatures, and know this
we must go on, in conforming our selves hereunto, and seeking his glory. And
albeit this Author may conceive, that salvation is the end he aims at, yet can
I not believe that he makes damnation the end that any man drives at. Nothing
being fit to be a man's end, but that which has rationem Boni, which surely
damnation has not.

3. His Annotations as touching the three Opinions proposed by him, come to be
considered in the next place; and these are two.

1. The Substance and Formality of them, which, as he says is an
unavoidablenesse of men's actions and ends whatsoever they be. And in this, he
says, all of them agree, all holding that in all things, undeclinable Fates,
and insuperable necessity do domincere. Whereunto I answer, that this is
contradictory to his own premises, as touching the third Opinion. For against
the Maintainers of Gods absolute decree, he did formerly object only
disjunctively, that either all men's actions were absolutely necessary, that is
unavoidable, or at least, that men's ends were unavoidable; which is to infer,
that but one of them is avoidable; but here he professes (as upon that which
he had formerly delivered) that by the Third Opinion, both men's actions and
their ends were unavoidable. And as for the second Opinion of the Manichees, I
find no mention of the unavoidable condition, either of man's actions or ends at
all, in the Relation thereof, by those who have most studied their History. And
as for the Stoics, I no where find, that they denied the liberty of men's will,
or that it was in man's power, either to forbear the doing of that he does, or
to do the things he forbears to do; but rather the contrary, that they made
choice, some of them at least, (though Austin delivers it without any such
distinction) to exempt the wills of men from subjection unto Fate: though I
deny not, but that many vain discourses might be differently entertained by
them, having no better light to guide them, then the light of nature, and
wanting that which God has in great mercy vouchsafed unto us, the light of
grace, and that in very plentiful manner. Much less do I find by them, that
any thing came to pass, invito Deo. Though I willingly confess, that such a
generation has risen up in these days, affirming that God wills and
desires the salvation of all men, and yet the greater part of men are damned.
And what is to come to pass, invito Deo, if this be not, I willingly profess
I know not.

But Melancthon, he says, does not spare to call this absolute decree, Fatum
Stoicum, Tabulas Parcarum, and to charge the Church of Ceneva, with laboring
to bring in the Stoics errors, as appears by Melancthons Epistle to Peucer,
and Beza's confession in the life of Calvin. To all which I answer.

1. That this Author either was better read in Melancthon then in Luther, or no
so just matter could he find in Luther, to cry down the absolute nature of Gods
decrees.

2. Beza reports what Melancthon seems to some, and that Epistle of his to
Peucer might be their ground. Now therein he delivers his mind merely upon
Laelius his relation, which was this, De Stoico Fato usque adeo litem Genevae
moveri, ut Quidam in carcerem conjectus sit propterea quod a ^^one differret.
This I say is Laelius his relation made unto Melancthon, whereupon Melancthon
says no more then this, O Mijera tempora! doctrina salutis peregrinis
quibusdam disputationibus obscuratur.

3. Melancthon died four years before Calvin, the one Anno 1560. the other
1564. And therefore if he did pass any censure on the Church of Geneva, it was
in Calvin's days, many years before his death. Now Calvin and he were very
great: Melancthon so well known and esteemed by Calvin, that more then once he
appeals to Melancthons judgment. Once in the point De Caena Domini, mentioned
by Osiander, Hist. Eccles. Cent. 16. Anno 1558. page 666. which was but two
years before his death. Likewise in the point of Free Will and Predestination,
as appears by Calvin's Epistle unto him, prefixed to his Books, de Libero
Arbitrio, which he sent unto Melancthon: Was it ever known that Melancthon
passes any censure upon them?

4. When Grotius in like manner objected Melancthon, see I pray how Lubbertus
answers him, In Respon. ad Pietatem Grotii. Quod ad Melancthonem attinet,
erras si ipsam stare pro Remonstrantibus existimas, etc. Idem Melancthon in 9.
ad Romanos, Cur inquit nos ad Evangelium vocavit and non vocavit Alexandrum
Macedonem, Augustum, Socratem, Pomponium Atticum, qui non minus civiliter
vivebant quam nos. Hic necesse est causam rejicere in voluntatem Dei. Et Jacob
electus est, Esau reprobatus priusquam quicquam boni vel mali fecissent: Ergo
opera non erant causa, sed voluntas vocantis. Non addam hic, quomodo
cavillentur ista nonnulli. Tantum hoc meminerit Lector, si opera secutura in
vita erunt causa electionis, non licuit Apostolo dicere, Non ex operibus. Ex
his constat (sait Lubbertus) Melancthonem idem cum Calvino and Luthero de
praedestinatione sensisle. Fatetur hoc ipse Melancthon ad Calvinum; suo
(inquiens) haec cum tuis congruere, sed mea sunt (...), and ad usum
accommodata. Idem in Epistola ad Erasmum: Ego integra conscientia non possum
Lutheri dogmata damnare. He proceeds farther to show, the different Method used
by them in delivering the doctrine of Praedestination. Calvinus, says he, a
Priori docet, illos qui electi sunt, immutabili Dei consilio electos esse,
atque inde infert illos perire non posse. Melancthon vero a Posteriori docet,
nos ex vera fide and seria resipiscentia discere quod sumus electi, Ego credo
in Jesum Christum and serio resipisco, ergo sum electus: atque ita in ipsa re
consentiunt. Hanc enim Melancthonis argumentationem approbat Calvinus, and
illam Calvini approbat Melancthon, tantum abest, ut alter alterius doctrinam
rejiciat aut contemnat.

5. When I observed this relation made out of an Epistle of Melancthons unto
Calvin, I could not rest satisfied until I had seen the Epistle it self: at
length I found it amongst Calvin's, Epist. 49. Therein coming to the point, Ad
Quaestionem (says he) de praedestinatione habebam amicum Tubingae doctum
hominem Franciscum Stadianum, qui dicere solebat, se utrumque probare, Evenire
omnia ut divina providentia decrevit, and tamen esse contingentia; sed se haec
conciliare non posse. Here we have gotten one friend more then we looked for,
and that a friend of Melancthons also: And to what end does he make mention
hereof, but to give Calvin to understand, that with him at Tubing, there wanted
not such as concurred with him in opinion, and that as touching the eveniency
of all things, by the decree of Gods providence, which yet might well consist
with Contingency, though we are not able to reconcile these, such is the
mysterious nature of Gods providence. And herein Stadianus agrees with Cajetan,
and Alvarez. For Cajetan having professed that the distinctions devised by the
Learned, for the reconciling of Gods predestination with the liberty of man's
will, did not, quietare intellectum, thereupon he says, Ego captivo meum in
obsequium fidei; In quo (says Alvarez) doctissime and pi^ssime loquitur.
Melancthon goes on to represent his carriage in Teaching, Ego, says he, cum
Hypothesin hanc teneam, Deum non esse causam peccati nec velle peccatum, postea
contingentiam in hac nostra infirmitate judicii admitto, ut sciant rudes,
Davidem sua voluntate ultro ruere and eundem sentio, cum haberet spiritum
sanctum, potuisse cum retinere; and in ea lucta aliquam esse voluntatis
actionem. All these things he grants afterward, to agree with the Doctrine of
Calvin. But may not a man proceed farther? and to dispute hereof something more
accurately then this, He denies it not: Haec etiamsi subtilius disputari
possunt, tamen ad regendas mentes hoc modo proposita, accommodata videntur. In
the same manner he goes on, Accusemus ipsi nostram voluntatem cum labimur, non
quaeramus in Dei consilio causam and contra eum nos erigamus; sciamus Deum and
velle opitulari and adesse luctantibus (...) (inquit Basilius) (...) Yet I
presume no Arminian will conceive that Melancthon did not acknowledge this very
act of willing to be the work of God, considering the Apostle so expressly
professes, that God works in us both the Will and the deed, according to his
good pleasure; and Leo Sermon. 8. de Epiphan. Dubium non est hominem bona agentem
ex Deo habere and effectum operis and initium volumatis: and Fulgentius Epist.
4. Ab ipso (Deo) est initium bonae voluntatis. And if Melancthon had any
conceit opposite hereunto, yet let the Opinion of the Affrican Bishops prevail
in authority above Melancthon, who in their Synodicall Epistle write thus (as
it is alleged by our Divines Act. Synod. Dordrac. page 270) In vivificandis
hominibus Deus nullum initium humanae voluntatis expectat sed ipsam voluntatem,
bonam faciendo, vivificat. And drawing to an end, I do not write these things
(says Melancthon) to deliver dictates unto you, who are most learned and most
expert in the exercises of Piety. And truly I know (says he) that these things
do agree with yours, haec cum tuis congruere sed sunt (...), woven with a
thicker thread, and ad usum accommodata Thus Melancthon unto Calvin, having
received his Books sent unto him, and written of Free Will and Predestination.

5. Within two years after I find a Letter written by Calvin unto Melancthon,
wherein he professes his joy of their agreement, as touching the main point,
in that whereabout their opinions were asked, albeit with some difference in
certain particulars, it is Epist. 63. amongst those of Calvin's, and the words
are these. Deo autem maximas gratias agere non desino, qui dedit ut in ejus
quaestionis summa de qua rogati eramus, sententiae nostrae congruerent. Tametsi
enim paululum est discriminis in particulis quibusdam, de re tamen ipsa optime
inter nos convenit.

The second Annotation of this Author is, the circumstance or the ground of the
three opinions mentioned. The Stoics deriving their necessity from the Stars
or first matter; The Manichees from the two supreme causes; And the Authors of
the third, from the peremptory decree of Almighty God. And that in this
difference, the Stoics and the Manichees have the better, it being better (as
he says) to derive the necessity of evil actions, or unhappy events, from an
evil God, or from the course of nature, then from the decree of that God who
is infinitely good. The substance of the opinion is all one, the ground wherein
they differ, is but accidental to the error.

To this I answer.

1. Is it so indeed, Better to derive the necessity of unhappy events, from an
evil God, or from course of nature, then from the decree of God? Is not God
then to be accounted the author of evil in the way of punishment? Is there any
evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Or does it less become him
to be the author Amos 2. Ier. 9. 24.
of affliction then of prosperity? Does not the Lord in the same place, and in
the same manner profess, that he delights in the execution of judgment, as
well as of mercy?

2. As touching the necessity he speaks of, whether in good, or in evil
actions; consider I pray his carriage, He did not object unto us, that we made
all the actions of men absolutely necessary, but either so, or the ends of men
unavoidable. Yet here he supposes the former to serve his own turn in this
present crimination, he holds it up, as it were contrary to his own conscience.
We acknowledge the actions of men to be free, not one being performed by any,
but in such sort, that they had power to forbear it, and still have to forbear
the like: But upon supposition of Gods decree, either to work in us any thing,
that is pleasing in his sight (which to be his gracious course, the Apostle
expressly professes, Heb. 13. 20.) or to permit any particular evil, we
willingly profess, that as well upon this, as upon Gods foreknowledge, it
follows consequently that necesse est, that such a thing come to pass; but
how? not necessarily, but agreeable to the condition of our reasonable natures,
contingently and freely. And this Arminius in plain terms professes in the
point of evil, to wit, supposing God permits a man to will this or that evil;
Necesse est ut nullo argumentorum genere persuadeatur ad nolendum, Exam. page
153. But I will farther display the doctrine of these Arminians, and prove,
First, that no evil comes to pass, but that God did will it. Secondly, that
never was there any greater necessity known to the World, then that which these
men bring upon good and evil actions, a necessity that binds the Lord himself.

1. As touching the first; These words of Arminius are well known, Deus voluit
Achabum mensuram scelerum sucrum implere. But I will prove it by their Doctrine
of scientia Media: For hereby they maintain, that God foreseeth by what motives
sin will be hindered, or not hindered, without any prejudice to the liberty
of the creatures will; As also that God in the storehouse of his wisdom, has
such store of moral impediments, as that he knows thereby, how to hinder any
sin if it pleased him. His words are these, Praeter illa sufficientia
impedimenta, etiam efficacia habet in suo sapientiae and potentiae promptuario,
quibus productis certo and infallibiliter peccatum impediretur. And this is the
difference with him, between a sufficient impediment of sin, and impediment
effectual. Effectual is that upon the use whereof, he knows full well, that
sin will be hindered. Sufficient is that upon the use whereof, sin will not
be hindered, and this is known to the Lord from everlasting. Now let them tell
me, why would not God make choice to use such an impediment, which he knew
would prove effectual, but such rather, as he knew would prove ineffectuall.
Does it not manifestly appear hereby, that it is Gods will, that sin shall
come to pass by his permission? Like as the Scripture is express to this
purpose, as where it is said, that Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles,
and people of Israel were gathered together against the holy Son of God, to
do that which Gods hand, and his counsel, had foredetermined to be done. Now
this is well known to have been no less then the ignominious handling and
crucifying of the Son of God. Acts 4. 28. And Revel. 17. 17. God put into the
hearts of the Kings to do his will, and to give their Kingdoms to the Beast,
as much as to say, to use their Regal power, to the supporting of Antichrist,
which we know was in part by Massacring the Saints of God.

2. Now to discover the strange necessity, that these men bring in upon all
things: It cannot be denied, but that God knows all future things, before
they come to pass. Therefore they are presupposed to be future in order of
reason before God, knows them to be future; therefore all things future, are
either such by necessity of nature, or by some cause; not by any cause, for if
there were any cause hereof, to wit, to make them pass out of the condition of
things merely possible of their own nature, into the condition of things
future, then this cause should be found either within God or without God. Not
without God can any cause hereof be found. For this passage of things, out of
the condition of things merely possible, into the condition of things future,
was from everlasting, therefore the cause hereof must have existence from
everlasting. But nothing was everlasting, Extra Deum, out of God; Therefore if
any cause hereof be to be found, it must be within God; otherwise it must be
confessed, that all things became future by absolute necessity of nature. If to
help this, they will devise something within the nature of God, to be the cause
hereof, let them tell us what that is. Not the Science of God, for all
confess, that secluding the divine will, Gods knowledge is the cause of
nothing. If they say, the will of God, they concur with us in embracing the
same Opinion, which they so much abhor. Nothing remains to fly unto, but the
Essence of God; If they plead, that I demand, whether the Essence of God
working freely, be the cause of the futurition of all things, or as working
necessarily? If as working freely, that is as much as to confess in express
terms, that Gods will is the cause thereof: But if they say the divine Essence
is the cause hereof, as working necessarily, hence it follows, that all things
good and evil come from God, as working by necessity of nature. See I pray and
consider the abominable, and Atheistical opinions, that these Arminians do
improvidently cast themselves upon, when they stretch their wits to overthrow
Gods providence, as it is carried in the 11th Article of Ireland, which is
this, God from all Eternity, did by his unchangeable Counsel ordain
whatsoever in time should come to pass; yet so as thereby no violence is
offered to the wills of the reasonable creatures, and neither the liberty nor
contingency of second causes is taken away, but established rather.

In the Conclusion, that which he vaunts of, as touching the Fathers, is mere
wind; for he gives you nothing but his word for it; which of what credit it
deserves to be, I leave to the indifferent to judge. And as for the plucking up
of the roots of virtue which he fables of: Consider I pray, what Sect of
Philosophers were ever known to be more virtuous then the Stoics; and how was
Zeno himself honored by the Athenians, for his grave and virtuous
conversation? Has not Erasmus delivered it, as out of the mouth of Hierome,
that Secta Stoicorum was Secta simillima Christianae? Yet I no where find, that
they brought in any necessity, that was not subordinate to the Will of the
supreme God: But these Arminians bring in a necessity of nature from without
God, to make him to do this, or that, if he does any thing; or at least, to
make God himself a necessary Agent, devoyd of all liberty and freedom,
contrary to that of Ambrose concerning the manner of Gods working, namely, that
it is, Nullo necessitatis obsequio, but solo libertatis arbitrio. But according
to these Divines it must be quite contrary, Nullo ^ibertatis arbitrio, solo
necessitatis obsequio.

And thus much as touching the first sort of this Authors Reasons, which he
accounts only Inducing; I come to the other sort, which he esteems convincing.

THE SECOND PART OF THE FIRST BOOK, Wherein are Examined those Arguments
against the Absoluteness of DIVINE REPROBATION, WHICH Mr HORD Took to be of a
CONVINCING NATURE.



OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield Printer to the University. M. D. C. LIII.

The Second Part of this Discourse, consisting of ARGUMENTS CONVINCING, whereof
there are Five sorts.
The First sort of Convincing Reasons Drawn from Scripture.
DISCOURSE.
SECT. I.
THOSE of the Second sort, by which for the present I stand convinced, that
absolute reprobation is no part of Gods truth, are drawn from these five
following heads,

1. Pregnant Testimonies of Scripture directly opposite unto it. 2. Some
principal attributes of God not compatible with it. 3. The end of the Word and
Sacraments, with other excellent gifts of God to men, quite thwarted by it. 4.
Holy and pious endeavors much hindered by it, if not wholly subversed. 5. The
grounds of comfort, whereby distressed consciences are to be relieved, are all
overthrown by it.
It it contrary to pregnant places of Scripture, even in terminis, Repugnant to
Scripture.
as will appear by these instances.

1. Ezech. 33. 11. As I live says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of
a sinner, but that the wicked turn from his ways and live. And least men
should say it is true, God wills not the death of a repenting sinner, the Lord
does in another place of the same Prophet, extend the proposition to them also
that perish, Ezech. 18. 32. I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies.
In this Scripture we may note three things.

1. Gods affection to men set forth 1. Negatively, I have no pleasure in his
death that dies. 2. Affirmatively, But that the wicked turn.


2. The persons in whose destruction he delights not, wicked men, such as for
the rejecting of grace dye and are damned. If God have no pleasure in their
death, much less in the death of men, either altogether innocent, or tainted
only with original sin.

3. The truth of this affection, as I live; cupit sihi credi (says Tertullian,
Lib. de paenit. cap. 4.) God would feign have us to believe him, when he says
I will not the death of him that dies, and therefore he binds his speech with
an oath: O beatos nos quorum causa Deus jurat, O miserrimos si nec juranti
Domino credimus. Happy are we for whose sakes the Lord vouchsafes to swear,
but most unhappy if we believe him not when he swears. Now if God delight not
in the destruction of wicked men, he did never out of his own pleasure take so
many millions of men lying in the fall, and seal them up by an absolute decree
under invincible damnation: for such a kind of decreeing men to everlasting
death, is quite opposite to a delight in men's eternal life.

TWISSE Consideration.
TO say that this or that opinion is untrue, because it does in terminis
contradict places of Scripture, is a very superficiary consideration: yet it is
not the first time that I have found it to drop from an Arminians pen: But
that it is a very superficiary consideration, I prove thus; For to deny God the
Son to be equal to the Father, is in terminis to contradict a pregnant place
of Scripture, Phil. 2. Where it is expressly said of God the Son, that he
thought it no robbery to be equal to the Father: yet notwithstanding it is
agreeable to that of our Savior, where he says, the Father is greater then I;
and so vice versa. In like manner to say that God cannot repent, is in terminis
to contradict pregnant places of Scripture: again to say that God can repent,
is in terminis to contradict other as pregnant places of Scripture; yet neither
of these is unsound; because each phrase is agreeable to Scripture in some
place or other. And the reason hereof is, because in terminis only to
contradict the Scripture, is not to contradict the Scripture; But when we
contradict the meaning of Scripture, then and not till then, are we justly said
to contradict the Scripture; And the reason hereof is, because the word of God
consists not in the outward bark or bone of the letter, but in the inward pith
and marrow of the meaning. And as for contradiction unto Scripture in terminis,
it may easily be proved, that to deny Gods delight in the destruction of
obstinate sinners, is to contradict a very Nec putemus in verbis Scripturarum
Evangelium esse, sed in sensu, non in superficie, sed in medulla, non in
sermonum foliis, sed in radice rationis. Hieron. in Epist. ad Galat. c. 1.
pregnant place of Holy Scripture, as namely Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26. Because I
have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded;
but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I
will also laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes; when your
fear comes as desolation, and your destruction as a Whirlewind. And yet never
a whit the more, is any contradiction found in Scripture for this: because
though they contradict each the other in terminis, yet there is no
contradiction if we consider the true meaning: As for example, it is both true
that the Father is greater then the Son, as touching the Sons Manhood; And
the Son equal to the Father as touching his Godhead. So of repentance, it
cannot be attributed to God as it signifies change of mind or counsel; but it
may be attributed unto God, as it signifies change of sentence; according to
that of Gregory, Deus mutat sententiam, consilium nunquam. So as touching Gods
pleasure or delight in the death of a sinner, as it is the destruction of the
creature he delights not in it; but as it is a just punishment of the
impenitent creature, he delights therein: Thus Piscator reconciles it, on
Ezech. 18. v. 23, and 32. Surely God delights in the execution of justice, as
well as in the execution of mercy, as Jer. 9. 24. I am the Lord which
exercises loving kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the earth, for in
these things I delight says the Lord.

2. Here first, the Author declines from the former phrase, of having no
pleasure in the death of a sinner, to not willing the death of a sinner; which
phrases have no small difference, as Piscator observes upon that in Ezech. 33.
11. for says he, potest homo velle id quo non delectatur, ut aegrotus potest
velle potum amarum, quo non delectatur, potest enim eum velle non perse, sed
propter aliud, nempe ad recuper andam valetudinem. And to deny that God wills
the death of as many as dye, is in terminis to contradict a pregnant place of
Scripture, as where it is said, that God works all things according to the
counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1. 11. And therefore seeing the inflicting of
death is Gods work he must will it: But this Author is more happy for invention
then his fellows: For whereas others of his opinion, work upon the place as it
is rendered in the vulgar Latin, Nolo mortem peccatoris: this Author has found
out an argument from the very phrase of our last English translation, to
advantage his cause, as when from Gods having no pleasure in the death of a
sinner, he quaintly inferres, therefore God does not of mere pleasure, will or
decree their death; But how superficiary this is also, and how foully it falls
in the issue, upon the Author himself (as usually it falls out with men,
that affect new and quaint inventions) I hope to discover in due place.

Farther observe; that place, Ezech. 33. 11. I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, according to our last English translation, and that, Ezech. 18. 23.
Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should dye, do differently render
one and the same phrase in the Hebrew, in the death of the wicked, Ezech. 33.
11. which is word for word according to the Hebrew; that the wicked should dye
Ezech. 18. 23. which being not according to the precise terms of the
original, it follows that hereby, our Translators did expound the sense of
the Hebrew, which is word for word, in the death of the wicked, and so
accordingly, that phrase, Ezekiel. 18. 32. in the death of him that dies,
imports as much as this, that he who dies should dye.

And as for Tertullian, that which he alleges out of him, neither makes for
him nor against us: we all believe what the Prophet delivers; but we enquire
about the sense of it; But in the same place Tertullian interprets the place
not absolutely but comparatively, thus, Vivo inquit Dominus, and paenitentiam
malo quam mortem, and indeed thus it is accommodated more then once in the Book
of Common prayer, as first in the general absolution; then, in one of the
Collects upon Good Friday: There is a double pleasure, that God may be said to
take in the one, but a single pleasure only in the other. For in the death of
an impenitent sinner, God delights only in the execution of justice: but in the
conversion of such a one that he may live, God delights both in the execution
of mercy, which is equivalent to his delight taken in the execution of
judgment, and over and above he delights in their repentance; For like as of
such as fall from God, it is said, His soul has no pleasure in them: so of
such as turn unto him, it is as true, that his soul has pleasure in them.

3. But give we him leave to enjoy the interpretation he affects, yet
consider I pray, whether he does not enjoy it tanquam Diis iratis, and to his
bane: for mark I pray his argument, and consider whether I do not from the
same argument, most strongly conclude against him.

1. His argument runs thus, If God delights not in the destruction of
wicked men, he did never out of his own pleasure, take so many millions of men
lying in the fall, and seal them up by an absolute decree under invincible
damnation. Now from the rule of contraries, I herehence dispute thus; If this
be a good consequence which he makes, then on the contrary it follows, that
seeing God does take pleasure and delight in man's eternal life (as this Author
expressly acknowledges) therefore he did out of his own pleasure, take so
many million of men lying in the fall, and seal them up by an absolute decree
under invincible salvation. Now this conclusion is as directly opposite unto
him in the point of election, as his conclusion is opposire to ours in the
point of reprobation. And my argument must be of the same force and validity
with his; because Contrariorum contraria est ratio. Yet I will not content my
self with this answer.

2. Therefore consider I pray in the next place, the true meaning of this
phrase I have no pleasure: in these places of the Prophet, the Author himself
though he does not plainly profess what is the meaning of it, as it became him
to do, and not to depend upon color of words suitable; yet by his drift he
manifests the meaning of it to be this, that God does not bring death upon a
sinner, of mere pleasure, but being provoked thereunto, (and that according to
the purport of the first place Ezech. 18.) by the sinner himself; and also,
(according to the purport of the second place) only in case of impenitency. And
I concur with him in this: And so I conceive it to be delivered in the same
sense with that Lament. 3. 32, 33. For though he cause grief (to wit by reason
of men's sins v. 39.) yet will he have compassion according to the multitude
of his mercies, (to wit, in case he repents Ier. 18. 7. Judge. 10. 16.) For he
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men. Mark I pray, not
willingly; to wit, in as much as he is provoked thereunto by sin, and by
refusal to repent. And this is in the former Scripture phrases, not to take
pleasure in the afflicting and grieving of men. For if any work be such, as
wherein pleasure is taken; we need not enquire after a cause why it is done,
but though no pleasure be taken in it, yet for some benefit redounding thereby,
a man may do it, yea though it be grievous and bitter unto him: As a sick man
is willing to take a bitter potion for the recovery of his health. Now come we
to the argument: God takes no pleasure in the death of any; therefore he does
not of pleasure inflict death. We willingly grant it, in as much as he never
inflicts eternal death on any, that does not dye in sin unrepented of: And
as he does not inflict death on any of mere pleasure, that is, without just
cause on the part of him that dies, deserving it: So we willingly confess,
that God did never decree to inflict death on any without just cause on the
Malefactors part deserving death. And this is the uttermost whereunto this
Authors argument can be extended. And all our Divines unanimously confess,
that God neither decreed to damn any man of his mere pleasure, but for his
sin wherein he died without repentance.

3. Observe the cunning of this Disputer, to deceive himself first, and then
to abuse his readers: For whereas he should have proceeded in his argument by
degrees, thus; God has no pleasure in the death of a sinner, therefore he does
not of his own pleasure inflict death; and thence proceed (if he had thought
good) to conclude the like of Gods decree, thus; if God does not of his
ownpleasure inflict, then neither does he of his own pleasure decree to inflict
death and damnation: This author leaping over the inflicting of death, as a
block in his way (for the last consequence would have betrayed its own
nakedness) flies at first to the application of it, to Gods decree: Now I
willingly grant, that Gods having no pleasure in the death of a sinner, does
signify, that God inflicts death on no man without a cause, for that were of
mere pleasure to inflict: But dares he herehence infer, therefore God does
not of mere pleasure decree to inflict death and damnation on man for sin,
for to this alone comes all the force of this argument. Now to show the vanity
of this consequence, consider I pray.

1. It is as if he should argue thus in plain terms; sin is always the
meritorious cause of damnation; therefore sin is the meritorious cause of
Gods eternal decree of damnation: Now this Enthymeme has no force any
farther, then it may be reduced into a Categoricall Syllogism; and this
Enthymeme is reducible into no other Syllogism then this; Damnation is the
decree of Damnation, sin is the cause of Damnation, therefore sin is the
cause of the decree of damnation. But in this Syllogism the proposition
contains a notorious untruth: Or thus, Sin is the cause of damnation;
therefore the foresight of sin is the cause of the decree of damnation: But
this Enthymeme is not reducible unto any categoricall Syllogism at all, for as
much as it consists of four terms; all which must be clapped into the
Syllogism whereunto it is reduced, and consequently make that Syllogism
consist of four terms, which utterly overthrowes the illative form thereof.

2. We may as well dispute thus; Good works as well as faith and repentance are
the disposing cause unto salvation, therefore good works as well as faith and
repentance (or the foresight of them) are the disposing cause to Gods election,
or to the decree of salvation.

But shall I tell you, the chief flourish whereupon this Author (and usually
the Arminians) does insist in this his loose argumentation, I conceive it to be
this; they hope their credulous readers, unexpert in distinguishing between
Gods eternal decree, and the temporal execution thereof, will be apt hereupon
to conceit, that we maintain, that God does not only of mere pleasure decree
whatsoever he decrees, but also that he does decree of mere pleasure to damn
men: which yet is utterly contrary (if I be not deceived) to the tenet of all
our Divines: all concurring in this, that God in the execution of the decree of
damnation, proceeds according to a Law, and not in the execution of reprobation
only, but also in the execution of election. And the law is this, Whosoever
believes shall be saved, whosoever believes not shall be damned, And like as he
inflicteth not damnation, but by way of punishment, so he conferres not
salvation but by way of reward. But in the execution of his decrees of election
unto grace, and reprobation from grace; we willingly profess that God proceeds
according to no law given unto men, to prepare themselves hereunto, but merely
according to his good pleasure, having mercy on whom he will, and hardening whom
he will: And this indeed is the critical point of this controversy: But
neither this Author nor his accomplices (some of them of my knowledge) have any
heart to deal on this. I come to his Second pregnant place as he calls it.

DISCOURSE. SECT. II.
GOD has shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all. Romans 11.
32. in these words of the Apostle are two [alls] of equal extent; the one
standing just against the other; an [all] of unbelievers, and an [all] of
objects of mercy; look how many unbelievers there be, on so many has God a
will of showing mercy. And therefore if all men of all sorts and conditions,
and every man in every sort be an unbeliever, then is every man of every
condition under mercy, And if every man be under mercy, then there is no
antecedent precise will in God of shutting up some (and those the most) from
all possibility of obtaining mercy; for these two are (...) they cannot stand
together.

TWISSE Consideration.
I Willingly grant the word [all] in each place is of equal extent, but how?
in the Apostles meaning in this place; that is, look in what sense the Apostle
takes the word [all] when he says God has concluded all under unbelief: in
the same sense he takes the word [all] when he says, that he might have mercy
upon all. And accordingly in case when he says the one he means by the word
[all] no more but Jews and Gentiles: it follows that when he says God has
mercy on all, by the word [all] he understands no more then both Jews and
Gentile, and that is, certain nations of men only, not all men of all sorts and
conditions; And therefore although it were granted him, that all men of all
sorts are unbelievers, yet unless he can prove, that in this sense the Apostle
speaks of [all] in saying God has concluded all under infidelity, let any
one that is indifferent, judge whether this argument be of any force. Thus our
Divines understand it, to wit, of Jews and Gentiles: Thus Aquinas and
Sasbutius Popish Divines interpret it. Aquinas his words are these, omnia, id
est, omne hominum genus, tam Judaeos quam Gentes in incredulitate conclusit, ut
omnium misereatur, id est, ut in omni hominum genere misericordia locum habeat;
And again; non est extendendum ad omnes homines sigillatim, sed ad omnia genera
hominum: Fit enim hic distributio pro generibus singulorum, and non pro
singulis generum. So Cajetan. Conclusit permissive omnes tam Judaeos quam
Gentes in peccatum infidelitatis. The Text it self does clearly justify this,
as appears by the two verses immediately preceding, wherewith this coheres. v.
30. For even as the Gentiles in times past have not believed God, yet have now
obtained mercy, through (the Jews) unbelief. 31. Even so now have they (the
Jews) not believed, by the mercy showed to you Gentiles, that they also, that
is, the Jews, may obtain mercy. This construction was embraced of old by
Austin, as appears by Beda upon the Romans, alleging August. de Civit. Dei
lib. 21. Conclusit Deus omnes in infidelitate ut omnium misereatur. Quos omnes?
nisi de quibus loquebatur, tanquam dicens and vos and illos. Deus ergo and
Gentiles and Judaeos, quos praescivit and praedestinavit conformes fieri
imagini filii sui, omnes in infidelitate conclusit, and de amaritudine
infidelitatis suae paenitendo confusi, and ad dulcedinem misericordiae Dei
credendo conversi clamaret etc. And anon after, Omnium itaque miseretur vasorum
misericordiae: Quid est omnium? and eorum scilicet quos ex Gentibus, and eorum
quos ex Judae is praedestinavit.

2. Observe how he hides himself under an ambiguous phrase, least he should
come with his foul opinion to the light: As when he says every man of every
condition is under mercy. The Apostles phrase on Gods part is misereri, to show
mercy; on man's part as partaking hereof is to obtain mercy. v. 30. 31. and to
obtain mercy is to believe. v. 30. as appears by the opposition: for to obtain
mercy and not to believe, are there made opposite, therefore to obtain mercy
and to believe are the same: For to believe and not to believe are formally
opposite. Now dares this Author avouch, that every man of every condition does
believe? Again the Apostles word ut misereatur, that he may show mercy, is not
spoken of the time present; for as much as for the time present, the Lord had
mercy only on the Nations of the Gentiles: But the time should come, that God
would also have mercy on the Jews, and consequently on all. But when should
this come to pass? Surely not 'till 1600 years after, to wit, when the time
comes which is appointed for the effectual and general calling of the Nation
of the Jews.

So that the foundation being most rotten, no marvail if the edifice he builds
hereupon must needs totter. For the Jews were thus to be shut up under
infidelity, for many hundred years, to wit, until the time came which the
Apostle prophesyeth of. And so were the Gentiles also before them, 'till the
time came of their calling. And thus Sasbutius interprets the Apostle in this
very place. Sensus est (says he) sic visum est Deo dispensare utriusque populi
salutem, Iudaeorum videlicet and Gentium; ut permitteret utrumque populum suo
vitio concludi, sive constringi, sub incredulitate and damnatione. Concludi,
inquam, ne ulla ratione poscit ex incredulitate sua vinculo se liberare, ut
ipsius misericordia gratuita locum habere agnoscatur in utroque populo tam
Iudaeorum quam Gentium. Thus we see that both his [alls] are not worth a
Bodkin; and to give him two [alls] more to increase his store, we may justly
say that all this is nothing at all to the purpose.

DISCOURSE. SECT. III.
John 3. 16. God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever etc. God loved the World, that is, the whole lump of Mankind,
therefore God did not absolutely hate the greatest part of Mankind. God loved
it fallen into a guilt of sin and misery, for he so loved them, as to send
his Son to redeem them; and a Savior presupposes sin. He did not
therefore hate the most of them considered in the fall, for love and hatred are
contrary acts, and cannot be exercised about the same Object. Many expositors
(I know) do take World here in a restrained sense, and understand by it the
company of the Elect, or the World of believers only, but they have little
reason for it (in my opinion;) for, 1. I think there can be no place of
Scripture alleged wherein this word World especially with the condition of
whole, as in 1 Epist. of John. 2. 2. (which is a place equivalent to this for
the matter of it, and a comment upon it) I say (I think) no place can be
produced where World does signify only the Elect, or only believers; but it
signifies either all men, or at least, the most men, living in some certain
place, and at some certain time, but without distinction of good and bad: or if
it be used any where more restrainedly, it is applied only to the wicked and
Reprobate men, who are wedded in their affections to the World, and the
transitory delights thereof, and therefore do most properly deserve this name.

2. Suppose it be granted that World in some Scriptures is restrained to the
Elect, yet it cannot bear this signification here; because,

1. The words then would have a bad and senseless construction; for thus would
they run, God so loved the Elect that whosoever believed in him should not
perish etc. And if they run thus, then this would follow, there are two sorts
of the Elect, some that do believe, and shall be saved; others that do not
believe, and shall be damned, which is a division or distinction unknown in
Divinity.

2. Believers and Unbelievers, damned and saved comprehend all Man kind, for
there is no man but is one of these. Now World in this place includes
believers and unbelievers, the saved and the damned, (as appears most plainly
to him that considers the words;) therefore it signifies here all Man kind
without exception of any. Against this Scripture therefore fights this absolute
reprobation and hatred of men.

TWISSE Consideration.
BE it the whole lump of mankind (if that Lettice like his lips.) I should
think by World, is meant homines in mundo degentes, men at any time living in
the World without any restraint: But herehence it follows not, that God does
not absolutely hate the greatest part of mankind; which this Author should
have proved, but he does not; therefore I will not only deny it, but disprove
it. First therefore consider, this love is only secundum Quid, in reference to
men's persons, namely, so far forth as in case they believe, they shall obtain
everlasting life through the Son of God: But if there were no farther love of
God toward man, they might be damned, yea every Mothers son for all this.
Secondly, if faith it self be a gift of God, and God gives it not to all, but
to some only, and those but a few; (for even of them that are called few are
chosen:) and withal if God has absolutely decreed to bestow this grace only
on a few, and deny it to the greatest part of the World, will it not manifestly
follow herehence, that if absolutely to decree the denial of faith be to hate,
then surely God absolutely hates the greatest part of men, notwithstanding this
love here mentioned, albeit we extend it to all and every one. Therefore it
became this Author to prove, that God is indifferent to give Faith to one as
well as to another: and that either absolutely, whence it would follow, that
all and every one, should both believe and be saved; or conditionally, and
therewithal represent unto us, what that condition is, whereupon God bestows
faith on one, and for the want thereof, he refuses to bestow faith on another.
This is the very critical point about the controversies of Gods decrees. Here
therefore he should have showed his strength: For as for Gods purpose to damn,
we willingly profess, that as God damnes no man but for sin, so he purposes
to damn no man but for sin. But as for his purpose to give or deny the grace
of regeneration, the grace of faith and repentance, we as readily profess,
that not the purpose only, but the very giving of faith and repentance, for the
curing of infidelity and hardness of heart in some, and the denying of it unto
others, so to leave their natural infidelity and hardness of heart uncured,
proceeds merely according to the good pleasure of his will, according to that
of the Apostle, He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth;
And by a cloud of testimonies out of Austin we can prove, that in this very
sense he understood the Apostle in that place. And indeed no other
interpretation of that place, can with any modesty be devised, or obtruded upon
us. As for the redeeming of all and every one by Christ, distinguishes that
which the haters of Gods truth do delight to confound. There is a redemption
from the guilt of sin, and a redemption from the power of sin: For we are
redeemed from our vain conversation. Christ came into the World to dissolve
the works of the Devil: No greater works of Satan then blindness of heart, 2
Cor. 4. 3. and hardness of heart, Ephesians. 2. 2. and 2 Timothy 2. last. The pardon
of sin, and salvation, God bestows only on believers, and upon condition of
faith: Now like as God is ready to bestow these benefits on all and every one,
and that for Christ's sake, in case they believe: so Christ has merited pardon
of sin and salvation for all and every one, in case they believe. Such is the
sufficiency of Christ's merit, that if every one of Adams race should believe,
every one should be saved: and this present Text proceeds upon this, namely,
upon the sufficiency of Christ's merits. But enquire farther whether Christ did
not merit for us the grace of faith, and if he did, whether absolutely of
conditionally; if absolutely then all must believe de facto, and be saved; if
conditionally, then faith is a grace, which God bestows on man conditionally.
Now let this Author show us what that condition is, upon performance whereof by
man, God will give him faith, and let him try whether he can carry himself so
warily herein, as not to plunge himself into plain Pelagianisme. This point is
a break-neck, or Crevecoeur unto all Arminians, they generally avoid the
delivering of their minds clearly hereupon, as a man would avoid a precipice.
It is true some Divines do interpret the word [World] here, of the Elect, as
Piscator; Rolloc does not, making no mention of the Elect hereupon. And
Piscators meaning is no more then this, viz. that this love of God in respect
of every gracious effect (I mean in the way of sanctifying grace) determins
only upon the Elect; for in all likelihood, he followed Calvin in this,
Universalem notam apposuit (says Calvin) tum ut promiscue omnes ad vitae
participationem invitet, tum ut praecidat excusationem incredulis. To the same
purpose (says he) pertaines nomen mundi, quo prius usus est. And again, se
toti mundo propitium ostendit, quum sine exceptione omnes ad fidem vocat: But
here he subjoynes a caution, thus; Caeterum meminerimus ita communiter promitti
omnibus vitam si in Christo crediderint, ut tamen minime communis omnium sit
fides. Patet enim omnibus Christus and expositus est, solis tamen Electis
oculos Deus aperit and fide ipsum quaerant. So that this gracious promise is
general to all and every one, whosoever believes shall be saved; But yet
notwithstanding if it shall appear, that God gives the grace of faith, to none
but to a certain number, (which are his Elect) it follows, that the effect of
this love of God, to wit, Salvation shall in the issue redound to none but Gods
Elect.

1. As for the designing a place where the World is taken for the Elect; we
need no such place, as I have showed; yet Piscator conceives that so it is
taken, John 3. 17. That the World might be saved by him. But what think you of
Romans 11. 15. Where the casting away of the Jews is said to be the
reconciliation of the World. And that 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ
reconciling the World unto himself. I say the reconciled World is only Gods
Elect, for the reconciled are all saved, as I prove by the Apostles argument
Romans 5. If when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son, how much more being reconciled shall we be saved by his life. Ioh. 1.
29. The Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World. Are their sins
taken away that are damned for them? And Ioh. 6. 33. He gives life to the
World; Is life given to any but to the Elect?

2. The second reasons, why in this place it cannot be so taken, are in effect
but one, and that a weak one:

1. Because, that they that understand it of the Elect, understand it so in no
other sense, but as I have expounded it.

2. If I should say of the twelve Apostles (Judas excluded, and Matthias
substituted in his room) that God so loved them, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever of them believed in him, should not perish but
have everlasting life; who can deny, but that this was a truth accommodated
unto them? but will it here hence follow, that among those Apostles, some were
believers some unbelievers? Suppose all the World were Elect, and it pleased
God to give them all Faith, should this Doctrine be the less true, whosoever
believes shall be saved? yet in this case it would not follow, that amongst the
World of men some were believers, and some unbelievers.

But whereas he faines, that some of our Divines should interpret the word
[World] here of Believers, that is such a fiction as is incredible. I come to
the fourth.

DISCOURSE. SECT. IV.
1. TImoth. 2. 4. Who would have all to be saved and come to the knowledge of
his truth. In these words the Apostle delivers two things. 1. That it is Gods
will, that all men should obtain an happy end, viz. Salvation. 2. That it is
his will also, that they should use and enjoy the means, which is the knowledge
of his truth, that so they might obtain the end, the salvation of their souls;
there is no let in God, but that all men may believe and be saved, and
therefore there is no absolute will, that many thousands of men shall never
believe nor be saved.

Two answers are usually returned, which give me little satisfaction: The first
is, that by All we are to understand all sorts, and not every particular man in
every sort and condition. It is true that [all] is sometimes so used in
Scripture, but (I believe) not here: for the very Text shows that we are to
understand by it, the Individualls and not the kinds: v. 1. There is a duty
enjoined, I will that prayers and supplications be made for all men, and in
this verse the motive is annexed, God will have all to be saved; as if he
should have said, our charity must reach to all, whom God extends his love to:
God will have all to be saved, therefore we must pray for all: Now in the duty
All signifies every man, for no man though wicked and profane, is to be
excluded from our prayers; pray for them (says our Savior) that persecute
you; And pray (says the Apostle here) for Kings, and all that are in
Authority, men in those days (though the greatest) yet the worst, yea very
Wolves, and Lions, and Bears of the Church; pray for them, and if for them,
then for any other, thus in the duty it signifies every man; and if it do so
in the duty, it must have the same extent in the motive too; or else the motive
will not reach home, nor have strength enough to enforce the duty. The second
answer is, that God will have all to be saved with his revealed will, have
Millions to be damned with his secret will. If this answer stand, then (in my
understanding) these inconveniences will follow.

1. That Gods words (which are his revealed will) are not interpretations of
his mind and meaning, and by consequence are not true; for Oration quae non est
mentis significatio, simulatio est.

2. That there are two contrary wills in God; a secret will, that many Sons
of Adam shall irrevocably be damned; and a revealed will, that all the Sons
of Adam may be saved.

3. That one of Gods wills must needs be bad, either the secret will, or the
revealed; for of contraries if the one be good, the other is bad; and so of
Gods contrary wills, if the one be good, the other must needs be bad, for malum
is contrarium bono.

TWISSE Consideration.
THe Conclusion here is very loose; the Arguments being thus; It is Gods will
that all should be saved; therefore there is no absolute will, that many
thousands of men shall never believe nor be saved: and the vanity of this
consequence, I will show more ways then one.

1. The Apostle does not say, It is the absolute will of God that all men shall
be saved: nay Vossius interprets this place, and that according to the meaning
of the Ancients, of voluntas conditionata, a conditional will in God, not
absolute; and he gives instance Hist. Pelag. lib. 6. 7. p. 638.
of it thus; It is the will of God that all shall be saved, in case they
believe in Christ. Now albeit it be the conditional will of God that all, and
every one shall be saved in case they believe, yet this hinders not, but that
it may be the absolute will of God, that many thousands of men shall never be
saved; as in case his will be to deny the grace of faith and repentance to many
thousands, as it is clear and undeniable that he does.

Nay the Remonstrants themselves, and particularly an Arminian that I had to
do withal lately, spared not to profess, that Election is absolute; if so,
then reprobation also is absolute; and I doubt not but that they will all
confess, that howbeit Gods will be, that all should be saved, yet thousands
are reprobated.

2. Suppose the Apostle had said, it is the absolute will of God, that all men
shall be saved, yet I say it follows not herehence, but that by the absolute
will of God many might fail of falvation: for it was the absolute will of God,
that every four footed beast should be represented to Peter, let down unto
him in a linen vessel; yet nevertheless it might be that many thousands were
not represented to him, and that by the will of God.

Thus having discovered the vanity of this conclusion; I will now proceed to
demonstrate that this place cannot be understood, of Gods will in proper
speech, viz. willing all and every one to be saved.

1. Like as it is impossible, that a man at the same time should be saved and
damned; so it is impossible, that God should at the same time and duration,
both will to save and will to damn the same man: But God from everlasting did
will to damn many thousands; therefore it was impossible, that from
everlasting he should will to save them.

2. If it be Gods will that all and every one shall be saved; then all and
every one shall be saved, For who has resisted his will. Romans 9. 19. And for
confirmation hereof, we find in our selves, that if we will do ought, we do
it if we can; and if we do not ought, the reason is, either because we have no
will to do it, or because we have no power to do it. In like sort, that God
does not save many thousands, the reason must be, either because he will not,
or because he cannot; not because he will not; for these profess that it is
his will to save all and every one; Therefore the reason why he does not save
all, must needs be, because he cannot save them: this was Austins argument 1200
years ago. Enchirid. cap. 96. and 97. handling this very place of the Apostle.

3. If God did from everlasting will the salvation of all and every one, then
either at this day he does continue to will the salvation of all and every one,
and shall continue for ever to will it, or no; if he does continue to will it
and ever shall, then say that God does will the salvation of the damned both
Men and Devils; albeit it is well known he damnes them. If he does not
continue to will it, then is God of a changeable nature; directly contrary to
the word of God, as well as to manifest reason: With him (says James) is no
variableness nor shadow of change. I the Lord am not changed, Mal. 3. 6. As
for that which he thrusts in, to help make weight, saying, that there is no let
in God, but that all men may believe and be saved, this is a most improper
speech; for no man is said (in proper speech) to be let from doing ought, but
upon presupposition that he would do it; now we utterly deny that God hinders
any man from believing and repenting, whose will is disposed to believe and
repent. But seeing all men have infidelity and hardness of heart natural unto
them, as a fruit of that corruption wherein all are borne; we deny that God
c^^es it in all, but only in whom he will, according to that of Saint Paul, He
has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth. And our Savior upon
the same ground, is bold to tell the Jews, saying, Ye therefore hear not my
words (that is, Romans 9. 18. Joh. 4. 47.
believe them not) because ye are not of God.

2. The first exposition here mentioned was given by Austin, many hundred years
ago. Enchirid. cap. 103. and he proves this his interpretation of the word
[all] by the congruity of it to Scripture phrase in other places, as where it
is said of the Pharisees, that they tithe every herb; his words are these, I^to
locuti^nis modo and Dominus usus est in Evangelio, ubi ait Phariseis, Decimatis
mentham, and rutam, and omne olus: neque enim Pharisei quaecunque aliena, and
omnium per omnes terras alienigenarum omnium olera decimabant. Sicut ergo hic
omne olus, omne olerum genus; it a and illic omnes homines, omne hominum genus,
intelligere possumus: yet see the ingenuity of this great light of the Church
of God: for forthwith he gives leave to devise any other convenient
interpretation; provided that we do not violate Gods omnipotency, by saying,
that any thing that God would have brought to pass, is not brought to pass;
his words are these, Et quocunque alio modo intelligi potest, dum tamen credere
no cogamur aliquid omnipotentem Deum noluisse fieri, factumque non esse; qui
sine ullis ambagibus si in caelo and terra (sicut and veritas cantat) omnia
quaecunque voluit fecit: profecto facere noluit, quaecunque non fecit. This
interpretation is generally received by our Divines, because of the congruity
thereof to the Text it self; for as much as the Apostle having first
admonished them in the general to pray for all, forthwith he descends to
specialls, as Vossius acknowledges, Generi speciem subjicit; now look in what
sort the Species is to be understood, after the same manner is the General to
be understood. Now the Specialls mentioned, are certain sorts or conditions of
men, as Kings, and such as are in authority; therefore the general [all] must
in like manner be understood of all sorts, and all conditions of men: upon this
consideration also it was that Austin did insist, in the place before
alleged: Praeceperat (says he) Apostolus ut or aretur pro singulis
hominibus, and specialiter addiderat pro Regibus, and iis qui in sublimitate
sunt, qui putari poterant fastu and superbia seculari a fidei Christianae
humilitate abhorrere. Proinde dicens, hoc enim bonum est coram salvatore nostro
Deo, id est, ut etiam pro talibus oretur; statim ut desperationem tolleret,
addit, qui omnes homines vult salves fieri, and in agnitionem veritatis venire.
Hoc quippe Deus bonum judicavit, ut orationibus humilium dignaretur, praestare
salutem sublimium. Now I come to consider what this Author has to say against
this exposition, for he gives us very gravely to understand, that it gives him
little satisfaction: we are therefore to expect some better satisfaction from
him.

It is true that [all] is so used in Scripture, not only some times, but very
frequently; let him come to instance in his sense, we are ready to instance
with him for ours. But the Text (says he) shows we are to understand the
individualls and not the kinds. Where first (I doubt) his ignorance, in
understanding the distinction aright, is his best ground of opposition. When
Austin urges for his interpretation, that of the Pharisees tything omne olus,
every herb, who doubts but they tithe Individual herbs. In like sort when
Peter saw in a vessel let down unto him (...) every four footed beast; no
question but Individual beasts were let down unto him, not every one of every
kind, but of every kind or of most kinds, or of many kinds some, so that the
meaning of the distinction is not to exclude all individualls (as this Author
seems to carry the matter,) but only, to exclude a necessity of understanding
all individualls of all sorts. It is enough if God will save some of all sorts,
that is, of all conditions some individualls. Then, seeing he undertakes out of
the very Text, to give us better satisfaction, then either Austin or our
Divines have hitherto received, it must needs be a shame for him to leave the
present Text, and fetch grounds elsewhere, for the clearing of Paul's meaning
here. Now let us observe, how congruously or incongruously to his own
undertakings, he carries himself in this business: of the duty enjoined, and
of the motive annexed, there is no question: but whereas he shapes the
coherence thus, and makes Paul in effect to speak after this manner; our
charity must reach to all to whom God extends his love to; God will have all to
be saved, and therefore we must pray for all. Though all this were granted him,
it makes nothing for him: but over and above here are causeless errors more
then enough:

For, first, our charity must extend farther then Gods love; was not Jacob
bound to carry himself charitably toward his brother Esau? though Gods hatred
of Esau, we know was as ancient as his love to Jacob.

2. We are not bound to extend our charity so far as God extends his love; for
many thousands there be in the World, (not to speak of the Elect departed this
life) toward whom it may be God extends his love, which yet are unknown to us;
and are we bound to pray for we know not whom. Again, Gods love, with this
Author, is extended as far as his will to save, and that is extended to all
and every one: and unless God be now changed, it must extend to them now after
they are damned, and must our charity be extended toward them also? But he
proceeds, let us proceed with him. Now (says he) [all] in the duty signifies
every man; but that we deny; he gives his reason, for no man though wicked and
profane, is to be excluded from our Prayers.

Against this I have two exceptions, (and yet if the whole be granted him, it
makes nothing for him:) my first exception is this; he promised to give us
satisfaction out of the Text it self; but who sees not but that this rule of
his, is brought in quite besides the Text: I from the Text have proved, and
from the coherence between the general and the special, that the special
being certain particular conditions of men, the general [all] must conformably
be understood of all conditions.

My second exception is this; he obtrudes upon us, that no man, though wicked
and profane, is to be excluded from our Prayers. I confess I do not find my
self apt to exclude any from my prayers; but I cannot endure, that a bold
fellow should obtrude his rules upon us as Oracles. The Apostle Saint John
forbids us to pray for them that sin a sin unto death. But let all this be
granted, what then? If it extends to every one in the duty, it must have the
same extent in the motive too; but this I deny; he says, else the motive will
not reach home, nor have strength enough to enforce the duty: but this likewise
I deny; and show withal, how the motive shall reach home, and have strength
enough even to enforce this duty, according to this Authors accommodation of
it; albeit God has a will not to save all and every one, but of all sorts and
all conditions some; of Kings some, of them that are in Authority some; For
seeing God saves of all sorts some, why should not every Christian Subject,
pray for his Prince and Rulers, seeing it may be they are those some, whom God
means to save, even of the rank of Princes, of the rank of Governors, and of
men in Authority. For God has not revealed to us, who they are whom he has
elected, and who they are whom he has reprobated. If he had, Austin tells us
what we should do in that case, De Civit. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 24. Si de
aliquibus it a Ecclesia certa esset, ut qui sunt illi etiam nosset, qui licet
adhuc in hac vita sint constituti, tamen praedestinati sunt in aeternum ignem
ire cum Diabolo, tam pro i is non or aret, quam pro ipso. If it shall be
farther urged, that we are to pray for all Kings, and all that are in
Authority, not only for our own; I answer, that this is nothing agreeable to
the end of such prayers here expressed by the Apostle, namely, That under them
we may live a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty. And what
have we here in England, to do with the King of Bungo, that we should pray for
him, or for the Kings in terra australi incognita, discovered by Ferdinando de
Quir, or for the great Duke of Crapulia?

3. As for the second interpretation; I do not find it so usual with our
Divines: Cajetan distinguishes here between voluntas signi and beneplaciti; so
does Aquinas, and this distinction of voluntas occulta and revelata, is usually
reduced to that of voluntas signi and beneplaciti; But voluntas signi, and
voluntas revelata, is more congruously applied to the things which God
commands, then to the things which God himself works; as for example, he
commands faith and repentance; and the commandments of God, are usually called
the will of God in Scripture, though improperly; and thus the distinction is
plain. God commands one thing, but it is not necessary, that he should will,
that that which he commands shall come to pass: As for example, God commanded
Abraham to sacrifice Isaac, yet he determined that Isaac should not be
sacrificed, as appeared by the event. In like manner he commanded Pharaoh to
let Israel go, yet withal told Moses he would harden his heart, that he
should not let Israel go. But this will of God called voluntas signi and
Revelata, cannot so congruously be said to pass upon man's salvation. Yet
because God may be said to command salvation, in as much as he commands faith
and repentance, that we may be saved; and in this sense, men are exhorted
sometimes to save themselves; As, Save your selves from this froward
generation; and Save some out of the fire with fear; and That thou may both
save thy self and them that hear thee; therefore we are content also to admit
of this Acts 2. 40. Jud. 23. 1 Timothy 4. 16.
distinction, and consider with what judgment and sufficiency this Author does
impugn it.

1. By his first opposition, it appears, that mere ignorance bears him out
against this distinction; For we do acknowledge, that Gods revealed will, and
his words revealing it, are true interpretations of his own mind and meaning;
though not of such a meaning as he expects should be fashioned. For he
conceives that Gods will in this case, is only of what shall be done; which is
most untrue: Hereby is only signified, what is man's duty to do, although it
may be God will not give him effectual grace to do it. As for examples sake,
when God commanded Pharaoh to let Israel go; hereby was signified, that God
would have it to be Pharaohs duty to let Israel go; though withal he
professes to Moses, that he would harden Pharaohs heart, whereupon he should
refuse to let them go. So when God commanded Abraham to sacrifice Isaac,
hereby it was signified, that it was Gods will to make it Abraham's duty to
sacrifice his Son, albeit God had determined, that when Abraham came to point
of execution of that which was enjoined him, he would hold Abraham's hand, and
content himself with Abraham's readiness, and good heart to obey God in this.

2. As to the second; it is untrue that any such thing follows as this Author
pretends, namely, that two contrary wills shall be found in God; For first
there is no contrariety in the wills here shaped by the Author himself; thus,
many shall be damned, and those, many may be saved. As for the word
irrevocable, wherewith this Author stuffes his proposition, that is no
attribute of damnation, or the manner thereof, but rather of Gods decrees;
wherein still he proceeds and spares not to foame out his own shame, desiring
to make Gods decrees of a revocable nature. Secondly, he understands not the
accommodation of the distinction aright, which is not directly to salvation and
immediately, but rather to praecepta, consilia, remedia, (as Aquinas expresses
it) of voluntas signi, which is all one in this case with voluntas revelata.

1. Applied to Gods commandment, joined with a will not to give grace to obey
his commandment, thus, it is Pharaohs duty to let Israel go; It Is not Gods will
that Pharaoh shall let Israel go, for he means to harden his heart to the
contrary.

2. Applied to salvation, consequent or not consequent, according as men shall
be found to obey or disobey Gods commandment: thus, it is my will, that as many
as believe and repent shall be saved, and consequently it is true, If thou
believe (whoever thou art) and repentest, thou shall be saved. I will give
grace to believe and repent to some only, whereby they may be saved; between
those in like manner, there is no contrariety at all.

3. And if there be no contrariety at all, then surely it follows not by this
Authors Logic, that if one of them be good, the other must be bad. I say by
this Authors Logic; for now adays men are given so much to Rhetoric, that
they forget all good Logic, if ever they learnt any: who I pray gives any such
rule, that if one contrary be good, the other must be bad? If heat be good, is
cold bad? Or if white be good, is black bad? But as for the case we treat of,
if these wills were found to be contrary, one of them should destroy the other,
and the other should have no being at all; and in case it has no being, shall
it be said to be bad? Yes, like enough, by the learning of the Arminians. I
come to the Fifth.

DISCOURSE. SECT. V.
2. PEter 3. 9. Not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance. This Scripture is not so liable to those exceptions, which are made
against the former testimonies, for it is a negative proposition, and must be
taken distributively; and therefore speaks that in plain terms, which is
contrary to absolute reprobation.

That which is usually replied is this, that the persons here spoken of, are
the Elect only. God is not willing that any of the Elect should perish. But the
contrary appears plainly in the Text; for the persons here spoken of, are those
toward whom God exercises much long suffering and patience; and who are they?
Are they the Elect only, or chiefly? No, but the Reprobates rather, that dye
for their contempt of grace. Reprobates are the proper objects of Gods long
suffering and patience, as we may see, Romans 2. 4. where the Apostle speaking of
such as go on in sin, and treasure up unto themselves wrath against the day
of wrath, says that God uses patience toward them, that so he might lead
them to repentance: and Romans 9. 22. He endures (says the Text) with much long
suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction. Reprobates therefore as
well as others does Peter here speak of, and says, that God would have none of
them to perish; if they do perish, it is their own fault and folly, and not
Gods absolute pleasure, who would have none to perish.

TWISSE. Consideration.
HEre be odd gambolls; as when he says the proposition here is negative,
whereas the propositions are two, and the latter affirmative, as well as the
former is negative. As for the taking of it distributively, as he speaks, the
Text expresses the negative distributively; implying belike, that when we
interpreted the former place de generibus singulorum, it was not to be taken
distributively, which is a very shallow conceit, for it is apparent we
distribute it de generibus singulorum; and more then that, of the particulars
of each kind, only we do not distribute it of all the particulars. In like
manner, though the Text in this place expresses a distribution, saying, not
willing, any to perish, this distribution is not extended to all: Nay, it
admits of a greater limitation then the former place did by our interpretation;
for (...) here must be referred to that which goes before in these words, God
is patient to us ward not willing any to perish, that is, (...), any of us to
perish, but all to come to repentance, that is (...), all of us; which can
admit of no other sense then all such as the Apostle was; he says it is
contrary to absolute reprobation; that is wind; when he proves it then we will
believe it, his word is no oracle.

2. Let us see how he disproves their interpretation, who accommodate it to
Gods Elect. The persons here mentioned (he says) are those toward whom God
exercises long suffering and patience, and demands whether these are the
Elect only or chiefly? and answers himself negatively; saying, that the
reprobates are the proper objects of Gods long suffering and patience, which he
proves out of Romans 2. 4. and Romans 9. 22. and so concludes the argument very
learnedly and judiciously Arminian like, ex omnibus affirmativis, in secunda
Figura; which of what force it is every weak Logician knows; for thus in
effect is his argument, They of whom God will have none to perish, are such
toward whom God expresses much long suffering and patience; But the
Reprobates are they toward whom God expresses much long suffering and
patience; Therefore the Reprobates are they, of whom God will have none to
perish.

2. And whereas the Apostle says, God is patient toward us, the meaning
according to this Authors judicious enlargement is, toward us who are partly
elect and partly reprobates: and so likewise when he says, 2 Pet. 1. 2. To you
who have obtained like precious faith with us, that is, with us of whom some
are elect and some reprobates. And 1 Pet. 1. 3. God has begotten us to a
lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, that is, begotten us, some of
whom are elect and some reprobates.

3. Now because the Apostle says plainly and simply, who is patient toward
us; this Author desiring to frame it in a suitable manner, to that of the
Apostle, Romans 2. 4. whereunto he has a hungry desire to reduce it, therefore
he makes bold to say, that the persons here mentioned by Saint Peter are such,
toward whom God exercises long suffering and patience: Thus again he is
willing very obsequiously to follow Lysanders counsel, who advised, when a
Lions skin would not serve the turn, to piece it up with a Fox skin. We
on the other side, though it cannot be denied, but that God does (...) toward
such as Saint Peter was, and those to whom he wrote, who had obtained like
precious faith with himself and his fellow Apostles, and other believers;
which cannot be denied to have been the elect of God, (so he calls them to whom
he wrote, 1 Pet. 1. 2.) yet we spare to draw any argument therehence, because
we know full well, that God does (...), and uses long suffering toward the
Reprobates also. So that we could not conclude that we would herehence, but
either by a Syllogism vicious in the form, as this Author does, or by a
Syllogism, that would be as faulty in the matter, thus; God shows patience to
none but Reprobates; they of whom God will have none to perish are such, as
toward whom God shows patience; therefore God will not have any Reprobate to
perish. And is not this a proper doctrine, that God will not have any Reprobate
to perish, both for the overthrowing of Gods omnipotency; for is it not a
clear case and undeniable, that all Reprobates do perish? As also for the
overthrowing of Gods immutability; for can it be denied, that when God damnes
them, he will have them to perish? Which if before he would not, can it be
avoided, but that Gods will must be changed? And lastly, for the bringing in of
manifest contrariety into the will of God; seeing they dare not deny that God
did from everlasting ordain every reprobate unto damnation: I say they dare
not deny this in plain terms, though their carriage is such, as if their
meaning were, that Gods will in decreeing their damnation is conditional quoad
actum volentis, as touching the very act of willing, whence it follows that
God shall not will their damnation until their death in infidelity and
impenitency; for it is fit the condition should exist before the thing
conditionated, whose existence depends thereupon. As for that he adds in the
close, If they do perish it is their own fault and folly; we make no question
hereof, though nevertheless we may well maintain, that it is Gods absolute
pleasure, not to take them off from their sinful and foolish courses, nor to
set an end to these vicious courses of theirs, which he could if it pleased
him, as well as he did set an end to the abominable courses of Manasses, as
also to the persecution and bloody courses of Saul; toward whom he did
undoubtedly (...), and exercise much long suffering and patience; though herein
there is no difference between them and reprobates, or very little; according
to that of Austin, Istorum neminem (non praedestinatorum) adducit Deus ad
salubrem spiritualemque paenitentiam, qua homo Deo reconciliatur in Christo;
sive illis ampliorem paenitentiam, sive non imparem praebeat: contra Julian.
Pelagian. lib. 5. cap. 4. I come to the last of this rank.

DISCOURSE. SECT. VI.
TO These testimonies, I may add those conditional speeches, if thou seek him
he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him he will cast thee off, for
ever, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. If ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if you
forsake him, he will forsake you. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. If thou do well, shall thou
not be accepted? but if thou do ill, sin lies at the door. Genesis 4. 7. The
just shall live by faith, but if any man withdraw himself, my soul non
approbabit eum, shall have no pleasure in him, he shall be a Reprobate. In all
these and many other places it is clear (for ought I can see) that God
forsakes no man, considered simply in the fall, till by actual sins and
continuance in them he forsakes God. Now if God reject no man from Salvation in
time or in act and deed, till he rejects God, then surely he rejected no man in
purpose and decree, but such a one as he foresaw, would reject and cast off
him. For Gods acts in time, are regulated by his decrees before time. Ephesians. 1.
11. God works all things (says the Apostle) according to the counsel of his
own will; and therefore there must be an exact conformity between them, as
between regulam and regulatum, the rule and the thing measured by the rule. By
whatsoever therefore God does in the World, we may know what he purposed to do
before the World; and by his actual casting men off, when they grow rebellious
and impenitent, and not before, we may certainly gather, that he decreed to
cast them off, for their foreseen rebellion and impenitency, and not before.
Besides it is all one in substance, to cast a man off indeed, and to entertain
a resolution to do it; our velle and facere are all one in Gods account, and
the reason is, because where there is a deliberate and settled will, the deed
will follow, if nothing hinder; much more is Gods will and deed all one, seeing
his will is omnipotent, and irresistible, and whatsoever he wills directly and
absolutely, is certainly done when the time comes.

All these plain Scriptures does this opinion contradict in terminis, and not
only these, but the whole course of Scriptures, by which it is much safer for a
man to frame his opinions, then by a few places picked up here and there, and
those obscure ones too: What Saint Austin speaks in another place, I may safely
say in this, numquid ideo negandum quod apertum est, quia comprehendi non
potest, quod occultum est? Shall we contradict plain places, because we cannot
comprehend the obscure? Aug. de bono persever. c. 14. Secundum plura (says
Tertullian) pauciora sunt intelligenda; (...) ne unus sermo subvertat alios;
secundum omnes potius quam adversum omnes intelligendus erit, A few testimonies
must be expounded according to the whole course of Scriptures, and not this
according to a few testimonies. This is my first reason.

TWISSE Consideration.
TO the places of Scripture here alleged, I give the interpretation, to
prevent the confusion of things that differ, which all affect who prefer the
darkness of Error before the light of truth; for it is most advantageous to
such, to fish in troubled waters.

To the two first, I say; God is first sought of us before we find him, as
touching the obtaining of many blessings at the hands of God according to that,
Ezech. 36. 37. I will yet be sought of the house of Israel, to perform it unto
them. But as touching the obtaining of an heart to seek him, thus God is found
of us before we seek him; according to that, Es. 65. 1. I have been found of
them that sought me not: witness Saul marching with a commission from the
Priests to Damascus, to bind all that called on the name of Jesus.

To the third I answer, by distinguishing acceptance, as we distinguish love;
Love is either complacentiae or beneficentiae; so acceptance is either unto
reward, or unto complacency; Rewards always follow our doing well; but grace
of doing well is always a fruit of Gods favor toward us in Christ.

To the last the just shall live by faith; But there is a grace of God
preventing faith; cur ille credat, ille non credat, what is the reason but the
mere pleasure of God giving the grace of Faith to one, and denying it to
another, according to that of the Apostle, He has mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he hardneth. They that withdraw themselves my soul shall have no
pleasure in them; The meaning is, they shall feel the smart of his
displeasure; but before they withdrew themselves God took not that pleasure in
them, as to give them his custodient grace, to keep them from withdrawing
themselves; which grace, and that out of his good pleasure he afforded unto
others: But this grace comes in no account throughout with this Author, like
unto the Remonstrants, who would have no other notice taken of any other
counsel of God, then that whereby he decrees to save believers and damn
unbelievers. But if you call them to enquire of Gods decree, to bestow the
grace of Faith and repentance upon some, and not on others; as whether it
proceeds absolutely or conditionally, they usually lend a deaf ear to this;
whereby it is as clear as the Sun, what estimation they make of the grace of
regeneration, of the grace of Faith, and of repentance; and after what manner
they give God the glory of it. By the way observe I pray, how he makes the
state of man in being a reprobate consequent to his withdrawing himself, which
undoubtedly is a Temporal act, and accordingly the act of Reprobation, whereby
a man is denominated a reprobate, to be merely Temporal; and consequently
such an act must election be also, viz. not eternal but Temporal.

Still he keeps himself in his strength of confusion, as most advantageous
for him; as in saying, God forsakes no man, till by actual sins and
continuance in them he forsakes God. But albeit God forsakes no man, as
touching the inflicting of punishment, until man commits actual sin, and
continues therein impenitently; yet before this God did forsake him, as
touching the denial of this grace custodient from sin; and the denial of
the grace of repentance to rise out of sin, which yet he grants to many; as
in showing mercy to whom he will, like as whom he will he hardneth, and so
accordingly cures in some, that natural infidely and hardness of heart
wherein we are all borne, and leaves it uncured in others. Now consider we his
argument following, which is this. If God reject no man from salvation in time,
or in act and deed till he reject God, then surely he rejected no man in
purpose and decree, but such a one as he foresaw would reject and cast off God.
Now this argument not one of our Divines deny, not only as it is applied to
reprobation; but neither do we deny it, applied unto election. For we
willingly profess, that like as God bestows salvation on none, but such as he
then finds believers, penitent, and given to good works: in like sort we all
profess, that God decrees to bestow salvation on none but such as he foreseeth
will believe, repent, and become studious of good works. Like enough, many do
wilfully dissemble the true state of the Question between us: others ignorantly
mistake it. The question is not whether God decrees to bestow salvation on such
as he foreseeth will believe, and reject those from salvation whom he
foreseeeth will not believe; but of the order of reason between these decrees
of God, and the foresight of obedience the one side, and disobedience on the
other; that is, whether like as faith, repentance, and good works in men of
ripe years do precede their salvation, as disposing causes thereunto; so the
foresight of faith, repentance, and good works, precede election, as disposing
causes or prerequisites thereunto. In like manner on the other side, whether,
as final perseverance in sin precedes damnation, as the meritorious cause
thereof; So final perseverance in sin as foreseen by God precedes
reprobation as the decree of Damnation, as the meritorious cause thereof: So
that the argument here mentioned (which is all his strength in this place)
rightly applied must run thus. Faith, repentance, and good works actually
existent precede salvation, as the disposing causes thereunto; therefore faith,
repentance, and good works foreseen precede election, as the disposing causes
thereunto; and what is this, but as good as in express terms to profess,
that election is of faith, repentance, and good works: though it be in direct
contradiction unto Saint Paul, professing in terminis (to speak in this Divines
language) that the purpose of God according to election is not of works. So on
the other side, Final perseverance in sin precedes damnation, as the
meritorious cause thereof; therefore final perseverance in sin foreseen,
precedes the decree of damnation, as the meritorious cause thereof. And then
what is to make reprobation to be of evil works, if this be not? Whereas Saint
Paul, look by what arguments he proves that election is not of good works, viz.
because before Jacob and Esau were borne, or had done good or evil, it was
said of them the Elder shall serve the Younger: by the same argument it is
equally evident that Reprobation is not of evil works. Yet we acknowledge an
exact conformity between Gods decrees and the execution thereof: because like
as God damnes no man but for sin, so he decreed to damn no man but for
sin: where sin is in each place made the meritorious cause of damnation,
not of the decree of damnation. And like as God bestows salvation on no man of
ripe years, but by way of reward of faith, repentance, and good works, so he
decreed to bestow salvation on no man of ripe years, but by way of reward of
faith, repentance, and good works; where faith repentance and good works, are
in each place made the disposing causes to salvation, but not to election.
There was never any so mad (says Aquinas) as to say that merits are the
cause of predestination, as touching the act of God predestinating, and Why?
but because so is the cause of predestination to be enquired into, as the cause
of Gods will is enquired into: but formerly he had showed that there can be no
cause of Gods will, as touching the act of God willing: Now let every one judge
whether the act of reprobation, be not as clearly the act of Gods will, as the
act of predestination; and consequently whether it be not equally as mad a
course (in Aquinas his judgment) to devise a cause of reprobation, as to
devise a cause of predestination on the part of Gods will. And no marvail, for
the act of Gods will is eternal, all the works of the creature are temporal:
Then, the act of Gods will is God himself, for there is no accident in God;
and therefore they may as well set themselves to devise a cause of God, as a
cause of Gods will. His phrase of casting off, is ambiguous; if it signifies
the denial of salvation, it follows disobedience; if it signifies the
denial of grace, it precedes disobedience, in what kind soever.

3. Our velle and facere are both temporal; in God it is otherwise; for his
deeds are temporal, and may admit the works of men precedaneous thereunto; but
his resolutions are his decrees, and they are all eternal, and can admit no
work of man precedaneous thereunto; yet is God as just in the one as in the
other. For like as he damnes no man but for sin, so he never decreed to damn
any man but for sin; But as touching the grace of regeneration, the grace of
faith and repentance, in the granting and denying of this, the Apostle plainly
tells us, he proceeds merely according to the good pleasure of his will; as
when he says, The Lord has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardneth: And here also God is as just in his decrees as in his executions. For
if it be just with him, to give this grace to whom he will, and deny it to whom
he will; it is as just with him, to decree the giving of it to whom he will,
and the denying of it also to whom he will. And why shall not the Lord take
liberty to cure infidelity and hardness of heart in whom he will, as he cured
it in Manasses and Saul; and leave it uncured in whom he will, as he left it
uncured in many a proud Pharisee, and proud Philosopher, notwithstanding all
their Morality they boasted of? Very seasonably he confesses Gods will to be
omnipotent and irrefistible, when nevertheless, he makes him to will the
salvation of all Reprobates, though not one of them is saved. But by that which
follows, by will omnipotent and irrefistible, it seems he understands only
will absolute, which he distinguishes from will conditionate, which can be no
other (I suppose) then this, my will is that all and every one shall be saved,
in case he believe and repent. Now seeing it is as true, that it is Gods will
that they shall be damned, in case they believe not and repent not, let every
sober man judge, whether this deserve to be accounted, a will of saving rather
then a will of damning; especially in case all men naturally, are far more
prone to infidelity and impenitency, then to faith and repentance. As for a
will conditionate in God, like enough this Author carries it hand over head
without distinction, as he does many other things besides: whereas no such will
is agreeable to the divine nature, quoad actum volentis, as touching the act of
willing, as both Bradwardine by clear reason, and Piscator out of the word of
God have demonstrated, but only quoad res volitas, as touching the things
willed by him.

4. I have showed the poverty of his performances, by the particular
examination of every place alleged by him, and made it plain, how he betraies
his own nakedness of interpretation of Scripture, and of argumentation
throughout; and therewithal, the vanity of this his boast, that our doctrine
of absolute reprobation, does contradict these plain Scriptures. But he like a
brave fellow well conceited of his achievements, and having thereby gotten
some authority to himself, is bold to give his word, that it contradicts also
the whole course of Scripture; which I verily believe he is as well able to
perform, as he has performed the former; and very judiciously takes upon him
to distinguish between the whole course of Scriptures, and a few places picked
up here and there, as if they were no part of the whole course of Scripture:
Belike by reason of their obscurity, as he pretends, no matter if they were
expunged; like as owls are offended with daylight. Our Savior tells us of
some that loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil.
None hate the light of Gods truth, more then such as are possessed with
errors, as with familiar spirits, especially when they have been found to play
the Apostates from Gods truth. Whether I have dashed my self upon the rocks of
Austins censure, by contradicting any Scripture that he has brought, or only
his corrupt and vile interpretation and accommodation of them, let the
indifferent judge. Yet what more plain then this, Gods purpose of election is
not of works; especially compared with the manner how Saint Paul proves it.
What more plain then this? God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardneth. It is apparent he utterly declines the critical point of these
controversies, which is as touching Gods giving grace, even the grace of faith
and repentance; and of what spirit that savoureth let every one judge. As for
interpreting any place, we do not abridge his liberty in interpreting it after
what manner he thinks good, but we are ready to weigh it, and if we find it too
light, to esteem of it as it deserves: neither do we refuse to take into
consideration, what he or any of his accomplices are pleased to insist upon.

DISCOURSE. The Second sort of Arguments Convincing drawn from Gods Attributes.
SECT. I. As touching the General.
SEcondly it fights with some principal Attributes of God, therefore it cannot
be true. For God uses not to make decrees contrary to his own glorious nature,
and incompatible with those excellent Attributes, by which he has discovered
part of himself to men.

Two things are here to be premised.

1. That Gods chief Attributes are those perfections, in the manifestation of
which by acts conformable to them, God is most glorified, which are Mercy,
Justice, Truth, etc. For God is more honored by the exercise of these amongst
men, then by the putting forth of his unlimited power and Sovereignty; as a
King is more renowned among his Subjects, for his clemency, equity, candid and
fair dealing, then for his Dominion and Authority, or any thing that is done
only for the manifestation thereof. And there is good reason for it. For,

1. Power is no virtue, but mercy, justice, and truth are; acts of power are
not Morally good of themselves, but are made good or evil by their
concomitants: if they be accompanied with justice, mercy, etc. they are good,
if otherwise, they are naught. For justum oportet esse quod laudem meretur.

2. Power and Sovereignty may as well be showed in barbarous and unjust
actions, as in their contraries. Saul showed his authority and power to the
full, in slaying the Lords Priests, and Nebuchadnezzar in casting the three
Children into the fiery furnace, and Daniell into the Lions Den; but no
mercy, nor justice, nor any thing else that was good.

2. The second thing that is to be preconsidered is, that justice, mercy, and
truth in God, are the same in nature with those virtues in men, though
infinitely different in degree (as light in the air, is the same with light in
the Sun in nature, not in degrees) and that which is just, merciful, and
upright in men, is so in God too. And by these virtues in our selves, and such
acts as are conformable to them, tanquam ex pede Herculem, we may safely
measure the same in God: For otherwise these things would follow.

1. The common and received distinction of Divine Attributes, into communicable
and incommunicable, would fall to the ground: for against it this night be
said, that the mercy, justice, truth, and other virtues that are in us, are not
Gods perfections in a lower degree communicated to us, but things of a
different nature.

2. Men cannot be truly said, to be made after Gods image, Genesis 1. 27. Nor when
they are regenerated, to be renewed after the same image, Col. 3. 10. And to be
made partakers of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. That Picture cannot be the
picture of such a man, which does not in its parts and lineaments clearly
resemble him; nor can we be truly the image of God, in respect of our graces,
if in these graces there be not a resemblance of Gods Attributes.

3. We may not safely imitate God, as we are commanded; Be you perfect as your
heavenly Father is perfect, Math. 5. 48. and be ye holy as I am holy. Nor when
we show forth mercy, justice, and truth in our actions, can we be properly said
to imitate God, if these be one thing in God, and in men another.

These two things being thus premised, viz. that Gods mercy, justice, and
truth, are three of his chief Attributes, in the exercise of which he takes
himself to be much glorified, and that we are to measure these Attributes by
the same virtues in ourselves. I come to the proof of my second reason against
absolute reprobation, which is, that it opposes some of Gods principal
Attributes, particularly his justice, mercy, and truth.

TWISSE. Consideration.
I Cannot but wonder at the performances of the true Author of this Discourse,
in comparing that which goes before, with that which comes after; His poverty
of argumentation out of Scripture, and the exuberancy of his discourse
following. Before he was in some straits, but now he seems to have gotten Sea
room enough: yet this is my comfort, I seem to perceive out of what chimney
all this smoke proceeds, and to be as well acquainted with the spirit that
breaths here, as if I were at his elbow while he penned it. Agnosco veteris
vestigia flammae: such like are Doctor Jacksons discourses; and him I have
known of old, and his Ephestion also; I profess willingly of Scholar
acquaintance, they were my greatest and dearest; But seeing it has pleased God
to put such a difference between us; I would have both them and the World know,
I do as little regard them as fear them.

Arminius himself is never more plausible, then in such like extravagant
discourses as a positive Theologue: But these inspirations were never derived
from him; they are flowers of another garden. These have been shapen in a more
Philosophical brain whereof some having gotten the reputation, give Oracles
therehence, first to form interpretations of Scriptures, in congruity to these
Theorems, as the true Author blusheth not to profess; which when he has
persuaded the World of, I see no cause to the contrary, but he may adventure a
degree farther, and persuade the burning of the Bible, so far as it
concerns the Doctrine of Predestination and Reprobation, Grace and Free Will,
and content themselves with these magisteriall precepts, as most sufficient and
sovereign for the endoctrinations of the Christian World in these points. But
he might have spared his pains in proving this consequence, that if our
Doctrine of Reprobation be contradictory to Gods principal attributes it
cannot be true. I say he might have spared the proof hereof, for all that he
brings in proof of this is but darkness in comparison of the domestical
light, and selfe-evidence, which this consequence carries with it. His
premises here, and discourse thereof is like unto the Turks parley before the
encounter, when he challenged any one of Scanderbegs army to a single combat.
For as that parley was merely complementall, and to no purpose, save only, as
he might conceit, to abate the fervor of his opposite, who longed to be dealing
with him; so this introduction, I find to be of no Scholasticall use in the
world, but merely Politic, to work some impression upon the readers
affections, where by it may come to pass, that when he reads of Gods mercy and
justice, as here it is set forth, he may be the more inclined to judge thereof,
according to the genius of human mercy and justice. Yet I am content to give my
self to be wrought upon by these pretty contemplations, as far as I shall be
convicted of any truth and sobriety in them: though I willingly profess I am
very suspicious (for I love to betray my infirmities) that there is little or
no truth and sobriety at all in them.

1. Now because he hopes to hatch much advantage unto his cause out of these
attributes, and to that purpose he sitts very long upon them, though his market
may be never the better for all that. He tells us these are Gods chief
attributes, and as it appears by that which follows, his practice is to
disparage his power (which I call the Lords Sovereignty) in comparison to
these; Now it seems they are chief indeed in his opinion, for the furthering
of his cause; but as for any absolute chiefty they have in God, I am not as yet
acquainted therewith, what I may be by this Authors performances I know not;
yet in the next page save one, he professes expressly, That all Gods
excellencies are infinitely good, and one is not greater then another; wherein
I do much approve his judgment, as savouring of more depth then this, which
yet I think not that he, who pretends to be the Author of this discourse, in
respect of his minority, should be likely to broach; as for other respects of
principality, I shall be ready to take notice of them in due place. But when he
says, God is most glorified in the manifestation of mercy, justice, and truth,
it is a very odd phrase: For it is one thing to be glorious, another thing to
be glorified; dare he deny that God is as glorious in his power and
sovereignty, as in his mercy, justice, and truth? As for the glorifying of him,
that depends upon the will of the creature. It may be some are more thankful
unto God, for blessing them with health, and riches, and honor, and
preferment; then for bestowing his Gospel upon them; but will it follow
herehence, that his goodness in giving riches, etc. is more glorious then his
goodness is seen in giving us his Word and Gospel? We read that when God laid
the foundations of the earth, the Stars of the morning praised God together,
and all the children of God rejoiced, Job. 38. 7. did these Angels glorify God
for his mercy, justice, and truth, in the creating of them? We read sometimes
of Gods power, sometimes of his wisdom manifested in the Creation, as Jer. 10.
11. and 51. 11. and Psalm: 136. 5. Jer. 10. 12. etc. But no where have I read
(that I can remember) he made the World by his mercy, justice, or truth; and
Revel. 4. 11. I find the glory of power given unto God in the creation, by the
24 Elders, but neither there, nor any where else (that I know) is the glory of
his mercy, justice, and truth, given unto God therein. Thou art worthy O Lord,
to receive glory, and honor, and power; for thou have created all things, and
for thy will sake, they have be and are created. And albeit men fail in
giving God the glory of his power and wisdom as they should, will it follow
herehence, that God is not so much to be glorified for his power and wisdom,
as for mercy, justice, and truth? yet who falls in this, that fails not in
the use of the Lords Prayer; the conclusion whereof is this, For thine is the
Kingdom, and power, and glory? And indeed albeit Power and Wisdom may be
showed other ways, then in the way of mercy, justice, and truth; yet Gods
mercy, justice, and truth, cannot be showed without the simultaneous
demonstration of his power and wisdom: And therefore when God comes to make
good his gracious promise, for the delivering of Israel out of Egypt: which
cannot be denied to have been a singular work of mercy, justice, and truth; the
Lord professes that then he would make himself known unto them by the name,
Jehovah, by which name he was not known before. The Incarnation of the Son of
God, was it not an admirable work, as well in the way of power, and wisdom, as
in the way of mercy, justice, and truth? I am apt to confound Gods justice with
his truth, ere I am aware, without having that awful regard to the authority
of this writer, as perhaps may seem fit: But I hope it is a pardonable fault,
considering my education hitherto in divinity; whereby I have attained only
thus far, to the acknowledgement of justice Divine; for justice consists,
in giving every one his due; now this due being either in respect of God, or
the creature: Justice Divine in giving God his due, Aquinas has taught me,
that it is all one with Gods wisdom, promoting his ends by congruous means;
justice Divine in giving the creature his due, I have learnt to depend wholly on
Gods determination, manifested by his promises and threatenings, and this is
commonly called justitia fidelitatis, which I take to be all one with truth.
But I am very willing to be better informed by this Author, and I give my self
to his contemplations, to have my thoughts fashioned by them as they can; and
if hitherto they have not transformed me into a new Creed, I cannot help that.
Now if it be so that Gods power and wisdom accompany the demonstration of his
mercy, justice, and truth, I cannot see how God is honored more by the
exercise of the one sort, then of the other, but rather on the contrary. So
that albeit a King is more renowned among his Subjects, for his clemency,
equity, candid and fair dealing, then for his dominion and authority; yet I
do not easily perceive, how God is renowned more for his clemency, equity,
etc. then for his power, etc. yet again this seems to me a very poor argument;
to conclude Clemency to be a chief attribute of God, because men do more
magnify him for that, then for his Power. For consider, a Malefactor going to
execution, is called back and saved by the Kings pardon, this man (be sure)
will magnify the King more for his clemency in saving him, then he would for
his justice in putting him to death: but will it follow herehence, that
Clemency is a more chief attribute of a King then justice? Solomon the
greatest of Kings has said, the Throne is established by Justice: and it was
wont to be said, fiat justitia, ruat orbis. No such thing is said of Mercy.
Then again the King could not do this but by virtue of his prerogative, yet
the Malefactor magnifies him not for his prerogative, but for the favorable
use of it for his good, for that is all he respects: yet ask I pray any man of
judgment, which is the chiefer attribute of a King, and more glorious of the
two; his prerogative or his clemency? Clemency is a very vulgar virtue, but the
royal prerogative is peculiar to one; A Thief after a robbery committed on
the highway, meeting with a beggar that beggeth a penny, if he astonish him
with the gift of twelve pence, the beggar is very likely more highly to magnify
him, then any honest man going on the way, that bestows but an half penny
upon him; yet, Whose liberality is the greater of the two? Carnal men renown
others for the benefit they receive by them; not according to their true worth:
yet there is a farther difference; humane authority may be abused, and
Sovereignty on earth is not always joined with good Morality, much less with
Piety; but in case a man could not sin, the more honor and authority is laid
upon him, the more glorious should he be; as being backed with the greater power
to execute his goodness. Thus it is with God, it is impossible he should abuse
his sovereignty; yea his mercy and justice are one and the same reality with
his power: what a vanity then is it to discourse as this Author does, in
preferring one attribute of God before another, as if God were more glorious in
the one then in the other. But he has farther reasons for this, let us
consider them: 1. Power (says he) is no virtue, nor morally good, but mercy
justice and truth are. I answer: Though it be so, yet who will say, the glory
of virtue is greater then the glory of power?

2. Especially considering, that virtue is common to the meanest.

3. A little virtue joined with power, shall bring forth far better fruits,
then a great deal of virtue without power.

4. Though it be so in man, whose power may be abused, shall we transfer it
to God, whose power cannot be abused, his power and his goodness being all one?

5. Moral virtues denote a goodness removeable where it is, obtainable where
it is not; but no such goodness can be found in God, and consequently no
Moral virtue in proper speech, whatsoever is in him, that being natural and
essential unto him.

6. Lastly, to power only and sovereignty we owe obedience, and not to
goodness, and jurisdiction is far more glorious then subjection. Yet by the
way it is untrue (in my judgment) that acts of Power are made good by being
accompanied with justice, speaking of Moral goodness; as acts of virtue alone
they are morally good, not as acts of power. If justum oportet esse quod laudem
meretur; then justice if not alone, yet chiefly, shall be that whereby one is
renowned: yet herehence it follows, that every act of Gods power shall laudem
mereri; because it is impossible that any thing he does should be otherwise
then just, such a justitia condecentiae follows all his actions; otherwise we
must grant, that God has power to do that which is unjust.

2. And accordingly, though power humane and Angelical, may be showed in
barbarous actions: yet power Divine cannot; let him do whatsoever he is able,
it shall not be unjust; let God turn all the World into nothing, another
manner of destruction then that of Saul's slaying the Lords Priests, or
Netuchadnezzars casting the three Children into the fiery Furnace, yet dares
this Author say, that God herein should be unjust.

I come to the second of his premises.

2. We have had a taste of this Authors faculty in roaving at large, and within
the Horizon of his own brain, we shall drink a deeper draught of it ere we
part. And once again I willingly profess, it cannot enter into my belief,
that these conceits have dropped from the fancy of a young Divine; some old
beaten Naturalist rather does employ his brain to do the Arminians this
service. I never found hitherto that Arminius, or any of his Batavian followers
have thus discoursed, that justice, mercy, and truth in God, are the same in
nature, with those virtues in men, though infinitely differing in degree. I
conceive Arminius (though wild enough in his 20 reasons, and especially in his
reasons drawn from the consideration of Gods justice) to be more Orthodoxe, and
far more Scholasticall then so; though I nothing doubt, we have a generation
amongst us that affect to have all learning in Divinity, to go by their rules
of Philosophy, and yet the basest Philosophy I think that ever was devised. And
this Author whosoever he be, seems herein to discourse after such a manner, as
if he were of the number of those that heard the Devil read Lectures through a
grate in the University of Toledo. If justice mercy and truth in God, are the
same in nature, with those virtues that are in men, then there is something in
man, that is the very essence of God; For undoubtedly whatsoever is in God, is
of his essence; yet those are they that attribute Manicheisme unto us. And
seeing the virtues of man are accidents, it follows that that, which under the
same name is attributed to God, is either an accident in God; or if it be his
essence, then the essence of God, is of the same nature with accidents in man.

Thirdly; hence it follows, that the Divine perfections consist of degrees,
and consequently must needs be accidental unto him, not substantial; for
substance admits no degrees.

Fourthly; if justice humane be of the same nature with justice Divine, it
follows, not only that, that which is just in man is just with God, but that
it must be after the same manner just; that like as men's justice consists in
obedience to Gods law, implying subjection thereunto: So justice Divine must
consist in obedience to Gods law implying subjection. And like as man is
obliged to be just, in the same manner God is obliged to be just. And
consequently like as Soul sinned and became unjust in slaying the Lords
Priests, so had God been unjust in doing the like.

Fifthly; man sins in suffering his brother to sin, when it lies in his
power to keep him from sin; and consequently, if that which is unjust with
man is unjust with God, God sins as often as he suffers any sin to be
committed in the world, for undoubtedly he could prevent it. August. contra
Julian. Pelag. lib. 5. cap. 4. Nos certe, si eos, in quos nobis potestas est
ante oculos nostros, perpetrare scelera permittamus, rei cum ipsis erimus: Quam
vero innumerabilia illa permitit fieri ante oculos suos; quae utique si
voluisset, nulla ratione permitteret, But let us see how he proves this, for he
adventures upon it like a tall fellow, and that with variety of demonstration.

1. The first is drawn from the received distinction of divine Attributes,
namely into such as are communicable unto the creature, and such as are
incommunicable; but here he conceales his Authority. But let him bring forth
the testimony of any Divine, that maintains any Attribute Divine to be the same
quoad nomen and nominis rationem, with any Attribute humane. Yet we may talk
of Gods Attributes so, as for distinction sake to say, some are such as are
also Attributed to man, others are not; without maintaining, that humane
virtues are of the same nature with Attribute Divine. Life is a Divine
Attribute, it is also attributed to man, to a beast, to a plant; But will any
wise man say that the life of God is of the same nature with the life of a Man,
of a Beast, of a Plant? What more equivocall then the word Canis? Attributed to
a Star, to a Fish, to a Foure-footed creature on the Earth; I answer much
more equivocall is every thing in common attributed to God and Man; For
whatsoever is in God, is his Essence, but between the Essence of God, and the
essence of Man, there is a vaster difference, then between the essence of a
Star, of a Fish, of a Dog; how much more difference is there between the
Essence of God, and an accident in man, such as his virtues are. In a word, the
virtue of Man is of an annihilable condition, and if it be of the same nature
with something in the nature of God, why should not something in the nature of
God be of an annihilable condition? I marvel not if men of this generation
are apt to profess that they will turn Atheists rather then concur in some
points with the Contra-Remonstrants; for their discourses breath Atheism in a
very high degree. It is a question among Schoolmen, whether Ens (the most
abstract notion of all other) be predicated univocally of God and the creature;
the Dominicans utterly deny it; Scotus maintains the contrary with some
curiosity of argumentation: but his Arguments are answered by the Dominicans
and particularly by Versor on the Metaphysics; but never, I think, was it
heard of Scotus or any other (till now) that the virtues of man are of the same
nature with the Divine Attributes, differing only in degree.

I come to his second Argument.

2. It was wont to be accounted that man was the image of God, not in respect
of the qualities of his mind and will only, but even in respect of his Essence
also; And some have been anciently condemned for denying this: why then do we
not say that the Essence of man is of the same nature with the Essence of God
differing only in degree. In the next place the power of understanding and
liberty of will in man a bodily creature, brings him nearest to God, of all
bodily creatures: it was wont to be said that all other creatures had vestigia
Dei, but man was imago Dei; as in whom is represented the Divine Nature as
intelligent and free; so far forth, as a compound creature of body and soul
can represent him; but who has ever said that the understanding of God was of
the same nature with the understanding of man: and the will of God of the same
nature with the will of man? It is well known that the understanding, and will
humane, are but natural faculties in man; but the understanding and will
Divine, is the very essence of God; and if man's essence be not of the same
nature with his faculties, does it become us to profess that the essence of
God is of the same nature with the natural faculties of man? As for the graces
of Gods spirit, what are these but the three Theological virtues; all other
are but Moral virtues sanctified by these; Now show me what Faith there is in
God of the same nature with our Faith differing only in degree? What hope there
is in God of the same nature with our hope, differing only in degree, what
charity there is in God of the same nature with our Charity, differing only in
degree. These indeed being of all other the most peculiar fruits of
regeneration, whereby we are renewed after the image of God, as touching the
adventitious qualification of our natures, should have Attributes divine
answerable unto them (if any) of the same nature with them, differing only in
degree. Yet herein (as I conceive) consists not so much our participation of
the Divine Nature, as in that, the Spirit of God the Father, and God the Son
is communicated unto us, given unto us to be the immediate fountain of all
actions and motions spiritual in us.

3. And albeit these Attributes, which in common do denominate God and man,
are one thing in God, and in man another: yet this nothing derogates from our
imitation of God; and striving to be perfect and holy in our kind as creatures;
like as God is perfect and holy in his kind as Creator. And that I may
represent some authority for my discourse, whereas this Author represents none
for his, it is a point generally received in the Schools, that in this
weakness of our understanding, we come to know what God is by negation rather
then by affirmation. Capreolus upon the first of the Sentences Did. 2. Quest.
1. rehearses diverse passages out of Aquinas to this purpose, as out of 1.
Contra Gentes cap. 14.

In consideratione Divinae substantiae praecipue utendum est via remotionis.
Nam Divina substantia omnem formam quam intellectus noster attingit, sua
excedit immensitate. Et sic ipsam apprehendere non pessumus, cognoscendo quid
est, sed aliqualiter ejus notitiam habemus, cognoscendo quid non est; tantoque
ejus notitiae magis appropinquamus, quanto plura per intellectum nostrum
poterimus ab eo removere. Tanto enim unumquodque perfectius cognoscitur, quanto
differentias ejus ab alio before intuemur. Quia in consideratione Divinae
substantiae non possumus accipere quid, quasi genus, nec distinctionem ab aliis
rebus per differentias affirmativas accipere possumus; eam oportet accipere per
differentias Negativas. Id. 3. Contra gentes cap. 47. Per effectus Dei
pertingere possumus ut cognoscamus de Deo, quia est, and quod causa aliorum
est, aliis supereminens and ab omnibus remotus: and hoc est ultimum and
perfectissimum nostrae cognitionis in hac vita, ut Dionysius dixit. lib. de
Mystica Theologia. Cum Deo quasi ignoto conjungimur, quod quidem contingit, cum
de Deo, quid non sit, cognoscimus, quid vero sit penitus manet ignotum: unde
and ad hujusmodi sublimissimae cognitionis ignorantiam demonstrandam, dicitur
de Mose Exodus, 20. quod accessit ad caliginem in qua Deus er at.

In the consideration of the Divine Essence, we must chiefly use the way of
negation: for the Divine Essence, through its immensity, does exceed every
form that our understanding can conceive: So that we cannot apprehend it by
knowing what it is; but after a sort we have the knowledge thereof, by knowing
what it is not. And so much nearer do we approach to the knowledge thereof,
the more we are able to remove from the nature of God. For every thing is known
so much the more perfectly by how much the more at full we do behold how it
differs from other things. Now in the consideration of the Divine essence, we
cannot take any thing as the Genus thereof; neither can we apprehend its
distinction from other things, by differences affirmative; and therefore we
must apprehend it by differences negative. The same Thomas in his Third Book
Contra Gent. cap. 47. By the effects of God (says he) we may attain to know
that God is, and that he is the cause of other things eminent above them, and
removed from them all: and this is the last and most perfect degree of our
knowledge in this life, as says Dionysius in his Book of Mystical Divinity:
We are conjoined with God as unknown which verily comes to pass, when we know
of God what he is not, but what he is it remains utterly unknown unto us; and
therefore to demonstrate our ignorance of this most sublime knowledge, it is
said of Moses Exodus 20. that he came unto the darkness where God was.

The same Capreolus proceeds to show out of Aquinas in 1 Sent. Did. 8. q. 1.
art. 1. ad 4. How we must make progress in our knowledge of God, by way of
remotion or negation.

Quando, inquit, in divinis procedimus per viam remotionis, primo negamus
corporalia, and Secundo intellectualia, secundum quod inveniuntur in creaturis,
ut bonitas and sapientia, and tunc remanet in intellectu Quod est, and nihil
amplius, unde est, sicut in quadam confusione.

When (says he) we proceed by way of remotion, or negation, in searching out
the Divine nature, first we deny of him all corporal things, and secondly we
deny of him all intellectual things, after such a sort as they are found in
the creatures, as godnesse and wisdom, (mark this well for these and such like
are the virtues which this Author says are of the same nature in God and man
differing only in degree) and then there remains in the understanding, id quod
est (as much as to say (...) Ens) and nothing more; and hence the understanding
remains as in a certain confusion.

And indeed the notion of entity is most general, most abstract, and if any
notion signifies one and the same nature, such as may be affirmed of God and
the creature, surely this is it. Now observe Aquinas his judgment concerning
this, out of the same Capreolus in these words.

Ad ultimum autem, Essentiam ipsam, secundum quod est in creatur is, ab ipso
removemus, and tunc remanet (intellectus noster) in quadam tenegra ignorantiae;
secundum quam ignorantiam, quantum ad statum viae pertinet, optime Deo
conjungimur, ut Dionysius dicit, and haec est caligo in qua Deus habitare
dicitur.

To the last (I answer) the very entity or existence in the creatures we remove
from God, and then our understanding remains in the darkness of ignorance;
according to which ignorance, so far forth as it pertains to our condition
(as Viatores) and in the way, we are conjoined with God in the best manner; as
Denis says: and this is the darkness, wherein God is said to dwell.

By this let any man judge, whether this Authors discourse be not as opposite
to the discourse of Aquinas, as touching the nature of God in resemblance to
ours, as the Antipodes are to us. And withal I do not find throughout his
discourse following, that he makes any use of these premises. And indeed there
is no need of them at all: For if he cannot prove this Doctrine of ours
repugnant either to Gods Mercy, or to his Truth, or to his Justice, these
premises will stand him in no stead: and if he can prove it to be repugnant to
those Attributes of his, his argument shall stand in the same force, as well
without these premises as with them.

Now, how well he makes good the repugnancy of our Doctrine to Gods mercy, we
are in the next place to consider.

DISCOURSE. SECT. II. As touching the First Special. Gods Mercy.
1. IT opposes Gods mercy. God is merciful. It is a great part of his Title.
Exodus 34. 6. Merciful and gracious. He is mercy in the abstract: 1 John 4. 16.
God is love. A Father of mercies, and God of all consolations. 2 Cor. 1. 3.
(...), a Savior of men. 1 Timothy 4. 10. Two ways is the mercy of God spoken of
in Scripture, 1. absolutely, 2. comparatively. 1. Absolutely; and so it is set
out in lofty and stately terms; its called rich mercy. Ephesians. 2. 4. Great
kindness. John 4. 2. Abundant mercy. 1 Pet. 1. 3. Love without height or
depth, breadth or length, or any dimensions: love passing knowledge. Ephesians. 3.
18, 19.

2. Comparatively. It is compared with his own justice, and with the love that
dwells in the creatures, and is advanced above both.

1. It is sometimes compared with his justice, and advanced above that, not in
respect of its essence; for all Gods excellencies are infinitely good, and one
is not greater then another; but in other things that concern the expressions
of it, particularly in these,

1. In the naturalnesse and dearnesse of it unto God. It is said of mercy,
Mich. 7. 18. It pleases him, or he delights in mercy, but justice and
judgment is called his strange work, alienum a natura sua. Isai. 28. 21. He
does not afflict willingly nor grieve the children of men. Lam. 3. 33.

2. In the frequent exercise of it self, Exodus 34. 6. He is slow to anger but
abundant in goodness. Mercies are bestowed every day, judgments inflicted but
now and then, sparingly, and after a long time of forbearance, when there is no
remedy. 2 Chronicles. 36. 15. All the day long have I stretched out my hands to a
gainsaying and rebellious people. Isai. 65. 2. that is, I have been patient a
long time, and in that long day I have not been idle, but employed in
exhortations, promises, and many mercies, whereby I might do you good. God
waits long for men's conversion, as the Mariner for the turning of the wind.

3. In its amplitude or objects to whom it is extended. Exodus 20. 5. Visiting
the iniquities of Fathers upon their children to the third and fourth
generation, but showing mercy to thousands: implying that his mercy is more
largely extended then his justice and that look how much three or four come
short of a thousand, so much does his justice come short of his mercy in
exercise of it.

4. In the occasions that move God to exercise them: It is a great matter that
moves God to punish, as we may see, Genesis 6. 5, 6, 7, 12, 13. When the
wickedness of man was great upon the earth, and all flesh had corrupted his
way then God thinks of punishment. He would not destroy the Amorites, till
their wickedness was full, Genesis 15. 16. Quoties volui (says Christ to
Jerusalem) Math. 23. 37. How often would I have gathered you, that is, I have
not taken advantages against you: nor upon the first, second, or third
unkindnesse cast you off, small matters have not moved me to destroy thee O
Jerusalem. But how small an occasion does God take to spare man? When God had
examined Sodom, and found their sins to be answerable to their cry, yet
then for ten righteous men's sakes would he have spared Sodom. Gen 18. 32.
Nay, he would have spared Jerusalem, if the Prophet by searching, could have
found one man that did execute judgment, and seek the truth Jer. 5. 1. What a
small and slender Humiliation made him to spare wicked Ahab and his house a
long time. 1 King. 21. 29. And the repentance of Neneve, whose wickedness
cried to the Lord for vengeance; Jonas ^. 2. did easily procure her a pardon.

Thus is Gods Mercy advanced above his justice.

2. It is also compared with the affection of a Father to his Son, of a
tender mother to her child, and of the most affectionate brute creatures to
their young ones, and set above them all. It goes beyond a Fathers affection to
his Son. Matthew. 7. 11. If you that are evil, can give good gifts to your
children, how much more will your heavenly Father give good things to them that
ask him? What does this [quando magis] imply? but that Gods love outstrips a
Fathers? and so it does a Mothers too, Isai. 49. 15. Can a Woman forget her
sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her womb?
yea she may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Women are compassionate toward
their Children, because they are the fruit of their wombes, and are a part of
themselves: but most indulgent are they toward those children to whom they are
Nurses, as well as Mothers, to their sucking children: and yet Women may forget
their children, their sucking children: but as for God, he can never forget his
children. And as if those comparisons were too small to express Gods affection
to his creatures, he proceeds farther, and compares himself, with one of the
most affectionate Females among unreasonable August. Tract. 15. in Joan. p. 16.
18.
creatures, the [Hen] Math. 23. 37. O Jerusalem Jerusalem, how often would I have
gathered thee, as a Hen gathers her chicken under her wings? No bird (says
August.) expresses such tender love to her young ones, as the Hen does.
Videmus nidificare Passeres quoslibet, ante oculos nostros, herundines,
circonias, columbas quotidie videmus nidificare, quos nisi quando in nidis
videmus, parents esse non agnoscimus. Gallina vero sic infirmatur in pullis
suis, ut etiamsi ipsi pulli non sequantur, filios non videas, matrem tamen
intelliges: Ita fit alis demissis, plumis hispida, voce rauca, omnibus membris
demissa and abjecta, ut (quemadmo dum dixi) et si filios non videas matrem
tamen intelligas. No Fowls discover themselves to be Mothers, so much as
Hens do: others when we see them in their nest with their young, we know
them to be Mothers, but no way else: but the Hen discovers her self to be so,
even then when her Chickens do not follow her, her feathers stand up, her
wings hang down, she clocks mournfully, and goes feebly; so that we may know
her to be a Mother, when yet we cannot see her brood. He has also such another
speech in another place, and concludes it with these Words, Quare ergo Dominus,
nisi propter Aug. in Psalm. 58. page 212. B. C.
hoc, Gallina esse voluit, in sancta Scriptura dicens. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
quoties volui te congregare ut gallina, etc. Our Lord and Savior did therefore
compare himself to a Hen, rather then any other creature, because of her
singular expressions of love to her young ones, even when they are out of her
sight.

By these things we see how highly the Scriptures speak of Gods mercy,
especially in the expressions of it to Mankind; To which testimonies let me
add these few more, Psalm. 8. 4. Lord what is man that thou art mindful of
him, etc. Prove. 8. 31. In the children of men did the wisdom of God delight
himself, when the foundations of the earth were appointed. He took not the
nature of Angels but the seed of Abraham. Heb. 2. 16. When the bountifulness
and love of God our Savior toward man appeared. Tit. 3. 4. ((...)) the
original word is: where do we read of (...) or (...). More merciful is God
to man, then to all other creatures.

With such a mercy cannot stand such a decree; absolute Reprobation being once
granted, we may (me thinks) more properly call God a Father of cruelties, then
of mercies, and [hatred then of love:] and the Devils names, [Satan and (...)]
an adversary, a destroyer may be fitter for him then (...) a Savior; which I
tremble to think. Does mercy please him, when he of his own will only has made
such a decree, as shows far more severity toward poor men, then mercy? Is
he slow to anger, when he has taken such a small and speedy occasion to punish
the greater part of men in Hell torments for ever, and for one sin once
committed, has shut up the greater part of men under invincible unbelief and
damnation? Is his mercy abundant, does it extend it self farther then justice,
when it is tackt up so short, limited to a few chosen ones, when 100 for one at
least, (take in all parts of the World) are unavoidably cast away, out of his
only will and pleasure? Or does his love pass knowledge, when we see daily
greater love then this in men and other creatures? What Father and Mother (that
have not only cast off Fatherhood and Motherhood, but humanity too) (so the
Authors Copy has it) would determine their children to certain death, or to
cruel torments worse then death, for one only offense, and that committed too,
not by them in their own persons, but by some other, and only imputed unto
them? How much less would they give themselves to beget Children, and bring
them forth, that they might bring them to the rack, fire, gallows, and such
like tortures and deaths?

But to deliver things a little more closely. Four things (in my conceit)
being well and distinctly considered, do make it apparent, that this decree is
incompatible with Gods mercy.

1. That Adams sin was the sin of man's nature only, and no man's personal
transgression but Adams; it was neither committed, nor consented to by any of
his posterity in their own persons.

2. That it was the sin of our nature, not by generation, for then the sins
of our Grandfathers and Fathers, would be our sins also, because we come
from them: and they would be our sins so much the more, by how much nearer we
are to the stock, from which we do immediately spring, then to the first root
and common Father of Mankind. It is the sin of our nature by imputation only,
it was Gods will that he should stand up for a public person, and that in him
all men should stand or fall. This is generally granted by Divines, and
particularly by that excellent servant of God M. Calvin. Neque enim factum est
(says he) ut a salute exciderant ommes unius parentis culpa. And a little
after (he says) Hoc cum naturae nequeat ascribi, ab admirabili Dei consilio
profectum esse minime obscurum est. And a little after, thus: unde factum est,
ut tot gentes uua cum earum liberis, infantibus, aeterna morte involveret
lapsus Adae absque remedio, nisi quia Deo it a visum est.

3. That God did pardon it in Adam, who did actually and voluntarily commit it
in his own person.

4. That Christ came into the World to take away peccatum mundi, the sin of
the World. Ioh. 1. 29. That God either did or might have satisfied his wronged
justice in the blood of the Covenant for all man kind, and without any
impeachment to justice, might have opened a way of Salvation to all and every
man.

These things being well considered, will make no man (I think) to conclude in
his thoughts, that if there be any such decree, God is not merciful to man at
all: much less is he more merciful (supposing this decree) to men, then he is
to other creatures, but more sharp and severe then he is to other creatures,
to the Devils themselves.

1. To other creatures, because the most of men are determined by his
omnipotent decree, to such a being, as is a thousand times worse then no being
at all; whereas other creatures, even the basest of them, though they perhaps
have but a contemptible being, yet they have such a being as is much better
then no being at all: it is far better not to be at all, then to be eternally
miserable without any possibility of the contrary: for so says our Savior
speaking of Judas: It had been good for that man if he never had been borne.
Men would not have accepted of life and being, when first they entered Math. 26.
24.
upon possession of it, if they had known upon what hard conditions it was to
be tendered, and that it was to be charged with such an interest, as can no
ways be recompensed by the benefits of life; or (did men firmly believe this
decree) they would at adventure, with Job, curse their birthday, be willingly
released from the right of creatures, and desire that their immortal souls
might vanish into nothing. What Minutius says of Pagans, might be truly
affirmed of men in general; Malunt extingui Minut. Faelix p. 113.
penitus, quam ad supplicia reparari. Nay Parents out of pity to their
Children, would wish that they might be borne Snakes and Toads, rather then
men; and creatures, whose being shall at last be resolved into nothing, rather
then immortal Spirits.

2. Then to the very Devils also, who are set forth in Scripture, to be the
greatest spectacles of Gods wrath, and irefull severity. In one thing this
decree makes most men and Devils equal, Utrisque desperata salus, they are
both sure to be damned; but in three things men are in a far worse condition
by it.

1. In their appointment to Hell, not for their own proper personal sins,
for which the Devils suffer, but for the sins of another man, made theirs
only By Gods order and pleasure.

2. In their inevitable destination to destruction, under a show of the
contrary. The Devils, as they are decreed to damnation, so they know it, they
expect it, they look for no other: but men, even those that are appointed unto
wrath, are yet fed up with hopes of Salvation, and made to believe that the
whole business is put into their hands; so as that if they do perish, it is
not [defectu misericordiae] because God has no mercy on them, but [defeclu
voluntatis propriae,] because they will not be saved, when yet there is no such
mercy. Now if it be worse to be deluded in misery, then simply to be miserable,
then the condition of men in this respect, is made by this decree to be worse
then the state of Devils.

3. In their obligation to believe, and the aggravation of their punishment by
not believing. The Devils, because they must be damned, are not commanded to
believe in Christ, nor is their punishment increased by not believing: but
poor men, who (by this decree) can escape Hell no more then the Devils, must
yet be tied to believe in Christ, and must have their torments increased if
they believe not. These things being so (I think) I may conclude that this
decree of absolute reprobation overthrowes the mercy of God in general, and
toward mankind.

Nor does that quiet my mind, which is usually answered to these objections;
viz. That God by this decree, does fully manifest his justice and his mercy
too; his justice toward the Reprobates, and his mercy toward the chosen
vessels: and that it is necessary that his decrees shall be so ordered, as
that both these may be clearly manifested by them. This (I say) does not
satisfy; for,

1. Gods mercy is revealed to be rich mercy, abundant, long suffering, beyond
apprehension, and surmounting his justice, in its objects and expressions. Now
such a mercy as this, set forth with such glorious titles, clothed with such
lovely properties, and exceeding the ability of any man's conception, such a
mercy (I say) is not manifested by this decree.

2. Neither is the pure and spotless justice of God set forth by this absolute
decree, as I now come to show. this being my second argument, drawn from the
Attributes of God, against absolute reprobation.

TWISSE. Consideration.
HEre we have a great deal of noise, and the most wastfull discourse that ever
I yet met withal, in the enlarging of a most hungry argument; the answer
whereunto himself perceives, and sets down (as he thinks good) in a few words,
after three large leaves spent in the enlarging of his opposition; namely to
this effect; that whatsoever he can say, in the advancing of Gods mercy we
willingly acknowledge: but withal we say, this mercy of God which makes God so
glorious, is peculiarly manifested toward the vessels of mercy, whom God has
prepared unto glory, in distinction from the vessels of wrath, as we read Romans
9. 23. and that in a higher degree then he has mentioned; this being one
special end, why God suffers with long patience, the vessels of wrath
prepared to destruction, Romans 9. 22. namely, That he might declare the riches
of his glory upon the vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory, v.
23. And after so much froth of words spent to no purpose unless to beguile his
reader, and dull him with verbosity, that he might not attend, and observe how
accurately he performs in the issue, that which he intends. Consider (I
beseech you) what a meager and starveling reply he puts to this. Gods mercy
(says he) is revealed to be rich mercy, abundant, long suffering, beyond
apppehension; we grant all this, and add that it is glorious also; and makes
the partakers of it to rejoice, with joy unspeakable and glorious; but this
belongs only to them that believe, and to certain who are called vessels of
mercy, in distinction from vessels of wrath, Romans 9. 22, 23. which vessels of
mercy, in distinction from vessels of wrath, must needs be the elect only, in
distinction from Reprobates: with what face can he deny, that such a mercy is
manifested on the Elect by our Doctrine?

2. I farther add that such a mercy is not manifested by his Doctrine as by
ours, for the glory of Gods mercy consists in this, that it is of free grace
pardoning our sins, regenerating us, changing our hearts, giving faith and
repentance to some, when he denies it to others; all this I say is of mere
grace, by our Doctrine without respect to any preparation or qualification in
man; according to that of the Apostle, He has mercy on whom he will, and whom
he will he hardneth: this is not their Doctrine, if it were, I see no cause of
any material difference between us.

3. And I find it strange, that men should grow to such a degree of immodesty,
as to affect singularity, and to show a dexterity, in such sort to advance Gods
mercy, as to obscure and deface his grace, as this Author does; for all along
you shall not find him to magnify Gods free grace: whereas Mercy showed to one
rather then to another, in respect of his being better disposed for the
receiving of it more then another, is rather of the nature of justice, then of
Mercy distinct from justice.

4. And to this purpose he takes no pains to set down, wherein this mercy
consists, which he so much amplifies, but carries it throughout in hugger
mugger, and in the clouds of generality, that it might appear the more likely,
to be indifferently extended to all; and albeit sometimes he expresses it, to
be the love of a Father toward his children, yet it is too too probable, that
he extends this to all and every one, as the children of God by creation; And
therefore particulates not wherein it consists, as namely whether in mercy
temporal or spiritual; and as touching mercy spiritual, whether this be not
the pardoning of men's sins, together with the illumination of the mind,
sanctification of the will, change of the heart, and giving of faith,
repentance, obedience, and final perseverance therein. For had he particulated
those, he had apparently marred his own market, and been driven to loose that
in retaile, which he hoped to gain in gross; For these mercies are not
extended to all. But their meaning is, God offers these to all, and that any
fail of them, it is because man disposes not himself for the receiving of
them. This is the issue of his advancing Gods mercy, utterly to disparage the
freedom of Gods grace. Now of the Divine mercy in this sense, to wit, as
freely extended to all, he has not one word throughout, as I can remember, in
so vast premises; all that he speaks of the extention of Gods mercy to variety
of objects, is dispatched in three lines of these his three large leaves; as
where he says, his mercy is more largely extended then his justice, and that
look how much three or four come short of a thousand, so much does his justice
come short of his mercy in the exercise of it; And upon this poor
interpretation, he grounds the only substantial part of his reply, to our
answer to this his argument. For to say that Gods mercy is rich, abundant, long
suffering, beyond apprehension, is nothing to the purpose. For all this hinders
not, but that the application of it may be, and is, made only to certain
vessels, who are called vessels of mercy, in distinction from vessels of
wrath, Romans 9. 22. 23. Therefore he adds, That it surmounts his justice in its
objects and expressions: wherein what he means by its expressions, I know not.
For I find no comparison made by him between Gods mercy and his justice in its
expressions; but only in respect of the objects, and there the expression of
justice, seems more quick then the expression of mercy: And as for the
extention of mercy, to more then justice is extended to, he dispatcheth in
three lines, as I said, of these three leaves of his discourse. But let us see
what force he finds in that comparison to serve his turn. First he says the
comparison is between three and four on the one side, and a thousand on the
other, as if the odds were a thousand to three or four: but how does he prove
that? The Text compares three or four generations to thousands; not to a
thousand generations, but to thousands: and he boldly conceives it to be
understood of thousands of generations; though it be much more then the World
consists of, from the beginning of the World to the end of it: For suppose the
World shall last seven or eight thousand years; how many years will he allow
to a generation? Suppose he allow but twenty, to explode the custom of the
Germans of whom Tacitus writes, that Sera virginum venus, which to this day is
continued: yet a thousand of such generations must make the World to consist of
twenty thousand years: But if it consist but of seven or eight thousand years,
you must allow but seven or eight years to a generation, to make up one
thousand generations. Then again the World was now two thousand years old when
this was delivered, so that it had not above six thousand years to continue,
and accordingly but six years was from thenceforth to be allowed to a
generation; And all this liberality of allowance, is no more then will make the
child a coat, to complete one thousand generations; whereas the Text speaks of
thousands in the plural number, and the least of plurality is two thousand; so
that to help this, we must allow but three years to a generation, by which
account they had need be married at two, and have a child at three, and who
then should rock the cradle? But leave we these fooleries, and content our
selves with the plain Text, and not piece it out with our brainsick additions.
We know that for Abraham's sake who feared him, and for the covenants sake he
made with him, he had mercy on thousands of his posterity, to bring them out of
Egypt, six hundred thousand men from twenty years old to threescore, and take
them unto him to be his peculiar people, which continued for the space of about
1600 years; and now for 1600 years they have been cast off from being his
people. And of the goodness of God toward Abraham, in choosing his seed after
him, even many thousands of them, the Jews had sensible experience that very
day he spoke unto them from Mount Sinai; he did not mean to trouble their
brains with any Algebra in counting up a thousand generations. But suppose
this were granted him; yet these that fear him, being only within the pale of
his Church, what a small handful were these, in comparison to all the world of
heathens besides, that hated him? Mark what difference S. Paul puts between
the Jews and the Gentiles, when he says, we Jews by nature, not sinners of
the Gentiles. Gal. 2. And the Psalmist before him Psalm. 147. He shows his
word unto Jacob, his statutes and ordinances to Israel, he has not dealt so
with every nation, neither have they known his judgments. According whereunto
the Apostle having demanded, saying, What is then the preferment of the Jew? or
what is the profit of circumcision? Answers thus, Much every way, and chiefly
because unto them were committed the Oracles of God. Romans 3. 1, 2. And the same
Apostle does not acknowledge the Gentiles to have obtained mercy at the hands
of God, until the time of their calling by the Ministry of the Gospel. Romans
11. 30. in these words: Ye in times past have not believed God, yet have now
obtained mercy through their unbelief. This might suffice for answer to this
argument, taking it in the full strength thereof. But I am content to run
over the whole discourse, and to take every part of it into consideration.

1. He says, God is mercy in the abstract, and Love. By this it is apparent
that the Attributes Divine, are the very Essence Divine, otherwise they could
not be predicated thereof in the abstract, and consequently, they can no more
be of the same nature with virtues Moral in us, then the Divine Essence can be
of the same nature with an accident.

2. He is a Savior of men; true, and it is as true: that he saves both man
and beast: and as for men, though he be a Savior of them all, yet in special
sort of them that believe.

3. When he says of the love of Christ, that it is without height, and depth,
and length, and breadth, he does overlash: for the Apostles prayer is in the
place quoted by him on the behalf of the Ephesians, that Christ may dwell in
their hearts by Faith, that being rooted and grounded in love, they may be able
to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth and length, and depth, and
height. For though the height of it be such, as is incomprehensible by us in
this World, yet the Apostle supposes an height, depth, length, and breadth
thereof, rather then denies it.

4. He says Gods Mercy is advanced above his Justice; not in respect of its
essence, for all Gods excellencies are infinitely good, and one is not greater
then another; but in things that concern the expressions of it. Here we have
words, but can any wise man draw it to any sober sense? What I pray is it to
advance mercy above justice, in things that concern the expressions of it?

He says it is more natural and dear to God then his justice: what reason is
there for this, if the one be equally as excellent as the other? To make this
good with some color at least; he alleges Mich. 7. 18. Mercy pleases him,
or he delights in it. The like we read Jer. 9 24. namely, that God delights in
mercy: and in the same place the Lord professes jointly, that he delights in
judgment. But Isaiah 28. 21. Judgment is called his strange work; Now three
several times, have I received this, from three several hands of Arminians;
each giving the same interpretation of it, as if it were called a strange work,
because it is alienum a natura Dei. I know none but Papists do justify them in
this interpretation; in my judgment a most unreasonable exposition; the Lord
taking unto himself the execution of judgment, as his peculiar, saying,
vengeance is mine and I will repay; And Magistrates are but Gods Ministers for
this; And he Romans 12. 19.
professes his delight in this as well as in the execution of mercy. It is
true he does not inflict judgment without cause, for that were not a work of
judgment in proper speech, but of power, and absoluteness rather, as in
turning a holy and innocent creature into nothing. And in that respect he is
said not to afflict willingly; sin always deserving it. Mercy is of another
nature, and supposes free grace, though I Lamen. 3.
find little or no notice this Author takes of this, throughout his discourse;
Neither do I find that he or any Arminian acknowledge, that the change of a
man's heart is wrought in a man of the mere grace of God, without any motive
cause in the creature. Neither do all Papists concur in this interpretation,
for Lyra and Burgensis are together by the ears hereabouts; and our Divines as
Junius and Piscator do render it, opus insolens and terribile, an unusual and
terrible judgment, interpreting it of bringing the Babylonians upon them; so
strange a work, that they should wonder at it. And as Moses foretold, that God
should bring upon them Wonderful judgments. Deuteronomy. 28. So the Prophet Abakuk
sets it forth in like manner. Abak. 1. 5. Behold among the Heathen, and regard
and wonder and marvel, for I will work a work in your days; you will not
believe it, though it be told you. For lo, I raise up the Caldeans, that
bitter and furious nation, which shall go upon the breadth of the Land to
possess the dwelling places that are not theirs. And, Jer. 19. 3. Behold I
will bring a plague upon this place which whosoever hears his ears shall
^ingle. For seeing Gods laws are strange things unto them. Hos. 8. 12. God
would bring such judgments upon them, that should be as strange unto them. And
in the same phrase it is said that destruction is to the wicked, and strange
punishment to the workers of iniquity. Job. 31. 3. Yet be this granted him, it
is nothing to the purpose. For be it never so dear unto God, yet if he
restrains his chief mercy which consists in changing the heart (whereof this
Author seems unwilling to take any distinct notice) only to the Elect, called
accordingly in Scripture vessels of mercy, in distinction from vessels of
wrath, which are the Reprobates, this nothing prejudiceth the absoluteness of
reprobation.

And as for the frequent exercise thereof; we read, Zeph. 3. 5. That every
morning God brings his judgments to light: and as for the mercy which
consists in regenerating man, which alone is to the present purpose; it is
apparent, that it is far less frequently showed, then the contrary judgment
in obduration; And certainly the vessels of mercy are by far fewer then the
vessels of wrath: and as for temporal mercies, the more frequent they are,
the worse, where the spirit of regeneration is wanting, through the corruption
of man, that makes him thereupon the more obdurate.

The vanity of the next, as touching the amplitude of the objects whereto mercy
is extended (though this alone is to the present purpose) I have already
sufficiently discovered; it being apparent that in Scripture phrase, only the
Elect are counted vessels of mercy, and all the rest vessels of wrath.

As there be examples of Gods long suffering and patience, so we have fearful
examples of the suddenness of Gods judgments, taking Men and Women away in
the very act of sin. Thus the Israelites in the Wilderness, when the flesh
of Quails was in their mouth, the heavy wrath of God came upon them, and sent
them to the graves of lust. Zimri and Cozbi perished in their incestuous act,
and gave up both lust and ghost together. Balshazzar a King, cut off in his
drunken revells, to make good the Prophecy of Isaiah, The night of my pleasures
has he turned into fear unto me. And in like manner the wrath of God seized
upon Herod in his pride. But above all, this appears in Gods dealings with his
Angels, who sinned once, and fell for ever without all hope of recovery. And
as for Gods sparing a man in case God gives not repentance, what will be the
issue, but filling up of the measure of their sins? For to speak in Austins
language, Contra Julian. Pelag. lib. 5. cap. 4. Quantamlibet praebuerit
patientiam, nisi Deus dederit, quis agit paenitentiam? Now the case is clear,
God gives repentance to a very few, who are in Scripture called vessels of
mercy; which nothing at all prejudiceth the absoluteness of reprobation.

5. Of the riches of Gods mercies to his children, we nothing doubt: but what
does this prejudice the absoluteness of reprobating those whom he never
means to make his children? But here it is to be suspected, that this Author
accounts all and every one the children of God; for forthwith he confounds this
notion with the notion of creatures, quite contrary to the most general
current of Scripture, not of the New Testament only, which teaches us, that we
are the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Gal. 3. and if children then
heirs, even heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ. Romans 8. But of the old
Testament also. Genesis 6: 2. The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they
were fair, etc. Exodus 4. 22. Thou shall say to Pharaoh, thus says the Lord,
Israel is my Son, my first borne; wherefore I say, let my Son go that he
may serve me: if thou refuse to let him go, behold I will visit thy Son,
even thy first borne. Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Ye are the children of the Lord your God. 2.
Thou art an holy people to the Lord thy God, and the Lord has chosen thee to
be a precious people to himself, above all the people that are upon the earth.

That of the Hen, though we give him liberty to amplify her natural
affections, as one of the most affectionate Females among unreasonable
creatures, yet does it nothing profit him for it represents Gods love
appropriated to his Children, which nothing prejudiceth the absoluteness of
his power reprobating others. Nay rather as it justifies his absoluteness in
electing them, if we consider the mere grace of God to have made the
difference, as the Scripture shows. Deuteronomy. 7. 7. The Lord loved you because he
loved you; and Deuteronomy. 9. at large he beats them out of all conceit of any
righteousness in them, moving the Lord to plant them in the Land of Canaan; so
by consequent it justifies the Doctrine of absolute reprobation also: for as
much as the Apostle professes, that like as God has mercy on whom he will, so
also he hardneth whom he will. Yet hereis much matter made of the Hen; like as
D. Jackson has done it before him, but he betrays no such authority for it
out of Austin as this Author does: to whom he is beholding for it, himself
best knows; If the pedigree be enquired into, their conceits may be found to
be of kin; yet give me leave to say somewhat of this similitude also.

And first, this Author commits a very great Anomaly, in entering upon it with
such state, as proves nothing answerable to his own profession anon after,
almost in the same breath. Mark the state (I pray) of his entrance hereupon,
thus: And as if these comparisons were too small too express Gods affection to
his creatures, he proceeds farther: now the comparisons preceding were taken
from reasonable creatures, as namely from Fatherly and Motherly affections
(amongst men) toward their children; and these comparisons he signifies to
have been to small, to express Gods affections to his creatures: and that
therefore the Lord proceeds farther, and compares himself to a Hen, which he
says is one of the most affectionate females among unreasonable creatures; not
daring to say, it is more affectionate then creatures reasonable; yet most
improvidently carried away with affectation of a Rhetorical flourish, he
faignes a gradation from creatures less affectionate, to creatures more
affectionate, and presently himself beats out the brains of his invention,
(before he is aware) as soon as it is borne.

As for Austins amplification of the affectionate nature of an Hen above other
creatures; we may consider that Austins Tractates on John, are of the nature of
Sermons, and therein the ancients do accommodate themselves to popular
amplifications. It is true we do not know Sparrowes, Swallows, Storkes,
Doves, to be Mothers, but when we see them in their nests; but what is the true
reason hereof? Is it not because their young ones are wild, and as soon as they
are apt to fly, one flies one way, and another flies another way, they come
together no more; it is not so with chickens which are tame creatures, and we
see the carriage of the Hen toward them, we do not see the carriage of other
fowls toward their young ones.

Yet we read not the like of a Hen, as of a Storke, that when her nest was on
fire, out of a desire to save them with her wings from the fire, has not
forsaken her young ones till she was burnt her self; And we have seen also
how a Hen has sometimes peckt her young ones, and driven them from her, when
they would have roosted under her.

And in my judgment our Savior does not represent his tender affection to the
Jews, by the general affection of an Hen to hers, but to that particular
carriage of hers in desiring to gather her chickens under her wings. The Doctor
here alludes unto a known song.
Neither do I think that he who invited those mighty men, but unto what? unto
a Hen, was to express his singularity of affection toward them: be it that
God is more merciful to man then to all other creatures; whence I pray
proceeds this? is it not merely from the good pleasure of his own will? and if
so, why may he not, out of the mere pleasure of his own will restrain his
saving mercy to some few, who are accordingly called in Scripture expressly
vessels of mercy; distinguished from all the rest who are called vessels of
wrath.

Whereas he says, that with such a mercy cannot stand such a Decree, as
absolute reprobation. We answer; neither do we say any such decree does stand
with such a mercy; it is rather absolute election stands with such a mercy,
then any reprobation. The Scripture plainly giving us to understand, that they
on whom reprobation passes, are not vessels of mercy, but vessels of wrath.
But like as God though he spared not Angels when they fell, nor left any way
open unto them for repentance, whereby to return to his grace and favor, yet
he spared man, and left a way open unto him, to return to his grace and favor
by faith in Christ. In like sort, though God were pleased absolutely to elect
some amongst men, yet this nothing precludes him from dealing as absolutely in
reprobating others, that is, in purposing to deny them the spirit of faith and
repentance, whereby they might rise after they were fallen; which grace most
freely and absolutely he decreed to bestow, and as freely and absolutely he
does bestow on others, according to that of the Apostle, Romans 9. 18. he has
mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth. By this I pray judge of
the insipid nature of this discourse, yet see the foulness of his mouth;
unless God be indifferent unto all, and make all vessels of mercy, he is a
Father of Cruelty, and more properly so to be called, then a Father of mercies,
and the very name of the Devil (for so he takes upon him to interpret that
name in the Revelation (...) a Destroyer) is good enough for him. And the
conscience of his own piety, no doubt expert in Paraphrasing, and shaping some
Rhetorical flourishes, and passionate expressions, bears him out with such
confidence as to fear no Blasphemy. It is very likely he has a high conceit
of these performances, that he is so bold, as to profess in effect, that if
the contrary be true, then will he be guilty of as great Blasphemy, as to have
called God Satan; yet see the absurdity (that throughout he may be like
himself) of his discourse; whatsoever God be accounted by him in respect of
reprobates, does this any way hinder him from being the Father of mercies
toward his elect, who alone in Scripture phrase are called vessels of mercy?
His hatred of Esau, does it any way hinder his love to Jacob? If to damn be to
destroy, and no creature has power to damn but God only, can any be a
destroyer in this kind but God, as the efficient cause of Damnation and
destruction? But in case our Doctrine holds, does he damn any but for sin?
and shall he in this case be styled (...), in the sense it is delivered in the
Revelation? What thinks he? If many thousands, even all the Infants of Turks
and Sarazens dying in original sin, are tormented by him in Hell fire, is he
to be accounted the father of cruelties for this? And I profess I cannot
devise a greater show and appearance of cruelty, then in this. Now I beseech
you consider the spirit that breaths in this man; dares he censure God, as a
Father of cruelties for executing eternal death upon them that are guilty of
it? Now has not he himself professed, that all borne in original sin, are
borne guilty of eternal death? his words are these, Fol. 2. p. 2. That all
mankind is involved in the first sin, and the fruits thereof, which are
corruption of nature, and the guilt of eternal death. And this he confidently
believes. Now I should think, that there is no show of cruelty in executing
eternal death on them that are guilty of it: For if God were cruel herein,
then also he were cruel in damning each one whom he does damn both Men and
Angels. Now I pray, let every sober reader judge, which is the greater cruelty
of the two, to execute eternal death on him that is guilty of it, or to make
him by mere imputation guilty of eternal death, who otherwise is not guilty
of it? Is not this latter far greater cruelty then the former? Or indeed the
only cruelty; there being no cruelty in the other at all? (like as Cicero said,
for a Mule to bring forth having conceived, is no strange thing, but for a Mule
to conceive that indeed is prodigious.) Now this latter is this Authors
doctrine, expressly professing in the next page to that where now we are, that
the sin of Adam (the fruit whereof he makes to be the guilt of eternal
death.) is the sin of our nature by imputation only: whence it follows,
that God makes all men guilty of eternal death by imputation only. Now judge I
pray which of us makes God the Father of cruelties, he or we? This is the
fruit of opposition to Gods grace; for how can they taste of that grace of God
which they impugn, and in impugning it, how can it be but that they should be
given over to the curse of Gods wrath, to fill up the measure of their sin,
as it is said of the Jews, to fulfill their sin always, for the wrath of God
is come upon them to the uttermost; yea and to be stricken with the spirit of
giddiness also; and become like a drunken man, that erreth in his vomit, the
issue whereof is to defile himself, and those that are nearest to him. Yet he
trembles to think of these blasphemies; for in all this you must think his
zeal is very warm, and his piety reakes. So Saul persecuted the Saints of God
as blaspheamers; but when God did strike him down with a light from Heaven,
that he found that himself only was the blaspheamer. 1 Timothy 1. Well, I am
contented to consider his reaking fit.

Does his mercy please him, when he has made such a decree, as shows far
more severity toward men then mercy? Why (holy Sir) Gods severity toward
some, who in Scripture are called vessels of wrath, what does it hinder Gods
mercy toward his elect? Gods severity toward the Jews, did it any whit
qualify Gods bountifulness toward the Gentiles? I marvel not, he holds up
his discourse of Gods mercy in general, that so it might be appliable to all;
this was a pretty dogge-trick of his. But if Gods mercy has his course toward
his children only, as himself makes the accommodation, if God be severe
toward those who are none of his, shall this any way prejudice his mercy
toward them? or if he take liberty to account all Gods creatures his children
by reason of creation, why does he not extend the mercy of God to Devils also,
and for shame leave off his former distinction of (...), and (...), and
confess ingeniously, that it is not worth a rush. But whether he will
acknowledge it or no, the Apostle plainly speaks of vessels of mercy, in
distinction from vessels of wrath, and surely the course of his wrath on them,
does nothing impair the free course of his mercy toward others. But give we
him leave, to breath on: Is he slow to anger, when he has taken such a small
and speedy occasion to punish the greater part of men in Hell torments for
ever, and for one sin once committed, has shut up the greater part of men
under invincible unbelief and damnation? Now, I pray, apply this his devout
interrogation unto the Angels that fell, who upon the first sin committed by
them, have ever since been shut up under invincible hardness of heart, and
damnation. Yet what does this hinder his slownesse of anger, which is to be
understood of the execution of his wrath; not of his decree. For all the
decrees of God are everlasting, nor can be otherwise. And as for the execution
of wrath, the Devils themselves feel it not yet; they are reserved to the
judgment of the great day; they believe and tremble; they cried out to our
Savior, art thou come to torment us before our time? Nay suppose all were to
be damned to eternal death as soon as they were borne, what injustice were
there in this, if so be all be found guilty of eternal death, which this
Author denies not? Nay farther, he says it is God that has made them guilty
of it by mere imputation: yet as for the corruption of nature, which he makes
to be the other fruit of Adams sin, I do not find that he ascribes that to
divine imputation. Now what is the nature of this corruption, is it invincible
unbelief or no? if it be, then he disputes against himself, as well as
against us; if it be not, what unbelief does he call it, or is it no unbelief
at all? So I demand whether it be invincible hardness of heart or no? if not,
whether at all it is to be called hardness of heart? if notwithstanding this
corruption a man has power to believe, to obey, power to yield to any
spiritual good whereto he shall be excited, why does he call it natural
corruption? The Apostle plainly professes of them that are in the flesh, that
they cannot please God; that the natural man perceives not the things of God,
and that he cannot know them: of some, that they could not believe: of others,
that they cannot repent. But be all this granted, he is never a whit the less
slow to anger, that is, to punish; the Devils themselves as yet do rather
fear then feel his wrath.

Lastly, touching punishing in hell, it is either spoken of Infants, or Men of
ripe years, if of Infants departing in infancy; if guilty of eternal death,
it is no injustice to inflict it; and though he be slow to anger toward some,
yet it is not necessary he should be so to others. The Scriptures witness the
contrary, in the flood where Infants perished as well as others; and in the
destruction of Sodom by fire, where none were spared save Lot and his two
Daughters. As for men of ripe years, their damnation is not for original sin
only, but for actual sins unrepented of. The Angels fell irrecoverably upon
one actual sin; I know not the like condition of any besides. And as for the
smallness of Adams sin, which this Author is pleased to extenuate, by
calling it a small occasion, as if he were of his spirit that said, If God
turned Adam out of Paradise for eating an Apple, shall not I turn thee out of
my service for purloyning a fat Capon? Why does he not charge God rather, for
making all men hereupon guilty of eternal death by mere imputation, as
himself says; then for inflicting eternal death only on them that are guilty
of it, as we say? But let we him finish the Declamation he has begun. Is his
mercy abundant, does it extend it self farther then justice, when it is tackt
up so short, limited to a very few chosen ones, when a hundred for one at least
are unavoidably cast away, out of his only will and pleasure. As touching this
I have already showed, how much he is out in his Algebra, but let that pass,
unless this Divine take upon him to deliver truer Oracles then Saint Paul, we
are bound to believe, that the elect only are vessels of mercy, distinguished
from reprobates, as vessels of wrath. Romans 9. 22, 23. and toward these alone
it is, that his mercy is abundant, in the way of bestowing saving and
spiritual graces. It is untrue, that he has proved any such thing as he
pretends, namely that Gods mercy is extended to more persons then his justice.
And applied aright, namely as touching mercy seen in pardoning sins, in
changing the heart, and saving souls, which are peculiar to Gods elect, the
most brazen faced opposite to Gods holy truth that lives cannot deny, but that
they to whom these are granted, are far fewer then they to whom they are
denied. And if within the Church only (for there only are found such as fear
God) his mercy extends to thousands of them that fear him, when but to the
third and fourth generation he punishes the sins of the Father upon the
Children, (which is all the proof this Author brings to this purpose) it
follows not herehence, that his mercy extends any whit to more then does
his justice, considering the small proportion of those within the Church, and
therein of them that fear him, in comparison to those without the Church. And
like as visiting the sin of Fathers, which is commonly understood of
temporal punishments, so in proportion the mercy is to be understood of
temporal mercy. And we well know that it is nothing necessary, that a man that
fears God, should have children. And like as God does not always thus visit
the sins of Fathers upon the Children; in like sort it is not always
necessary, that God should show mercy to thousands of every one of them that
fear him. He dealt so with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; they to whom the Law
was delivered, knew this full well; then again, must not they who look to have
an interest in this gracious promise, look unto it, that they walk in the steps
of their Forefathers that feared God? By all which may appear, the
superficiary nature of this Disputants argumentation, even then, when the zeal
of his cause makes him, as most confident, so also most luxuriant. Lastly, do
we say that God damnes any man out of his only will and pleasure? Do we not
profess that he damnes no man but for sin? And as he damnes no man but for
sin, so likewise that he decreed to damn no man but for sin, though there
could be no cause of this his decree, but of his mere will and pleasure he
made this decree, namely, to damn many thousands for their sins. But let him
come to an end of this his roaving discourse, when he thinks good and not
before. Or does his love pass knowledge, when we see daily greater love then
this in men, and other creatures. What Father or Mother, would determine their
children to certain death, or to cruel torments worse then death, for one only
offense, and that committed too, not by them in their own persons, but by some
other, and only imputed unto them? How much less would they give themselves to
beget Children, and bring them forth, that they might bring them to the rack,
fire, gallows, and such like tortures and deaths; What do I hear? Does man
or any creature, show more love to their Children, then God does toward his
Elect? Did they ever provide such a sacrifice to make satisfaction for their
Childrens sins, as God did provide for his? Yea but reprobates also are Gods
Children, this must needs be his meaning, though in plain terms he spared to
express so much. How unnatural then was Christ, who would not pray for the
World if they were all his children? And what meant he to profess, that he
sanctified himself only for them for whom he prayed? Which sanctification of
himself, was in respect of the offering up of himself upon the cross, as
Maldonate confesses, was the interpretation of all the Fathers whom he had
read. And in that prayer professes of them saying, they are thine, and thou
gave them unto me, as much as to say; the World was not his. And farther
consider; Is it safe to measure out Gods proceedings, by the proceedings of
men? What Father or Mother would be content to execute a Child of theirs upon
the Gallows, when by some capital crime he has deserved it? How much less
hold them upon the rack of continual tortures; what then? must not God be
allowed to inflict eternal death upon his creatures? And what has an earthly
Father or Mother to do, either to determine or execute death on any? This
belongs to God not to man, unless he make choice of them, as of his Ministers
for the execution of vengeance. But this Author is nothing yet awaked out of
his dreams, or his Arminian Lethargy. Yet I hope he will grant that God did
foresee all this, even the sins of Judas in betraying, and of the Jews in
crucifying the Son of God; yet nevertheless, he was content to bring forth
both him and them into the World. Now what earthly Father and Mother, would not
make choice rather to be Childlesse, then to bring forth such children as
should deal with them, as Nero dealt with his Mother? Proceed then: and as
from the affections of earthly Fathers and Mothers, he disputes against the
absoluteness of Gods decrees, so also in the next place, let him conclude the
like, to the utter overthrowing of Gods foreknowledge. Yet who of our Divine
says, that God for one offense has determined death and tortures to any
reprobate of ripe years? Do they not all profess, that as many as dye in
actual sins unrepented of, God determined to damn them for those actual
sins unrepented of? I do not think he can allege any that denies this.
Again, what one of our Divines maintains that Infants perishing in original
sin, are damned for that sin, which is made theirs only by imputation? What
a shameless habit has he gotten to himself to deliver untruths? yet will he
not (I warrant you) be accounted a Pelagian, neither will he plainly deny
original sin as Grevincovius is said to have done, and that testibus
convinci potuit. Their Tenets are nothing less shameful, then Pelagius his
Tenets were, only they have not that ingenuity which Pelagius had, in
professing plainly, that there was no original sin conveyed unto us by
propagation.

Now he comes more closely unto the matter, yet but a little neither; a loose
and dissolute discourse is most suitable with his Genius.

1. Adams sin was no man's personal sin but Adams; true, for there was no
man then but Adam; but all men being the posterity of Adam, were then in Adam,
in that one person of Adam, and in him all have sinned, says the Apostle, Romans
5. and without consent to sin they could not sin.

2. When he says this sin of Adam, was not the sin of our nature by
generation; it is so wild an expression, that I profess I cannot devise any
tolerable sense of it. That we were in Adam when he sinned, it was fully
sufficient to bring upon us that corruption, that depth of corruption wherein
we are all conceived and borne, and not by imputation. What Divine amongst
Papists or Protestants is he, that maintains, that Adams sin, was the sin
of our nature by imputation? This is undoubtedly one of Arminius his flowers,
which this Author takes up among the rest, to make himself a nosegay to smell
unto. It was Gods will that all should stand or fall in him. For if it had
pleased him, he could have destroyed Adam for his transgression, and made a new
stock, from whom to derive the World of Mankind: But resolving all should
descend from him, he must withal resolve, that upon the sin of Adam, and of
them all in him, they must take from him such natures as Adams nature, and
therein all our natures were made corrupt by sin; excepting Gods grace to
provide better, both for Adam and his posterity, as he thought good. So that
look in what sort Adams nature was corrupted by sin, in such sort must we
receive corrupt natures from him. Here Calvin is brought in with a robe of
commendation, as an excellent servant of God: But God knows his heart, and the
hearts of all that oppose Gods truth in these points. It Is true that Calvin
says, both in respect of Gods power, to have propagated Mankind from another
original then from Adam as also in respect of his power, to reform corrupt
nature, in whomsoever it pleased him. But did Calvin think it possible, for
corrupt nature, to propagate any other nature then it self is? God made man
after his Image and likeness; but afterward we read that Adam brought forth a
son, after his Image and likeness; who can bring a clean thing out of that
which is unclean, says the book of Job? And that which is borne of flesh is
flesh, says our Savior. But does it herehence follow, or does Calvin, or any
Calvinist, or Lutheran, or Papist, say, that Adams sin is made ours only by
imputation? The case is not alike of other parents. For Adam was created in
grace, and endued with the spirit of God: this holy condition was lost by the
sin of Adam, and we receiving our natures from him, in the state of his
corruption, must therewithal receive, natures bereaved of grace, and of the
spirit of God. No such detriment to our pure nature was wrought, or could be
wrought, by the transgression of any other progenitor, no, nor by any other
sin of Adam besides the first.

3. God did pardon it in Adam upon his repentance, so is he ready to pardon it,
and all actual sins also of all men upon their repentance. And God renewed
Adam too, of his free grace after he was corrupt, and regenerated him by
showing mercy upon him; But this work proceeds according to the mere pleasure
of Gods will, as the Apostle witnesses saying, He has mercy on whom he will,
and whom he will he hardneth.

4. Christ came into the World, to take away the sins of the World, that is
by satisfaction for sin, to merit the pardon of it, nor pardon of sin only,
but salvation of soul also; but for whom? surely for none but such as should
sooner or latter believe in him; for God has ordained that these benefits of
Christ's death and obedience, should not be distributed absolutely, but
conditionally, to wit, upon the condition of faith. But as for the benefits of
faith and repentance, these are not benefits communicable upon a condition; for
what condition can precede them but a work of man? and it was condemned 1200
years ago: to say grace is given according unto merits, that Bellarmine
interprets simply of works; though Papists are apt enough to stand for merits,
and the Apostle says in plain terms, that God does not call us 2 Timothy 1. 9.
according unto works; these therefore are communicated according to the mere
pleasure of Gods will: He might have given faith to all, but he would not, I
will show mercy on whom I will show mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I
will have compassion. Exodus 33.

These things (he says) being well considered, will make any man (as he
thinks) to conclude in his thoughts, that if there be any such decree, God is
not merciful to men at all. A most unshamefac't pretense, and savouring of a
spirit that has expectorated all natural ingenuity: does not every one
perceive, that all this nothing at all hinders the incomprehensible nature of
Gods mercy toward his Elect? Dares he himself in plain terms deny this,
namely that it nothing prejudiceth the course of Gods mercy toward his Elect?
For what if by the sin wherein they are borne, they be made guilty of
eternal death, yet if God be pleased to pardon this sin, nor this only, but
all actual transgressions of theirs; yea, and break the yoke of their
corruption, and as he sees their ways so to heal them, yea to heal their
rebellions, and backslidings, to subdue their iniquities, to rule them with a
mighty hand, to make them pass under the rod, and bring them unto the bond of
the covenant, and when he has brought them thither, to hold them there, to
perfect the good work he has begun in them; As he has laid the foundation of
his temple in their hearts, so to finish it, to be the Author and finisher of
their faith, and as of their faith, so of their repentance, to hold them in his
hands, so that none shall take them therehence, to keep them by the power of
God through faith unto salvation, to build them upon a rock that the gates of
hell shall not prevail against them; either to deliver them from the hour of
temptation, or to deliver them out of it, or so to order it, that it shall not
be above their strength, to be with them when they go through the water, and
through the fire, that the floods shall not overwhelme them, the fire shall not
burn them, but as he leads them into it, so he will support them in it, and
lead them through it, as he led the Children of Israel into the red sea, and in
the red sea (as an horse in the Wilderness, that they should not stumble) and
out of the red sea, into the Wilderness, and in the Wilderness, and out of
the Wilderness; In a word, to fulfill the good pleasure of his goodness
toward them, his grace in them, and every good work that he has appointed for
them; in such sort that the beast shall not prevail over them, until they
have finished their testimony: and in which respect Saint Stephen, even when
the stones flew about his ears as thick as hail, seems to have gone to his
death, as composedly as a man goes to his bed; having ended his Sermon first,
his prayer for them in the next place, and lastly the commending of his own
spirit into the hands of God: this mercy, this rich mercy, this unspeakable
mercy, this Author most virulently, and most unconscionably, in cunning and
crafty carriage, labors to obscure and deface, and to dispute us out of the
faith of it, if it lay in his power (which lies not in the power of the Devils
themselves) as much as himself, and his informers scorn to apprehend any hope
of it; And all this as unsipidly and unscholastically, as profanely, by
general and indefinite terms, saying, by this Doctrine of ours God is not
merciful to men at all; wherein I guess his lurking hole is, in the
indefinite condition of the term Men; for dares he say, that by this doctrine
of ours we make God unmercifull to all men, even to the very Elect? Yet when he
says, to men at all, the face of his discourse in the common understanding of
it, should look this way. But if his meaning be, that he is not made merciful
to all, has himself any farther improved the mercy of God, then by enlarging
of it unto the children of God? And if he by children of God, understand all
men created by him, and we, only those, whom God has adopted in Christ and
regenerated, I pray consider, which of us, delivers himself in best
congruity to the Scripture phrase and meaning? Can he be ignorant, who they be
whom the Scripture styles vessels of mercy? Or that these are set in
opposition to vessels of wrath; and would he have us as brainsick as himself
to put no difference in the accommodation of Gods mercy; between vessels of
mercy, and vessels of wrath? As for the comparison between men and other
creatures, he is like himself throughout in the execution thereof.

1. He undertakes to show, that God is not so merciful to men as to bruit
creatures; most men are determined by Gods omnipotent decree, to such a being
as is a thousand times worse then no being at all. To let pass the absurdity
of the comparison, comparing things incomparable, to wit, being with no being;
and ascribing a betternesse to no being, which is as much as to ascribe a
better being to no being. Does not he himself acknowledge that as the elect
are but few amongst them that are called, so the number of Reprobates, is far
greater then the number of the Elect? Does not himself maintain, that God
has determined all reprobates (that is the most of men) by his omnipotent
decree, to such a being as is a thousand times worse then no being at all,
according to his judgment, and that this determination Divine is everlasting?
or though he dare not in plain terms deny, that God has determined most of
men to damnation. Does he not here bewray the disposition of his heart, namely,
either to maintain that Gods decrees are not everlasting, nor determined
concerning men, until their deaths, or that they are of a revocable nature? Or
will he fly to the qualification of the Divine decree here mentioned, and say
that albeit the most part of men are destinated to damnation by the decree
divine, yet not by an omnipotent decree? I guess his meaning is not by an
absolute, but by a conditional decree; for as for any distinction of Divine
decrees, into decrees omnipotent, I never yet read or heard; but this Gentleman
being of a phrasifying spirit, we must permit him sometimes to overlash,
otherwise we shall not have occasion to say of him, as Augustus said sometimes
of Haterius, Haterius noster sufflaminandus est. But if by a conditional
decree only, God has reprobated those whom he has reprobated, then the
decrees of reprobation cannot be eternal, but must needs be temporal; for res
conditionata, the thing conditionated cannot exsist before the condition it
self (whereupon it depends) has exsistence. Now the condition of reprobation
is merely temporal, to wit, final perseverance in infidelity or impenitency.

2. What if the condition of other creatures, be better then the condition of
reprobates? For what sober man should expect that the condition of impenitent
sinners should be better in the end, then the condition of beasts, who have
made themselves worse then beasts? But then he will say, what shall become of
all those amplifications of Gods mercy toward men, commended to us in holy
Scripture? I answer they all have place concerning Gods children, Gods elect,
the Scripture phrase acknowledging no other vessels of mercy, and counting all
others in distinction from them vessel of wrath; and one end whereto tends
Gods providence toward these vessels, the Apostle signifies plainly to be the
amplification of his mercy toward the vessels of mercy. Romans 9. 22, 23. Which
may be unfolded thus, that by seeing the miserable conditions of vessels of
wrath, they may be more sensible of Gods mercy toward them, in putting so
gracious a difference between them.

3. It cannot be denied, but God foresaw what the condition of most men would
be, if they were brought forth into the World; What then did God mean to bring
them forth? Where was his mercy in this? Were it not a thousand times better
for them not to be borne? And by being borne, was it not infallible that their
condition would be a thousand times worse then the condition of beasts,
according to this Authors grave and Philosophical discourse?

4. Consider though God foresaw, that being so dealt withal, as God meant they
should be, they would never repent nor believe; yet seeing God had other means
and motives in store, which he knew full well would prove effectual, to bring
them to faith and repentance, were he pleased to use them; (as Arminius
acknowledges, as I have often cited him, and it cannot be denied by the
maintainers of scientia media.) Where was Gods mercy, that would both have them
brought forth, and use only such means to bring them to faith and repentance,
which he knew would prove ineffectuall, and resolved not to use such means with
them, which he knew would prove effectual thereunto? I appeal to the
judgment of every sober man, whether this proceeded not merely from Gods
absolute decree to make them vessels of Wrath, that is fit vessels in whom
should shine the glory of his vindicative justice; even to show the riches of
his glory toward the vessels of mercy, whom he had prepared unto glory, as on
whom he was pleased to bestow such means of grace, as he knew full well would
prove effectual to bring them to faith and repentance, and final
preseverance, that so their souls might be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus
Christ: Mark I beseech you an evident demonstration from invincible grounds of
the truth, which this Author by base and superficiary considerations, labors
to deface and exstinguish if he could. For what if in the state of nothing,
they were so intelligent as this Author faines them, as to know to what end God
made them, and thereupon, would not accept of life? What if afterward they
should curse the day of their birth, and wish they had been made Toads or
Snakes? What shall God be therefore straightened in the exercise of his power, to
make what creatures he will, and to what end he will? For qui dedit esse, good
reason, quo fine sint habeat potestatem: What if the clay were so intelligent
as to know, that it should be fashioned into a vessel for a close-stoole or
chamberpot, when his neighbor clay shall be fashioned into a drinking cup to
serve at the table of King Agathocles, and it, out of the clayey stomach and
pride thereof, shall repine and grudge to be so basely used, and say (in one of
Aesops Fables) that it had rather continue clay still; shall therefore the
potter forgo his sovereignty in making of the same lump one vessel unto
honor, and another unto dishonor? What if God should tell Nebuchodonosor that
after he is dead, his scull should be turned to some such base use, and that
some common jakes should have the bottom of it pitched with his bones; and he
thereupon should wish he had never been rather; shall this be sufficient to
derogate from the Sovereign power of God, or restrain him from the like, or
from giving Jehoiakims body no better burying then the burial of an Ass? Or
cause stately and proud Jezabells body to be eaten of dogs? O what base manner
of discourses are these to deflower the Power and Sovereignty of the Almighty!
but I wonder not if after men have prostituted all honesty in opposing the
grace of God, they are soon found to loose their wits also. Yet I have not
done, I must not pretermit to answer his Scripture passage. What if it had been
good for Judas he had never been borne; it were as true if there were no
absolute decree of God for his damnation, but foreknowledge only that he would
be demned; but shall God therefore be forbidden upon the forfeiture of the
reputation of his goodness, to bring forth Judas into the World? But by the
way our Saviors words do not import hereby, that it were better for him he
had not been; for a being he might have had though never borne into life, as
many a one has had, that never saw the light of the Sun, their womb being
their grave. But because some men's tongues run riot against me, for the
interpretation of this passage, which I make in my Vindiciae, not sparing to
profess they will turn Atheists, when that is true, and as ready they have
been to profess under their hand, that they will sooner deny there is a God
then concur with the Contra-Remonstrants in their Doctrine of Reprobation: I
pray let them be enquired of, whether they, or any wise man else, was ever
known after such a manner to outface the interpretation that Maldonate gives of
that very place, which here I will subjoyne for special reason: thus then
Maldonate, De quo verbo nimis fortasse subtiliter quidam disputant, quomodo
melius Iudae fuisset, natum non esse, cum non esse, nullum, damnatum esse,
aliquod bonum sit; aliquid enim est, qui damnatus est; omne autem quod est, qua
est, bonum est. Hieronymus judicat existimasse aliquos, Iudam fuisse, antequam
nasceretur, Christumque certo consilio non dixisse, melius fuisset homini illi,
si numquam fuisset, sed si natus non esset, quasi, etiamsi non nasceretur,
futurus fuisset, ideoque naturalia bona sine malis habiturus. Suspicor D.
Hieronymum Originistas notare voluisse, qui omnes animas initio creatas fuisse
crediderunt and pro suo quamque merito aut expertem manner corporis, aut in
corpus tanquam in carcerem mitti; and vero Origines ipse ita hoc loco scribere
videtur, ut non long ab ea sententia abhorrere videatur. Eodem fere modo,
Enthymius interpretatur: at length he adds his own interpretation of the place
in the words following, Sed non sunt hujusmodi, Scripturae locutiones ad
Scholarum excutiendae subtilitatem: sunt enim proverbiales, and sumptae de
vulgo, in quibus quidam plerumque hyperbolicum esse solet, ut apud Job. cap. 3.
11. Quare non in vulva mortuus sum? Egressus ex utero non saltem perii? Et cap.
10. 18, 19. Quare de vulva aduxisti me? Qui utinam consumptus essem ne oculus
me videret, fuissem, quasi non essem, de utero translatus ad tumulum. Et cap.
3. 3. Et Jer. 20. 14. Pereat dies in qua natus sum. Haec enim omnia non tam
deliberato animi judicio, quam per querimoniam quae mala sua amplificare solet,
dicta sunt. Christus ergo ita de Juda loquitur, quemadmodum credibile erat,
ipsum de se in suppliciis positum esse loquuturum. Erat autem credibile eum
dicturum esse utinam nunquam natus essem, melius mihi fuisset non nasci, quam
ista pati; cum Job and Jeremias viri sanctissimi multo minor a passi idem
dixerint. Add quod Christus non dicit melius futurum fuisse, ut Judas non
nascitur, sed melius futurum illi esse, id est, ejus opinione, and judicio:
quemadmodum multis res adversas patientibus accidere videmus, ut corrupto
dolor judicio mortem vitae anteponant, cum dubium non sit melius esse vivere
quam mori.

2. I come to the comparison he makes between men and Devils, objecting that
our Doctrine makes God less merciful to men then to Devils. In one thing
(says he) this decree makes most men and Devils equal, utrisque desperata
salus, they are both sure to be damned. Now I say, this is most untrue. What
man living is in a worse state then Manasses was, when he made his Children
pass through the fire to Devils, gave himself to Witchcraft and Sorcery, and
filled Jerusalem with blood? On Saul when fleshed with the blood of Stephen,
and Ferox scelerum quia prima provenerant, he got a commission from the High
Priest to go to Damascus, and bind all that called on the name of the Lord
Jesus; yet it appeared in the issue that both these were the elect of God. Do
not they themselves profess that reprobation is upon final perseverance in
infidelity or impenitency? So that there is no sufficient evidence of
reprobation, but this final perseverance in sin. In like sort by their
Doctrine, none can be sure of his election until he be dead, because they
constitute it upon foresight of final perseverance in faith and repentance. It
is true if God should reveal to any that he is a reprobate, he might be sure
he should be damned, and that as well according to their shaping of
reprobation, as according unto our.

But in three things he says men are in a far worse condition by it; let us
consider them.

1. The first is, In their appointment unto Hell, not for their own proper
personal sins, but for the sins of another, made theirs only by Gods order
and pleasure.

Now I see why he pretends to oppose the Sublapsarian way (keeping his liberty
upon every occasion to ejaculate what his malice can suggest unto him against
the Sublapsarian.) For only against the Sublapsarian way this objection has
place; and that not justly, but most unjustly, most untruely. For not one of
them that I know, does maintain that God by reprobation intended to damn,
either Cain, or Judas, or Esau, but for their actual sins and transgressions
unrepented of. And as for those Heathen Infants who perish in original sin,
they perish for that corruption wherein they are borne, which is as natural
unto them as the Leprosy of the Father, or any hereditary disease is naturally
derived to the Child; by virtue whereof they are borne children of wrath, as
the Apostle expresses, and if to be borne children of wrath, be to be in a
worse condition then Devils, seeing to be borne children of wrath, is not our
making; if it be of Gods making, and that according to Gods mere pleasure; it
must be acknowledged, that this is a worse condition, and nevertheless God is
to be justified herein: and wisdom is justified of her Children: and if
Arminius will not concur with us herein, sure I am Papists will. For thus
Bellarmine discourses, De lib. arbit. lib. 2. cap. ult. Long major justitiae
rigor apparet in reprobatione hominum quam Angelorum, tum quia maximam partem
hominum, minimam Angelorum reprobavit, tum! etiam quoniam Angelorum nullum De
us paenae sempiternae addicit, nisi propter culpam propria voluntate comissam,
hominum autem plurimos damnat propter solum Originale peccatum, quod aliena
voluntate commissum fuisse non dubium est. And yet though in this respect, the
rigor be greater, nevertheles considering the punishments of Infants, which
Austin professes to be mitissimam, thus it is qualified that undoubtedly it is
better for the^ to be as they are then to be Devils. Though as touching the
kinds and degrees of punishment, that is of a mysterious nature, the Scripture
co^cealling it, and we have no help of reason to succor us in the
investigation thereof. Far better, our care be to avoid it, both as well by
orthodoxy of Faith, as by holiness of life. And him that looks for salvation
by grace it behooves, to look unto it, how he shapes this grace of God, least
if he be found to mock God, giving the main stock of his conversion to his own
Free will, rather then unto God, he may be mocked in the end, and meet with no
better Salvation, then the liberty of his will can procure him, which will
prove condemnation rather then salvation. See (I pray) what giddiness of
spirit he betrays, in laying such a crimination to our charge, whereunto
himself is obnoxious in an equal degree, or in a higher degree then we. For
he has confessed, that God of his mere pleasure, makes all Infants guilty of
eternal death; now where appears the greater rigor? on our side, who say, God
inflicts eternal death on none, but such as are guilty of eternal death? or
rather on his side who says, that God of his mere pleasure, makes men guilty
of eternal death?

2. The second is, that their inevitable destination to destruction, is under
show of the contrary: the Devils as they are decreed to damnation, so they
know it, but men even those that are appointed unto wrath, are yet fed up with
hopes of salvation. Is it possible that a man in his right wits should so
miserably forget, and so shamefully carry himself? Does not he himself
maintain that all reprobates are from everlasting appointed to eternal death?
It may be his meaning is, that no reprobate is appointed to eternal death
until his death; so making Gods decrees temporal, and denying them to be
eternal. But if this be his opinion, what Arminian or Remonstrant concurres
with him in this? But if reprobation and election be eternal; how do we feed
reprobates up with the hope of salvation, more then he himself? Does he think
none but the elect are his hears? (for I do not know whether he may run, and
whether his shallow wits may carry him: whether to the dreaming of an
universal election with Huberus.) And does he not feed up all his hearers with
hope of salvation as well as we? And how do we feed them up with hopes of
salvation? Do we feed our hearers with any other hopes of salvation, then are
builded upon faith and repentance, and final perseverance therein? And do we
not strike them as well with the terrors of God, and fears of damnation, in
case they do not believe in Christ, or not break off their sins by
repentance? And does not he the like? Or if he has good grounds of hope, that
all and every one that hears him, is or may be an elect of God, why may not we
or any other Minister, have as good grounds as he for such an hope? But what
does he mean so superficially to presume, that we teach that men do not
perish, defectu misericordiae divinae, but defectu voluntatis propriae? Why
should he so confidently presume, that we should teach such contradiction to
the doctrine of Augustine, who professes expressly of many, that they perish
non tam quia ipsi servari nolint, This is alleged also by our British
Divines in the Synod of Dort: Romans 9. 18. John 8. 47. Romans 9. 23.
quam quia Deus non vult. As is apparent of all Infants that perish in
original sin, out of the Church of God: Nay why should he presume of all us
to be stricken with the same spirit either of infatuation or obstinacy, as to
Preach a Doctrine so directly contrary to the holy doctrine of Saint Paul,
professing, that God has mercy on whom he will, etc. And to our Savior whose
profession is, that therefore men hear not Gods word because they are not of
God. How otherwise could the damnation of the vessels of wrath, tend to the
augmentation of the riches of Gods glory toward the vessels of mercy; namely,
when they shall consider, that it was the mere grace of God to put so merciful
a difference between them and others; regenerating them, and bestowing faith
and repentance on them, the bestowing whereof he denied to many thousand
others, yet withal it is true that men therefore do not believe and repent,
because they will not: but if you ask quare nolunt, says Austin, imus in
longum; yet to this he accommodates his answer thus, men will not many things
either quia latet, they know not the benefit of it, or quia non delectat, it is
not pleasing to them. At (says he) ut innotescat quod latebat, and suave fiat
quod non delectabat, Dei gratia est, quae humanas adjuvat voluntates: We do
not smother this truth of God, that we may delude men, we rather represent how
all flesh are obnoxious and endangered unto God; that all are borne in sin,
and therewithal children of wrath, and such as deserve to be made the
generation of Gods curse; and that it is at his pleasure to show mercy on any:
only the word of God has power to raise us from the dead, his voice pierces
the graves, and makes dead Lazarus hear it, and it is his course to call some
at the first, some at the last hour of the day; Thus we desire to bring them
acquainted first with the spirit of bondage, to make them fear, that so they
may be prepared for the spirit of Adoption, whereby they shall cry Abba father:
neither do we despair of any that are humbled with fear, we count rather
their case most desperate, who are nothing moved hereby, or that persuade
themselves they have power to believe when they will, and repent when they
will; we account no greater illusions of Satan then these; yet these abominable
opinions may be fostered by some, and masked with a pretense of great piety
forsooth, and a show of holiness, and a zeal of defending Gods glory, and
salving the honor of his mercy, justice and truth.

3. The third is, in their obligation to believe, and the aggravation of their
punishment by not believing. The Devils, because they must be damned, are not
commanded to believe in Christ, yet poor men must be tied to believe in
Christ, and their torments must be increased if they believe not. I make no
doubt but this Author is as confident of his learned and judicious carriage in
shaping this comparison, as that the fruit of Adams sin is the guilt of
eternal death in all mankind. But none so bold (we commonly say) as blind
Bayard: and it seems either he knows not, or considers not, that the first
sin of Angels was unto them as death unto man; that sin placed them extra
viam, and in termino incur abilis miseriae, as death only places wicked men in
the like case. Now we do not say that God commands man after he is dead to
believe in Christ, any more then he commands obedience unto Angels, since
their case is become desperate. The Devils are not commanded to believe or
repent, because God does not, nor never did purpose to damn any of them for
want of faith, or of repentance, but for their first Apostasy from God. But it
is otherwise with man, for God does not purpose to damn any of them but for
sin unrepented of. And therefore as good reason there is, why their damnation
should be increased, for want of repentance and acknowledging of Gods truth, as
why the Devils should be damned for their first Apostasy. If perhaps (as it is
likely enough) this Author to hold up his comparison, shall fly to God decree
of reprobation, upon supposition whereof, it was impossible that men should
either believe or repent; I answer first, that in like sort upon supposition
of Gods foreknowledge, that they would neither believe nor repent, it follows
as necessarily, as it is necessary that Gods knowledge should be infallible,
that it was impossible they should believe and repent: and the like follows
as necessarily of the Apostasy of Angels, as of the infidelity and impenitency
of man. And as men are pretended to harden themselves in vicious courses upon
supposition of the unalterable nature of Gods decree; So Austin gives instance
in like manner of one that hardened himself upon pretense of Gods infallible
knowledge. De bono persever. cap. 15. Fuit quidem in nostro Monasterio, qui
corripientibus fratribus, our quaedam nonfacienda faceret, and facienda non
faceret, respondebat, quali^cunque nunc sim, talis ero, qualem me Deus esse
futurum praescivit. Qui profecto and verum dic^hat, and hoc vero, non
proficiebat in ^onum, sed vsque adeo profecit in malum, ut deserta Monasterii
societ^te, fieret canis reversus ad ^uum vonutum, and tamen adbuc qualis sit
futurus, incertum est Secondly I answer, that the like may be said of Angels
upon presupposition of Gods decree to deny the grace of standing unto them,
which Austin professes expressly, namely, that either in their creation
minorem acceperunt amoris divini grattam; or that afterward, the reason why
the one sort stood when the other fell was this, to wit, because they were
amplius adjuti then their fellows, and consequently the other minus adjuti.
And as God gave grace to the elect Angels, which he denied to others: So it
cannot be denied, but that from everlasting he decreed, both to bestow it upon
the one, and deny it unto the other. Now howsoever I know the Arminian party
cannot swallow this morsel; yet by this it appears how supersiciary is that
augmentation of the difference between Men and Angels, wherewith this Author
contents himself: yet notwithstanding it is not want of faith alone that
condemns any man; by want of Faith man is lest to the covenant of works, to
stand or fall according to his own righteousness or unrighteousness: whereof
if he fail, and withal despises the counsel or God offered him in his
Gospel, is there noe good reason, his condemnation should be the greater? For
certainly it is in the power of a natural man, to afford as much faith to
this, as to many a vile and fabulous relation, which is far less credible by
judgment natural: we see both profane persons and hypocrites, so far to
believe the Gospel, as to embrace a formal profession thereof, and sometimes
proceed so far therein, as that it is a hard matter to distinguish them from
sincere professors: yet we say a true faith is only such as is infused into the
heart of man, by the spirit of God in regeneration. Now, what one of our
Divines can be represented, that ever was known to affirm, that the damnation
of any man shall be increased, because God did not regenerate him, and in
regeneration inspire a Divine faith into him? As for our answer in general to
this argument considered in brief, and this Authors reply; my refutation
thereof I dispatched in the first place. Although he carries himself not
fairly in relating the answer on our part; in as much as therein he mixeth the
consideration of justice divine, which is aliene from the present purpose, with
the consideration of mercy divine, which alone is congruous; that so while he
puts off the plenary justification of his reply, to that which is aliene, he
may seem to undertake a full justification of his reply to the whole. But I
hope we shall be as able by Gods assistance, to manifest his sinister carriage
in the interpretation of Gods justice, as we have done already, as touching his
accommodation of Gods mercy.

DISCOURSE. SECT. III. This I divide into Five Subsections.
SUBSECT. I.
IT Fights with the justice of God, etc.

The Lord, says David, is righteous in all his ways, Psalm. 145. The
judgments of the Lord, says Solomon, are weight and measure, Prove. 16. 11.
That is, exact and without all exception. So just is God, that he offers the
justice of his decrees and ways, to the trial of humane understanding. Isai.
5. 3. Judge I pray you, between me and my vineyard: and Ezech. 18. 25. He is
content to prove himself just by plain arguments, through the whole chapter;
Are not my ways equal, and your ways unequal? And he permitted Abraham,
when he was in his greatest humility, acknowledging himself to be but Dust and
Ashes, to reason with him about the equity of his doings; Will thou slay the
righteous with the wicked. Shall not the judge of all the earth do right? Genesis
18. 23, 25. And Moses also, Number. 16. 22. is suffered to argue Gods justice in
the same manner; Shall one man sin, and will thou ^e ^^oth with all the
Congregation* In a word; so evidently just is God in all his proceedings, that
many both good and bad, who have felt his justice have cleared God, and deeply
charged themselves, witness, Ezra, Nehemiah, and Daniell in their ninth
Chapters, and Adonibezek, Judges 1. ^. and the Emperor Mauricius, who having
seen his children butchered, and waiting every Osi^nd. Eccles, Hi^ ^ent. ^. p.
200.
minute for the bloody stroke of death, brake out into these words; Justus es
Domine, and justum est judicium tuum. Righteous art thou O Lord, and just is
thy judgment. With this inviolable justice of God, absolute reprobation (of
such especially as are commanded to believe and called to Salvation) cannot be
reconciled. My reasons are these.

1. Because it makes God to punish the righteous with the wicked, as it is
taught the Supralapsarian way, directly, as it is defended the Sublapsarian way
by good consequence.

The Sublapsarians present man to God in his decrees of reprobation considered
without sin and will have God to determine the infliction of unspeakable
misery upon millions of men, without consideration of any evil in them
original or actual (as I have touched before) and so they make him plainly to
be a destroyer of the righteous.

The Sublapsarians (for against their way have I tied my self to bend my
reasons) present man to God, considered indeed in original sin, which is a
sin (so far as it concerns Adams posterity) made ours only by Gods order
and appointment, and so in effect they say, 1. That God did lay upon every man
a necessity of being borne in original sin. 2. That he has determined for
that sin, to cast away the far greater part of Mankind for ever; and so
they make God to do by two acts, the one accompanying the other, which the
other say he did by one: and they will not stick, if they be put to it, to say
as D. Twisse does, Quod Deus potest intercedente libera sua ^^stitutione, illud
D. Tw^sse^. 2. di^r.1. p. 15.
etiam absolute poterit, vel sine ali ^^^ constitutione intercedent^. That is
God may decree men to hell (for that is the thing he speaks of) for Adams
sin, which is derived to them by the only constitution of God, he may as well
do it absolutely, without any such constitution. It is all one in substance,
to decree the misery of an innocent man, and to purpose, that he shall be
involved in a sin, that so he may be brought to misery: neither of these
Decrees are just. Non iustitia iusta dicetur (says Fulgentius) si puniendum
reum non invenisse sed fecisse dicatur: major vero e^it iniustitia, si lapso
Deus retribuat Fulgent. ad Menim. l. 1.
poenam, quem stantem praedestinasse dicitur ad ruinam.

TWISSE Consideration.
With us Christians there is no doubt or question made of the truth of this,
that God is righteous in all his ways: yea though he command Abraham to
sacrifice his son; and though he caused not only Achan to be stoned for his
trespassing about the excommunicate thing, but his children also with him; and
though he visit the sin of Fathers upon the Children to the third and fourth
generation of them that hate him. And though in the drowning of the World, he
caused Infants to perish with their parents, some in their Mothers womb, some
hanging on their Mothers breasts: And so in the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah with fire from heaven. And not so only, but the righteous God has
given us power over inferior creatures, to wear them out in serving our
turns with them, yea and to knock them in the heads, to cut their throats, and
strangle them as we think good: and we are no whit the more unrighteous in
executing this power, which God has given us upon them: yea in giving his own
and holy Son to be reviled, blaspheamed, betrayed, condemned, crucified, so
to make his soul an offering for our sins. In all these ways the Lord is
righteous, and holy in all his works, Solomon says, Prove. 16. 11. That a just
weight and balance are the Lords, all the weights of the bag are his work.
And the same Solomon in the same chapter says, v. 4. The Lord has made all
things for himself, yea even the w^^ed against the day of evil. This revives
in me the remembrance of a pretty story; An odd fellow came to his Neighbor
to borrow a bushel of Malt, saying, the merciful is righteous and lends;
the other answered him in the same element saying, The ungodly borrows and
pays not again; Where is that says the borrower? Where is yours says the
other? Why, says he, the place I mentioned is in the 37 Psahne. So is mine
too, says the other. But proceed we along with him: Whereas he says Gods
judgments are without exception, that is untrue, for we find the Apostle Saint
Paul to take notice of exceptions made against the ways of God in some
particular casts; as when God has mercy on Romans 9. 18, 19, 20, 21.
whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth: upon the proposal of this
Doctrine the Apostle takes notice of such an exception as this. Thou will say
then, why does he yet complain, for who has resisted his will: and the
justification hereof, the Apostle derives from no other consideration then
this, that God is our Creator, and we are his creatures: And that as the Potter
has power over the clay of the same lump, to make one vessel to honor, and
another to dishonor; so has God. O man (says Paul) who art thou that
disputest with God, shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it, why have
thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over the clay? And as the Psalmist
says, That Gods judgments are like a great deep: So the Apostle professes,
That his judgments are unsearcheable, and his ways past finding out. And in
the common opinion this is Romans 11. 33.
delivered as touching the depth of Gods counsel in reprobation and
predestination; and by the coherence of the words, with that which goes before
it, appears to be spoken upon Gods dispensing and denying grace to whom he
will, and when he will; As for example; like as there was a time when God had a
Church in the World, without distinction of Jews and Gentiles, so afterward
the providence of God was to display it self after three several ways, the
first was in gathering a Church unto himself out of the World, from out of the
posterity of Abraham, these were called the Jews, in distinction from the
Gentiles, who for a long time had not obtained mercy, as the Apostle speaks,
Romans 11. 30. In as much as they believed not: And this dispensation of grace
peculiar unto the Jews, with rejection of the Gentiles, continued for about
1600 years. Then God gathered a Church among the Gentiles, with rejection of
the Jews, as the Apostle signifies in the place before alleged, saying, now
you have obtained mercy through their unbelief. And this dispensation of Gods
grace peculiar unto the Gentiles, has continued now, for about 1600 years. And
we believe a time shall come, for the calling of the Jews, and then the Church
of God shall consist both of Jews and Gentiles, and the general calling of
them, as the Apostle signifies, Romans 11. 12. If the fall of them be the riches
of the World, and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, how much
more their fullness: and v. 15. If the casting away of them be the reconciling
of the World, what shall the receiving of them be but life from the dead: and
v. 31. Even so have these also now not believed, that through your (Gentiles)
mercy, they also (the Jews) might obtain mercy. For God has concluded them
all under unbelief, that he might have mercy on all. And hereupon it is, that
the Apostle breaks forth into admiration of this various providence of God, and
different dispensation of his grace, saying, O the depth of the riches both of
the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearcheable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out? So that albeit the justice of God, be apparent to the
understanding of man in some of his ways, yet not in all. Neither does it
follow, that because God offers the justice of his courses, to the trial of
humane understanding in some particulars, therefore he offers it to the same
trial in all; or that the understanding of man is able to comprehend it in
all. Not only carnal men cry out sometimes, Where is the God of judgment?
Mal. 2. 17. Again, it is in vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we
have kept his commandments, that we have walked humbly before the Lord of
hosts? But even the children of wisdom, which are apt to justify her, are yet
sometimes offended through weakness of faith, or want of judgment to
comprehend the depth of Gods providence, when they have considered the strange
prosperity of the wicked, as Job. 21. 6, 7, 8. and David, Psalm. 73. and Jeremy,
Jer. 12.

But to consider punctually the instances here particulated. First not one of
them treats of Gods decrees, though this Author boldly claps then in amongst
the ways of God: And these places throughout entreat not of the decrees
themselves, but of the executions of Gods decrees. As that Isaiah 5. 3. Judge I
pray you between me and my vineyard; yet this was mere grace and not justice;
but the laying of it wast, (as there he threatens) for the unfruitfulnesse
thereof, was just even in the conscience of man: So likewise the ways of God
mentioned, Ezech. 18. 25. are most equal, as namely in rewarding the obedient,
and punishing the disobedient. In like sort there is no question to be made of
Gods decrees, concerning the rewarding the one, and punishing the other. And it
is as true, that all this is nothing to the purpose. The main question being
touching Gods decree, to give the grace of obedience to one, and deny it unto
others; and of the execution hereof, in showing mercy on whom he will, and Romans
9. 18;
hardening whom he will. No reason hereof can be devised by man without falling
into manifest absurdity, or manifest heresy, or both. It is true God will not
slay the righteous with the wicked: for the Infants of wicked Parents, until
God be pleased to regenerate them, are not to be accounted righteous, as being
borne children of wrath. Ephesians. 2. 3. And therefore as in the conflagration of
Sodom, God took a course to save righteous Lot, yet the Infant children of the
Sodomites were consumed Genesis 19.
in the same fire with their Parents. And in like manner I answer to that of
Moses. Number. 16. 22. Shall one man sin, and will thou be angry with all the
congregation? You know though Korah might be, and in likelihood he was the
principal instigator yet Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab, and On, the
son of Peleth, the sons of Reuben joined with him in the separation, and
with these were joined no less then 250 Captains of the assembly, and they
famous in the congregation and men of renown. Nor did those alone perish in
this their separation, but their families also. So that whereas when Moses
exhorted all the rest to depart from the tents of those wicked men, and
thereupon Dathan and Abiram came out and stood in the door of the Tent, with
their Wives, and their Sons, and their little Children, all these were
swallowed up, and went down quick into the pit: and do you think their little
Children were partners with them in this conspiracy? And is not this judgment
strange? What can justify this, but the power of God, is Lord over his
creature, together with that original corruption that is found in every one
when they come into the world? Guess, I pray, how happy this Author is in his
observations. This makes me remember, how at my first coming into this place,
having to deal with certain Brownists, being willed thereunto by our Diocesan:
An old man among the rest, was willing to confer, so we would give him
liberty to open his mind at full; we willingly condescended unto him, and
thereupon he began to allege places of Scripture to justify his separation;
and wheresoever he found the word separate, that he took up for an argument on
his side (like him that did set down every ship that arrived in the harbor at
Athens, as one of his ships) and amongst the rest, this 16 chapter of Numbers
afforded him one authority v. 21. where the Lord speaks unto Moses and Aaron,
saying, separate your selves from among this congregation; whereunto I
answered; here indeed is a separation commanded, but from whom? Surely from
those who rose up in rebellion against Moses and Aaron: Now if you can prove us
to be such, as rise up in rebellion against Moses and Aaron, then, in the name
of God separate your selves from us: But if we are not the men that rise up in
rebellion against Moses and Aaron, but you rather, then are not you commanded
to separate from us, but we rather are commanded to separate from you; yet we
desire only, that you will not separate from us, and all shall be well. But to
return, what does this author think? Was God in a passion, or something
precipitate when he said, separate your selves from among this congregation,
that I may consume them all at once, and did Moses moderate him as being
more-staid of the two? I hope, if God had done as much as he offered to do,
his action had been justifiable, as well in the one as in the other. Certainly
God should be just, even in turning his holy Angels into nothing: and was just
in exposing his holy Son to tortures unexpressable upon the cross; other
manner of proceedings, then were those which were used toward Adonibezek and
Mauricius: they justified God from consideration of their former sins: No
such course of justification could have place in annihilating Angels, or had
course in breaking the Holy Son of God for our iniquities. Yet these
instances are remarkable to observe therein, the felicity of this Authors
discourse. For first, was it God indeed that executed this judgment upon
Adonibezek? Now the Text says, the children of Judah were Judge. 1. 6, 7.
they that dealt thus with him: did God then use their free wills, as his
instruments for the execution of this judgment? And how was this? Was it by
working them hereunto, or only by concurring with them to this act, as
foreseeing they would do such an act, and thereupon decreeing to concur to
the producing of that act? If God did work them hereunto, then can God work the
will of any man to the doing of any free act freely: for who dares say that the
children of Israel did not as freely do this as ought else? But if God only
concurred with them, to the doing of it modo vellent, and only, upon foresight
that they would do it, decreed to concur to the doing of it, calls he this
Gods execution of judgment, depending merely upon the pleasure of man
foreseen by God?

As for the outrage executed upon Mauricius by Phocas, this was no less then
abominable villainy, as committed by him. Yet if God used him as an instrument
herein, to execute his judgment, then God by the sinful act of one, can and
does punish the same of another, and consequently God must be the Author of
that sinful act, whereby he punishes another, and that by Arminius his rule,
which is this, Omnis paena non permittitur sed infligitur a Deo, and habet Deum
authorem. Now I come to consider his accommodation of so impertinent a
discourse. He says absolute reprobation cannot be reconciled with this justice
Divine: we say there is no need at all of reconcilement: for what an insipid
thing is it, to talk of a course of reconciling them, who were never at odds?
But he takes upon him to prove the repugnancy between them by three reasons.

1. The first whereof is this. It makes God to punish the righteous with the
wicked, as it is taught the Supralapsarian way directly. I confess here is a
direct somewhat, but whether a direct truth, or a direct lie, let the
indifferent judge. He adventureth the proof of it thus: The Supralapsarians
present man in his decree of Reprobation considered without sin: that is true
I confess, and it is as true that they present him considered without
righteousness also; and for good reason, because Gods decree was eternal, and
the creature at that time had no being and to consider a thing that has no
being, as having being, is not so much considerare, to consider, as errare or
fingere, to err or feign, this I have delivered in my Vindiciae gratiae Dei,
and that in the first part of the first book. And this Author pretends he has
read the second, yet he takes no course to refute this or ought else. But let
him go on. God (he says) is made by them to determine the infliction of
misery on men without consideration of sin, either Original or actual.
First, let it be granted, yet herehence it follows not, that he is made to be
a destroyer of the righteous, or to punish the righteous with the wicked, which
was that he affirmed. To determine punishment is one thing, to punish is
another thing. Certainly in the opinion of those he speaks of, God punishes
none but the wicked; the very conscience of this Author cannot but convict him
of falsehood in this crimination: For certainly by their opinion it does not
follow but that every one is found wicked, when God does punish him. I may as
well say in most absolute congruity, that by their opinion, God does punish
men, before they have any being by creation: for such they were indeed, and
neither wicked nor righteous, when God passed the decree of reprobation upon
them. But neither do these Divines maintain, that God did decree to damn any
man but for sin. Nay, I go farther: let the object of reprobation be men not
yet created, and so considered, as I have proved it to be so, herehence it no
way follows, that the decree of reprobration, is in any moment of reason or
nature, before the consideration or citra considerationem peccati: and this
also have I proved. This Author boldly supposes the contrary to be true,
without any proof, yet pretends he has read my Vindiciae Gratiae Dei farther
off then where I have handled this. I say he pretends it, but I do not know
how he comes by this, it may be as Capons come by Chickens.

Hence he proceeds to the Sublapsarians also, the whole Synod of Dort (as it is
supposed) our Britain Divines, and all; for against their way he has tied
himself to bend his reasons, but so, that as the Pope by his grants, does
never bind his own hands, for this Author has power to untye himself at
pleasure, and to fly out against the Supralapsarians also: as Scanderbeg did
against the two Persian challengers; but he was put thereunto, because they
contrary to the compact, set both at once on him. But this champion like a tall
fellow, and of a brave spirit, as if he should not have his hands full of a
whole Synod, lets fly at all: They indeed, I mean the Sublapsarians, consider
mankind in original sin; this he may well suppose: but he goes farther, and
supposes also, that this sin is made ours only by Gods order and
appointment: For so, says he, they in effect do say.

1. That God did lay upon every man, a necessity of being borne in Original
sin. But in this also he speaks at pleasure, quoting no passage of any
Author. God may be said to lay upon man a necessity of eternal condemnation,
dying in sin unrepented of: yet no sober man will say, that God is the author
of a man's condemnation, by Gods only order and pleasure; For this implies, that
there is no meritorious cause of condemnation in man. God (we say) of mere
pleasure, bestows the grace of repentance on whom he will; because he finds
all equal in natural corruption, and no difference in any, whereby to move
God to bestow grace on him rather then on another. The case is not alike when
God comes to bestow salvation and inflict damnation; for some he finds dying in
sins, others dying in the Lord: yet we deny not but by power absolute, and
secluding the determination of his own will, he could annihilate the righteous
as well as the wicked. In like sort the whole course of nature depends merely
upon the pleasure of God: yet we say it is natural for a Leprous person, to
beget a Leprous person: and so as natural it is, for that which is borne of
the flesh to be flesh, though each depends upon the constitution of God. For
albeit Adam lost the spirit of God by his transgression, and all supernatural
graces wherewith he was endued; yet like as God by regeneration, of his mere
pleasure restored them afterward to Adam, and in due time does restore them to
every one of his Elect: so in their very conception, if it pleased God, he
could for Christ's sake infuse them; notwithstanding the sin of Adam; and
consequently it is the free act of God, in refusing after this manner to deal
with them. Yet this nothing hinders, but that the propagation of spiritual
corruption unto all Adams posterity, may be as natural as the propagation of
any hereditary disease from the Father to the child: and over and above, that
it is not in the way of mere pleasure, but in the way of justice; for the sin
of Adam, which was the sin of our nature, bereaving him of that original
righteousness wherein he was ^reated: and causing all mankind to be, 1.
Derived from him, whereas he could have otherwise provided, 2. And that from
Adam after his nature was corrupt with sin, whereas he could have derived
posterity from him before his fall, had it pleased him. And therefore I approve
the second Canon of the Synod of Dort, whereunto our English Divines with many
others subscribed: where they profess, that the corruption derived from Adam
to his posterity was, per vitiosae naturae propagationem justo Dei iudicio
derivata. This I take to be much different from saying, Adams sin is made
ours by mere pleasure, or by imputation only. So the fifteenth Article in the
confession Ecclesiarum Belgicarum runs thus; Credimus Adami in obedientia,
peccatum originis in totum genus humanum diffusum esse: quod est totius naturae
corruption, and vitium haereditarium, quo and ipsi infantes in matris suae utero
polluti sunt, quodque veluti radix omne peccatorum genus in homine producit;
ideoque ita foedum and execrabile est coram Deo, ut ad generis humani
condemnationem sufficiat. Our Britain Divines, in their second Thesis upon the
third and fourth Articles, explicate themselves concerning the condition of
original sin in this manner. Lapsae voluntati inest non tantum peccandi
possibilitas, sed etiam praeceps ad peccandum inclinatio; Nec aliter se potest
res habere in homine corrupto, nondum per divinam justitiam restaurato: cum ea
sit natura voluntatis, ut nuda manner nequeat, sed ab uno, cui adhaeserat,
objecto excidens, aliud quaerat, quod cupide amplectatur, ideo per spontaneam
defectionem habitualiter adversa a Deo creatore, in creaturam effraeni impetu
fertur, ac cum ea libidinose ac turpiter fornicatur, semper avida fruendi
utendis, ac vetita moliendi ac patrandi. Quid mirum ergo si talis voluntas sit
Diaboli maneipium? I find indeed in Corvinus such a profession of his, namely,
that ex puro Dei arbitrio, qui Adami peccatum nobis imputare voluit, etiam in
nos reatus derivatus est. And Walaeus in answer unto him writes thus; Nec
quinto illo ad Romans Capite, ad quod nos hic Corvinus remittit, quicquam tale
dicitur aut innuitur, nempe quod ex mero Dei arbittio pendeat haec primi
peccati imputatio.

2. The Second thing he puts upon our Divines is, That God has determined for
that sin, to cast away the far greater part of mankind for ever: and so
they make God to do that by two acts, the one accompanying the other, which
the other say he did by one. To which I answer, First, that if they say that
God does no more by two acts, then, the other say, God did by one, seeing I
have proved that the other do no way maintain that God does punish the
righteous with the wicked, which is his immodest and unshamefac't crimination;
no nor do they maintain, that God determined to damn any but for sin, and
which is more then that, supposing humanum genus nondum conditum, to be the
object of reprobation, yet does it not follow, that in any moment of nature,
the decree of damnation is before the consideration of sin; surely neither
will it follow, by the Sublapsarian Doctrine, that God does not decree to
punish any man with damnation, but for those sins wherein he dies unrepented
of; much less that God does punish the righteous with the wicked, which is the
crimination of this Author, proposed, I doubt, against his own conscience. It Is
true, some perish only in original sin, and that justly: for if they be
borne children of wrath, is it strange if they dye children of wrath? And is it
not just with God to inflict eternal death on them, whom this Author
professes to be guilty of eternal death? only he says, that God of his mere
pleasure, makes them guilty of eternal death: That is his saying, not ours:
For though we say original sin makes a man guilty of eternal death, by the
free constitution of God; yet we say not, that this free constitution of God
was made of his mere pleasure, but justo Dei judicio* like as whosoever
believes not shall be damned, here damnation is by the free constitution of
God, made the portion of unbelievers: but dares this Author infer herehence,
that it is not made so justo Dei judicio? indeed God gives grace according to
the mere pleasure of his will: but no wise man will say, that he damnes men
according to the mere pleasure of his will; for this phrase implies, that
there is no cause thereof on man's part: And indeed there is no cause on man's
part, why God should give him grace, but there is cause enough on man's part,
why God should inflict damnation on him, and yet this work of God though just,
is never a whit the less free. So in damning for original sin only, though
Gods constitution hereof be just, yet is it never a whit the less free; and
though it be free, yet it is never a whit the less just: And like as damnation
is inflicted on final impenitents, sola Dei constitutione, only by virtue of
this constitution Divine, whosoever repents not of his sin shall be damned;
(for it is apparent, God might have annihilated them, had it so pleased him)
yet is it never a whit the less just. In like sort it is by the sole
constitution of God, that original sin is propagated to all men, Christ
excepted. for God could have derived mankind from another stock after Adams
fall: and as he does regenerate men usually by his word, so he might if it
pleased him, in their very conception give them his spirit, and those
supernatural graces, whereof Adam was deprived by sin: yet the propagation
of sin from Adam to posterity. is never a whit the less just; no nor any
whit the less natural; like as the whole course of nature, depends upon the
alone constitution of God. But when I say that God can without respect of
sin, inflict any torment upon his creature, this is delivered of power
absolute. This power the Lord did execute upon his own son: for what was his
sin? Was he not the spotless lamb of God? Yet what agonies did he suffer in
the garden, what torments and terrors upon the cross, when he cried out My
God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me? But the like power he does not execute
on us, only he gives us authority to exercise the like power over other
creatures: if the powder of an Hare burnt alive in an Oven, be found to be
wholesome for us, he gives us leave thus to deal with him, and the like: yet
have not these creatures sinned either against God, or against us. Of this
absolute power of God, I have discoursed more sparingly in the place cited by
him, Lib. 1. p. 2. De Electione, digres. 3. If this Author has any mind to
except against it, either in whole or in part, he might have tried his
strength, and not contented himself, with showing his teeth only. Yet by his
leave, whether those he speaks of, will concur with me in this, it is more
then I know, but to serve his turn at this present against those whom he has
tied himself to oppose, as he professes, he cares little what he avoucheth to
save himself of farther pains. By the way let me take notice of one argument
more then I dreamt of, for the maintenance of Gods absolute power to inflict
any pain upon a creature, and that of his mere pleasure, which this Author ere
he is aware suggests unto me; And accordingly thus I dispute. If God can out of
his mere pleasure make a man guilty of eternal death, surely it seems that of
his mere pleasure he may inflict eternal death on any. But God can of his mere
pleasure make a man guilty of eternal death, as I prove out of this Author,
who professes that God out of his mere pleasure, made all mankind guilty of
eternal death: Now we commonly say, that ab actu ad potentiam valet
argumentum. And see farther how miserably he overlasheth. The highest degree
whereunto he can improve the harshnesse of our Doctrine is this, that we should
teach, that God does decree the misery of an innocent man. Now I pray consider,
is it not as harsh, that God should decree the death, the agonics, the
sorrows, and tortures of an innocent man? And is it not apparent, that God
decreed the death and those unspeakable sorrows of his innocent son? Yet we
say not that God decreed any other man's death or damnation, but only for sin.
But it is all one in his opinion to say, God decrees the misery of an innocent
man, and to purpose that he shall be involved in a sin, that so he may be
brought to misery. First, I say his opinion is no Oracle, if it were, the world
would soon grow wild. Secondly, this suffices not to prove his crimination,
which was this, that by our Doctrine, we make God to punish the righteous with
the wicked, not that we make God to do that which is all one in substance.
Thirdly, his best arguments are his phrases, whereby he hopes to season others
affections as well as his own; as in saying God purposed man shall be involved
in sin: For if he speak of mankind, made guilty of the sin of Adam, he
forgets his own Tenet; that God of his mere pleasure makes Adams sin the
sin of his posterity, and thereby of his mere pleasure makes them guilty of
eternal death. And as touching our Tenet herein, is there any such harshnesse
in saying, that God causes a leprous child to be borne of Leprous parents? But
if he speak it in general of any sin, for which any man is damned, our
Doctrine is, that the sins which come to pass, must needs be permitted by
God, and for God to permit any sin, is to will that such a sin shall come
to pass by Gods permission. Arminius himself professing, that if God permit a
man to will that which is evil, Necesse est ut nullo argumentorum genere
persuadeatur ad nolendum. And the Scripture is express as touching the foulest
actions that ever were committed by man, to wit, in the most contumelious
usages of the son of God, namely that both Herod, and Pontius Pilate,
together with the Gentiles, and people of Israel were gathered together, to
do what Gods hand, and Gods Counsel had predetermined to be done. And when
Fulgentius says, that God had been unjust, if he had predestined stantem ad
ruinam; ad ruinam here is ad peccatum, and Predestination in the Fathers sense,
is only eorum quae Deus ipse facturus erat, which God himself meant to effect,
not what he meant to suffer. That they took predestination in this sense, it
appears by Austin. lib. 2. de bono persever. c. 17. his words are these. In sua
quae falli mutarique non potest praescientia opera sua futura disponere, illud
omnino, nec aliud quicquam est praedestinare. Mark it well, opera sua, his
works, now sin is no work of God, but a work of the creature only.

I come to his second reason.

DISCOURSE. SUBSECT. II.
IT is against Gods Justice, because it makes him to require faith in Christ,
of those to whom he has in his absolute purpose denied both ability to
believe, and a Christ to believe in.

That Reprobates are bound to believe as well as others, it is the constant
Doctrine of Divines; amongst whom Zanchius delivers it for a Thesis: Quisque
(says he) mandato Dei tenctur credere Zanch. lib. 5. c. 2. de not. Dei, q. 1.
de praedest. Sanct.
se ad salutem aeternam in Christo fuisse electum, maxim is qui fidem in
Christum profitetur. And in his explication of this Thesis he says, Cum
dicimus unumquemque teneri hoc credtre, neminem, ne reproios quidem, qui neque
unquam credent, nec credere in Christum possunt, excipimus; and nisi credant,
gravissime ommum peccant. Every man, especially he that professes Christ, is
bound to believe that he is chosen in Christ to salvation; every man without
exception, even the Reprobate himself; and if he believe it not, he commits a
most grievous sin above all others. This that he says, he proves by John 16.
9. The spirit shall convince the World of sin, because they believe not in
me: Reprobates therefore are bound to believe.

But now they cannot be justly bound to believe if they be absolute and
inevitable Reprobates, for three causes.

1. Because it is Gods will that they shall not believe; and it appears to be
so, because it is his peremptory will that they shall have no power to believe;
for its a Ma^ime in Logic, that Qui vult aliquid in causa, vult effectum ex
ista causa necessario profluentem: No man will say that it is Gods serious
will, that such a man shall live, when it is his will, that he shall not have
the concourse of his providence, and the act of preservation* now will any say
(that forget not themselves) that God does unfainedly will that those men shall
believe, whom he will not furnish with necessary power to believe. Now if it be
Gods will, that absolute reprobates shall in no wise believe, they cannot in
justice be tied to believe. For no man is bound to an act against Gods
peremptory will.

2. Because it is impossible that they should believe, they want power to
believe, and must want it still: God has decreed they shall have none to their
dving day: without power to believe, they can no more believe, then a man can
see without an eye, and live without a Soul. Nemo obligatur ad impossibilia.
To believe is absolutely impossible unto them; and therefore in justice they
can be tied to believe no more then a man can be bound to fly like a Bird, or
to reach heaven with the top of his finger.

3. Because they have no object of says. Credere ^ubet, d^ fidei nulium
objectum (...): This decree makes God to oblige men to believe, and to give
them no Christ to believe in, and to punish them as transgressors of the
covenant of grace, when yet they have no more right unto it, or part in it,
then the very Devils. Can God justiy bind men to believe a lie? To believe
that Christ died for them, when it is no such matter? If a man should command
his Servant to eat, and punish him for not eating, and in the mean time fully
resolve that he shall have no meat to eat: Would any reasonable man say that
he were just in such a command, such a punishment? Change but the names, the
case is the same.

TWISSE Consideration.
IN this discourse on the point of Gods justice, this Author seems to storm,
and shows great confidence of bearing down all before him: but the more
ridiculous will it prove in the issue, when it shall appear, that all this
wind beats down no corn. He takes his rise from a particular opinion of
Zanchy, whose opinion is, that all, even Reprobates are bound to believe they
are elected in Christ unto salvation, though never they shall believe nor can
believe. But does this Author himself concur with Zanchy in this opinion? If
he did, I presume it were upon some better ground then the authority of Zanchy;
and in all likelihood we should have heard of those grounds: or does himself
believe, that that passage Ioh. 16. 9. He shall convict the World of sin,
because they believed not in me, does evince as much, or import as much as that
is, whereunto Zanchy drives it? If he does not concur with Zanchy in either
of these, why should he tie us to the particular authority of Zanchy? Must we
be bound to stand to every interpretation of our Divines, or every particular
opinion of theirs, wherein perhaps they were singular? Secondly, suppose this
opinion of Zanchy be a truth, and suppose we concur with him herein, will it
from this opinion follow, that therefore even Reprobates, have power to
believe? Who sees not that it is a flat contradiction to the antecedent? For
the Doctrine of Zanchy as here it is related, is this, that even Reprobates,
though they cannot believe, yet are they bound to believe. Now will it
herehence follow that therefore they have power to believe? Whereas it is
manifestly supposed in the antecedent that they cannot believe. And to my
understanding, the distinction of Elect and Reprobate in this case is most
unseasonable. For to what end do we Preach unto our hearers, that all sorts of
men are bound to believe, but this, to wit, that every one that hears us,
being privy to his condition, may understand that he, of what condition soever
he be, which is supposed to be better known to him, then to the Preacher, or at
least as well, is bound to believe. But as for these different conditions of
elect and reprobate, no man can be privy to the one, until he does believe;
nor to the other, until final perseverance in unbelief. And if I list, I
could allege the opinion of another Divine (who is very peremptory in his
way) professing that the Ministers calling upon us to believe, is no
commandment at all, but like a Kings gracious Proclamation unto certain
malifactors, who are all accused of High Treason, giving them to understand,
that in case they will voluntarily confess their sin, and accept of his
gracious pardon offered them, he will most graciously pardon them. But if they
will not, but stand rather to their trial, presuming to acquit themselves
right well, and prove themselves to be true Subjects, let them stand to the
adventure, and issue of their trial. And that thus the covenant of grace is
offered to be received by them only, who fear to come, and dare not come to
the trial of the Covenant of works. But I will not content my self, in
putting off Zanchy in this manner; although by the way I cannot but profess,
that were I of their opinion, who teach that God gives unto all and every one,
when they come into the World, a certain grace, for the enlivening of their
wills, whereby they are enabled to will any spiritual good, whereto they shall
be excited; I see no reason but that the way is open to everlasting life, as
well by the covenant of works, as by the covenant of grace: for let perfect
obedience be the spiritual good whereto they are excited, let them but will
it, as it is supposed they can; and then God will be ready to concur to the
doing of it, like as to the work in us (...) credere, and (...) resipiscere,
modo velimus, so also I should think, to work in us perfect obedience modo
velimus. And in this case I pray consider, what need were there of faith in
Christ on their part, more then on the part of the Holy Angels; certainly
there would be no need of repentance.

Thirdly therefore consider we the constant Doctrine of Divines, not that
Reprobates are bound to believe, but that all that hear the Gospel are bound
to believe: but in what sense? Piscator says, as I remember, that the thing,
which all such are bound to believe, is the Gospel; according to that Mar. 1.
Repent ye and believe the Gospel. Now to believe the Gospel is one thing, the
sum whereof is this, That Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners;
but to believe in Christ is another thing, which yet this Author distinguishes
not, though it appears by the course of his argumentation, that he draws to
this meaning, and that in a particular sense, which is this, to believe that
Christ died for them; as appears expressly in the latter end of this Section.
And no marvel if this Author carry himself so confidently in this, being, as
he is, armed with such confidence. But I am glad that in one place or other, he
springs his meaning, that we may have the fairer flight at him, to pull down
his pride, and sweep away his vain considence: though we deal upon the most
plausible argument of the Arminians, and which they think insoluble. My answer
is; first, Look in what sense Arminius says Christ died for us, in the same
sense we may be held to say (without prejudice to our Tenet) of absolute
reprobation, that all who hear the Gospel are bound to believe that Christ
died for them. For the meaning that Arminius makes of Christ's dying for us, is
this, Christ dyed, for this end, that satisfaction being made for sin, the
Lord now may pardon sin, upon what condition he will; which indeed is to dye
for obtaining a possibility of the redemption of all, but for the actual
redemption of none at all. Secondly, But I list not to content my self with
this; therefore I farther answer, by distinction of the phrase of dying for us,
that we may not cheat our selves by the confounding of things that differ. To
dye for us, or for all, is to dye for our benefit, or for the benefit of all:
Now these benefits are of a different nature, whereof some are bestowed upon
man only conditionally (though for Christ's sake) and they are the pardon of
sin and Salvation of the Soul, and these God does confer only upon the
condition of faith and repentance. Now I am ready to profess, and that, I
suppose, as out of the mouth of all our Divines, that every one who hears the
Gospel (without distinction between Elect and Reprobate) is bound to believe
that Christ died for him, so far as to procure both the pardon of his sins,
and the salvation of his soul, in case he believe and repent. But there are
other benefits, which Christ by his obedience has merited for us, namely, the
benefit of faith and repentance. For it pleased the Father, that in him should
all fullness dwell, Col. 1. And He has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in Christ, that is, for Christ's sake: and Ephesians. 1. 3. Heb. 13. 21.
God works in us, that which is pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ, and
therefore seeing nothing is more pleasing in Gods sight on our part, then faith
and repentance, even these also, I should think, God works in us through Jesus
Christ: and the Apostle prays in the behalf of the Ephesians, for peace, and
faith, and love from God Ephesians. 6. 23.
the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, that is, as I interpret it, from God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as an efficient cause, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ, God and Man, as a meritorious cause thereof. Now I demand whether
this Author can say truly, that it is the constant opinion of our Divines, that
all who hear the Gospel, whether Elect or Reprobate, are bound to believe,
that Christ dyed to procure them faith and repentance. Nay does any Arminian at
this day believe this, or can he name any Arminian that does avouch this? Nay
does himself believe this? If he does not, if he cannot show any Arminian that
does, with what face can he charge this opinion upon us, as if we should extend
the obligation to believe, much farther then the Arminians do, whereas usually
they criminate us, for not extending it so far as we should. And indeed there
is a main difference between these benefits and the former: For as touching the
former, namely pardon of sin and salvation, God does not use to confer
them, but conditionally, to wit, upon the condition of faith and repentance.
But as for faith and repentance, does God confer them conditionally also? If
so, then let them make known to us, what that condition is on man's part, and
whatsoever it be, let them look unto it, how they can avoid the making of
grace, to wit, the grace of faith and repentance, to be given according unto
works. But if these graces are conferred absolutely, and Christ dyed for all to
this end, that faith and repentance should be conferred absolutely upon all,
then it follows manifestly herehence, that all must believe and repent, and
consequently all must be saved. So that not only Election (as Huberus that
renegate feigned) must be universal, but Salvation also. Thus have I given in
my answer distinctly, to that which he delivered most confusedly. Fourthly I
come to the scanning of the particular opinion of Zanchy, namely, that every
one that hears the Gospel, whether elect or reprobate (for so I suppose it
proceeds, to wit, only of them, who hear the Gospel, though this Author,
takes no consideration of that neither, but hand-over-head, lays about him
like a mad man) is bound to believe, that he is elect in Christ; and will try
whether I cannot reduce that opinion of his also, to a fair interpretation.
And here first I observe, Zanchy is not charged to maintain, that every hearer
of the Gospel, is bound to believe, that he is elect in Christ unto faith and
repentance, but only to salvation: that puts me in good heart, that Zanchy and
I shall shake hands of fellowship in the end, and part good friends. Secondly,
I distinguish between absolute-Election unto Salvation, and election unto
Salvation-absolute. The first only removes all cause on man's part of election,
the latter removes all cause on man's part of salvation. By cause of salvation I
mean only a disposing cause, such as faith, repentance, and good works are, as
whereby (to express it in the Apostles phrase) we are made meet partakers of
the Col. 1. 12.
inheritance of the Saints of light. Now albeit Zanchy maintains as we do,
that all the elect are absolutely elected unto salvation, there being no cause
on man's part of his election, as we have learned: yet neither Zanchy nor we do
maintain that God does elect any unto salvation absolute, that is, to bring him
to salvation, without any disposing of him thereunto by faith and repentance.
Now to accommodate that opinion of Zanchy, I say it may have a good sense, to
say that every hearer is bound to believe, both that Christ dyed to procure
Salvation for him, in case he do believe, and that God ordained that he should
be saved, in case he do believe; where belief is made the condition only of
salvation, not of the Divine ordination; and the confusion of these by the
Arminians, does usually make them confident and insolent, and in a word, Magnas
Tragoedias excitare. But take a way the confusion of things that differ, their
combs are cut, their locks are shorn, and they are but as another man. Now
having showed in what sense every hearer, is bound to believe that Christ died
for him, and in what sense not, let us consider of what worth this Authors
arguments are, breathing nothing but smoke and fire, I will not say, like the
great Potan, but like fell Dragon; but I nothing doubt we shall pare his
nails, and make him calm enough ere we have done with him, so that a little
child shall be able enough to lead him. Now that they cannot be justly bound to
believe, if they be absolute reprobates he takes upon him to prove by three
reasons.

1. The first is, because it is Gods will that they shall not believe, because
it is his peremptory will, that they shall have no power to believe. I answer,
it is indeed the will of Gods decree, that is, he has decreed not to give any
Reprobate a justifying faith, but hence it follows not, that therefore they
cannot believe thus far the contents of the Gospel, namely, that both Christ
has merited, and God has ordained, that as many as do believe shall be
saved. For this, as I take it, is not usually accounted by our Divines a
justifying faith, but rather it comes within the compass of such a faith, as
is commonly counted faith historical.

Secondly I answer, it follows not, that because God has decreed to deny
them the grace of faith, therefore they are not bound to believe; which I prove
by Scripture: For was not Pharaoh bound to let Israel go, when Moses was sent
to him from Exodus 7. 2, 3.
the Lord, to command him in the name of the Lord, to let Israel go? Yet the
Scripture plainly teaches us, that the Lord told Moses that he would harden
Pharaohs heart, and that he should not let Israel go. What I pray is now
become of his reason, compared with the light of Scripture? And what have we to
do to enquire into Gods counsels, as whether he has decreed to give us grace
or no? Is it not enough to bind us to obedience, for God to command this or
that unto us? Did Abraham enquire in his thoughts, whether it were his purpose
yea or no, that Isaac should be sacrificed? Nothing less; but upon the Lords
command, he forthwith addresseth himself to the work, rising early in the
morning, and going forward in the Lords business. Then again, we find by
common experience, that natural men are too to confident rather, and
presumptuous of their power, then diffident, and distrustful; dicere De Great.
and lib. arbit. c. 2.
solet humana superbia (says Austin) si scissem fecissem: it were better for
them if they did acknowledge their impotency, and by what means this corruption
of theirs is brought upon them, that would bring them nearer to the Kingdom of
God. But if I have a debtor, whom I know to be a Bankerupt, but he knows it
not, but having many bags of Brass or Copper pieces, which he takes to be
Gold, conceits himself able enough to pay all his debts, and more too: shall I
be said to commit any indecent thing, by urging him to pay that he owes? This
argument is as old as Pelagius: but what was Austin his answer? In mandato
cognosce quid debeas habere, in corruptione cognosce t uo te vitio non habere,
in oratione cognosce unde possis habere.

3. Lastly, if God cannot justly command, and by command bind man to obey, in
case he has no power to obey; in like sort God cannot justly complain of
their disobedience, who being hardened by God, cannot obey him: And indeed as
this Author argues against the justice of Gods commands in this case, so the
Apostle brings in one arguing the injustice of Gods complaints in the like
case. For having delivered this Doctrine, that God has mercy on whom he will,
and whom he will he hardneth: forthwith he brings in one tumultuating against
it in this manner. Thou Romans 9. 18.
wilt say then why does he yet complain, for who has resisted his will? And
if any man be not ashamed to argue as he did (says Austin) let us not be
ashamed to answer as the Apostle did: and how was that? Surely only thus: O man
who art thou that disputest with God? shall the thing formed, say to him that
formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over the clay,
of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor?
And albeit this, I trow, should be sufficient to satisfy a Christian, yet we
observe farther, how this Author confounds impotency Moral, which consists
in the corruption of man's powers natural, and impotency natural, which
consists in bereaving him of power natural. The Lord tells us by his Prophet
Jeremy, that Like as a Blackamore cannot change his skin, nor a Leopard his
spotts, no more can they do good, that are Jer. 13. 23.
accustomed unto evil. Now if a man taken in stealth shall plead thus before a
Judge, My Lord, I beseech you have compassion upon me, for I have so long time
inured my hands to pilfering, that now I cannot forbear it: will this be
accepted as a good plea to save him from the Gallows. Again, it is observed
that men are naturally prone to run upon the committing of things forbidden
them; Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas: and nitimur in vetitum: yet this is
no just excuse. Lastly; as for faith, it is well known that Divines distinguish
between fides acquisita, and fides infusa; that we may call a faith naturally
acquired, which is found in carnal persons, whether profane or Hypocritical:
and this is a faith inspired by Gods spirit. The object of each is all one, and
a Man may suffer Martyrdom for the one as well as for the other, which
manifests the pertinacious adherence thereunto. And it appears that all
professions have had their Martyrs; Ucali Fartax a Calabrian borne, endured the
Galleys fourteen years, rather then he would turn Turk; yet at length he
became a Turk, and only in spleen to be revenged on a Turk, who had given him
a box on the ear, and became a great man amongst them: And at the famous
battle of Lepanto, he alone maintained his Squadron entire, and beat the
Christians. But to return, albeit it be not in the power of nature to believe
fide infusa, yet is it in the power of nature to believe the Gospel fide
acquisita, which depends partly upon a man's education, and partly upon reason,
considering the credibility of the Christian way, by light of natural
observations, above all other ways in the World. And when men refuse to
embrace the Gospel, not so much because of the credibility of it, but because
it is not congruous to their natural affections, as our Savior tells the
Jews, Light came into the World, and men loved darkness rather then light,
because their deeds are evil: Is there Ioh. 3.
any reason why their condemnation should be any whit the easier for this?
Neither have I ever read, or heard it taught by any, that men shall be damned
for not believing fide infusa, which is as much as to say, because God has not
regenerated them; but either because they have refused to believe, or else if
they have embraced the Gospel, for not living answerable thereunto, which also
is in their power, quoad exteriorem vitae emendationem, though it be not in
their power to regenerate their wills, and change their hearts, any more then
it is to illuminate their minds: yet I never read that any man's damnation, was
any whit the more increased for not performing these acts. Thus far I have
been content to expatiate in the way of reasonable discourse, to meet with this
Disputer in his own element; though every sober Christian (I should think)
should rest satisfied with the word of God, which both teaches us that the
natural man perceives not the things of God, neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned, and that all men are found dead in
trespasses and sins, before the spirit of regeneration comes, that men cannot
believe, that they cannot repent, that they that are in the flesh cannot please
God; and that a man hardened cannot obey; and yet withal, that God does command
faith, repentance, and obedience, and complains of default in performance. And
if any man charge such courses as unjust, what is the Apostles course in
meeting with such imputations, but either to show, that the word attributes
such a course to God, and therefore it cannot be unjust, as Romans 9. 14. What
shall we say then, is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid, for he says
to Moses, I will have compassion on him, on whom I will have compassion, and I
will show mercy on him, to whom I will show mecy: or to fly to the
consideration of the Lords dominion over all, as Creator over his creatures. I
come to his second reason.

2. And that is, because it is impossible that they should believe, they want
power to believe, and must want it still. God has decreed they shall have none
to their dying day. I answer: This argument is the very same with the former,
not so much as differently dr^st, or crambe bis cocta, and therefore my former
answer will serve in every particular. Yet add this also, this impossibility
is only upon supposition of Gods Decree, which nothing hinders the liberty of
the creature, in doing freely what he does, and freely leaving undone what he
does not, as appears manifestly by diverse instances. For upon supposition of
Gods decree, that not a bone of Christ should be broken, it was impossible they
should be broken: yet who doubts, but that the Soldiers did as freely abstain
from the John 19. 33, 36.
breaking of Christ's bones, as they did freely break the others bones? And the
Text notes the reason why they brake not Christ's bones, to wit, because they
saw he was dead already. In like sort upon supposition of Gods decree, that
Josiah by name should burn the Prophets bones upon the Altar: Cyrus by name
should build him a City, and let go his captives; it was impossible that it
should be otherwise: yet I think no wise man doubts but that Josiah did the
one, and Cyrus the other, as freely as they did any thing in their lives. And
therefore this Author does miserably overlash in the element of his Philosophy,
and rational discourse, in saying, a man in justice can be tied to believe no
more, then a man can be bound to fly like a Bird, or to reach heaven with the
top of his finger. He might as well say, that because God had determined that
the Soldiers should not break Christ's bones, therefore they had no more power
to break Christ's bones, then they had power to fly like a Bird, or to reach
Heaven with the top of their finger. Certainly there is no man but by grace may
be enabled to believe: but never was any man known to affirm, that by grace a
man may be enabled to fly like a Bird, or to reach Heaven with the top of his
finger. If this be not miserably to overreach, I know not what is. As for his
rule, Nemo obligatur ad impossible, judge I pray of the truth of it by this;
What if a man by a vicious conversation, has made it as impossible for him to
do good, as it is impossible for a Blackemore to change his skin, or Ier.
13. 27.
a Leopard his spots; Shall he therefore be obliged no longer to do good? And
as by our own sins committed by our persons, so by the sin of Adam, which
was the sin of our nature, upon the whole nature of man was this impotency
brought, as the Scriptures teach, and none that I know were known in the days
of Austin, to deny, but the Plagians.

I come to the Third.

3. Now this depends upon a notorious confusion of things that differ. For I
have showed, how the Lord has given them a sufficient object of that faith,
which he requires of them, as touching Christ's dyeing for them; namily, to
believe that Christ has merited the pardon of sin, and salvation for as many
as believe in him, in such sort, that if all, and every one throughout the
World should believe in him; they should be saved by him. And this depends
merely upon the sufficiency of Christ's merits, and undoubtedly it was the will
of God, that Christ's merits should be of such a value, as was sufficient for
the salvation of all, and every one: otherwise it were not true, that if all
and every one should believe in Christ, they should be saved by the virtue of
Christ merits. But as for any obligation to believe that Christ died to procure
faith and repentance for all and every one; I never yet heard or read of any
Arminian, that he believed it. Nay in their Apologia Remonstrantium, or Censura
Censurae, they plainly profess, that Christ died not at all to merit faith,
and regeneration for any. In like sort it is not credible to me, that any
Arminian believes, that Christ dyed for any so, as to procure pardon of sin
and salvation absolutely for him, whether he believe or no, provided that he
live to be capable of faith and repentance, and to enjoy the Gospel, and the
Preaching of Christ crucified. And like as it is no lie, but truth, that Christ
dyed to procure salvation, to as many as believe in him, so in being obliged to
believe this, or punished for not believing it, is neither to be obliged to the
believing of a lie, nor punished for not believing it. Therefore it is false to
say there is no such matter. For look in what sense they are bound to believe
that Christ died for them, in the same sense it is most true, that Christ died
for them; they are bound to believe that Christ dyed to procure salvation for
every one that believes: and it is most true, that in like manner, Christ has
procured the salvation of every one that believes: so that here is a truth to
feed upon, and they that oppose it, are strengthened in their vain confidence
by a mere mist of confusion, which they raise unto themselves and others, that
so they may set the better face upon that lie, which they hold in their right
hand, wherewith they are so enamoured that they had rather forsake their own
mercies, then forgo it. And so I come to the third and last reason in general
drawn from Gods justice.

DISCOURSE. SUBSECT. III.
THe third reason why absolute Reprobation infringeth Gods justice is, because
it will have him to punish men for the omission of an act, which is made
impossible unto them by his own decree, not by that decree alone whereby he
determined to give them no power to believe, having lost it, but by that decree
also, by which he purposes that we should partake with Adam in his sin, and
be stripped of all that supernatural power, which we had by Gods free grant,
bestowed upon us in Adam before the fall: These are my reasons which move me to
think, that this absolute decree is repugnant to Gods justice.

TWISSE Consideration.
I Have already showed how Gods decree and impossibility arising upon
supposition thereof, does no way prejudice the liberty of the creature, as by
pregnant passages of the Scripture is made plain unto us. And as for the other
decree here spoken of; First it is untrue which he supposes, that, God by a
special decree decreed all mankind to be made partakers of Adams sin, and
therein to be stripped of all supernatural power, which before the had by Gods
free grant. For if it were just with God to decree, that Adams nature, upon his
sinning, should be bereaved of all supernatural power, which formerly he
enjoyed, this and this alone should suffice to bereave all his posterity of
supernatural power to do that which is good. For seeing all his posterity did
receive their natures from Adam after his fall, they must therewithal
necessarily receive their natures from him, bereaved of all supernatural power
unto that which is good, until such time, as God be pleased of his free grace
to restore it by regeneration. 2. Is it not good reason that God, for Adams
sin, should bereave us of all supernatural power in Adam, as of his mere
grace he did adorn us all with supernatural power in Adam? 3. Notwithstanding
this depravation of supernatural power in Adam, yet we acknowledge that
nevertheless, whatsoever sin a man commits, he commits freely: and the
School has taught it before us, Aquin. p. 1. q. 23. art. 3. ad. 3. licet
aliquis non possit gratiam adipisci qui reprobatur a Deo, tamen quod in hoc
peccatum vel illud labatur, ex ejus libero arbitrio contingit, unde and merito
sibi imputatur in culpam.

DISCOURSE. SUBSECT. IV.
TWo things are usually answered. First, that there are many things delivered
for truths in Scripture, (among which this is one) which are above the reach of
humane capacity, and therefore are we quietly to submit, as to other revealed
truths, so to this, and not to be so bold as to examine the justice of this
decree, or any thing else in it, by our shallow and erring understandings. But
this answer takes not away the arguments, for I have these things to reply.

1. That though there be diverse things revealed in Gods word, which are above
reason, viz. That there are three Persons and one God; and that Christ was
borne of a Virgin; that the world was made of nothing, that the dead shall be
raised, etc. to all which we must captivate our understandings, and yield a
firm assent propter authoritatem dicentis: yet there is nothing revealed
therein, abhorring from, and odious to sound and right reason; for it cannot
be, that the most excellent gifts of God, Faith and Reason, Nature and
Scripture should overthrow one another: and that the wise God, who is the
fountain of all right reason, should discover any thing to us in his word, or
enjoyne us any thing to be believed, which is vere (...), truly and properly
unreasonable. Our faith is an act of our service of God, and Gods service is
cultus (...), a reasonable service. Romans 12. 2. and Gods word is also (...),
milk reasonable and without guile; they are so called, no doubt, to show that
there is a sweet harmony between faith and reason, things revealed, and men's
understandings: though there be a disproportion, yet there is no contradiction
between them.

2. That therefore all those Doctrines which are adverse and repugnant to
understandings, purged from prejudice and false principles, are not to be taken
for doctrines of Scripture, but devices of men corrupting Scripture by false
glosses and interpretations, and consequently, that this absolute reprobation
of so many millions of miserable men, out of Gods only will and pleasure,
because it is most irksome to the ears and understandings of all sorts of men
best and worst, that stand indifferent to the entertainment of any truths, that
may appear to be so, is no doctrine of the Text, no part of the word of God.

3. That howbeit some things in Scripture, which are peculiar to the Gospel,
are above our understandings, and must without hesitation be believed, yet
there are many things there, which have their foundation in nature, and may be
apprehended by the light of nature, and demonstrated by reason; and among these
things the justice of Gods ways is one, as I have showed before out of Isaiah
5. 3. and Ezekiel. 18. and it is but a mere evasion, when the absolute decree is
proved by sound reasons to be unjust, to say, reason is blind, and must not be
judge, but the Scripture only: for God offers the justice of his ways to the
trial of reason.

TWISSE Consideration.
THis Author seems to swell, in the conceit of his rational performances, as
if never any fly sitting upon a cart-wheele in a Summers day had made such a
dust as he had made. And fashioning to himself a victorious conquest, as if
all his adversaries were but Pigmies to this Anakim, glad to run into
corners, or into Acorn-cups to hide themselves there. For his reasons like some
hobgoblins, do so fright them, more then all the spirits that stand by the
naked man in the book of Moons: And therefore all the help they have, if we
believe this Pyrgopolinices is to charm them, by saying, that many things are
delivered in Scripture, which are above the reach of humane capacity, among
which this is one, etc. And I take this to be sound. For otherwise, 1 Timothy 3.
16;
why should the Doctrine of Godliness, be called a mystery of Godliness. And
the Schools teach, that Fides est assensus inevidens: and Cajetan who was no
gras-hopper, as great an Anakim as this Author, or his familiar spirit takes
himself to be, spares not to profess, that about the reconciling of Gods
predestination with the liberty of man's will (a point that comes so near to
this in hand as a point can do) there are many distinctions devised by the
learned, but yet he says of them, that they did not qutetare intellectum, and
therefore that he did captivare suum in obsequium fidei: and Alvarez, no dwarf
neither in Scholasticall, that is, rational Divinity, adds that herein
Cajetan piissime and doctissime loquitur. But who they are, that have taken
notice, of those arguments here specified, and at the sight of them were so
stoned, as at the sight of some Medusas head, and thereupon came to this course
of incantation or pacification, he does very wisely conceal, and like a man of
authority, puts it upon us to take it upon his word. Yet I do not remember
that I have rested my self upon any such course, though the holy Apostle
thinks it sufficient to clear any course of God from injustice, by proving
that Scripture does attribute such a course unto God, as I have showed out of
Romans 9. 14. It is true, the spirit which this Author breaths, is the right
Pelagian spirit, according to the Pelagians in Bradwardines days: for their
vaunt was, that they could not be refuted by any reason Philosophical, but
only by certain naked authorities Theological, (as I have heard of a Scholar,
sometimes challenged by a friend and kinsman of his, for being given (as he
heard) to the Arminian Tenet, made a ready answer with protestation, that that
opinion was very plausible, but that St Paul was against it.) And therefore
Bradwardine undertakes to confute them by reason Philosophical; so far off
was he from being cowed with their vain boasts and braggs. His words are these;
Sicut antiqui Pelagiani ventoso nomine secularium scientiarum inflati
consistorium Theologicum contemnentes Philosophicum flagitabant; ita and
moderni. Audivi namque quosdam advocatos Pelagii, licet multum provectos in
sacris apicibus; affirmantes Pelagium nusquam potuisse convinci per naturalem
and Philosophicam rationem; sed vix arguebatur utcunque, per quasdam
authoritates Theologicas, maxim autem per authoritatem Ecclesiae, quae
Satrapis non placebat: Quapr opter per rations and authoritates Philosophicas
ipsos disposui reformare. And for my part, though I affect not in those points,
to go beyond Scripture and Christian reason, yet I am content to be led
whethersoever my adversary thinks good to lead me: And as a Scholar of my
acquaintance being left handed, and accordingly casting his cloak over the
right shoulder, was answered by a Citizen observing it, when he enquired his
way, saying, when you shall come to such a place, you must turn on your right
hand, meaning indeed, on the left; so likewise I am nothing afraid of this man's
Philosophy, nor his Abettors neither, nothing doubting, but as many as I find
opposing this divine truth, which we maintain, their best dexterity, in
Philosophical and rational discourse, will prove but a left handed
Philosophy: and in this very field of argumentation, I purpose to lay upon him
ere we part. But let us first consider the things that he replies.

1. He says, There is nothing in Scripture abhorring from sound and right
reason, he adds, Odious too: as if his Philosophy had taught him, that it is
the part of reason to hate, and not rather of affections. This rule when we
were initiates in the University, we were soon acquainted with: Yet this Author
to vent his fullness, casts himself upon an unnecessary proof thereof, and
the mischief is, that his proof makes his cause worse then it was before.
For having formerly made the comparison between the word of God, and sound and
right reason; in his reason he states the comparison between faith and reason,
nature and Scripture, not distinguishing between nature corrupt, and incorrupt,
reason corrupt and incorrupt. Our service of God is reasonable, in as much as
it is performed by reasonable creatures, and the rule thereof is not Romans 12. 1.
natural reason, but merely the word of God. In whom was natural reason more
eminent, then in Philosophers? Yet were they wont to be called Haereticorum
Patriarchae: and the Apostle has profess of all such, that the things of God
seem foolishness unto them, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Now I pray consider soberly, how
reasonable such courses are judged to be, which are accounted foolishness, and
what a sweet harmony there is between things revealed, and men's understandings;
and whether reasonable, and foolish, be not a plain contradiction; as well as
wise, and foolish. If we enjoy a more pure and refined reason then they, let us
give illumination Divine the glory of it: and say with him in Job, verily there
is a spirit in man, but the illumination of the Almighty gives understanding.
And seeing the word of God, is the only means of Divine illumination, let Job.
32. 8.
us thank Gods word for all. I come to the second Material of his reply.

2. And that is this, that all those Doctrine which are ad^erse and repugnant
to understandings purged from prejudice and false principles, are not to be
taken for Doctrines of Scripture, but devices of men, corrupting Scripture by
false glosses and interpretations. No marvel that when men oppose the
mysteries of Godliness, they fall upon the mysteries of iniquity. Here we have
a rule given to try whether a Doctrine proposed, be to be taken for a Doctrine
of Scripture yea or no? And mark it well, I beseech you, and I desire that
every sober man will mark it well, and judge whether it deserve not to be
numbered amongst the (...), the depths of Satan: And withal judge whether the
pretended Author of this discourse, can in any probability be the Author of
this, and whether it becomes not rather some old beaten Soldier in
Arminianisme, that takes upon him to be the Master and Dictator of Sentences.
About Regula fidei, the rule of Faith, there is much question between us and
Papists; the meaning whereof is, what that is whereinto must be made the last
resolution of our Faith? We say it is the word of God contained in the Books of
the Old Testament and the New; Papists say, it is the voice of the Church. This
Author devises a new way, which I think was never heard off before, except
among the Socinians, namely, that it is the judgment of understandings purged
from prejudice and false Principles. For albeit the Doctrine of Faith, we judge
to be contained no where, but in Gods word, yet notwithstanding as touching the
meaning of it, nothing must be taken to be the true meaning of Scripture, how
fairly soever grounded thereupon in show, unless withal it seem nothing
repugnant to understandings purged from prejudice and false principles. Into
this therefore must be made the last resolution of our faith.

Again, where shall we meet with these judges as they are here described, to
wit, as having their understandings purged from prejudice and false principles:
undoubtedly, like as the Church of Rome, when they have once brought the matter
hitherto, that the last resolution of faith, must be made into the voice of the
Church, are confident enough, that when the question is made of the voice of
the Church, where that is to be found, they shall undoubtedly be able to carry
it for the Church of Rome: So these Arminians, or Socinians rather, when they
have once brought the matter to this pass, that the last resolution of our
faith must be made into the judgment of men's understandings purged from
prejudice and false principles; and that the question begins to be made of
understandings thus purified, where they are to be found, they will be so
favorable to themselves, as to conceive, that such understandings are to be
found no where, but amongst the nation of the Arminians; or at least among
such, whose judgments are naturally inclined toward their Tenets. But is this
a decent course to rest in the judgment of any man's understanding, whereas the
soundnes of his understanding is not, nor cannot be discerned, but by the
strength of his argument: and again, considering the judgment of man is
miserably corrupted in such sort, as that the things of God seem foolishness
unto them, Is it not much fitter that we should judge of every man's
understanding by Gods word, which cannot err, rather then judge of the meaning
of the word by the understanding of man? Let any man use his understanding in
opening and interpreting the word of God unto us, and clearing the meaning
thereof unto us as much as he can, by reason, by argument, by demonstration,
but still let it be indifferent for any to judge, in what congruity his
interpretation stands with the Text it self, and no man's judgment to be a
rule of Faith unto others.

Before he goes off from this, he gives another description of those, whose
judgments must be the rule of the right interpretation of Scripture; to wit,
such as stand indifferent to the entertainment of any truths. Now this seems to
me to be as poor as the former, or rather much poorer. For this indifferency
as I take it, is in respect of affections; now albeit a man may be thus
disposed, in respect of his affections, yet he may be of a very weak judgment;
as for example, I have heard of a good man, that was sometimes wavering about
the point of Ceremonies, yet very willing to receive information; and therefore
conferres with both sides, as well such as held them lawful in the use, as
with those that held them unlawful, and still was carried every way with the
force of their reasons, who conferred with him for the present. Then again,
suppose the indifferent were most fit to judge, where shall we find those
indifferent persons, or who shall give rules, and what rules, according whereto
to proceed in this our inquisition? Again, who are to be presupposed in
likelihood, to be the more indifferent, then such as have not hitherto been
versed in these controversies, and is it fit, that they who have been many
years versed in them, should stand to the judgment of those who are little or
nothing exercised therein? Lastly is the creature fit to judge of the
Sovereignty of his creator, or being conceived of the freedom of his own will,
to judge how far it is reasonable, God should have power over his will and no
farther? When the Apostle calls upon the Corinthians, to judge whether that
which he wrote unto them, were the commandments of God or no, whom does he
call unto this office? Does he call any other but such as are spiritual? If
there be any amongst you that is a Prophet, or spiritual, let him know that
these things are the commandments of God. 1 Cor. 14. He does not say, if there
be any amongst you, that has his understanding purged from prejudice, and
false principles, let him know that these things which I write unto you, are
the commandments of God. And the same Apostle tells us, that the things of God
are spiritually to be discerned. 1 Cor. 2. 14.

Yet it is remarkable, that he appeals to the judgment not of the best only,
but the worst also in this: but something qualified I confess, to wit,
provided that they stand indifferent to the entertainment of any truths. Mark
it well, of any truths: and who are these? Not possessed with the entertainment
of any Truths, but indifferent to the entertainment of them, I say who are
these? The regenerate or unregenerate? Here I am at a stand, not knowing which
way to take. But it may be this is spoken only in reference to our Doctrine of
absolute Reprobation. But of whatsoever it be spoken, let him give instance in
either or in both; it seems he is indifferent to have it take place either way,
for he proposed it of best and worst. But why should he presuppose an
unregenerate man to be indifferent, to the entertainment of any truth? Whereas
the Apostle professes of a natural man, that he cannot know the things of
God, and he gives the reason of it, because they are spiritually discerned; and
formerly said that they were foolishness unto him. Yet I willingly confess,
the Doctrine of absolute Reprobation, is very harsh to the judgment and
affections of carnal men; and such as we had never embraced, had it not been
for the word of God, which plainly professes, that election is not of (good)
works; and that by such an argument, as whereby it is manifest, Romans 9. 11.
1. That election is as well proved not to be of faith, as not of works. 2.
That reprobation is not of evil works; yet the harshnesse hereof, is nothing
like so much appearing in its proper colors, as upon their deciphering and
blazing of it, who are as zealous for making election to be upon foresight of
faith and works (though this latter member, they are loath to have the World
take notice of) as they are opposite to the absoluteness of reprobation. Now
whereas before I have showed, that there is a great deal of difference between
absolute election unto salvation, and election unto salvation absolute: And
that not one of our Divines does maintain, that God does elect men unto
salvation absolute, but to obtain salvation upon their faith and repentance,
and final perseverance therein: In like sort there is as great difference
between absolute reprobation unto damnation, and reprobation unto damnation
absolute. And if none of our Divines do maintain, that God ordains any man of
ripe years to obtain salvation, otherwise then upon their faith and repentance,
and final perseverance: how much less do they maintain, that God ordains any
man unto damnation, otherwise then for his sin and final perseverance
therein without repentance? Whereas these enemies of the grace of God, as Saint
Austin sometimes called the Pelagians, to make their cause more plausible to
the affections or carnal men carry the matter so, as if we maintained that God
ordained them to be damned absolutely, and for the mere pleasure of God,
concealing the only cause for which God ordained, that they should be damned,
namely, for the wilful transgression of Gods holy Commandments. Only the
giving and denying of the grace of regeneration, the giving of faith and
repentance, for the curing of that natural infidelity and impenitency that is
found in all; and the leaving it uncured by denying faith and repentance: this
indeed we maintain to be absolute, according to that of Saint Paul, he has
mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth. Romans 9. 18. Now, dare any
of them deny faith and repentance to be the gift of God? They do not, they
dare not; only of late they have come thus far, as to deny that Christ
merited faith and regeneration for any. Secondly, inquire whether God gives
faith and repentance to some, and denies it to others of his mere will and
pleasure, or because he finds some good works in the one, which he finds not in
the other. Here is the critical point, we defend no other absoluteness of
election and reprobation, but such as depends wholly on this, namely, that God
finding men equal in corruption, has compassion on some, giving them faith
and repentance, which he denies unto others: All other absoluteness of
Election and Reprobation, besides that which we undertake by clear
demonstration to deduce herehence, we utterly renounce. Neither can our
adversaries be so grossly ignorant, as not to perceive that this is the
critical point of these controversies, the resolution of the truths wherein,
will set an end to all contention about Election and Reprobation. Why then do
they not deal plainly, and try their strength in this, whereby they should
carry themselves fairly and ingenuously, and deal above board. For here alone
is that absoluteness of God in execution, which we maintain; but here they
are not so prone to show their horns: this argument is not so fit for the
raising of clamours and Tragedies. And hating the truth of God as touching his
sovereignty over his creatures, to have compassion on whom he will, and to
harden whom he will; as also the prerogatives of his grace, to work us
effectually to that which is pleasing in his fight, and that in whom he will
also: yet not daring plainly to deliver their mind in this, as wherein they are
found most absurd, and encumbred with shameful contradictions; therefore by
the back door as it were, they hope to discredit it, and by opposing the
absoluteness of Reprobation, to supplant and undermine the Doctrine of Gods
free grace. And not content with this, they miserably corrupt our doctrine
also, in the point of absolute Reprobation, drawing it to this; as if not
reprobation only, but damnation also were made absolute by us: and that God
damned men not so much in the way of justice for their sin, as of his own
mere pleasure. At length to come to the third particular of his reply.

3. And that is this, that howbeit some things in Scripture, which are peculiar
to the Gospel, are above our understandings, and must without hesitation be
believed: yet many things there, have their foundation in nature, and may be
apprehended by the light of nature; and amongst these, the justice of Gods
ways is one, as has been showed. Isai 5. 3. and Ezekiel. 18. To this I answer,
That the ways of God mentioned Isai. 5. 3. is only in his expecting fruits
after so great pains that he had taken, in husbanding his vineyard. And Ezekiel.
18. consists only in rendering unto men according to their ways. Neither does
it follow, that because the justice of God does plainly appear in these
particulars, therefore it does appear as clearly, or comprehensively in all
others. Is there no difference between the ways of God there mentioned, and
the ways of Gods justice mentioned in other place; as namely, in causing the
Sons of Achan to be stoned to death with Achan himself, for his Sacrilege:
in drowning the old World, not sparing the very Infants and sucklings: and for
their conspiracy against Moses and Aaron, causing the earth to swallow up not
Dathan and Abiram only, but their Wives and Children, and all that they had? So
in consuming Sodom and Gomorrah with fire. And as for the punishing of of
sin, this is no peculiar truth of the Gospel. I had thought the Gospel, in
the proper nature thereof, had been above reason altogether, and no way capable
of demonstration. And as for the justice of God, must not this suppose him to
be a free agent? Or was this known to Aristotle by all the light of nature
whereunto he attained? We that believe him to be a free agent, and withal the
creator of all, are ready to demonstrate, that it is in his power to do what
he will with his creature, and that not only to annihilate him, though never so
holy, but to inflict what pain soever upon him, yea even the torment of hell
fire; which Medina acknowledges to have been Communem omnium Theologorum
sententiam, viz. that this he can do, ut Dominus vitae and mortis; as I have
showed in my Vindiciae graciae Dei, and by variety of arguments proved it, more
then once in two several digressions, which this Author pretends to have seen,
yet answers not one of them. And as for justice divine toward the creature
(whereupon this Author does with such confidence discourse,) both Vasquez and
Suarez Jesuits, in other points concerning Gods justice, are miserably at odds,
yet jointly concur in this, that all justice Divine, does presuppose the free
determination of Gods will: Now, because I find this Gentleman, so conceited of
the purity of his rational faculty, and the power thereof, as to require that
all interpretation of Scripture, should veyle bonnet to the sovereignty
thereof; I purpose to try his ability this way, for the expediting of certain
arguments about the absoluteness of Gods decrees in general, and particularly
of the decree of Reprobation. Therefore to combat with him on his own ground,
and in his own element, I dispute thus.

1. No temporal thing can be the cause of that which is eternal, but the
sins of men are all temporal, whereas Reprobation is eternal, therefore the
sins of men cannot be the cause of Reprobation.

If it be said, that sin is not made the cause of reprobation, but as it
exsists in Gods foresight, and so not so much sin as the prescience of sin
is the cause of reprobation. I reply, that this device cannot stand, viz. that
the prescience of sin should be the cause of reprobation, and that for this
reason; The cause of reprobation whereof we enquire, is of the nature of a
meritorious cause, But the prescience of God can no way be said to be a
meritorious cause thereof. Science and prescience are causes of Gods works in
the kind of an efficient Physical, not in the kind of an efficient moral,
such as are all causes meritorious.

If it be farther said, that not so much the foresight of sin, as (to speak
more properly) sin foreseen is the cause of reprobation: I reply against it
in this manner; sin foreseen does suppose Gods decree to permit sin, and
consequently if sin foreseen be before reprobation, then also the decree of
permitting sin is before the decree of reprobation, that is, the decree of
damning for sin. But this cannot be, as I endeavor to prove by two reasons.
The first is this; There is no order in intentions, but between the intention
of the end and the intention of the means, and the order is this, that the
intention of the end is before the intention of the means. Therefore if the
decree of permitting sin be before the decree of damning for sin, the
decree of permitting sin must be the intention of the end, and the decree of
damning for sin must be the intention of the means. But this is notoriously
untrue: For it is apparent that damnation tends not to the permission of sin,
as the end thereof; for if it did then men were damned to this end, that they
might be permitted to sin. But far more likely it is, that sin should be
permitted to this end, that a man might be damned, which yet by no means do I
a vouch; other reasons I have, to show the vanity of this argumentation. I
rather profess, that permssion of sin and damnation are not subordinate as
end and means, but coordinate, both being means tending jointly to a farther
end, which, under correction from understandings purged from prejudice and
false principles, I take to be the manifestation of Gods glory in the way of
justice vindicative.

2. My second reason is, if permission of sin be first in intention and then
damnation, it follows that permission of sin should be last in execution;
but this is most absurd, namely, that a man should be first damned, and then
suffered to sin.

2. My second principal argument is this; Reprobation, as it signifies Gods
decree, is the act of Gods will; now the act of Gods will is the very will of
God, and the will of God is Gods essence, and like as there can be no cause of
Gods essence, so there can be no cause of Gods will, or of the act thereof.
Upon some such arguments as these, Aquinas disputes, that the predestination of
Christ, cannot be the cause of our Predestination; adding that they are one act
in God. And when he comes to the resolution of the question, he grants all as
touching actum volentis, that the one cannot be the cause of the other; But
only quoad praedestinationis terminum, which is grace and glory, or the things
predestined. Christ is the cause of them, but not of our predestination, as
touching the act of God predestinating. And I think I may be bold to presume,
that Christ's merits are of as great force to be the cause, why God should elect
man unto salvation; as man's sins are of force, to be the cause why God should
reprobate him unto damnation. The same Aquinas (a tall fellow as touching
Scolasticall argumentation) has professed that no man has been so mad as to
say that merits are the cause of predestination, quoad actum praedestinantis;
and why, but because there can be no cause on man's part of the will of God
quoad actum volentis. Now reprobation is well known to be the will of God as
well as election; and therefore no cause can there be on man's part thereof
quoad actum reprobantis. And it is well known, there is a predestination unto
death, as well as unto life, and consequently it is as mad a thing in his
judgment to maintain, that merits are the cause there of quoad actum
praedestinantis

God by efficacious grace could break off any man's infidelity if it pleased
him, that is, by affording him such a motion unto faith, as he foresaw would be
yielded unto: this is easily proved by the evident confession of Arminius
formerly specified. Now, Why does God so order it, as to move some in such a
manner, as he foresees they will believe; others in such a manner as he
foresees they will not believe? but because his purpose is to manifest the
glory of his grace in the salvation of the one, and the glory of his justice in
the damnation of the other. Herein I appeal to the judgment and conscience of
every reasonable creature that understands it, in spite of all prejudice and
false principles to corrupt him.

4. In saying sin foreseen is the cause of Gods decree of damnation, they
presuppose a prescience of sin, as of a thing future, without all ground. For
nothing can be foreknown as future, unless it be future: now these disputers
presuppose a futurition of sin, and that from eternity, without all ground.
For consider, no sin is future in its own nature, for in its own nature it is
merely possible and indifferent, as well not to be future, as to become
future; and therefore it cannot pass out of the condition of a thing merely
possible, into the condition of a thing future without a cause. Now what cause
do these men devise of the futurition of sin? Extra Deum, nothing can be the
cause thereof: For this passage of things out of the condition of things
possible, into the condition of things future, was from everlasting, for from
everlasting they were future; otherwise, God could not have known them from
everlasting, And consequently the cause of this passage, must be acknowledged
to have been from everlasting, and consequently nothing without God could be
the cause of it, seeing nothing without God was from everlasting. Therefore the
cause hereof must be found intra Deum, within God; then either the will of God,
which these men do utterly disclaim, or the knowledge of God; but that is
confessed to presuppose things future, rather then to make them so; or the
essence of God; now that may be considered either as working necessarily, (and
if in that manner it were the cause of things future, then all such things
should become future by necessity of nature, which to say is Atheistical) or
as working freely; and this is to grant, that the will of God is the cause why
every thing merely possible in its own nature does pass from everlasting into
the condition of a thing future, if so be it were future at all. And indeed
seeing no other cause can be pitched upon, this free will of God must be
acknowledged to be the cause of it: And consequently the reason why every thing
becomes future is, because God has determined it shall come to pass; but with
this difference, All good things God has determined shall come to pass by his
effection, All evil things God has determined shall come to pass by his
permission. And the Scripture naturally affords plentiful testimony to
confirm this, without forcing it to interpretations congruous hereunto, upon
presumptuous grounds that these arguments proceed from understandings purged
from prejudice and false principles.

5. My fifth argument is this. If sin be the cause of Reprobation, that is,
of the decree of damnation, then either by necessity of nature, or by the
constitution of God; not by necessity of nature, as all, that hitherto I have
known confess. But I say neither can it be by the free constitution of God;
for mark what a notorious absurdity follows hence, and that unavoidably,
namely, that God did ordain, that upon foresight of sin, he would ordain
them to damnation; mark it well, God did ordain that he would ordain, or God
did decree that he would decree. In which words Gods eternal decree is made
the object of Gods decree. Whereas it is well known that the objects of Gods
decrees are merely things temporal, and cannot be things eternal: we truly
say God did decree to create the World, to preserve the World, to redeem us,
call us, justify us, sanctify and save us, but it cannot be truly said, that
God did decree to decree, or ordain to ordain: for to decree is the act of
Gods will, and therefore it cannot be the object of the act of Gods will. Yet
these arguments I am not so enamoured with, as to force the interpretations of
Scripture to such a sense, as is suitable hereunto, presuming of the purity of
my understanding, as purged from prejudice and false principles. I could
willingly content my self with observation of the Apostles discourse, in
arguing to this effect; Before the Children were borne, or had done good or
evil, it was said the elder shall serve the younger: therefore the purpose of
God according to election Romans 9. 11.
stands not of works. In like manner may I discourse: Before the Children were
borne or had done good or evil, it was said the elder shall serve the younger:
therefore the purpose of God concerning Reprobation stands not of works. And
like as hence it is inferred, that therefore election stands not of good works;
so therehence may I infer, that therefore reprobation stands not of evil
works.

6. If sin foreseen be the cause meritorious of reprobation, then faith and
repentance and good works are the disposing causes unto election. For
therefore evil works foreseen are made the meritorious cause of reprobation,
because evil works exsistent, are the meritorious cause of damnation. And if
this be true, then also because Faith and Repentance and good works, are the
disposing causes unto salvation, then by the same force of reason, faith,
repentance, and good works foreseen, must be the disposing cause unto
election; But faith, repentance, and good works foreseen, are not the
disposing causes unto election; as I prove thus.

1. If they were then the purpose of God according to election, should be of
faith, repentance, and good works, which is expressly denied by the Apostle,
as touching the last part; and may as evidently be proved to be denied by him
in effect of the other parts also, by the same force of argumentation which he
uses: as for example, from this anticedent of the Apostles, before the
Children were borne, or had done good or evil, it no more evidently follows
that therefore the purpose of God according to election is not of works, than
it follows that the same purpose of God according to election is not of
faith, nor of repentance: For before they were borne they were no more capable
of faith, or of repentance, than of any other good works. And undoubtedly faith
and repentance are as good works, as any other.

2. If God does absolutely work faith in some, and not in others according to
the mere pleasure of his will, then it cannot be said, that faith foreseen, is
the cause of any man's election. For in this case faith is rather the means of
salvation, then salvation a means of faith; and consequently, the intention of
salvation rather precedes the intention of faith, than the intention of faith
can be said to precede the intention of salvation. And to this the Scripture
accords, Acts 1348. As many believed as were ordained to everlasting life,
making ordination to everlasting life the cause why men believed; answerable
hereunto is that Acts 2. last. God added daily to the Church such as should be
saved: and that of Paul to Titus, according to the faith of Gods elect: So that
according to Paul's phrase fides est electorum, but according to the Arminians
Doctrine the inverse hereof is a more proper and natural predication, as to
say, electio est fidelium.

But God does absolutely work faith in some men, according to the mere pleasure
of his will, denying the same grace to others: which I prove;

1. By Scripture. Romans 9. 18. God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will
he hardneth, compared with Romans 11. 30. Ye in times past have not believed,
but now have obtained mercy; where it appears by the Antithesis, that to find
mercy is to believe, that is, to obtain the grace of faith at the hands of God,
in Saint Paul's phrase.

2. By clear reason: for if it be not the mere pleasure of Gods will, that is
the cause hereof, then the cause hereof must be some good works, which he
finds in some, and not in others; whence it manifestly follows, that God
gives grace according unto works, which in the phrase of the ancients is
according to merits: and for 1200 years together, this has been reputed in the
Church of God mere Pelagianisme.

2. I further demand, what that good work is, whereupon God works it in one,
when he refuses to work it in another? Here the answer I find given is this,
that God does work in man (...) velle credere modo velit. Now of the absurdity
hereof, I appeal to the very light of nature, and let all the books that ever
were written on this argument be searched, and let it be enquired, whether ever
any did express themselves in the manner of so palpable and gross absurdity:
as wherein the act of willing is made the condition of it self: whence it
follows evidently, that it must be both before it self, and after it self;
for the condition must allwaies exsist before the thing conditionated. Yet they
are driven upon these rocks of absurdities in spite of their teeth: so
shameful is the issue of their discourses, who, in hatred of Gods truth
revealed in Gods word, and in a proud conceit of their own performances in the
way of argumentation, dare prescribe rules to all others, how to carry
themselves in the interpretation of Scriptures; as namely, to be so wary, as
that they do not deliver any thing, repugnant to understandings purged from
prejudice and false principles: as if the word of God supposed them that are
admitted to the studying thereof, to have their understandings already purged
from prejudice and false principles: not that it is given by God for this very
end, namely, to purge our understandings: for what is the illumination or
opening of the eyes of the mind, other than the purging of the understanding
from prejudice and false principles: and how miserable these aeriall disputers
do betray themselves, and manifest how they are transported with prejudice,
and corrupted not with false only, but gross principles, by this it may
appear in part.

I come to the consideration of his reply to the second answer, which here he
represents.

DISCOURSE. SUBSECT. V.
SEcondly it is answered, that God is not bound to restore men power to
believe, because they once had it, and have lost it through their own fault; as
a Master is not bound to renew his Servants stock, if he have wasted it by his
bad husbandry.

But this answer does yet satisfy me as little as the former: for I grant that
God is simply and absolutely bound to no man, he is agens liberrimum, a most
free dispenser of his own favors, both what he will, and to whom he will; but
yet he is conditionally; determinavit seipsum, he has bound himself to give
supernatural abilities to men by three things.

1. First Decernendo, the Almighty is eternally subject to his own decree, or
else he would be mutable; and therefore what gifts soever he has decreed to
men, he is bound to give them by virtue of his decree.

2. Secondly Promittendo. We use to say promise is debt, it is justice to
perform what it was free to promise; and whosoever he be that promises, and
pays not, is guilty of a trespass (witness Ananias and Saphira) and
unworthy of the Kingdom of Heaven. Psalm. 15. 4. If therefore God has made a
promise of any gift or grace to men, this promise binds him to performance.

3. Thirdly Legem ferendo. By giving men a Law to keep, which without
supernatural power, they cannot keep any more than they can eat a rock. By
such a Law the Almighty lawgiver binds himself to his creatures, to give them
such power as may enable them to keep that law, or else he becomes the true and
proper cause of the transgression of it. We shall find God evermore giving
strength, when he gives a command: when he commanded the creatures to increase
and multiply, he gave them a multiplying virtue. when Christ bid the lame man
arise, take up his bed, and walk, he puts into his limbs an ability of
walking: when Adam had a spiritual law given him to obey, which without
spiritual strength he could not, God gave him strength answerable to the law,
as all Divines agree, consenting to that noted speech of Austin, that Adam had
posse non cadere, though he never had non posse cadere; a power and
possibility, though not a necessity of continuing in obedience. That I may
bring this home to my purpose. I say that God is bound to restore unto men,
power to believe, supposing these ways that follow.

1. That he has vouchsafed to enter into a New Covenant of Peace with men,
when he needed not. 2. That in that Covenant he requires obedience at men's
hands, even at theirs that perish. 3. That he promises eternal life to every
man, if he obey and keep the Covenant. 4. That he punishes the disobedient
with everlasting death. These particulars supposed, the most free God who is
necessarily bound to none, is engaged to give ability of believing to men; nor
can he justly without this gift, punish the disobedient any more, then a
Magistrate having put out a man's eyes for an offense, can command this man with
justice to read a book, and because he reads not, put him to death: Or then a
Master (that I may return the Simile in the answer) when he has taken away
from his Servant the stock, which he has misimployed, can afterward exact of
him a just employment of the same stock, and punish him because he imployeth it
not. I conclude therefore, that the absolute and inevitable reprobation of such
men as are called to believe in Christ, and punished if thev believe not, is
utterly repugnant to the justice of God, and therefore cannot be a part of his
word.

TWISSE Consideration.
THis Second answer is in like manner, delivered at pleasure, without quoting
the Author of it: And no marvel if this Author desires to have the making of
his own bed, that he may lie the more softly. Yet touching the similitude here
mentioned let it be stated aright: a Master trusts his servant with a stock,
not to receive it from him again, though the stock be of a moveable nature,
but to receive from him in lieu thereof, some yearly emolument. In this case
let him say what he can against it: now here his discourse is for the most part
at large, showing how God, though a most free agent, may oblige himself to his
creature.

1. Decremendo; whether hereby God does bind himself to his creature (which
has no being at all when Gods decrees are made) or to himself rather, it is
little or nothing material to the present: what soever it be that God decrees,
we are sure that must come to pass, provided that we do not make his decrees
of a revocable nature with some; but as touching any use of Gods obliging
himself this way unto his creature, this Author is content to say nothing at
all, in the accommodation.

2. Promittendo. And we willingly grant, that what God promises he never
fails to perform, after that manner as he has promised: as namely in case he
has promised that as many as believe in Christ shall be saved, we nothing
doubt, but if all the world should believe in Christ, all the world should be
saved. But whether any devise a promise concerning the giving of faith and
repentance unto all, and every one; and that whether conditionately or
absolutely this Author is content to say just nothing. As likewise, neither
does he take upon him to plead any promise of God, to give to all and every one
power to believe or power to repent.

3. Legem ferendo. This alone of all the three serves his turn, and therefore
here he does expatiate, much more than in the former. And herehence he
inferres, that God binds himself to give supernatural power, to keep the Law
he commands, provided the Law be such, as without supernatural power, he can
no more keep it, than eat a rock. Now this accommodated to Adam, had need of
explication, seeing we read of no other Law given unto him, than of abstaining
from a certain fruit: which I do not deliver as if I doubted, but that to the
performance of obedience herein, a supernatural power was requisite; but only
to signify, that it were worth the labor to give a congruous explication of
it. Though of Adam I nothing doubt but he was endued with supernatural power,
to perform other manner of duties than this. And yet again, this denomination
of power supernatural, had need also of explication; for though that power
which Adam had given him in creation, be supernatural to us, yet our Divines
usually conceive it as natural unto Adam, received together with his nature,
and such as should have been natural unto us all, had Adam continued in his
original integrity. But I am content to let that pass; only whereas he says,
that by such a law the Allmighty lawgiver binds himself to his creatuees, to
give them such power as may enable them to keep that law; I think rather if
any obligation had place in this case, it were rather to maintain the power
already given them, than to give it. For every lawgiver rather presupposes
ability of obedience in them, to whom he gives a law; then first gives a law
and then gives ability to perform obedience thereunto. And certainly God first
created man after his own image, before he gave him any law to be a rule of
his obedience unto his creator. So I take the multiplying virtue, was given to
his creatures in their creation, before he said increase and multiply: In the
curing of the lame man, his word indeed was a word of power, like as when he
said let there be light, and there was light. For though it go under the form
of a command, yet it was not so properly a command (which is to command
obedience) as the going forth of virtuous efficacy to create: like as that also
Ezekiel. 37. O ye dry bones hear the voice of the Lord. And undoubtedly the
strength of obedience given unto Adam preceded Gods command, for his abstaining
from the fruit of the tree, in the midst of the Garden. He had in his creation
given him, posse non cadere, not non posse cadere, the event manifested as
much: and it is as true according to the same Austin, that God gave him posse
stare si vellet, not velle quod potuit. But that God is bound to restore, any
such power unto mankind, which they have wilfully lost, is boldly avouched, but
let us consider how Scholastically it is proved.

1. The first reason hereof is, because God has vouchsafed to enter into a new
Covenant of Peace with men, when he needed not. To this I answer, that God has
entered into a new Covenant with men, is an indefinite proposition, as touching
the persons included in this Covenant, and being not in a necessary matter but
contingent, this Covenant proceeding merely from the good pleasure of God, it
has no more force than to signify, that God has vouchsafed to enter into a
new Covenant of peace with some men, which we wilingly grant but not with all,
neither does this proposition, enforce any such meaning. And that God has not
entered into a new Covenant with all, I prove by these reasons.

1. As many as are under the Covenant of grace, sin shall have no dominion
over them. Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have the dominion over you, for you are
not under the law but under grace. But sin has the dominion over too many,
even over the most part of the world, as we find by lamentable experience,
therefore too many, even the most part of the World, are not comprised under
the Covenant of grace.

2. The covenant of Grace, does covenant on Gods part, not only to give
salvation upon condition of faith and repentance, but for Christ's sake to renew
men's natures also, and to give them faith and repentance. As appears by diverse
passages of Scripture: Jer. 31. 31. Behold the days come says the Lord, that
I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of
Judah. v. 32. Not according to the Covenant, that I made with their Fathers,
when I took them by the hand, to bring them out of the land of Egypt, the which
my Covenant they brake, though I was a Father unto them. But this shall be the
Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after those days says the
Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts,
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your bodies, and will
give you an heart of flesh, and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them. Ezekiel. 20.
23. I will surely rule you with a mighty hand, etc. 37. And will cause you to
pass under the rod, and bring you into the bond of the Covenant. Isai. 57. 18.
I have seen his ways, and will heal him. Hos. 14. 5. I will heal their
rebellions, I will love them freely. And that faith it self and repentance, is
the gift of God, who has taken upon him by his covenant of grace, to be our
Lord and our God to sanctify us, is manifest by diverse pregnant passages of
holy Scriptures.

2. I come to his second reason. And in that Covenant he requires obedience at
men's hands, even at theirs that perish. God in his covenant of Grace requires
obedience unto salvation, but of his free grace undertakes to regenerate them,
and work them to obedience; but how? Agreeable unto their rational natures,
that is by admonition, instruction, exhortation, that is to work faith and
repentance, by exhorting and persuading them unto repentance: And because this
he performs by his Ministers, to whom he has not revealed who they are, whom
he has chosen, therefore he commands them to Preach indifferently unto all,
persuade all, exhort all, unto faith and repentance, whereof also he makes this
use even toward reprobates, that whereas they are naturally confident of their
ability, to do as much as any other, and as Austin says dicere solet humana
superbia si scissem, fecissem. The Lord by his Ministry takes from them this
excuse, so that unto all that hear is this truth delivered, whosoever
believes and repents shall be saved: and thereupon every one is exhorted in
the name of the Lord to believe and repent. But God resolves to work faith
and repentance in none, but those whom he has chosen, according to that Acts
13. 48. As many believed as were ordained to everlasting life. And withal the
Doctrine delivered in the Gospel is such, and so confirmed, as may justly make
them inexcusable that do not believe: when it shall appear, that many a vile
legend they are apt to believe, and in the mean time despise Gods holy Oracles,
by divine Authority, many ways confirmed unto them.

3. It is most true, eternal life is promised to every on that obeys and
keeps Covenant with God; but God over and above works some unto obedience,
unto faith and repentance, bestowing these gracious gifts on them, even on
whom he will, when he hardens others even whom he will. Romans 9. 18.

4. He punishes the disobedient with eternal death; true: but acording unto
what Covenant? Not according unto the Covenant of grace, that is only a
Covenant for Salvation, but according unto the Covenant of the law, the
Covenant of works.

Whereas herehence this Author inferres, that the most free God is engaged to
give ability of believing unto men: he may as well infer, that he is engaged
to give ability unto men to the keeping of his law, and what need was there of
Christ's coming into the world? Seeing by his coming into the world, we have
gained no better condition by the Arminian Tenet, than to be saved if we will;
and if men have ability to to keep the law even by the law, they may be saved
if they will: and it will follow as well, that God, without giving this ability
to keep the law, cannot justly punish the transgressors of it; as that God
without giving men ability to believe cannot punish men for not believing: no
more than a Magistrate having put out a man's eyes for an offense, can command
this man with justice to read a book, and because he reads not, put him to
death. But this is a very vile simile, and stands in no tolerable proportion to
that whereunto it is resembled. For the man thus bereaved of his eyes has a
will to read, and consequently it is no fault for not reading: for all sin is
in the will. But it is not so, in not obeying either Law or Gospel. If a man
had a will to obey and believe but he could not, in such a case it were
unreasonable he should be punished. But in the case of disobedience unto God,
we speak of, all the fault is in the will voluntarily and wilfully, they
neither will obey the one, nor the other: like as they that have accustomed
themselves to do evil, can not do good, as a blackemoore cannot change his
skin. Yet with this difference, that man is never a whit the more excusable,
or less punishable for not doing that which is good; not so the blackemore,
for not changing his skin. But such is the shameful issue of them that
confound impotency Moral with impotency natural, as if there were no
difference. As wild is the comparison following, of the Masters exacting from
his Servant a just employment of that stock, which he has taken from him. An
evil servant may have a will to play the good husband in employing his Masters
stock, where he pleased to entrust him with it: But though he has a will to be
faithful and thrifty, yet without matter to work upon, he cannot exercise this
fidelity of his to his Masters behoof. Show the like will in a carnal man to
believe if he could, and if God bereave him of power, in such a case, then
conclude the unreasonablenesse of Gods courses herein. But if the Master gave
him a stock to employ, upon a reasonable rent to be paid him yearly for certain
years: if so be the servant wast the stock, Shall it not be lawful for the
Master nevertheless to require his debt? And bid him pay that he owes him?
This is the case we speak of. In Adam we all have sinned, says the Apostle,
and thereby have wasted that stock of grace which God had given us, and so
disabled our selves to perform that duty we owe to God: What therefore? Shall
not God call upon us to pay our debts, because we are become bankrupts?
Especially considering the natural man is proud enough of his abilities to
perform any thing that is good. And as for ability to believe, is there not a
kind of faith performed by profane persons, by Hypocrites, who concur with
the best in the profession of the Gospel? Nay, Is there not a secret kind of
hypocrisy, as when a man thinks his heart is upright toward God, when indeed
it is not? Otherwise what should move Saint Paul to call upon the Corinthians
to examine themselves whether they were in the faith, saying, Know you not your
selves how that Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? 2 Car. 13. 5. It is
true there is a faith infused by the spirit of God in regeneration; but who
ever said that any man was damned, because he does not believe with such a
faith? As much as to say, that non-regeneration is the meritorious cause of
damnation. Now how well he has proved that our Doctrine in the point of
absolute reprobation is repugnant to Gods justice, let the indifferent judge.

DISCOURSE. SECT. IV. Which I divide into Three Subsections.
SUBSECT. I.
THe Third Attribute which it oppugneth, is the truth of God. God is a God of
truth, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Truth it self. Ioh. 14. 6. So called because he is the
fountain of truth, and the perfection of truth, without the least mixture of
false-hood; the strength of Israel cannot lie. 1 Samuel 15. 29. Never could any
man justly charge him with dissembling; Let God be true and every man a liar,
(says the Apostle) that he might be justified in his sayings, and overcome
when he is judged. Romans 3. 4. That is, men may lie, (for all men are liars) but
God cannot lie, (for God is true:) if any man should go about to challenge him
of untruth, his challenge would easily appear to be a calumny. The truth of
God, like a glorious Sun, will break through all those clouds of accusations
which seek to obscure and hide it. Simile gaudet Simili; God loves such as are
of a true heart. Psalm. 51 6. And has an hypocrite in utter detestation, and
therefore he must needs be true himself. No man (for ought I know) doubts of
it.

But by this decree is God made untrue, and hypocritical in his dealing with
all men, and in all matters that concern their eternal estate; particularly,
in his commands, in his offers of grace and glory, in his threats, in his
passionate wishes and desires of men's chiefest good, and in his expostulations
and commiserations also.

1. In his commands; for by this doctrine God commands those men to repent and
believe, whom he secretly purposes shall never believe. Now whom God commands
to believe and repent, those he outwardly wills should believe and repent. For
by his commandments he signifies his will and pleasure, and he must inwardly
and heartily will it too, or else he dissembles: For words if they be true, are
an interpretation of the mind, when they are not, are mere impostures, and
simulations.

2. In his offers of grace and glory: these offers he makes to such as refuse
them, and perish for refusing them, as well as unto those who do accept them
to their salvation. This is evident Math. 22. where those were invited to the
wedding that came not. And Acts 3. 26. Where it is said, To you has God sent his
Son Jesus to bless you, in turning every one of you from your iniquities.
Math. 23. 37. How often would I have gathered of you, says Christ, speaking of
such as neglect the day of their visitation, and so lost their salvation: This
is evident also by reason, for as many as are under the commandment, are under
the promise too, as we may see, Acts 2. 38, 39. Repent and be Baptized every
one of you, and you shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost; for to you, and
to your Children is the promise made. In which words Peter makes the command
and the promise of equal extent, both universal: And there is reason for it,
for he makes the promise his motive to persuade obedience to the command; and
it would not have reached home, if it had not respected all those, to whom he
gives the command.

No man, Reprobate or other, thinks any less; every man that hears the Gospel
Preached, takes himself to be under the gracious offer of eternal life; and
upon these thoughts has some desires, some hopes of it, and stirs up
himself to forsake some pleasing sins, which otherwise he would not part
with, and to do some unpleasing duties, which otherwise he would not do; Now,
if God does not mean that most of those to whom he offers his grace and glory
shall have either, will he not be found halting in his offers?

Zanchy tells us roundly, that every man that is called, is bound to think that
he is elected; otherwise L. 5. de not. Dei cap. 2.
he does offer great injury unto God, and does perstringere Deum mendacii, qui
illi in verbo dicit se velle salutem ejus, and in hunc finem ad Christum
vocasse. In which speech he plainly implies, that if God call a man, whom he
has absolutely rejected, he does but delude him when he calls him. The like
speech has Bucer; Primum quod Deo debes, est ut credas esse te ab eo
praedestinatum, nam id ni credas, facis eum tibi, cum te ad salutem vocat per
evangelium, illudere. A man must believe that he is predestined, Bucer in
cap. 8. ad Romans q. de praedest.
or else he makes God to mock him when he calls him. A man therefore that is
not predestinate, but an absolute reprobate, when he is called to salvation, is
but deluded; it is the necessary result of their speeches. If a creditor should
resolve upon no terms to forgive his debtor one farthing of the debt, and yet
make him offers to remit the whole upon some conditions, and bind the offers
which he makes, with a deep and solemn oath, Would we not say that he is a
rank dissembler, and a mere deluder of his poor debtor? We can say no less of
God, if it be true that he has irrevocably decreed, at no hand to save such
particular men, and yet promises, and swears, that he will save them if they
will believe his promises and repent. What can such promises be but mere
delusions of miserable men?

3. In his threats and commination also (by this doctrine) is God made to be
hollow and unsincere, for, Against what sins are they denounced? Always
against actual sins: we never read that they are denounced against us for
original sins, for the transgression of Adam, or for that corruption ot
nature, which we brought with us into the world; and consequently they import
that the sins for which men go to hell, are their actual transgressions.
But if it be true that God decreed man to hell for original sin, that which
those threatenings import and signify is not true, and so God is not sincere to
them. Besides; all threatenings imply, that evils threatened may be avoided, for
therefore are they denounced, that men by them might come to repentance, and so
escape the evil that are threatened: but if some men be peremptorily ordained
to destruction, then their destruction cannot be prevented, and so the
threatening of damnation (in this respect also) does signify an untruth, and God
in them deals not plainly with men.

TWISSE Consideration.
THat God is true, we make no more doubt than that there is a God at all: and
that God is as far from hypocrisy as hypocrites are far from him. They that
beat their fellow servants, and eat and drink with the drunken, we are taught
shall have there portion with hypocrites: and we judge it impossible that God
should cherish any such disposition in himself, which he so hates in others.
But how God is made untrue and hypocritical in his dealings with men in all
(or in any) matters, that concern their eternal estate by our doctrine of
Reprobation, more than by our doctrine of election, it is a mystery unto me;
whether we consider his commands, his offers of grace and glory, his threats,
his passionate wishes and desires of men's chiefest good, and in his
expostulations and commiserations also. But come we to examine how learnedly
and judiciously this is carried throughout in the particulars.

1. That God commands by his Ministers many to believe and repent, whom he
secretly purposes shall never believe we willingly grant; like as he commanded
Abraham to sacrifice Isaac, and yet secretly purposed that he should not
sacrifice him. This is evident by the word of God, for both his command given
to Abraham to this purpose is there expressed, as also his effectual hindering
of Abraham, when he came to the point of sacrifysing him; and look what God
did, that he secretly purposed to to do: For he does all things according to
the counsel of his will Ephesians. 1. 11. Only here is the difference, God
commanding Abraham to sacrifice his Son, did positively hinder him from
sacrificing Isaac, but God commanding all to hear the Gospel to believe,
does not hinder them from believing, when they are willing to believe. But only
refuses to give them that grace whereby alone their natural infidelity might
be cured; according to those words of our Savior, Ye therefore hear them (my
words) not, because ye are not of God. John. 8. 47.

Now let every sober man judge, whether Gods course be not to be censured for
hypocrisy, as well in the one as in the other: yet is this a most trivial
argument, and thus usually answered by our Divines, and particularly by Master
Perkins. But this author takes no notice of this our common answer, to reply
against it, but is content to pretermit it in silence; a manifest evidence that
he has nothing of worth to say against it: for I cannot conceive him to be so
ignorant, as not to know this usual answer of our Divines. But let we him
proceed in his course. Whom God commands to believe and repent, those he
outwardly wills should believe and repent; for by his commands he signifies his
will and pleasure, and he must inwardly and heartily will it too, or else he
dissembles. All this is as congruously appliable to Gods commandment given
unto Abraham for the sacrificing of Isaac, as to the commandment of believing
and repenting given unto any; although there is a vast difference between Gods
commandment of Sacrificing Isaac, and his commandment of believing. For God
himself gave the one immediately, and that to a particular person, Abraham:
But God commands his Ministers to preach his Gospel unto all, that are present
to hear them, and why? But as he tells Paul. Acts 18. 9. because he has much
people, in the place whereto he sends them, and yet tells them not who those
people are, who his elect are and who are not. But they, though thereupon they
proceed to Preach unto all without difference, yet so, as aiming at the
salvation of the elect. I do all things for all men, says Saint Paul, 1 Cor.
6. 22. That I may save some; and who are they? Let himself answer, where he
says, I suffer all things for the elects sake; and by the way where he
distinguishes of Gods willing outwardly and inwardly, I willingly profess I
never 2 Timothy 2. 10.
read nor heard of it before. Gods words and commandments are outward, and
uttered by him, but his will is always inward, though it may be, and is
signified by his words, and so is his will signified always by his
commandments; But what will? Not that such a thing as God commands shall be
done, as this Author ignorantly conceives, but that it shall be their duty, (to
whom the commandment is given) to do that which is commanded: for if Gods
will were that such a thing should be done de facto, undoubtedly it should be
done and come to pass de facto, for who has resisted his will? So that here
we have Romans 9. 19.
a true interpretation of the mind of God by his commandment, to wit, quid ab
homine fieri debeat, but no interpretation of any such mind in God, as if fieri
vellet, whatsoever he commands. For the case is clear and undeniable that Gods
will was, that Isaac should not be sacrificed, as well as by his command, to
make it Abraham's duty to sacrifice him. The like was the case of Pharaoh to
whom the Lord sent a message by Moses to let Israel go: hereupon it was
Pharaohs duty to let Israel go, and that upon Gods command, God thereby
signifying his will to make this act Pharaohs duty; But was it Gods will also
that Pharaoh should de facto obey, and let Israel go upon this command? If
so, why does God tell Moses that he will harden Pharaohs heart, and that he
shall not let Israel go.

Where we have a manifest example of the great difference of the objects of
Gods will; the one what Gods will was, that Pharaoh ought to do; and the other
what his will was should be done by him: the letting of Israel go, was that
which Pharaoh ought to do by the will of God, but the not letting of Israel
go by Pharaoh, was that which God willed should come to pass; And why does
not this Author take boldness to censure these proceedings of the Lord with
Pharaoh as hypocritical proceedings? The same spirit will serve the turn for
both, though not without betraying as much judgment as honesty. In the like
sort, it might be urged of the very elect, as of the reprobate, for the very
elect are not always converted at the first hearing of the Gospel, nor till
the time God has appointed for their effectual vocation: yet from their first
hearing of the Gospel, this command is made unto them, and thereby is
signified Gods will that they ought to believe it, yet is it not Gods will that
they shall believe, and be converted until the time that God has appointed.
That which in my judgment is more to the purpose is this, that by commanding
to believe, he supposes them at least in pretense to be endued with a power to
believe; but then say I in like manner, he supposes them to be indifferent to
believe or not to believe, as they will, that is either to yield or else to
resist; now this is indifferent to be objected as well against election, as
against reprobation: For like as we say it cannot be that the reprobate should
believe de facto, so we say it cannot be, that the elect should not belief at
that time, de facto, which God has appointed for their effectual conversion.
And what advantage this Author can hence work to himself, I will be ready to
take into consideration, as soon as it is offered. So that hitherto I hope, I
have freed the divine course maintained by us, from all just imputation of
imposture and dissimulation: let him look to it how he can clear his
conscience from the impiety of his crimination. I come to the Second.

2. Here those offers of grace and glory, which we ascribe to God, he charge
with imposture and simulation. But he contents himself with the generality of
grace, that is for his best advantage. I will answer to each part. As for
glory or salvation, we offer it unto none, (neither do we teach that God
makes offer of it unto any) but to such as finally persevere in faith and
repentance, according to that, Revelations 3. To him that overcomes, I will
give to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down
with my Father in his Throne. And be thou faithful unto the death, and I will
give thee a Crown of life. And Gal. 6. Be not weary of well doing, for in good
time ye shall reap if ye faint not. And accordingly we teach, that it is the
will of God, that as many as believe and repent and persevere therein, shall be
saved: and no other will of God is signified herein. And if this be true, that
God does will this, and no other thing then this is signified in his offers of
glory and salvation.

What color of imposture and dissimulation, does appear in all this? For
glory and salvation, God does not will that it shall be the portion of any one
of ripe years, absolutely but conditionally, to wit, if he repent and believe.
And in case all and every one of the World should believe and repent, all and
every one (how notorious sinners soever they be found) shall be saved; such is
the sufficiency of Christ's merits. I say this is true, not of them only, who
are invited to the Wedding. Math. 22. Nor of them only, to whom Saint Peter
speaks, Acts 3. 26. Or to them only, of whom our Savior speaks, Math. 23.
37. But of all and every one throughout the World: and it is as true, that none
of them shall be saved, if they dye in infidelity and impenitency, this God
himself signifies to be his will by his promise, Acts 2. 28, 29. on the one
part, and on both parts, Mark 16. 16. And as God signifies this to be his
will, so indeed is his will according to our doctrine, and there is no color
of imposture or simulation in all this. In like sort as touching the grace of
pardon of sin, this also God offers unto all that hear the Gospel, but how?
Not absolutely but conditionally, in case they believe and repent; and it is
Gods will that every one who believes, shall have his sin pardoned; none
that I know either thinks or teaches otherwise, whether he falls out
either to be elect or reprobate; though how to distinguish men according unto
this difference I know not, I leave that unto God.

And accordingly as touching the desire and hopes, that hereupon arise in the
thoughts of Reprobates, I am nothing acquainted with them, any more than I am
with their persons: as likewise neither am I private to their stirring up of
themselves to forsake some pleasing sins, which otherwise they would not part
with; and to do some unpleasing duties, which otherwise they would not do:
But in general I have read in Austin, that God calls some (though
Reprobates) ut proficiant ad exteriorem vitae emendationem quo mitius
puniantur. But I can hardly believe, that Herod was any one of them, though he
did many things at his admonition, because I see a shameful issue, giving way
to the cutting off John Baptists head, for the gratifying of a wanton damsel.

Now like as we say, God does signify his meaning to be, that as many as
believe and repent shall have their sins pardoned, and their souls saved: So
if it can be proved that there is no such meaning in God, then in my poor
judgment it cannot be avoided, but that God must be found halting in his
offers. But for my part, I acknowledge such a meaning in God, neither have I to
this hour, found any one of our Divines either by word or writing to have
denied this to be the meaning of God: and I wonder what this Author means after
this manner to carry himself in the clouds of generalities; and whether it be
through silliness, or malitiousnesse I am to seek: but if I may be so bold as
to guess, I think the root of all this his superficiary discourse is the
confounding of absolute Reprobation with absolute Damnation, and in like sort
absolute election with salvation absolute: for as for pardon of sin, and
salvation, we acknowledge them to be bestowed on men of ripe years
conditionally; and as God bestows them, so also he decreed to bestow them (we
say) conditionally, to wit, in case they believe and repent: but in case they
believe and repent not, damnation is their portion, and that by the decree of
God. But as touching the gift of faith and repentance, these we maintain to be
given of God absolutely, according to the mere pleasure of his will: and
accordingly denied unto others, as the Apostle signifies, saying, He has
mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth. But this Author meddles
not hither to with these gifts, but keeps Romans 9. 18.
himself to the graces of pardon of sin, and of salvation, which God
bestows conditionally; and signifies his meaning to be, to bestow them
conditionally, namely, in case they believe and repent, and not otherwise, and
such indeed we maintain to have been his meaning, and that from everlasting.
So that in all this there is no color of imposture or simulation. But in that
which follows, he steals upon the grace of faith it self; let us see how
clearly, and with what felicity he carries himself, and whether it be not
answerable to his former carriage which he continues throughout.

Zanchy (he says) tells us roundly, that every man that is called, is bound to
think he is elected; but why does he not speak out and say, that every one is
bound (in the opinion of Zanchy) to believe that he is elected, as formerly he
related it. I grant that to believe is to think, for credere, is defined to be
cum assensione cogitare, but thoughts he knows are very wild, they have their
course in dreams; as a hungry man may dream that he eats and drinks, but
when he awaketh, his soul is empty. And as for that doctrine of Zanchy, I have
already given a fair interpretation of it, upon consideration that he speaks
it of election not unto faith, but unto salvation: and seeing God has
manifested in his word his determination to give salvation to every one that
believes, it follows herehence, that every one is bound to believe, that as
many as do believe shall be saved: and consequently every one that hears the
Gospel is bound to believe, That God has determined to bestow Salvation on
him, in case he be found to believe. The like construction may be given of
Bucers Doctrine; namely, that God has predestined him to obtain Salvation in
case he believe, not otherwise. For God has not predestined any man of ripe
years to obtain Salvation, whether he believe or not. And seeing God has
plainly professed that whosoever believes shall be saved. Mar. 16. 16. If I
do not accordingly believe, that God has predestined me to obtain salvation
in case I do believe, I do hereby make God to delude me in saying Whosoever
believes shall be saved. And whereas this Author upon the back of this adds,
that a man therefore that is not predestinate, but an absolute reprobate, when
he is called to salvation is but deluded; and that this is the necessary result
of our speeches. All the color of this his inference, depends merely upon
confusion of things that differ. For he distinguishes not between absolute
predestination unto salvation, and predestination unto salvation absolute:
likewise he distinguishes not between absolute reprobation unto damnation, and
reprobation unto damnation absolute: neither does he distinguish between
predestination unto faith, and predestination unto salvation; nor between
reprobation from faith, and reprobation unto damnation. And the absoluteness
of predestination appears only in predestination unto faith, not in
predestination unto salvation. For salvation being bestowed on none of ripe
years, but by way of reward of their faith, repentance and good works; hence it
follows, that God predestinates none unto salvation of ripe years, but by way
of reward of their obedience. But as for predestination unto faith, it is
clear, that God purposes absolutely to bestow faith on whom he will. So on
the other side damnation being inflicted on none, but for sin God has
destinated no man unto damnation but for sin. But as touching obduration,
like as God hardneth whom he will, so he decreed to proceed herein, to wit, in
hardening of men according to the mere pleasure of his will, that is,
absolutely. Now let us not suffer a cauteriate conscience, to smother a plain
truth, with the confusion of those things which are to be distinguished.
Absolute is opposed to conditionate; and this distinction applied to Gods will
is to be understood not quoad actum volentis, sed quoad res volitas; as for
example, God decrees that a man shall be saved upon condition of faith, this is
called voluntas conditionata, so oVssius expounds it. Hist. Pelag. lib. 7. p.
638. his words are these, Aliqua vult cum condition, quae idcirco in effectum
non prodeunt nisi condition impleta. Some things (God) wills with a
condition, which come not unto effect, but upon the fulfilling of the
condition; this is plainly understood, not of the act of willing, but of the
things willed, which he calls aliqua, and the instance he gives us is this, quo
modo omnes homines salvari 1 Timothy 2. 4:
vult, sed per and propter Christum fide apprehensum, after which manner he
will have all to be saved, but by and for Christ apprehended by faith; where
faith is plainly made the condition of salvation, not of Gods will; yet this
will of God, he calls forthwith a conditionate will, and that according to the
ancients, in these words, de hac conditionata illa Dei voluntate extant long
plurima apud veteres Scriptores. By which it is manifest, that voluntas
conditionata, is by Vossius so called, and in his opinion by the ancients, not
on the part of God willing, as if there were any condition thereof, which
Bradwardine has disproved as a thing impossible well near 200 years ago; but
on the part of the things willed by God; now the things willed by God are
either absolutely so willed, or conditionally; as for example, pardon of sin
and salvation, are only conditionally willed by God: to wit, upon the condition
of faith and repentance, but as for the gift of faith and repentance, they are
willed by God to be bestowed absolutely, to wit, according to the mere pleasure
of Gods will, hence it follows that the will of God to confer salvation, is
only voluntas coditionata, and denominates not a man absolutely predestined,
but only conditionally, still understanding it not quod actum volentis, but
quoad res volitas, as Vossius himself interprets it, and that according to the
ancients. In like sort the will of God to inflict damnation, is a conditionate
will according to the same construction that Vossius makes of a will
conditionate, according to the Fathers; and denominates not a man absolutely
reprobated, but only conditionally. Now this being the will that Zanchy and
Bucer speak of, most preposterously does this Author shape a man hereupon, to
be termed an absolute predestinate, or an absolute reprobate: For in this
respect, like as the will of God in this case, is accounted not absoluta but
conditionata, so the person denominated hereby, in all equity is to be
accounted, not predestined absolutely, but conditionally, nor reprobated
absolutely but conditionally. But in respect of another will of God, I
willingly confess, one may be accounted predestinate absolutely, and another
reprobated absolutely, to wit, in respect of the will of giving the grace of
faith and repentance unto one, and denying it to another: And that because
faith and repentance are not given and denied upon any condition, but
absolutely, according to the mere pleasure of God; as we are ready to
maintain. But herehence no species of contradiction arises, for like as it is
no contradiction to say that God wills absolutely unto Paul the grace of
faith and repentance, and conditionally wills unto him and every one
salvation, to wit, upon condition of faith and repentance: In like sort, there
is no contradiction to say, that the same man is predestined absolutely unto
faith, and conditionally unto salvation: In like sort it may be said without
all contradiction, that the same man is both reprobated absolutely from faith,
and yet reprobated conditionally from glory unto condemnation. And lastly, in
like manner, there is no contradiction to say, that the same man is
predestined conditionally to obtain salvation; and yet absolutely reprobated
from faith: especially seeing it is all one, to be predestined conditionally
to obtain salvation, and conditionally to obtain damnation: For he that is
ordained to be saved in case he believe, is therewithal ordained to be damned
in case he believe not: The ground whereof is, that of our Savior Whosoever
believes shall be saved, whosoever believes not shall be damned. Now if God
may both will unto a man salvation conditionally, Mar. 15. 16.
to wit, upon condition he believes, and yet withal will the denial of faith
absolutely unto him, without all contradiction, (as I have already proved) it
follows, that without all contradiction, a man may be said both to be
predestined to obtain salvation conditionally, viz. In case he do believe,
and so to be predestined absolutely, to be hardened, or to have the grace of
faith denied him. So that this Authors conclusion depends merely upon
confusion of different denominations of a man said to be absolutely, or
conditionally predestined: which may be in respect of different things
whereto he is predestined, to the one absolutely, to the other conditionally,
and consequently without all contradiction. For he that is absolutely
reprobated from the grace of faith, may yet be conditionally predestined unto
salvation. For to be conditionally predestined unto salvation, is to be
conditionally predestined unto damnation, and what sober man will say, that
there is any contradiction in this, to say, that the same man is both
conditionally reprobated unto damnation, and absolutely reprobated from faith.
Faith being such a gift of God, that like as God absolutely bestows it on
some, so as absolutely he denies it to others. But as for condemnation, that is
inflicted on none but for sin, like as salvation is bestowed on none of ripe
years, but as a reward of obedience. In like manner God decreed not either to
bestow the one, or inflict the other but conditionally, to wit, upon condition
of faith on the one side, and upon condition of infidelity on the other. Now if
such confusion be committed in these denominations of the predestinate and
reprobate, absolutely and conditionally, on the part of things willed by God,
as namely in respect of grace and glory on the one side, and in respect of the
denial of grace and glory, together with inflicting of damnation on the other;
How much more must this confusion be augmented, if not only different things
willed by God (as before mentioned) are confounded, but over and above the act
of Gods will is confounded with things willed by him. For as for the act of
Gods will, that it admitts no condition, I have formerly demonstrated by
diverse arguments; one whereof, and that invincible, is this; If sin be the
cause or condition of Gods will, or decree of damnation, then either by
necessity of nature, or by the constitution of God; not by necessity of nature
(as all confess,) nor (say I) can it be by any constitution of God, as I prove
thus; If by the constitution of God, then God has ordained that upon the
foresight of sin, he will ordain men unto salvation; where the eternal
ordination of God, is made the object of Gods eternal ordination; a thing
utterly impossible, it being apparent that nothing can be the object of Gods
eternal ordination or decree, but things temporal. The similitude whereby he
illustrates, not his conclusion, but the pretended absurdity of our doctrine,
is most aliene. For God is not like unto a creditor, Who resolves upon no
terms to forgive his debtor one farthing of his debt, and yet makes offer to
remit the whole debt upon some conditions. For as God has professed that
whosoever believes shall be saved, so; Has not God resolved that Mar. 16. 16.
whosoever believes shall be saved? Was ever any of our Divines known to deny
this? But herein they join issue with their adversaries, as the
Contra-Remonstrants did with the Remonstrants, namely, in maintaining that this
is not the whole decree of predestination; But that there is another decree of
predestination besides this; namely, that God over and above has determined to
bestow faith on some. So on the other side, none of our Divines were ever known
to deny, that God has decreed, that whosoever believes not shall be damned;
but further they profess, that this is not the whole decree of reprobation,
but that there is another decree concerning reprobation besides this, namely,
that God has over and above decreed to deny some the grace of faith, and that
absolutely. Now whereas he says, we maintain that God has irrevocably decreed
not to save some, whom he promises that he will save if they believe; Is he
well in his wits, for charging us with that, by way of crimination, which no
understanding Divine among the Arminians themselves dare deny? I mean as
touching the point of Gods irrevocable decree. For what Arminian has dared in
plain terms to profess, that Gods decrees are of a revocable nature? Whereas
the mere prescience of God, is sufficient to make them irrevocable; How much
more if Gods prescience be grounded upon his decree? as indeed there is no
other ground imaginable, without falling upon manifest Atheism. But whereas he
fashioneth our Doctrine, so as if we said, that God has decreed at no hand to
save them, to whom he promises salvation upon condition of faith; this is a
notorious untruth, and such as implies manifest contradiction: For to say he
has resolved at no hand to save them, is as much as to say, that he has
resolved to save them on no condition. But if he has promised to save them in
case they believe, undoubtedly he has resolved, to save them upon condition of
faith. Only Gods resolution to save them, is not held in suspense, considering
that from everlasting, he well knew who would believe, and who would not; and
therefore he knew this, because he purposed to grant faith unto the one, and
deny it unto the other. So that in all this cry, we have little wool, no
substance of any sound proof, but mere clamours and miserable confusion; as
God sees how well it becomes him to smite them with the spirit of confusion,
that build Babell of their own invention, and oppose the truth, the precious
truth of his sovereignty over his creatures, and of the prerogative of his free
grace, to have mercy on whom he will, like as he shows his power in hardening
whom he will, and in smiting with giddiness whom he will.

3. In the next place, we are to hear how God, by our Doctrine in his threats
and comminations is hollow, and unsincere. I willingly grant these are always
denounced against actual sins, as also that the sins for which men go to
hell, are actual sins, if they live to be conscious of actual
transgressions. But if God have decreed men to hell for original sin, then
God (says he) is not true, and so not sincere. This is utterly unconsequent;
For God can manifest his pleasure otherwise than by his threatenings. Of the
Sodomites it is said, they suffer the vengeance of eternal fire; and Infants
perished therein, as well as men of ripe years: And the Apostle plainly says,
that we have all sinned in Adam, and that the wages of sin is death, without
distinction; and that all are Romans 5. 12. Romans 6. 22. Ephesians. 2. 3.
borne children of wrath, and therefore as many as dye in that condition, dye
children of wrath. And whence has this Author learned, that the sin of Adam
has brought upon us the guilt of eternal death, as formerly he has
professed: but if I be not deceived, this extends farther than to Infants, and
in as much as some of our Divines conceive the corrupt mass, to be the object
of reprobation, hereupon he conceits, they make God to damn all Reprobates for
original sin; whereas their doctrine is no other than this, that God
determines to damn every man for no other sins, but such wherein they dye
unrepented of, whether they be original or actual. Threatenings are denounced
unto all to this end, that men may know, that by continuing in sin without
repentance there is no hope of mercy, and therefore as they desire to be saved,
it is there duty to break them off by repentance: And in particular unto some
that by this consideration, God may bring them unto repentance. But these are
only Gods elect, but as for others God never brings unto them true repentance,
according to that of S. Austin, Istorum neminem adducit Deus ad salubrem
spiriitalemque poenitentiam qua homo reconciliatur Deo in Christo sive illis
ampliorum patientiam Contra Julian Pelag. l. 5. c. 4.
sive non imparem praebeat. Yet God ordaines no man of ripe years unto
destruction but for sin finally continued in, without repentance; and the
threatening of damnation signifyes no other thing but this, that if they repent
not, they shall be damned, which is most true to whomsoever it is pronounced;
and this dealing of God is plain enough. But these Divines would not have faith
and repentance to be the gifts of God, but the works of men's free-wills, that
so they might be their own crafts-men of their salvation.

DISCOURSE. SUBSECT. II.
4. GOd is also full of guile in the other things before named, by this
opinion, viz. in his passionate wishes, that even those men might repent, that
repent not, and might be Saved that through their impenitency are not Saved. Of
these we read Deuter. 5. 29. Oh that there were such a heart in them to fear
me, that it might go well with them.

And in Psalm. 18. 13. O that my people had harkened unto me, and Israel had
walked in my ways. And Isaiah. 48 18. Oh that thou had hearkened unto my
commandments. etc.

2. In his expostulations. Isai. 5. 3. judge I pray you between me and my
vineyard, what could I have done more for my vineyard? Ier. 2. throughout.
Especially v. 5. and 31. Have I been a wilderness unto Israel, or a land of
darkness? And ^. 32. Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire,
yet my people have forgotten me days without number. Ezekiel. 33. 11. Turn ye,
turn ye, O ye house of Israel why will ye dye?

3. In his commiserations also of the woeful condition of foolish men, that
would not be reclaymed. Hos. 11. 8. How shall I give thee up Ephraim, how shall
I deliver thee O Israel? My repentings are kindled together, my heart is
turned within me, and Math. 23. 37. O Jerusalem Jerusalem which killest the
Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee. In all these there is but
little sincerity, if there be a settled resolution that the most of those,
toward whom those wishes, chidings, and melting considerations are used, shall
be unavoydable damned Gods fairest offers, his sweetest invitations, his
greatest sympathies, and amplest courtesies, (if this doctrine be true) come
very little short I think of Absolons feast, Ioabs congie, the kiss of Judas,
and the Hyaenaes tears, for in all these, aliud animo vult, aliud verbis
significat; he says one thing and means another, and therefore dissembles.
This is so evident, that some maintainers of absolute reprobation do not deny
it, but ascribe unto God Sanctam Simulationem, duplicem personam, duplicem
voluntatem a Holy counterfeiting a double face, a double will, by which they
offer extreme injury unto God, for tolerabilius est (says Tertullian) duos
divisos quam unum versipellem Deum praedicare. It is more tolerable to set up
two Gods then a double and deceitful God. If this be granted, Jesuits have no
cause to be ashamed of their Tertul. lib. cont. praxeam.
equivocations: nor Politicians of their Holy water, and crafty dissimulations;
men need not be afraid to cogge and lie, and deal deceitfully one with
another, but are ^ather to be commended for their courtship and complements,
and false-heartednesse, because in this they do but imitate God, to whom
whosoever they be that come nearest, they are the best. But howsoever some do
inconsideratly ascribe such things to God, the most (I know) would tremble to
entertain such thoughts: and therefore the more horrible it is; to lay such
things to the charge of the Almighty, the farther I take this opinion to be
from all truth and honesty.

TWISSE Consideration.
GOD (he says) by our Doctrine, is made full of guile in his passionate
wishes, that even these men might repent, that repent not. The guile I guess
consists in this, that God hereby makes show, that he would have them to
repent, when yet indeed, he has no such will. To this I answer, that by the
same reason he might conclude, that God carries himself with guile, in taking
unto himself eyes, and ears, and hands, and heart, for hereby he makes show
that he has the members of a man. But to this we answer, that this show is
only unto them that understand that properly, which is to be taken
figuratively: so that it is not the word of God, so much as the weakness of
men in understanding it, that casts this color. For these things indeed, are
spoken only per (...), which is a metaphorical kind of speech. And if God
takes liberty to conform himself to the members of our body, may not he take
as great liberty to conform himself to the passions of our minds, and to
assume unto him, the passions of fear, wrath, and jealousy, joy, sorrow, and
such like? Isai. 63. 8. For he said surely they are my people, Children that
will not lie, so he was their Savior: yet what follows in the next verse
save one: But they rebelled and vexed his holy spirit. According to the course
of this Divines superficial consideration, a man might conceive, that God is
subject to error, and improvidence, as well as man; for God said surely they
will not lie, but it appeared by the event, that they did lie. So that hereupon
we are driven to conclude, that the former passage is delivered per (...), in
conformity to a man's judgment, who promises unto himself better obedience
from his child for the time to come, then afterward he finds. In like sort,
God in his passionate wishes, conformes himself to the condition of man, who
uses this sometimes, as a means to work impression upon his child, to be more
careful to order his conversation toward his parents. And this being apt to
work upon a child, though but naturally ingenuous, why may not God use this
course? nay if he should not use this course, he could not be said to do all
for his vineyard, that could be done, in the way of outward husbandry. So that
passionate wishes, are but a passionate kind of exhortation; God through us
does beseech you (says Paul) we pray you in Christ's stead, to be reconciled
unto God. 2 Cor. 5. 20. Yet nevertheless the same Apostle professes that the
Gospel was a savor of death unto death to some, 2 Cor. 2. 15. Now the Gospel
includes all these and such like patheticall admonitions; And hereby God does
effectually signify, how much he delights in the obedience of the creature, and
in the glorifying of his mercy in their salvation. But yet this mercy of God,
in giving the grace of obedience, is not showed indifferently toward all, but
only to some, even whom the Lord will. Romans 9. 18. And this consideration
drives us to interpret such passionate wishes not properly, but figuratively.
For whereas the Lord says, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Oh that there were such an heart in
them to fear me. Who can deny but that God could give them such an heart, if
it pleased him? And the same Moses professes of these very people of Israel,
that God had not given them such an heart for the space of 40 years. Deuteronomy. 29.
4. you have seen the great temptations and signs; But the Lord has not given
you an heart to perceive, nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear unto this day,
and Jerem. 32. 40. He makes promise of giving it to some; I will put my fear
in their heart, that they shall never depart away from me. In like sort whereas
the Lord says, Isai. 48. 18. Oh that thou had hearkened unto my
commandments. Psalm. 81. 13. Oh that my people had hearkened unto me, and
Israel had walked in my ways! who doubts but that it was in the power of God,
to work them hereunto, by boaring their ears, and circumcising them, by
regenerating them, and so making them to be borne of God; that so being of God,
they might hear his words. John 8. 47. As also to put his own spirit within
them, and cause them to walk in his statutes, and keep his judgments and do
them: Ezekiel. 36. 27.

2. In his expostulations, in that, Isai. 5. 3. What could I have done more for
my vineyard? What does this signify more, than that more could not be done? But
how? In the way of outward Husbandry, conforming himself to an husbandman,
that has planted a vineyard. For can it be denied, but that God could have
made them fruitful, had it pleased him: and though Paul plants and Apollo
waters, yet, Is it not Gods peculiar office to give the increase? Is it not
he that works in us every good thing that is pleasing in Heb. 12. 2.
his sight through Jesus Christ. Heb. 13. 21. Is not he both the Author and
finisher of our faith? Was it not he that gave repentance unto Israel; Acts 5.
31. And to the Gentiles. Acts 11. 18. And must we not wait with our hearers,
if so be God may give them repentance? 2 Timothy 2. 25. And as for that of Jerem.
2. 32. Can a Maid forget her Ornament, or a Bride her attire, yet my people
have forgotten me. And have I been a Wilderness unto Israel, or a land of
darkness. Is not this exprobration of their unthankfulness just, and without
v. 31.
guile, unless God do actually change all their hearts. Yet this might be a
means and also was, and is, and ever shall continue to be a means to bring Gods
people to repentance. And undoubtedly the worst of them, had power to have
abstained from many of those foul sins, yea from all of them, wherewith God
does upbraid them; albeit to abstain from any sin in a gracious manner, be a
work of Gods special grace, which he affords not, according to men's works
(which way tends all this eager but superficiary discourse) but according to
his own purpose and grace. 3. Hosea 11. 8. God represents as it were a conflict
within him, between his mercy and justice; and his mercy has the glory of the
day; But wherein? To spare them, though their sins deserved at his hands,
that he should make them as Adma and Zeboim, as Sodom and Gomorrah. He would
rather show himself to be as he is, God, and and not Man; And wherein? But in
this, man may pardon his enemy, but cannot change his heart, it is otherwise
with God, he can both pardon our sins, and change our hearts, and to this
purpose he becomes our Lord and our God, and walks in the midst of us, as the
holy one of Israel, to sanctify us, as it follows in the same place of
Hosea, v. 10. They shall walk after the Lord, he shall roar like a Lion, viz.
In such expostulations, comminations, etc. but the issue shall be gracious; for
when he shall rear, then the children of the West shall fear, that is fear
unto him, as Hos. 3. 5. That is, come flying unto him, and to his goodness
with fear: like Birds scared from one place, fly with greater speed to
another: so conscience affrighted with sense of sin, and apprehension of Gods
wrath, shall fly from his wrath, unto his mercy, to his goodness: whereof God
shall make unto them a full representation in David their King, that is in
Christ, as in whom we behold the glory of Gods grace with open face, and
trepidare in Latin, is found to be of the same signification with festinare.
And v. 11. Is manifested as much, as where it is said, They shall fear as a
sparrow out of Egypt, and as a Dove out of the land of Egypt; and I will place
them in their houses, says the Lord. That is, come flying unto the Lord with
fear. As for that Math. 23. 37. O Jerusalem, how often would I: etc. This is of
another nature, as being delivered by Christ the son of God, made under the
Law, who, as in his manhood, he might entertain such desires in proper speech,
so by the Law of God, was bound to desire the conversion of his brethren, as
well as any other Prophet, or man of God, or minister of his word. But such
confusion becomes this discourse right well.

In all this (he says) there is little sincerity, if there be a secret
resolution, that the most of these, toward whom those wishes, chidings, and
commiserations are used, shall be unavoydably damned. But what if but one of
them, toward whom these are used, by a secret resolution shall be unavoydably
damned, is there sincerity enough in these courses divine? Sureif this
resolution, concerning the unavoydable damnation of the one, does not prejudice
Gods sincerity, neither shall such a resolution concerning the damnation of
two, or of two hundred, or thousands, or the most, any way prejudice sincerity
divine. But this kind of discourse, is spread all over this Treatise, like a
scab only to work upon vulgar affection, where judgment is wanting to observe
the frothy condition of it. And whereas he says that in all this God aliud
animo vult aliud verbis significat, its most untrue, as to every one should be
made manifest, according to the right understanding of it, had he been pleased
to accommodate it severally, and show what that is, which God signifies by his
word, and what that is, which he wills in his heart. And indeed, as in the
point of Gods commandment, I have showed there is no color of contradiction
between it, and Gods purpose, but only according to this Authors superficiary
interpretation. For to command a thing, is only to will, that it shall be our
duty to do it: notwithstanding which, it is apparent, God may purpose not to
give grace to work the doing of it. So in every one of the rest, had he
instanced as it became him, and showed wherein the guile consisted, the
absurdity of this crimination might have been made as manifest as in this. That
which he conceales, and which he would have his readers rather take to
themselves, than show himself clearly to stand to the maintenance thereof,
seems to be this; that every one has power given him to believe, to repent, to
change his heart, yea to regenerate himself, but it sticks in his teeth, and
he dares not speak it out plainly. Only he keeps himself to Gods resolution,
concerning man's unavoydable damnation; yet we maintain not that any contingent
things come to pass unavoydably, that were utterly against the nature of a
contingent thing, which is to come to pass, so as joined with a possibility of
not coming to pass. And as for damnation in particular, we acknowledge it
throughout, to be avoydable by repentance, and not otherwise, unto men of ripe
years: And as for repentance, we say, that there is no man but may repent as
long as he lives, through grace: so that in the issue the maine point to be
debated herein is, whether every man living has such a grace given him as
whereby he may repent. But upon this point though his whole discourse be
grounded thereupon, yet is he content to say just nothing; least their
shameful and most unconscionable courses in dishonouring the grace of God,
should be discovered and brought to light. But consider in a word or two as
touching this universal grace, which they make to consist in the inabling of
the will, to will any goodthing whereunto they shall be excited. If such a
grace be universal, then every one has power to believe, and power to repent.
But this is untrue, for the Apostle tells us of some, that they cannot
repent. Romans 2. 4. of the natural man, that he cannot discern the things of
God; and that they are foolishness unto him; and while they seem foolishness
unto him, is it possible that therein he should discern the wisdom of God? 1
Cor. 2. 14. our Savior tells us of some, that they cannot believe: Ioh. 12.
46. and tells others to their face, saying, How can you believe, when ye
receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God
only, Ioh. 5. 44. Likewise of them that are in the flesh Saint Paul says, They
cannot please God. Romans 8. 8. 2. It is the habit of faith that inables us to
believe, so that if all men have power to believe, it must be confessed, that
all men have faith, but the Apostle says, Fides non est omnium; 2 These. 3. 2.
Tit. 1. 1. he says it is electorum; like as Austin professes Habere fidem,
sicut and habere charitatem gratiae est fidelium: de praedest. Sanct. cap. 5.
3. Whosoever has power to prduce a vital act, has life in him; and
consequently, whosoever has power to produce any act of the life of grace,
has the life of grace in him: But the acts of faith and repentance, are the
acts of the life of grace, therefore whosoever has power to produce these,
has in him the life of grace. But this is not true of all, for the Scripture
testifies of some, that they are dead in sin. Ephesians. 2. 1. Are strangers from
the life of God. Ephesians. 4. 18. Again, then all should be regenerated, but that
is untrue, for regeneration is signified, Psalm. 19. in Scripture to be wrought
by the word of God. 1 Peter. 1. 23. Iam. 1. 17. But all have not the word of
God. 4. If a man has power to believe and repent, then the reason why a man
does not believe and repent, is not because he cannot, but because he will not;
so that in the issue it comes to this, that a man may believe if he will,
repent if he will; But such a power is not grace, but nature rather, as appears
by Austin. l. 1. de Gtnesi contra Manich. cap. 3. where he professes, that
omnes possunt credere si velint: now compare this, with that he has in the
same place, where though he says that omnes credere possint si velint, yet
posse credere, simply taken, arises merely out of the gift of charity; which
he professes to be gratiae fidelium, de praedest. Sanct. c. 5. But there he
professes that posse habere fidem, is naturae hominum, the very natural
condition of all men. I farther prove it by reason thus; Look by what power I
can believe if I will, by the same power I can refuse to believe if I will; Now
such a power is no other, then whereby a man is indifferent to do good or
evil: but such a condition is not grace; for grace is goodness, now goodness
does not dispose any, either to good or evil indifferently, but precisely to
that which is good; like as naughtiness disposes a man only to that which is
evil.

He sleeps so sweetly upon his Arminian pillow, that his very dreams make him
confident of the evidence of his deductions. And he gives reasons for it, and
that of most force for conviction, namely the confession of his adversaries;
the maintainers of absolute reprobation, for even they, he says, do not deny
this, but ascribe unto God sanctam simulationem, duplicem personam, duplicem
voluntatem. But he names none, content to sing to himself and his Muses
throughout, when he relats what our sides answer to his profound discourses.
And I commend his wisdom more then his honesty in this, for if he had quoted
his Authors herein, it may be something might have bin discovered that would be
little pleasing unto him: yet herein he confounds things much different; for as
for a double will ascribed unto God, all the Learned do acknowledge so much,
and the Scriptures testify it; as namely, that his decree is called the will of
God: as, what the Lord wills, that has he done, both in heaven and in earth,
and who has resisted his will? as also that Gods commandment is called
usually the will of God, as, This is the will of God, even your sanctification,
that every one should know how to possess his vessel in holiness, and
honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles do which know
not God. 1 These. 4. 4, 5. as for duplicem personam, that is a phrase which I
never read before, yet the phrase of (...), is usually in the Holy Scripture,
as when God takes unto him both the members of a man's body, and the passions of
his mind; and so speaks in the way of condescension to our infirmities, as to
put upon himself the person of a man: and this is undeniable by all that are
not Anthropomorphites. And as touching our blessed Savior, we acknowledge in
him duplicem naturam, a double nature, though not duplicem personam, a double
person, and accordingly sometimes, he both speaks of himself, and is spoken
of, as touching the nature of his Godhead, and sometimes as touching the
nature of his Manhood. As for the first, that alone is material to his
present purpose, namely, as touching Sancta Simulatio, ascribed unto God by our
Divines. Now it were worth the while to know who is his Author in this, and
that of the passages alleged by this Author, does profess that they do
represent in God an holy kind of simulation: How could he exspect that this
should give any satisfaction, seeing he conceales the Author of it? And what
reader would not be moved, with a very greedy desire to know the Author of such
an interpretation of the passages alleged by this. Divine, that he might
consider whether it be rightly alleged or no; and if rightly, with what
sobriety they deliver it? Now I remember well to have read in Piscator, that
the Scripture attributes in a certain place Simulation unto Christ, not in any
passage of this nature we treat of, as namely, Luke 24. 28. Where it is said,
he made as though he would go farther: like enough to irritate their
devotions, and to provoke their zealous desire so much the more to retain him
a little longer. And I willingly profess not the Simulation, but the
Dissimulation of this Author in this case has stirred up a desire in me to be
sati^fied, as touching the Author of this Sancta Simulatio. Now I find in
Piscator his answer to Vorstius his Parasc^uen, the first part page 29. both
that place of simulation attributed unto Christ out of Luke 24. 28. And also,
how that in the examples of Gods messages sent to Hezekiah, that he should dye
and not live; And to the Ninevites by Jonah, Yet forty days and Nineve shall
be destroyed, his opinion is, that therein God does signify care, se velle quod
non 2 Kings 20. 1. Jonah. 3. 4.
vult. His words are these; Adhaec etsi Deus interdum significet se velle quod
non vult, non tamen propterea hypocriseos insimulandus est; (for this Vorstius
objected unto him) Sed potius sapientia ejus agnoscenda in hominibus ad serias
preces and seriam poenitentiam adducendis; ut liquet in exemplo Begis Ezekiae
recuperantis sanitatem and Ninivitarum conservatorum: and whereas Vorstius
lays to his charge, that in saying God commands one thing, and purposes
another, he does impute unto God Hypocrisy, (which is the very substance of
this Authors answer in this place.) See I pray how he answers it without
attributing any holy simulation at all unto God in this case. Ad praecepta vero
quod attinet: non statim sequitur Deum agere Hipocritam si quid praecipiat,
quod fieri nolit; etenim hypocritam is demum agit, qui simulat pietatem qua
caret. Sane quicquid praecipit Deus, id vult voluntare approbante, si fiat,
nisi interveniat praeceptum contrarium, ut factum est in praecepto quod dederat
Abrahamo de mactando Isaaco. Interim tamen voluntate decernente non vult ut
singuli ea faciant quae omnibus Genes. 22.
praecipit, ut liquet in caede Christi per Judam and Judaeos perpetrata. Acts
2. 4. Hereupon I look farther, and consider what Vorstius has answered unto
this. Now Vorstius his answer hereunto is this. Amic. duplic. p. 137. Non is
tantum hypocrita est qui pietatem simulat qua caret, sed and ille qui dolose
alterum sub blanda specie decipit, offerens ei salutem quam nunquam in animo
habuit ipsi dare. Piscator in his answer hereunto, does not distinguish between
hypocrisy, and a holy simulation, as if he denied the former of God, and
affirmed the latter. But Vorstius himself does not deny unto God, all kind of
simulation, but only dolosam, such as is deceitful, Amic. duplic. p. 135. 138.
And withal professes, that God may signify that he wills some thing which
indeed he wills not. I am persuaded, for fear of starting this, this
discourser was loath to name his Author, if so be he himself read that which
he here speaks of, sancta simulatio in Piscator, and took it not hand over
head from another information, without all crime of hypocrisy; his words are
these. p. 138. Fateor equidem Deum non continuo hypocriseos insimulandum esse,
si interdum aliquo modo significet se velle quod revera non vult: posset enim
hoc facere si velit ex absoluta sua authoritate, nempe cum eis de rebus agitur,
quae neque cum sanctissima ipsius natura, neque cum voluntate jam in verbo
patefacta quicquid pugnant. And whereas he farther urges, that nevertheless,
we must not yield easily any manner of simulation attributed unto God, though
it be not deceitful, laying it to Piscators charge, that he did attribute
simulation unto God, in the message he sent by Isaiah to Hezekiah, and that
other sent by Jonah to the Ninevites; Piscator denies that he affirmed any such
thing, or that he alleged the examples of Hezekiah and the Ninevites to any
such purpose, though he adds, that in his opinion, it is not disagreeable to
those examples, to acknowledge an holy simulation of God therein: take his own
words; Tu hic pugnas sine Adversario: nam ego neque affirmavi facile aliquam
simulationis speciem Deo tribuendam esse, neque exempla illa Ezekiae and
Ninivitarum huc retuli: Interim non puto ab exemplis illis alienum esse, ut
sanct a Dei simulatio in illis statuatur. And this it may be is the only ground
of this Authors calumnious pretense in this place; namely, that some
maintainers of absolute reprobation, do not deny that which he inferres
concerning Simulation divine, in the passages alleged by him, ascribing unto
God sanctam simulationem: whereas Piscator acknowledges not any such thing, in
any passages of Scripture alleged by this Author, but only as touching the
examples of Hezekias, and the Ninevites, and that in this modest manner only,
that albeit he did not allege them to any such purpose, as to maintain
simulation in Gods courses, yet non puto (says he) ab exemplis illis alienum
esse ut sancta Dei simulatio in illis statuitur. And Vorstius himself
acknowledges that simulation may be attributed unto God, and I think he does
not mean it of any unholy simulation, and that he thinks God may signify, that
he wills something, which indeed he wills not. Now judge I pray of the
spirit of this man, that takes such base courses, to calumniate both the
servants of God, (who are now at peace with God, but his malice is not at peace
with them) and through their sides, the truth of God also. But it may be this
Author relates it but from a second hand. But whosoever be the Author, I pray
judge accordingly of his Rhetorical flourish upon the back of this, in
comparing this opinion of Gods courses, which is no more Piscators, than
Vorstius his, in some cases, with Jesuits equivocation, and Politicians
Holywater and crafty dissimulations, with Absolons feast, Joabs congie, and
Hyaenaes tears; because forsooth, God made show to Hezekiah, that he should
live no longer, and to the Ninevites, that their City should be destroyed,
though he had no such meaning, and all to stir them up to turn unto God by
hearty prayer and repentance, and that to lay this to the charge of the
Almighty, is far from truth and honesty.

DISCOURSE. SUBSECT. III.
THat which is usually said by such as maintain the absolute decree, to clear
God from hypocrisy in these things, is, That God seriously wishes the
salvation of the Reprobate, but not absolutely, he would have them to be saved,
that are not saved; but yet upon condition they will repent and believe; and
therefore though they do perish, yet is God can did and sincere in his offers
of salvation to them; for therefore do they perish because they perform not
the condition, not because God offers not seriously salvation unto them.

But this answer is too short. It Is true indeed, God will have all men to be
saved only upon condition they will believe and repent; according to the speech
of Saint Ambrose, Deus vult omnes salvari si and ipsi velint; for if he would
absolutely have it so what can hinder it? who has resisted his will? And it is
true likewise that a conditional promise may be seriouse as well as an
absolute; but then the condition must be possible unto them, to whom the offer
and promise is made; and the performance of the condition must be a part of
Gods will, as well as the salvation promised; or else the promise cannot be
candid and sincere. In substance it is all one, not to offer a curtesy at all
and and to offer it under a condition not possible, and in circumstance it is
far better to deny a benefit absolutely, than so to promise it. For such a
promise is a denial under a color of the contrary. The Lawyers tell us that a
contract Sub condition impraestabili nullus aestimatur: And the Logicians,
that propositio conditionalis quae habet annexam conditionem impossibilem,
aequipollet simpliciter neganti. Any offer which is made upon a condition not
performeable by the party is equivalent to a bare negation. It is all one for a
man to deny a piece of money flatly to one blind man, and to promise it to
another blind man upon a condition that he will look upon it with his eyes,
and it is all one for a man that has a daughter to bestow in marriage to tell
the suitor I will give you my daughter if you will but span the earth and touch
the heavens with your finger; and to tell him plainly, set your heart at rest I
will never bestow her upon you. And thus have I showed the contrariety of this
opinion to the principal attributes of God: which is my second general reason
against it

TWISSE. Consideration.
THat Salvation, and that by the ordinance of God, is only obtaineable by men
of ripe years, by faith and repentance, as also, that in case every one should
believe and repent, every one should be saved, is without question. For has
not our Savior professed, that whosoever believes shall be saved; and does it
not undeniably follow herehence, that it is Gods will, that whosoever believes
shall be Mark. 16. 16.
saved: Neither is this any wish as this Author faigneth, neither does any of
our Divines say, that ever I read, or till now heard of, that God wishes that
all that believe shall be saved; this being a most absurd speech and
contradiction to the ordinance of God. For those things which God or man are
said to wish, are such which do not always come to pass: but this ordinance
of God, whosoever believes shall be saved, is more stable than the covenant
which God has made with day and night. Not any Arminian that ever I read, does
express himself in so prostitute a manner, as to say, God seriously wishes
the salvation of Reprobates, in case they believe. For he has not wished, but
ordained, and made it a positive law, that whosoever believes shall be saved,
and herehence it follows, that if all and every one, from the beginning of
the World to the end, shall believe in Christ, all and every one of them shall
be saved. But when they speak of velleity in God, or wishing, the object
thereof they make not to be the salvation of men in case they repent, but
absolutely the salvation of men: which kind of velleity, is resolved indeed in
the issue, into a conditionate will, thus; Gods will is, that all shall be
saved in case they repent: not thus, I do wish that all may be saved in case
they repent, according to the most absurd fiction of this Author. At length he
grants that God will have all men to be saved, only upon condition they will
believe and repent; and that conditional promise may be serious, as well as an
absolute: but then (says he) the condition must be possible to them, to whom
the offer and promise is made, and the performance of the condition must be a
part of Gods will, as well as the salvation promised, or else the promise
cannot be candid and sincere. Whereto I answer, that it is confessed on both
sides, that God has ordained, that all that believe shall be saved, and
consequently it must be granted, that the promise of salvation hereupon, to
wit, upon faith, must needs be candid and sincere, it being the promise of God.
Now shall we herehence infer hand over head, that therefore the condition
must be possible unto all, in spite of all other evidences to the contrary,
though never so plainly and expressly laid down unto us in holy Scripture; as
namely, that a natural man perceives not the things of God, they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. 1 Cor. 2. 14. That they that are in the flesh cannot please God.
Romans 8. 8. That they who are accustomed to do evil, can no more do good,
then a Blackemore change his skin, or the Leopard his spots. Jer. 13. 23.
This is the immodest course of this Author, to set up one piece of Scripture,
by his paltry consequences, to outface another, nothing less evident.
Notwithstanding this Scripture discovers unto us, how this impotency of doing
good, is contracted unto us all, by sinning in Adam, as whereupon we were
bereaved of grace, and of the spirit of God: yet if he would deal fairly, and
deny original sin, he should err no more then Pelagius did, and withal, he
should have as much ingenuity as Pelagius had: But now though equal to him in
the one, yet is he inferior to him in the other. But come we nearer to him
than so; What one of our Divines denies the performance of this condition to
be possible to al men? But is it fit that he should talk of possibility (as he
does at large,) without any reference to the grace of God? And dares he say
that it is possible to any man, whether elect or reprobate, without grace? I
say he dares not say so much, though like enough, he and all the Sect of them,
have a good mind to it. What then is the issue of all this Controversy between
us, but to enquire what manner of grace that is, without which it cannot be,
that any should believe? Is it only such a grace, as gives only power to
believe? This is no better than plain Pelagianisme, as appears by Austin de
great. Christ. cont. Pelag. and coelest. c. 6. and in the end, where he comes to
make an overture for the compounding of the Controversy between them: Or, Is it
some other grace prevenient, working only Morally by way of persuasion? This
also appears clearly to have been the opinion of Pelagius, in the same book of
Austin cap. 10. And he challenges him to the acknowledging of another manner
of grace, if he will not only be called a Christian, but be indeed a Christian:
Or Lastly, is it only grace subsequent, by way of concourse, as to say, that
God works in us the act of believing, provided that we will believe? This,
this is that Helena, that our homeborne Arminians are inamoured with, mere
Pelagianisme: for who sees not, that thus the grace of faith is conferred To.
9. 18, 19.
according to the acts of willing in men, which is as much as to say, it is
conferred according to works. Then mark yet farther absurdities; for thus God
has not mercy on whom he will in giving faith, but on whom man will; and what
color is there in this case, for any such objection to be made hereupon, as is
devised by the Apostle? Thou will say then, why does he yet complain, for who
has resisted his will? Further consider; Does not God in this manner concur
to the most sinful act that is committed in the world? And why then do we not
as well say; that the commission of sin is not possible without grace
subsequent; for certainly it is not possible without divine concourse. Lastly say
farther, what is the grace required to the very act of willing; Does God work
this also by grace subsequent? As much as to say, God works in us the act of
willing, provided we work it in our selves. Such morsells as these can easily
go down with these stomachs, which are apt to tumultuate upon the hearing
that God has power to make whom he will vessels of mercy, or vessels Rom: 9.
21, 22, 23.
of wrath; man must be the crafts-master of his own fortunes, and it were
neither agreeable to Gods mercy, nor to his justice, nor to his truth, unless
their free will has the greatest glory of their conversion; and God be
admitted no more to the working of that act of faith, and of repentance, than
to the working of the most sinful act that is committed in the world. But I
find it nothing strange, that as many as refuse to be in subjection unto God,
have liberty enough to be made vassalls, and be brought in subjection unto
their own corrupt and unreasonable fancies. For the word of God forsooth must
be tempered, and interpreted according to the rules of their reason; their
reason must not be ordered, and squared according unto the word of God. But to
proceed, the Lawyers rule of the nullity of a contract, sub condition
impraestabili, is nothing to the present purpose: For the case is not alike
between man and man; and between God and man. God stands not at the pleasure of
man, to contract in what manner he thinks good. And when he has given him
power to perform, whatsoever at any time he shall command him; if man disable
himself, shall God hereby be deprived of his right to command what he thinks
good, and to punish for disobedience as he thinks good? We read of some, that
have cut off their thumbs, to disable themselves for military service: is it
not just with men to punish such, as run away after they have received their
press moneys? But there is yet another geofaile in the accommodation of this
rule of Law. For, conditio impraestabilis there, is such as cannot be performed
by reason of impotency natural; but the impotency we speak of, in the case
between God and man, is merely impotency moral; to wit, therefore they
cannot, because they will not, were it not for the corruption of their will, no
power were wanting in man to believe, and repent. But as Austin says,
alleged by the Britain Divines out of Retract. 1. 15. Voluntas sine
charitate est tota vitiosa cupiditas; and upon the 3d and 4th artic. De
conversione, qua denotat immediatum opus Dei hominem regenerantis. Thesi. 2.
They profess that in voluntate lapsa est potentia passiva ad esse hoc
supernaturale extrinsecus adveniens, recipiendum, non autem activa, ad idem vel
per se, vel cum alio producendum. Jer. 17. 14. Sana me domine and Sanabor. And
out of the Synodicall Epistle of the Bishops of Africa to the same purpose,
they allege this passage, In vivificandis hominibus Deus nullum initium
voluntatis humanae expectat, sed ipsam voluntatem bonam faciendo vivificat. And
also that of Austin de corep. and gra. cap. 14. Creatio in Christo in
libertatem voluntatis facta est, and sine nobis: si in libertatem, tum non ex
liberate: si sine nobis, tum penes nos non est hoc Dei opus impedire. Be it
all one to deny a piece of money flatly to a blind man, and to promise it upon a
condition, that he will look upon it with his eyes: In like sort, as touching
the Reprobate, God has no purpose to give salvation, but to deny it rather;
although he give this general rule, that whosoever believes shall be saved;
Mark. 16. 16.
and therefore he gives this rule, because he purposes by these means, to draw
his elect unto Christ by faith; such a manner being most agreeable to their
reasonable natures. And the reason why the rule is proposed to all, is, because
partly Gods Ministers are not acquainted with Gods counsel so far, as to
know whom he has elected; partly in respect that the more carnal men are, the
more confident they are of performing any such duties, I mean of power to
perform it, as namely to believe, to obey, to repent: partly to the end, that
some hereby may be brought, ad exteriorem vitae emendationem, quo mitius
puniantur, as Austin sometimes speaks: as also because there is a kind of
faith, performeable by a natural man; for we see both profane persons and
Hypocrites, concur in an outward profession of Christianity, with the
children of God: yet there is a great difference between blindness natural,
and blindness spiritual; for in the one there is a will and desire to see,
not so in the other; the one being impotency natural, the other moral. And in
a word, there is no impotency moral in man, that has not been brought upon
him through sin, either original, of actual. As for the spanning of the
earth, or touching the heaven with ones finger, this never was in the power of
man; but to believe any word of God, I hope this Author will not deny to have
been sometimes in the power of man: nay he seems to be of opinion, that it is
in the power of all men still, yet he would not be thought to deny original
sin. One thing yet remains to be considered; he said to whom the promise of
salvation is made, the performance of the condition, must be a part of Gods
will, as well as the salvation promised: But of what will of God must this be a
part? Of his will as it signifies his commandment? We grant it is; for he
commands, saying, Repent and believe the Gospel; and by this commandment it
is apparent, that it is the will of God, that it shall be the duty of every
man, that hears this commandment, to obey it. But will he have it a part of
Gods will, to work it effectually in all? And how I pray? Either by way of
grace prevenient, or by way of grace subsequent? Not by way of grace
prevenient, for then all that hear the Gospel, should believe and be saved;
for to work Faith effectually that way, is to work the will unto Faith. As
for the working of it by way of grace subsequent; this I have been lately
taught by an Arminian, to be no other than the working of it by way of
concourse, and that depends on the will of man: and we do not deny, but that
if any Reprobate will believe, God will concur to the working of this
belief; but so we say, (and no Arminian that I know will deny it) that if man
will work any sinful act, God will concur to the working of it; in as much
as it is generally held, that no acts of the creature, can be performed without
Gods concurrence thereunto. Now how well, and how judicially this Author has
played his part in showing the contrariety of our opinion to the Attributes of
God, I am content the indifferent may judge.

DISCOURSE. The third sort of Reasons, namely, that it is contrary to the
nature and end of Gods gifts conferred upon men.
SECT. I.
Thirdly, it is contrary to the nature and end of Gods gifts conferred upon,
men which gifts are of two sorts:

1. Gifts of nature, our creation, sustentation; preservation; together with
health, strength, beauty, wisdom; etc.

2. Gifts of grace, which have a more immediate relation to everlasting life,
and are means either, 1. Of purchasing salvation, viz. the coming of Christ
into the world to be made a sacrifice for sin; or. 2. Of applying the
salvation purchased, namely, the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, the long
suffering of God, the illumination of men's understandings, the plantation of
many excellent virtues in their hearts, and many more of the like sort.

What the true use and end of these gifts of nature and grace is, the Scripture
does plainly and particularly show us. First, for the gifts of nature, we find
that they are bestowed on all that have them, for the encouraging and enabling
of them to serve God, and save their souls: for, Act. 14. 16, 17. the Apostle
says, that God (even in these times wherein he permitted the Gentiles to walk
in their own ways, and withheld from them the light of his holy word,) did
give unto the people of the world, rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons,
filling their hearts with food and gladness, by these not leaving him self
without witness: which implies that he gave them these good things, make
himself known unto them, and so that he might draw them to glorify him,
according to their knowledge of him, Acts. 17. 26. The Apostle says directly,
that men are therefore made and placed in this world, and appointed to their
several times and dwellings; that they may seek God and find him, that is,
that they may serve him and save themselves; for what is it to seek God but to
serve him? And what is it to find God, but to enjoy his face and favor here
and in Heaven? Caelum quippe and terra and mare, omnisque creatura quae videri
and intelligi potest, ad hanc praecipue Prosper de vocat. gent. l. 2. c. 4. p.
428.
disposita est humani generis utilitatem; and natura rationalis de
contemplatione tot specierum, and de experimentis tot bonorum, de perceptione
tot munerum, ad cultum and dilectionem sui imbueretur authoris, implentis omnia
spiritu Dei, in quo vivimus, movemur, and sumus. They are the words of Prosper:
therefore is every creature made and ordained, especially, that mankind which
is endued with knowledge and ability to discourse, might by the sight of so
many goodly sorts of creatures, and the rast of so many blessings, be drawn to
the love and service of his and their maker. And a little after, in the same
Chap. he says, Quod ergo in Israel per constitutionem legis, et prophetica
eloquia gerebatur, hoc in universis nationibus totius creaturae testimonia et
bonitatis Dei miracula semper egerunt: look of what use the law and Prophets
were to the Israelites; of the same use were the gifts of creation and
providence to the Gentiles. God intended not to do to the Gentiles (as the
Manichees say he dealt with the Jews) to feed them and fat them up with more
outward blessings, as so many hoggs and swines with husks and acornes, but to
draw them up by these to an exspectation of better things, and a careful
endeavor to please God, that so they might obtain them. The end of all
creatures and of all created gifts bestowed upon man is subordinate to the end
of man; man's end is to glorify God on Earth and to enjoy perpetual society
with him in Heaven. And their end is to encourage and direct man to atchieve
that high and noble end which his Creator has appointed him.

TWISSE Consideration.
HEre we have a roaving discourse: I must pick out of it what I can, to draw it
up to some sense of argument: the ground of all the pith and substance of it,
is two places in the Acts, and two passages out of Prosper. The first out of
Acts 14. 16, 17. God in times past suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their
own ways; nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did
good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts
with food and gladness. Now as for the first verse of these, he is content to
say nothing at all thereof; neither to deliver what those ways were, nor in
what sense God is said to suffer them to walk therein: which yet may easily be
cleared, by comparing it with what is delivered, Acts 17. 30. Where the times
preceding the Gospel, are called times of ignorance. The times of this
ignorance, and this agrees with the comparative difference made between Jews
and Gentiles, Psalm. 147. 19. He shows his words unto Jacob, his statutes and
judgments unto Israel. v. 20. He has not dealt so with any Nation: and as
for his judgments, they have not known them. So that by the ways of the
Gentiles, I understand the ways of Ignorance; and these are no other than the
ways of darkness, and can bring forth no better fruit, than the works of
darkness; according to that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were darkness but
now are light in the Lord, walk therefore as children of the light. And
again, the night is Romans 13. 12.
passed, the day is at hand, let us therefore cast away the works of
darkness, and put upon us the armor of light. And as for Gods suffering of
them to walk in those ways, that is expressed in another ph^ase, Acts 17. 30.
thus, And the times of this ignorance God winked at; and the meaning thereof
appears by the Antithesis, in the adversative following, thus, But now he
admonishes every man every where to repent. Thus formerly he dealt with the
Jews, giving them a law, and sending Prophets from time to time, to call them
to obedience, to repentance: but such were not his gracious proceedings with
the Gentiles. But give we him leave to follow his own advantage. God left not
himself without witness, in sending rain and fruitful seasons. So it was in
most places, I know none but Egypt excepted, and that is to be excepted; not
only by evidence of Phylosophicall inquisition after the cause thereof, in that
question, Utrum Aegyptus sit impluviata? but by evidence out of Gods word.
Deuteronomy. 11. 10, 11, 12. The land whether thou go to possess, is not as the
Land of Egypt, from whence ye came, Deuteronomy. 11. 10, 11, 12.
where thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst it with thy foot as a garden of
herbs; but the land whither ye go to possess it, is a land of mountains and
valleys, and drinks water of the rain of heaven. This Land does the Lord
your God care for; the eyes of the Lord thy God are upon it, from the beginning
of the year to the end of the year. Yet had they fruitful seasons by the
inundation of Nilus; but this was not so apt to dispose them, to take notice of
a divine providence, as the common course of fructifying the Land by rain. But
yet the whole world in the frame thereof, was sufficient evidence of the
Eternal power and Godhead. Romans 1. 20. and Psalm. 19. 1. The heavens declare
the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work. And albeit
Aristotle, the greatest of Philosophers, maintained the eternity thereof
without beginning; yet he confesses ingeniously in his Book De coelo, that all
that went before him maintained mundum genitum esse; neither was his discourse
of power to raze out that natural instinct hereof, which seems to be graven in
the hearts of men, and was the chief ground of that universal acknowledgment
of a divine power supreme. Now as God made himself known by his works so I
nothing doubt but herewithall it was their duty to know him, and according to
their knowledge to serve him and glorify him, in acknowledgment of his
glorious nature, so far as they took notice of it; But as for a rule whereby
they should worship him, I know none that God had given them, or that they
could gather from contemplation of the creatures. And surely the knowledge of
God, as a Creator only, is nothing sufficient to salvation; but the knowledge
of him as a redeemer: And therefore seeing the World by wisdom knew not God in
the wisdom of God, it pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching to save
them that believe. 1 Cor. 1. 21. And the Gentiles are set forth unto us in
Scripture, as such who knew not God. 1 These 4. 5. 2 These. 1. 8. And had they
means sufficient without, and ability sufficient within to know him? How could
it be that none of them should know him? Was it because they would not? How
absurd a conceit is this to every one that understands, and considers common
Principles of Philosophy, namely, that the things that are subject to our
free will, are contingentia aequaliter, as soon falling out one way as the
other? And it is well known not only what pains they have taken, but also with
what strange success, in searching after the nature of the first mover, as
appears by Aristotle in the 12th of his Metaphysics. Yet did not he attain
(for ought ever I could find) to the acknowledgement of his free agency, in the
making of the world, and in the government thereof. Yet were they inexcusable
(and thus far their knowledge brought them. Romans 1. 20.) in changing the
glory of the incorruptible Romans 1. 23.
God, to the similitude of the image of a corruptible man, and of birds, and of
fourefooted beasts, and of creeping things. The other place is Acts 17. 26.
That he takes to be more full for his purpose; there the Apostle speaking in an
University, and which had been miserably corrupted with the Atheistical
doctrine of Aristotle, concerning an eternity of the World, and Gods working
necessarily, not freely, tending to the quenching of that light of natural
instinct, which is more or less found in all, as touching the Divine
providence; yet the Apostle even amongst such makes bold to suppose the
creation of the World by God; and that therefore he is Lord of Heaven and
Earth; and also obtrudeth upon their natural consciences, that God it is who
gives life, and breath, and all things; and that he of one blood (whom we know
to be Adam) made all mankind, to dwell on all the face of the Earth; that he
has assigned the seasons (of the year, and what are they but Spring, Summer,
Autumn, Winter, depending upon the motions of the heaven above) and the bounds
of their habitations, what is that but the several habitable parts of the
earth, for the habitation of all creatures, in whose Nostrills is the breath of
life; not that every man, or Nation, has his place of habitation appointed by
God, (though this also be true, but nothing agreeable to Arminian Divinity,
which like an East wind, blasts the providence of God throughout) this the
Apostle does not obtrude upon them; but the former generals only; and all this
God has done (...), that they should seek the Lord; now this may be
understood two ways, either de facto, God did intend that this indeed should
be done by them; or ex officio, that it should be their duty: of this
distinction this Author takes no notice, but hand over head, takes it in the
first sense, as it were in spite both of the Apostle, saying, Who has
resisted his will? And of the Psalmist, professing that what he wills he has
done, both in Heaven and Earth. But indeed this is man's duty to endeavor to
know him that made him: to this purpose he has endued him with an
understanding heart; The spirit of man being as the lamp of God which
searches all inwardnesse; But as for the words following, if happily they
might Prove. 20. 27.
seek after him and find him; though he be not far from every one of us; so
that though he be not far from every one of us, in as much as in him we live
and move, and have our being, and though they should seek after him, yet upon
an if, the Apostle plainly puts the finding of him. For albeit Durand
professes, that by the very light of nature we may attain to the knowledge of
God, touching these things that belong to the unity of his nature; yet who ever
amongst the Gentiles attained hereunto, after all their search? God has set
the World in man's heart, says Solomon, yet can he not find out the work that
he has wrought from the beginning to the end: we are yet to seek in the
Eccles. 3. 11.
knowledge of the creature, how much more in the knowledge of the Creator? Yet
what shall all such knowledge profit a man, if he be ignorant in the knowledge
of him as a redeemer?

I come to Prosper l. 2. De vocatione Gentium cap. 4. God has so disposed of
the World, as that the reasonable creature, by the contemplation of Gods
works, and taste of so many blessings, imbuerctur, he does not say might be
drawn, but imbueretur, might be endued, to wit, with the knowledge of God in
such sort, as to move him ad cultum and dilectionem Dei. And all here mentioned
both as touching the knowledge of God, and touching the service and love of
him; is but as the object of man's duty, signifying what ought to be done by
him, not as the object of Gods decree, as whereby he determined what should be
done indeed by him. For had he determined this, who could have resisted him?
Shall we say that voluntatis omnipotentis effectus impeditur a voluntate
creaturae, as Austin Enchirid. cap. 96.
expresses the absurdity hereof? As for that which follows, not in the same
Chapter, as this Author writes, (whether out of his own reading or mistaking
another dictates I know not) but in the chapter following, to wit, c. 2. the
former place being indeed c. 1. according to my book, not cap. 4. As this
Author quotes it. And it is a truth considered in general, for (...), to seek
the Lord, God did move both Jews and Gentiles; the Jews by his word over and
above his works; but the Gentiles only by his works. But the manner of the
revelation made to the one and to the other, was far different, as the same
Author expresses cap. 3. Aliter eos juvit quos ad cognoscendum se caeli and
terrae testimoniis conveniebat, aliter illos, quibus non solum elementorum
famulatu sed etiam doctrina legis Prophetarum, oraculis, miraculorum signis,
and Angelorum cooperationibus consulebat, etc. God (he says) intended not to
feed the Gentiles with outward and more common blessings, but to draw them up
by these to an expectation of better things, and a careful endeavor to please
God that they might obtain them. But what blessings had the Gentiles more than
common blessings; does he particulate any? And as for the expectation of better
things, than the things of this world, whereunto he pretends God does draw them
hereby; what oracle has he for this? Prosper in the Book wherein he insists
has nothing at all of any possibility of knowledge of God unto salvation,
arriveable unto by the mere contemplation of the creature; neither have I
found any such Oracle throughout the Nation of the Arminians. Nay he professes
plainly, that that knowledge of God, which is attaineable by the contemplation
of the creature is not sufficient, unless he enjoy the true light, to discuss
the darkness of man's heart. De vocatione Gent. l. 2. cap. 6. his words are
these. Tam acerbo natura humana vulnere sauciata est, ut ad cognitionem Dei
neminem contemplatio spontanea plene valeat erudire, nisi obumbrationem cordis
vera lux discusserit. And the Apostle more than once professes of the
Gentiles, that they were without hope; And the taste of the powers of the world
Ephesians. 2. 12. 1 These. 4. 13.
to come, seems to be, by the Apostle, ascribed to the word of God as the
cause of it. Heb. 6. Yet it is true, the Heathen had odd notions of a condition
after death, (as many as believed the immortality of the soul) but where I
pray, was it upwards in heaven, or downwards rather under the earth, as Styx,
Phlegeton? and the Campi Elisii? yet Cicero looks upwards I confess in his
Tusculans questions, but yet he goes no farther than the stars; and this was
their expectation of better things; though Adrian an Emperor and a Scholar
too, bemoans himself, that he knew not what should become of his poor soul,
Animula vagula blandula, Hospes comesque corporis; Quae tu abibis in loca, nec
ut soles dabis jocos, horridula, rigida, nudula. But this Author most
confidently supposes, that these better things are manifest by the creatures;
by the contemplation whereof, he might attain to the knowledge of them: and
then I doubt not, but he might entertain a hope to attain them; provided he
carefully endeavored to please God, (which this Author conceaves to have been
very possible) and therewithal knew what that was, by doing whereof, he might
be sure to please God: And all this he obtrudes upon his Reader, by a most
dissolute course, without one crumme of reason for it. In like sort, he
discourses very confidently of the end of man, without distinction of any
relation hereof; as if the end of man were equally known as well by light of
nature, as by revelation of Gods word. Solomon tells us, That God made all
things for himself, even the wicked against the day of evil. Was this known
to the Gentiles by the light of nature? Not one of all the Prove. 16. 4.
Philosophers of old acknowledged the Worlds creation out of nothing; and who
ever manifested any such faith among them, as of enjoying a perpetual society
with God in heaven? But it may be they all erred in interpreting the book of
nature aright, and understanding the language thereof concerning this point of
faith. This Author may do well to clear the World of this error, and that
out of the book of the creatures, and then proceed to interpret unto us
therehence, a general resurrection also. And if he could find Christ there
too, together with the Incarnation of the Son of God, and his death and
passion, resurrection and ascension, and sitting at the right hand of God to
make request for us, and our justification by faith in him, together with
regeneration also, and the general judgment; then no doubt though the Gospel
should continue 1 Cor. 1. 32.
to be a scandal to the Jews, yet surely through the incomprehensible benefit
of his comfortable achievements, it should continue no longer to be
foolishness unto the Gentiles; only our faith should then cease, and be turned
into sight, before we are brought to the seeing of the face of God. And yet I
see no great need of Christ, if it be in the power of an Heathen man to know
what it is to please God, and to have an heart to please him; For certainly as
many as know what it is to please God, and have an heart to please him, God
will never hurt them, much less damn them to hell. Yet the Apostle tells
us, that they that are in the flesh cannot please God: Romans 8. 8.
but whether this Author thinks Heathens, to be amongst the number of them that
are in the flesh, I know not. But I little wonder, when an Arminian spirit of
giddiness has possessed him, if he proceed to the confounding not only of the
Law with the Gospel, but heathenisme also (such as might be) with
Christianity. But suppose a man might attain to as much knowledge, by the
mere contemplation of the book of nature, as we do obtain by the Revelation
of Gods word, yet we that conceive the knowledge of Gods word to be no
impediment to the absoluteness of reprobation, must needs find our selves as
much as nothing straightened herein, by this Authors roaving discourse, as
touching the general providence of God in his works: as long as that of the
Apostle (he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth) shall
stand Romans 9. 18.
and be received for the word of God; we shall never want ground for
maintaining the absoluteness both of election by the one, and by just
proportion, of Reprobation also by the other. For so long as God does
absolutely, and according to the mere pleasure of his will, decree to have
mercy upon some, by giving them faith and repentance, for the curing of their
infidelity and hardness of heart, this is very sufficient to maintain the
absoluteness of election unto grace, and if God does absolutely, and according
to the mere pleasure of his will decree, to harden others, by denying them the
grace of faith and repentance, so to leave their natural infidelity and
hardness of heart uncured, this shall be as sufficient to maintain the
absoluteness of Reprobation from grace. As for election unto salvation, though
the decree thereof can admit no cause, yet we say that God by this decree, does
not decree to bestow salvation on any man of ripe years, but by way of reward
of faith, repentance, and good works: as for the decree of Reprobation from
glory, and to damnation; though the decree has no cause, yet we say that God
by this decree, does not decree to inflict damnation on any, but for sin
unrepented of: only I confess, that as touching the interpretation of those
words of Saint Paul, (He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will Romans 9.
18.
he hardneth) I do not know how it may be charmed by good wits, least it may
seem repugnant to some reason gathered by contemplation of the creatures; for
some affect, such a course in these days, namely to temper Gods word according
to the light of natural reason; whereas in the simplicity of institution
wherein I have been brought up, I have been taught that the light of natural
reason ought rather to be regulated by the word of God.

DISCOURSE. SECT. II.
NOw for the gifts of grace, they are all given to them that enjoy them for the
same use and end also.

1. Christ came into the world, not that he might be a rock of offense, at
which the greater part of men might stumble and fall; but shed his blood, and
by his bloodshed to purchase Salvation unto all mankind, not only for those
that are saved, but for those also who through their wilful impenitency and
unbelief are not saved; as we may, see, John. 3. 17. God sent his son (says
our Savior) into the world, not to condemn the world, but that the world
through him might be saved; In which words the end of his coming into the world
is set down; 1. Negatively [not to condemn the world.] 2. Affirmatively. [But
that the world through him might be saved] and therefore fully. The like speech
we have, John 12. 47. I came not to judge the world but to save it. These
Negatives joined with the Affirmative deliveryes of the end of Christ's coming
show that the Salvation of all men was the only end of his coming, the end
exclusively, no other end was properly intended but this. The son of man came
to seek and to save that which was lost Luke 19. 10. that is every man because
every man was lost. And Acts 3. 26. To you has God sent his Son Jesus to
bless you in turning every one of you from your iniquityes [every one] that
is, you that reject him, as well as you that receive him. The end of Christ's
coming then into the world was the Salvation of all and every one therein.

TWISSE Consideration.
IF the gifts of grace are given for the same use and end, for which was given
Creation and Providence to the Gentiles; then look to what end the gifts of
grace are given, to the same end tends the making and governing of the World by
God: as much as to say, look to what end tends the Book of Gods Word, to the
same end tends the Book of Gods Creatures. And like as Christ came into the
World for the salvation of all, and every one. So the book of Gods creatures
was given for the same end, namely, for the salvation of all and every one; and
consequently it follows (seeing Gods wisdom prescribes congruous means to
the end intended by him) that the book of the creatures, is a very congruous
means for the salvation of all and every one. But whether this Author will have
that knowledge of God revealed in the book of the creatures, tend only to this
end, like as he says, Christ came into the world, only to this end, I know
not: Sure I am that Saint Paul says, that the invisible things of God are made
manifest from the creation in his Romans 1. 19, 20.
works, even his eternal power and Godhead, (...), that they might be without
excuse.

In the next place he tells us positively, that Christ came not into the World,
that he might be a rock of offense, at which the greater part of men might
stumble and fall; but to shed his blood, and by his bloodshed to purchase
salvation for all mankind, etc. But this Antithesis which here he makes, is
stark naught; For this very shedding of his blood, in a word Christ crucified,
this very thing (I say) was it, that was both a Scandal to the Jews, and
foolishness to the Gentiles. 1 Cor. 1. 23. And that not only the greater part
of men might stumble and fall at this rock of offense, but all and every one, I
thought it had been without all question: Nay undoubtedly all had stumbled,
that is, had been taken with unbelief, if God in mercy had not provided better
for them by the power of his grace. For dare any Arminian deny faith to be the
gift of God? But was it not Gods will that not only the greater part might
stumble, but that indeed they should de facto stumble at this rock, and fall;
and consequently that Christ came into the World, with such a purpose of God
concerning them? I prove it thus; First out of Isaiah. 8. 14. He shall be as a
stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense to both the houses of Israel, for a
gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 2. Again, 1 Pet. 2. 8.
The Apostle professes, that To them who are disobedient, Christ is made a
stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense, being disobedient: and adds
expressly, that hereunto they were ordained. 3. Thirdly, Did not God intend
that they should not be of God, as many as are not regenerated by him? If he
did intend this, (and how can a man be of God, but by Gods making, and how is
this possible to be done, without God his intending of it?) Then also he did
intend they should not hear Christ's words, and consequently, that they should
stumble at him; for therefore men hear not Christ's words, because they are not
of God. John 8. 47. Yet let him win his opinion by argument, and wear it.
But that out of John 3. 17. God sent his Son into the world, not to condemn
the world but that the world should be saved by him, is a great deal too short
to make the Child a coat; likewise that John 12. 47. is of no farther extent.
The term World in each is an indefinite term, and it is in a contingent
matter, and therefore it is equivalent only to a particular proposition, and
not to an universal; Had it been delivered not of the world only, but of all
the world, nor so only, but of all men in the world? yet Prosper, so much
insisted upon by this Author, has provided to our hands a fair
interpretation, namely, that all men in Scripture phrase, is taken sometimes
for all the elect only. As De vocatione gent. l. 2. c. 1. Apparuit gratia
salutaris Dei omnibus hominibus, and tamen ministri gratiae odio erant omnibus
hominibus: habente quidem salutis suae damnum rebellium portione, sed obtinente
plenitudinis censum fidelium dignitate. And lib. 1. c. 3. Habet ergo populus
Dei plenitudinem in electis and praescitis atque ab hominum generalitate
discretis, specialis quaedam est universitas. Yet in my judgment, our Saviors
words in each place tend only to show, that his coming into the World in
humility, was only to perform the work of man's redemption; and not to
pronounce the sentence of condemnation on any, as he shall do at the last
judgment, when he shall come in glory. And yet because much is to be done for
a quiet life, let us distinguish the benefits of Christ's merits; Salvation we
know is to be conferred on none of ripe years, but such as believe and repent;
and undoubtedly if all and every one should believe and repent, all and every
one should be saved by him: on the other side, if not one should believe and
repent, not one should be saved by him. But what does this Author think of
faith and repentance? Are these also benefits purchased unto us by the merits
of Christ? This is the point that puts all the Arminians to their purgation. If
they be so, then I demand, Whether Christ purchased these to be obtained by all
and every one, absolutely or conditionally? if absolutely, then all and every
one must have faith and repentance; and consequently, all and every one must be
saved: if only conditionally, then let them name upon what condition the gift
of faith is to be obtained, and let them look to it, how they avoid the giving
of grace according to men's works, which in the phrase of the Ancients, is the
giving of grace according to men's merits. The son of man came to seek that
which was lost. Luke 19. 10. We grant that; but when it is added, that is every
man, we deny this: As for the reason added, for every man was lost; put these
propositions into a Syllogism, and see what stuff it will make; thus, Christ
came to save that which was lost; every man was lost; therefore Christ came to
save every man. Now let every young Sophister judge, whether here be not four
terms; had it been said, that Christ came to save every one that is lost, the
place had been indeed alleged to the purpose. It is also said, I am not sent
but to the lost Math. 15. 24.
sheep of the house of Israel; let this be understood only as touching the
exercising of Christ's Ministry among them; for this Author (I suppose) will not
say he was sent to redeem them only; will it herehence follow, that seeing
every one of them was lost, therefore he exercised his Ministry unto every one
of them? how improbable a thing is this? How much less did he exercise his
Ministry amongst the twelve Tribes dispersed in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
etc. Yet my former distinction may serve to accommodate the business, and to
clear the truth, although we prove so liberal as to grant him his hearts
desire. Lastly as touching that, Acts 3. 26. To you has God sent his Son to
bless you, in turning every one of you from your iniquities; every one of you,
that is, says this Authors gloss, as well you that receive him, as you that
receive him not. But let us not carry the matter in hugger mugger, without
distinction. If this were the end of Christ's coming into the world, then it was
intended by some one or other, and that must needs be God; Now did God intend
that they should be turned from their iniquities absolutely or conditionally?
If absolutely then all must be turned from them; if conditionally, then show
what that condition is; if faith, we willingly grant, that as many as believe
shall be blessed, and turned from their iniquities. For Christ indeed dyed for
this end, namely, to redeem us from our iniquities, and to purge Titus 2. 14.
us a peculiar people unto himself zealous of good works; But as for faith
and repentance which is also a gift of Christ, Christ did not purchase this for
all absolutely, for if he did then all should believe; if conditionally, then
upon some work of man, and consequently the gift and grace of faith, shall be
bestowed according unto man's works; which is express Pelagianisme. To the
contrary, that Christ died not for all; I prove thus: First, the reason why
none can lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, is because Christ died for
them Romans 8. If therefore Christ died for all, none can Romans 8. 33, 34.
lay any thing to the charge of a Reprobate, more then to the charge of Gods
Elect. Secondly, Christ prayed only for those who either did or should believe
in him; and for whom he prayed for them only he sanctified himself. Ioh. 17.
And what is the John 17. 9, 19.
meaning of the sanctifying of himself for them, but that he meant to offer up
himself in Sacrifice upon the cross for them; as Maldonate confesses, was
the joint interpretation of all the Fathers, whom he had read. Thirdly, did he
dye only for all then living, or which should afterward be brought forth into
the World, or for all from the beginning of the world? If so, then he dyed for
all those that already were damned. Fourthly, if he dyed for them, then Christ
has made satisfaction for their sins; and is it decent that any man should
fry in Hell, for those sins for which Christ has satisfied? Lastly, if
Christ has died for all, then has he merited Salvation for all; and shall any
fail of that salvation which Christ has merited for them? Is it decent that
God the Father, should deal with Christ his Son, not according to the
exigence of his merits? If we had merited salvation for our selves would God in
justice have denied it unto us? Why then should he deny any man salvation, in
case Christ has merited salvation for him?

DISCOURSE. SECT. III.
1. THe Ministry of the Word and Sacraments is given also to the same end, and
is in its own proper nature and use an instrument of conveying the spirit of
regeneration Suffrag. Britain p. 30. 31. Art: 2. Thesi. 5.
to those that enjoy it, and to all those: I cannot have better proofs for
this than those that our Reverend Divines of Dort have gathered to my hands.
Isa. 59. 21. This is my Covenant with them (says the Lord) my spirit which is
upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of
thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor seeds seed for ever. Hinc
patet (say they) from these words it appears, that the Word and Spirit are
joined together in the Ministry of the Word, with an inseparable bond by
promise of God. Hence it is that the Ministers of the New Testament are called
Ministers not of the letter but of the Spirit, not of the letter which kills,
but of the Spirit which gives life: and the Ministry of the Gospel is called
(...), in the same place; v. 8. the Ministry of the Spirit. 2 Cor. 3. 6, 8.
Hence is the Gospel called (...) grace bringing Salvation, Tit. 2. 11. and
(...) The word of reconciliation. 2 Cor. 5. 19. To these let me add 1 Pet. 1.
23. where the word is called the seed of the new birth, and 2 Cor. 5. 20. where
Ministers are called Ambassadors for Christ, to beseech men to be reconciled
to God; and they are so called to show that the Word preached, is by Gods
appointment an instrument to make men new creatures, and that the matter of
Ministers errand is peace and reconciliation; and the proper fruit of it in
Gods intent is not the obduration and destruction, but the conversion and
salvation of men. The same men out of Ioh. 15. 22. (if I had not come and
spoken to them, they should not have had sin, but now they have no cloak for
their sin) do say it is evident, that Christ in his Preaching did administer
so much inward grace, as was sufficient to convince those that rejected the
Gospel of positive unbelief, and so to render them obnoxious to just
punishment, and consequently (say I) so much as sufficed by their good
husbandry, to have converted and saved them. For that grace leaves none
inexcusable, which is unsufficient to convert them. I will conclude that which
they say of this gracious intention of God in the Ministry of the Word, with
that speech of Prosper cited by them in the same place; non omnes vocari ad
gratiam eos, quibus omnibus Prosp. ad cap: Gall: resp. ad object: 4.
Evangelium praedicatur, nonrecte dicitur; etiamsi sint qui Evangelio non
obaudiant. They that say, that all those to whom the Gospel is Preached (even
those that obey not the Gospel) are not called to grace, they say an untruth.
God looks for grapes (says the text) Isai. 5. 2. What does this imply? but
that it was Gods principal aim in the husbandry which he bestowed upon the
Church of Israel, that it should bring forth good fruit, though in the end it
did not. How often would I have gathered you, says Christ to Jerusalem, Math.
23. 37. and in John, 5. 34. These things have I spoken to you that ye might be
saved, but ye will not come unto me that ye might have life. v. 40. Intimating
no less than this that it was his full intent by his preaching to gather and
to save those very particular men that in the end were not gathered nor saved
through their neglect or contempt of Christ's Ministry,

TWISSE Consideration.
NO question but The word of God is the sword of the spirit. Ephesians. 6. And the
Law of the Lord is a perfect Law, converting the Soul, Psalm. 19. And it seems
to be delivered in opposition to the Book of the creatures, as if he had said,
though The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handy work, yet this is the peculiar prerogative of the Book of Gods word, and
the Doctrine contained therein, that it converteth the soul: and upon this is
grounded the great preferment of the Jews above the Gentiles, chiefly that
unto them were committed the Oracles of God. Yet this Author is content to make
no difference, between the use and end of the Book of Creatures, and the Book
of Gods word; but professes the use and end of both, to be the very same. The
passage alleged out of the suffrages of the Britain Divines, is most aliene
from the present purpose: For the Thesis of theirs, proceeds of the
administration of grace by the word, not of regeneration, but of conviction of
all such, who believe not, and continue impenitent; that through their own
fault, they perish for neglecting or contemning the Gospel. In Ecclesia ubi,
juxta promissum hoc Evangelii, salus omnibus offertur, ea est administratio
gratiae, quae sufficit ad convincendos omnes impenitentes and incredulos, quod
sua culpa voluntaria, and vel neglectu, vel contemptu Evangelii perierint, and
oblatum beneficium amiserint. And in the explication of this Thesis, they
propose two things to be cleared. 1. That some measure of grace is ordinarily
administered in the Ministry of the Gospel; aliquam mensuram gratiae ordinary
in Ministerio Evangelii administrari: and for proof hereof alone, they
allege this passage out of Isai. 59. ult. This is my covenant with them says
the Lord, My spirit which is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth: So that the word and spirit are
joined together always; but not always to regenerate; but either to
regenerate and bring to obedience, or to convict of disobedience.

And accordingly, The Ministers of the New Testament, are called Ministers not
of the letter, but of the spirit: that is not of the Law; the Ministry whereof,
is not the Ministry of the spirit, but yet this is rightly to be understood, to
wit, of the spirit of adoption, for undoubtedly even the Ministry of the Law,
is the Ministry of the Spirit also, but Romans 8. 2 Cor. 3. 9.
of the spirit of bondage, to hold men under fear: it is called the Ministry
of condemnation, and the reason hereof I conceive to be, because God does not
concur with the Ministry of the Law, by the holy Spirit, to work any man to
the performance of the condition of the Law, which is exact and perfect
obedience: but thus he does concur with the Ministry of the Gospel, namely,
by his spirit, to work men to the performance of the condition thereof, which
is faith in Christ, and true repentance, therefore the letter, to wit of the
Law, is called a killing letter; but the Gospel is joined with a quickening
spirit, and therefore Piscator conceives, that the Gospel in this place is
called by the name of the spirit. So then the Gospel gives life by the
spirit which accompanyeth the Ministry thereof; but to whom? To all, as this
Author supposes? Nothing less, the general experience of the world does
manifest the untruth thereof. But this Author is ready to suppose (though not
very forward to speak out in this) that it would regenerate if men were not
defective to them selves. So then man must first perform some work on his
part, and then the spirit of the Gospel does regenerate them: as much as to
say the grace of regeneration, is dispensed by God according to some work of
man, which in plain terms Pelagius durst not profess, but joined with others
to anathematize it in the Synod of Palastine. Yet this Doctrine is the very
Helena wherewith the Arminians are enamored. Now the Apostle professes in
plain terms of himself and his fellow laborers, we are unto God the sweet
savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them which perish; to the one
we are the savor of death unto death and to the other a savor of life unto
life. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16.
So then it is (...) Tit. 2. 11. and (...) the word of reconciliation. 2 Cor.
5. 19. And the seed of the new birth. 1 Pet. 1. 23. As where by God regenerates
man; according to that of Saint James, of his own will has he begotten us by
the word of truth, Iam. 1. 18. Not whereby man does regenerate himself
according to the Arminian tenet, whose doctrine it is, that God works in us
(...) velle credere and resipiscere modo velimus. Now as God has mercy on wom
he will in converting his heart unto obedience, of faith and repentance, Romans
9. 18. and 11. 30. So God regenerates whom he will. So that we all grant that
Gods word is by Gods appointment an instrument to make men new creatures. But
whom? Not all indifferently, but the elect of God called the sheep of Christ;
John 10. 16. Other sheep have I which are not of this fold, them also must I
bring and they shall hear my voice. Mark I pray, who they are that shall
hear Christ's voice, to wit, Christ's sheep, called also Christ's people. Acts.
18. 9, 10. Then said the Lord to Paul by night in a vision fear not but speak
and hold not thy peace, for I am with thee and no man shall lay hands on thee
to hurt thee, for I have much people in this City. Paul knew not who these
were, yet for their sakes being thus encouraged, he would go on to Preach, and
to become all things to all men, that he might save some. 1 Cor. 6. 22. And who
were these some, but the elect, as elsewhere he signifies, saying, I endure all
2 Timothy 2. 10.
things for the elects sake, called also the children of God. Ioh. 11. 51, 52.
This he spoke not of himself, but being High Priest that same year, he
Prophesyed that Jesus should dye for that Nation, and not for that Nation only,
but that he should gather together in one, the children of God which were
scattererd. This gathering was to be performed by the word the instrument, by
Gods appointment, to make men new creatures: but upon whom should it work
effectually? The Text plainly calls them, and setts them forth unto us, by
the name of Gods children. The same men (says this Author) that is, our
Britain Divines at the Synod of Dort, do say out of John. 15. 22. (If I had
not come and spoken to them, they should not have had sin, but now they have
no cloak for their sin) it is evident that Christ in his Preaching did
administer so much inward grace as was sufficient to convince those that
rejected the Gospel of positive unbelief, and so to render them obnoxious to
just punishment; Now hence this Author frames this inference, And consequently
(I say) so much as sufficed by their good husbandry, to have converted and
saved them; For that grace leaves none unexcusable which is insufficient to
convert them. Now to this I answer, If our Divines had acknowledged any such
consequence to be just, they had a fair calling to make profession of it at
that time. But consider we the rest of their Thesis delivered in the same
place. The first is this, Ex speciali amore and intention tum Dei patris tum
Chisti, mortuus est Christus pro electis, ut illis remiffionem peccatorum and
salutem aeternam reipsa obtineret, and infallibiliter conferret. It was of the
intention and special love of God the Father and God the Son, that Christ
should dye for the elect, effectually to procure for them, and infallibly to
confer on them pardon of sin, and salvation. The second is this, Ex hoc
eodem amore per and propter meritum and intercessionem Christi dantur iisdem
electis fides, and perseverantia, caeteraque omnia per quae conditio foederis
impletur, and beneficium promissum, id est, vita aeterna infallibiliter
obtinetur: out of the same love through and for Christ are given, to the same
elect, faith and perseverance, and all other things, whereby the condition of
the covenant is fulfilled. The third is this, Deus lapsi generis humani
misereatus, misit filium suum qui seipsum dedit pretium redemptionis pro
peccatis totius mundi; God having compassion on mankind fallen, sent his Son
who gave himself, a price of redemption for the sins of the whole World:
this I understand of the sufficiency of the price given, whereby it comes to
pass, that Christ is remedium universo generi humano applicabile: as I have
received from the mouth of one of those, and a principal one, in such sort,
that if all the World should believe, all the World should be saved: now mark
I pray, how they carry themselves in the explication of this Thesis, and what
difference they put between Christ's dying for the elect, and his dying for
others. Sic ergo pro omnibus mortuus est ut omnes and singuli mediante fide
possint virtute (...) hujus remissionem peceatorum and vitam aeternam consequi:
Sic pro electis est mortuus ut ex merito mortis ejus secundum aeternu^ Dei
beneplacitum specialiter illis destinato and fidem infallibiliter obtineant and
vitam aeterna^. So Christ died for all that all and every one by faith
intervening, may by virtue of this redemption, obtain pardon of sin, and
salvation; the meaning whereof is this, that every one may obtain remission of
sin and salvation in case he does believe, not that they have power to
believe; For they profess immediately before, that whereas God has ordained
that after the acceptance of Christ's sacrifice, remission of sin and
salvation, shall be conferred on none, but such as believe on the redeemer,
here the secret decree of election opens it self, when the price which was
paid for all (mark the explication hereof in the words following) and which
unto all believers shall redound, certainly to eternal salvation, yet it does
not profit all, because it is not given to all to fulfill the condition of this
covenant; as much as to say, because faith is not given to all. The fourth
Thesis. In hoc merito mortis Christi fundatur Mark. 16. 16.
universale promissum Evangelicum juxta quod omnes in Christum credentes
remissionem peccatorum and vitam aeternam consequantur. In this merit of
Christ, is founded that universal promise of the Gospel, according whereto
all that believe in Christ shall obtain pardon of sin, and everlasting life.
The fifth Thesis, Is that which this Author insists upon, but preposterously
applied by him; the Thesis runs thus, In Ecclesia ubi juxta promissum hoc salus
omnibus effertur, ea est administratio gratiae quae sufficit ad convincendos
omnes impoenitentes and incredulos, quod sua culpa voluntaria and neglectu vel
contemptu Evangelii perierint. Take the last Thesis in the last place. Non
obstante hoc pacto universali de salvandis credentibus, Deus nulle pacto aut
promisso tenetur Evangelium aut gratiam salutiferam omnibus and singulis
communicare. Notwithstanding this general covenant of saving believers, God is
not tied by any covenant or promise to communicate the Gospel and saving grace
to all and every one. And that he bestows it on some, passing by others, it is
of divine mercy and liberty. But let us examine the sobriety of the
consequence, which this Author makes: namely, that if the grace administered in
the Gospel, be sufficient to convict them who resist it of positive unbelief,
then it is sufficient also by their good Husbandry to convert them. Mark I
pray the nature of grace here shaped thus, sufficient by their good Husbandry
(to wit, by the good Husbandry of the hearers) to convert them. Now wherein
does this conversion consist? Surely in believing, for of unbelief they are
convicted by the Gospel, as many as contemn or neglect it: and hence he
inferres, that it was sufficient to convert them, which must be by the
Antithesis, to bring them to faith, provided that they (that is the hearers)
play the good husbands in the using of it; But what is it to play the good
husbands? These and such like Phrasiologies, are the usual sculking courses of
the Arminians, like the ink which the Fish Saepia casts forth, that she may
thereby the better hide her self, and escape from the hands of the Fisher. But
certainly it must be some work or other to be performed by the hearer, whereby
he shall be brought to faith: therefore I say, it is either the work of Faith
it self, or some other work preceding it: not of faith it self, for faith it
self, cannot in reason be said to be a work, whereby a man is brought to
faith. Secondly, herehence it follows, that Man's good husbandry, being here
distinguished from the work of Faith it self, the act of Faith is hereby made
the work of man's will, not of Gods grace: if some work preceding faith,
whereupon faith is wrought by grace, it follows that the grace of faith, is
given according to man's works: this is the foul issue of their tenet, making
faith either not at all the work of God, or if wrought by God, to be wrought
according to man's work. And thus they shape the grace of God, conferring
faith, not only toward Reprobates, but also toward the elect. Now observe I
beseech you, how our Britain Divines do purposely reject this Doctrine in
the Synod of Dort art. 3. in their third Thesis, of those which are rejected by
them. The Thesis which they reject is, positis omnibus gratiae operationibus
quibus Deus ad efficiendam hanc conversionem utitur, voluntatem hominis
relinqui in aequilibrio: velitne credere vel non credere convertete se ad Deum
vel non convertere. All the operations of grace supposed, the will of man is
left in an even balance, whether he will believe or no, whether he will
convert himself to God or no: this is the very opinion of this Author, against
which our worthy Divines dispute there in this manner. If this were so, then it
would follow that God by his grace, is not the principal cause of man's
believing and conversion, but man by his free will rather: For in this case God
shall not predominantly work man's conversion, but upon condition only, to wit,
in case the will first move it self whereby the less work is given to God,
and the greater work to man, to wit in man's conversion. 2. Herehence it will
follow that God gives no more grace to the Elect than to the Reprobate, and
that the elect are not bound to be more thankful to God than the non-elect,
because the work of God in both is no other than to place the will in an even
balance. 3. The grace of conversion is given with an intention that it shall
prove effectual and to move, nay rather to bring man to the producing of the
act of faith, in such sort, as it cannot be made in vain; Haec gratia a nullo
duro cord respuitur ideo quippe tribuitur ut cordis duritia primitus auferatur.

And seeing the good Husbandry of man's consists in obedience to the Gospel it
appears hereby, that the grace they speak of is no other than the Gospel,
exhorting to repentance, and this we confess is sufficient in a certain kind,
to wit, in the kind of instruction and exhortation: and is not this sufficient
to convict of unbelief as many as wilfully resist it, and such is the
condition of all in hearing the Gospel, to whom God gives not the grace of
conversion, for as Saint Austin Ep. 89.
says, Libertas sine gratia non est libertas sed contumacia, and no other
impotency of belief do we ascribe to a natural man, but such as consists in
contumacy, which is merely a fault and corruption of the will, not the defect
of any natural power: and therefore as I said, the impotemcy of converting to
God by faith and repentance, is impotency moral, consisting merely in the
corruption of the will; and there is no question but every man has as much
power to believe as Simon Magus, of whom it is said that he believed. Fides in
voluntate est (says Austin) and credimus quando volumus, but the will of man
is so corrupt, that without special preparation by Gods grace, it is rather
wilfully set to walk in the ways of flesh and blood, than obsequious to that
which is good: we make no question but that as Prosper says, every one that
hears the Gospel, is thereby called unto grace, even to obtain pardon of
sin and salvation upon his faith in Christ and is called upon also to
believe: but withal we say with our Britain Divines, Art. 3. De Conversione
Thesi 1a. In the explication thereof, that God gives his elect not only posse
credere si velint (which in Austins opinion lib. 1. de genesis contra Manic. cap.
3. and de praedest. Sanct. cap. 5. is common to all,) but velle credere, nay
they spare not to profess that if God should work in us only posse credere,
posse convertere, and leave the act of believing and converting to man's free
will, we should all do as Adam did; and fall from God through our free will,
and never bring this possibility into act; take their own words. Quod si vires
quasdam infundendo daret Deus tantum posse credere, posse convertere, ipsum
interim actum committeret libero hominum arbitrio, certe quod primus parens
fecit faceremus omnes: libero arbitrio a Deo deficeremus nec possibilitatem
hanc in actum perduceremus. Haec itaque eximia est illa specialis gratia qua
non modo possunt credere si velint, sed and volunt cum possunt. Phil. 3. 13.
Dat Deus nobis and velle and perficere. As for that which he discourses of
Gods principal aim, that the Church of Israel should bring forth good fruit:
let us speak plainly, and not cheat our selves first, and then become
impostors unto others: was it that which God did principally intend? Gods
intentions are his decrees, now if God did decree they should bring forth fruit
de facto, who has resisted his will? Nay take their own rules according to
their doctrine of Scientia media. Why did God give them only such a grace to
move them unto fruitfulnes, which he foresaw they would resist? And refuse to
give such grace, as he foresaw would not be resisted, and that without all
prejudice to their wills? Let the^ answer unto this, for that God in the
storehouse of his wisdom has such courses as being used, he foreseeth
infalliby that any sin will be hindered, Arminius acknowledges, as I have often
alleged him. But we may safely say, 1. That God intended it should be their
duty to bring forth fruit. 2. If he did farther intend that the Church of
Israel should de facto bring forth fruit, this he did bring to pass also: but
withal let us consider what the Apostle teaches us, and take that along with
us also, namely, that all are not Israel, that are of Israel; and so in his
elect he effects this. 3. I doubt not but this is pronounced chiefly for the
elects sake, and though they are not as yet so fruitful as they should be, yet
I nothing doubt, but this passionate expostulation, was a means to turn them
to the Lord, that is, some of them: For God calls them not all at once, but
some at one hour of the day, some at another. 4. It might be a means to bring
others also, though not to true conversion, yet ad exteriorem vitae
emendationem. As for that of our Savior over Jerusalem Math. 23. 37. That is
of another condition in two respects. Jerusalem neither saw his tears, nor
heard his bemoaning of it; but we hear of it, and read it in his word, and it
is equally effectual with the elect of God, and others also; as the
expostulation we read Isai. 5. Secondly our Savior was a man as well as God,
and though the Son of God, yet made under the Law, and accordingly as much
bound to desire and endeavor the salvation of all amongst whom he was sent, as
any Prophet, or Apostle, or Minister of Gods word. That in the 5. Ioh. 34.
These things have I spoken unto you, that ye might be saved; What is the
meaning thereof but this. These things have I spoken unto you, exhorting you to
believe, that ye might be saved; according to that v. 24. He that hears me,
and believes him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but has passed from death to life: and by the words following,
in the words alleged by him it appears, that there is no other intention of
salvation meant, than in case they believe: But ye will not come unto me that
ye might have life, v. 40. And as before I said, Christ being made under the
Law, was bound, as well as we are, to desire the salvation of his Brethren,
that is to desire and labor the conversion of those to whom he was sent, that
so they might be saved.

DISCOURSE. SECT. IV.
THis is also the use and end for which the Sacraments were ordained, as we may
see Luke 7. 30. Where we have these words, But the Scribes and Pharisees and
expounders of the Law despised the council of God against them selves, and
were not Baptized of John. In which words thus much is plainly included, that
it was Gods counsel and purpose in John's Baptism, to bring them to Christ,
and in him to Heaven; much more is it in the end of Christ's Baptism which is
more excellent than John's was, not in substance but in the fullness of grace
administered, and dispensed by it. Mark. 1. 4.


All that have been Baptized into Christ (says the Apostle) have been Baptized
unto his death. Romans 6. 3. And Gal. 3. 29. All ye that are Baptized into Christ
have put on Christ, the very phrases there used show, that Baptism is in its
original intention an instrument of uniting men to Christ and giving them
communion with him in the benefits of his death: except a man be borne of water
(says Christ) and of the spirit, he cannot etc. Ioh. 3. 5. In which words are
delivered two things. 1. The necessity of regeneration; (except a man be born
again.) 2. The working causes of it, efficient, the Spirit of God,
isntrumental, the Sacrament of Baptism, there called water from the outward
matter of it. Baptism therefore is appointed to be a means of regeneration to
all those that are Baptized, and does effect it in all that do not put an
obstacle in the way to hinder it. For this cause does the Apostell dignifye it
(the layer of regeneration) Titus 3. 5. I will shut up this with Acts. 2. 38.
Ephesians. 5. 26.
Where Peter says, repent and be Baptized every one of you for the remission
of sins: plainly implying that therefore is Baptism ordained to be received
that those who do receive it might have their sins remitted.

The patience of God also, which is another singular donation and gift of God
to men, is exercised to this very end, as appears Romans 2. 4. Despisest thou
the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering, not knowing
that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? But thou, after thy
hardness of heart that can not repent, heapest up etc. In these words we may
note for our purpose, 1. Gods end and intent in forbearing sinners, and that is
the leading of them to repentance, and so to Salvation, (for repentance is Per
se ordinata ad salutem as a means to the end.) 2. The persons to whom God
intends this good by his forbearance, and they are such as despise the riches
of his goodness, and have hard and impenitent hearts. 3. The issue and event
of this their contempt of Gods patience, and that is a treasuring up wrath
unto themselves against the day of wrath. Out of all which laid togeher arises
thus much, That God by sparing wicked men, who have hard and impenitent hearts,
intends their everlasting good, though they, by the abuse of his patience, and
refusal to repent, do treasure up to themselves wrath and eternal misery.
The like to this is delivered in the 2 Peter 3. 9. God is not slack, (as some
men count slacknesse) but patient toward us, that is, us men. And why patient
toward us? Because he would have none to perish. The end therefore of Gods
patience is man's repentance and Salvation.

TWISSE. Consideration.
THough this Author does little answer your expectation, in confining himself
to Reprobation, therein to give you satisfaction, as touching the reason why he
has changed his mind in certain controversies; yet it may be, his purpose is
to make you amends, by acquainting you with some mysteries of his, concerning
Baptism, out of Luke 7. 30. Where it is said of the Scribes and Pharisees, that
in refusing to be Baptized of John, they despised the counsel of God against
themselves; hence he inferres, that it was Gods counsel and purpose in John's
Baptism, to bring them to Christ, and in him to heaven: as much as to say God
purposed to bring them to Christ and to heaven, but they would not; and so it
came to pass that Omnipotentis Dei voluntatis effectus, was hindered by the
will of the creature, which Austin accounted a very foul Enchirid. c. 46.
absurdity, as if God were not able to bring them to Christ: yet our Savior
professes, that like as none can come unto him except the Father draw him, so
on the other side, every one that the Father gives me comes unto me, Ioh. 6.
And the Apostle says, Who has resisted his will? John 6.
Omnipotente facilitate convertit, says Austin, and ex nolentibus volentes
facit. But as for the Text, suppose the Evangelist had called it the purpose of
God, yet the object of his purpose is not expressed, and why might it not be
Gods purpose to make it their duty to hearken to John, and to submit to the
Lords Ordinance administered by John, as well as Gods purpose that they should
obey him, and be persuaded to be Baptized by him: yea and much rather too,
considering the foul absurdity wherewith this interpretation is charged, as
formerly I have showed; and he must have the stomach of an Ostrich, that can
digest it. But where I pray was it ever read or heard before, that Gods purpose
is at any time despised? Gods counsel indeed is too often despised, as when he
says, I council thee to buy of me gold, etc. Revel. 3. And the counsel of
God signifies no other will of God, than is the will of commandment, of
admonition, of exhortation, and such like. But whereas he talks of a greater
fullness of grace in the Baptism of Christ, than in the Baptism of John, this
belief is one of his mysteries concerning Baptism. John Preached Christ unto
the people, Acts 19. 4. And John's Baptism was the Baptism of repentance for
the remission of sins, that is, Preaching of repentance, he administered
Baptism unto them in assurance of the forgiveness of their sins, upon their
repentance. And therefore he put off the Scribes and Pharisees, calling upon
them to bring forth fruits of repentance first. So Peter speaks of the
Baptism of Christ, Acts 2. Repent and be Baptized for the forgiveness of your
sins. So was circumcision unto the Jews a Seal of the righteousness of
faith, that is, of the forgiveness of sins through faith. It seems this
Author is none of the Rhemists adversary in this, who upon Math. 3. 11. writes
thus. It is an Article of our adversaries, that the Baptism of Christ, is no
better then the Baptism of John, they make it of no more value or efficacy for
remission of sins, and grace, and justification than was John's: whereunto Mr
Fulke makes answer, saying, Remission of sin is proper unto God as well in
John's Baptism, as in the Baptism of Christ, and that John in that place
compares the Ministry of Man with the authority and power of God, and though
some of the ancient Fathers were of another opinion, yet Saint Mark says
expressly, That John Preached the Baptism of repentance. unto forgiveness of
sins. And who can separate forgiveness of sins from true repentance? When
the Lord promises, at what time soever the sinner repents, to pardon his
sins. The seal of Baptism also added to the doctrine of Repentance, must
needs testify remission of sins, namely, the soul to be washed by mercy, as
the body is with water. Neither does this doctrine derogate any thing from the
Baptism of Christ, seeing it is Christ that forgiveth sins, and gives grace
in the Baptism ministered by John and ministered by his Apostles: For John's
Baptism was by Gods institution, not of John's devising.

It is true, All that have been Baptized into Christ, have been Baptized into
his death, Romans 6. 3. and Gal. 3. 26. All that have been Baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ. But take Baptism aright, and let Peter be an interpreter
of Paul. Baptism saves us, says he, 1 Pet. 3. 21. But least you should
mistake him, mark what he adds, Not the putting away the filth of the flesh,
here is the outward Baptizing with water, but the interrogation which a good
conscience makes to God. Nay let Paul be an interpreter of himself. 1 Cor. 6.
12: But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. Now I willingly confess, that
as many as are washed and sanctified and justified by the spirit of God, have
put on Christ, and are Baptized into his death, to the mortifying and
crucifying the old man in them. And as by the Baptism of the spirit we do put
on Christ, so are we united unto Christ, and have a communion with him in the
benefits of his death. But as for the intention of Baptism of water, I know
none it has, much less do I know how to put a difference between intention
original, and some other intention which he conceales, content to suffer the
distinction, to fly with one wing. The Baptize is intention I am somewhat
acquainted with: On man's part, to Baptize such as are brought to the font for
that purpose, and by Baptism to consecrate them to the service of that God,
who is one in nature, but three in persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: on
Gods part, to seal unto us the righteousness of faith, which I learn out of
Romans 4. 11. In the description of Circumcision, and the meaning thereof, I take
to be the assuring of forgiveness of sins to them that believe, and this is
congruous to the description both of John's Baptism, and Christ's Baptism set
forth unto us in holy Scripture. As for that John 3. 5. Except a man be borne
of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot etc. Master Fulke in his answer to the
Rhemists on that verse writes thus; It is not necessary in this place by Water,
to understand material Water, but rather the purifying grace of Christ, as,
cap. 4. v. 11. Whereof the washing with water in Baptism, is an outward sign
and seal, which also is termed fire, Math. 3. 11. The water therefore in
Baptism is not our regeneration properly, but a Sacrament and seal thereof;
Isid. Origin. l. 7. cap. de Spiritu Sancto. Aliud est aqua Sacramenti, aliud
aqua quae significat Spiritum Dei; aqua enim Sacramenti visibilis est, aqua
spiritus sancti invisibilis est, ista abluit corpus, and significat quid sit in
anima, per illum autem spiritum Sanctum anima mundatur, and saginatur. And a
little after, Indeed (says he) the words of our Savior Christ are not
properly of the external Sacrament more then, Ioh. 6. Of the other Sacrament;
except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have
no life in you: whereas all Infants are excluded from that Sacrament, and
consequently should be excluded from life, if the words were meant of the
outward Sacraments. And the Fathers of the ancient Church, which thought
Baptism was necessary, did likewise think the communion to be as necessary for
Infants; as Augustine, Innocentius Bishop of Rome, and all the Church of their
time, for any thing we can gather by their writings. Finally, when the word of
Water in this Text signifies the purifying grace of Christ, rather than the
outward element of Baptism, here can be no argument drawn out of this place,
that Sacraments confer grace of the work wrought, but according to the
dispensation of Gods spirit, who works according to his own pleasure; as in
this chap. v. 8. 1 Cor. 12. When this Author talks of the necessity of
regeneration, I doubt he considers not, that hence it follows, that either
all that dye unbaptized are damned, (for I presume he speaks of the necessity
of it unto salvation,) or that many thousands are now adays regenerated
without any Sacrament of regeneration. That the Spirit of God is the efficient
cause of Regeneration, I think no Christian doubts; but this Author makes
the Baptizing with Water to be an efficient also, as when he says, Baptism is
appointed to be a means of Regeneration to all that are Baptized, and not only
so, but that it does effect it also in all that do not put an obstacle in the
way to hinder it. I acknowledge willingly that Baptism material, is an
instrument, to wit, both as a sign and as a seal: But that it is an
instrument in any other kind of operation, than belongs to a sign and seal, I
have not hitherto learned out of the word of God. And as I remember, Arminius
was sometimes challenged for Heterodoxy about the Sacraments; and withal, that
his Apology was this, he never ascribed any other efficacy unto the Sacraments,
than is denoted under the terms of Signs and Seals; but no marvel, if a
degenerated condition has seized on any, that such proficiunt in pejus, and
grow more and more degenerate. The phrase used here in calling Baptism a means
of regeneration, sounds harsh in my ears, we commonly say, and it is the
doctrine of our Catechism, that a Sacrament is an outward and visible sign,
of an inward and invisible grace: now this grace in Baptism I take to be the
grace of regeneration; and is it a decent expression to say, that the sign of
Regeneration is the means of Regeneration? As for Baptismus spiritus, the
Baptism of the spirit, that is the very working of regeneration, but Baptismus
fluminis, the Baptism of water, that is the administration of the outward
sign, and seal of the grace of regeneration. The word Preaches forgiveness
of sins to all that believe, so does the Sacrament of Baptism; but the word
Preaches this to the ear, the Sacrament to the eye. The word assures it, for
it is Gods word, the Sacrament assures it, for it is Gods seal, but neither of
these works the assurance without the spirit of God: and as for the working
of Faith it self, I have read that Faith comes by hearing, I no where read
that Faith comes by the being Baptized. And sure I am when men of ripe years
came to be Baptized, they were first Catechumini, then competentes, and none
admitted unto Baptism, unless the word had formerly brought them unto faith.
The Apostle calls Baptism the laver of regeneration, by the Rhemists
translation, the fountain of regeneration, by the former English translation,
the washing of regeneration, by the last: but whereas this Author dignifies it
with this title, because it does effect regeneration in all that do not put an
obstacle in the way to hinder it: if this Author shall prove it (while his head
is hot,) we shall give that credence to it, as it deserves; in the mean time,
it stands for a bold affirmation; let him take his time to make it appear to
be sound: the Rhemists upon the place have this note; As before in the
Sacrament of holy Orders [1 Timothy 4. 2 Timothy 1.] So here it is plain that
Baptism gives grace, and that by it, as by an isntrumental cause, we be
saved. Master Fulkes answer is this, Here is no word to prove that Baptism
gives grace of the work wrought, but the Apostle says that God has saved us
by the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which is testified by the Sacrament of
Baptism (mark I pray the office of Baptism in Master Fulkes judgment, to
testify the renewing,) which is Sacramentally the laver of regeneration; not by
the work wrought but by the grace of Gods spirit, by which we are justified.
So speaks Saint Peter, and explicateth himself 1 Pet. 3. 21. Baptism saves
us not the washing of the flesh of the body, but the interrogation of a good
conscience. And because I know no obstacle that an Infant can put to hinder the
effect of it, for I suppose the obstacle must be rational, and Infants are not
come to the use of reason, to perform any rational act, which may prove any
rational obstacle; therefore it seems this Authors opinion is, that all who
are Baptized in the Church, are regenerate: this indeed was the profession of
Master Mountague before he was Bishop; and was answered by Bishop Carelton, as
touching the best firmament of his opinion; the Book of our Common Prayer,
where the Child Baptized is said to be regenerate; that is to be understood
Sacramento tenus, which is Saint Austins phrase, and which he distinguishes
from truly regenerate: And Bishop Usher in his History of Gotteschaleus,
alleges out of the Author of the imperfect work upon Matthew, Hom. 5. this
sentence, Eos qui cum tentati fuerint, superantur, and pereunt, videri quidem
filios Dei factos propter aquam Baptismatis, revera tamen non esse filios Dei,
quia non sunt in Spiritu Baptizati. As also out of Austin De Unitate Ecclesiae,
cap. 19. Visibilem Baptismum posse habere, and alienos qui regnum Dei non
possidebunt: sed esse donum Spiritus Sancti quod proprium eorum est tantum qui
regnabunt cum Christo in aeternum. And lastly out of the same Austin, as he is
alleged by Peter Lombard, l. 4. Sent. dis. 4. Sacramenta in solis electis
efficere quod figurant. All this is to be found in that Book of Bishop Usher p.
188. Besides many more pregnant passages are collected by him for the same
purpose. And not to charge him with authority only, but with some reason; when
Saint, James says Jam. 1. 18. Of his own will he has begotten us by the word
of truth; what I pray is here meant by the word of truth? Is it not the
Gospel, to wit, The Preaching of Christ crucified? Now consider to whom does
he write, but to the twelve Tribes, that is, to the Christian Jews, such as
were begotten to a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, as Saint
Peter speaks writing also to the Jews. If then these Jews were regenerated
by the Preaching of the Gospel, surely they were not regenerated by
Circumcision; and if regeneration were not necessarily annexed to the Sacrament
of Circumcision, amongst the Jews, then neither is it necessarily affixed to
the Sacrament of Baptism amongst the Christians. For our Divines do usually
maintain against the Papists, that the Sacraments of the Old Testament, were
as effectual to the Jews, as the Sacraments of the New Testament are
effectual unto us Christians. It is true, Baptism is ordained, that those
which do receive it may have the remission of their sins, but not
absolutely, but conditionally, to wit, in case they believe and repent, as
appears both in that place, Acts 2. 38. and Romans 4. 11. And Baptism as a Seal
does assure hereof, only in case they believe and repent; and therefore none of
ripe years were admitted unto Baptism, until they made profession of their
faith, and as for Infants, they were also anciently said to be Baptized in fide
Parentum.

Gods patience Romans 2. 4. And the goodness of God manifested therein, leads
a Man to repentance: so do his judgments also, Hos. 5. In their affliction
they will seek me early; and so does Gods word: and all this only in the way
of a moving cause, and exciting to repentance, every morning God brings his
judgments to light, he fails not yet; will not the wicked be ashamed. Zeph
3. 5. But it is the duty of all to be moved by his word, by his works, by his
mercyes, by his judgments, to turn to the Lord by true repentance. But God
alone is he that works them hereunto, without whose efficacious grace none of
all these courses will prevail, as Isai. 57. 17. For his wicked covetousness
I was angry with him and have smiten him, I hid me and was angry. They wanted
neither admonition from his word, nor from his corrections yet they profited by
neither, as it follows; yet he went away and turned after the way of his own
heart: yet what is Gods resosolution, but to overcome their stubbornness by the
power of his grace, as there we read; I have seen his ways, and will heal
them: now who are these whom he leads so, as to bring them to repentance, let
Austin answer, Contra Julian. Pelag. l. 5. c. 4. Bonitas Dei te ad poenitentiam
adducit, verum esse constat, sed quem praedestinavit adducit, and he adds a
reason, Quamtamlibet enim praebuerit poenitentiam, nisi Deus dederit, quis agit
poenitentiam. And in the same Chapter professes, touching the
Non-praedestinate, that God never brings them to wholesome and spiritual
repentance, whereby a man is reconciled to God in Christ, whether God affords
them greater patience than he affords his elect; or nothing less? His words
are these, Istorum neminem adducit ad poenitentiam salubrem, and spiritualem,
qua homo in Christo reconciliatur Deo, sive illis ampliorem patientiam, sive
non imparem praebeat: God intends by this his patience, that it is the duty of
all to repent; that is, that they should repent ex officio; but did he intend
they should de facto repent? what then could hinder it? Then he would afford
them efficacious grace, to heal them, as he promises Isai. 57. 18. Then would
he rule them with a mighty hand, and make them pass under the rod, and bring
them unto the bond of the covenant. So then to the point in particular here
observed. 1. God leads all to repentance by his goodness, manifested in his
forbearance and long suffering, by way of admonition, that it is their duty to
turn unto God by repentance, while he gives them time and space for
repentance. 2. But as for those whom he has elected, he not only thus leads,
but also effectually brings them to repentance, in the time he has appointed,
before which time they are found sometimes to despise the riches of his
goodness, and to have hard and impenitent hearts, as much as any Reprobate:
who more foul in the committing of horrible abominations than Manasses? Who
more furious in persecuting the Church of God then Saul? Yet God took away the
stony heart (and what is harder then stone) out of their bowels, and so he
does to all whom he regenerates. 3. As touching a final contempt of Gods
patience, that is peculiar unto Reprobates; as for the elect, though some are
called at the first hour of the day, some not till the last, yet all are
effectually called, before they drop out of the World. To say that God intends
the everlasting good of Reprobates, is to deny the first Article of our Creed,
even Gods omni potency, as Austin has disputed 1200 years ago; we find in our
selves, that whatsoever we will do, if we do not it, it is either because we
cannot do it, or because our will is changed, but to ascribe either mutability
or impotency to God, is intolerable in a Christian, and it cannot be denied,
but God did from everlasting intend their everlasting damnation: so that to say
he did intend their everlasting good, is flat contradiction; neither is there
any way to charm it, but by saying, God intends their everlasting good
conditionally; but to intend it after such a manner, is apparently no more to
intend their salvation than their damnation, nay less rather; considering the
conditions of salvation are utterly impossible unto man, unless God correct,
and cure his corrupt nature; but this grace he dispenses according to the
mere pleasure of his will, as the Apostle signifies in saying, he has mercy
on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth. As for that 2 Pet. 3. 9. He is
patient toward us, not willing (...) any of us to perish, it has been already
considered; but here he interprets toward us, as if it had been said,
toward us men, and I hope the elect are men, as well as others: but what
ground has he for this liberty of interpretation? Why may he not take the
liberty in interpreting of John, as well as Peter, both were pillars; (Gal. 2.)
where he says, They went out from us, but they were not of us, for had they
been of us, they had continued with us; and still swalloweth a palpable
absurdity following hereupon, even to the denying of Gods omnipotency, in as
flat contradiction to the Apostle, where he professes, that God has mercy on
whom he will, which is not to have mercy on all, but on some only, hardening
others, as Romans 11. The election has obtained it, but the rest are hardened.

DISCOURSE. SECT. V.
IN the last place those other gifts of God, whereby men's understandings are
enlightened, and their souls beautifyed, (which are knowledge, repentance,
fortitude, liberality, temperance, humility, charity, and such like) are
bestowed upon all them that have them, (among whom are many that may prove
Reprobates in the end) that by the exercise of them, and continuance in them,
they might be Saved. The Reprobates are adorned with many of those graces, as
apears plainly by many Scriptures, especially Hebr. 6. 4. Where the Apostle
says, that it is impossible for those that have been enlightened, tasted the
heavenly gift, been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, tasted the good word of
God, and the powers of the world to come, if they fall away, should be renewed
by repentance: and the graces which the Apostle speaks of here, are not
ordinary and common, but special graces, illumination, faith, relish of the
sweetness of Gods Word, and the taste of Heaven. The persons spoken of, are
Apostates, such as are under the possibility of falling away, (for upon a
dainger not possible cannot be built a solid exhortation) and if Apostates then
Reprobates, and the thing intimated is that upon Apostates and Reprobates are
these gifts bestowed. The Like speech we have: Hebr. 10. 26. For if we sin
willingly, after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice for sin etc. from whence we collect, that men that sin
willingly and unpardonably, may receive the knowledge of the truth, yea and be
sanctified by the blood of the Testament and the Spirit of grace, v. 29. 2 Pet.
2. 20. They may escape the filthiness of the world i. e. be washed from their
former sins by repentance, the unclean spirit may go out of them. Mat. 12.
43. They may receive the word with joy, Mat. 13. 20. And many excellent graces
they may have besides: All which graces are not given them that they might
abuse them, and so purchase to themselves the greater damnation; or that they
might do good to others with them, but none to themselves; but rather that as
by the former gifts Suffrag. Britt. p. 41. These. 2. and p. 43. These. 3.
of nature, so by these of grace, they may obtain Salvation. If God aim at
this in those gifts that are farther off, much more in these, which make those
that have them (like the young man in the Gospel) not far from the kingdom of
Heaven. Thus we see what end God aims at in his gifts to men.

TWISSE Consideration.
THese gifts this Author formerly described to be gifts of grace, applying
salvation unto men, which he distinguishes from gifts of grace purchasing
salvation, in the entrance upon this reason of his. Now it is apparent, that
most of these gifts have been found in the heathen men: and who was ever heard
to call these virtues found in the heathen, gifts of grace, applying the
salvation purchased by Christ, whereof they were wholly ignorant, like as of
Christ himself. And whereas he makes, faith and repentance, to be gifts
communicated unto such, who (as he expresses it,) do prove Reprobates in the
end; Saint Austin to the contrary, as formerly I have alleged him out of his
5. lib. contra Julian Pelag. c. 5. Expressly professes of the Non
praedestinate, that God brings not one of them to wholesome and Spiritual
repentance, whereby a man is reconciled to God in Christ: And our Britain
Divines in the Synod of Dort, upon the 5th Article and fourth position,
profess in like manner of all such as are none of Gods elect, that it is
manifest they never really and truly attain that change and renovation of the
mind, and affections, which accompanies justification; nay, nor that which
does immediately prepare or dispose to justification. For they never seriously
repent, they are never affected with hearty sorrow for offending God by
sinning, nor do they come to any humble contrition of heart, nor conceive a
firm resolution to offend any more. And whereas he says, that such do prove
Reprobates in the end, he may as well say of others, that they prove elect in
the end, which does wholly savor, of shapeing the decrees of God, to be of a
temporal condition, and not eternal; unless he delivers it of the
manifestation of it in the judgment of men, which yet as touching Reprobates
cannot appear until their death, and it is a very hard matter for any man, to
pass upon men generally the censure of elect, or reprobates; the hypocrisy of
man has such power to evacuate the one, and the secret operation of Gods mercy
and grace the other. How far reprobates may attain to the illunination of
their mind, and renovation of their wills, and reformation of their lives, is
set down more fully by our Britain Divines in the Synod of Dort, than by this
Author; not one particular (if I mistake not) being mentioned here, as touching
the places of Scripture, containing the indication thereof, which is not set
down there, and some there are set down, which are not set down here. In
their first position concerning those who are not elect, upon the fifth Article
(this Authors quotation here leaving out the Article) and by a wild reference
to the page, being fitter to confound a Reader than direct him) the first
position there is this, There is a certain supernatural enlightening granted to
some of In the English Translation. Page 104. Page 106.
them who are not elect, by the power whereof they understand those things to
be true, which are revealed in the word of God, and yield an unfeigned ascent
unto them. And in the explication of it Luke 8. 13. The seed which fell upon
the stony ground, notes unto us such hearers, as for a while believe, that is,
those that for a while give ascent to things revealed from above, and
especially to the covenant of the Gospel; and thereby it is plain, that this
their ascent, is no way feigned, because they received the word with joy. Acts
8. 30. And afterward they Page 107.
give a farther reason of it thus, For it is not to be imputed for a fault to
any man, that he is fallen from an Hypocritical faith, neither can a shipwreck
be made of a feigned faith, but only a detection and manifestation of it, nor
indeed can he suffer shipwreck, who was never in the ship. 2 Pet. 2. 20. Some
are said to have escaped from the filthiness of the world, by the knowledge of
the Lord, whose latter end is worse than their beginning: and of those Ioh. 12.
42. who believed in Christ, but did not confess him, they write that they
believed with an unfaigned dogmaticall faith, which then lay secretly hid in
their hearts: but never showed it self in any outward profession, for fear of
danger ensuing. Their second position is this, In these forementioned, there
does arise out of this knowledge and Page 108.
faith, a certain change of their affections, and some kind of amendment of
their manners. This they prove out of Math. 13. 20. They received the word with
joy: and 1 Kings 21. 17. concerning Ahabs humbling of himself: and out of Heb.
6. 4. alleged by this Author, and over and above out of v. 6. observe a
renovation also, in as much as it is said, That it is impossible they should be
renewed again, which implies, that they had been formerly renewed in some sort,
and out of Chap. 10. 19. That they trod under foot the blood of the Covenant,
by which they are sanctified; and that they attained to some amendment of life,
they prove both by the example of Herod; and out of 2 Pet. 2. 20. where it is
said of them, that they had escaped from the filthiness of the world. And
Chap. 1. 9. Where they are said to have forgotten that they were purged from
their old sins. And out of Math. 12. 43. Where it is said the unclean spirit
was departed out of them, and that all this was not feigned, but that they
proceeded out of the power of those dispositions unto grace, and from the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost: yet notwithstanding all this in their fourth
Page 110.
position they pronounce, that they never attain unto the state of adoption
and justification: and in their explication of it, that they never attain the
change and renovation of the mind and affections, which does immediately prepare
and dispose unto justification; For they Page 111.
never seriously repent etc. at large. Now seeing God brings them no farther,
as he does his elect; with what sobriety can it be said, that God intends their
salvation? And as for the point of sanctification, which here is attributed to
them, other Divines do not go so far, as to interpet it of any inward
sanctification, as Paraeus; Erat autem (says he) Sanctificatio Apostolorum non
interna sed externa in professione fidei, and participatione sacramentorum
externa consistens, erant sanctificati, hoc est, a Judaeis and Paganis
professione segregati, and pro veris Christianis habiti. Loquitur enim secundum
judicium charitatis, quae omnes de doctrina for is consentientes habet pro
sanctificatis, licet non omnes cordibus vere sint sanctificati, Non eergo hinc
sequitur, Apostatas. Vere fuisse regeneratos. Pro quibus enim Christus ne or
are quidem dignatus est, eos multo minus sanguine suo sanctificavit: ideo
Johannes Apostatas de Ecclesia renatorum fuisse negat: ex nobis egressi sunt,
quia non erant ex nobis. Et Petrus vocat eos canes and porcos redentes ad
vomitum, and volutabrum, canis vero etiam post vomitum est canis, and sus lota
est sus, canem vero and suem se semper mansisse, and ille and ista per reditum
ad vomitum and volutabrum declarat. Cameron likewise in in his Myroth. p. 334.
Dupliciter sanctificantur homines alii absolute, ut soli fideles, cum scilicet
non tantum ab aliis hominibus segregantur (hoc enim verbum sanctificare saepe
significat in Scriptura) a Deo, sed and remissione peccatorum apprehensa and
Spiritus Sancti virtute sanctificati, and in sanctitatis studio permanent. Alii
comparate, qui scilicet separantur quidem ab aliis hominibus externa fidei
professione, and aliqua forte vitae instituti immutatione, at non
sanctificantur absolute ut fideles, ad hoc posterius sanctificationis genus
pertinet hoc Apostoli dictum, in quo sanctificatus fuit. But albeit they were
truly sanctified, (to suppose that for the present) yet if God purposed not to
give them perseverance therein, undoubtedly he intended not their salvation.
Nay, no Arminian denies, but that God did from everlasting intend the salvation
of all such Apostates; and to say that he had a velleity to save them, is to
dash a man's self against the rock of absurdity, as to deny Gods omnipotency,
unless he will say Gods mind is changed: and to talk of a conditionate will
intending their salvation, is no more to say, that he intends their salvation
in case they do believe, than to say, he intends their damnation in case they
do not believe. And as for his allegation out of the suffrages of our Divines
in the Synod of Dort, that is very wild, neither mentioning the Article, nor
rightly quoting the page: though the things here proposed are mostly taken out
of the first and second Thesis, concerning the Non-elect, upon the fifth
Article: but no glimps do I find there, of any such end of Gods granting these
dispositions, as that thereby they might be brought unto salvation; though as
in the elect such like dispositions are, so in the Reprobate, they might be
preparations to farther grace, if it pleased God so to ordain as to bring them
on forward to justification and true sanctification conjunct therewith, and
thereby unto salvation.

As for the ends which God does intend thereby, to wit, by bringing them so
far; look whatsoever God does bring to pass hereby, that God does intend.
For nothing can fall out casually unto God. If they do persevere in this
condition, to wit. as touching the outward emendation of their life, it is, ut
mitius puniantur, as Austin expresses himself somewhere, which now does not
come to my remembrance, if they fall from it, whereupon they shall be more
grievously punished: this also was intended by God. Or if others are bettered
by them, undoubtedly this also was intended by God, as also to teach all others
not to content themselves with superficial renovation, superficial obedience;
and so likewise illumination clearly takes away that excuse, which some are
apt to make, as Austin observes, namely, Dicere solet humana superbia si
scissem fecissem. Which how well this Author infringeth, we are to De great. and
lib. arb. c. 2.
consider in the next place.

DISCOURSE. SECT. VI.
BUt there are some Scripturs which seem to say the contrary. v: g. Romans 1. 20.
Where God is said to reveal himself to the Gentiles by the creatures (...)
that they might be without excuse. Luke 2. 34. Simeon said of Christ, that he
is appointed for the falling, and rising again of many in Israel; and. 1 Cor.
1. 23. I preach Christ (says Paul) to the Jews a stumbling block. 2 Cor. 2.
16. We are the sweet savor of death unto death: and it seems by these places,
that God gives these things to some, that they may stumble, and be left without
excuse; What shall we say therefore to these places? Of all these Scriptures in
general, I may say this, that they are to be understood of the end, which is
many times effected by these gifts of God, and not of the end that is primarily
intended in them; and they show what Christ, the Word Preached, and the gifts
of nature and grace, are (occasionally) to some men through their voluntary
rebellion against God, and his Ordinances; and not what they are
(intentionally) in Gods first thoughts and resolutions. He intends them for
them, for their good, though many times they receive them to their hurt: it is
with Gods Ordinances and gifts (and that very often too) as it is sometimes
with Physic, it is given by the Physician for the Patients good, many times
through the distemper of his body, it does him hurt. And as it is with the
Sun, God intends by the shining of it, the enlightening and clearing of men,
and other creatures in this inferior World, others are hurt by the light of it,
(accidentally) by reason of the climates wherein they live, or the ill
affectednesse of their eyes and bodies. So the blessings of God, which out of
his abundant goodness, are bestowed upon men for their eternal good, through
the ill frame and temper of their heart, do effect their hurt; partly because
lighting upon naughty hearts, they loose their force and edge, (for quicquid
recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis;) and partly because of the severity
of God, who as he has an antecedent and gracious will to do men good, so he
has a consequent and judiciary will of giving up wicked men to the lusts of
their hearts, and of permitting them to dash against Christ, and other means of
eternal life, and so to fall into endless misery and mischief, as we may
see, Psalm. 101. 11, 12. and Rev. 22. 11. He that is filthy let him be filthy
still.

Now if this be the meaning of those Scriptures, then they thwart nothing that
has been said of Gods gracious intent of promoting the eternal good of men,
by his blessings bestowed upon them. For argumentum ab eventu ad intentionem
Dei non valet; because no sinful event is properly under Gods will and decree,
but his prescience only, or at most under a permissive decree, and many things
happen in the World, which are besides the antecedent and principal purpose of
God, not because there is any want of power in God, but because his will is
oftentimes conditional, and therefore not effected, because the condition is
not performed.

TWISSE. Consideration.
THe gifts of grace he speaks of are three. 1. The knowledge of God revealed
in his works, 2. Christ, 3. The Gospel; for these alone are they, whereof the
objection proceeds, which he proposes to be answered. Of the first: it is most
true, that the end thereof represented in the objection, is effected by it, to
wit, the bereaving men of excuse, as namely in a certain kind, which Austin
interprets, De great. and lib. arb. c. 2. in this manner, Quomodo dicit
inexcusabiles nisi de illa excusatione, qua dicere solet humana superbia si
scissem fecissem, ideo non feci, quia nescivi. How does he call them
inexcusable, but in respect of such an excuse, which the pride of man moves
him to use, saying, had I known it I would have done it, therefore I did it
not, because I knew it not: thus the Gentiles were left without excuse, in
turning the glory of the incorruptible God, to the similitude of the image of a
corruptible man, etc. And for as much as he had sufficiently manifested
himself by his works, to be eternal, and consequently uncorruptible. So that
knowledge sufficiently revealed, does always take away the pretense of
ignorance for a man's excuse, whether a man have any need of excuse, as in case
he lives not answerable to his knowledge, or no need at all to excuse himself,
as in case he does conform himself to that knowledge which God has given
him, in which case he is not said to be inexcusable, though pretense of
ignorance by way of excuse is taken from him, as well as from others; but
because he has no need of any such excuse, as depends upon pretense of
ignorance, therefore he is not denominated inexcusable, but such only who would
excuse themselves by such a pretense, but cannot. But as touching the other
gifts of grace mentioned, to wit, 1. Christ, 2. The Gospel, it is most untrue
that the end specified, is effected by them: for Christ does not effect the
falling of any; neither is the setting of him up, any cause of any man's
falling, neither is the stumbling of any, effected by the Preaching of the
Gospel; for what is men's stumbling thereat, but their disobedience thereunto.
1 Pet. 2. 8. Now the Gospel does not effect any man's disobedience, but the
corrupt heart of man alone is the efficient cause thereof. And I cannot
sufficiently wonder, at so crude a conceit as this Author manifests, by so
inconsiderate an expression. I grant the end primarily intended, was no other
then Gods glory: But as for the salvation of Reprobates, that is neither
primarily nor secondarily, nor at all intended by God, as I have often
demonstrated; both in as much as God has from everlasting intended their
damnation, and therefore cannot without contradiction intend their salvation.
And withal God is unchangeable and omnipotent, and therefore as he can procure
the Salvation of any, if withal he intends and wills to procure it,
undoubtedly such a one shall be saved. Against all which, this Author proceeds
without taking any course to charm those foul absurdities whereinto he
precipitates himself. And when he says of the stumbling of many at the
Gospel, that it is not primarily intended, he does most inconsiderately
confess, that it is intended by God, though not primarily, which is enough for
us; and the Apostle is express, professing of such who stumble at the word
through disobedience, That thereunto they were ordained. 1 Pet. 2. 8. Neither
do we say that the Gospel or Christ, is the cause of any man's falling; but
only the occasion thereof: man's corrupt heart alone (as formerly I said) being
the cause thereof. But God intends their stumbling shall come to pass, which
must needs be, in case it is through disobedience that they stumble, and God
has purposed to deny them the grace of obedience, as indeed he has to many,
like as he does deny it to many; as appears by his hardening of many, even
whom he will, like as on the other side, he has mercy on whom he will. So
Christ's carriage was not the cause, but the occasion only of the Jews plotting
against him, because they observed that he did many miracles, and if they let
him alone, all men would believe in him, and the Romans would come and take
away both their place, and the Nation. Ioh. 11. 47, 48. Yet look what they did
against him, God had before intended and determined to be done; For both Herod,
and Pontius Pilate together with the Gentiles, and people of Israel, were
gathered together, to do what Gods hand and counsel had determined before to
be done. Acts 4. 28. Yet not primarily intended neither, for all this was to a
farther end, namely, to procure the redemption of the World, yea of some of
them who crucified him. Yet there was a farther end than all this, namely, the
glory of God, in the way of mercy mixed with justice, and that brought to pass
by admirable power and wisdom. This was first in Gods thoughts and
resolutions, as the supreme end, all the rest were but as means tending
thereunto: yet do we not say this was intentionally in Gods first thoughts and
resolutions, which is as if he should say, intentionally in Gods intentions;
and with the like genius of sobriety, he distinguishes between occasionally
and intentionally, enclosing the terms with a parenthesis, as if there were
some great judgment, though little wit, in this distinction, and therefore
would have it observeable. Occasion is justly distinguished from a cause, but I
never found it distinguished from intention, till now. It seems he would say
accidentally or casually, for such alone are praeter intentionem, if any, and
so fit to be opposed to intentionally; but this distinction sticks in his
teeth, he was loath in plain terms to express so shameful an opinion, as
to profess that any thing comes to pass in the World, besides Gods intention,
which is the distinction of things fortuitous in Aristotle. Nay, he leaves
place for Gods intention of them secondarily, denying only that he intends them
primarily. But still he keeps this conclusion, and holds that up, whatsoever
becomes of his premises, as when he says God intends them for them, for their
good, that is his Oracle; but Saint Paul's Oracle is, that the invisible things
of God, that is his eternal power and Godhead, are seen by the Creation of the
World being considered in his works, (...), that they may be without excuse,
and that the Preachers of the Gospel, were unto God a sweet savor of Christ
in them that are saved, and in them that perish; without putting any difference
according to this Authors Gemora, that this is to be understood of the one
occasionally, of the other intentionally. But to ransack this also, and to
speak distinctly, What is the good that God hereby intended them? Was it
Salvation? And how did he intend that unto them? Was it intended to be their
portion, whether they believed in Christ or no? Undoubtedly his meaning can be
no other then this, he intended they should be saved by him, provided they did
believe in him: Now what Christian was there ever known to deny this, namely,
that as many as believed in Christ, should be saved by him? But let me ask
another question, Did God intend they should believe in him? Yes surely in the
opinion of this Author: but is not faith the gift of God? They are ashamed to
deny this, at least in concione populi, whatsoever they do consessu familiari.
Why then did not God give them faith? Why surely because they refused to
believe in him, so that had they believed in him, then God would have given
them faith; as much as to say, had they bestowed faith on themselves, then God
would have bestowed faith on them: this is their sobriety that oppose the grace
of God, and such be their sobriety still that fall away from the truth of God.
If Physic do the Patients harm through the distemper of their bodies, this
must be through the ignorance of the Physician, who either knows not the
distemper of their body, or else knows not how to master it. But spare, I
pray, to make God obnoxious to the like ignorance or impotency, when the Lord
says, I have seen his ways and will heal them, Isai. 57. 18. When was it
ever known that such a patient was not healed? What greater distemper of the
soul than backsliding or Rebellion? Yet when God says I will heal their
backsliding, and I will heal their Rebellions. Hosea 14. verse. 4. When was it
ever known, that any of his Patients, were not the better for his operation,
but the worse rather? At length, that breaks out of this Author, that formerly
stuck in the way, like a burre in his throat, as when he says that God intends
the chearing of men by the shining of the Sun, but that some are scorched by
the heat of it, some hurt by the light of it, is accidentally, as if these
effects were not intended by God; as much as to say, that God does not intend,
that the sun should scorch in Zona torrida, though the sun works by
necessity of nature, and cannot but scorch there, as the Abissines felt to
their smart, who were wont to pray unto the sun as he was rising to spare
them, but after he was passed, and going down, to curse as fast for his
scorching of them, whence it is conceived that proverb came, plures adorant
solemn orientem quam occidentem: as natural it is to the light to scatter the
sight, and if by scattering the eye be ill affected, this is as natural to the
sun; like as to make sweet flowers send forth their odoriferous savours, as a
dung-mixen, to exhale an unsavory smell: but suppose a man should loose his
sight by the light, as some have by the light of the sun, being kept long in
some dark place before, shall this be accidental unto God, whereas the Prophet
professes, there is no evil in the City which the Lord has not done? Like as
Gods blessing it is, that neither the sun scorcheth him by day, nor the
influence of the Moon, or any other planet, hurt him by night. But come we to
the Apodosis of the simile, He renewes his coccismes of Gods blessings out of
his abundant goodness, bestowed on men for their good; which is a general
speech, and in the generality nothing to the present purpose, we know God
saves both man and beast, he makes his sun to shine, and his rain to fall
on the just and on the unjust, but as for the knowledge of God revealed in his
creature, whatsoever is brought forth according to it, we doubt not but God
intended it, as civil society, and some natural fear of God, and civil
conversation; where any thing is done contrary unto it, the Apostle has
discovered unto us, the end of natural revelation is, that they might be
without excuse; they connot say, si scissem fecissem, that excuse is taken from
them. As for the dictates of supernumerary Apostles, we have no cause to regard
them, especially when they are cantradictitions to the word of God, and
Christian reason, the Gospel is unto God throughout a sweet savor in Christ,
both in them that are saved, and in them that perish; It is true, that it is
through the corruptions of men's hearts, that men do not yield obedience to it,
but that corruption God can cure, and does cure where it pleases him; that men
do obey, it is also through the good temper of their hearts, but through the
grace of God, curing that corruption in them, that he leaves uncured in others;
And we willingly grant, that he intends their salvation in whom he means to
cure this corruption, to bring them to the obedience of faith: but most absurd
it is to say, that he intends their salvation, on whom he never meant to show
any such mercy, but rather to harden them; where the honest and good heart is
wanting, the word proves not fruitful, but only where such an heart is found.
Now it is Gods work, (I know) alone to take away the stony heart, and to give
an heart of flesh. But this Author carries himself so throughout, that he
would have this work to be the work of man's free will, not of God, any other
way than by persuasion, admonition, exhortation, and concourse; many talk of
Robin Hood that never shot in his Bow; and this Author talks of the anticedent
will of God, which I doubt whether he understands either the meaning of
Damascen herein, or of Crysostom either Vossius reduces it as I have showed
before, to Voluntas conditionata, thus, God wills that men should be saved if
they believe, is it not as true, that his will is, they shall be damned if they
do not believe? this is the only gracious will this Author magnifyes; but God
give me experience of another manner of his gracious will toward me, namely,
as he sees my ways, so to heal them, yea, and to rule me with a mighty hand,
so he make me to pass under the rod, and bring me unto the bond of his
covenant. But yet see I pray whether this Author be yet come to the sobriety of
his senses, in speaking here of Gods severity in the way of a will judiciary;
as when he gives wicked men up to the lust of their hearts, and permits them to
dash against Christ, and other means of eternal life, Now I pray consider,
who are those wicked men whom God thus gives over to their lusts? Were we not
all such? Did not God find us all weltering in our blood. Ezekiel. 16.? Had not we
all stony hearts. Ezekiel. 36.? Were we not all blind, lame, deaf, nay were we
not dead in sins. Ephesians. 2. 1.? Did not the Gospel find the Ephesians so?
Did not the Word of truth find the Jews so? James, 1. 18. How then comes this
difference that Christ is a stumbling block to some and not to others? We say
the difference is, because God has mercy on some, and hardens others. Romans 9.
18. Because some are borne of God, therefore they hear Gods Word, others are
not borne of God, and therefore they hear not Gods word. Ioh. 8. 47. The
Arminians say God gives power to every one by an universal grace to will any
good whereto he shall be excited. So when the Gospel is Preached, every one
has power to obey it: if he does obey it, then Christ is a precious stone to
him, but if it disobey it, then he is given up to the lusts of his heart, and
permitted to dash against Christ, and other means of eternal life. Here we
have a phrase, but we are to seek of the meaning thereof; what is it to dash
against Christ? It must needs be to commit some sin or other, for that is the
object of Gods permition, for of all other things God is acounted the Author,
not the permitter, the object of permition is nothing but sin, now what sin
can that be, whereby we are said to dash against Christ, and other means of
salvation, but disobedience to Christ and to the means of grace: so that from
the first to the last, the sense comes to this, as many as disobey Christ and
the means of grace, they are given over to the lusts of their hearts, and
permitted to dash against Christ and other means of eternal life, that is, are
permitted to disobey Christ and to resist other means of eternal life. So that
their disobedience to Christ and the Gospel is very punctually and juditiously
set down to precede by two degrees their disobedience to Christ, and his
Gospel. Some may think that this Arminian prosilite does not carry himself
well in his business and for betraying the nakedness of his cause may be in
dainger to be excommunicated out of their Synagogue. But Sir you must believe
it, this is the very leprosy of their Doctrine that over spreds it from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot, and they are in love with it,
accounting it not only sanity, but perfect beauty. God indeed is said in
Scripture, to give men over to their lusts, when he forbears either courses of
admonition and reproof by his word, or by his judgments in his works, or
when he forbears to restrain Satan, as formerly he did: but disobedience to
the Gospel undoubtedly is, hoc ipso, a dashing against Christ, although God
may continue to admonish and exhort even to the end; as to profane and
hypocritical persons in the Church, he gives not over this course of his
until the end. I have often represented the absurdity of this Authors conceit,
of a gracious intent in God, of promoting the eternal good of Reprobates;
whereas it cannot be denied, that God has from everlasting intended their
damnation: and as for our saying, that God intends they shall be without
excuse, that Christ is set up for their falling, that the Gospel is unto God a
sweet savor in Christ, not only in them that are saved, but in them that
perish. This Author is so far from overthrowing the truth of it, that
(besides other absurdities delivered by him in the way) the Author himself
has no heart to deny it, only saying, that God intends it not primarily, which
is rather to grant that he intends it (though not primarily as whereabouts
there is no question) than to deny it, and that occasionally they are so;
whereas no man but himself has said (in saying that they do effect this end)
that Christ or the Gospel are the cause hereof, but only that they are the
occasion. But this hinders not Gods intention of them: For undoubtedly God
intends as well things occasioned as things caused, though not in his first
thoughts and resolutions, which belongs rather to the end than to the means,
to wit, to be first intended. So that in plain terms, he has not hitherto
dared to deny, that God intends them, though he manifests a good mind to
maintain, that they come to pass accidentally and casually in respect of God;
For he spares not to profess, that the scorching of men, and the hurting of
weak eyes falls out accidentally, and that to God; for he proposes this by
way of distinction, from that which God intends, which he says is the chearing
of men by the light of the Sun: like as here he denies that men's stumbling at
Christ, is a thing intended by God; like as in saying a sinful event is not
properly under Gods will and decree, but under his prescience only, or at most
under a permissive decree. And this I confess, is a very plausible doctrine in
the judgment of flesh and blood; save that this Authors faint carriage in the
delivering of it, is enough to make a man suspect it, as plausible as it is,
yet it is hardly true and sound. For he dares not say, that a sinful event is
not at all under Gods decree, only that he says, it is not properly under Gods
decree. But Saint Peter speaking of them that stumbled at the word of God
through disobedience, professes in plain terms, that hereunto they were
ordained, 1 Pet. 2. 6. And all the Apostles there assembled. Acts 4. 28. Do
profess, that both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of
Israel, were gathered together against the Holy Son of God, to do what Gods
hand, and Gods counsel had determined before to be done. And ere I part I hope
to prove, that any sinful act that comes to pass in the world, is as properly
intended of God, as any good act whatsoever, although there be a vast
difference in the bringing of them forth: God causing the one, and only
permitting the other as it is evil. And that because it comes under Gods
prescience, and it is well they are not so Atheistical as to deny Gods
prescience; but I doubt not to make it good, that either they must deny that
every thing comes under Gods prescience, or they must grant that every thing
comes under Gods decree. For consider, nothing can be foreknowne of God as
future, unless it be future. Now let us quietly enquire how any thing becomes
future, and if any cause hereof can with reason be devised without the decree
of God, let us all become Arminians, and deny God either at all to be, or to be
a free agent, but working by necessity of nature: For if future things be
future of their own nature, then all things must be acknowledged to come to
pass by necessity of their own nature, which is to deny God. But if things be
of their own nature merely possible, and indifferent to become either future
or non-future, then there must be acknowledged some cause whereby they are
brought out of the condition of things merely possible, into the condition of
things future. And this cause must exist from everlasting, otherwise it should
not be so ancient as the effect thereof, for it is well known that all things
future have been future from everlasting, otherwise God could not have
foreknown them from everlasting: but all confess that God from everlasting
foreknew every future thing; Therefore the cause making them to pass out of
the condition of things merely possible (such as they were of their own
nature) into the condition of things future, was also from everlasting. Now
consider where was this cause to be found? Not without God: for nothing without
God either was or is everlasting without beginning; therefore is it to be found
within God or no where. Consider in the next place, what is that within God
which is fit to be the cause hereof. We say it is his decree, but this Author
cannot away with that. Therefore Si quid novisti rectius isto candidus imperti.
Certainly the knowledge of God cannot be the cause; for as Aquinas says, that
causes nothing but as joined with Gods will, and therefore it is commonly
conceived that foreknowledge does rather presuppose things future than make
them so: nothing then remains to be the cause hereof, but the essence of God.
Now the essence of God may be considered two ways, either as working
necessarily, or as working freely: if it be the cause of things future as
working necessarily, then it follows that God shall produce them by necessity
of nature, which utterly overthrowes Divine providence. What remains then but
that we must be driven to confess that Divine essence makes them future, as
working freely, which is as much as to profess, that Gods will and decree is
that alone, which makes things to pass out of the condition of things merely
possible in to the condition of things future. And I challenge the whole Nation
of Arminians, and Jesuits to answer this argument. Yet this decree we
willingly acknowledge is a permissive decree: but look that we understand that
aright also; thus God decrees this or that evil to come to pass by his
permission, like as good things he decrees shall come to pass by his
effection: and that upon Gods permission, it is necessary that that which he
permits shall come to pass, is acknowledged not only by our Divines, but by
Vorstius, by Arminians, by Navarettus the Dominican as I have quoted the^ in my
Vinditiae gratiae Dei, which yet they deliver without clear expressing how:
which I perform thus, look what God decrees to permit, it is necessary that it
should come to pass, but how? Not necessarily but contingently and freely, And
the Scripture is express as before expressed, that the most barbarous actions
co^mited against Christ by Herod, Pontius Pilate, together with the Gentiles
and people of Israel, in their contumelious usages of him, were all
predetermined by the hand and counsel of God. Mark the issue of this Authors
most frivolous discourses: for this will whereof he speaks, whereby God is
pretended graciously to will man's Salvation, conditional; as much as to say,
it is Gods will that a man shall be Saved in case he believe in Christ; now what
Christian was ever known to deny this. Secondly, consider whether this deserves
to be called a will to save more than a will to damn, for like as it is
certain a man shall be saved if he believe in Christ, so it is most certain a
man shall be damned if he believe not, and withal consider to which of these
the nature of man is most prone, whether to faith or to infidelity.

DISCOURSE. SECT. VII.
BUt by this opinion the gifts of nature and grace have another end, either God
does not mean them unto those that perish, albeit they do enjoy them; because
they are mingled in the world with the elect, to whom only they are directed:
or if he do, he means they shall have them, and by them be lifted up above
the common rank of men, [ut lapsu graviore ruant] that their fall may be the
greater: for how can God intend that those men should receive them or any good
by any of them, whom he has by an absolute decree cut off and rejected utterly
from grace and glory. More particularly by, this doctrine,

1. Christ came not into the world to procure the Salvation of them that
perish, because they were inevitably preordained to perish.

2. The word is not sent to them, or if it be, it is that they might slight it
or contemn it and increase their damnation by the contempt of it; and so these
inconveniences will arise;

1. That God is a mere deceiver of miserable men whom he calls to Salvation in
the name of his Suffrag. Erittaine. p. 43.
Son, by the preaching of his word; because he fully intends to most men the
contrary to that which he fairly pretends:

2. That Ministers are but false witnesses; because in their Ministry they
offer Salvation conditionally to many, who are determined to damnation
absolutely:

3. The Ministry of the Word cannot leave men inexcusable, for Reprobates may
have this just plea: Lord, do thou punish for not believing in thy Son,
when thou did call us to believe by the preaching of thy Word, thou did
decree to leave us (woeful men) in Adams sin, to leave us neither power to
believe, nor a Christ to believe in; how can thou justly charge us with
sin, or increase our punishment for not believing in him, whom thou did
resolve before the world was that we should never believe in. That Ministry
gives men a fair excuse which is given to no other end than to leave them
without excuse.

4. The Sacraments (by this opinion) signify nothing, seal up, confer
nothing to such as are not Saved, but are mere blankes and empty ordinances
unto them not through the fault of men but by the primary and absolute will of
God.

5. Lastly, other gifts bestowed upon men of what nature soever they be, are to
the most that receive them in Gods absolute intention,

1. Unprofitable, such as shall never do them good in reference to their
final condition.

2. Dangerous and hurtful, given them not of love but extreme hatred, not
that they might use them well and be Blessed in so doing, but that they might
use them ill, and by ill using of them procure unto themselves the greater
damnation. God lifts them up (as the Devil did Christ) to the pinnacle of the
Temple that they might fall, and loades them with knowledge and other goodly
indowments that with the weight of them, he might sink them into Hell, and so
by good consequence Gods chiefest gifts are intended, and laid as snares to
entrap men's Souls. Men that have them have little cause to be proud of them,
(for they are the more unhappy because they have them) or small reason to be
thankful for them, or to love the giver of them, but to hate rather, because
they are but giftlesse gifts, no better than an usurers bounty, Jaells
courtesy Souls bestowing Michal to David, or a bayte for a proud fish which he
swallows with an hook to boore.

TWISSE Consideration.
WE have hitherto received a poor and hungry discourse, but now in the
accommodation of it he thunders and lightneth, as his manner is, both the
Master and the Disciple would have it in their own power to make themselves
elect, otherwise it seems they have little comfort, and therefore they
discharge a great noise of thunder against our Doctrine of reprobation: as if
they would awe God to give them liberty to elect themselves, otherwise they
will powder his absoluteness, in taking upon him to Reprobate whom he list. Me
thinks these Arminians talk in the spirit of Dr Story, as if they would
scould us out of our faith, I will not say God out of his Throne; but he is
able to plead his own, we are unworthy to plead for him, yet thus far he is
pleased to honor us, as to admit us to plead for him, like as he is the God
that pleades the cause of his people: I have showed how absurdly this Author
makes the salvation of reprobates to be intended by God, which yet in the issue
is but after a conditional manner, which is no more to intend their salvation,
then their condemnation: well let us see the quality of these absurdities he
fastens upon us. The first is, that God does not mean the gifts of nature and
grace unto those that perish: where to I answer, That as touching the gifts of
nature, there is no color for this, for they (as the Author sets them down)
are these, creation, sustentation, preservation, health, beauty, wisdom; now
let any sober man consider whether it be possible, that it should not be Gods
meaning for as many as do enjoy them, to enjoy them. As for the gifts of
grace, these he divides into graces purchasing Salvation, and graces applying
Salvation, after it is purchased: the grace purchasing Salvation is Christ; now
we say that Salvation is purchased, to be conferred upon every man of ripe
years conditional only, namly, in case he believes, and on all that do
believe; for our Savior has said that whosoever believes shall be saved,
whosoever believes not shall be damned: as for the purchasing the grace of
faith, that we say is so purchased to be conferred absolutely and not upon
condition of any work for that is manifest Pelagianisme, and therefore Christ
dyed not to procure that for all, for then all should believe de facto, and be
saved: therefore we say, he dyed to procure this only for his elect. But the
Arminians do now openly profess to the world. that Christ merited not faith
and regeneration for any: so that God meant not, that Christ should be given to
any for the purchasing of faith for him. So that herein certainly they are more
to blame than we, by this Authors rules. As for the graces of applying
Salvation, these are the Ministry of the word and Sacraments, the long
suffering of God, the illumination of men's understandings, the plantation of
many exellent virtues in their hearts. I will answer particularly concerning
the^ all, leaving those many more which he conceales, to his own enjoying the
contemplation of them. And first as touching the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments, we willingly profess, that we find no monument of the Americans
enjoying of them before the discovery of that western world by Columbus
Vesputius, and Magellan, no nor to this day in the terra incognita Australi,
whereof relation is made by Ferdenando de Quir: but herein I confess the
Arminians go beyond us in there spiritual discoveries; for, by the
Catoptricke glass of their own fancy, they tell us, that though Christ has
not been preached amongst them by man, yet it may be he has been preached
amongst them by Angels, and deliver it for certain, that having universal
grace given them, if they use that well; as many as use it well shall have the
Gospel preached unto them, if not by men yet by Angels: but as for the
administration of the Sacraments by. Angels also they have discovered nothing
unto us hitherunto that I know. And as for Gods patience, undoubtedly they
enjoy it as much as we, if they be as long lived as we. And I know nothing to
the contrary as touching illumination natural; that I doubt is not meant to be
comprehended under the graces, aplying Salvation purchased by Christ, yet why
not as well as fortitude, liberality, temperance, humility, chastity, and truly
herein I do not find them any whit inferior unto Christians, in some they
went beyond us apparently; if we go beyond them in any thing, I for my part
take it to be in gace rather than nature. As for illumination spiritual,
huhumane I know none they had, and as for Angelical Revelation that is a dish
of Lettice for Arminian lips; I want faith to give me any stomach to it: I
come to those exellent virtues which this Author pretendes to have been planted
in their hearts; had he spared faith and repentance I could willingly have
acknowledged the rest amongst heathens, and that according to Gods meaning; but
what soever and in whom soever they are found, he thinks too hardly of us,
when he says, that God according to our opinion, does not mean them to those
that enjoy them: and if he does mean them unto such, surely they are directed
unto them: how is it possible it should be otherwise, especially as touching
virtues, yea and the Ministry of the Word also, for he commanded them to Preach
the Gospel to every creature, to wit, where they came: only we willingly
confess, then he does not mean any of those shall bring any of them that
perish unto Salvation. Secondly, as touching the lifting up of them up a bove
the common rank of men by these gifts, hear is a miserable confused
discourse, so many things being put together, to make up one term in a
proposition; but it is beneficial to some to fish in troubled waters, and if
my answer savor of the like confusion it is nothing strange, for he that
walks in the Sun, must needs be colored. But I think I may say, look what
gifts men have, caeteris paribus, they are above the rank of those that have
them not, but that they are given ut lapsu graviore cadant, That their fall may
be the greater, This deserves to be particularly considered. First, in
general, I say whosoever does by occasion of those gifts here spoken of, fall
the more grievously (which in many particulars is a mystery to me, to the
consideration whereof I purpose to descend in the next place) God did both
intend that such a fall of theirs should come to pass by his permission, and
that upon such an occasion: for even they that stumble at Gods word through
disobedience, and expressly said by Peter to be ordained thereunto, thus I
look out for a ground for that I deliver, giving leave to the adversaries of
Gods truth to roave at pleasure in the pouring forth of their impious dictates:
but come we to the particulars, and first as touching the gifts of nature, I
confess as touching the first of them (creation) that if that had not been, he
had never fallen, but nevertheless when God resolved to create, he resolved to
create all things for himself, Even the wicked against the day of evil, and
if I err in that I have an honorable Prophet to be my companion, even Solomon
himself. As for preservation and sustentation, Prove. 16. 4.
I willingly confess that if Judas had perished before he had been admitted
into Christ's service, his damnation had been the more easy: and God electing
him ad prodendum sanguinem (if I may be so bold as to speak in Austins
language) did determine that his sin by Gods permission should be the more
grievous, by occasion of his advancement into the number of Christ's disciples.
As for health, strength, beauty, wisdom, I see no reason why they should
promote any man's damnation, but that a fool, or an ill-favored, or a weak,
or a sickly person, may be as great a sinner as the wise man, or beautiful, or
strong, or healthy. How, because Christ died for the salvation of as many as
do believe, which we all hold, or dyed to procure faith and regeneration for
none (as the Arminians hold) any man is promoted to a greater measure of sin
thereby, is a mystery to me. As touching the ministry of the word, Saint Peter
speaks plainly of some, that it had been better for them they had never known
the way of right ousnesse, than after they have known it, to depart from the
holy Commandment given to them, he says not this of all, and Austin
professes of some Reprobates, that by the Gospel they are called Ut
proficiant ad exteriorem vitae emendationem quo mitius puniantur. As for the
patience of God S. Paul professes plainly, that some after the hardness of
their hearts which cannot repent, despising the patience and long suffering of
God, and therein his goodness leading them to repentance, do Romans 2. 5.
thereby treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and Reprobation of the
just judgment of God. And I should think that even this God intended should
come to pass by his permission, otherwise he would have given them repentance,
or shortened their days, for give me leave to say with Austin, Quantamlibet
prebuerit patientiam, nisi Deus dederit, quis agat paenitentiam. Contra Julian.
Pelag. l. 5. c. 4. As for knowledge, that does clearly take away excuse,
grounded upon pretense of ignorance, and like as our Savior said to his
Disciples Ioh. 13. If you know these things happy are ye if you do them: So
likewise the more men know good things, the more unhappy are they, if they do
them not: yet it is not necessary that knowledge should aggravate the damnation
of the Reprobate, as in case they do thereby, proficere ad exteriorem vitae
emendationem, for in this case surely, mititus punientur, but if they do grow
worse by occasion of their knowledge, we spare not to profess that God
intended this should come to pass by his permission, why not as well as the
crucifying of the Son of God? Act. 4. 28. As for the virtues in the last
place, which here are pretended also to be given to work for their harm, and
among them faith and repentance, we are so far from affirming, that they are
given for the harm of them that perish, that we to the contrary maintain,
that they are given to none but Gods elect, and to bring them unto salvation,
Acts 13. 48. As many believed as were ordained to eternal life. And faith is
called the faith of the elect. Tit. 1. 1. and Acts 11. 18. Then has God also
unto the Gentiles given repentance unto life. Contra Juli. Pelag. l. 5. cap. 4.
Mark it well, not unto death, but unto life: And Austin long ago has
professed, that of those who are not predestined, God brings not one unto
wholesome and spiritual repentance, whereby a man is reconciled unto God in
Christ. Knowledge is here shufled in among the rest of these virtues, as if
that were not all one with the illumination of the mind, at least most
deservedly to be ranged with it. As for other virtues here mentioned, as
fortitude, liberality, temperance, humility, chastity, where these virtues are
bestowed after a natural manner (for no otherwise, nor in any gracious manner,
are they found in Reprobates, as I suppose, ready to be called at any time to
an account upon that point, and to manifest six maine differences between the
moral virtues of heathen men, and the same virtues (in name, and as touching
the substance of the acts, wrought by them in Christians) I should think they
are rather given for their good that enjoy them, than for their harm, namely,
Ut profici ant ad exteriorem vitae emendationem, quo mitius puniantur. All the
harm that may come by them, that I can devise for the present, is to grow
proud of them: and I willingly profess, that nothing makes a greater
separation from God then pride, and it may be, Moralists fret at this, that
their Morality is no better esteemed of. But what think you? May a man be
proud of humility, for that is one of the excellent virtues here specified; why
not, of the natural humility which is in them? As Sir Philip Sidney observes
in his defense of Poetry, that Philosophers write Books against vainglory,
whereunto nevertheless they set their names. So they might write Books in
commendation of humility, and thereunto set their names also. Yet I am not
truly of such an opinion, as to think, that God should give any of these
virtues, to the end they should grow proud of them: for I do not find it any
way requisite to a proud man, that he should be virtuous: for in my judgment,
pride is a very humble vice, and disdaines not to dwell in the hearts of the
meanest. Plato could discern it through Antisthenes his patcht coat: and when
Diogenes trod under foot Platoes hangings, saying, I tread under my foot
Platoes pride: it is observed that he did this majori festu, with greater
pride: And as one sometimes said, a man may be as proud of a Cloakebagge which
he carries behind him, as Cardinal Campeius was of his Sumpter-horse, that
followed after him; and yet that pride of his, might be of no better then of
Brick-bats when all was known, what show soever it made unto the people. And
men of generous minds, and parts, and means answerable, are many times found,
through the grace of God, more truly humble, than many a base fellow, that has
nothing to be made reckoning of but his own conceit. As the fly sitting upon
the Cart wheel in a dry Summer, said, see what a dust I make. Saint Paul's
righteousness which he speaks of, Phil. 3. I take to be better than the
virtue of any Philosopher, which yet he accounted but dung, that he might win
Christ. But by the way I observe how liberal these men are, in acknowledging
the gifts of God in gross, which they will be found utterly to deny if they be
examined upon them in particular. As for example, Moral virtues (we commonly
say) are Habitus acquisiti, acquisite habits, and that by frequentation of
consimilar acts, whereupon the habit arises naturally: Now do these men
maintain that God is the Author of these acts, otherwise than by concourse,
working in them, (...) velle and facere modo velint? I can show it under the
hands of some of them in express terms. Now I pray you, is not God the Author
of every evil act after this manner, as well as of any good, by their own
confession? for they grant that God concurres to every sinful act, and works
(...) velle and facere thereof also, modo homines velint. Who then is so simple
as not to observe, that they make God the Author of virtues after no other
manner, than they make him the Author of vices: Yet they are content to talk
liberally of the gifts of God, only to cheat the simple; I mean as many as are
not acquainted with their juggling: as for us we maintain, that God
determines the will, not only to the substance of a good act by determination
natural, but also to the goodness of it by determination supernatural: as for
example, no virtuous act is truly good, but as it is performed out of the love
of God, but what love? Out of such a love of God, as is joined with the
contempt of himself (judge you whether such a love may be performed by power
of nature) and this amor usque ad contemptum sui, Gerson makes to be the
character of the child of God: like as amor sui usque ad contemptum Dei, he
make the character of a child of the Devil. But to draw to an end of this
confused discourse, wherein are clapped together gifts of nature, seven whereof
are reckoned up as creation, sustentation, preservation, health, strength,
beauty and wisdom; and gifts of grace, and that either purchasing salvation as
Christ, or applying salvation, which are of four forts. 1. The Ministry of the
word and Sacraments, 2. Gods patience, 3. Illumination of the mind, 4. The
plantation of many excellent virtues, eight whereof are particulated, as 1.
knowledge, 2. faith, 3. repentance, 4. fortitude, 5. liberality, 6. temperance,
7. humility, 8. chastity, (which by this time I have gotten by heart ere I am
aware, I am so beaten to it, through a tedious discourse) of all which hand
over head, it is affirmed that either God means them not to them that enjoy
them, but as they are mingled with the elect, which has no color as I can
perceive, save of the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, for is it sober to
impute to any, to say that creation, or preservation, or health, strength,
beauty, wisdom, or Christ himself, or Gods patience, or illumination of mind,
or the virtues he speaks of; as knowledge, faith, repentance, fortitude,
liberality, temperance, humility, chastity, are not given to any, but as they
are mingled among the elect? Or that they are given for their hurt: touching
this last I answer in brief, that it is a very absurd thing to say, that God
gives any of these gifts to man to this end, that they may by occasion be hurt
by them: but God both gives them, and (in case they prove an occasion of harm,
of sin unto them) he permits them through occasion from them to sin, and
therein to presevere (as touching Reprobates) to damn them for their sins,
to the manifestation of his own glory, in the way of justice vindicative: as
also hereby, the more To declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of
mercy which he has prepared unto glory. Romans 9. 23. When they shall find, that
had not God put a gracious and merciful difference between them and others,
Christ had been a rock of offense, as well unto them as unto others: the
Gospel had been a savor of death unto death to them, as well as others. All
other gifts which God has bestowed upon them, look in what sort they have been
an occasion of falling unto others, so they might have been in like sort, an
occasion of falling unto them also: for it is as true as 2 Cor. 1. 15, 16.
the word of God is true, that the Gospel is a savor of death unto death to
some: and that Christ was set up as well for the falling of some, as for the
rising of others: yea a rock to fall upon to both the houses of Israel, and as
a snare, and as a net to the Inhabitants of Luke. 2. 34. Isai. 8. 18.
Jerusalem, and many among them shall stumble and shall fall, and shall be
broken, and shall be snared, and shall be taken. And that as many as stumble at
the word, and are disobedient, they were thereunto ordained. And the holy
Prophet wanted not faith when he delivered this execration, 1 Peter. 1. 8.
Psalm. 69. 22.
let their table be a snare before them, and their prosperity their ruin. And
how poorly this Author labors to charm the energy of these and such like
passages, let the indifferent judge by that which is delivered. As for the last
of an absolute decree, cutting off and rejecting some from grace and glory, I
will end this with representing the sottish condition of this Author, herein
parbreaking his stomach, without all judgment and sobriety. First observe, how
he claps together grace and glory, as if there were no difference in the manner
of Gods cutting off from the one and from the other. (whereas the manner of
Gods cutting off from the one, as it is maintained by us, is such as impudency
it self, has not the face to lay any thing to our charge therein.) As for the
manner of Gods cutting off from the other, as it is maintained by us, there is
indeed such absoluteness, as they malign bitterly, but withal it is so
clearly set down in holy Scripture, that their hearts serve them not with open
face to vent their spleen against it; and that is a chief reason of this
Authors declining the other controversies, and keeping himself only to this,
though I verily think, this has proceeded from the counsel of his abettors:
And for the same reason it is, that he claps together the cuting off from
grace and glory. But I will take leave to distinguish them, and answer
distinctly to both a part, to make their madness and unreasonablenesse more
apparent. And first I will speak of Gods absolute decree of cutting off from
glory. Now this is well known to be opposed to a decree conditional, as in the
end of the former Section this Author calls it, and uses it, as according to
their own doctrine, in opposition to ours, but most indiscreetely and
unlearnedly. This conditional will of God is to be understood, quoad res
volitas, as touching the things willed by God, so Vossius accommodates it in
his History of the Pelagian Heresy, as before I have showed, and makes it all
one in effect with Gods antecedent will: and D. Iaokson in his Book of Divine
providence treating hereof, professes in plain terms, that the distinction
of Voluntas antecedens and consequens, is to be understood, quoad res volitas,
as touching the things willed. Now the thing willed here, is the cutting off
from glory: now this Author together with his instructor, will have the will
of God concerning this, to be conditional, to wit, that it is Gods will, that
no man shall be cut off from glory, but for sin, now we say so too, and
profess, that like as God has not ordained that any shall be damned, but for
final perseverance in sin: so likewise God has not ordained that any man
shall be cut off from glory, but for final perseverance in sin. But whereas
the Remonstrants maintained, that there is no other decree of Reprobation but
this, and so likewise on the other side, that there is no decree of
Predestination, but such as is properly opposite hereunto, namely this, That
the decree by which God has purposed in Christ, and for Christ, to save those
that believe and repent to the end, is the whole and entire decree of
Predestination unto salvation. On this point the Contra-Remonstrants opposed
them: and accordingly our Britain Divines, make this the first erroneous
opinion, which they reject upon the first Article as touching election. And
likewise as touching Reprobation, the first erroneous opinion which they
reject, is this, That the decree by which God from all eternity, and that
irrevocably, has purposed out of lapsed mankind to leave none, but the
impenitent and incredulous in sin, and under the wrath of God, as being
aliens from Christ, is the whole and entire decree of reprobation. This I say
is the first erroneous opinion which our Britain Divines reject: which this
Author takes no notice of, but most unlearnedly discovers, that he understands
not the state of the question. Secondly, Now I come to Gods absolute decree of
cutting off from grace, this we willingly confess, is merely absolute and
unconditionall quoad res volitas, as touching the things willed by God; for the
things willed by God herein, are the denial of mercy, and grace, to regenerate
some; the denial of the grace of faith and repentance, concerning which the
Apostle professes, that God proceeds herein, merely according to the good
pleasure of his will, Romans 9. 18. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he
will he hardneth. Romans 11. 30. Even as they in times past have not believed
God, yet have now obtained mercy through their unbelief. Where to obtain
mercy, in the Apostles language, is plainly as much as to believe. Austin in
many places justifies this, Epist. 105. ad Sixtum. (...) ille credat, ille non
credat, cum ambo idem audiunt: etsi miraculum in eorum conspectu fiat, ambo
idem vident, altitudo est divitiarum sapientiae and scientiae Dei: cujus
inscrutabilia sunt judici^ and apud quem non est iniquitas: dum cujus vult
miseretur, and quem vult indurat. And near the end, Audiat haec and non
contemnat, quod si contempserit, ut contemneret inveniat se obduratum.
Enchirid. 98. Quis porro tam impie desipiat ut dicat, Deum malas hominum
voluntates quas voluerit, quando voluerit, ubi voluerit, in bonum non posse
convertere? Sed cum facit pre misericordia facit: cum autem non facit per
judicium non facit, quoniam cujus vult miseretur, and quem vult obdurat: Here
misereri eujus vult, is voluntates hominum quas vult in bonum convertere. See
lib. 1. De great. Christi, contra Pelag. and Caelest. cap. 46. He cites this
saying out of Ambrose. Sed Deus quem dignatur vocat, and quem vult religiosum
fecit. And thereupon breaks out into this exclamation. O sensum hominis Dei ex
ipso font gratiae Dei haustum, videte si non Propheticum illud est, miserebor
cujus misertus ero: and Apostolicum illud non volentis neque currentis sed
miserentis Dei: quia ut dicit etiam nostrorum temporum homo ejus quem dignatur
vocat, and quem vult religiosum facit. Here Misereri, Romans 9. 18. is all one
with Vocare, and Religiosum facere. And lib. 1. ad Simplician: cap. 2. Unde
datur intelligi, quod infra utrumque posuit, ergo cujus vult miseretur, and
quem vult indurat, ita sententiae superiori potest congruere, ut obduratio Dei
sit nolle misereri, ut non ab illo irrogetur aliquid quo sit homo deterior, sed
tantum quo sit melior non erogetur: quod si fit nulla distinctione meritorum,
quis non erumpat in eam vocem quam sibi objecit Apostolus, dicis itaque mihi,
quid adhuc conqueritur, nam voluntati ejus quis resistit: conqueritur enim Deus
saepe de hominibus sicut per innumerabiles apparet scripturarum locos, quod
nolint credere and recte vivere. So that the meliority of man, which God works
sine meritorum distinctione, does by Austins judgment consist in recte vivendo
and recte credendo, now here is the proper field of Scholasticall combat
betwixt us. Ecce Rhodus, ecce Saltus, let them try their strength to the
uttermost, to prove that the reason why God regenerates one, and not another,
why God bestows faith and repentance upon one, and not on another, is because
man has disposed himself by some good work performed by him, which another
has not: and when they have proved this, then will we truly confess, that
Pelagianismus est vere Christianismus, not Semi-Pelagianismus only, as it was
sometimes objected to Arminius. But proceed we to the particulars following,
for by this Doctrine of Gods absolute decree in opposition to their
conditional decree, this Author says;

1. Christ came not into the World to procure the salvation of them that
perish. I answer, That look in what sort he came into the World, to procure
the salvation of them that perish by their Doctrine, after the same sort he
came to procure their salvation by our Doctrine. For as it is their Doctrine,
that God decreed that for Christ's sake, salvation should redound to all that
believe, so is this our Doctrine also: but we deny that this is the whole
decree of predestination. We farther say, that God purposed to bestow Faith on
some, and not on others, and accordingly to send Christ to merit faith and
regeneration for them, which the Remonstrants in the Censura Censurae, do now
a days utterly deny; and if this Author, together with his instructor, think
that Christ was sent to merit faith and regeneration for all, then either
absolutely or conditionally; if absolutely, then all must believe de facto, and
be regenerated; if conditionally, then let them discover unto us this
condition, and avoid direct Pelagianisme if they can. 2. Indeed we think the
word is not sent to all that perish, we find it by manifest experience: in
reference to Ministry humane, and if they have so strenuously rubd their own
foreheads, as to feign out of their own heads a Ministry Angelical, let them
not expect that we should take their forgeries for Oracles Divine. 3. It is not
true, that where it is sent among them that perish, it is sent only that they
should slight it, it may be sent as well, ut proficiant ad exteriorem vitae
emendationem quo mitius puniantur: as for those that do slight it, and stumble
at it, being disobedient, Saint Peter plainly says, that hereunto they were
ordained. Let them therefore cry down Peter first, and then we will take it in
good part, to be cried down also. And if God sent his Son into the World to
be crucified by some; why might not he as well send the Preaching of Christ
into the World, to be slighted and despised by others: and Saint Paul has
professed, that the Preachers of it, are unto God a sweet savor in Christ,
even in them that perish: Yet we say not that this is the end why God sends it
to any: But we say God both sends it, and permits many to slight it, and to
persevere in the contempt of it, that he may manifest his glory in their just
condemnation, and declare thereby also the riches of his glory on the vessels
of mercy, whom he has prepared unto glory, by making it appear, what a
merciful difference God has put between them, and others. To the particulars
subordinate hereunto, I answer distinctly thus.

1. God deceives none in calling them to Salvation, in the name of his Son,
by the preaching of his Word, any more by our Doctrine, than by the Doctrine of
this Author: for as he maintains that God intends Salvation to all men, no
otherwise than in case they believe, so do we; and as we maintain that God
does fully intend to most the contrary, but no otherwise than in case they
believe not, so does he: only as touching the obtaining of faith and
regeneration, here is the difference between us: we maintain with Saint Paul,
that God has mercy on whom he will, in bestowing the grace of faith and
regeneration, and hardens whom he will by denying of it; so does not he: and
accordingly we say, Christ merited faith and regeneration for his elect. But
the Remonstrants openly profess that he merited faith and regeneration for
none at all. Hereby let the indifferent judge which of us makes God the
greatest deceiver they or we. And the truth is, this Author nor his instructor,
are willing to discover themselves in this point, for fear least nothing
should save them from breaking their necks, but to be received upon the
featherbed of Pelagianisme: so fearful a precipice is likely there to meet
with them; at the margent of this, there stands a wild quotation thus, Suffrag:
Britain, p. 43. as if the Author was loath his meaning should be found: or it
may be in transcribing the copy sent him he did mistake. But the Article upon
which these Theses are dilivered he utterly leaves out, like as in his former
quotation of the sufferages. But after much searching I guess I find that
which he refers unto on the 3. Article, 3. Position, which is page: 166. in
Synod. Dordare: and in the English sufferages of our Divines of Great Britain,
the position is this, whom God does thus prepare by his Spirit (as was
signified in the former position) through the means of the word, those does he
truly and seriously invite and call to faith and conversion. I make no question
but whatsoever God does, he does truly and seriously: And as for that sancta
simulatio which this Author formerly upbraided our Divines with, for
attributing it unto God, I have formerly discovered the false nature of that
aspertion, though he thought to walk in the clouds, that his juggling might not
be discovered. The explication of the position is added thus, By the nature of
the benefit offered, and by the evident word of God we must judge of those
helps of graces which are bestowed on men, and not by the abuse of them.
Therefore when the Gospel of its' own nature calls men unto repentance and
Salvation, when the incitements and Divine graces tend the same way, we must
not think any thing is done fainedly by God; this is proved too. All these I
willingly acknowledge neither do I know any of our Divines that deny it; and
more particularly I am willing to particulate wherein I take it to consist. God
hereby does signify that as many as believe shall be Saved: and so I say he
does seriously intend as much; as likewise, that none shall be saved without
faith; likewise God does signify, that he is well pleased, with faith and
conversion, in whomsoever he finds it, and herein he deals most truly and
seriously, likewise hereby he signifies his own will to make it their duty to
believe, which also is most true and serious. But none of all these I know full
well, will satisfy these with whom we deal; unless we acknowledge, that God
has a kind of velleity also, both of their conversion and salvation; but let
them show me any passage out of these Suffrages where this is acknowledged.
They add, If God should not seriously invite all whom he vouchsafes this gift
of his Word and spirit, to a serious conversion, surely both God should
deceive many whom he calls in his Sons name, and the messengers of the
Evangelicall promise might be accused of falsewitnesse, and those which being
called to conversion, do neglect to obey, might be more excusable. All this I
willingly grant, neither do I know any Divine of ours that denies it,
according to the three particulars formerly specifyed, wherein I desired to
explicate the truth and seriousness of all this, though those worthy Divines
of ours go not so far. As for their last clause which is this, For that
calling by the Word and spirit cannot be thought to leave men unexcusable,
which is only exhibited to this end, to make them unexcusable. I willingly
confess I do not sufficiently understand them in this. For albeit I have
already particulated diverse things werein the seriousness of this Divine
invitation does consist, (neither do I find any end of this Divine invitation
mentioned at all by these our Divines, whom from my heart I honor for their
just desert;) yet to me it seems most clear, that Revelation does so
necessarily take away excuse, upon pretense of ignorance, and admonition, and
invitation, as necessarily takes away excuse, upon pretense of not being
admonished and invited, that if God did invite them to no other end than this,
namely to take away these excuses, surely these excuses were clearly taken
away, and consequently so far they should prove unexcusable: But I guess
they take the denomination of inexcusable, not according to the signification
formal as it signifyes bereaved of excuse: but rather according to the
signification material, connotated thereby which is faultiness, and in this
sense I confess, it is ordinarily taken togeither with the condition of being
without excuse, and thus and in this sense I willingly subscribe unto them, and
therewithal show what I take to be their meaning, namely this, that if God,
making show that if they believe he will accept them, and that they shall be
Saved, did not indeed mean that he would in that case accept and save them,
then there were no reason why they should be accounted faulty and condemned for
their not believing. Thus in a desire exactly to conform my self to the
judgment of these worthyes of our Church, made choice of by our Sovereign to
be sent in so Honorable an Embassage, to countenance that famous Synod of the
most reformed Churches; I have made bold to interpret them, and to show my
concurrence with them, although I have not consulted with any of them upon that
point, which if I had; like enough I might have received better satisfaction:
And I hope they will not disdain that without consulting them I have
adventured thus to interpret them; and what do I know whether their judgment
may not prove to be the very same, and that in deed they had no other meaning.

2. My former answer will serve for this, Gods Ministers do offer Salvation
conditionally, to wit, upon condition of faith, neither, are any ordained to be
condemned, but in case of infidelity: yet I see the cunning carriage of this
Authors instructor, for he would feign fly from the absoluteness, or
conditionality of Gods decree, as touching the things willed quoad res volitas,
unto the absoluteness or conditionality of it: quoad actum volentis, as
touching the act of willing, although both Uossius practice, and this Authors
also in expressing his own meaning of Gods conditional will, and Doctor
Jacksons profession is to the contrary: namely that it is to be taken quoad res
volitas only, and not quoad actum volentis: but withal we teach, that Gods
Ministers do not only teach upon what terms on man's part, God will either
bestow salvation, or inflict damnation: but also they teach that upon no
terms on our parts, but merely according to the good pleasure of his own
will, does God show mercy unto some, bestowing faith and repentance upon them,
and by denying the same grace harden others, and they are the true witnesses of
God, equally in both.

3. Neither is there any just excuse hereby left to Reprobates, yet I confess,
this were a very plausible pretense, if we had no Oracles of God at all to be
the rule of our faith, concerning God, and his providence: but as we have, so
we fail not therein, of a direct answer hereunto, Romans 9. For after the
Apostle had professed, That God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardneth: v. 18. Forthwith he brings in this ojection upon the stage v. 19.
Thou will say then, why does he yet complain? for who has resisted his will?
And both Bellarmine and Arminians confess, that where obduration has place,
there is no power of obedience: And the Apostle himself implies no less in
that place. Now what does the Apostle answer hereunto but this v. 20. O man who
art thou, which disputest with God? shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it why have thou formed me thus? 21. Has not the Potter power over the
clay of the same lump to make one vessel to honor and another to dishonor?
as much as to say, if God be acknowledged to be our Creator, we must give him
leave to do what he will with his creature, for does not every creature do
what he will with the work of his hand? Every tradesman in his trade takes as
much liberty to do with the workmanship of his hands, as this comes to. And
Medina has not spared to profess, and that tanquam ex concordi omnium
Theologorum sententia: that if God should inflict the very pains of Hell upon
an innocent creature; he shall do no unjust act, though herein he should not
carry himself as Judex, Judge, but as Dominus vitae and mortis as Lord of life
amd Death. And we all know what power God gives us over inferior creatures,
to strangle some, to cut the throats of others, to knock down others, not
with reference to the moderation of their pain, but only to the wholesome
condition of their flesh unto us. And we know what power God executed upon his
own dear Son to break him for our iniquityes, on him to lay the chastisement
of our peace, that so by his stripes we might be healed. But let that pass,
let us try another way that may be answered unto this. Suppose not one shall be
condemned for want of faith, but only left to be judged by the covenant of
works, who sees not but that the same plea has place here as well as in the
former case, and God may be as well challenged for injustice, in condemning men
for breach of the law, who have no power to keep the law? And who sees not how
ready this Author is to justifye this plea, and consequently acknowledge that
every man has power to keep the law; and so to bring us back again to the
covenant of works, or to confound the covenant of grace with the covenant of
works: which indeed is their course throughout. For they maintain that every
man has universal grace for the enlivening of their wills, whereby they are
enabled to will any spiritual good whereto they shall be excited, and who
doubts but obedience to the law, and that in all perfection, is a spiritual
good: again they maintain that they can believe if they will, and so
accordingly do any good thing that they will: and indeed were not the will in
fault, I know no natural power defective in the performance of any good, that
a man has a will unto: this I can show under the hands of one of them, in a
manuscript sent unto me. And I have good reason to conceive there are more
hands in it than one. Thirdly consider, do thou complain thou had no power
to believe, but I pray thee tell me, have thou any will to believe? If thou
neither have, nor ever had any will to believe, what a shameful and
unreasonable thing is it to complain that thou have no power to believe? Saint
Paul had a most gracious will, but he found in himself no power to do that he
would, but what is Romans 7. 18, 19.
the issue of this complaint? To fly to the face of God? Nothing less! but to
confess his own wretchedness, and flee unto God in this manner, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? And receiving a gracious answer
concerning this, concludes with 24. 25.
thanks, I thank my God through my Lord Jesus Christ: if I have a will to
believe, to repent, I have no cause to complain, but to run rather unto God
with thanks for this, and pray him to give that power, which I find wanting in
me. And indeed (as I may add in the fourth place) this impotency of believing,
and infidelity, the fruit of natural corruption common to all, is merely a
moral impotency, and the very ground of it is, the corruption of the will:
therefore men cannot believe, cannot repent, cannot do any thing pleasing unto
God, because they will not, they have no delight therein; but all their delight
is carnal, sensual, and because they are in the Romans 8.
flesh they cannot please God: and because of the hardness of their hearts
they cannot repent, sin is to them as a sweet morsel unto an Epicure, which
he rolleth under his tongue. Fifthly, do thou blaspheame God, because of
Leprous Parents, thou art begot and conceived, and borne a leprous child? What
impudency then is it in thee, to challenge him for injustice, in that the
spiritual leprosy of thy first Parents, is propagated to thy soul. Lastly, if
thou renouncest the Gospel, what reason have thou to complain of want of
power to embrace it, so far as not to renounce it? have thou not as much
power to believe, as Simon Magus had? as many a profane person and hipocrite
has, that is, bred and brought up in the Church of God? Had thou gone so
far as they, and performed submission unto the Gospel, by profesing it,
surely thou should never be brought to condemnation for not professing of
it, but rather for not walking according to the rule of it; which thou
promisedst when first thou gave thy name to Christ. I come to the third.

3. Look what the Word promises, that do the Sacraments scale: the word
promises Justification and Salvation to all that believe, the same does the
Sacraments seal. As Circumsion Romans 4. 5. Is said to be the seal of the
Rightiousnes of faith so is Baptism: it did in our Saviors days and in the
days of his Apostles seal to the believer, and penitent Person the assurance
of the forgiveness of their sins; over and above Baptism is the Sacrament
of our birth in Christ, and the Lords Supper of our growth in Christ, each an
outward and visible sign of an inward and invisible grace. But what is the
grace were of the Sacrament is a sign? Is it a power to do good if a man
will? Call you that grace which is not so much as goodness, for certainly
goodness consists not in a power to do good if a man will, but in a definite
inclination of the will it self, to delight in that which is good, and to be
prone to do it. But this grace whereof Baptism is a sign, is suo tempore
conferenda, like as Circumcision was, even to those Jews who yet were not
regenerated, until they were partakers of the Gospel. Jam. 1. 18. Of his own
will has he begotten us by the word of truth. Writing unto the twelve tribes
of the Jews. And it is very strange to me, that regeneration should so many
years go before vocation. But this opposite Doctrine, and the sealing of a
blanke is nothing strange to me: I was acquainted with it twenty years ago,
and I seem plainly to discern the chimney from whence all the smoke comes.

4. As for other gifts bestowed on the Reprobates.

1. We willingly confess they shall never bring them to salvation, be they as
great as those who were bestowed on Aristotle, Plato, Aristides, Sophocles, and
the most learned moral and wise men of the World, that never were acquainted
with the mystery of Godliness: it was wont to be received generally for a
truth, that Extra Ecclesiam non est satus; But Arminians take liberty to coin
new Articles of our Creed.

2. But yet they may do them good, hereby they may Proficere ad exteriorem
vitae emendationem quo mitius puniantur. For certainly it shall be easier in
the day of udgement, for Cicero then for Cattline, for Augustus than for
Tiberius, for Trajan than for Heliogabalus.

3. And therefore it is certainly false that they are hurtful, and that they
proceed out of extreme hatred. And as for love, the Scripture teaches us that
Jacob was loved of God, and Esau hated, each before they were borne. Such is
the condition of all the elect as Jacob, of all the Reprobates as Esau; and in
Thomas Aquinas his judgment, Non velle alicui vitam aeternam est ipsum odisse.
Knowledge I confess of the mysteries of Godliness, where life and
conversation is not answerable, does increase men's condemnation: neither is God
bound to change the corrupt heart of any man: if they are workers of iniquity
Christ will not know them at the great day, though they have Prophesyed in his
name, and in his name cast out Devils; neither was it ever heard of, that the
graces of edification, and graces of sanctification must go together, and that
God in giving the one, is bound to give the other. As for being proud of them,
pride for ought I know, requires no other causes but domestical corruption:
but he that acknowledges God to be the giver of any gift, and has an heart to
be thankful for it, I make no doubt but he has more grace than of edification
only: certainly the gifts they have, sink them not to hell, but their corrupt
heart in abusing them. And has a man no cause to be thankful unto God for one
gift, unless he will add another? The Gentiles are charged for
unthankfulness Romans 1. But it seems by this Authors Divinity, it was without
cause, unless we will with this Author say, they all had sufficiency of means
without, and power within to bring them to salvation: and what had Israel
more? Or the elect of God more in any age? True, for according to the Arminian
tenet, an elect has no more cause to be thankful to God for any converting
grace, than a Reprobate. In a word, what good act wrought in the heart of man,
whether of faith or of repentance, or any kind of obedience, has man cause to
be thankful to God for, when God works it in him no otherwise than modo homo
velit, and so they confess he works every sinful act? Have they not in this
case more cause to thank themselves than to thank God? And unless we concur
with them in so shameless, unchristian, graceless, and senseless an opinion,
and in effect, if God converts the heart of man according to the mere pleasure
of his will, and hardens others: all the gifts that he bestows on man, are
censured by this audacious censurer, as Saul's bestowing Michal on David, Jaells
courtesy, and usurers bounty, etc. or a bait for a poor fish, as if God
needed any such course to permit him to sin in what kind or degree soever, to
expose him to any degree of condemnation; or as if the Creator has not power
to do what he will with his creature, any more than an Usurer has over his
poor brother, or Saul over David, or the like. Thus the consideration of his
third reason I have brought to an end. I come to the Fourth.

DISCOURSE. The Fourth Reason. It is prejudicial to Piety.
SECT. I.
MY Fourth General against absolute reprobation is, It is a hinderance of
Piety: it serves to discourage holiness, and encourage profaneness. It
makes Ministers negligent in Preaching, Praying, and every duty else, that
tends to the eternal good of their People. It makes people careless also of
hearing, reading, praying, instructing their families, examining their
consciences, fasting and mourning for their sins, and all other godly
exercises. In a word, it cuts asuder in my opinion the very sinews of
religion, and pulls away the strongest inducements to an holy life. Therefore
it is no true and wholesome doctrine. That it does so, it will appear these two
ways that follow. 1. It takes away (Hope) and (Fear) Hope of attaining any
good by Godliness; Fear of sustaining any hurt by wickedness: and so it
takes away two principal props of Religion. This reason may be resolved into
two branches. Hope and Fear uphold Godliness: Were it not for these it would
fall to ruin: by these are men strongly led on to virtue, and withheld from
vice.

1. Hope does (excitare) stir men up to begin, and (corroborare) strengthen
in the doing of any good action begun. By this hope of heaven did our Savior
stir up himself to endure the Crosle and despise the shame Heb. 12 By this
he heartned his Disciples to do and suffer for his sake Math. 5. 11. Abraham
left his Country and kindred at Gods call, because he looked for a City whose
builder and maker was God. Heb. 11. 8, 9, 10. Moses left all the pleasures and
treasures of Egypt, and endured afflictions with the people of God, because he
saw him that was invisible v. 27. The Martyrs endured racks, gibbets, Lions,
sword, fire, with a world of other torments, because they looked for a better
resurrection, v. 35. Paul endeavors always to keep a good conscience through
the hope of a blessed resurrection. Acts 24. 15. All the heroical acts of
active and passive obedience, have sprung from the hope of a weight of glory.

Husbandmen, Soldiers, Merchants, are all whetted on by hope to diligence in
their callings, as daily experience shows. Hope (says Aquinas) confert ad
operationem, and he proves it first by Scripture 1 Cor. 9. 10. He which Eareth
and Thresheth must Ear and Thresh in hope: And then by a twofold reason. 1.
From the Nature of hopes object, Bonum arduum and possible, some excellent good
attainable by industry. Existimatio ardut excitat attentionem, hope to get that
by pains, which is conceived to be a thing of worth, stirs up to pains
taking. 2. From the effect of hope, which is delectatio, an inward pleasure,
which the party that lives under hope is affected with by his hope. There is no
man which has an inward contentment and satisfaction of heart in the work that
he has to do, but goes on merrily. The hope of Heaven therefore is a great
encouragement to piety.

2. The fear of Hell also is a strong curb to hold men in from Wickedness,
and therefore (says one) God has planted in men a fear of vengeance, that by
it, as the ship by the rudder, the soul may be presently, turned aside from
any rocks, or gulfes, or quicksands of sin, when it is near them, and so
may steer its course another way. For this cause, fear of God, and abstaining
from evil, are often joined together in Scripture Job. 1. 1. Exodus 1. 17. And
the want of this fear is made the root of all licentiousness in sinning Genesis
20. 11. Nor does fear only hinder a bad action, but it promotes a good. It
hinders a bad action directly, because it is fuga mali, a flying from that
evil of misery, which is annexed to the evil of sin; and it promotes a good
action accidentally, because men think that they are never so safe from the
mischief which they fear, as when they are exercised in such employments as
tend to the getting of a contrary state.

Work out your salvation (says the Apostle) with fear and trembling;
implying, that the working out of salvation goes not on handsomely except the
fear of missing it be an ingredient to the work.

The second branch of this Reason is, That by the absolute decree Fear and
hope are taken away. For hope is properly exercised about Bonum futurum and
possibile haberi, some good thing that may be obtained, not a good thing that
must be obtained of necessity: and the object of fear is malum possibile
vitari, an evil that may be escaped. For metus est fuga mali, fear is a
flying from evil, and therefore supposes that the evil is avoydable; for no
man will fly from an evil that cannot be prevented, but will yield himself up
to it, as Caesar did to the murderers in the Senate house. Now by this decree
Heaven and Hell are not objecta possibilia, but necessaria. Heaven shall
unavoydably be obtained, by those that are elected, and Hell must as certainly
be endured, by those that in Gods eternal purpose are rejected. For men have
no power to alter their eternal states: all men by this decree, are precisely
determined ad unum, to one state, to necessary salvation, or necessary
damnation, without any power or liberty to choose whether.

And from hence the conclusion is clear, that the absolute decree, takes away
the chiefest inducements to holiness, and determents from wickedness, and
consequently hinders a Godly life exceedingly.

TWISSE. Consideration.
TRavailers report of the Territory of Venice, that the farther they go into
it, the stronger and stronger they find it. But such is not the condition of
this Authors discourse; for the farther I wade into it, the weaker and weaker
it appears. And to this I answer first in general, That our Britain Divines
make answer to the like crimination made against our Doctrine upon the 5.
Article p. 168. according to the English translation of it; saying, Both Gods
truth, and man's experience, easily wipe off this aspersion. For this Christian
persuasion of perseverance and salvation, not only in respect of its own
nature, but also according to the very event in the Church, does by Gods
blessing produce a quite contrary effect. First in respect of the thing it
self. The certainty of the end does not take away, but establish the use of
the means. And the same holy men, who upon sure grounds promise unto
themselves, both constancy in the way of this Pilgrimage, and fruition of God
in their everlasting home, know also that these are not obtained without
performance of the duties of holiness, and the avoydance of contrary vices:
And therefore they turn not their backs from these means, but industriously
embrace and prosecute them. 1 John 3. 3. Every man that has this hope in
himself, purifyeth himself, even as he is pure. Esaias 38. 5. When Hezechiah
had received that promise from God of an addition of fifteen years to his life,
he did not therefore neglect the use of medicines or meat, but, that this
promised event might be brought into act, he applied for the cure of his body,
the plaster which was prescribed unto him by the Prophet. The Apostle does
altogether reject this consequence of carnal security imputed to this
Doctrine, and that with a kind of indignation Romans 6. 1. Shall we continue in
sin that grace may abound? God forbid. How shall we which are dead to sin,
live any longer therein? As if S. Paul would intimate unto us, not only the
incongruity, but also the impossibility of such a sequel. 2. As touching the
event; true it is, that any the most wholesome truth of God, may be perverted by
the abuse of men. But upon this doctrine, we cannot acknowledge that there
grows any such inconvenience, no not de facto, that is, in the event it
self. Let us take a view of the reformed Churches, in which this confidence of
perseverance and inviolable adoption is believed and maintained. Do we find
that thereupon the bridle is let loose unto riot? That piety is trampled down?
We give thanks unto God through our Lord Jesus Christ, that amongst ours (who
enjoy this full persuasion of spiritual comfort, and are confident that there
is an inheritance which cannot be lost, laid up for them in Heaven) there is
not found less care of Godliness, nor less endeavor (so far forth as man's
infirmity will suffer) to live an unblameable life, then is to be found among
any sort of these, who pin their perseverance on their own free will, and
will not grant it to flow from any foregoing election of God. This may suffice
for answer to the generality of the crimination.

From the generality he descends to specialties. And in the first place he
urges, It takes away hope and fear. He begins with hope, and enlarges
himself in the commendation thereof out of Scripture, By this hope of Heaven,
did our Savior stir up himself to endure the cross, and despise the shame.
Heb. 12. He could not allege a more pregnant passage to cut his own throat,
and mortify the vigor of his argument; For in this place it depends upon such
a notion of hope, as signifies only a possibility of obtaining a future good,
and not a necessity of obtaining it, as afterward himself accommodates it,
and so he will have the hope which here he insists upon, such as is mixed with
fear; as if our Savior were in doubt of obtaining a Crown of glory. By this
he heartned his Disciples to suffer for his sake. Math. 5. 12. Rejoice and be
glad for great is your reward in heaven. Here also we have no hope mixed with
fear, whereupon he heartens them; but the very assurance of faith grounded upon
Christ's promise, and what greater assurance then this? The like promise for
assurance of faith is made Math. 10. 32. And indeed hope in the Scripture
phrase (though in these places there is no mention thereof) is but an
expectation of enjoying that whereof we have a certain assurance by Faith. The
object of faith being Verbum rei, of hope, res verbi, as Luther is said to
distinguish them. Such is the hope signified by our looking for the Savior
Phil. 3. 20. For therefore we look for him, because we are persuaded by the
assurance of faith, that he shall come, and that as a Savior unto us, as there
it is expressed in these words, Who shall change our vile bodies, and make them
like to his glorious body. Such is the hope mentioned, Col. 1. 5. as grounded
upon their true knowledge of the grace of Christ v. 6. And upon their Faith v.
4. For upon believing we rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.
And this joy is in hope of the glory of God, Romans 5. 2. Of the same nature is
that hope Tit. 2. 13. So Abraham's looking for a City whose builder and maker is
God. Heb. 11. 8, 9, 10. But was not this hope of his grounded upon assurance of
faith to enjoy it? So Moses his seeing of him that was invisible, was by the
eye of faith. And the scope of that whole Chapter, is for the commendation of
faith; a faith therefore they had of a better resurrection, and the certainty
hereof, was the certainty of faith. Now let every sober reader judge, which of
our doctrines does more tend to the justifying of a certainty of salvation, the
Arminians or ours.

That which follows of the Husbandmen, Merchants, Soldiers, is far of
another nature; their hopes of their ends have no ground of faith: many times
it comes to pass, that spem mentita seges, and though aliquis pendens in cruce
vota facit, yet most commonly it proves but a vain hope. Merchants many times
prove bankrupts; and Soldiers when they are most erected with hope of victory,
do sometimes most shamefully take the foil: What a proud message did Benhadab
send to Ahab 1 King. 20. 10. The Gods do so to me, and more also, if the dust
of Samaria be enough to all the people that follow me, for every man an
handful. But Ahab answered him saying. Let not him that girdeth his harness
boast himself as he that puts it off. At the battle of Lipsich upon Tillies
defeating of the Duke of Saxony, word hereof was dispatched with post have to
the Emperor, together with some of the Dukes Ensigns, and scoffs upon the
Duke himself; they were confident of beating Sweden and that so all Germany
should be theirs; but herein that old Lad reckoned before his host; the same
Post brought heavy news to Vienna at length, of a great discomfiture to the
Imperialists, and of the victorious Army of the King of Sweden. Yet a hope not
only upon weak, but sometimes upon very vain grounds, stirs up the spirit;
how much more upon certain grounds of good success, as that of the Apostle
Romans 6. Sin shall not have the dominion over you, for ye are not under the
Law but under grace, therefore let not sin reign over you, as much as to
say, Play the men, fight valiantly the Lords battles against sin and Satan,
for ye shall have the victory in the end.

The fear of Hell is a curb to hold men in from wickedness I willingly
confess, but the knowledge hereof is not natural, but by revelation divine,
which to carnal men who live by fight is of little force: Witness the story
of the Welch-man who robbing an honest man upon the high way, and being told by
him, that he should answer for it at the day of judgment, say thou me so
(quoth the thief) and will thou trust me till that day, then give me thy
cloak too. We find by experience, the most unclean person, if he meets with
never so beautiful a piece, yet if he knows she has the Pox; the fear of
infection will be of more power to restrain him then the fear of Hell. Yet
God by his word works in men, (even in carnal men) as a taste of the
sweetness of Heaven, so of the bitterness of Hell; the one to erect with
hope, the other to awe with fear: and in both respects they may be said (in my
judgment) to have a taste of the powers of the World to come. And like as the
Law was added because of transgression, that is, to restrain transgression, as
some expound it: so likewise the representation of Gods wrath and jealousy, may
in the sanctions thereof have good force in this. And in the Godly also I make
no question, but it is of good use; though the love of God, has in great
measure overcome that servile fear; yet as their faith is not so perfect, as
to be void of all doubting, so neither is their hope so perfect, as to be free
from all mixture of fear: But the chaste fear, the filial fear, fear of
displeasing God who has been so gracious unto them, is that fear which is
predominant in such. And even fear of Gods fatherly chastisements in this
world, is an hedge of thorns keeping them within the goodness of the Lord,
and far more forcible then the fear of Hell fire to the carnal Gospeller.
And this Author does carry himself very unlearnedly in confounding their
differences, and discoursing of the fear of God without distinction; As if the
fear of of God in Job. 1. 1. were the fear of Hell, and the fear of the
Midwives Exodus 1. 17. As if there were no difference between servile fear, and
a filial fear. Saint Paul was so confident of his salvation, that he
professes his persuasion, That neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, should be able to separate him from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. 38. Yet 2 Cor. 5. 11. Knowing
therefore (says he) the fear of the Lord we persuade men. Genesis 20. 11.
Abraham said, The fear of God is not in this place, therefore they will kill
me for my Wifes sake. But does this Author carry himself as it becomes a
Divine, to take the fear of God, wheresoever he meets with it, for no other
fear then the fear of Hell. Certainly the fear of God is as a fountain of
life to avoid the snares of death. Yet I presume though our Savior was nothing
affected with the fear of hell, yet was he never a whit the less forward to
all holy coversation; Nor Paul neither, though he professes, I know whom I
have trusted etc. The Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and preserve
me to his heavenly Kingdom.

That fear and trembling Phil. 2. 13. is not fear of hell, but humility,
standing in opposition to presumption of a man's own strength; as appears by the
reason, wherewith the Apostle enforces that exhortation of his, To work out
our salvation with fear and trembling: for says he, God it is that works in
you both the will and the deed, according to his good pleasure. And if the
working out of our salvation goes not on handsomely, except the fear of
missing it, be an ingredient to the work, as this Author discourses; then it
seems his fear of missing makes him go on more handsomely, in working out
his salvation, then either Paul the Apostle, or our Savior did: for I no where
find that our Savior feared the missing of it; no nor Paul neither, after his
conversion; though he knew full well, that conscionable carriage in his
vocation, was a necessary means, without which he could not obtain it; and
therefore professes, that he did beat down his body, and bring it in
subjection, least Preaching unto others himself should become a cast away.

We deny that by the absolute decree maintained by us, hope and fear are taken
away; and we prove it by an invincible argument. For undoubtedly the decree of
Christ's salvation, was absolute, yet did not this take away either hope or
fear: for it is recorded of him, That for the hope that was set before him, he
despised the shame, and also, that he was heard in that which he feared: though
sinful fear, and slavish fear, was far from him, as far as hell from
heaven. The object of Christian hope is not only a good thing possible to be
had, but certainly to be had. For we read of (...). Heb. 6. A full assurance of
hope, were it of a thing uncertain, how indecent were it for the Apostle to
compare it to an Anchor 1 John 3. 3. He that has this hope purges himself as
he is pure. Was this a wavering hope, grounded upon an uncertain apprehension?
Mark the verse immediately preceding, and consider whether it does not enforce
the contrary. Now are we the sons of God, but yet it is not made manifest
what we shall be: And we know (mark his assurance well) that when he shall be
made manifest, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. The
description of fear, is answerable to the description of hope. we were wont to
define the one by the expectation, appropinquantis boni, the other by the
expectation imminentis mali. Yet it is true the object of the one is such a
good, as in its own nature is possible to be obtained, and of the other, is
such an evil as is possible to be avoided. But like as eternal life is not
attainable without faith and repentance; so neither is damnation avoydable, but
by faith and repentance. And we willingly grant that both eternal life is
attainable, and damnation avoydable by faith and repentance, yet undoubtedly
the unpreventable nature of an evil, does no way hinder a man's fear, unless
he knows it to be unpreventable. Neither does the knowledge of the
unpreventable nature thereof hinder fear, but improveth it rather, in as much
as in such a case, there is no place for any hope to qualify the fear. And
this is farther apparent by the example of the Devils, of whom Saint James
says That they believe and tremble, surely they do not tremble the less,
because their torment is unpreventable by the appointment of of God: yet do
they not give themselves up to their sorrows, but cried out to our Savior,
What have we to do with thee thou Jesus the Son of God, art thou come to
torment us before our time: Caesar's case was not the case of fear, for fear
is the apprehension of an evil before it come; but Caesar was so far from
fearing, that though he were forewarned to take heed of the Ides of March (as I
remember) least they proved fatal to him, was so far from apprehending any
fear thereupon, that going that day to the Senate House, and meeting by the
way with him who had given him that warning, he called him by his name, and to
show his fearlesse condition said, The Ides of March are come; true Sr quoth
the other, but they are not yet past. The mortal wound in the Senate House was
given him before he feared it; for of thirty and odd wounds there received, it
is written that every one of them was mortal. His heroical spirit bare him
out nevertheless (not against the fear, for that was now out of season, but)
against the sense of mortal pain, in such sort, as not to commit any indecent
thing, in dying under the hands of so many Assassinates either in word or deed;
for not a word of distemper, was uttered by him, only to Brutus his near
Kinsman, and dear unto him, when he came upon him in like manner as the rest,
he said (...), and took care to gather his garments in such sort about ut
honest caderet. Heaven and hell are ordained by God as the portion, of the
righteous the one, of the wicked the other. I hope this Author will not deny
but that Heaven (according to his phrase) was unavoydably obtained by our
Savior, yet this nothing hindered his hope, but rather confirmed it by casting
out of fear. And the hope of Christ is the first thing this Author instanceth
in, while he amplifies the nature of hope; but in his large expatiation
thereon, according to his course he spent so much time, that he might well
forget it, before he come to the accommodation of it unto his Argument. And
indeed hope in Scripture phrase, is the looking for of Christ, and the glory he
brings with him; and what a senseless thing is it to conceive, that the more
sure we are of blessedness, the less we should expect and look for the
enjoyment of it? Does not our Savior bid his Disciples Luke 10. 20. not to
rejoice in this, that Devils are subdued unto them, but rather to rejoice in
this, that their names are written in heaven. Now let any sober man judge,
whether this joy shall be of force to expectorate our hope, and not rather to
confirm and increase it. As for Hell, I know none are assured thereof, as of
their due portion, but the Devils, yet they fear and tremble never a whit the
less for that. But men while they live on earth, not one of them in particular
that I know are, or have any just ground to be assured of their damnation. For
albeit faith in Christ may well be an assurance of man's election; yet nothing
but final perseverance in infidelity or impenitency, can be a just assurance
to any man of his damnation. As for the eternal states of men, they are not
existent, but only in Gods intention, and consequently to alter their eternal
states, is to alter Gods intentions. Now what Arminian of these days, that is
of any learning and judgment, dares boldly affirm, that it is in the power of
the creature to alter Gods intentions. In like sort with what sobriety can any
man deny, that every man is determined either to salvation or damnation, the
prescience of God being sufficient hereunto; and we acknowledge that none is
ordained by God to be damned, but for final perseverance in sin unrepented
of: none to be saved of ripe years, but by way of reward for his faith,
obedience, repentance. As for power and liberty to choose either, let that be
first rightly stated: Moses Deuteronomy. 30. 19. (or the Lord rather by him)
professes that he has set before them life and death; and exhorts them to
choose life, the meaning whereof is to choose that, the consequent whereunto is
life; now that was obedience unto the laws and holy ordinances of God. Now as
touching the power and liberty, to choose this, we say,

1. That this power was given to all in Adam, and we have all lost it in him
through sin: for we all sinned in him, as the Apostle in express terms
professes Romans 5. 12.

2. The power that we have lost in Adam, is no natural power, but a moral
power like unto that whereof the Lord speaks by the Prophet Jeremy. Jere. 13.
23. Can a Blackamore change his skin? Or the Leopard his spotts? No more can
you do good, that are accustomed to evil. Nor will any sober man judge that
such an impotency as this does make a man excusable? In the like sort our
Savior unto the Jews: John. 5. 44. How can ye believe that receive Honor
one of another, and seek not the Honor that comes of God only? So that this
impotency is merely moral, arising from the corruption of their wills. Had a
man a will to believe to repent, but withal had no power to believe and repent
though he would, here indeed were a just cause of excuse: but all the fault
hereof is in the will of man. This our Britain Divines at the Synod of Dort
upon the 3. and 4. Articles of the second Position express in this manner. The
nature of man being by voluntary Apostasy habitually turned from God the
creator, it runs to the creature, with an unbridled appetite, and in a
lustful and base manner commits fornication with it, being always desirous to
set her heart and rest on those things which ought only to be used on the by,
and to attempt and accomplish things forbidden. What marvel then if such a
will be the bondslave to the Devil. The will without charity is nothing but a
vicious desire, inordinata cupiditas. Aug: Retract. 1. 5. 3. Yet the same
Austin professes Lib. 1. de Genesis cont: Manich: cap. 3. credere possunt and ab
amore visibilium rerum and temporalium, se ad ejus praecepta servanda
convertere si velint. And ad Marcel. De spiritu and littra. proves at large
that fides in voluntate est. Only it is the grace of God to prepare the will,
ut velit, and so to increase with Retract. lib. 1. c. 10.
the gift of charity ut possit, so that there is a great deal of difference
between posse si velit, and posse simpliciter, in Austins judgment posse si
velit is less then velle, but posse simpliciter, is more then velle. 4. Lastly
what means this Author to discourse thus hand overhead of power and liberty to
choose whether as if (whatsoever they pretend) their true meaning were, that
man has power to believe and repent without grace. For as for power to believe
and repent through Gods grace no man denies. Why then does he not try his
strength on this point which indeed is the critical point of these
controversies, and wherein it will clearly appear, whether they differ one jot
from the Pelagians. For the question between the Pelagians, and the Catholics
in Austins days was not about the possibility of willing or doing that which
is good, but only about the act of willing and doing: And herein they granted
instruction and exhortation requisite. All the question was about the working
of his will, to will and do that which is good, as appears by Austin in his
book De gratia Christi contra Pelag: and Caelesti: cap. 6. And repeated again
toward the end, coming to an issue of the business, after he had discovered
much concerning Ambrose his opinieon thereabouts.

But whatsoever his premises be, in his conclusion he commonly speaks it home,
as herein saying, It is clear that the absolute decree, takes away the
chiefest inducements to holiness, and determents from wickedness, to wit,
because it takes away hope and fear; whence it follows, that seeing Christ
had hope of heaven, he was not absolutely destinated unto glory. And seeing the
Devils are said to believe and tremble, therefore certainly their damnation is
yet preventable, although there is yet this maine difference between reprobate
men on earth, and Devils, that though the Devils are assured of their
reprobation, yet no man either is, or can by any ordinary way be assured of his
reprobation. I conclude thus, This his Discourse tends mainly against all
certainty of Salvation: whence it follows, that either he had no certainty of
his salvation while he was with us, or if he had, it stands him upon now to
profess that he has utterly lost it.

DISCOURSE. SECT. II.
2. THe injuriousnesse of this Doctrine to Godly life, may farther appear by
these considerations that follow, one depending upon another.

1. Absolute and peremptory decrees are inevitable, whatsoever the things be
about which they are exercised; and men's everlasting states, if they be
absolutely determined, are altogether undeclinable. Stat sali lex
indeclinabilis, the law of destiny is undeclinable. And the reason is, because
it has an inevitable cause, the adamantine decrees of Allmighty God, which are
indeclinable two ways.

1. Irreversible, liable to no repeal (as the Statutes are which are made in
our Parliaments:) but sarre more unalterable then the Laws of the Medes and
Persians. As I have spoken so will I bring it to pass: I have purposed, and I
will do it. Esaias. 46. 11. Men do many times bite in their words again,
because they do utter things rashly, and do repeal their Statutes and
Ordinances, because they see some inconveniences in them, which they could not
foresee: but God never alters or calls in his absolute decrees because they are
all made with great wisdom and foresight.

2. Irresistible. It lies not in the power of any creature to disanull them.
Who has resisted his will? Romans 9. 19. Our God is in Heaven: he does
whatsoever he will: Psalm. 115. 3. Whatsoever is once determined by his absolute
will is no ways alterable by the will of man. It is more possible for a man to
hinder the rising of the Sun, or to stay his course in the Heaven, to stop
the revolutions of the year, and overturne the whole course of nature, then to
make the least alternation in any of Gods absolute decrees.

2. Men's actions about ends, and things determined by an absolute decree are
vain and fruitless; and the reason is, because they cannot make them
otherwise then they were determined to be; and therefore in vain do men
labor to obtain Everlasting Life and avoid Eternal Death, if there be noe
liberty and power in their hands to choose Life or Death, but must of necessity
take that which is assigned them, be it Life or Death; for by their labor they
effect just nothing; for if they be absolutely appointed to destruction, their
hearing, reading, praying, almes-giving, and mourning for their sins cannot
possibly procure their Salvation; damned they must be. And if they be
absolutely ordained to Savation, their neglect of holy duties, their ignorance,
their love of pleasures and continuance in a course of ungodliness, cannot
bring them unto damnation; they must be Saved: If somany Souls in a Parish be
in this manner decreed to Heaven or Hell, the Minister Preaches in vain, and
the people hear in vain. For there cannot one Soul be Saved, for all their
pains, which is ordained to Hell, nor one Soul be cast away by their
negligence, which is appointed for Heaven. It is in vain for thee (says
Christ to Saul) to kick against the pricks: (i.) to endeavor by thy
persecutions and slaughters to root out my Church in the world; because the
preservation of it is absolutely Act. 9. 5.
decreed in Heaven. Teaching us by that speech, that a man's labor in any thing
whatsoever, is never profitable, except it be exercised about an end attainable
thereby, and without it not possible.

3, Men are not willing to be employed in fruitless actions if they know it.
I so run (says the Apostle) not as uncertainely; so fight I, not as on that
beats the Air: but I keep under my 1 Cor. 9. 25.
body and bring it into subjection, least that by any means, when I have
Preached unto others I my self should be a castaway. The meaning is, I
endeavor to keep Gods commandments, I fight with the tentations of the
Divill the allurements of the world, and mine own corruptions, I keep my body
low by watchings and fastings, and other severe acts of holy discipline. But
Cui bono? do I all this at random? Uncertain whether I shall get any good,
or prevent any mischief hereby? No, but I do this, as one that is sure that
by so doing, I shall obtain Eternal Life, and otherwise I cannot escape
Eternal Death: intimating in these words the common disposition of men, which
is to labor where some proportionable good is to be gotten, or evil
prevented, otherwise to spare their heads and their hands too.

TWISSE Consideration.
TO talk of the decrees divine as things evitable or inevitable, is very
absurd: for things denominated evitable or inevitable are only things to come,
not yet existent; but such are not decrees divine, they are as everlasting as
God himself without any beginning of duration. As for the things decreed by
God, they are of a double nature. For God has decreed some things to come to
pass necessarily, other things to come to pass contingently. Now those things
that come to pass contingently do so come to pass (and that by the decree of
God) as joined with a possibility not to come to pass, and consequently to
come to pass so as joined with a possibility to be avoided. Such are Salvation
and damnation in as much as God has annexed these as rewards, unto final
perseverance in faith and repentance, the one; unto final perseverance in
sin unrepented of, the other. This is the undeclinable law of Gods decree,
that, whosoever believes shall be Saved Mar. 16. 16.
and whosoever believes not shall be damned. But we do not say, that this is
the whole decree of predestination and Reprobation, with the Remonstrants, and
with this Author. But that there is another decree of God, the effect whereof
is as undeniable, as the effect of the former, which this Author dissembleth
throughout: and the effect of this decree is not conditional like unto the
effects of the former decree, but absolute. And it is the more strange that
this Author should so much insist upon the effects of the former, and nothing
at all on this: whereas the effects of the former nothing at all serve his
turn, but through mere confusion: for he carries the matter so as if we
maintained that God does decree to dispense Salvation and damnation absolutely
according to the meare pleasure of his will, and not conditionally as he finds
his creatures either dying in faith or dying in sin, which is most untrue.
And yet his usual course to relieve himself in the case of impertinency and
extravagancy is to fly to the effects of the other decree which we willingly
confess to be absolute; yet has he no appetite to deal directly in the
discussing thereof. Now we profess that as God according to the mere pleasure
of his will bestows faith and repentance on some and denies it to others,
according to that of the Apostle. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he
will he hardens. Romans 9. 18. So God from everlasting decreed, according to
the mere pleasure of his will to bestow the gift of faith and repentance on
some and deny it to others. All the decrees of God we acknowledge to be
unchangeable from within, irresistible from without. Yet this Author applies
these attributes only to Gods absolute decrees, intimating that it is otherwise
with Gods conditional decrees: which conceit of his savoureth of the same
learning and judgment with the rest. Besides it is his course hand over head to
talk of the distinction of Gods decrees, into decrees absolute, and decrees
conditional: whereas the decrees of God as touching the acts of God willing,
admit noe such distinction; the act of Gods will being allways absolute and
never conditional, as both Piscator theologically has proved against Uorstius
and Bradwardine most scholastically has demonstrated; and by other reasons may
be demonstrated and made as clear as the Sun; some of which reasons I have
formerly mentioned in this discourse: only quoad res volitas as touching the
things willed this distinction has place; as both Dr Jackson in his book of
Providence acknowlegeth of that distinction of Voluntas antecedens and voluntas
consequens (which by Uossius interpretation is all one with voluntas absoluta
and voluntas conditionata) namely that it is to be understood only quoad res
volitas. And in the same sense is voluntas conditionata interpreted, as appears
by the practice of Uossius Histor. Pelag p. 638.
and of this Author throughout. Now in this sense we do not acknowledge that
Gods decrees of Salvation and damnation are absolute, but merely conditional;
so that this Author does but fight with his own shadow in this his
argumentation, making as shameful a mistake as ever Don Quixot did, when he
conceived the Barbars basin to be the Helmet of Mambrino, and fell furiously
upon him, in a zeal of martial glory, to recover Spolia opima, so fat and
rich spoils. By the way observe, to alter Gods absolute decrees, is no other
thing, then to alter that which is once determined by Gods absolute will. For
after this different manner does this Author express one and the same thing in
this Section. Now consider, is not the rising of the Sun the course of
Heaven, the revolution of the year, the whole course of nature, some of these
things which are determined by Gods absolute will? With what giddiness then
does he affirm that to hinder or stay or overturne any of these is more
possible then to make alteration in Gods decrees; seeing to make alteration in
Gods decrees is but to alter things which God has once determined by his
absolute will. But as for Salvation and damnation these are not determined by
God, like as the rising of the Sun, the course of Heaven the revolutions of
the year, and the whole course of nature. For these are determined by God to
come to pass absolutely; but the Salvation or damnation of man are determined
by God to come to pass conditionally.

2. And accordingly man's ends are not determined by an absolute decree, like
unto the rising of the Sun. For the rising of the Sun is by God determined
to come to pass absolutely, so are not the special ends of men, to wit,
Salvation and damnation (for these are the ends of men which this Author
speaks of) these (as I said) are determined to come to pass not absolutely
but conditionally: And therefore men's actions hereabouts, are not vain and
fruitless: And the reason is because man's Salvation is determined to befall
him only in case he believe and repent and become studious of good works: In
like sort damnation is determined to none of ripe years, but in case he gives
off all care of faith repentance and good works. Did God determine a man shall
be Saved whether they be good or evil, like as he determined the Sun should
rise whether men sleep or wake, whether they be idle or well occupied (for so
he makes his Sun to shine and the rain to fall upon the just and unjust)
then indeed man's actions in furthering their Salvation were vain and
fruitless. But the Antecedent is a notorous untruth. For our Savior has
professed in express terms that whosoever believes shall be Saved, and
whosoever believes not shall be damned. As for the liberty and power of a man
to perform faith and repentance, whether this be granted unto all? Is an other
question, which this Author might have discussed had it pleased him, and taken
upon him to maintain universal grace; but he declines this throughout, like
as others of this sect too, fearing therein some precipice. And herein we are
willing to grant that God has absolutely determined that some shall believe
and repent, as he has determined the Sun rising, not upon any condition in
man, but according to the mere pleasure of his will, bestowing the grace of
faith on some, and denying it to others. For if God did bestow faith on man
upon condition of some precedent work in man, then grace should be given
according to men's works (that is in the phrase of the Ancients) according to
men's merits, which is direct Pelagianisme, and condemned in the Synod of
Palestine above twelve hundred years ago. But this Author carries himself
very preposterously, thus confounding two questions into one: the one, Whether
salvation be determined by God, to be conferred absolutely on man? Which we
deny as much as himself does. The other is, Whether faith and repentance be
determined by God to be conferred on man conditionally? Which we maintain; and
wonder not a little that this Authors stomach (working like the raging Sea)
chiefly against this, yet dares not come to the debating of this, no nor so
much as in plain terms to speak out his opinion, and profess, that the
reason why God bestows faith on one, and not on another, is because he finds
some disposition or work in him, on whom he bestows faith, which he finds not
in another to whom he denies it. Yet he goes on most ridiculously in the same
tenor, saying. If they be absolutely appointed to destruction, their hearing,
reading, praying, almesgiving, and mourning for their sins, cannot possibly
procure their salvation: damned they must be. But we still deny that men are
absolutely appointed to destruction, we willingly grant the elect are
absolutely appointed unto grace, namely to have regeneration, faith and
repentance to be conferred upon them, and that absolutely, not upon any
foregoing condition performed by them, but according to the mere pleasure of
God; but as for salvation, that is appointed to be bestowed upon them, only by
way of reward of foregoing faith, repentance, and good works, observe by the
way, how he considers not the contradictious nature of that which he imputes
unto us. As first that we deny man to have any liberty or power to choose life
and death. And secondly, that we maintain, That their hearing, reading,
praying, almesgiving, and mourning for their sins, cannot possibly procure
their salvation; which is to imply, that they have power to hear, read, pray,
give alms, and mourn for their sins, and consequently that they have power
to choose life or death. For to choose life or death, is no other then to
embrace such courses, as by the ordinance of God, lead to life or death. Now
such are hearing, reading, praying, giving asmes, and mourning for sins; for
these courses are the way to everlasting life. Yet as touching the latter, well
we may say that Reprobates can neither hear, nor read, nor pray, nor give
alms as they ought, nor mourn for their sins; yet surely we are so far from
saying, that these courses cannot possibly procure salvation, that on the
contrary rather, we are ready to profess that these courses rightly used,
shall infallibly procure salvation; for there is none more precious mourning,
then to mourn for sin; and our Savior has pronounced them blessed, adding,
that they shall be comforted. Was it ever heard amongst us, that men should be
damned for reading, hearing, praying, and mourning for their sins? Yet the
word of God teaches us, that men may houle, yet be far enough off from
mourning for their sins, as Hos. 7. 14. They cried not unto me when they
houled upon their beds: they assembled themselves for corn and wine, and they
rebelled against me. And if men be damned notwithstanding such mourning, I
should think it is nothing strange. Of the same tenor is that which follows.
If they be absolutely ordained to salvation, their neglect of holy duties,
their ignorance their love of pleasure, and continuance in a course of
ungodliness, cannot bring them to damnation; as if this were our doctrine:
whereas to the contrary we maintain, that from election flows holiness. Ephesians.
1. 4. Who has elected us in Christ, that we should be holy. And faith, Acts
13. 48. As many believed as were ordained to everlasting life. And 2 These. 2.
13. God has elected you unto salvation, by sanctification of the spirit, and
faith of the truth. And indeed our profession is, That Gods purpose is to
bestow salvation by way of reward of faith, repentance, and good works: And
accordingly there is no other assurance of election, then by faith and
holiness. 1 These. 1. 3, 4. Remembering the work of your faith, the labor of
your love, and the patience of your hope, knowing beloved brethren, that ye are
elect of God. And therefore Saint Peter exhorts Christians, To make their
election and vocation sure, by joining virtue with their faith, and with virtue
knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and with temperance patience, and
with patience Godliness, and with Godliness Brotherly kindness, and with
Brotherly kindness Love. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. 10. But it were pity this Author
should have liberty denied him servire scaenae, and to execute his Historical
part in conforming our Doctrine to the Heresy of the Predestinatians, (so
called) as it is recorded by Sigebert. And indeed the very Doctrine of Austin,
was charged with the same crimination: For albeit Sigebert professes that this
Heresy arose ex Augustini libris male intellectis: out of Austins Book not
rightly understood; yet the learned Archbishop of Armach, had made it
manifest, that this very crimination was charged upon Austins doctrine. Histor.
Gottesc. page 22. And that out of the beginning of the 6. book Hypomnestican or
Hypognosticon. The words are these, and I pray mark it well, whether it be not
punctually the very objection which this Author makes in this place: Credere
nos vel praedicare sugillatis (quia cum lege Dei and Prophetis cum Evangelio
Christi ejusque Apostolis Praedestinationem dicimus) quod Deus quosdam hominum
sic praedestinet ad vitam regni caelorum, ut si nolent orare, aut jejunare, aut
in omni opere divino vigiles esse, eos omnino perire non posse, nec prorsus sui
debere esse sollicitos, quos Deus, quia voluit semel jam eligendo
praedestinavit ad vitam: Quisdam vero sic praedestinavit in Gehennae paenam, ut
etiam si credere velint, si jejuniis and orationibus omnique se voluntati
divinae subjecerint in his Deum non delectari, and vitam illis aeternam in toto
dari non posse; sic electione praedestinatos esse ut pereant. Judge I pray
whether this be not the very objection charged upon the doctrine of Austin,
which this Author charge upon our doctrine. And indeed that most learned
Bishop shows, how that albeit, the Predestinatian heresy is pretended by
Sigebert to have risen out of Austins books not rightly understood, as also by
Tyro Prosper (Ancient to Sigebert) as he is set forth in Print; yet Tyro
himself plainly professes, that the Heresy mentioned orta est ab Augustino,
rose from Augustine himself, as appears by the Manuscripts of that Author,
which that learned Bishop had searched, one found in Bennet College in
Cambridge, and another in the Kings Library: whereby it is apparent, that this
pretended Heresy of the Predestinatians (no Author thereof being ever known to
the world) was a mere nickname devised by the Remnants of the Pelagians, and
reproachfully cast upon the doctrine of Austin, as now a days it is upon our
doctrine, which is the same with Austins. As for the Ministers Preaching in
vain in some sense, and in some cases; this is nothing strange to them that
have their eyes fixed on Gods oracles, and not on the oracles of their own
brains. For the Prophet Esaiah thus complains, and that as some conceive in
the person of Christ, Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have spent my
strength for naught, and Isai. 49. 4.
in vain, yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God.
And Jerem. 8. 8. How dare ye say, we are wise, and the love of the Lord is with
us? Lo certainly in vain made he it, the pen of the scribe is in vain. And
Ierem. 6. 29. The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed of the fire: the
founder melts in vain: for the wicked are not plucked away. Reprobate silver
shall man call them, because the Lord has rejected them. And like as the
sowing of seed is sometimes in vain. Levit. 26 16. So why may not Preaching be
in vain, which is a sowing of seed also. Yet in respect of Gods end, it is not
in vain: For he has the ends he aimed at; for even in them that perish, there
arises a sweet savor unto God 2 Cor. 2. 15. As well as in them that are
saved. And if they stumble at the word being disobedient, Saint Peter tells
us, that hereunto they were odained 1 Pet. 2. 8. Yea and Austin tells us, that
even Reprobates by the Ministry of Gods word, are sometimes brought ad
exteriorem vitae emendationem, quo mitius puniantur. And as for the Preachers
of the Word, their labor is not in vain in the Lord. 1 Cor. 15. last. And
Esaias 49. 4. My judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. For even
Christ himself was forsaken of many. John 6. Yet was that no disparagement to
him before God. They desire indeed that all men might be saved that are
partakers of their Ministry, as they are bound in charity, but with submission
to the will of God, so that finally their desires in the issue are terminated
only in the elect. They became all things to all men, that they may save some.
1 Cor. 6. And who are they let Paul speak. I endure all things 2 Timothy 2. 10.
for the elect sake. As for the hearers themselves, as many as are elect, they
believe by it sooner or later and are brought to repentance. 2 Timothy 2. 25. And
finally to salvation, That thou may both save thy self and them that hear
thee, (says Paul to Timothy) So that 1 Timothy 4. 16.
to them surely it is not in vain; And as for Reprobates they are convicted by
it of their unbelief, Suffrag. Britt. on the 3. and 4. Articles. Excuse is
taken from them for they cannot plead that they never heard the Gospel, whereby
me^ are admonished to repent Act. 17. 30. Thereby to excuse themselves: yea and
sometimes they may be the better for it, in respect of an outward co^formity,
only it is in vain in respect that salvation is not obtained by them though the
Gospel and the Ministry thereof be a means te^ding thereunto, in as much as it
opens the way of salvation, and discovers all false ways. But pains for
obtaining salvation, and Hell, are ill joined together; For therefore hell is
their portion because they neglect the means of salvation, and take no pains
about it at least good pains. For our Savior plainly tells us of some that
they shall seek to enter in at the straight gate, and shall not be able Luke
13. 24. It seems they took some pains, though they were not able to enter. We
are accounted Predestinarian Heretics for saying so much; but I hope he will
not reckon our Savior too amongst the number. So Esaias 58. 2. Yet they seek
me daily, and will know my ways, even as a Nation that did righteously and
had not forsaken the statutes of their God: They ask of me ordinances of
justice. They will draw near unto God, saying. Wherefore have we fasted and
thou see it not? We have punished our selves and thou regardest it not. Here
is devotion and pains too, in the way thereof, but I think they had never a
whit the better interest in heaven for this. Does this doctrine also savor of
the Predestinarian heresy? As for that pretended passage out of Acts 9. It is
in vain for thee to kick against the pricks, I find no such saying of Christ to
Saul but (...) an hard thing; for shall he not wound himself that does so,
more then hurt the pricks themselves? So was Paul by those persecuting courses
of his, in the highway to damnation; yet it is true also, Gods Church is
nothing damnified by the persecutions and martyrdomes of Gods Saints. For
sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae; one is cut off, but many rise up in the place
of a few. Like as a seed of corn falls into the ground and dies; but a blade
springs out of that one that dies, and brings forth an ear of many grains. By
the way I am wondrous glad to hear the acknowledgement of a precious truth, to
break forth out of the mouth of this Author ere he is aware, namely, That the
preservation of Gods Church is absolutely decreed in heaven. For mark I
beseech you, wherein the preservation of Gods Church consists. 1. One is in
preserving them that are called from Apostasy. If this be absolutely decreed,
then the perseverance of men in the state of grace is absolutely decreed; and
consequently it is absolutely maintained; And if perseverance in faith be
absolutely maintained; then faith it self was absolutely wrought, and
absolutely decreed to every one that enjoys it. 2. Another is the restraining
of Tyrants from persecuting the professors of Christ: If this be absolutely
decreed, then the free actions of men are absolutely decreed by God: for to
abstain from persecuting is undoubtedly a free action of man. 3. But in case
both Tyrants are permitted to rage, and many are permitted to fall away; And
all are mortal and must dye; therefore the next effectual means of
preserving the Church, is the raising of others in their place to profess the
Gospel. Now this is wrought by the effectual calling and converting of men
unto faith in Christ, and consequently the effectual calling and converting of
men is absolutely decreed by God. Thus truth has prevailed over the mouth of
error, to make it testify for Gods truth and against error: Magna est
veritas, ut praevalebit. Here this Author has raised spirits against himself
improvidently; let him try how he can lay them, and conjure them down again.
3. I come unto the third. I willingly grant that men are not willing to be
exercised about fruitless actions; And as for the actions specified by Saint
Paul; as they were not fruitless to him; so I make no question but that they
are in like manner profitable to all that perform them, as Paul did, namely
the actions of mortification. We have Saint Paul's word for it, which is of some
force (if so be he be not reputed among the number of Predestinarian
heretics, as well as Austin and our Divines) If by the spirit you mortify the
deeds of the flesh, ye shall live. Endeavor Romans 8.
goes beyond desire: yet Nehemiah commends himself to God in this manner. We
that desire to fear thy name. And the holy Prophet Esaias. The desire of our
hearts is toward Nehem. 1. Es. 26. Heb. 13.
thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. And S. Paul. We desire to live
honestly. And to fight with the temptations of the Devil, the allurements of
the World, and a man's own corruptions, is undoubtedly a manifest token of a
true Soldier of Christ Jesus. And mortification in special; such need not
doubt, but that they shall crucify the flesh, with the affections and lusts.
For they that walk in the spirit, shall not fulfill Gal. 5. 1 Ioh. 5. Romans 16.
the lusts of the flesh; their faith shall give them the victory over the
world, and God in his good time will tread Satan under their feet.

DISCOURSE. SECT. III.
TO be exercised in fruitless affairs, it is both a folly and a misery. 1. A
folly, for, de necessari is nemo sapiens deliberat, says the Philosopher. And
our Savior speaking of things above our power; Cur estis solliciti? says he
to his Disciples, Mat. 6. 27. Luke 12. 25, 26. Why take ye thought about such
things? Which is as much as if he had said, It is an argument of folly in you,
to trouble your selves about such things, as lie not in your liberty. 2. A
misery in the opinions of all men, as the fable of Sysiphus implies, who (as
the Poets feign) is punished for his robberies in hell, with the rolling of a
great stone to the top of a sharp hill, where it cannot rest, but presently
comes tumbling down again. The Moral of that fable is, that it is a torment,
and a torment fit for Hell; for a man to be set about any work that is
fruitless and vain. Men will rather be exercised in high and hard
employments, that produce proportionable ends; then pick strawes, play with
feathers, or with Domitian, spend their time in flapping or killing of flies,
or do any other easy works, which end in nothing but air and emptiness,
except they be fools or selfe-tormentors. And therefore when Balaam once saw
that the Lord had fully determined to bless Israel, and that all his
Sorceries could not effect the contrary; he presently gave over, and set no
more enchantments; And reason teaches every man to do the like.

If any man were fully possessed with a persuasion that this temporal estate
were determined in Heaven, and that he should be worth just so much, neither
more nor less; he would conclude, that his care and pains could not profit
him, nor his idleness impoverish him: and so would be quickly persuaded to
take his ease. And if it were evident, that every Commonwealth had a fatal
period, beyond which it could not pass, and short of which it could not come,
and that all occurrences good or bad, were absolutely preordained by the
Almighty, then the King would call no Parliament, use no Privy Counsel: for
there would be no use of them at all. As once a famous Privy-Councellor told
our late Queen Elizabeth, men would neither make laws nor obey them, but
would take the Council of the Poet.

Solvite mortales ammos, curisque levate,
Totque supervacuis animum deplete querelis:
Fata regunt orbem, certa stant omnia lege.
From these three premises laid together, it follows directly, that the
doctrine of an absolute decree, which determines men's ends precisely; is no
friend to a Godly life. For if events absolutely decreed be unavoydable; if
men's actions about unavoydable ends be unprofitable; it in unprofitable
employments men will have no hand willingly: men that know and consider this,
will have nothing to do with the practice of Godliness. For their ends being
absolutely pitched and therefore unavoydable; they will conclude, that their
labor in Religion will be unprofitable, and so will not labor in it at all.

That which has been said, may be yet farther confirmed by two witnesses. The
one of them is by two witnesses. The one of them is our Calvin, who in his
Institutions has these words: Si quis it a plebem compellet; si non cred it
is, ideo fit, quia jam divinitus exitio praedestinati estis; is non modo
ignaviam Instit. lib. 3. c. 23. Sect. 14.
fovet: sed etiam in dulget malitiae. If any man (says he) should speak thus
to people; If there be any among you that believe not, it is because ye are
ordained to destruction; this man would not only cherish slothfulness, but
wickedness also. Which is as much to say (me thinks) as this; If a man should
set out the doctrine of absolute reprobation in its colors, and explain it to
a people in a clear and lively fashion, he would hereby open a door to
liberty and profaneness.

The other witness is a man of another stamp, the miserable Landgrave of
Turing, of whom it is recorded by Heisterbachius, that being admonished by his
friends, of his vicious and dangerous conversation Hist. lib. 1. de memor.
hist. c. 27. p. 38.
and condition, he made them this answer: Si praedestinatus sum nulla peccata
poterunt mihi Regnum Coelorum auferre: si praescitus nulla bona mihi illud
valebunt confer. If I be elected no sins can bereave me of heaven; if I be
a reprobate, no good deeds can help me to heaven. I conclude therefore that by
this opinion (which is taught for one of Gods principal truths;) Religion is,
or may be made a very great looser, which is my fourth general reason against
it.

TWISSE. Consideration.
DE necessari is nemo sapiens deliberat; This is true of things necessary by
course of nature, not of things necessary merely upon supposition of Gods
decree. For such things are as often contingent as necessary; For as he
decrees that some things shall come to pass necessarily, so he decrees that
other things shall be brought to pass contingently: As the buying of the
Prophets bones by Josiah, Cyrus his dimission of the Jews out of Babylon to go
to their own Country: the contumelious usages of Christ by Herod and Pontius
Pilate, together with the Gentiles and people of Israel, were necessary in
respect of Gods decree; it being expressly testified by the Apostles with one
mouth, that all these were gathered together against the holy Son of God, to
do what Gods hand, and Gods Counsel predetermined to be done. Act. 4. 28. Yet
who is so impudent as to deny, that all these did freely, whatsoever they did
against Christ. In like sort you know what was the course of proceedings
against Protestants in Queen Mary's days, when they were convicted by
Ecclesiastiques of such opinions, which they accounted heretical, and which
were made capital by Law of the Land: then they were delivered over unto the
secular power, to be put to death. So that herein, to wit, first in making such
bloody Laws. Secondly, in executing them for the establishment of Popish
Religion: The Kings gave their power to the Beast, that is, employed their
Regal power and authority to the countenancing of Romish Religion: this
undoubtedly was a contingent thing. Yet was this determined by God (as the
Scripture testifies Revel. 17. 17.) God has put in their hearts (that is in
the hearts of the ten Kings) to fulfill his decree, and to be of one consent,
and to give their Kingdom unto the Beast, until the word of God be fulfilled.
Again, suppose God has determined my salvation; yet if he has determined to
save me no other way then is revealed in his word, namely, by growing in 1 Pet.
3. Gal. 6.
grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: If he has made known
unto us that, without holiness no man shall see God. That a man in good time
shall reap, provided that he faint not, nor be weary of well doing. Who sees
not that a necessity of Godly life is laid upon all that will be saved. Now God
has revealed this latter expressly unto us in his word, but as for the
salvation of particular persons; we have no such revelation at all set down
unto us in Gods word, but in general thus. Whosoever believes shall be saved,
whosoever believes not shall be damned. Be thou faithful unto the death, and
thou shall receive a Crown of life. Whosoever continues unto the end shall be
saved. And good works (as Bernard says) are via Regni, though not causa
regnandi. Therefore if any man desire to come to the Kingdom of Heaven, he
must be careful to walk in the way that leads thither. The Word says not
to any man in particular. Thou shall be Romans 10.
saved, but, If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved. Such was not the promise made to Paul concerning the saving of them, who
were in the ship with him, but it proceeded in an ansolute form. Acts 27. 23,
24. There stood by me this night the Angel of God whose I am, and whom I
serve, saying. Fear not Paul, for thou must be brought before Caesar: and lo
God has given unto thee freely, all that sail with thee. Here is a manifest
signification of Gods decree and determination to save all that were in the
ship: yet did this make Paul or the rest negligent in using such means whereby
they might save themselves? It is apparent that it did not: For the Mariners
they thought to fly out of the ship; and to that purpose had let down the boat
into the Sea, under color as though they would cast anchor out of the
foreship, meaning to provide for themselves, and leaving others to shift for
themselves. But Paul perceiving this, and the dangerous condition of it unto
the rest, as that which would bereave them of the ordinary means of
preservation, he said to the Centurion and the Soldiers, except these abide in
the ship, ye cannot be safe. Did not Paul fear the failing af his own credit
and reputation? Who having before assured them, and that by the message of an
Angel of their safe coming to land; now on the other side tells them, that
unless the Mariners abide in the ship, they could not be safe? Nothing less;
neither did the Captain and Soldiers fly in his face, as an impostor, and one
that had abused them; as by this Authors dictates they might, especially if he
had had the Catechizing of them; but rather of themselves conceiving it an
unreasonable thing so to depend upon the promise of man or Angel, as not to
use the best means that lay in their power: Forth with the Soldiers cut off
the ropes of the boat, and let it fall away, choosing rather to loose their
boat (which yet was of good use too) then their Mariners. This was not all,
but Paul uses spiritual means, and by exhortation comfort them, that so
they might take heart, and the better set themselves to the use of the best
means, not weakly but courageously for their preservation. This is the
Fourteenth day that y e have tarried, and continued fasting receiving nothing.
Wherefore I exhort you to take meat, for this is for your safeguard, for there
shall not an hair fall from the head of any of you. And when he had thus
spoken he took bread, and gave thanks to God in presence of them all, and
brake it, and began to eat. Then were they all of good courage and they also
took meat. Well at length the ship brake, and the Centurion commanded, that
they that could swim should cast themselves first into the Sea, and go out to
Land; and the others some on boards, and some on certain pieces of the Ship.
Here to the end we see no means neglected; And so it came to pass (to wit by
use of such means) that they all escaped to Land. Yet was the promise of their
Salvation made to Paul in an absolute form, so is not the promise of Salvation
made to us. Now I leave it to the indifferent to judge of the wisdom of this
Authors discourse. Yet non deliberation is no suffitient evidence of the
needless condition of means. For Aristotle says that Ars non deliberat, not
because he uses no means to bring about his ends, but because the Artificer
which is his crafts-master, is not to seek of the means. For the same reason
deliberation is not incident unto God, his wisdom is nothing the less in
discerning congruous means to bring about his intended ends. As for that of
our Savior Cur estis solliciti de vestitu? Surely it is not of any thing above
our power in respect of use of means; Indeed to ad one Cubit to our stature is
not in our power, neither do I know any that take thought thereof, But it is
no more in man's power to bless his own cares and labors for the procuring of
himself meat, drink, raiment, then it is in his power to add a cubit or two
unto his stature. Therefore it becomes us not (...) that is, to distract our
selves with carking cares, as touching the end of our affairs, but he forbids
us not to be careful in the use of means. For to this purpose God would not
have Adam to be idle in Paradise, he must dress the Garden, though the
thriving of ought thereby was not so much by his care as by Gods providence.
And therefore he has given us six days to work and commands us to do all
our works therein; but as for the issue of our labors, leave that to God and
his blessing; And whether our labors are successful or not successful, not
to trouble our selves there abouts. It was spoken to the singular commendation
of Dr Raynolds by him that Preached his funeral Sermon, that he was most
carfull of the means, most careless of the end. Thus I have endeavored to
distinguish those things which this Authors very judiciously confounds. And as
it was no folly for Paul to do as he did that all good means might be used
for their preservation; so much less was misery, nay they had been in
amiserable case, had they neglected any due means to preserve themselves: for
St Paul (notwithhanding the message delivered unto him by an Angel, and his
promise thereupon made unto the Centution) spared not to profess that unless
the Mariners staid in the ship they could not be Saved: so that this Authors
fable of Sysiphus, is no better accommodated then the rest, save that herein he
may refresh his reader, and thank him for his courtesy, for representing unto
him as in a glass the nature of his proceedings. For in this his discourse he
does very accuratly play the part of Sysiphus for he takes great pains
inkindeling a fire, but alas he cannot warm himself thereby; he must blow
his nails still; there is no remedy. And truly I see noe reason to the
contrary, but that a man as profitably bestows his pains in picking strawes,
or playing with feathers, as this Author does in such manner of discourses.
Domitian killed flies, but this Author does not so much as flap a fly; only I
confess he does very energetically discover the nakedness of his own
discourse. And such be the issue of those that affect a name by becoming
Arminian Proselits; and show as little grace in their writings, as it becomes
them whose growth in perfection (by their own account) is to appose the grace
of God Pelagian like, whom Austin was bold to call the enemies of Gods graee;
Indeed it was high time for Balaam to leave his sorceries when he saw the Lord
was determined to bless Israel. For his sorceries were no means to bless
them, but to curse them rather. In like sort, if I am persuaded that God has
appointed me unto Salvation, it will be high time for me to leave off all care
of faith repentance and good works, when this Author shall make it appear,
that these studies are no more conducent (in Gods ordination) unto salvation,
then Balaams sorceries were to the blessing of Israel, but rather the highway
unto damnation, as his sorceries were to the cursing of the Lords people.

I make no doubt (what this Authors creed is to the contrary I care not) but
that every man's temporal estate is determined in heaven, as well as Paul's
escaping safe out of shipwreck, and all that were in the same ship, to the
number of two hundred threscore and sixteen souls, yet both Paul and all the
rest did not take their ease, but were vigilant to take all opportunity, to use
the best means for their safe arrival at the land; some by swimming, some by
sitting on bords, some on one piece of the ship some on another, and so (and
not but so) they came all safe to land. And as our Divines in the Synod of Dort
observe, albeit the Lord had promised Ezechiah, he should recover, and fifteen
years more should be added to his life, yet he refused not the counsel of the
Prophet Esaias, in laying a plaster of figs unto his sore. We know what was the
form of Ionahs Preaching to the Ninivites Ion. 3. 4. Yet forty days and
Niniveh shall be destroyed. Here we have an absolute form of sentence
denounced against them. And the people of Niniveh believed God, Yet did they
not give over all courses for the pacifying v. 5.
of the wrath of God, but proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the
greatest of them to the least of them; the King himself arising from his
throne, and laying his robe from him, and covering himself with sackcloth,
and sitting in ashes, and commanding others to do the like. And mark their
reason. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn from his fierce
wrath that we perish not. In like sort damnation being determined to none, but
to such as are v. 9.
finally impenitent: and this being not doubtfully or obscurely, but clearly
revealed unto us in Gods word, shall our endeavors to turn unto God by Godly
sorrow and repentance, be accounted vain and fruitless in the judgment of any
sober man? And let this Author look unto it, that these Ninivites do not one
day rise in judgment against him; And not the Ninivites only, but the Stoics
also, who as they acknowledged some things fatalia, so they confessed there
were some things confatalia; And this very argument here used they commonly
called (...), an idle argumentation; because it tended to the humouring of men
in their idle courses: And thus is it censured above 1500 years ago by Cicero
in his Book De fato. It is the blessing of God that makes men fat, and if God
has determined this, and man knows it, will he therefore sit still and starve
himself? It is the blessing of God that makes men rich. God promised as much
to the Israelites, in case they kept his Commandments, which commandments did
not instruct them in good husbandry; but where they instigated hereby to
neglect any usual means of making themselves rich? Nothing less, nay God was
jealous least in presumption of their own wise and thriftie courses they
should give the glory of it to themselves and not to God. Deuteronomy. 8. 17. Beware
least thou say in thy heart, My power and the strength of mine own hand has
prepared me this abundance. But remember the Lord thy God: for it is he which
gives thee power to get substance. If it be said that God has not determined
to make any man fat, but by feeding; nor any man rich but by laboring in some
vocation, or other, I answer, That neither has God determined to bring any man
to Salvation, but by Sanctification of the spirit and faith of the truth 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. By feeding on Gods Word, which is the word of grace able to save
Act. 20. 32.
our Souls. Iam. 1. and to build further and to give us an inheritance among
them that are sanctified through faith in him. In like sort if God has
appointed every Commonwealth a fatal period, yet if he has appointed to bring
them to flourishing estate by certain means, or to desolation no otherwise
then by neglecting the means of prosperity, as it is aparent he does not,
would any wise man conclude hence, that it were bootlesse either to call
Parliaments or to make use of privy Councelors? But this Author perhaps will
reply, that this is not absolutely to ordain a period to a state, for as much
as the period is brought to pass by means. Be it so; Now let the indifferernt
consider whether we do maintain, that the periods of men, to wit Salvation on
the one side and damnation on the other, are by God brought to pass without
means. Do we maintain that God damnes or decrees to damn any man but for
final perseverance in sin? Do we maintain that God brings any man to
Salvation (if he come to the use of reason) but by faith repentance and
good-workes? But the truth is this Authors ignorance in part, and in part a
dexterity that this Sect has to confound things that differ, is his best
armor of proof, to hold up his confidence in spending his powder liberally,
but without shot. For salvation is not bestowed, or damnation inflicted
absolutely, but that merely upon the foregoing of faith and repentance; this
merely upon final perseverance in sin. Only regeneration together with the
grace of faith and repentance, is bestowed absolutely by God upon whom he will,
and denied to whom he will, according to that of Paul, He has mercy on whom he
will, and whom he will he hardneth. And it is very strange that this being the
critical point, and the most momentous point of controversy, and such, the
decision whereof carries with it the decision of all the rest, this Author
should unshamefacedly decline it. But some there be that hate the light because
their works are evil; but does it become him to tax others for declining the
trial, when none shows more vile carriage this way then himself? What that
Privy-Councellor was, I know not, nor have I any evidence of the truth of the
story, but as it lies dictated at pleasure; I have showed how it nothing
disadvantageth our cause, though the Author of that speech were not only a
Privy-Councellor but a great Divine too. Yet amongst many good, there might be
some bad in Queen Elizabeth's days. If that were true which is reported to have
been mentioned by Dr Lively in a Lecture of his in Cambridge, namely that a
certain Book was found under a Privy-Councellors pillow, whose inscription
was this De tribus Mundi impostoribus, Mose, Christo, Mahumite. As for fate
stoicall (to give the Devil his right) I no where find it maintained by any of
them so as to prejudice men's wills, but by many great ones I find this expressly
denied and hereof I have already spoken more at large.

Still he keeps his course in impugning an absolute decree determining men's
ends precisely: What secret mysteries he conceales in the Word, precisely. I
know not; but it is aparent, we maintain no such determining the Salvation of
any man, so as to exclude a Godly life. We both know and teach that without
Holiness (as much as to say without a Godly life) no man shall see God. But we
further say, that this is not wholly the decree of predestination, though this
Author with his Remonstrants would feign rest here: but we farther say, that a
Godly life is the gift of Gods grace, and that God bestows this gift on whom
he will; but this Author has no great lust to oppose us here. The more
Equivocall a phraise is, the fitter it is to serve his turn, that lies upon
advantages, to promote error and obscure truth. And therefore keeps himself
to the absolute decree and precise determinations; either not understanding or
not considering, that an absolute decree may be takendivers ways, either quoad
actum volentis as touching the act of God willing, or quoad res volitas, as
touching the things willed, the decree properly signifies the act of God
willing; but this Author in consideratly takes it quoad res volitas as touching
the things willed all along, as appears by his oppossing it to decree or will
conditional; And will conditional with him is such, as when the thing willed
is not effected because the condition is not performed. They are his own words
in the last Section save one of his former sorts of reasons, the very last
words. As for example, the will of Saving men is not accomplished, because men
do not believe. Then as touching the things willed Gods decrees being
considered, here also arise different considerations; for as much as the things
willed are different Grace and Glory; As for Glory and Salvation we do not say
that God has decreed to confer that absolutely, but only conditionally; yet
thereupon he stiks throughout. supposing his adversaries to maintain an
absolute decree concerning the conferring of Salvation abolutely, which is most
untrue, wherein he fights without any adversary; yet there he discharges
himself very strenuously, and lays about him like a mad man. But as for
grace, to wit, the grace of regeneration, the grace of faith and repentance;
this we readily profess that God does bestow it absolutely, to wit, on whom he
will, according to the mere pleasure of his will. All this, It is the glory of
this Author in his discourse most juditiously to confound; which made him the
more to abound in matter, that he might seem to say some thing, when indeed it
is nothing, supple to the purpose. And to meet with him in every particular of
his conclusion; The events (to wit of Salvation or damnation) are not at all
decreed by God to come to pass absolutely, but merely conditionally, and
consequently not unavoydably, but avoydably rather; like as things that come to
pass contingently do come to pass with a possibility not to come to pass,
and accordingly God decreed they should came to pass contingently; And
consequently men's actions hereabouts are not unprofitable, nay they are both
necessary for obtaining the ends here intimated, and such as never fail of
obtaining them. As for example. Sanctification of the spirit, and faith of the
truth, never fail of procuring Salvation; for as much as God ordained by these
means to bring men unto Salvation 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. And by no means else. And
therefore most absurd it is to conceive, that the practice of Godliness proves
unprofitable, and from such wild promises the unprofitable nature of the
prctise of Godliness, can prove no better then a wild conclusion.

I come to his two witnesses; the first is Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 23. sect. 14.
Si quis ita plebem compellet; si non creditis, ideo fit, quia jam divinitus
exitio destinati estis, is non modo ignaviam fovet, sed indulget malitiae. This
(says this Author) is as much to say as this; If a man should set down the
doctrine of Reprobation in its colors, and explain it to people in a clear
and lively fashion, he would hereby open a door to liberty and profaneness.
Now this Calvin delivers as out of Austin; as appears both by his entrance
hereunto, and by his shutting up of it; His entrance into it is this. Et tamen
ut singular aedificationis studium sancto viro fuit, (that is Austin) sic
docendi very rationem temperat ut prudenter caveatur, quoad licet, offensio.
Nam iquae vere dicuntur congruenter simul posse dici admonet; The man he
speaks of still is Austin, as is apparent to him that shall consider the
coherence of this Section with the former. Then he sets down the inconvenient
manner of Preaching this truth, as Austin does, though not in Austins words but
in his own. Si quis ita plebem compellet; si non creditis, ideo fit, quia jam
divinitus exitio destinati estis. etc. And shutting the whole up he expressly
names Austin, misliking such manner of Preaching thus; Tales itaque Augustinus
non immerito tanquam vel insulsos Doctores, vel sinistros and ominosos
Prophetas ab Ecclesia jubet facessere. What is the mystery then of this, that
Calvin is here brought in for a witness, in making a relation of Austins
discourse, and Austin himself whose judgment Calvin does but relate is
pretermitted, especially considering that Austins testimony, where it serves
his turn, would give far more credit to his cause then Calvin's: you will
give me leave to guess at the mystery, which I take to be this; Calvin is well
known to be opposite unto him in the doctrine of reprobation; but Calvin
acknowledging that this Doctrine might be delivered in a harsh manner, which
yet nothing moved him from entertaining it: this harsh manner of propounding
it, is enough to serve this Authors turn, to defame it both in his own
conceit, and in the conceit of others, such as himself. For as for Calvin's
opinion to the contrary, that is of no consideration with him, yea though
Luther also join with him in this. He is especially in these days, and with
some persons so contemptible, as never was honest man more. But to bring in
Austin acknowledging this Doctrine, and taking notice of some harsh manners in
propounding it, and yet notwithstanding embracing it in despite of the
harshnesse thereof, and showing withal, how this harsh manner of propounding
the same truth may be tempered; his Authority this Author well knew, and
considered would be of greater Authority to sway for it, then some harshnesse
in the propounder, or this Authors Me thinks, would sway against it: And
therefore he thought fit to spare the bringing in of Austin to testify for him,
and contents himself to bring Calvin only upon the stage, though he does but
relate in effect the discourse of Austin; Thus as formerly I said, this
Treatise savours more of the Fox then of the Lion. But let us bring him unto
Austin De bono perseverantioe. cap. 16. Where the objection made by them of
Marseiles against Austins Doctrine of Predestination is proposed thus. Sed
aiunt ut scribitis neminem posse correptionis stimulis excitari, si dicatur in
conventu Ecclesiae audientibus multis. Ita se habet de praedestinatione
definita sententia voluntatis Dei, ut alii ex vobis de infidelitate, accepta
obediendi voluntate veneritis ad fidem, vel accepta maneatis in fide: caeteri
vero qui in peccatorum delectatione remoramini, ideo nondum surrexistis, quia
nec dum vos adjutorium gratiae miserantis erexit. Veruntamen si qui estis
nondum vocati, quos gratia sua praedestinaverit elegendos, accipietis eandem
gratiam, qua velitis and sitis electi: Et si qui obeditis si praedestinati
estis rejiciendi, subtrahentur obediendi vires, ut obedire cessitis. But they
say (as you write) that no man can be excited by the good of reprehension, if
in the congregation before many, the Preacher shall thus discourse. Such is the
sentence of Gods will determined as touching predestination, that some of you
receiving the will of obedience, shall come from infidelity unto faith, or
receiving the gift of perseverance shall continue therein. But if there be any
among you who are not called, whom God has through his grace predestined to
be elected, they shall receive the same grace, whereby to will to be, and to
become elect. And if there be any of you, who obey the Gospel, that are
predestined to be rejected, the strength of obeying shall be taken from you,
that you may cease to obey. Here is the objection against it, Austins doctrine
of predestination, and reprobation at full; his answer to it follows at full;
but how? Not in denying ought that hereby is employed concerning his doctrine of
Predestination, but to the contrary; First showing that this harsh proposition
of things, must not deter us from the embracing of it; Secondly, showing how
the same truth may be delivered in a more temperate manner. Ita cum dicuntur
(says he) ita nos a confitenda Dei gratia, i. e. quae non secundum merita
nostra datur, and a confitenda secundum eam praedestinatione Sanctorum; that
is, These things thus delivered, must not deter us from confessing Gods
grace, which is not given according unto works, and from confessing the
predestination of Saints, according thereunto. Where observe I beseech you how
far he joins together the doctrine of Gods free grace, with his doctrine of
predestination according to his Tenet, which here was opposed by the same
Argument, wherewith the Author in this place oppugneth ours. Manifestly giving
to understand, that his doctrine of Predestination could not be impugned as
there it is, but withal they that impugn it, must deny the freeness of Gods
grace, and maintain that it is given according unto works or merits. So that as
he answers them, so we may take liberty to answer this Author, and say that
this argument of his must not deter us from confessing predestination
according to Gods free grace; least so we be driven to maintain that Grace is
given according unto works. And the reason is manifest; For if it be not of the
mere pleasure of God, that he bestows faith on one, and denies it unto
another, then the reason hereof must be because God finds some better
disposition in one then in another, and therefore he gives him, that is better
disposed, the grace of faith which he denies unto another. Now this both in
Austins judgment and in clear reason appears to be the maintaining, that
grace is given according unto works, which is condemned in the Synod of
Palestine above 1200 years ago. Yet Austin rests not here, but shows how the
same objection may have place, as well for the overthrowing of prescience
divine, as for the overthrowing of predestination divine. We (says he) must no
more be deterred by this objection from confessing, the freeness of Gods
grace, and predestination divine suitable thereunto, then we are hereby
deterred from acknowledging Gods foreknowledge, and shows how the same
objection may be accommodated against Gods foreknowledge, thus. Sive nunc
recte vivatis sive non recte; tales vos eritis postea quales vos deus futuros
esse praescivit, vel boni si bonos vel mali si malos. That is, Whether at this
time you live well or not well, such you shall be as God foreseeth you will be;
either good if he foreseeth it will come to pass, or evil if he foreseeth you
will be evil. Now (says he) if upon the hearing of this, some are converted
unto slothfulness (this is the very objection proposed by Calvin for the
matter of it, but the form is different. For Calvin says the Preacher, does
cherish slothfulness, etc. Austin signifies only, that by such kind of
Preaching, men take occasion of slothfulness, and therefore it is fit that
Calvin should in that sense only be interpreted, seeing he only relates in
effect that which he finds in Austin,) suppose (says Austin going on) That
hereupon they run after their lust, shall we therefore think, that to be
false, which was delivered as concerning Gods foreknowledge? Then he tells a
History of his own experience, namely how one in the same monastery whereof he
was, abused in this manner the doctrine of foreknowledge. For when his
brethren reproved him he would stubbornly answer, Whatsoever I am now, surely I
shall go out of the World, such as God foreseeth I will be. Wherein says
Austin, he speaks truth, but he was so far from profiting by it unto good,
that at length he utterly forsook our society, returning as a dog to his
vomit; and yet what he will be, says he, the Lord knows. Now who doubts but
that our doctrine of justification by faith, and not by works, may be an
occasion to some, to abuse the grace of God unto wantonness; such there were
even in the Apostles days: but what? Shall we therefore renounce that
doctrine? I am not yet come to the tempering of the manner of proposing this
doctrine, I have more to say before I come to that. What difference is there in
harshnesse between these doctrines, If ye do not believe, therefore ye do not
believe, because God has ordained you to destruction, and this, If ye do not
believe, therefore ye do not believe because God has not regenerated you: Let
any man show how a door is open to slothfulness, more by the one, then by the
other; especially considering the ground of all, is man's inability to believe,
without this grace of God effectually preventing and working him unto faith.
Now this doctine is plainly taught, and that particularly of certain persons,
to their faces: Ioh 8.. He that is of God hears Gods word, ye therefore hear
them not, because ye are not of God. The phrase, to be of God, I interpret here
of regeneration, but both Austin of old, and our Divines of late, do interpret
of election; and so it is precisely the same with the Preaching of reprobation
in his true colors, as this Author interprets it, and passes this censure
upon it, as opening a door to liberty and profaneness; which may I confess
well be occasionally to carnal men, or to men possessed with prejudicate
opinions, yet here it appears plainly, to be in effect the same with that which
our Savior himself Preached. But take this withal; as it may be an occasion
of slothfulness, so it may be a means to humble men, and beat them out of the
presumptuous conceit of their own sufficiency to hear Gods word, to believe,
to repent, and the like; and thereby to prepare them to look up unto God, and
to wait for him in his ordinances, if so be as the Angel came down to move
the waters in the poole of Bethesda, to make them medicinable; so Gods spirit
may come down and make his word powerful to the regenerating of them, to the
working of faith, and repentance in them. And I appeal to every sober man's
judgment, whether to this end tended not the very like Doctrine and admonition
proposed by Moses to the Children of Israel in the Wilderness. Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 3,
4. Ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in the land of Egypt
unto Pharaoh and all his servants, and unto all his Land. The great temptations
which thine eyes have seen those great miracles and wonders. Yet the Lord has
not given you a heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto
this day. For is it not Moses his purpose to set before their eyes how little
they have profited in obedience and thankfulness unto God, and amendment of
life, by all those great works of his, in the way of mercy toward them, and
in the way of judgment toward the Egyptians? And what was the cause of all
this, but the hardness of their hearts, and the blindness of their eyes? and
to what end does he tell them, that God alone can take away this hardness of
heart, and blindness of mind, which hitherto he had not done? Might he not
seem to justify them, in walking after the hardness of their hearts by this,
and harden them therein by this Doctrine of his? like as this Author casts the
like aspersion in part upon the like Doctrine of ours? Yet Moses passes not
for this, so he might set them in a right course, to be made partakers of Gods
grace, and that by the ministry of the Law, to humble and prepare them for the
grace of God, which is the Evangelicall use of the Law. And it is remarkable
that in the first verse of this Chapter, these words are said to be the words
of the Covenant, which the Lord commanded Moses to make with the Children of
Israel in the land of Moab, beside the Covenant which he made with them in
Horeb. Wherefore seeing the Covenant made in Horeb, was the Covenant of the
Law, it follows that this Covenant is the Covenant of grace, and these words
are the words of the Covenant of grace, which is plainly expressed in the next
Chapter v. 6. And the Lord thy God, will circumcise thine heart, and the heart
of thy seed, that thou may love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, that thou may live. And what is the usual preparation
hereunto but to humble men by convicting them of sin, and of their utter
inability to help themselves, and that nothing but Gods grace is able to give
them an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear. But yet because
we do not speak in the same measure of the spirit, and of power, as Moses and
our Savior did, therefore we labor to decline all harshnesse as much as lies
in our power, where we see occasion is like to be taken of offense. Therefore
first as touching this discourse of Calvin's. If you believe not, therefore it
is, because you are already destinated unto damnation. I say this is untrue
more ways then one. First if he conceives destination unto damnation, goes
before Gods decree to deny faith: this I utterly deny, and have already proved,
that in no moment, of reason does the decree of damnation precede the decree of
denying grace. Therefore Gods decree to deny them grace, is rather the cause
why they believe not then the decree of damnation. Secondly whether we take it
of the one or of the other, or of both, yet the proposition is utterly untrue.
For it does not follow, that because a man does not as yet believe, therefore
God has decreed to deny him faith; and because he has so decreed, therefore
he denies him faith. For he that believes not to day, may believe to morrow.
Saul was sometimes a persecutor of Gods Church; but was it at that time lawful
to conclude, that because he did not then believe therefore he was destinated
unto damnation: so that the reason indeed is, either because God has not
decreed at all to give them faith, or because the time which God has ordained
for their conversion is not yet come. This is so clear that Calvin himself
were he alive, would not gainsay upon consideration. Neither does he justify
this discourse, but only says, we must be more wise, then so to discourse to
our Auditors. But this Author in saying, this is to set down our doctrine of
reprobation in its colors, delivers that which is shamefully untrue, and
nothing suitable with our doctrine. More necre to the matter we should say
rather, That like as therefore a man hears Gods word because he is of God
(that is as I interpret it, because he is regenerated of God) so therefore men
hear them not, because they are not of God, that is not yet regenerated; but
yet nevertheless they may be in good time. Yet here also there is some defect
for want of clear explication of this truth; For will you conclude hence, that
non-regeneration is the cause of infidelity (as some do in effect)? Why but
this is either notoriously false, or if true it is true in such a sense, as
whereby God is no more the cause thereof, then a Physician is the cause of a
disease, because he will not cure it. For infidelity is a natural fruit of
man's hereditary corruption, and God alone can cure it, but if he will not, God
is not to be said to be the cause of any disobedience issuing therefrom,
otherwise then per modum non removentis, by way of not removing the cause of
it; or per modum non dantis quod prohiberet, by way of not curing the cause,
that is, by not giving faith. Now what harshnesse there is in this, to as many
as do not concur with the Pelagians, so as in plain terms to profess, that
Grace is given according to men's works; And the objection framed against
Austin, and grounded upon that doctrine which he acknowledged ran thus.
Caeteri qui in peccatorum delectatione remoramini ideo nondum surrexistis, quia
nec dum vos adjutorium gratiae miserantis erexit. Therefore you are not risen
out of that delight you took in sin, because the succor of Gods grace has
not raised you, not as Calvin expresses it. Therefore you believe not, because
ye are ordained to destruction. And this very doctrine, as formerly I said, our
Savior spares not to apply to some particular Ioh. 8.
persons, and Preach it to their faces; like as Moses Preaches the very same
doctrine to the Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 3, 4. Yet Austin to prevent
harshnesse does not like this manner of proposing it so well, seeing it may be
and it is fit it should be delivered coveniently thus. Si qui autem ad huc in
peccatorum damnabilium delectatione remoramini apprehenditis saluberrimam
disciplinam. Quod tamen cum feceritis, nolite extolli quasi de operibus
vestris, aut gloriari, quasi non acceperitis. If any of you do yet continue in
the delightful course of damnable sins take hold of wholesome discipline,
which when you have done, be not proud thereof as of your own work, or Glory as
if you had not received this grace of God. Now what advantageous service this
first witness has done him, I am well content the indifferent may judge. I
come to his second witness, that is of the Land-grave of Turing, reported by
Hesterbachius; as I remember it is about the Twelfth Century of years since
our Saviors incarnation. This man being admonished by his friends of his
dangerous and vicious courses, made this answer. Si praedestinatus sum nulla
peccata poterunt mihi Regnum Caelorum auferre; Si praescitus, nulla bona mihi
illud valebunt confer. It is not the first time I have met with this story;
not in Vossius only, but in an Arminian Manuscript; it seems they make some
account of it; yet I see no cause they should make any such account thereof. It
is the common voice of profane persons corrupting the doctrine of
Predestination to serve their own turns. My self remember an instance of it
in my minority, when I was little more then a child; and I remember both the
Person whom, and the place where it was delivered, and it was accounted as a
sign of a profane heart; yet this Vossius makes use of, as an instance
forsooth of a Predestination Heretic. And I wonder why they do not devise as
well a Praescientiarian Heresy; and that by as good an instance as this, of one
of Austins Monks, who being reproved by his brethren, made the like answer as
touching Gods praescience, but yet with more sobriety, saying, Whatsoever I am
now, I shall be such as God foreseeth I will be. Yet herein as Austin
professes, he spoke nothing but truth; but the saying of the Landgrave implies
a notorious untruth, namely, that if he were predestined he should be Saved,
though he continued in his sinful courses; Now this I say is a gross untruth;
For predestination is the preparation of Grace (as Austin desineth it) and
consequently such as are predestined shall be taken off from their sinful
courses in good time, and by Grace be brought unto Salvation. In like sort he
supposes a Reprobate may be truly righteous; whereas Austin professes of
such, as are not predestinate that God brings none of them to wholesome and
spiritual repentance, whereby man is reconciled unto God in Christ, what
patience soever he affords them. Contr. Jul. Pelag. l. 5. c. 4. Nay this kind
of Argumentation, drawn from destiny Stoicall, wherewith our adversaries do
usually reproach our doctrine of Predestination, like as the Pelagians did in
the same manner reproach Saint Austins doctrine concerning Predestination. I
say this argument was in course, and profligated in the days of Cicero, and
censured as (...), an idle argumentation (as before I mentioned) and it is to
be seen in Cicero his book De Fato; and thereupon they distinguished of some
things which they called, Fatalia, as victory, and some things which they
called, Confatalia, as all necessary means requisite to the getting of the
victory. And Origin though he be accounted a favourer of our adversaries
Doctrine in his writings, yet he shows the vanity of this Argument applied to
fate, whereby undoubtedly he means providence divine. For he proposes such a
kind of objection, as if a sick man should dispute himself from taking Physic
after this manner. Either by destiny is it appointed I shall recover or no; If
my destiny be to recover I shall recover though I use no Physic, if my
destiny be not to recover, all the Physicians in the world shall do me no good.
And the vanity of this is represented by the like argument in another manner
thus: If it be thy desteny to beget children, whether thou usest the company of
Women or no, thou shall beget children: And concludes thus; Ut enim hic si
fieri non potest ut quis procreat, nisi cum muliere concubuerit, sic si
valetudinis recuperatio medicinae via efficitur necessario adhibetur medicus.
The Greek of Origin is set down at large by Turnebus in his disputation upon
Cicero his book De Fato, against Ramus. Now judge you I pray, what color of
detriment to Religion, has he produced from our doctrine of absolute
Reprobation, and whether his discourse herein is any better then the
imagination of a vain thing.

DISCOURSE. SECT. IV.
BUt there are two things chiefly, which are said for the vindicating of this
opinion from this crimination.

1. First, that many of them which believe and defend this opinion, are Godly
and holy men, and therefore it does not of it self open a way to liberty; but
through the wickedness of men, who pervert the sweetest, and the surest truths
revealed in Gods word, to their own damnation.

Resp. It cannot (I confess) be denied, that many of this opinion are Godly
men, but it is no thanks to their opinion, that they are so; (the true and
natural genius of which is to breed sloth, to drown men in carnal security,
and to countenance carnal liberty.) but to some thing else, either to Gods
providence, (who will not suffer this doctrine for his own glory and the good
of men, to have any great stroke in their lives;) or to men's incogitancy, who
think not of reducing it ad praxim, or drawing conclusions out of it, but rest
in the naked speculation of it, as they do of many others; or lastly to some
good practical conclusions, which they meet with in the word of God, and apply
to their lives (as they do not the former deductions) such as these are for
example; Be ye holy as I an holy. Without holiness no man shall see God. If ye
consent and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the land. Godliness has the
promise of this life and of the life to come, and such like. And hence we may
learn to measure this opinion, not by some few of the men that hold it, but by
the sequels, which the Logic even of simple men, if they should apply their
brains to ponder and consider it, would fetch out of it. No man that has
thoroughly sucked it in, and understood the force of it, but will either
relinquish it, or live according to the natural importment of it, that is,
licentiously.

2. Secondly, it is said, that albeit this Doctrine does teach, that men are
absolutely elected, or absolutely rejected; yet it tells no man who in
particular is elected, who rejected, (that must appear by themselves and their
lives) and so it does not stifle holy endeavors in any, but rather encourage
them in every man, because it makes them to be signs, whereby men must and may
get the knowledge of their election.

Resp. For answer to this (in my judgment or the present) the ignorance of a
man's particular case does not alter the case a jot. For he that believes in
general, that many and they the greatest company without comparison, are
inevitably ordained to destruction, and a few others unto salvation; is able
out of these two general propositions, to make these particular conclusions,
and to reason thus with himself; Either I am absolutely chosen to grace and
glory, or absolutely cast off from both, If I be chosen, I must of necessity
believe and be saved; If I be cast off I must as necessarily not believe and be
damned, Therefore what need I take thought either way about means or end? My
end is pitched in Heaven, and the means too; my final perseverance in faith
and my salvation; or my continuance in unbelief and my damnation. If I lie
under this necessity of believing, and being saved, or of dying in unbelief,
and being damned, in vain do I trouble my self about means or end, I have
my supersedeas, I may take mine ease, and so I will, it is enough for me to sit
down and wait what God will do unto me.

And in this manner (it is to be feared) do too many reason in their hearts,
and by this very ground (though they will not perhaps acknowledge it) encourage
themselves to profaneness. Though men cannot hide their wickedness, yet they
will hide their grounds which flesh them in it, either through modesty, or to
avoyde some farther ignominy. The fool has said in his heart there is no God:
Psalm. 40. Suetonius de Vita Tiberii c. 69. p. 180. Says of Tiberius that he
was circa Deos and religiones negligentior, quippe addictus Mathematicae,
persuasionibus plenus omnia fato agi.

TWISSE. Consideration.
I have already made answer to his objections after my manner; it remains I
consider what he delivers in debilitating those answers which he takes in to
consideration.

1. This answer was made by our Britain Divines in the Synod of Dort upon the
first Article, but so, as that they proposed it not by it self alone, but
jointly with showing that neither the Nature of our Doctrine does any way prove
any hinderance unto piety; as formerly I have made mention thereof.

Whereas he says that many of this (our) opinion are Godly men but that is no
thanks to their opinion that they are so. I answer, that neither do we give
the glory of our Godliness to our good opinion, nor have cause to thank it
therefore; but we give God the Glory both of leading us into this truth amongst
many others, and for that Godliness that is in us also. For we acknowledge
that God is able to convict our consciences of that truth hereof, and yet
refuse to lead us thereby into any Holiness at all. Yet let every sober man
judge who are in a fairer way to true Holiness, or who are more likely to be
in the state of true Holiness, they that oppose the grace of God in working
our wills to faith and repentance, or they that acknowledge it. They who
maintain that God of the mere pleasure of his will, regenerates us, endueth
us with the spirit of faith and repentance; or they who maintain that God does
not give faith and repentance to whom he will. Neither is it the meaning of St
Paul where he says God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardneth; but rather where he finds an absolute disposition or work in one,
which he finds not in an other. Again consider I pray indifferently, who are
more likely to be partakers of Gods grace; they who truly magnify it as the
Author of their faith and repentance and of every good work performed by them,
and that in a preventing manner; or they that pretend to make Gods grace to be
the Author of their faith and repentance and every good work only by giving
them power to believe, if they will (which we are able to prove both by the
judgment of Austin and by clear reason to be mere nature and not grace) and
accordingly exhorting them to believe, and last of all concurring with them to
the producing of the act of faith in them in case they will; And seeing grace
proves effectual only by this subsequent manner of operation; whether they do
not plainly mock God in making him the Author of grace, seeing in respect of
this effectual operation they might as well make him the Author of every
sinful act as of every gracious act, For it is agreed on all hands that God
concurres as well to every sinful act as any gracious act. Whereas he says,
The true and natural genius of our Tenet is to breed sloth, and to drown men
in carnal security, and to countenance carnal liberty. I answer these words
of his are but wind, his reasons I have already considered, and proved them to
be of no weight. For they depend partly upon a vain supposition, as if we
maintained that God has oppointed men unto Salvation though they live as they
list, whereas our doctrine is directly contradictious here unto. For we teach
that God ordaines no man of ripe years to obtain Salvation but by
Sanctification of the spirit and faith of the truth as we are plainly taught 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. And the Evangelist signifies as much, where he says. As many
believed as were ordained to Everlasting Life. Act. 13. 48. It may be as well
said that as many repented, as many gave themselves to work out their
Salvation with fear and trembling to purge themselves from all pollutions of
flesh and spirit, and to perfect Holiness in the fear of God, as were
ordained to Salvation: partly because we maintain that God gives faith and
repentance and regeneration to whom he will, that is only to those whom he has
chosen, denying the same grace and that absolutely; unto all others, which if
it be not true; but that God does grant it, or ordain it according to men's
works, then we must all turn Pelagians, whom Austin calls inimicos gratiae
Dei; And in such a case judge I pray whether it be possible that such can be
partakers of Gods grace, namely, if they are the enemies of Gods grace. Is it
possible that he who partakes of Gods sanctifying grace should stand out in
hostile opposition against it? Can we be at once both friends of the Bridegroom
and enemies of his grace? Further consider more particularly wherein does this
consist, which he imputes unto us, of drowning men in carnal security, is it
in denying unto man any grace that he attributes unto him? Surely well we may
deny unto every Reprobate such a grace as he himself hates, and impugnes to
wit, grace effectually preventing the will, and making man to believe and
repent, but if you scanne every particular of those which he calls grace, you
shall find that we deny not any one of them unto Reprobates more then he does.
This perhaps may seem strange unto you; therefore it deserves the more
carefully to be considered; for I doubt not but to make it good. Grace
subsequent is the only effectual grace with them, and that consists in Gods
concurrence to the working of faith in the heart of man, if man will work it
in him self. Now dare they say we deny, this namely, Gods concourse to the act
of faith, whereas we maintain with them that God concurres to every act, even
to the most sinful act, that ever was committed since the world began; only we
are a shamed to call this concurrence grace, because it is found to have course
as well in the producing of evil actions, as in the producing of good. So that
if every man in the world should believe, we deny not but that God should
concur with him to the working of that belief, we profess that if every
Reprobate in the world will believe, God is ready to concur with him to the
act of that will of that belief. From the consideration of their grace
subsequent I arise to the consideration of their grace prevenient, and that is
two fold, one is the grace exciting, to wit, by moral admonition, suasion,
exhortation, This act we are willing to call and account a gracious act, and we
do as willingly acknowledge that God affords it unto all Reprobates (as well
as to the elect) within the pale of the Church. For every one that appears in
any Congregation is equally exhorted to believe, to repent, to turn from their
wicked ways. So that hitherto we find no difference. We willingly acknowledge
that Reprobates are partakers of these operations divine as well as the elect.
One grace prevenient remains, which is habitual, and which our adversaries
will have to be universal and it consistes in a power to believe and repent,
and to will any spiritual good whereunto they were excited, and accordingly
they call it the enlivening of man's will. This I deliver by experience of what
I have seen under the hands of some of them. Yet they will not acknowledge that
all are regenerate; yet what is regeneration, but the infusion of life
spiritual, and that chiefly into the will; And they will have the will to be
enlivened by grace, which cannot be spoken in respect of life natural,
therefore it must proceed of life spiritual, unless they will devise a life
intermediate between life natural, and life spiritual. Some times they call
it a power to believe if they will, and such a power Austin acknowledges
common to all, lib. 1. Genesis ad liter: cap 3. And justifies it in his Retract.
lib. 16. Now this seems somewhat strange, considering the very regenerate have
not such strength of goodness, as whereby they are enabled to do what good
they would, as Romans 7. 18. To will is present with me but I find, not to
perform that which is good. And Gal: 5. 17. The flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary one to the
other, so that ye cannot do the same things that ye would. To help this and
to clear Austin from contradiction to express Scripture in this; I find that
posse si velit is one thing, posse simply delivered is another thing. And this
I find distinguished in that very place of Austines Retractations; For whereas
as he had said in that lib. 1. de Genesis contr. Man. cap 3. That, Omnes homines
possunt si velint, both credere, and ab amore visibilium rerum and temporalium
se ad Dei praecerta implenda convertere. And coming to retract this, and
perceiving what advantage the Pelagians might s^atch hence for the
countenancing of their cause, in extolling the power of nature, he wisely
prevents that by expounding himself, and clearing his own meaning thus. Non
existiment novi haeretici Pelagiani secundum eos esse dictum; manifesting
thereby that this was the Pelagian Tenet yet were they not to be blamed for
this, but only because they called not in Gods grace for further help then
this, save only in the way of instruction. For Austin concurred with them still
in this particular even then when he wrote his books of Retractations, as there
it follows in these words Verum est enim omnino (mark by this Emphasis with
what assurance of faith he delivered this) Omnes homines hoc posse si velint:
Thus far he goes along with them: but then mark wherein he goes beyond them
in these words following; Sed praeparatur voluntas a Domino and tantum augetur
munere charitatis ut possint; When he says, praeparatur voluntas a Domino,
the effect thereof undoubtedly is ut velint which is the state and condition of
the regenerate, who yet may complain that they cannot do that which they
would as the Apostle formerly signifies, that is that simply and effectually
they have not yet power enough to what they will; therefore Austin adds to the
preparation of the will, ut velint, an augmentation of strength ut possint,
saying tantumque augetur munere charitatis ut possint; that is; not only to
will that which is good, but so intensely to will it, as to prevail over the
flesh lusting against the spirit, whereby it comes, ut non modo velint, sed and
possint; and consequently and efficiant quod velint. So that posse simpliciter
does include velle; and adds such strength thereto as now to go on to the
doing of that it wills without restraint from the flesh. And that this posse is
but an augmentation of the gracious disposition of the will, appears by the
same Austin de corrept. and gratia. cap. 11. Prima gratia est qua sit ut habeat
homo justitiam si velit, secunda ergo plus potest, qua etiam sit ut velit, and
tantum velit tantoque ardore diligat, ut carnis voluntatem contraria
concupiscentem voluntate spiritus vincat. The first grace is that whereby a man
may have righteousness if he will, therefore the second grace is of more power,
as whereby a man is made to will and that in such measure, as by the will of
the spirit to overcome the will of the flesh affecting that which is contrary
thereunto. And in the very next chapter, c. 12. He calls this prevailing will,
Posse simply, Tantum spiritu sancto accenditur voluntas eorum, ut ideo possint,
quia sic velint, and ideo velint, quia Deus sic operatur ut velint; Their will
is in such measure inflamed with the Holy Spirit, that therefore they are able
(to do that which is good) because they will in such a measure, and therefore
they will in such a measure because God so works as to make them willing in
such measure: Austin goes on in this manner Nam si in tanta infirmitate vitae
hujus ipsis relinqueretur voiuntas sua, ut in adjutorio Dei manerent si
vellent, nec Deus in iis operaretur ut vellent inter tot and tantas tentationes
infirmitate sua voluntas ipsa succumberet, and ideo perseverare non possent,
quia deficientes infirmitate nec vellent, aut non ita vellent infirmitate
voluntatis ut possent. For if in so great infirmity of this life, their will
were left unto the^, that in the help of God they might continue if they
would, and God should not work in them that they would, amongst so many and so
great tentations, this will it self would sink (under the burden of them)
and therefore could not persevere, because failing through infirmity they would
not, or (at least) they would not in such a measure, through the wills
infirmity, as to be able to stand. So that posse simpliciter still with Austin
includes the will, and is a denomination of the will, arising from the strength
of it prevailing above the flesh, lusting to the contrary. In like sort
Honorius Augustodunensis de praedest. and lib. arbit: diverse times ascribes
posse to grace subsequent, like as he ascribes velle to grace prevenient, as
when he says; Deus operatur in electis suis sua gratia praeveniendo velle, and
subseqendo posse. And again, gratiam accipimus, cum nos Deus praevenit, ut
velimus, and subsequitus ut possimus. And again Gratia Dei praevenit ut bonum
quod sprevit cupiat, and sequitur ut illud implere praevaleat. So that in
effect this posse comes to be all one with agere or perficere quod volumus. For
when we not only will that which is good, but so affectionately will it, as to
prevail over the flesh lusting against it, all inward impediments being thus
mastered, the perfecting of that we will must needs follow. But as for that
posse si velint, this goes before the willing of it And I see no reason to the
contrary but that we may with Austin acknowledge such a power common to all;
which in the disputations between Austin and Pelagius was called possibilitas
agendi quod bonum est; and Austin was so far from excepting against it as
maintained by Pelagius, that more then once; he professes, that in case like
as he acknowledged posse to be from God, so he would acknowledge velle and
agere to be from God he should be received for a good Catholic in this, by
Austins judgment. I will cite a passage or two out of Austin expressly
signifying this, and that out of his book de gratia Christi, contra Pelag: and
Caelest: The first is cap 6. Pelagius his words are these. Qui ipsius
voluntatis and operis possibilitatem dedit whereupon Austin writes thus Hanc
autem possibilitatem in natura eum ponere, de verbis ejus superioribus clarum
est. Sed ne nihil de grati a dixisse videretur, adjunxit, Quique ipsam
possibilitatem gratiae suae adjuvat semper auxilio; non ait, ipsam voluntatem
vel ipsam operationem, quod si diceret, non abhorrere a doctrina Apostolica
videretur: as much as to say, did he acknowledge this he should be a good
Catholic; Now ad juvare voluntatem and operationem, in Austins phrase is
effectually, operari ut velit and operetur homo quod bonum est; as appears by
that which follows. Sed ait (to wit Pelagius) ipsam possibilitatem illud
videlicet ex tribus quod in natura locavit gratiae suae adjuvat semper auxilio.
Now mark Austins interpretation of him thus, ut scilicet in voluntate and
action non ideo laus sit Dei and hominis quia sic vult homo, ut tamen ejus
voluntati Deus ardorem dilectionis inspiret; so that adjuvare voluntatem in
Austins phrase, is inspirare voluntati dilectationis ardorem. So then I see no
reason, but that we may well grant unto our adversaries, that all men have a
power to believe if they will, and from the love of temporal things, to
convert themselves to the keeping of Gods commandments; But this is mere
nature in Austins judgment; for he calls it in that very chapter, naturalem
possibilitatem, and cap. 47. coming to an issue: Si ergo consenserit nobis, non
solam possibilitatem, sed ipsam quoque voluntatem and actionem divinitus
adjuvari, and sic adjuvari, ut sine ullo adjutorio nihil been velimus and
agamus, eamque esse gratiam Dei per Jesum Christum, nihil de adjutorio gratiae
Dei, quantum arbitror, inter nos controversiae relinquetur. And indeed to say
that a man has power to believe and repent if he will; this is not to
maintain any universal grace otherwise; then as nature may be called grace.
For grace is goodness, but goodness does not consist in a power to do good if
we will; but it is an habitual disposing of the will to that which is good
only, how much more is it so of grace which we count supernatural goodness.
Neither is the maintenance of such a power to do good, any contradiction to
holy Scripture, testifying that Men cannot believe, cannot repent, cannot
please God, cannot be subject to the law of God, cannot do good; For, this
impotency is only moral, and the subject of this impotency is only the will
and it consists in the corruption thereof, being wholly turned away from God,
and converted to the creature in an inordinate manner; Enemies and strangers
from God, their minds being set on evil things. Col. 1. 21. And to say that a
man can believe if he will, can from the love of visible and temporal things,
convert himself to the observation of Gods precepts if he will, which Austin
in his latter days, even then when he wrote his Retractations, professes to
be true omnino. And in his Book ad Marcellinum De Spiritu and litera. cap. 31.
Professes it an absurd thing to deny this namely, that every one may believe
if he will. Vide nunc utrum quisque credat si noluerit aut non credat si
voluerit. Quod si absurdum est etc. And cap. 32. Cum ergo fides in potestate
sit, quoniam cum vult quisque credit, and cum credit volens credit. I say to
affirm this (namely that a man can believe if he will) is no more then to say,
that a dead man can speak if he were alive. For as the Scripture teaches,
that all men are dead in sin, 'till the spirit of regeneration comes to
breath into our hearts, the breath of a spiritual life; So this deadness is
to be found no where so much, as in the will. And therefore Aquinas professes,
that a man is more corrupt, quoad appetitum boni, then quoad intellectum very.
The Heathen could profess, Video meliora proboque deteriora sequor. And in my
experience I find that Arminians do not satisfy themselves with this
universality of grace, as to say, A man can do good if he will, unless they
add, that also potest velle; as I have observed in Corvinus. And those whom I
have in private been acquainted with do not rest in this, that All men can
believe if they will, but they say also, that by universal grace, the will is
enlivened, as I have seen under their hands, and thereby enabled to the willing
of any spiritual good, whereto they shall be excited. So that if they rested
here, to wit, in saying, that by universal grace all men may believe if they
will, there is no grace acknowledged by them, tending to the furtherance of the
good of mankind, but we acknowledge it as well as they, and make the extension
of it as large as they. And therefore the more vain and void of all reason is
their pretense, that we for want of acknowledging such an universality of grace
as they do, do drown men in carnal security, and countenance carnal
liberty. Only though we grant the reality of that which they maintain, yet we
deny that it deserves to be called grace, as touching the first prevenient
grace as they call it, which we with Austin say deserves to be called nature
rather then grace, as we speak of grace, to wit, as distinct from nature, and
indeed supernatural. And as for grace subsequent, that consisting only in
concourse, we deny that to be grace; for as much as Gods concourse is granted
as well to any sinful act, as to any gracious act, as now adays is commonly
acknowledged on all sides. But as for the enlivening of all men's wills, and
enabling them to will any spiritual good whereto they shall be excited (for
this is their very form of words) we utterly deny this, and are ready to
demonstrate the unreasonablenesse thereof. For first seeing this cannot be
understood of life natural but of life spiritual, it follows that all men
by this doctrine are regenerated; and as they confess this disposition
continues in all unto death, so it follows, that all and every one should dye
in the state of regeneration also: Secondly, seeing there are but three sorts
of qualities in the soul of a reasonable creature, as Aristotle has observed,
to wit, powers, passions, and habits; it follows that this enlivening of the
will must consist, either in giving it new powers, or new passions, or new
habits, which it had not before. But neither of these can be affirmed with any
sobriety, neither do I find that they look to be called to any such account,
but in their aeriall contemplations of Gods attributes, especially of his mercy
and justice, shaped at pleasure, do conceive hand over head, that such an
enlivening there must be of the will of man in all, without troubling
themselves to enquire wherein it consists. But let us proceed in our trial of
the soundness of it, by the touchstone of rational and Christian discourse.
First therefore, I say it can be no new power infused into the will by this
enlivening; For the will it self is a power; and it was never heard that
potentia can be subjectum potentiae, a power can be the subject of a power; and
that a power should be in a power, as an accident in the subject thereof.
Rational powers are but two, the power of understanding, and the power of
willing, and both these are natural, following ex principiis speciei, from the
very nature of the humane soul, as all confess. But some may say, are there
not supernatural powers bestowed on man as well as natural? I answer, these
supernatural powers, are but the elevating of the natural powers unto
supernatural objects; as the understanding by enlightening it, and the will by
sanctifying it. Never was it said, I presume, that a man regenerate had two
understandings in him, by the one to understand things natural, and by the
other to understand things spiritual; but that by the same understanding he
understands both, but by light of nature the one, by light of grace the other.
The holy Ghost says, That they who are accustomed to do evil, can no more
do good, then a Blackemore can change his skin, and a Leopard his spots: Yet
when men of evil become good, they get not new powers properly, but new
dispositions rather of their natural powers, which we call habits, and may be
called moral powers, but not of indifferency to do good or evil, such as the
natural power of the will is, but such as whereby is wrought in the will, a
good likeing of that which is good, an abhorring of that which is evil; so
that indeed these moral powers do not make the will able to will, but rather
actually willing of that which is good in general, which general willingness
is specified according to objects present, and opportunities offered of doing
good in one kind rather then another. Like as justice makes a man willing unto
just actions, which willingness is exercised this way or that way, according
to emergent occasions. Secondly, no new passions are given by this enlivening
of the will; well our passions may be ordered aright, both touching their
objects, and touching the season, and touching the measure, and touching the
rule of them; and in respect of this gracious ordering of them, they may be
called new; like as a man regenerate is called a new man, though as he has the
same members of his body, nor more nor less, so he has still the same
faculties and passions of the soul, no more nor no less; but these faculties
are better seasoned, these passions are better ordered, and in like sort, these
members of the body, are better employed then they were before; before they
were made weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, now they are made, weapons of
righteousness unto God. Romans 6. 13. Thirdly, let us enquire whether by this
pretended enlivening of the will common to all men, there are any new habits
engendered. For that is the most probable. And so we commonly say that in
regeneration, besides the receiving of the spirit of God to dwell in our
hearts, which is a great mystery, there are certain habits whereby our
natural powers are elevated unto supernatural objects, and thereby fitted to
perform supernatural acts; and these are but three, (and accordingly but
three sorts of supernatuall acts) and commonly accounted the three Theological
virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity; And all moral virtues, which for the
substance of them, in reference to their acts whereby they are acquired, and
which they do bring forth, are found in natural men, do become Christian
graces, as they are sanctified by these three, and as their actions do proceed
from these. By faith we apprehend things beyond the compass of reason, by hope
we wait for the enjoying of such things, which neither eye has seen, etc. And
by charity, we love God (whom yet we have not seen) even to the contempt of
our selves. Now I presume they will not say that these habits of Faith, Hope,
and Charity, are bestowed upon all and every one, by that fained universal
grace of theirs. And what other habits they do or can devise, I have had as
yet no experience, neither am I able to comprehend. And indeed faith does not
leave a man in indifferency to believe or no; nor hope to wait, or no; nor
charity to love God, or no: but they do all dispose the heart of man to
believe only, to wait upon God only, to love God only; they being the curing of
infidelity, and despair, and hatred of God, or rather the removing of them,
yet but in part, as regeneration in this life is but in part, there being still
a flesh in us lusting against the spirit. Gal. 5. 17. Thus we may maintain,
that albeit every man has power to believe if he will, and repent if he will,
a will to believe and a will to repent being the greatest work in the work of
grace, I mean the renovation of the will, and making it willing to that which
is good, though it requires strength also to master the lusting of the flesh,
whereby it grows simply and absolutely potent to do every good thing, without
any effectual impediment from within, yet nevertheless, till this renovation
be wrought by the hand of God, we may well say there is an utter impotency
moral to do any thing that is good and pleasing in the sight of God, whereby
they cannot believe, they cannot repent, they cannot be subject to the law of
God, And if to Preach this doctrine be to breed sloth, to drown men in carnal
security, and to countenance carnal liberty; then our Savior did breed sloth
etc. when he told his hearers plainly, He that is of God hears Gods words, ye
therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God, Ioh. 8. 47. As likewise
when he Preached unto them in this manner. No man can come to me, except the
Father which sent me draw him. Ioh. 6. 44. And the Evangelist also in saying,
He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not see
with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and
I should heal them. Ioh. 12. 40. And none more then Moses, when he tells the
people of Israel in the Wilderness, saying, Ye have seen all that the Lord did
before your eyes in the land of Egypt, unto Pharaoh and unto all his servants,
and to all his land. The great temptations which thine eyes have seen, those
great miracles and wonders, yet the Lord has not given you an heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day. Yet this Author
confesses that our Saviors hearers, and Moses his hearers, many of them might
be Godly men; but no thanks to this doctrine of theirs that they were so (the
true and natural genius whereof (to wit, of Christ's doctrine and Moses his
doctrine, for it is apparent, that it is the same with ours in this particular
we now speak of) is to breed sloth, to drown men in carnal security, and to
countenance carnal liberty) but to some thing else, either to Gods providence
who will not suffer this Doctrine (for his own glory and the good of men) to
have any great stroke in their lives; or to men's incogitancy, who think not of
reducing it, ad praxim, or drawing conclusions out of it, but rest in the naked
speculation of it, as they do of many others; or lastly to some good
practical conclusions, which they meet with in Gods word, and apply to their
lives (as they do not the former deductions) such as these are. Be ye holy as
I am holy: without holiness no man shall see God: Spectatum admissi risum
teneatis amici? Yet I pray restrain that, and give your sorrow course rather
in beholding such profane aspersions cast upon the holy Doctrine of Christ,
his Prophets and Apostles; as if thereby sloth were bred, and men drowned in
carnal security, and carnal liberty countenanced. We are of another mind, for
Wisdom is justified of her Children; we observe the wisdom of God herein to
prevent the greatest illusions of Satan; and such Doctrines as stand in most
opposition unto grace. The morality of Heathen men was admirable; yet were it
far greater, we conceive no greater opposition unto grace, then to look for
justification by it. In the next place, we conceive there is no greater
opposition unto grace, then for a man to arrogate unto himself, ability to do
that which is pleasing in the sight of God. Our Savior has said. John 15. 4.
that, As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the
Vine, so neither can we except we abide in him. So that either all the World
must be engrafted into Christ or else it is not possible they should bring
forth sweet grapes. Yet these men will have all and every one, to have their
wills enlivened and enabled to will any spiritual good, whereby they shall be
excited. Is this doctrine of theirs fit to humble them, and not rather to puff
them up with a conceit of their own sufficiency? Is not our doctrine far more
fit to humble us, and to what other end tends that of Moses, The Lord has
not given you an heart to perceive, eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this
day, But to beat them out of the conceit of any sufficiency in them, to profit
either by Gods word, or by his works, so as to be drawn thereby to do any
thing that was pleasing in the sight of God; and can there be any true
holiness where humility is wanting? Again, they are only thankful unto God
for giving them power to believe, to repent, and for exciting them hereunto;
and concurring with them to the act of faith and repentance, for they
acknowledge no other grace but this; We are bound by our doctrine to be
thankful, not only for these operations, but also for causing us to walk in
his statutes, to keep his judgments and do them, for healing our ways, our
backslidings, our Rebellions, they by their Doctrine, are bound to be
thankful unto God, for no other grace in the way of grace prevenient, then
such as he vouchsafes to reprobates, and did vouchsafe to Cain, to Judas, and
to the Devils themselves; how is it that they are not stricken with fear,
least in this case their condition be no better, then the condition of
reprobates though God in good time may provide better things for them, then
their opinions, have any congruity unto, having course only to the obscuring
and defacing of Gods grace? We by our doctrine are bound to give God thanks for
ruling us with a mighty hand, and making us to pass under the rod, and
bringing us unto the bond of the Ezekiel. 20. 37. Ezekiel. 37. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Ephesians. 2.
Phil. 2. 13.
Covenant; for taking away our stony heart, and giving us an heart of flesh;
for circumcising our hearts to love him with all our heart; for raising us out
of the dead, when he found us dead in sin; for working in us both the will,
and the deed of every good work, not according to any thing in us, but
according to his good pleasure: And this is so far from breeding sloth in us,
or to drown us in carnal security in the Apostles judgment as that upon this
very ground, as by a forceable inducement he exhorts us to work out our
Salvation with fear and trembling, manifestly implying, that when men are of
another opinion, as namely to think that the will and deed of any good thing
is their own work, or if they do acknowledge it to be Gods work, yet if they
do not acknowledge it to be wrought by God, according to his good pleasure,
but according to some disposition whereby they dispose themselves thereunto;
that is the highway to make them carnally secure, and how but by a carnal
confidence that they have power to turn to God when they list, to believe and
repent when they will, and withal that their wills are as pliable to good as
to evil, and so make it an easy matter at any time to turn to God. I appeal
to the judgment of every sober conscience to judge between us which of our
Doctrines most tends to the countenancing of carnal security, according to the
Tenor of the Apostles exhortation in this place and that in coherence with the
reason whereby he does enforce it, theirs, or ours. But to proceed, they
acknowledge Christ to have merited for them only a power to believe and repent
and means to excite them hereunto, and concourse divine to the act of
believing and repenting in case they will; we acknowledge not only all this,
but over and above that Christ has merited for us, the working of our wills
effectually and predominantly hereunto, and that God makes us perfect to every
good work, working in us that which is pleasing in his sight through Jesus
Christ. Nay what will you say, if the Remonstrants Heb. 13. 21.
now a days openly profess, that Christ merited not for any man faith and
regeneration, and I commend them for their ingenuity, in dealing fairly and
plainly confessing that which their opinion does manifestly drive unto. Lastly
we confess that God has power as to show mercy on whom he will, and harden
whom he will, so to make whom he will a vessel of mercy, and whom he will a
vessel of wrath, this we clearly profess, namely, that God has such power
even over our selves, and our childeren and all those that are near and dear
unto us, as over any others: But this these adversaries of ours now a days
utterly deny; now I pray consider whose doctrine savoreth of greater holiness
in acknowledging the sovereignty of God over his creatures, theirs or ours? But
it will not be labor lost altogether to consider those causes whereunto he is
pleased to impute that Godliness, which is found in us. The first is Gods
providence; and indeed I find them liberal enough in acknowledging Gods
providence in general terms, and as forward to blast it when they come to
particulars. Now as for that providence which is the cause of Godliness, we
like plain fellows commonly call it grace, and the ground of this Authors
subtility in calling it providence and not grace, I comprehend not. But what is
that operation of providence divine or grace which is the cause of Godliness?
Is it any other in his opinion then that universal grace whereby they have
power to be Godly and which grace God affords unto Reprobates, and that
exciting grace whereby God persuades them to be Godly, and his readiness to
concur to any act of Godliness in case we will: and is not all this afforded
(in his opinion) to Reprobates as well as to the elect, to them that have no
Godliness at all in them, as to them that have? And why may not this doctrine
of ours whereby we maintain, that God works in us both the will and the deed
according to his goodpleasure, be a means to make us set our selves to the
working out of our Salvation with fear and trembling, considering that the
Apostle professes this doctrine of Gods energeticall operation of every good
thing in us as a strong inducement to work out our Salvation with fear and
trembling; and wherein consists any man's Godliness if not in this, to wit, in
working out his Salvation with fear and trembling? And is it not apparent that
we maintain this doctrine. namely, that God is he who works in us both the
will and the deed, and every good thing, and that according to his good
pleasure in far more undoubted manner then they do. And how can it appear
that they do acknowledge this? To give us power to will that which i good
(which is the effect of that universal grace they talk of) is this to work
in us either the will or the deed? To excite us by persuasion and exhortation
to will and do that which is good, to believe and to repent, is to work
either in us the will or deed of that which is good, of faith of repentance?
Lastly to be ready to concur with us to the will or deed of faith and
repentance if so be we will concur with him to the same, or to concur with
us to the producing of the act of willing and the act of doing that which is
good, in case we produce the same act of willing and doing that which is good,
is this to work in us both the will and the deed? Consider I pray is it not
true that God is as ready to concur with us to any sinful act, in case we
will concur with him; and does he not concur with man to the produceing of
any sinful act, in case man at that time does produce it; And will any sober
man say that this is also for God to work in him both the will and the deed of
every sinful act? And why might we not say so, if God works it only by
concourse? Lastly to work in us both the will and the deed provided that man
will concur to the working hereof not otherwise, is this to work it
according to his good pleasure, and not rather according to man's good pleasure?
And how I pray, or in what sense does he say that God by his providence will
not suffer this doctrine to have any stroke in our lives? For if he suffers it
not, then he hinders it; let it therefore be made appear how he hinders it; To
concur with us, if we will concur with him in the producing of any act of
Godliness, is this to hinder our carnal security? If so then to concur with
us to the producing of any sinful act is to hinder our Godliness. Surely to
give power whereby men are enabled to do any spiritual good if they will is
not to hinder carnal security, for such a power is given to all by universal
grace, yet this does nothing hinder the carnal security of many thousands. Or
does he hinder it by exciting us to the contrary? Yet if this doctrine (as we
conceive) be apt to drown us in carnal security, how can he be said to hinder
us from it? For either the doctrine must yield to such excitations and
exhortations from carnal security; or such exhortations must yield to the
doctrine, especially considering what Austin says, that if there be any
difference between docere and suadere or exhortari; yet even this doctrinae
generalitate comprehenditur. And for incogitancy, which is a second device,
pretended as the cause why this doctrine does not expose us to carnality, is it
not incredible, these points being so much ventilated by them as none more? The
Church of God having been exercised with none more (as I think) these hundred
years; that men should not think of, or consider of those dangerous
consequences in manners, as these do forge in their own brains. And as for
the last, imputing our Godliness to some good practical conclusions; may I
not justly say, that if ever any man wrote with the spirit of giddiness, this
Author deserves to have a chief place amongst them: For compare his answer to
the second objection with this; There he says such dissolute conclusions as
these following, do arise out of this doctrine of ours: If I be chosen, I must
of necessity believe and be saved; If I be cast off, I must as necessarily not
believe and be damned; what need I therefore take thought either way about
means or end. Now will it not as well follow, what need I therefore take
thought of holiness, of obedience? For even these are as good practical
conclusions. Believe and thou shall be saved. Repent and thou shall be saved,
and whosoever bebelieveth not shall be damned. As these, Be ye holy as I am
holy. Without holiness no man shall see God. If ye consent and obey, ye shall
eat the good things of the Land. And by the way observe I pray, with what
judgment he calls them practical conclusions; whereas all save two of them,
are exhortations rather then conclusions; And those two; to wit, Without
holiness no man shall see God, and, Godliness has the promises, both of this
life etc. I should take them to be principles rather then conclusions. Whether
simple men do apply their brains to ponder and consider this doctrine or no,
I know not; but certainly the learned and Godly maintainers of it, have had
cause enough to ponder it, and consider it thoroughly, and have given evidence
enough of their thorough consideration of it; yet have they fetched no such
sequells out of it. If simple men do, and our adversaries be of the number of
them, and content themselves with such simplicity; yet is it not enough for us
that the Apostle does not? the holy Apostle S. Paul? but expressly enforces
the contrary there from; namely; that because of God works in us the will and
the deed according to his good pleasure, therefore it becomes us to work out
our Salvation with fear and trembling? Now which of us do most exactly
concur with the Apostle in mainning that God does work in us both the will
and the deed according to his good pleasure, I am very well content, that all
the World both wise and simple, both Learned and unlearned may judge.

2. As touching the second; First let us consider how the objection is shaped.
Secondly, as it lies, with what judgment and sobriety it is impugned.

1. It is true men are absolutely elected or absolutely rejected; but we
content not our selves with generalities, wherein as Aristotle has observed,
do lurk many equivocations: Neither do we delight in confounding things that
differ. Election and rejection or reprobation, and in general the will of God,
may be considered, either Quoad actum voluntis, as touching the act of God
willing, or as touching the things willed. Of this distinction this Author
takes no notice; It is fit for some and advantageous to fish in troubled
waters. Now as touching the act of God willing; both Aquinas has proved, that
there can be no cause thereof; and withal professes, that never was any so
mad as to say That merits can be the cause of predestination, quoad actum
praedestinantis, as touching the act of God predestinating. And Bradwardine
has curiously disputed this way that no will of God is conditional, to will
quoad actum volentis, And Piscator against Vorstius has proved the same after
his way; and by variety of demonstration this way may be convinced, as in part
I have showed in this discourse, both on the part of election, and on the part
of reprobation. And both Dr Jackson in his book of Providence, professes that
the distinction of Voluntas antecedens and consequens, or antecedent and
consequent will in God is to be understood quoad res volitas as touching the
things willed, as much as to say, non quoad actum volentis. And Gerardus
Vossius drawing the distinction of will antecedent and will consequent unto the
distinction of will absolute and will conditional, applies it only quoad res
Histor. haer. Pelag. l. 7. th. 2. p. 638.
volitas, and so interpriteth Fathers discourse thereof; And of a conditional
will gives this instance; God will have men to be Saved, in case they believe
where faith is clearly made the condition of Salvation, a temporal thing the
condition of a temporal thing, not the condition of Gods will to save; it
being no way fit that a temporal thing should be made the condition of a thing
eternal, such as is Gods will to save. And this is more apparent by the
reading of Vossius himself. Histor: Pelag: l: 7. treating of Gods will to save
all. Now if we speak thus of Gods will quoad res volitas as touching the
things willed; these things willed being very different, we have reason to
consider them distinctly also. Now these things are either grace or glory
commonly called Salvation, And as touching grace, to wit, the grace of
regeneration, the grace of faith and repentannee, we willingly confess that
Gods will to confer them is so absolute, that he has determined to confer
them according to the mere pleasure of his will, not according to man's works
(which is plain Pelagianisme and condemned in the Synod of Palestine above
1200 years ago) and as he gives them to whom he will, so he denies them to
whom he will according to that Romans 9. 18. He has mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he hardneth. But as touching Salvation or damnation in which
respect this Author usually speaks of the absolute or conditional will of
God; we uttererly deny, that God in the dispensation or administration, or
execution of these proceeds or ever did decree to proceed according to the
mere pleasure of his own will, but altogether according to their works. For
albeit God has made no law according whereto he means to proceed in giving or
denying grace, yet has he made a law according whereto he proceeds in
bestowing Salvation, and inflicting damnation. And the law is this: Whosever
believes shall be Saved, Whosoever believes not shall bedamned 2 Cor. 5. 10.
We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things, which are done in his body according to that he has done,
whether good or evil. So that according to that sense wherein this Author
usually speaks of the absolute and conditional will of God, we utterly deny
that God does absolutely elect any man to Salvation, or reject any man unto
damnation; though he does absolutely elect some unto grace, that is to the
grace of regeneration; to the grace of faith and repentance, and absolutely
reject others there from. For as much as he bestows these graces on some and
denies them unto others not according to their works, but according to the
mere pleasure of his own will, but he does not inflict damnaton or bestow
Salvation according to the mere pleasure of his will, but according unto man's
works. And as he carries himself in the execution of Salvation and damnation,
after the same manner he did from everlasting decree to carry himself, namely
to Save no man of ripe years but by way of reward of their faith, repentance,
and good works; so to damn none but for their infidelity, impenitency and
evil works. As for the manifestation of Gods will of election and reprobation
unto any, we say, that ordinarily, man may be assured of his election. For the
spirit of God is given to this very end even to shed the love of God in our
hearts, that is, Gods love toward us. Rom: 5. 5. And what is the shedding
therefore in our hearts, but his working in us a sense and feeling thereof,
especially considering that the sense of Gods love to us is the cause of our
love to wards God; according to that 1 John. 4. 19. We love him because he
loved us first: and accordingly the spirit is said to testify unto our spirits
that we are the sons Romans 8. And if sons then heirs, even heirs of God,
and heirs annexed with Christ. And the Apostle St Peter exhorts us to give
diligence te make our election and vocation sure; implying manifestly 2 Pet. 1.
that men may be sure of their election; otherwise why should our Savior wish
his Disciples to rejoice not in this that Devils were subdued unto them, but
that their names were written in Heaven. And by what means may a man be assured
hereof, but either Luke 10. 20.
immediately by the testimony of the spirit, or mediatly by the fruits of the
spirit as the fruits of our election; one where of is faith plainly so
signified Act, 13. 48. As many believed as were ordained to everlasting Life.
And Act. 2. last. God added daily to the Church such as should be Saved; And
repentance is another: Act. 11. 18. Then has God unto the Gentiles also given
repentance unto life. Giving to understand that as many as to whom God gives
repentance, he has ordained them unto life. And indeed by the work of our
faith, and labor of our love, and the patience of our hope, others come to be
assured of our election (how much more our selves, no man knowing the things of
man so as the spirit of man 1 Cor: 2.) Thus St Paul professes his assurance of
the election of the Thessalonians 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3, 4. We remember the work of
your faith, and the labor of your love etc. Knowing beloved brethren that ye
are elect of God. And hereupon he proceeds to assure them, that Antichrist by
all his deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness shall never prevail over them; in
as much as he prevails only over them that perish 2 Thessalonians: 2. 10. But as for
them they are the elect of God; And how does he know that? Surely by their
faith and sanctification which were visible in them v: 13. But we ought to give
God thanks always for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, because that God
has from the beginning chosen you unto Salvation by sanctification of the
spirit and faith of the truth. But as for reprobation we say that no man can by
any ordinary way be assured thereof, seeing nothing but final perseverance in
infidelity or impenitency is the infallible sign thereof, whence it follows
that no way of desperation is open to one, but the way of assurance and
abundance of consolation is opened to the other, and thereby encouragement to
proceed cheerfully in the ways of Godliness, being assured that the more
holy they are the greater shall be their reward. And surely if certainty of
salvation were a means of licentiousness, the Apostle S. Peter would never
have exhorted us, to give diligence to make our calling and election sure. And
we manifestly seem to perceive strength 2 Pet. 1. 10.
of encouragement hereby unto Godliness; as being assured that Christ dyed for
us, to the end we might live unto him. And God receives us as Sons and
Daughters to this end, that we should purge our selves from all pollutions of
flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness in the fear of God. As also being
assured, that God will not lay our infirmities and 2 Cor. 7. 1. and 6. last.
sins unto our charge, and will be ready to keep us from presumptuous
sins, and however it fares with us, Yet sin shall not have dominion over
us, (and consequently we shall have the victory over it, either by obedience,
or by repentance) because we are not under the law but under grace. Romans 6. 12.
Now what encouragement is this to the Soldiers of Christ, to go on
chearefully and courageously in fighting the Lords battles against the world,
the flesh and the Devil, seeing we are assured the day of victory and the glory
of it shall be ours in the end: God keeping us by his power through faith unto
Salvation 1 Pet. 1. And delivering us from every evil work (to wit either by
obedience or by repentance) and preserving us to his heavenly kingdom; and
that either, by delivering us from the hour aftentation which comes all over
the world Revel: 3. Or delivering us out of it 2 Pet: 2. 9. Or having an eye to
our strength so to order it that we shall be able to bear it 1 Cor: 10. 14. As
for those that have not yet any comfortable evidence of their election; yet
considering that they may have it, and albeit the number of the elect are by
far, fewer then the reprobate; yet considering how few have the Gospel in
comparison to those that enjoy it not; though Turks and Saracens and Heathens
are without hope Ephesians. 2. 12. and 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. Yet we Christians are not yea,
albeit of them that are called, but few are chosen Mat. 20. 16. and 22, 14. Yet
considering how many corrupt ways there are amongst Christians, Nestorians,
Armenians, Abyssines or Coptites, who join circumcision with the Gospel, as in
Egypt and Ethiopia, (the Greek Church denying the proceeding of the Holy Ghost
from the son) and corrupted with many other superstitions. Lastly considering
how far Antichristanity is spread and the abominable Idolatry of the Church of
Rome, we whom God has delivered out of Babylon have no cause (I mean any
particular person) to project, that because the elect are but few, therefore we
are not of the number of them, and thereupon give over all care of hearkening
to Gods word, which is the power of God unto Salvation and may show its power
upon us also we know not how soon, but rather as our Savior answered (being
demanded of his disciples whether there were but few that should be saved)
saying strive [you] to enter in at the straight gate, plainly giving to
understand, that as the gate is said to be straight that leads unto Life, so
there be but few that enter thereat and therefore they should strive so much
the more to be of the number of those few. For what if along time we have
little or nothing profited, what if we have cause to doubt whether we have any
true faith or no; such doubts maybe better signs then we are awar of;
otherwise why should the Apostle exhort the Corinthians to examine themselves
and prove whether they were in the faith or no? But however it fairs with us
does not the Apostle plainly teach us, that God calls some at the first hour
of the day, some at the the third, some at 2 Cor. 13. 5.
the last?

2. Now I come to the consideration of his answer to the objection, as himself
has formed it. And first I observe, that whereas he pretends to build his
answer upon consideration of the number of Reprobats without comparison greater
then the number of the elect, yet the absurd reasoning which he brings
hereupon, does nothing at all depend on that. For albeit the number of the
elect, were greater then the number of such as are Reprobats, and that without
comparison; yet the reasoning here deduced from the contrary proposition has
equally place, as in the contrary case, As namely, to reason thus: Either I am
absolutely chosen to grace and glory or absolutely cast off from both. Secondly
the joining of grace and glory together, as this Author does join them in this
reasoning shaped by him is a miserable confounding of things that differ. For
to be absolutely chosen unto grace is to be ordained to have grace conferred
upon him not according to any work of his, but merely according to the good
pleasure of Gods will, answerably to that of the Apostle, God has mercy on
whom he will, but no man is so chosen unto glory, as namely to be ordained to
have Salvation bestowed upon him not according unto works, but according to
the mere pleasure of God, if we speak of men of ripe years. For God has
ordained to bestow Salvation on such only by way of reward of their faith,
repentance, and good works. So on the other side to be asolutely cast off from
grace, is to be ordained to have grace denied him; not according to any work
of his, but merely according to the good pleasure of Gods will, like as Paul
professes, that the Lord hardens whom he will, But no man is so castaway
from Glory, or unto damnation, as namely, to be ordained to be deprived of
Glory and to be damned, merely for the good pleasure of God, but altogether
for his infidelity, impenitency and evil works. Thirdly, no such thing
follows as here is inferred from the supposition of election unto Salvation.
For seeing no man is elected to obtain Salvation, whether he believe or no, but
only in case he believe, hereupon men are rather excited to labor for faith,
then to be careless thereof; and farther we say, that as God has ordained to
bring them to Salvation, so he has ordained to bring them hereunto by
sanctification and faith. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. And the word of God is a powerful
means to work them hereunto, even to the working out of their Salvation with
fear and trembling, and that because they are given to understand that God is
he who wroketh in them both the will Phil. 2. 13.
and the deed according to his good pleasure. On the other side if a man be
ordained to damnation, yet seeing no man is ordained to be damned but for
despising the means of grace in case he hear the Gospel; and for ought any man
knows he may as well be ordained to salvation as to damnation; this I should
think, is rather an excitement not to despise or neglect the means of grace,
then to despise or neglect them. Suppose God should not damn any man, but
annihilate them, and suppose this were known unto us; by the same argumentation
it would follow, that a man should have no care of good works: But this
consequent is notoriously untrue. For seeing the perfection of my reasonable
nature, whereby I differ from brute Beasts, consists in knowledge and moral
virtues; and there is no knowledge that does more ennoble us, then the
knowledge of God, and no better rule of morality, then the law of God; surely
it stood me upon in reason, to strive according to my power to know God, and to
be obedient rather then otherwise; although I know for certain, that after
certain years, both body and soul should be returned unto nothing. Come we
now to the consideration of this reasoning, in respect of grace. Suppose God
has elected me unto grace; yet seeing he bestows not grace but by his word,
therefore there is no reason I should neglect the use of his word, but rather
good reason why I should embrace it, and that with all earnestness. Like as in
case God has ordained I shall have Children, does it hence follow that I need
not use the company of a Woman; because seeing God has decreed I shall have
Children, therefore I may be sure to have them, whether I company with a Woman
or no, belike right as Capons come by Chicken? On the other side, suppose God
has not ordained me unto grace; yet hence it follows not, that I should
neglect all care of moral virtue, yea or the use of Gods word. First not of
moral virtue; for next unto grace, moral virtue commends a man, and like as
many heathens were famous for morality, without any sanctifying grace; so may I
be in the same kind of reputation also. And seeing no better rules of morality
are to be found, then in the Scriptures, therefore may I well be moved to give
my self to the study thereof. And Austin tells us, that some, even of
reprobates, by the word of God may Proficere ad exteriorem vitae emendationem,
quo mitius puniantur. Last of all, consider how the like objections were made
against that destiny, which was maintained by the Stoics. Carneades was a
great oppugner of the Stoics, yet was ashamed of such a kind of Argumentation
as this Author affects. For it was commonly accounted ignava ratio; and thus
Turnebus writes of it, Ignava autem ista ratio, captiosa cum esset, and
calumniae plena, a Carneade non probabatur, alioque argumento factum sine ulla
captione oppugnabat. He had other manner of reasons to oppose Fate Stoicall,
then by so sorry an argumentation as this. And this is delivered by Turnebus,
upon that passage in Cicero's book De Fato, Where he shows how Chrysippus did
make answer unto this very argument in effect above 1600 years a go; Take the
words as they lie in Cicero, Nec nos impediet illa ignava ratio quae dicitur:
Appellatur enim quidem a Philosophis (...), cui si pare amus, nihil est omnino
quod agamus in vita. Hic enim interrogant (now I beseech you mark the argument
well) si fatum tibi est ex hoc morbo convalescere, sive medicum adhibueris,
sive non, convalesces. Item si fatum tibi est ex hoc morbo non convalescere
sive tu Medicum adhibueris, sive non, non convalesces. If it be destined that
you shall recover out of this disease, whether you use the help of a Physician
or no, you shall recover. Again, if it be destined that you shall not recover
out of this disease, whether you use a Physician or no, you shall not recover.
Now compare this, I pray, with this Authors argumentation in this place; If I
am chosen I must of necessity believe and be saved; What need therefore to take
thought either about means or end? as much as to say, either of believing or
of salvation. Again, If I be cast off, I must as necessarily not believe and
be damned; In vain therefore do I trouble my self about means, or end; as
much as to say, about laboring and endeavoring for Faith, whereby I may avoid
damnation: And judge, I pray, whether there be one hayres breadth of
difference, between these argumentations. For like as it is unreasonable to
conceive, that man is destined to recover out of sickness, but by use of
means, such as is the use of a Physician; in like sort, as unreasonable it is
to conceive, that God has destined any man of ripe years to be brought to
salvation, but by faith in Christ; or that God has appointed any man to be
damned, but for want of faith, or want of repentance. Observe I pray the
censure that is passed upon it in Cicero, Recte hoc genus interrogationis
ignavum atque iners nominatur, quod eadem ratione, omnis e vita tollitur actio.
And farther he shows how that the same argument, if there were any force in
it, might have place, without all mention of Fate. Licet etiam immutare (says
he,) ut Fati nomen non adjunges, and eandem tamen teneas sententiam hoc modo,
si ex eternitate verum hoc fuit, ex iste morbo convalesces, sive adhibueris
medicum sive non, convalesces. Itemque si ex aeternitate hoc falsum fuerit, ex
isto morbo convalesces, sive adhibuer is medicum, sive non adhibuer is, non
convalesces; deinde caetera. In the next place there it is showed how
Chrysippus made answer to this argument. Haecratio a Crysipo reprehenditur:
Quaedam enim sunt (inquit) in rebus simplicia, quaedam copulata: simplex est
moretur eo die Socrates, Hinc sive quid fecerit, sive non fecerit, finitus est
moriendi dies. At si ita fatum sit, Nascetur Oedipus Laio, non poterit dici,
sive Laius fuerit cum muliere, sive non fuerit. Copulata enim res est and
confatalis; sic enim appellat qui a ita fatum sit, and concubiturum cum Uxore
Laium and ex eo Oedipum procreaturum. Then he illustrateth the absurdity of the
deduction in another manner thus, Ut si esset dictum, luctabitur Olympiis Milo,
and referret aliquis, Ergo sive habuerit adversarium sive non habuerit,
luctabitur, erraret. Est enim copulatum, luctabitur, quia sine adversario nulla
luctatio est. And he concludes all of this kind to be but captious
argumentations, and that they admit the same solution. Omnes igitur istius
generis captiones, eodem modo refelluntur. Sive tu medicum adhibueris, sive non
adhibueris, captiosum: tam enim fatale est medicum adhibere quam convalescere.
Haec, ut dixi, confatalia ille appellat. And this manner of solution was so
sufficient, that Carneades disdained to press the Stoics with this kind of
argumentation, though opposite enough to their opinion, as forthwith Cicero
expresses it. Carneades hoc totum genus non probabat, and minus inconsiderate
concludi hanc rationem putabat: itaque premebat alio modo, nec ullam adhibebat
calumniam. So that he condemned this as a calumnious argumentation against the
Stoics, though himself were a sore adversary of theirs.

And therefore if any Christians do reason thus, either in their hearts to
countenance them in profane courses; or justify such reasoning, thereby to
oppose Gods free grace in election, the unreasonablenesse thereof being thus
set forth, and acknowledged on both sides by the very light of nature, let them
take heed and fear least heathen men rise up in judgment against them. As for
Tiberius his opinion and persuasion, Omnia fato agi, it is apparent what he
understood by Fatum, for there it is said, that he was Mathematicae addictus;
whereby it seems, he went no farther then the stars, for the original of his
fate. But it Tiberius was circa Deos and religiones negligentior, were the
Stoics so too? I had thought that like as none were more opposite to the
Epicures then they, so none were more religious and devout among the Heathens
then they. Yet there is no opinion so true or good, but by a profane heart may
be abused. But as for the efficacy of Gods will, we are so far from
maintaining, that it takes away either the liberty of man's will, or the
contingency of second causes, that we profess with Aquinas, that the root of
all contingency, is the efficacious will of God; and with the Authors of the
Articles of the Church of Ireland, Artic. 11. That God did from all eternity
ordain, whatsoever in time should come to pass; and yet neither the liberty,
nor the contingency of second causes, is thereby destroyed, but established
rather.

DISCOURSE. The Fifth and last sort of Reasons. It is an Enemy to True Comfort.
SECT. I.
I Am come to my last reason against it, drawn from the Vncomfortablenesse of
it: It is a doctrine full of desperation, both to them that stand, and to them
that are fallen, to men out of temptation, and in it.

It 1. Leads men into temptation. 2. Leaves men in it.
And therefore it is no part of Gods word, for that is (...), good news to men,
a storehouse of sweet consolations for them that stand, and such as are
fallen. These things are written (says the Apostle) Romans 15. 4. That by
patience and consolation of the Scriptures we might have hope; implying that
therefore was the word written, and left to the Church, that by the comforts
contained in it, those poor souls that look toward heaven, might never want
in any changes or chances of this mortal life, a sweet gale of hope to refresh
them, and carry on their ship full merrily toward the Haven. It leads men into
temptation, and into such a one too, as is as sharp and dangerous as any the
tempter has. The Devil can easily persuade any man that makes absolute
reprobation a part of his creed, that he is one of those absolute Reprobates;
because there are more absolute Reprobates (even an hundred for one,) then
absolute chosen ones: and a man has a great deal more reason to think that he
is one of the most, then one of the least, one of the huge multitude of
inevitable castawaies, then one of the little flock, for whom God has
absolutely prepared a Kingdom. Such a man is not only capable of, but framed
and fashioned by his opinion for this suggestion; which is a very sore one, if
we may believe Calvin, Bucer, and Zanchius.

Calvin tells us, Quod nulla tentatione vel gravius, vel periculosius fideles
percellit Satan, that the Devil cannot assault a believer with a temptation
more dangerous. And a little after he says, It is so much Instit: l: 3. c: 24.
Sect: 4.
the deadlier, by how much commoner it is then any other, Rarissimus est cujus
non interdum animus hac cogitatione feriatur, unde tibi salus nisi ex Dei
electione? Electionis autem quae tibi revelatio? Quae si apud quempiam semel
invaluit, aut diris tormentis miserum perpetuo exeruciat, aut reddit penitus
attonitum. So ordinary is the temptation, that he who is at all times free from
it is a rare man (we are to conceive that he speaks of those that believe
absolute reprobation:) and so dangerous it is, that if it get strength, he
which is under it, is either miserably tormented, or mightily astonished. And a
little after this, he says again. Ergo si naufragium timemus, solicit ab
hoc scopulo cavendum, in quem nunquam sine exitio impingitur, He that will not
wrack his soul must keep from this rock.

Bucer also has a passage like to this, Vt caput omnis noxiae tentationis
(says he) repellenda est quaestio, sumusne praedestinati? Nam qui de hoc
dubitat, nec vocatumse, nec justificatum esse credere poterit, hoc est, nequit
In 8 Rom: q. 2. de praedest:
esse Christianus: This doubt whether we are predestined or no? Must be
repelled as the head of every pernicious temptation: for he that doubts of this
cannot be a Christian. Praesumendum igitur ut principium fidei nos omnes esse a
Deo praescitos. Every man therefore must presume it as a principle of faith
that he is elected.

This very speech of Bucers Zanchy makes use of to the same purpose. We see
then by the restimony of these worthy men, that this temptation is very
dangerous and ordinary too, to such as think Zanch: lib: 5: de natura Dei.
Quaest: de Praedest. Georg. Major in 2 Timothy 2. Fol.. 1109.
there are absolute reprobates. The truth of both will farther appear by the
example of Petrus Hosuanus a Schoolmaster in Hungary, who intending to hang
himself, signified in a letter which he left in his study for the satisfaction
of his friends and Countrymen, the cause of it, in that writing he delivered
these three things.

1. That he was of Calvin's and S. Austins opinion, that men are not dealt
withal, secundum bona, or mala opera, according to their works good or evil,
but that there are occultiores causae more hidden causes of men's eternal
condition.

2. That he was one of that woeful company of absolute castawaies, Vas
formatum in ignominiam, a vessel prepared to dishonor: and that therefore
(though his life had been none of the worst) he could not possibly be saved.

3. That being unable to bear the dreadful apprehensions of wrath, with which
he was affrighted he hanged himself. For these are some of his last words
there recorded, Discedo igitur ad Lacus Infernales aeternum dedecus patriae
meae, Deo vos commendo, cujus misericordia mihi negata est. I go to those
infernal lakes, a perpetual reproach to my Country, commending you to God
whose mercy is denied me.

Out of this example we may easily collect two things.

1. That men who think that there are many, whom God has utterly rejected out
of his only will and pleasure, may be easily brought to think by Satan's
suggestion, that they are of that company: And

2. That this temptation is very dangerous; I conclude therefore the first part
of my last Reason, that absolute Reprobation leads men into temptation.

TWISSE. Consideration.
AS I remember, when this Author first had resort unto some prime stickler for
the Arminian way to confer with him there about, it was told me that this
Author should allege, that our doctrine of election was a comfortable
doctrine: but then on the other side, it was alleged, that granting that, yet
with all it did expose to dessolutenes of life. And therefore I little expect
any such argument as this to be proposed, least of all to be ranged amonst the
number of those that are taken to be of a convincing nature. Yet is it the
less strange, because the Apostle tells us of some, that their course is
proficere in pejus, to grow worse and worse. But let us consider, whether he
speeds any better in this then in the former. And whereas he says, It is a
doctrine full of desperation both to them that stand, and to them that are
fallen. I do not find that in the accommodation of this argument, he takes any
more notice of this distinction throughout this Section. The Gospel is (...),
and the power of God unto Salvation; but to whom? Surely to them that believe.
Romans 1. 16. and preserve: Be faithful unto death and I will give thee a Crown
of Life. Revel. 2. 10. He that believes in him is not condemned, but he that
believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of
that only begotten Son of God John 3. 18. Likewise the comfort which the
Scripture ministers to strengthen men with patience to hold out in the promise
of Everlasting Life, though it be long in coming; as which is the portion only
of such as are not weary of well-doing, and faint not for according to that of
the Apostle, Be not weary of well-doing, so in good time ye shall reap if you
faint not. Gal. 6. 9. And as for poor souls, if they be poor in spirit,
undoubtedly they are blessed, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: And whose
doctrine, the Arminian or ours, does best maintain poverty of spirit, I am
very willing the different may judge Yet of the poor of the world and most
despised, God does choose to be rich in faith, and (in this poverty of spirit)
heirs of the Kingdom which God has prepared for them that love him. And Gods
Kingdom does most consist of such poor and despised creatures. Iac. 2. 5.
1 Cor: 1. 27, 28. And as for this love of God, we acknowledge that God does
not leave it in his elect to the liberty of their wills, but rather that he
works it in them by the circumcision of the heart: Deuteronomy: 30. 6. The Lord thy
God will circumcise thine heart and the heart of thy seed to love the Lord thy
God with all thine heart, and withal thy soul that thou may live. And
indeed the Kingdom is promised to none but such as love him. Jac: 2. 5. It is a
singular consolation that all things work together for the good of man; but
this consolation is applied only to them that love God, which are called
according to his purpose. Rom: 8. 28. And as for the phrase of looking toward
Heaven, if thereby be meant their waiting for Christ's coming, I make no
question but such also shall be delivered from the wrath to come. 1 Thessalonians: 1.
10. It being not possible they should wait for him, unless they love his
appearing: and the Apostle has assured such that the Lord has a Crown of
Righteousness in store to bestow upon them 2 Timothy: 4. 8. And I take the like
phraise to signify no less then the conversion of their hearts to God. Jer:
50. 4. In those days and in that time says the Lord, the children of Israel
shall come, they and the children of Judah together going, and weeping shall
they go, and seek the Lord their God, v. 5: They shall ask the way to Sion
with their faces thither-wards saying, come let us join our selves to the Lord
in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten.

Now I come to the particular accommodation of this argument against our
doctrine. And of this he says, that It leads men into temptation, and into
such a one as is as sharp and dangerous as any the tempter has. Now the
temptation here spoken of consists in this, that The Devil can easily persuade
a man that makes absolute reprobation a part of his Creed, that he is one of
those absolute reprobates because those are more absolute reprobates (even an
hundred for one) then absolute chosen ons, and a man has a greatdeale more
reason to think that he is one of the most then one of the least, one of the
huge multitude of inevitable castawayes, then on of that little flock, for whom
God has absolutely prepared a Kingdom. And this he pretends to prove out of
Calvin, Bucer, and Zanchius; and this together with a story related out of
Georgius Major a Lutheran concerning Petrus Glosuanus, a Schoolmasters in
Hungary is all his proof. Now in answer hereunto I will proceed by degrees.
First he continues still to serve his turn with the equivocation of this
phraise of absolute reprobation without distinguishing: And albeit, it may be
gathered by his discourse, that as Others do, so he himself considers it not
quoad actum volentis, as touching the act of God willing, but quoad res
volitas, as touching the things willed. Yet he is well pleased to confound the
things willed into one, as if they had no difference as touching their
absoluteness, whereas the denial of grace together with the inflicting of
damnation, (which are the things willed by reprobation which accordingly is
distinguished into Roprobation from grace, and reprobation from glory, or unto
damnation) are so different, that God does decree indeed the absoluteness of
the one, but he does not at all decree the absoluteness of the other, but
merely the conditional nature thereof. For grace he denies and purposes to
deny absolutely. For the Apostle plainly professes, That as God has mercy on
whom he will Rom: 9. 18. By bringing them unto faith. Romans 11. 30. So he
hardens whom he will by denying faith unto them. But as for Glory and
damnation, like as God does not absolutely, so neither did he decree absolutely
to deny the one and inflict the other, but only conditionally, to wit, in case
of final perseverance in sin. Therefore I have reason to understand him of
reprobation from grace, as often as he speaks of absolute reprobation, and
consequently his meaning must be that God does not deny grace, but upon
condition of man's doing or not doing some thing, so that if either man did
something or leave undon some thing, the^ God would give him grace, which for
want thereof he does not; which is as good, as in plain terms to profess,
That grace is given according to works. Then again consider, what is that
grace, which is given upon condition, and not absolutely by these men's opinion;
Is it which thy call universal, and wherein consists the enlivening of man's
will, and the enabling of him to will any spiritual good whereto, he shall be
excited? This cannot be given any otherwise then absolutely; for as much as
they make it to be given when a man comes into the world: and to that purpose
do allege that, John 1. 9. This is that true light which enlightens every
man that comes into the world. Or Is it exciting grace, that is not given
absolutely? This cannot be neither; For this exciting grace is in the ministry
of the Word. Now when the Gospel is brought unto a Nation, not only the civil
sort; but the most profane are made partakers of it indifferently; so that
predestination hereunto must be acknowledged even by the Arminians themseves to
be absolute, as it signifies predestination unto grace prevenient. So that if
any predestination unto grace, be not absolute but conditional, it must needs
be predestination unto grace subsequent. As for example, God does decree to
work in man the act of willing that which is good; this decree (say they) is
not absolute but conditional. Now I pray consider what is, or can be the
condition hereof, but the act of willing? And this indeed is their doctrine, as
I have seen it under the hand of one of them, namely, that God does work in us
(...) velle modo velimus, as much as to say, If we will make our selves willing
to believe, to repent, to do any good work, then God will make us willing
hereunto. This is the issue of the comfortable doctrine of these Arminians; and
unless we concur with them in such unsober expressions, we expose our selves
to the temptations of Satan (yea the forest temptations if we believe this
Author;) and bereave our souls of all comfort from the Scriptures; As if
divine consolations were like to their argumentations, the one as unsober as
the other. But let us consider the force of his Argument; If it be so easy a
matter for the Devil to persuade a man of this, how came it to pass that he
did not persuade Austin hereof, or Prosper, or Fulgentius, or any of those
ancient writers, in this argument against the Pelagians: How is it that he
could not perform so easy a matter upon Calvin, Bucer, Beza, Zanchy, Junius,
Piscator, or any other of those famous writers in this argument? How is it that
he prevails over so few in comparison? Nay, consider was there ever any that
was persuaded, or can this Author produce any evidence to prove, that ever any
was persuaded that himself was a Reprobate upon this ground, to wit, because
the number of Reprobates are by far fewer then the number of Gods elect.
though (as he speaks) an hundred for one? I have read of diverse, collected by
Goulartius within that century of years next preceding his work, that have
cast themselves away in despair; yet not all neither upon conceit of their
absolute reprobation: And of them that have so conceived, not one do I find
that has entertained this conceit upon the ground here mentioned by this
Author Francis Spira is a strange president, but the ground of this desperate
condition is manifested to have bin this, that he co^ceived himself to have
sined the sin against the Holy Ghost. Many in our days have been known to
have made themselves a way, and this very year 1632, has brought forth many
strange examples in this kind; but hitherto I have not heard that the ground of
this their desperate resolutions was this, that the Devil had persuaded them
they were absolute Reprobates, much less that they were persuaded hereunto by
so sorry a ground, as that which this Author alleges. And as before I
signified, all this must proceed of reprobation from grace; And if God deny
grace upon the mere pleasure of his will, and not according to men's works,
the way is open to desperation, and it is an easy matter for the Devil to
persuade us that we are absolute Reprobates; as this Author with great zeal
of his cause, belike upon the singular comfort he finds in his own way,
disputes. But over whom has the Devil this power? Not over Heathens, for
they are nothing acquainted with the doctrine of election, and reprobation; but
over Christians; Yet consider I pray, who are Christians, but such as believe
in Christ? And is it an easy matter for the Devil to persuade such as believe
in Christ that they are Reprobates? If so then either as it is reprobation from
grace, or as it signifies reprobation from glory, not as it signifies
reprobation from grace; for it is supposed they are in the state of grace, to
wit, in the state of faith, which is the prime grace. As for reprobation from
glory, we do not maintain that God does absolutely deny that, or that he
decreed absolutely to deny that, but only to such as should be found to dye in
sin. Again, as many as maintain absolute reprobation, they do withal
maintain that faith is a fruit of election and consequently by the Genius of
their doctrine must conclude that they are elect and not Reprobates. Again,
they according to their doctrine do maintain, that who is once in the state
of regeneration connot fall a way totally or finally: Therefore they are not so
easy to be persuaded that they are Reprobates at all, but elect rather. Let
them, that is our adversaries, look to this, and that they are not easily
persuaded by the Devil that they are reprobates, at least, that they neither
have or can have any assurance of their election, for as much as they deny
faith to be a fruit of election; and whatsoever their faith be, yet are of
opinion that they may totally and finally fall from it, and be damned. Farther
consider, seeing this Author denies not, but the damnation of every Reprobate
is decreed by God everlastingly, and that irrevocably, though upon foresight of
final perseverance in sin. I pray what comfort is it for any man that he is
not an absolute Reprobate, if so be he is persuaded that he is a Reprobate, and
from everlasting ordained to condemnation? Now I will prove that it is an easy
matter for the Devil to persuade any Arminian that he is a Reprobate, by the
same argument which this Author uses against us. For seeing the Reprobates
are more by far then the elect, even an hundred for one, and withal that it
is an easy thing for the Devil to persuade any man that he is rather of that
number which is greatest then of that which is least, hence it follows by his
own form of argumentation that it is an easy matter for the Devil to
persuade any Arminian that he is a Reprobate. Yet the vanity of this
argumentation I have formerly showed by representing first the vast number of
Heathens in all ages in comparison unto Christians. Secondly the variety of
Sects in Christian Religion, and that most of them miserably corrupt, together
with the vast number of profane persons on the on side, and of Hypocrites on
the other, why should any man that is privy to his own heart, as looking
toward Heaven, be carried away with so base a pretense, as to conceive
himself to be a Reprobate, especially considering the nature of man to hope
the best of his fortunes, and that upon no ground to speak of, as it appears
in those who venture in Lotteries. Whereas every true Christian believing in
the Christ has a certain ground for the assurance of his election by our
doctrine. And truly I am verily persuaded the Devil is more wise then to think
so base an illusion as this, is likely to prevail; Save that in case this
Author or his Informator do believe as they pretend, hereupon he may take
advantage to work upon them according to their own rules to persuade them
thereby, that they are Reprobates: and 'till we find he has prevailed so with
them, we have no reason to conceive that it is an easy matter for him to
persuade us that we are absolute Reprobates; no nor then neither considering
that we make no such rules, but rather conceive them to be the fancies of
cracked or crazed brains. And the Devil had need be more wise then so, if he
practice to prevail with us, which undoubtedly, so long as God be pleased by
his grace to keep us in our right wits, he never shall: Certainly if they
desire to bring this rule into our faith, they must first manifest that the
Devil has so prevailed with them to make them conceive themselves to be
Reprobates; otherwise it cannot be they should conceive so easy a matter for
the Devil to persuade any of us upon so sorry a ground as this, that we are
absolute Reprobates. As for them that are fallen, (to prosecute that
distinction this Author gives according to the parts of it, which the Author
himself does not) Christians fallen may be understood two manner of ways,
either as fallen from the state of grace, or as fallen only into sin, but
still standing in the state of grace. As touching the first we acknowledge no
such falling away, St John professing of certain Apostates saying, They went 1
Ioh. 2. 19.
out from us, but they were not of us; for had they been of us, they had
continued with us. As for such as fall into sin, we that maintain absolute
election and reprobation, do withal maintain with King James in the
conference at Hampton Court, that all such shall arise again by repentance.
And therefore there is no reason we should conceive, upon the committing of any
such sin, that we are Reprobates; least of all upon so base grounds as here
are specified by this Author. Now I come to his proof of this by his three
testimonies.

1. The first whereof is the testimony of Calvin: whereto I answer first in
general, That not one of these Authors here mentioned take any notice of the
ground whereupon this Author builds, namely, of the paucity of the elect in
comparison to Reprobates, therehence to conclude, That it is an easy matter for
the Devil to persuade them that they are Reprobates, if they should have been
sure to have received so much from the pen of this Author. More particularly I
acknowledge the words of Calvin here alleged, namely, that the Devil does not
assault the believer with a temptation more dangerous: But why does not this
Author go on to tell, what the temptation is which as it were in a breath
Calvin sets down thus, Quam dum ipsos suae electionis dubitatione inquietans,
simul prava ejus extra viam inquirendae cupitate solicitat. It consists of two
parts. The first is disquieting of them with doubting of their election. The
second is, his soliciting of them with an ill desire of inquiring about it,
after a wrong way. Both these Calvin so compounds, as to make up but one
tentation: In the next place, Calvin shows what it is for a man to inquire of
his election a wrong way. Extra viam inquirere voco, ubi in abditos divinae
sapientiae recessus perrumpere homuncio conatur, and quo intelligat quid de se
sit constitutum apud Dei tribunal, ad supremam usque aeternitatem penetrare. To
inquire after it out of the way, is, when a vile man endeavors to break
into the secrets of divine wisdom, and to pierce into the highest eternity, to
know what God has ordained of him there. This he says is for a man to cast
himself into a deep, to be swallowed up of a bottomless gulf, and to throw
himself into innumerable snares, such as he can never wind himself out off.
And to this he says we are very prone; and hereupon comes in the next
sentence alleged by this Author, Rarissimus enim est few there be whose minds
are not taken up with this contemplation, Whence does Salvation come unto thee,
but from Gods election? Now what revelation have thou of thine election? And if
these thoughts do once take hold of a man, either in cruel manner it torments
miserable man continually, or makes him altogether stand astonished. All this
is delivered by Calvin of them who enquire about their election a wrong way;
the very same way being condemned also by King James in the conference at
Hampton Court, or that which he there delivers much at one. And all this,
this Author very judiciously conceales, thinking such a dog-trick well becomes
his free will, and his grace also. But then Calvin discovers also another
way, in ea lustranda, that is, in discovering a man's election; and such as
wherein, tuta est pacata, addo etiam jucunda, navigatio a man may sail safely,
peaceably, and sweetly: and that they who search after their election in a due
order, as it is contained in Gods Word, they are like to reap thence singular
consolation, eximium inde referent consolationis fructtum. Then he shows what
this way is, and that we must begin from our vocation (to wit, unto faith and
unto repentance) and thence ascend to our election, in this way he professes
no uncomfortable condition, but most comfortable is likely to accrue unto him.
The wrong way he warnes us to avoid carefully: but withal professes, that no
rock at all is likely to be met withal in this right way. By this I desire
every indifferent person will judge aright of this Authors carriage.

2. The next is Bucer in 8. ad Rom: q: de praedest: Now Bucers discourse, as it
is related by this Author himself appears to tend to no other end but this,
that Christians should not disquiet themselves with doubting, whether they are
predestinate or no, but rather without doubt persuade themselves that they are
of the number of those whom God has predestinate. And by this I perceive what
is his meaning here in, which formerly I understood not, when this of Bucer was
alleged by this Author to an other purpose. And his meaning seems to be
this, whosoever is called and believes in Christ, ought to believe that he is
predestinate. For indeed faith in his opinion is the fruit of our election, and
from the like in the Thessal: Paul was persuaded of their election 1 Thessalonians: 1.
3, 4. Remembering the work of your faith and labor of your love, knowing that
you are elected of God. Now shall others hereby be drawn to be confident of
our election, and shall not we our selves who alone are privy to the secret
passages of our hearts, when others are not. Now I pray consider, whether this
be so much as to intimate that it is a far easier matter for a man to be
persuaded that he is a Reprobate, then that he is of the number of Gods elect.

3. By this I perceive the meaning of Zanchy also, in saying, That every
Christian is bound to believe that he is elect: Let us in the name of God
examine our faith whether it be true faith or no; but surely so far as we are
persuaded of the truth of our faith, so far have we no cause to doubt of our
election. But this of Zanchius is no more to the purpose, whereunto this
Author alleges it, than that of Bucers.

4. In the last place, I come to the relation of Georgius Major of a certain
Schoolmasters in Hungary, Petrus Hosuanus by name, for so I find him called in
Dietricus, though this Author calls him Ilosuanus, mistaking belike the copy
which he transcribed. Now Dietricus relates it as out of Georgius Major as this
Author does. But I wonder not a little that Osiander in his last Century makes
no mention of it, that I can find, though I have searched after it, as the
Woman in the Gospel did after her lost groat: Whether he gave any credit to
Georgius Major his relation, I know not; or whether any thing came to his
knowledge afterward, as touching the unfaithfullnesse thereof. But take we it
as it lies in this Authors relation.

1. That he professed himself of Calvin's and Austins opinion: I hope this
makes no more against Calvin and us, then it does against Austin and all those
that took part with him, against the Pelagians in his days, and the remnants
of them afterward. But if his opinion was, that men are not dealt withal
secundum bona or mala opera, but that there are occultiores causae of men's
Eternal conditions, will any sober Arminian impute this unto us? Do we say
that God damnes any man but for sin, or that God rewards any man of ripe
years with Salvation but by way of reward, of their faith repentance and
good-workes? When the Remonstrants at the Hague conference proposed their
doctrine of predestination and reprobation, after this manner, namely, That God
from eternity did ordain to save believers and to damn unbelievers, (to this
effect), Did any of the Contra-Remonstrants, or any of the Synod of Dort except
against the truth of this? But whereas the Remonstrants and Arminians did
acknowledge this to be the whole decree of predestination and reprobation:
Against this exception was took both in the Hague conference, and in the Synod
of Dort, and Theses also by diverse foreign Divines laid down against it, and
particularly by our Brittayne Divines amongst others; All of them maintaining
that there was an other decree concerning the giving of the grace of
regeneration, of the grace of faith and repentance unto some, and denying it
unto others. And this decree, we willingly maintain, proceeds not, no not in
the execution thereof, according to men's works good or evil, whatsoever be
the end of any that maintain it. The contrary, namely, that grace is given
according unto works, being a doctrine generally condemned in the Church from
the year 415, at that time it was condemned in the Synod of Palestine, and
Pelagius himself driven to subcribe unto it, otherwise himself had been
anathematized. But this Author delivers it as the opinion of Hosuanus
concerning men's Eternal conditions, whereby I take to be meant Salvation and
Damnation. And indeed as here the doctrine is expressed, it is more agreeable
with the doctrine of the Predestinarians, as Sigebert relates it, then with the
doctrine either of Austin or Calvin: and the same Sigebert writes not that it
was Austins doctrine, but that it rose out of the misunderstanding of Austins
writings: Yet I confess that Tyro Prosper before Sigebert spares not to
profess, of that Predestinarian hereby, that it rose from Austin; as Dr Usher
observes. But this was a mere practice of the Semi-Pelagians, corrupting the
doctrine of Austin, the better to expose it to obloquy and reproach. 2. As for
the second, that he was one of the woeful company of absolute castawayes.
Herein the Author of this discourse accomodates himself to his own stage;
Throughout Dietricus his relation, I find no mention of any such distinction as
of reprobates and absolute reprobates, but an acknowledgement, certum esse
numerum salvandorum, and praedestinatorum vel ad vitam, vel ad mortem; And of
himself, that he was ex numero damnatorum, but I do not find the word
absolute throughout. That his life was none of the worst, himself was no
competent judge: yet I confess there are degrees of profaneness and
hypocrisy, and the very reprobates are not equal in sin. And withal a
moral life is esteemed in the world in respect of their conversation toward
men; but we know that to deny Gods truth, and to oppose it against the light of
conscience, is of an higher nature in the sight of God, and usually is of more
fearful consequence. Of Francis Spira I find no complaints made in respect of
his morality toward men, but he laid unto his own charge, That he had sinned
against the holy Ghost. Yet neither this Hosuanus, nor Spira do I find to have
broken forth into any blasphemy against Gods justice in reprobating them. Nay,
this latter was heard strangely to discourse of the justice of God, without any
murmuring against his power. And in our time we have heard of strange examples,
of some that have gone soberly on to the destroying of themselves, in a very
devout acknowledgement of Gods justice in giving them over.

3. As touching the dreadful apprehensions of Gods wrath, I nothing doubt, but
when God gives men over to the power of Satan, they may be so improved by him,
as to make a man weary of his life, though I find not this specified in
Dietricus, who yet relates this story out of Georgius Major. But I read the
like in Goulartius his collections of a desperate man in his time dying, that
said (among many other horrible speeches) that he wished to be already in Hell.
And being demanded the cause of so wicked a desire: For that (said he) the
apprehension of torments which do attend me, cause me presently to feel a
double Hell; when I shall feel it at the full, I shall not exspect it any
more. But no mention throughout of any opinion of his concerning Divine
reprobation that moved him thereunto. The words here alleged, Discedo ad
lacus infernales, Deo vos commendo, cujus misericordia mihi negata est. These,
I say, and the matter of these alone, I find in Dietericus his relation out of
Georgius Major on 2 Tym. c. 2. p. 59. 6. It runs thus. Ait in Hungaria and
multis aliis locis notissimum esse de homine quodam Calviniano, Petro Hosuano
Rectore Scholae Gengerinae, qui ex desperatione sibi ipsi laqueo injecto vitam
finivit, Anno 1562. die 22. Julii; relicto manuscripto, in quo (praeter alia)
haec exstitere. O me infaelicissimum omnium, quia satius fuisset me nunquam
natum. Verum est certum esse numerum salvandorum; hoc ex me, sed quid ad me?
Hoc ita necessario fieri debuit. Nemo igitur argumentetur, Deus omnes vocat;
long secus se res habet. Calvini sententiam de certo praedestinatorum numero,
item Augustini, quisque teneat. De me intelligo quemlibet ante uterum matris
pradestinatum, vel ad vitam, vel ad mortem, quod nunquam quisquam nisi in hora
mortis cognoscere potest. Ego sum ex numero damnatorum, ergo Deo nunquam
asscribi possum. Hoc certo credatis rectum esse quod Paulus Romans 9. scribit.
Misereor cujus misereor. Discedo ad lacus infernales. Deo vos commendo, cujus
misericordia mihi negata est. Et addit Major haec verba, Hic est fructus
perversae doctrinae de praedestinatione hominum. Concerning which relation give
me leave to observe somewhat.

1. Here is no such thing as this Author relates, that Hosuanus should say that
man by Calvin and Austins opinion, is not dealt withal, secundum bona or mala
opera, (and indeed this deciphering out of Austins and Calvin's opinion, is
notoriously untrue;) neither as touching occultiores causae, of men's eternal
conditions, as indeed it is apparent, that in the way of a cause meritorious,
there is no other cause of damnation then sin, and in the way of a disposing
cause no other cause of salvation then faith, repentance, and good works; And
as touching the efficient cause of both, none is or can be the cause thereof
but God. But as touching the cause why God gives grace to one, and denies it to
another, we willingly confess there is no cause thereof, but the mere good
pleasure of God. In like sort, of absolute cast-awayes here is no mention, no
nor of Vas formatum ad ignominiam, nor any such saying of himself, that he was
none of the worst.

2. Here is no mention made of the cause moving him hereunto, as this Author
pretends, but only it is said, that it proceeded of desperation. And though
Major adds as a Coronis his censure, that, Hic est fructus perversae doctrinae
de praedestinatione hominum; yet I hope his censure is no Oracle with us, no
nor with Lutherans neither; for I find him branded by Osiander in his
Ecclesiastical History. And though he were of Austins and Calvin's opinion in
this point of predestination, and did despair, yet it follows not, that this
doctrine moved him to despair. Suppose the conceit of being a reprobate moved
him hereunto; might it not move him hereunto according to the Arminian tenet,
as well, and according to any tenet, provided they do not believe that God
has as yet decreed nothing, or if he has, that his decrees may be recalled?
And then again by our Doctrine of Predestination it cannot be concluded of any
man that he is a reprobate while he lives. Nay, this seems contrary to his own
opinion, which was this, that no man can know whether he be predestinate to
life or death, till the hour of his death; and his death was not brought upon
him, but wrought by him. And as it was in his power not to have killed
himself, so was it in his power not to believe that he was a reprobate by this
opinion of his. Then again, what moved him to conceive that he was a reprobate,
is concealed all along. Now the conscience of sin committed against the Holy
Ghost, may make a man conceive he is a reprobate, of what opinion so ever he be
concerning reprobation. And as I take it, That famous Doctor of Germany, whom
Goulartius mentions remaining then at Hall in Swabe, was no Calvinist; of
whom he reports out of the History of Germany, That having oftentimes turned
his Conscience, some times toward God, some times toward the World, having
inclined in the end to the worser part, said and confessed publicly, that he
was undone, and fell so deep into despair, as he could neither receive, nor
take any comfort or consolation, so as in this miserable and wretched estate of
his soul, he slew himself most miserably. It was not the doctrine of
Predestination or Reprobation brought him unto this. And though a man has not
sinned against the holy Ghost, yet a conceit of such a sin may drive a man
unto this; or of blasphemies in an inferior degree, when God gives a man over
unto the power of Satan, as Gaulartius makes mention by his own experience of
another desperate man, whom he had heard, who being exhorted to turn from the
too vehement apprehension of Gods justice unto his mercy, which was open unto
him: He answered very coldly, you say true, God is God, but of his children,
not for me, his mercy is certain for his elect, but I am a reprobate, a vessel
of wrath and cursing, and I do already feel the torments of Hell: When they
did exhort him to call God his Father, and Jesus Christ his Son, My mouth
(says he) does speak it, but my heart has horror of it, I believe that he
is the Father of others, but not of me: When they did lay before him that he
had known God, heard his word, and received his Sacrament; yea but (he added) I
was an hypocrite, and guilty of many blasphemies against God; And then he
returned to his ordinary discourses; I am a vessel prepared to wrath and
damnation, I am damned, I burn. The same Goulartius reports out of the History
of the times of a Learned man at Lovaine, called Master Gerlach, Who had
profited so well in his studies, as he was one of the first amongst the learned
of that time. And that being touched with a grievous sickness, he sighed
continually; and feeling himself to draw near his end, he began to discover
the ground of his sighs, speaking such fearful words, as desperate men are
accustomed to utter; crying out and lamenting that he had lived very wickedly,
and that he could not endure the judgment of God, for that he knew his sins
were so great, as he should never obtain pardon, so as in this distress he
dyed, oppressed with grievous and horrible despair. What this wickedness of
his was in special it seems he concealed; it might be horrible enough, though
done in secret, yet no just cause of despair, unless it were the sin
against the holy Ghost. The like is recorded of M. James Latomus one of the
chief Doctors of the University of Lovaine, being one day out of countenance
in a Sermon before the Emperor Charles the Fifth, returning ashamed and
confounded from Brussells to Lovaine, and did so apprehend the dishonor, that
he fell suddenly into despair, whereof he gave many testimonies in public;
the which did move his friends to keep him close in his house, from that time
unto his last gasp. Poor Latomus had no other speech then that he was rejected
of God, that he was damned, and that he hoped for no mercy nor salvation, as
having maliciously made war against the grace and truth of God. He dyed in
this despair, neither was it possible for any friends, or Physicians to make
him change his opinion.

3. If this story of Hosuanus be a truth, I like his condition the worse for
not giving any reason moving him to this desperation, and making him to
conceive that he was a castaway. For it is apparent that by our Doctrine the
way is open, (namely by faith in Christ) to be persuaded that he is an elect of
God, but no way open to conceive that he is a reprobate. Not any sin before
faith, for faith in Christ gives sufficient assurance of the pardon of all
former sins, nor yet want of faith, for though a man want faith to day, yet
he may enjoy it to morrow, as Palmer told the Sheriff that executed him,
saying, As it has pleased God to call me to day, so it may please him to call
you to morrow. Least of all was the consideration of the great number of
Reprobates in comparison with the small number of Gods elect, likely to be the
cause thereof; neither is any such mentioned either of Hosuanus or of Spira, or
of Latomus, or of Krans, or of any other that ever I heard or read, which is
sufficient to discredit this Authors discourse in this place.

4. Lastly, observe the absurdity of this speech, Commendo vos Deo, cujus
misericordia mihi negata est: Though he had no heart to commend himself to
Gods mercy, yet he takes heart to commend others thereunto, as if God though he
would show no mercy to him, yet for his sake, and his prayers, and commendation
sake, he would show mercy unto others.

I find a story in Osiander of one Adamus Neuserus, delivered with a far
better grace to discredit Calvin's doctrine, not in point of Predestination, but
as touching the person of Christ, in opposition to the Ubiquitary Chimera of
the Lutherans, as Sir Edwin Sands calls it; and it is this, Neuserus Pastor
Heilderbergensis ex Calvinista Arrianus, ex Arriano Mahumetanus, and Eques
Turcici Imperatoris factus, and Constantinopoli circumcisus est, inque des
peratione Turcica ad Inferos descendit. Ante mortem suam D. Stephano Gerlachio
referens, qua occasion in Arrianismum and Turcismum incidisset, dixit, Qui
vult cavere Arrianismum caveat Calvinismum. Yet Dietericus alleges the
former story of Hosuanus, only to requite Lampadius, who gave instance of the
uncomfortable ends of certain Lutherans, as also to show that personal faults
or unhappinesses, must not prejudice the truth of any cause, albeit it be
maintained by them. I could in some part requite Georgius Major with a saying
of Augustus the Elector of Saxony, concerning his Lutherans, which I find in
Melchior Adamus in vita Penceri. This Pencer had been imprisoned by the Duke of
Saxony, and in that state had continued many years, yet at length being set
free by the mediation of the Prince of Anhalt. When the Duke found that he
continued still in the same faith for which he was imprisoned, Laudo (quoth the
Duke) Doctorem Pencerum, facit quod viro bono dignum est, perseverat in sua
confessione firmiter and constanter. Ego quid credam, and in quo acquiescam
incertus sum prorsus, quod Deus novit. De die enim in diem aliquid novi mei
sacerdotes cudunt, and proferunt, and ex uno me errore in alterum pelliciunt,
atque implicant dubitationibus perpetuis.

One story more; for I am compelled unto it by the Genius of this adversary.
The day before I entered upon this Section, a Gentleman of good quality coming
to this Town, sent unto me, desiring to enjoy my company with him at his Inn.
I had heard well of him before, both of his service in the Low Countries, and
at the Isle of Ree. Amongst other things, he fell upon discourse of the good
discipline in the Low Countries, especially as touching the preparation of the
people to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, both by preparatory Sermons before
the day comes, as also by going to their houses, to know of their purpose to
come to the Lords table; and whether any difference between them and their
neighbors were any impediment thereunto. In this course of theirs one coming
to a certain house, the Master whereof and his Wife were turned Arminians, and
making the usual motion unto the Wife (for her husband was not within) she
began to rail upon him, and to defye him, and to profess her disdain to
come to their Communion at all. The Minister used not many words, but as soon
as he heard whereto her speech tended, departed; not long after the Master of
the house coming home, and hearing the Minister had been there, and where
abouts he began to rail much more then his Wife, disdaining and indignating
that the Minister should come unto him about such a business, and calling him
black Devil, with protestation that if he had been at home when the other
came, he would have had his blood or trodden out his guts. That night this
Arminian Bedlem fell sick, and in his weakness vomited blood, which not only
came out of his mouth, but out of his nose, eyes and ears, as it is said.
Hereupon he sent for the Minister, who came unto him, when he came he confessed
his fault and fury against him, beseeching him to pardon him, The Minister
exhorted him to make his peace with God, for as for himself he had not
offended him, and gave him the best comfort he could; never the less the
fellow dyed. The Gentleman, that made this relation to my self and an other
with me, upon the noise of so strange a buisinesse, thought good to enquire of
the truth; and coming to Leyden (there was this Tragedy acted) he went to his
Painter, whom he meant to employ in drawing his picture, and asked him about
the matter: This Painter was also become an Arminian, and told him, that indeed
the Man had raved against the Minister in the street, but the manner of his
death was nothing so as he had heard. After this, the same Gentleman passing
over from Flaunders side unto Dort; as he was in the boat, asked the Boatman of
the truth of this report. This Boatman also was an arminian, and he tells him
it was nothing so, but that the man dyed by accident, as any other man might;
An other in the boat hearing this, turns to the Gentleman, saying, Captain,
believe him not, for the story you have heard is a certain truth, but this
Rogue (says he poynting to the Boat-man) is an Arminian, and these Arminians
are like the Egyptians, let God show never so many miracles and judgments upon
them, yet they will not believe; I protest I do nothing affect them, nor
please my self in these and such like relations, but I am driven to it, to
requite the adversary, who helps out his hungry discourse with such tales as
these.

DISCOURSE. SECT. II.
IT leaves men in temptation: and this it does two ways, First by making the
tempted incapable of true comfort. 2. By making Ministers unable to give true
comfort. First it makes the tempted incapable of true comfort; like a Gorgons
head, it does so trouble their fancies, and amaze them, especially in their
paroxysmes and fits, that the strongest arguments of comfort, applied with as
much art and cunning as can be, will not fasten upon them. With David they say
in their fear, that all men are liars, namely, all such as come to comfort
them in their temptation: And the reason is, because it is an opinion
incompatible with any word of comfort, that can be ministered to the distressed
soul in this temptation. Gods love to mankind, Christ's death for all mankind,
and the calling of poor sinners without exception to repentance or salvation,
with all other grounds of consolation. the tempted will easily elude with the
grounds of his opinion: which that we may the better see, let us imagine that
we hear a Minister and a tempted soul, reasoning in this or the like manner.

Tempted. Woe is me; I am a castaway: I am absolutely rejected from Grace and
glory.


Minister. Discourage not thy self thou poor afflicted soul; God has not
cast thee off. For he hates nothing that he has made; but bears a love to all
men, and to thee amongst the rest.


Tempted. God hates no man as he is his creature, but he hates a great many
as they are involved in the first transgression, and become guilty of Adams
sin. And God has a twofold love, (as I have learned,) a general love,
which puts forth it self in outward and temporal blessings only, and with
this he loved all men: And a special love, by which he provideth everlasting
life for men, and with this he loves only a very few, which out of his alone
will and pleasure he singled from the rest. Under this general love am I, not
the special.


Minister. God so loves all men, as that he desires their eternal good, for
the Apostle says, he would have all to be saved, and he would have no man
perish, nor thee in particular.


Tempted. All, is taken two ways: for all sorts and conditions of men, high
and low, rich and poor, bond and free, Jew and Gentile; and for all particular
men in those several sorts and conditions. God would have all sorts of men to
be saved, but not all particular men of these sorts; some of my Country, and my
calling, etc. but not all; or me in particular. Or if it be true that God
would have all particular men to be saved; yet he wills it only with a revealed
Will, not with a secret will, for with that he will have a great company to be
damned absolutely. Under this revealed will am I, not the secret.


Minister. Christ came into the World to seek and to save what was lost, and
is a propitiation not for our sins only, (idest) the sins of a few
particular men, or the sins of all sorts of men, but for the sins of the
whole world; therefore he came to save thee, for thou wast lost, and to be a
propitiation for thy sins, for thou art part of the whole world.


Tempted. The World, as I have heard, is taken two ways in Scripture; largely
for all mankind, and strictly in a more restrained signification, for the
elect, or for believers: Or if it be true that he dyed for all mankind, yet he
dyed for them but after a sort, he dyed for them all dignitate pretii, he did
enough to have redeemed all, if God would have had it so: but he did not dye
for all voluntate propositi, God never intended that he should shed his blood
for all, and every man; but for a few select ones only, with whom it is my lot
not to be numbered.


Minister. God has founded an universali Covenant with men, upon the blood of
Christ thy Mediator, and therefore he intended it should be shed for all men
universally. He has made a promise of salvation to every one that will
believe, and excludes none, that do not exclude themselves.


Tempted. God purposed his Son should dye for all men, and that in his name
an offer of remission of sins and salvation should be made to every one but
yet upon this condition, that they will do that which he means the greatest
part of them shall never do, (idest) Repent and Believe, nor I among the rest.


Minister. God has a true meaning that all men who are called, should repent
and believe; that so they might be saved: as he would have all to be saved, so
to come to the knowledge of the truth; and as he would have no man to perish,
so he would have all men to repent; and therefore he calls them in the
Preaching of the word to the one, as well as to the other.


Tempted. God has a double call; an outward call by the Preaching of the word,
an inward call by the irresistible work of the spirit in men's hearts. The
outward call is a part of Gods outward will, with that he calls every man to
believe; the inward and effectual call is a part of his secret will, and with
that he does not call every man to believe, but a very few only whom he has
infallibly and inevitably ordained to eternal life. And therefore by the
outward will, which I enjoy among many others, I cannot be assured of Gods good
will and meaning that I shall believe, repent, and be saved.


By this we may see, that no sound comfort can be fastened upon a poor soul,
rooted in this opinion, when he lies under this horrible temptation; The
example of Francis Spira an Italian Lawyer, will give some farther light and
proof to this. This Spira about the year 1548, against his knowledge and
conscience did openly abjure his religion, and subscribe to Popery; that
thereby he might preserve his life, and goods, and liberty. Not long after he
fell into a deep distress of Conscience out of which he could never wrestle,
but ended his woeful days in despair. To comfort him came many Divines of
worth and note; but against all the comforts that they applied unto him, he
opposed two things especially. 1. The greatness of his sin: It was a sin
of a deep dye, committed with many urging and aggravating circumstances, and
therefore could not be forgiven. This argument they quickly took from him, and
convinced him by the example of Peter, that there was nothing in his sin,
that could make it irremissible. Peter that committed the same sin, and with
more odious circumstances, repented and was pardoned, and so (no doubt) might
he. 2: He opposed his absolute reprobation; and with that he put off all their
comforts. Peter (says he) repented and was pardoned indeed, because he was
elected: as for me I was utterly rejected before I was borne; and therefore I
cannot possibly repent, or be saved. If any man be elected he shall be saved,
though he have committed sins, for number many, and heinous in degree: but if
he be (ex repudiatis) one of the castawaies, necessario condemnabitur: though
his sins be small and sew. Nihil interest, an multa, an pauca, an magna, an
parva sint, quando nec Dei misericordia, nec sanguis Christi quicquam ad eos
pertinet. A reprobate must be damned, be his sins many or few, great or
small; because Gods mercy, and Christ's merits belong not to him. In this very
story, (recorded by Coelius Secundus, and Calvin, with some others who lived at
that time, and wrote of it to their friends;) as in a glass we may see the
disconsolate condition of a poor soul, that is strongly conceited, that the
greatest part of the world, are absolute reprobates, and that he is one of
them; he sticks so fast in the mire and clay, that he can very hardly be
drawn out.

TWISSE. Consideration.
THis Section I may fitly divide into two parts. The first whereof is a pretty
Comedy. The second a Tragedy. The first is practiced by this Author in a
dialogue, shaped by himself and accordingly accomodated to his own stage, as
an Interlude of his own making. The Tragedy is related only of Francis Spira;
and I willingly confess, It is the strangest that ever, I heard or read, of a
man going on soberly to the utter undoing of himself both body and soul. But
the relation of it is most hungryly performed by this Author as if his care
were only to serve his own turn, and then cares not what becomes of the maine
condition of the story, which indeed is most remarkable: I have but touched
upon it in former passages, but here I shall insist upon it more at large; and
the rather, because it is here proposed not more unfaithfully then impiously,
to deface or outface the precious truth of God concerning his absoluteness in
making whom he will a vessel of wrath. But first I must dispatch my answer to
the Antegredients of those two parts. And let it be remembered what formerly I
have delivered, that still he confounds reprobation from grace, with
reprobation from glory; as if we maintained the absoluteness of the one, as
well as we do maintain the absoluteness of the other; which is most untrue.
For albeit, we maintain that God has decreed absolutely to bestow grace upon
some, (which are Gods elect,) and absolutely to deny grace unto others, (whom
we account Reprobates here upon,) not conditionally; for if grace were ordained
to be bestowed conditionally, to wit, upon condition of some work performed by
man; then should grace be bestowed according unto works, which in the phrase
of the Ancients is all one, with saying, that grace is bestowed according unto
merits. And this was condemned above 1200 years ago in the Synod of
Palestine, and Pelagius driven to subscribe unto it, lest otherwise himself
had bin excommunicated. But we, do not maintain that God has ordained that
damnation shall be absolutely inflicted on any but only conditionally, to wit,
in case they dye in sin. Yet it became this Authors wisdom to confound them,
least distinguishing them as they ought to be distinguished, and carrying
himself fairly in opposing the absolutenes of reprobation there alone, where
alone it is maintained by his adversaries, to wit, in the particular of
reprobation from grace, he should at first dash manifest himself to maintain,
that grace is bestowed not according to the good pleasure of God, but according
to the works of men; and that upon this ground it is, that he builds the
comfortable condition of his doctrine, concerning predestination, which indeed
makes no difference in Gods proceedings between the elect and reprobate, but
respects them all alike; For their power to believe and repent is their grace
universal, which they say is given to all alike. So exciting grace in the
ministry of the Word is equally made to all that hear it, whether elect or
reprobate. And these are the kinds of grace prevenient: Then as for grace
subsequent, that consists only in Gods concurrence unto the act of faith and
repentance which depends merely upon man's will (in their opinion) and God is
as ready to concur to the working of it as well in one as in another, in case
man will. On the other side it would appear that our doctrine is censured as
uncomfortable, only because it teaches man for the obtaining of true comfort
to depend merely upon the grace of God, and not upon his own free will.

Again, observe how that like as Gregory observes that the same spirit of
Antichrist might be found in them that are far distant in time, so an
Arminian spirit savoreth the same things one with an other, and perhaps at
unawars, though they in whom it is found be much distant in place. Vossius in
his last book of his History of the Pelagian heresy says, That our Divines
do aleadge that place of St Paul against their adversaries in the point of
predestination, as the head of Medusa; a place indeed that clearly justifies
Gods absoluteness both in predestination and reprobation: And this Author
says that our doctrine on the same point is like to Gorgons head: Now the
Learned well know that Gorgon and Medusas head have no difference. Now whether
our doctrine be so uncomfortable as this Author objects, it will appear when
we come to examine the paroxysme and fit of temptation, especially the kind of
it being such, as this Author out of his fruitful invention has made choice
of to represent, as able to elude the strongest arguments of comfort, and they
applied with as much art and cunning as can be; supposing that of this art
and cunning also, he has given plentiful testimony in the succeeding
dialogue; which is a very remarkable passage of this Authors sufficiency,
especially coming out of his own mouth; Of the integrity whereof there seems
no cause to doubt, considering that Arminian ingenuity and modesty whereunto he
has lately arrived.

He further adds as much weight to his former assertions as words can, which
though they be but wind, yet with some, who Camelion like live by the air, may
prove very weighty, saying, that this doctrine of ours is incompatable with any
word of comfort (which is very much, though a word and any word be very little)
that can be ministered to a distressed soul in this temptation. Now it is very
likely that in his dialogue following he brings in as potent arguments of
consolation, as our doctrine will afford. The heads or placss of consolation he
reckons up, Gods love to mankind, Christ's death for all mankind, and the
calling of poor sinners without exception to repentance and Salvation with all
other grounds of comfort, and all arguments (he says) drawn from hence our
opinion will elude and preclude all consolation from the distressed soul. But
give me leave to make a fair motion as touching the special heads of
consolation here particulated. If it shall be found that these heads of
consolation do admit a double sense, one of the Arminian making, an other of
our interpreting; if consolations drawn therefrom in an Arminian sense be
eluded by our Tenet, will any disparagement thereby arise to our tenet,
provided we find store of consolation from them taken in our sense, especially
being ready to admit any indifferent trial concerning the sense thereof,
whether theirs or ours prove most agreeable to the word of God; But Ecce
Rhodus, ecce Saltus, we are come to the Dialogue it self, where he undertakes
to make good, that which he says And here begins the Interlude.

Tempted.
Woe is me; I am a Castaway; I am utterly rejected from grace and Glory.

CONSIDERATION.
Let me take liberty to set down what I should think fit to answer unto such a
complaint, Now my Answer is this, Who has revealed this unto thee? Art thou
privy Counselor to the Almighty? We are taught that secret things belong to
the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 29:
but the things revealed are for us and for our Children to do them. Now
where, and when, and how has God revealed this his counsel unto thee, namely,
concerning thy rejection from Grace, and Glory? We know no other revelations
divine then are contained in his Word: Now has God in his word revealed unto
thee more then unto me that thou art a reprobate. The word says unto thee, If
thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus: and believe in thy heart
that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, Rom: 10. 9. Now how
can thou make it appear that this belongs less unto thee then to any Martyr
that ever was content to lay down his life for Christ? Will thou say, Thy
sins make thee to conceive so: I answer, are thy sins greater then were the
sins of Manasses, who made his sons pass through the fire to Molech, gave
himself to witchcraft and sorcery, and filled Jerusalem with blood from corner
to corner? If his sins were not sufficient to conclude that he was a
Reprobate, why should thy sins be thought sufficient to conclude that thou art
a Castaway? Are thy sins greater then Saul's were, who was a Blasphemer, a
Persecutor of the Saints of God from City to City; Yet was he received unto
mercy. Will thou say, Thy sins have been committed since thy calling? Yet are
they greater then was the sin of Peter, in denying Christ his Master, with
execrations and oaths? And these sins were committed not only after his
calling; but even within his Masters hearing too. Yet he went out and wept
bitterly. And Christ as soon as he was risen, sent word of his resurrection by
name to Peter to comfort him. Nay has not God taught us in his word, that the
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John. 1.? And how can
thou make it appear, that any one that ever was or is, has greater interest
therein then thy self? will thou say this remedy belongs unto none, but such
as believe and repent; but I do not. I answer, in like sort there was a time
when Paul believed not, and when every one believed not; yet at length they
believed, and so may thou: will thou say, But I cannot believe and repent? I
answer, this is the condition of all till God takes away the stony heart out of
their bowels, and gives them a heart of flesh, and puts his own spirit within
them; will thou say God gives grace to others, but not to thee? I answer, there
was a time when God had not mercy on them, at length an hour came wherein he
called them: so an hour may come wherein he may call thee. And thou have no
more cause to conclude that he has rejected thee, then every Child of God had
before his calling, that God had rejected him: without grace neither thou
can, nor they could believe; but grace can bring all to faith and repentance;
and thou have no more cause to think that God will not bring thee to faith,
then any elect had, before his calling, to think that God would not bring him
to faith. Now seeing this grace is given in the Word, do thou wait upon God in
his own ordinance, (which any natural man has power to do; as namely, to
go hear a sermon) thou know not how it may work upon thee, yea though
thou come thither with a wicked mind. For we read of some that coming to
take Christ were taken Ioh. 7. 32, 45, 46.
by him. And Father Latimer taking notice of some that come to Church to take a
nap, yet never the less (says he) let them come, they may be taken napping.

Minister.
Discourage not thy self thou poor afflicted soul, God has not cast thee
off, for he hates nothing that he has made, but bears a love to all men, and
to thee amongst the rest.

CONSIDERATION.
And not only poor, but miserable also is that afflicted soul that has no
better comforter; whether we consider the nature of the consolation, or the
warrant of it. For first, has not God made Froggs, and Toades, and Devils, as
well as man; And has an Arminian that boasts so much of strongest arguments of
comfort, no better comfort to an afflicted soul, then that she is Gods
creature, which is the condition of a Frogge, and a Divill, and a damned
spirit. 2. Then as touching the warrant of it; Is the book of Wisdom the best
storehouse of comfort for an afflicted soul, a book written by Philo the Jew
that living after Christ's passion, resurrection and ascension, yet never
believed in him. Again speak out and tell us what is the fruit of that love,
which God bears to all men; Has he ordained to give Salvation unto all, and
to this afflicted soul in particular? If he has not, but damnation rather
unto some, and particularly to this soul; (for upon what ground dare thou
say, or can assure he has not:) art not thou as miserable a comforter to
her, as ever Jobs friends were to him? Or has God ordained to give all men the
grace of regeneration, the grace of faith and repentance; if so, then either
absolutely or conditionally; if absolutely, then all must be regenerate, all
must believe and repent. If conditionally, speak it out, and let thy Patient
know what condition that is, on performance whereof by man, God will give him
faith; say what thou will, the comfortable issue shall be this, That grace is
given according to works; and this indeed is the only Arminian consolation.

Tempted.
1. God hates no man as he is his creature, but he hates a great many as they
are involved in the first transgression, and become guilty of Adams sin.

CONSIDERATION.
Pooresoule, suffer not thy self to be instructed by them that labor to
deprive thee not only of the comfort of Gods grace, but of the comfort of
common sense: Do thou well understand what it is to hate a man as a sinner,
and not as a man? If hatred be no more then displeasure; surely whatsoever be
the cause of it, in hating thee he is displeased with thee, as thou art his
creature, and that in thy proper kind of man; if withal it signify punishment,
whatsoever the cause thereof be, surely he punishes thee as man, though not
for thy natures sake, for that is the work of God, but for some corruption he
finds in thee. And we should prove very sorry comforters; if on such a
distinction as this, we should ground any true consolation; which has his
course not only with the Devils, but even with them that are already under the
torments of Hell fire. But let not the authority of the book of Wisdom, with
thee weigh up and elevate the authority of Scriptures; nor Philo the Jew be
preferred before St Paul, or the Prophet Malachy, by whom we are taught that
as God loved Jacob before he was borne, so he hated Esau; and before they were
borne, what difference was there between them? Yet this passage out of the
book of Wisdom is in a Collect of the Papists Liturgy; I conceive a good
sense may be made thereof without any prejudice to absolute reprobation, (for
of Papists we ate said to have learnt it and are reproached for it.) And what
is that good sense they make of it? Take it if thou will from Aquinas 1. q: 23.
art 3: ad. 1. Dicendum quod Deus omnes homines diligit, and etiam omnes
creaturas in quantum omnibus vult aliquod bonum: non tamen quodcunque bonum
vult omnibus; In quantum igitur quibusdam non vult hoc bonum, quod est vita
aeterna, dicitur eos habere odio, vel reprobare: Now if we take this Colect
from them, let us take also their good meaning with it; and if we can, let us
make it better and not worse. We commonly say, that passions are attributed to
God not quoad affectum, but quoad effectum: Now the effect of hatred is either
the denial of grace, or the denial of glory, or the inflicting of damnation;
The two latter are executed only according to men's sins; but the first, to
wit, the denial of grace, proceeds merely according to the good pleasure of
Gods will; like as the giving of grace (as the Apostle (not Philo) signifies,
that God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth; Now to show
mercy is to bring a man to faith. Romans 11. 30. And if grace be not given
according to the mere pleasure of Gods will, it must be given according unto
works, which is as much as to say in the phrase of the ancients, according
unto merits, which all along has been condemned in the Church of God, as mere
Pelagianisme. Yet hitherto tends all the consolation that Arminianisme can
reach forth unto thee; which is to afford thee no better consolation then can
be afforded to a Reprobate.

2. As for Adams transgression, let not that affright thee, who art borne
within the pale of the Church, and of Christian parents; for the children of
such are holy. 1 Cor. 7. when all others are unclean. Yet why should any man
find it strange, that some of them who are guilty of eternal death, should
suffer eternal death? And this Author has formerly confessed, that Adams
sin has made all his posterity guilty of eternal death. Now albeit God
hates many, whether as involved in Adams transgression, or no, what matters
that to thy discomfort, if he hate not thee. And what ground have thou to
conceive, that thou art in the number of them whom he hates, rather then of
those whom he loves? He is no good Physician, that looks not into the cause of
the desease, to remoove that; nor he any good comforter that looks not into
the cause of thy discomfort, to remoove them; It is to be thought that such an
one desires rather to feed thy discomfort, then to cure it. Such is the
practice of this comforter, otherwise he should not apply his arguments of
comfort (which he magnifies as the strongest) with as much art and cunning as
can be: But understand him aright, this art and cunning tends not to the
furtherance of thy consolation, but to the advantage of his own Arminian
cause;; and to this end, I confess, he does apply them with as much art and
cunning as he can.

2. And God has a twofold love, a general love, which puts forth it self in
outward and temporal blessings only, and with this he loves all men. And a
special, by which he provides everlasting life for men, and with this only he
loves a very few, which out of his alone will and pleasure he singled from the
rest. Under this general love am I, not the special.

CONSIDERATION.
1. As touching the distinction, hold thee to it, least otherwise thou never
prove capable of more comfort then a Reprobate is capable of. No Arminian has
the face to deny that God saves but a very few; And the reason is, because very
few do believe and repent: in this we all agree. Again, no Arminian denies
that very few do believe and repent, and finally persevere therein. Again, no
Arminian denies faith and repentance to be the gift of God, and that hereby
alone men are singled out from the rest. Now the question is, Whether God
singleth out some men from the rest by giving them faith and repentance
according to the mere pleasure of his will, or according to their works? We
say, according to the mere pleasure of Gods will, for he has mercy on whom he
will. Rom: 9. 18. Arminians say according to men's works; and hereupon in the
issue comes all their consolations to be grounded, that is upon a notorious
Heresy condemned above 1200 year ago.

2. But as touching the accommodation of this distinction unto thy self, saing
thou art under Gods general love not under his special: I pray the tell me
what ground thou have for that? what one of Gods elect, while they were in the
state of nature, had not as great cause to be as uncomfortable as thy self;
and why may not thou be in Gods good time in as comfortable a condition as
any of them, and to say as John does, see what love the father has showed us
that we should be called the sons of God? do thou mourn for thy sin or
no? if thou do not, Why should thou look to be partaker of those comforts
which are peculiar to them that mourn? If thou do, thy Savior has said,
Blessed are they that mourn for they shall be comforted. Do thou hunger and
thirst after the favor of God, and to be made partaker of the righteousness
of Christ which alone can give thee assurance of thine election? If thou do
not hunger and thirst after this, why should thou be cast down, because
thou have not this assurance? If thou do desire this assurance, and to that
purpose have an hungry appetite after the righteousness of Christ; thy Savior
says, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they
shall be filled. Or have thou a desire to have thy sins pardoned, and thy
soul saved; but not any desire that thy soul may be sanctified; what comfort
should thou or any such expect at the hands of God? Thou would serve the
Devil, but thou, would not go to hell with the Devil. But I tell thee,
God has decreed the contrary, namely, that all such shall have this doom; Go
ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Yet I
will not leave thee, nor give over all hope of thee; for I am glad to hear
thee confess, that though thou desire thy sin may be pardoned, and thy
soul saved, yet thou have no desire that thy soul should be sanctified;
therefore answer me but to one thing more, and I have done with thee; Is it thy
grief and sorrow, that thou have no desire, that thy nature may be sanctified,
or is it no grief at all unto thee? If it be no grief unto thee, then still
thou take delight in sin; and how can delight in sin, stand with the
fear of Gods judgments, and if thou fear not God, how can thou break
out into such complaints, Woe is me for I am a Castaway: These motions usually
proceed from the terrors of God; And if thou art once acquainted with Gods
terrors, in consideration of thy sinful condition; then be of good cheer,
for these symptoms are commonly as the pangs of Childbirth, whereby it comes
to pass, that a Christian soul is at length brought forth into the world of
grace. And therefore the spirit of bondage, to make us fear, does prepare, and
make way for the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. And by
experience I have known some, being Romans 8.
thus cast down, and stricken with fears of being cast-awayes, when they have
been demanded which condition they have thought better of, either this present
condition of fear and terror, or the former condition of their profaneness,
when they were without all remorse or check of consciences; they have readily
professed, that this present condition of fear and terror, was the better of
the two. Now let us hear how well the comforter plays his part.

Minister.
God so loves all men, as that he desires their eternal good; for the Apostle
says, he would have all to be saved, and he would have no man perish, nor thee
in particular.

CONSIDERATION.
He proceeds very judiciously I confess, by way of gradation from the
Apocryphal, to the Canonical; but at once he makes use both of corruptor
stilus, and adulter sensus. The very words of the Apostle he corrupts; for the
Apostle no where says that God would have all to be saved, that God would have
none to perish; it is (...) who will have all to be saved in the one; and (...),
not willing any to perish in the other. Men would do many things that they
cannot; it is not so with God. And if it be not adulter sensus, to apply this
to all and every one, here is comfort indeed with a witness; For if God will
save every one; and withal can save them, whereof there is no doubt to be
made, then there are no Reprobates at all; every one is predestinate to
salvation by the will, that is, by the decree of God; And who has resisted his
will, says S. Paul. And will he not have all and every one to believe and
repent? If not, then seeing he will have all to be saved, it follows that God,
will have all men to be saved, whether they believe or no, repent or no; But if
he will have all to believe and repent, by that will whereby he will have all
to be saved; seeing God can give all men faith and repentance; what follows
but that all and every one shall believe and repent, and be saved, and
consequently, there are no Reprobates at all? But I know full well what their
interpretation of this is, namely, that God is ready to give faith and
repentance unto all, to wit, in case they will; but does not God give the very
will to believe and repent? Yes in case they will. Take this comfort then into
thy bosom, and make the best use of it to persuade thee that thou art no
castaway; For if thou believe and repentest, all is safe, thou have as good
assurance of thy salvation as Gods word can give thee. And though faith and
repentance be the gift of God, yet this comforter does assure thee, that if
thou will believe thou shall believe, if thou will repent thou shall repent.
For God does not give the grace of faith and repentance, according to the mere
pleasure of his own will, but according to men's works; for albeit the Apostle
says, God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth; yet that
is not to be understood of vocation, but rather of justification. And let it
not startle thee, that justification in Scripture phrase, is opposed to
condemnation, and not to obduration, but to thy comfort be it spoken, it must
be opposed to obduration here; least otherwise faith and repentance should not
be given according to men's works, but according to the mere pleasure of God;
which is a very uncomfortable doctrine. But be thou assured, that if thou will
believe and repent, thou shall believe and repent, such is Gods grace; and
though it be as true, I confess, on the other side, that if thou will not
believe and repent, thou shall not believe and repent; yet that is not to be
accounted Gods grace, least so we should say, that Gods grace is as active to
evil, as it is unto good. So that hereby thou may still perceive, that all
thy comfort depends on this, that the grace of faith and repentance is given
according to men's works.

Tempted.
All, is taken two ways: for all sorts and conditions of men, and for all
particular men: God would have all sorts of men to be saved, but not all, or
me in particular.

2. Or if he will have all particular men to be saved; yet he wills it only
with a revealed Will, but not with a secret will, for with that he will have a
great company damned. Under his revealed will am I, not the secret.

CONSIDERATION.
1. That All is taken after these two ways in Scripture, and that in this
place 1 Timothy 2. it is to be taken of genera singulorum, I have formerly proved,
both by the circumstances of the Text, and by the analogy of faith, for
otherwise we should trench upon Gods omnipotency and unchangeablenesse; and
lastly by the judgment of Austin. But take the meaning aright, not that God
would, but that God will have all men, that is, of all sorts, even of Kings and
Princes, some to be saved; but not all and every one.

As for the distinction of a revealed will, and secret will applied to
salvation, thou may learn that somewhere of Papists, but not of us. For the
revealed will is Gods commandment; now that which God commands is a part of
his Law, so is not salvation, but rather a reward of obedience. Yet they apply
this distinction only in reference to faith and repentance, whereunto God has
annexed salvation. And it is Gods revealed will that all who hear the Gospel
should believe and repent ex officio; but it is not Gods will to give every one
of them grace to believe and repent, as we find by manifest experience. It was
Gods will in like manner to command Abraham to sacrifice his son, but it was
not Gods determination that Isaac should be sacrificed. In like sort he
commanded Pharaoh to let Israel go, but withal he told Moses, he would harden
Pharaohs heart, that he should not let them go for a long time.

2. But in the accommodation of these distinctions unto thy self, What ground
have thou to affirm, that God wills not thy salvation in particular? If thou
believe, Gods word assures thee thou shall be saved; if thou believe not,
yet thou may believe; and Gods word has power to bring thee unto faith, as
formerly I have discoursed. And as for the best of Gods Children who do
believe, to the great comfort of their souls, rejoicing with joy unspeakable
and glorious. 1 Pet. 1. They were sometimes in as uncomfortable a condition as
thou now art. And the rather I put thee upon this, because I see he that takes
upon him to comfort thee, does take a course rather to feed thy humor, then to
remove it, in as much as he never enquires into the cause thereof. For albeit
he gave to understand, he would apply his argument with as much art and cunning
as could be, yet it may be, that was rather with respect to the advantage of
his own cause, then to thy consolation. But let us see whether he mends it in
the next.

Minister.
Christ came into the World to seek and to save what was lost; and is a
propitiation, not for our sins only, i. e. the sins of a few particular
men, or the sins of all sorts of men, but for the sins of the whole World;
therefore he came to save thee, for thou wast lost; and to be a propitiation
for thy sins, for thou art part of the whole World.

CONSIDERATION.
Still he continues to afford thee as much comfort as any Reprobate in the
world; and if thou desire no more, thou may rest satisfied with this; but
withal I confess, he affords thee as much comfort, as he can afford any of
Gods elect, for he makes elect and Reprobate all alike in receiving comfort
from Gods Word. Christ came into the world to save that which was lost, but
unless he came to save all that is lost, it will not follow that he came to
save thee. We know that pardon of sin and salvation is procured by Christ,
for none but such as believe; and therefore be not deceived, without faith
look for neither; by faith be assured of both, and that thou art one of Gods
elect and no Reprobate. And observe well he tells thee nothing of Christ
meriting faith and repentance; this now a days is plainly denied by the
Remonstrants; and this Author is content to say nothing of it; when he is put
to it we know what must be the issue of it; if he says Christ has merited
faith and repentance Censura Censurae. p. 59.
for thee, the meaning is but this; Christ has merited that if thou will
believe thou shall believe, if thou will repent, thou shall repent. And that
Christ has merited that God should bestow faith and repentance not on whom he
will according to the mere pleasure of his will, but according to men's works.

The comfort that our doctrine ministers unto thee, is this, If thou do
believe in Christ, thou may be assured thou art an elect of God, if thou do
not believe, there is no cause why thou should think thy self a Castaway;
for albeit thou have not faith to day, yet thou may have faith to morrow.
Give thy self to Gods Word: and wait upon him in his ordinances, thou may
be so wrought upon as that unbeliever was, 1 Cor: 14. Who is there represented
falling down on his face, and confessing that God was in the Preacher of a
truth. And though at first thou attendest to it, but in a carnal manner, yet
God may open thy heart as he opened the heart of Lidia, and make thee attend
unto it in a gracious manner. Act. 16. 14.


Tempted.
The World (as I have heard) is taken two ways in Scripture, Largely for all
mankind; and strictly for the elect, or believers: In this latter sense Christ
dyed for the World. Or if for all, yet it was only dignitate pretii, not
voluntate propositi; thus only for a few selected ones, with whom it is not my
lot to be numbered.

CONSIDERATION.
Suffer not thy self to be abused by them, who pretending thy comfort, yet
seek nothing less, but only the promoting of their own cause. And observe
how he takes notice of no other benefits of Christ's death, then such as belong
unto men upon the condition of faith, to wit, pardon of sin and Salvation; in
which case the mention of Gods elect comes in very unseasonably. And thus is
the love of God set forth unto us; so God loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have
everlasting life: And if it be not thy lot to be numbered amongst believers,
then we can give thee, by Gods Word, no assurance of thy Salvation. But if thou
art not a believer yet, thou may be in good time as formerly I have spoken
more at large; and therefore no reason to think thou art a Reprobate. And if
once thou do believe in Christ, our doctrine gives thee assurance of
Justification, Salvation, and Election; the Arminan doctrine does not.

As for faith and repentance, we say Christ has merited them also, but to be
bestowed how? According to men's works say our Arminians, though foreign
Arminians profess plainly that Christ merited not faith and regeneration for
any. And if thou relishest this comfort, be satisfied with it; we say faith and
repentance are bestowed absolutely according to the mere pleasure of Gods
will, and accordingly Christ merited them, but not for all, for then all should
believe and repent and be saved; but only for some, and who can these be but
Gods elect; whence it follows clearly that whosoever believes may by our
doctrine be assured of his election, not so by the doctrine of Arminians; but
if thou believe not thou art in no worse case then the best of Gods childern
have been; for there was a time when they believed not; therefore thou have no
more cause to think thy self a castaway then they had.

Minister.
God has founded an universal Covenant with men upon the blood of Christ, and
therefore he intended it should be shed for all men universally; he has made a
promise of salvation to every one that will believe, and excludes none that
will not believe.

CONSIDERATION.
This I confess is to administer as much comfort, as is administered to any
Reprobate; but how can this qualify thy discomfort, and discontent, which
rises from this conceit, that thou art a Reprobate. And the truth is, that by
our Doctrine, we were all in a miserable case, if Gods Covenant of grace
extended no farther then this. But has not God promised to be our Lord, and
our God that sanctifyeth us, to circumcise our hearts, and the hearts of our
Children, to love the Lord our God Ezekiel. 20. 12. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Ezekiel. 36. 27, 28.
Es. 57. 18. Hos. 14. 5.
with all our hearts: to take the stony heart out of our bowels, and give us
an heart of flesh, and to put his own spirit within us; as he sees our ways,
so to heal them, yea, to heal our backslidings, to heal our rebellions. All
this, this sweet comforter takes no notice of, contenting himself with such a
grace to be merited for him by Christ as this, if he will believe he shall
believe; if he will repent he shall repent; if he will love God with all his
heart, he shall love him with all his heart. Yet when a man does believe, they
are able to give him no assurance of his salvation, or of his election; because
they maintain, that a man may totally and finally fall away from grace: And
all because their doctrine is, that Gods effectual grace in working the act of
faith and repentance, is given merely according to men's works.

Tempted.
God purposed that his Son should dye for all men, and that in his name an
offer of remission of sins, and salvation should be made to every one, but
yet upon this condition, that they will do that which he means the greatest
part shall never do (i. e. Repent and believe) nor I among the rest.

CONSIDERATION.
How does God mean that the greatest part of men shall never believe and
repent, by our opinion? Is it in this sense, that they shall not believe and
repent if they will? When was it ever known that any of our Divines ever wrote
or taught this? We think rather it is impossible it should be otherwise, and
therefore say it is a very absurd thing to call this [Grace] as the Arminians
do. Indeed we say that God does not mean by his preventing grace to work the
wills of the greatest part of men to believe and repent: Do not the Arminians
say so too? Yes verily, and a great deal more: for they deny that he works
any man's will to believe and repent in this manner; but we say God purchases
thus to work the wills of all his chosen ones, and when he has wrought them,
to keep them by his power through faith unto Salvation; and put his fear in
their hearts, that they shall never depart a way from him. Jer 32. 40. And upon
this 1 Pet. 1. Ier. 32. 40.
ground we can assure believers of their election which Arminians cannot; And
them that believe not, keep from despair in better manner then the Arminians
can, for they leave them to themselves to believe; whereas the Scriptures show
that to be impossible: so that they take upon them to comfort such quite
against the hair. But we comfort them with a possibility. of being converted
unto God by representing his allmighty power, whose voice is able to pierce
into the graves and make dead Lazarus hear it. This power he showed in
converting Saul, when he marched furiously (Jehu like) against the Church of
God. Therefore be thou of good comfort, especially considering thou art as it
were under the wings of God, thou hear his voice; many come out of their
graves at his call; some at one time, some at another, and so may thou God
knows how soon; then shall thou be assured of thine election, which by
Arminianisme thou can not be; in the mean time thou have no cause to
conclude that thou art a Reprobate.

Minister.
God has a true meaning, that all men who are called should repent and
believe, that so they might be saved; as he would have all to be saved, so to
come to the knowledge of the truth; and as he would have no man to perish, so
he would have all men to repent, and therefore he calls them in the Preaching
of the word to the one, as well as to the other.

CONSIDERATION.
He keeps his course to afford thee the best comfort his doctrine yields,
which is as much as is incident to a Reprobate, and how that should make thee
conceive better of thy self, then as of a Reprobate, I do not perceive, Gods
meaning is that as many as hear the Gospel should believe and repent ex
officio; that is, that it shall be their duty, for he commands it: but he has
no meaning to bestow on all and every one the grace of faith and repentance, as
appears by experience. And if God did will they should de facto believe and be
saved, then either God is not able to bring them to faith and to save them, or
else his will is changed. In like sort if it were his will that all and every
one should know his truth, then God is not able to make all and every one know
his truth, for it is apparent that all do not; it is apparent that all have
not the Gospel; The Apostle says, That God will not have any of us to perish
but all to come to repentance: he does not say he would but he will: And this
is true of (...), such as the Apostle speaks of, believers and elect. But as
for others, the Scriptures plainly profess, that God blinds them, hardens
them; and of Israel in the wilderness, The Lord (says Moses) has not given
you an heart to perceive, nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear unto this day.
Deuteronomy: 29. 4. He calls all that hear the Gospel indifferently by the Ministry
of the Word, but he opens not the heart of all to attend unto it, as to the
Word of God, like as we read he opened the heart of ^idia. Acts. 16. 14.

Tempted.
God has a double call, outward by his word, inward by the irresistible work
of his spirit; with this he does not call every man to believe, but a very few
only, whom he has infallibly, and inevitably, ordained to eternal life, and
therefore by the outward call, which I enjoy among many others, I cannot be
assured of Gods good will and meaning, that I shall believe, repent, and be
saved.

CONSIDERATION.
Our Doctrine teaches not that God calls every one by his Word, that is an
Arminian interjection. But the outward call belongs to many more then are
chosen, as our Savior says, many are called but few are chosen; Indeed he
gives faith and repentance to a very few, which no Arminian denies; only the
Question is, Whether God gives faith and repentance to whom he will, or
according to men's works. We saytis to whom he will, proceeding herein according
to the mere pleasure of his will; and not according to men's works; which to
affirm is manifest Pelagianisme, and publicly condemned many hundred years
ago. It is true, if thou do not believe, Gods Word does not assure thee that
he will make thee believe; that were to assure thee of thine election before
thy vocation; a most unreasonable thing to be expected. But God by his word
assures thee, that it is his meaning that without faith thou shall not be saved.
Yet there is no cause thou should think thy self a Reprobate; for this was
the condition of every one of Gods elect before their calling. It may be thou
may have experience of the same power of divine grace, to bring thee to faith
also, and to repentance; therefore seeing Gods Word is the only means to work
faith, wait daily at his Gates and give attendance at the posts of his doors;
and do not prescribe unto him, or say with 2 King: 6.
Joram, Shall I wait upon the Lord any longer? though it be longere he calls
thee, yet it may go never a whit the worse with thee for that, for sometimes
it falls out that the last are first, and the first last: and the
commendation that Austin makes, of the Theef's faith upon the Cross, is
remarkable, De orig, animae, lib. 1. cap. 9. Tanto pondere appensum est,
tantumque valuit ap ud eum qui haec novit appendere, quod confessus est dominum
crucifixum, quantum si fuisset pro Domino crucifixus. Tunc enim fides ejus de
ligno floruit, quando discipulorum marcuit, nisi cujus mortis terrore
marcuerunt ejus resurrectione reviresceret. Illi enim desperaverunt de
moriente, ille speravit in commorientem. Refugerunt illi authorem vitae,
rogavit ille consortem poenae. Doluerunt illi tanquam homines mortem, credidit
ille regnaturum esse post mortem, Deseruerunt illi sponsorem salutis, honoravit
ille socium crucis. Inventa est in eo mensura Martyris, qui tunc in Christum
credidit, quando defecerunt, qui futuri erant Martyrs.

2. From the Comedy I come to the Tragedy, I mean the story of Spira. Sleidan
says of him, that Incredibili ardore caepit complecti puriorem doctrinam: and
cum indies magis magisque proficeret, non domi tantum apud amicos quid sentiret
de singulis dogmatis, verum etiam passim apud omnes explicabat. Tidings hereof
coming to the Popes Legate then at Venice John Casa Archbishop of Beneventum,
he convents Spira, who confesses his error before him, entreats pardon, and
promises obedience for time to come. The Legate not contented with this,
commands him to go home, and publicly to revoke his error. Sleidan writes
no more here of but this, Accipit ille conditionem, and licet etiam tum
inciperet ipsum paenitere facti, tamen urgentibus amicis, qui non ipsius modo,
sed conjugis etiam and liberorum and facultatum ipsius spem totam in eo positam
dicerent, obtemperavit. Osiander writes that pessimo consilio obsecutus,
abnegando veritatem caelestem perrexit, eamque public ut haeresin blasphemavit
and abjuravit. The distress of conscience which overtooke him hereupon is
notorious, the issue whereof was to end his woeful days more woefully in
despair. But nothing more strange then his discourses and meditations in the
midst of this his desperate condition. As for the particulars following, 1:
Touching the greatness of his sin, and that he was taken off from that by
the example of Peter, I find no such thing neither in Sleidan, nor Osiander,
nor in Goulartius; but rather in this latter, who makes the largest relation
thereof taken out of the discourse of one Henry Scringer, a learned Lawyer who
was then at Padua, who did see, and many times talk with this poor Spira; I
find that which makes to the contrary, namely, that the sin which he laid to
his own charge was the sin against the Holy Ghost. And no example I trust
neither of Peter, nor any other was sufficient to take him off from despair in
such a case. 2. And as for the discourse here suggested of his absolute
reprobation, which he opposed against their comforts ministered unto him, no
mention thereof, neither in Sleidan, nor in Osiander; nay Osiander writes that
he was wished to revoke doctrinam Lutheranam, and this was it which he did (as
he says) blaspheme as an heresy, and abjure. Goulartius indeed relates how he
conceived himself to be reprobated of God, as justly he might in case he
judged himself to have sinned against the Holy Ghost; And as for that which is
here set down in Latin, of him that is a Reprobate, namely, that necessario
condemnabitur, though his sins be small and few, and that nihil interest multa
an pauca, magna an parva sint; quando nec Dei misericordia, nec Christi sanguis
quicquam ad eos pertinet. Neither Sleidan, nor Osiander nor Goulartius makes
any mention of it. And therefore I wonder not that he neither follows
Sleidan, nor Osiander much less that he follows not Goulartius. He cites
Caelius secundus and Calvin as his Authors, and some others that wrote thereof
to their friends, but names them not; as neither where it is that Caelius
secundus makes mention of it, or in what book of Calvin it is found. I
imagined it might be in his Epistles; I have spent some hours in searching
therein from the year 1545 to the year 1663, and can find nothing concerning
it. Now Goulartius wrote since Caelius secundus, and Calvin and Sleidan, and
his relation is large; and it semes he inquired in to it somewhat better then
they that went before him. And thus he relates it out of the discourse of Henry
Scringer a Lawyer of Padua, who saw Spira at that time, and diverse times spoke
with him.

In a small town of the territory of Padua called Civitelle there was a
Learned Lawyer, and advocat, a wise and very rich, man and an honorable father
of a family, called Francis Spira, who having said and done diverse things
against his conscience, to maintain himself and his charge, (observe by the
way he delivers the cause only in general concealing the speciality, it being
so strange a testimony and evidence against the Romish Religion) being returned
to his house, he could never rest an hour, not a minut, nor have any ease of
his continual anguish: And even from that night he was so terrified and had
such horror of his actions, as he held himself for lost. For (as he himself
did afterward confess) he did set plainly before his eyes, all the torments,
all the pains of the damned, and in his soul did hear the fearful
sentences, being drawn before the judgment seat of Jesus Christ (a fearful
example to all Apostates;) The next day and so following he was not seen to
resume any courage, but his spirits were strangely troubled, and the terror
took from him all rest and appetite. This accident was so grievous to his
friends, as some repented them much that they had been the cause of so great
an inconvenience, by their entreaties. Others, thinking it did proceed from
some choleric or melancholy humor, were of opinion to send him to Padova to
be Physicked by the Learned Physicians, revived by honorable company, and
settled by the coference of Learned men there, to some of which he was well
known. His Wife and Children with some of his familiar friends did accompany
him, and he was lodged in one of the chief houses. Frisimilega Bellocat and
Crassus (famous Physicians) did visit him, and give him Physic with singular
affection: and soon found that he was little sick in body, but grievously in
mind, for in all other things he discoursed gravely, and constanstly, so as
none of his familiar friends could discern that the quickness of his
discourse was any thing impaired. Continuing still in his weakness, many were
much troubled, and daily his Chamber was full of People; some curious to see
and hear, others were desirous to draw him to hope in the mercies of God; I
was present at many of his speeches, with some men of honor and Learning. To
deliver that which I could observe, I began first to note his age and his
fashion. He was about 50 years old, free from the violent passions of youth,
and from the coldness of old age. Nothing came out of his mouth, that was
light or foolishly spoken: or that might discover any doting in him; although
he did daily discourse of grave and important matters with the Learned, and
that some did propound unto him high questions especially in Divinity.

2. I will briefly relate same speeches they had with him. During his abode at
Padua and I will not forget that he declared with a settled judgment, that he
did see the eternal vengeance of God prepared against the sin, that he had
committed: (This was the true cause of his despair, and not an ungrounded
conceit of his reprobation; but the conscience of his sin cast him upon this,
and made him conceive he was a Reprobate.) For that he did find in him self
that those things which God had given to others to rejoice their spirits, all
conspired against him in despite of his horrible forfeit: (I doubt the phrase
here in the original was not well understood by the Traslatour;) For although,
said he, that God for a great blessing had promised to many holy men a goodly
issue, and a great number of children, in whose love and obedience they may
repose their age; yet in the midst of his miseries, The hands and faces of his
Children were as horrible unto him as the hangmans (and indeed for the good of
his children he renounced Gods truth for mere temporal respects.) It cannot
well be expressed what grief and vexation he seemed to receive when his
children brought him meat, forcing him to eat, and threatening him when he
refused it. He confessed his children did their duties, and yet he took it in
ill part, saying, that he did not acknowledge God any more for his father, but
did fear him as his adversary armed with judgment. For he had been three weeks
in this apprehension, when he spoke these things, without eating or drinking,
but what they forced him unto, the which he received with great difficulty,
resisting with all his power, and spitting out that which they forced him to
take. Some of the Assistants were of opinion to make him afraid, to make him
the more apt to receive food, first for the soul, then for the body; asking
him if he did not fear greater and sharper torments after this life then those
he then felt. He confessed that he expected far more sharp, and had already
horror of them: yet he desired nothing more then to be cast headlong in to
them, that he might not fear other more grevious torments. They asked him
again if he thought his sin so foul as it could not be pardoned through the
bounty and infinite mercy of God? His answer was, that he had sinned against
the Holy Ghost, which was so great a sin, as is called a sin unto death;
that is to say, subject to the eternal vengeance of God, and to the pains of
Hell: (now judge I pray whether the example of Peter was sufficient to take him
off from desperation; for will any say that Peter in denying his Master sinned
against the Holy Ghost;) whereof (to wit, the sin against the Holy Ghost)
this poor wretch discoursed amply, learnedly, and too subtly against him
self: Learned and Godly men, which did assist him, omitted no testimonies that
might assure a wounded conscience that God is merciful, gentle and ready to
pardon. But all this could not divert him from this opinion, neither could they
draw any other thing from him, then that he desired much that he might return
to some hope of pardon. But it fares with me (says he) as with criminal
persons, shut up in close prisons, and fettered hand and foot. Sometimes they
are saluted by their friends passing by, who advise them to break Prison, and
to deceive their guards if they can. Such Prisoners would gladly follow their
counsel, but it is a vain desire: Even so is mine, said he.

3. As for the Scriptures which were cited to him, touching the love and
affection of God the Father, by reason of his Son Jesus Christ, he did avow
them; adding, that they belonged only to them, whom Jesus Christ did repute his
brethren, and his members; but as for him, he had renounced that love, and
willingly rejected brotherly alliance, neither was ignorant in how great
tranquillity of mind they might be, who had once embraced the promises of
salvation, and did wrest them continually therein. For confirmation whereof,
this his sad disaster (said he) was propounded for an example before all men's
eyes: that if they were wise they should not hold it light, nor happened by any
chance, but to learn by his ruin, how dangerous it is, to fall any thing from
that which belongs to the great glory of the Son of God: Adding that it was a
slippery, and very dangerous passage, yea most fearful to him that stood not
carefully on his Guard. Moreover forasmuch as such evident examples, of the
vengeance of Almighty God did seldom appear to the eyes of men, they deserved
to be the more carefully regarded. That amongst a great number of Reprobates in
the World, his calamity was not singular; but his only punishment and ruin did
satisfy God, a just Judge to admonish all others to have a care of themselves.
He added withal, that therein he did acknowledge the severity of Gods
judgment, who had chosen him to make him a spectacle, rather then any other,
and to admonish all by one man's mouth, to abstain from all iniquity;
confessing withal, that there was no reproach or punishment, which he had not
deserved, by reason of his foul offense. After he had discoursed thus
sincerely and gravely of the justice Divine, he said they should not take it
strange, this his long speech touching the true reason of the will of God: for
that oftentimes God does wrest out of the mouths of Reprobates, most assured
testimonies of his Majesty, his justice, and his fearful vengeance. How
strangely does he plead for Gods justice against himself as a Reprobate? when
our Arminians are like to blaspheame that justice of God against Spira, which
Spira justifies against himself, using a long discourse upon this sentence,
and desirous to show the greatness of Gods judgments. There are some (says
he) who have all things so wishfully, as they live in all delights, who
notwithstanding are registered for perdition, whereof Jesus Christ propounds an
example in the rich man. Luc. 16. That God does often propound to mankind an
hope of reward to draw them to the right belief of his holy will, and ofttimes
withdrawes them from impieties, by fearful and prodigious signs. And yet as
impiety is natural to men, they make not their profit of such instructions,
and think not that it concerns them: but impute it to any other thing, rather
then to the wisdom of God, to fear and reverence him: Hereupon he made a
bitter invective against a certain Philosopher, whom he had known above twenty
years before, for that his Morosoph had been so impudent to deliver in his
lessons, yea to write it, and publish it in Print, that all the Miracles that
Christ had done upon the earth, might well be done by a man that were skillful
in the knowledge of natural things. It were hard to represent the admiration
wherewith they were surprised, and with what compassion they were moved, that
came to visit him, for the discourses which they heard come from his mouth.
Every man labored to reduce this poor man, to some hope of his salvation.
Among others there was one, a Reverend man for his holiness of life, who
departed not from the Patients bed, it was the Bishop of Capod' Istria in the
Venetians Territory; (This was Vergerius, who afterward renounced Popery, and
became a Protestant:) He ceased not to exhort Spira, and ceased not by many
testimonies of the holy Scriptures, to divert him from that apprehension;
Adding that he did not think his spirit was altogether void and destitute, of
some good and heavenly inspirations, seeing he spoke so holily and devoutly of
the excellency of Christian Religion.

4. Although the sick man knew full well that these admonitions proceeded from a
sincere and true heart; yet for that he had diverse times rejected them, he
began to frown, saying to the Bishop, you believe, as I think, that I do
willingly nourish this obstinacy in my mind, and that I take delight in this
vehement passion of despair: If you be of that opinion, you are deceived: I
will tell you, to the end you may know my resolution, that if I could be
persuaded that the judgment of God, might by any means be changed or
mitigated for me, it should not grieve me to be tormented ten thousand years,
with the sharpest pains of hell, so as I might have any hope of rest after
this long sufferance. But even in that whereby you do exhort me to gather any
hope, I see all means of health and pardon taken from me. For if the
testimonies of holy Scripture have any authority (as they have) do you think
that Jesus Christ has said in vain, that he which has renounced him before
men, he will renounce him before his heavenly father? Do you not see that it
concerns me, and that it is as it were, particularly verified in my person?
What shall become of him, whom the Son has disavowed before his Father, when
as you say, we must hope for no salvation but in Jesus Christ. Thereupon he did
expound certain passages of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and of the second
Catholic Epistle of Saint Peter, out of which he drew terrible conclusions
against himself. We cannot believe with what gravity and vehemence, his words
were delivered, neither was there ever heard man pleading better for himself,
then Spira did then against himself. He did allege notable things of Gods
justice, detesting his forepassed life; admonishing all that were about him,
very earnestly, not to think that Christian life was a light thing, and easily
discharged. That it does not consist only in having the head Baptized, in
reading certain verses and texts of the Gospel, and to be termed an honest
man, but it was needful to live as the word of truth does command him.
Thereupon he repeated a Text out of Saint Peter, exhorting us to show through
holiness of life, certain signs of the love of God toward us, and of the
confidence we should have in him: He said moreover, that he had known many who
after they had tasted the sweetness of true felicity, suffered themselves so
to be carried away, as they had no longer care to perform that which belonged
to a child of God.

5. He protested that he had sometimes imagined, that his sins had been
hidden, and that he could not be punished, for that Christ had made
satisfaction for them: but then he knew too late, that those things belonged
only to the elect, and chosen of God, betwixt whose sins, and the celestial
Throne, Jesus Christ sets his precious blood, and the dignity of his obedience,
as a veil and shadow to cover them, and does plant them against the Divine
vengeance, as an high and strong Rampart, that sinners repenting them, might
not be oppressed, nor drowned with the deluge and overflowings of their offenses
and sins. As for himself, seeing that he had renounced our Savior Jesus
Christ (here was the true burden of his sorrowful heart) he had, as one
should say, overthrown this strong Rampart with his own hands, so that after
this ruin, and overflowing the deluge of waters of this vengeance, had covered
and swallowed up his soul. One of his most familiar friends said unto him,
that he did hold the cause of this his great torment, proceeded from abundance
of Melancholy humors, that did so trouble his brain. Spira remembering that he
had many times refuted that opinion, and seeing they were to begin again, said
unto the other; You may think what you please, but God in truth has troubled
my spirit, and deprived me of judgment; seeing it is impossible for me to have
any hope of my salvation. Having continued in such and the like speeches,
during his abode at Padua, they carried him back, to his own house at
Civitelle, where he dyed in this despair.

DISCOURSE. SECT. III.
It makes Ministers unable to afford true comfort to the tempted; and this it
does, because it 1. Takes from them all solid grounds of comfort. 2. Leaves
them only weak and insufficient grounds.


1. It bereaves them of the solid grounds of comfort; which are these. 1. The
universality of Gods love. 2. Of Christ's death. 3. And of the covenant of
grace. That Minister which does explain and apply these three things soundly,
and wisely to him that is tempted in this kind, does that which is abundantly
enough for the relieving and releasing of him from his temptation, and he that
does not apply these, leaves him as he found him in the midst of his temptation
still, whatsoever may be said to the contrary in the hear of disputation.

Etsi multa disputantur durius (says Melancthon) tamen necesse est in vero
agone ad hanc arcem confugere, Melanct. loc. com. p. 525. c. de Praedest.
videlicet, quod de voluntate Dei indicandum sit ex verbo expresso, and quod
promissio sit universalis, and quod sit mandatum Dei aeternum and immutabile
audire filium and assentiri promissioni. Though there be many things disputed
in this point more harshly, yet when all is done, the universal promise of
grace, and salvation, is a Christians only Bulwark in this temptation, and
combat. Obtemperemus igitur (says he) ne vagentur animi quaerentes electionem
extra verbum, and relicto Christo, and omisso mandato de amplectenda
promissione; sed teneamus certa est indubitata fide promissionem gratiae non
inanem esse fabulam; sed Deum vere patefecisse voluntatem suam in promissione,
and vere praestare quod promisit. Let us not therefore leave Christ and look
for an election out of the word, but let us judge of Gods will, in saving men
by the promise, and commandment, which are both universal. And in another
place of the same book, he has these words. Sicut est necesse scire
Evangelium promissionem esse gratuitam, ita est necesse scire Evangelium
promissionem universalem esse, hanc universalem tenere necesse est, adversus
periculosas imaginationes de praedestinatione, ne disputemus hanc promissionem
ad paucos quosdam alios pertinere, non pertinere ad nos. Non enim dubium est,
quin omnium animos haec cogitatio exerceat. As it is needful to know that the
promise of salvation is free, so it is needful to know and hold, that it is
universal, against some dangerous conceits of predestination, etc. By these
speeches we see clearly, what this learned man thought to be the true balm of
Gilead, whereby a wounded scule should be cured, viz. the universality of the
promise (and of Gods love and Christ's death too, for they all hang together,
and cannot be disjoined.) The reason why these grounds are able to help a man
in this case, is twofold.

1. Because they are directly contradictory to the temptation; a will to save
all, a giving of Christ to death for all, and an offer of grace to all, cannot
possibly stand with an absolute antecedent will, and intent of casting away the
greatest part of mankind, or indeed any one man in the world. Upon this
follows the second reason.

2. Because they serve to convict the tempted, that he cannot be in that
condition in which he supposes himself to be. For if two contradictories
cannot be true, he that evinceth the truth of the one, convinces the
understanding of the untruth of the other: and he that makes it appear that
this contradictory, [God would have all to be saved, redeemed, and called to
repent and believe,] is true, puts it out of doubt to the understanding, that
the other contradictory, [God will have most men to be absolutely, and
inevitably damned,] must needs be false, and so raises up that poor soul
that was pressed down with an erroneous conceit and fear that it was true. In
this manner did Junius (though not in the same temptation) relieve a Woman
perplexed exceedingly with a strong persuasion, that she and all her Children
should be damned; because she was busied about her Children at a certain time,
when she should have been at Mass. Junius makes short work with her, tells
her that her employment about her Children, was a duty pleasing unto God, but
the Mass was a mere Will Worship: and so delivering her of her error, (upon
which the temptation was built,) gives her present ease and comfort. In like
manner tell a man that fears he is an absolute reprobate, that there are no
such absolute Reprobates, and that his fear is but a mere fancy, and his
doubt a dream; convince him once by contradictory grounds that there is no man
in the World in that state in which he thinks himself to be, and you drive
out one nail by another, and expel the temptation. These are the Sword of
Alexander, which will cut asunder the Gordian knot of absolute Reprobation, and
these are the true Nepenthes of a sick soul.

Now these true Grounds of hope and comfort, a Minister cannot make use of,
that holds absolute Reprobation; if he do usurp them, he cannot maintain
them against the replies of the tempted, unless he relinquish his opinion;
because (as I have said) there is a plain contradiction between them, and no
man is able to maintain two propositions; which speak contrary things, to be
both true, any more then he can make it good, that the same thing may have a
being, and yet not have a being at the same time. For example, a Minister comes
to comfort a man, that thinks himself to be an absolute Reprobate; and how
does he set about it? He tells him, that God would have all to be saved, that
Christ dyed for all, etc. But what right has he to these grounds of comfort,
holding the contrary conclusions. viz. That God will have a great many to be
damned, and to have no part in Christ? Well he usurpes them notwithstanding,
but is he able to maintain them against the answer of the tempted, can he make
a good reply? No: for thus the tempted answers, God would have all to be saved
with a revealed will, and, Christ died for all sufficiently, not intentionally:
Or if God did intend that he should dye for all, yet he intended it upon a
condition, which he purposes, the most should never perform; What can the
Minister reply upon this? If he will make a direct reply, that shall take away
the answer, he must deny that God has two wills contrary to each other; a
secret will, that many shall be unavoydably damned, and a revealed will that
all may be possibly saved; and he must also deny that God has an intent, that
Christ should not dye for a great many; or that he intended he should dye for
all, upon condition they should believe and repent; and yet intend that the
most should never believe and repent. But can he deny these things? He cannot,
except he deny his own conclusion, and opinion, which is, that there are many
thousands, eternally and unavoydably rejected in Gods absolute purpose, from
grace and glory for ever: For that conclusion is all one, with the answer of
the tempted, and contradictory to those arguments of comfort, which he is glad
to make use of. Absolute reprobation therefore, bereaves that Minister, who
believes it, of the solid grounds of consolation, and so makes him unable to
recover a poor soul wounded with this temptation.

TWISSE. Consideration.
1. HEre in this Section the question is, Whether our Doctrine of absolute
Reprobation, bereaves a Minister of the solid grounds of comfort? Still we
must remember how magnificently this Author goes on, to confound things that
differ. For whereas we maintain that God has decreed to proceed absolutely
with men, only in the giving and denying of grace, not absolutely in the giving
of salvation, or inflicting of damnation. And this Author, though he so
carries the matter all along, as if we maintained Gods proceeding to be
absolute herein, to wit, in granting salvation to some, and inflicting
damnation upon others, yet has he no means to help himself herein, and cast
a show of a true crimination, but by flying to Gods absolute proceedings, in
giving or denying grace. And albeit in this point, wholly consists the Crisis
of this Controversy, yet this Author utterly declines the sifting thereof, as
some precipice and breake-neck unto his cause; to wit, Whether God gives and
denies grace according to the mere pleasure of his will, or according to men's
works; albeit the issue of all his comforts comes to this, namely, that either
God is not the Author of our faith, (which now adays the Remonstrants with
open mouth profess, that Christ merited for none,) or if to juggle with the
World they pretend an acknowledgement, that God is the Author of it, yet they
plainly profess, that he dispenses it to some, and denies it to others,
according to some good condition, or disposition, he finds in the one, and
which he finds not in another. But let us take into consideration what these
solid grounds of comfort are, whereof a Minister is bereaved by our Doctrine;
Three I find here mentioned; A treble Universality. 1. of Gods love. 2. Of
Christ's death. 3. Of the Covenant of grace. As if universality now adays were
a better Character of the Arminian faith, then of the Roman Religion. I may
take liberty to equivocate a little, when this Author equivocates throughout,
and that in a case, wherein i^ is most intolerable, in a case of consolation
to be ministered to conscientia timorata, as Nider calls it, a poor afflicted
soul as this Author expresses it. To the discovery whereof I will now
proceed, having signified in the first place, that all these consolations are
no other, but such as every Reprobate is capable of, as well as the Children of
God, which is so apparent as needs no proof; only in the issue of their Tenet,
the faith of them freeth a man from the conceit of being an absolute Reprobate.
So that in effect it comes to this; Thou poor afflicted soul, be of good
comfort, for if thou will hearken unto me, and embrace those solid grounds of
comfort which I will reveal unto thee, assure thy self they shall be as the
Balm of Gilead unto thy soul; whereby thou may be confident, that albeit it
may be thou art a Reprobate, and that God from everlasting has ordained thee
unto damnation, that yet certainly thou art no absolute Reprobate, no more then
Cain, or Esau, Saul, or Judas, or the Devils were; For these my principles
will assure thee that there never was, nor is, nor shall be any absolute
Reprobate throughout the world.

2. I come to the examining of them particularly, and to show that every one of
them is as it were against the hair. So evident are the testimonies of
Scripture against them all; and they are obtruded upon a superficiary and most
most unsound interpretation of Scripture in some places. For 1. as touching the
first, the universality of Gods love; For hereby Gods love is made indifferent
unto all, and consequently toward Esau as well as to Jacob, whereas the
Scripture professes that God loved Jocob and hated Esau; and this the Apostle
makes equivalent to the Oracle dilivered to Rebekah concerning them before they
were borne. 2. He might as well have proposed it, of the universallity of Gods
mercy; whereas the Scripture expressly distinguishes between vessels of mercy
and vessels of wrath. 3. This love is explicated by them to consist in a will
to save all. Now election is but Gods will to save; and the Scripture plainly
teaches, and it is confessed by all that I know (excepting Coelius Secundus to
whom this Author it seems is most beholding for his story of Spira) that
though Many are called yet but few are chosen. And whereas it is confessed,
that the most part of men are Reprobates, that is, from everlasting willed unto
condemnation; yet never the less they bear us in hand that all men even Cain
and Judas, yea and (as I think) the Devils and all were willed by God unto
Salvation. And that there is no contradiction in all this. And every poor
afflicted soul must believe hand over head that all this is true (what species
of contradiction soever be found therein which this Author from the beginning
of his discourse to the end has taken no pains to clear) least otherwise he
forfaits all hopes of comfort, upon such sovereign grounds as are here
proposed, by faith wherein aman may be as well assured of his Salvation and
freedom from damnation, as any Reprobate in the World. For albeit he be a
Reprobate, and God should reveal this unto him, yet upon these grounds he may
be confident that he is no absolute Reprobate. 2. I come to the Second
comfortable supposition, and that is, the universality of Christ's death,
namely, that he died for all. Now this is opposite to Scripture evidence, as
the former; yea and to Christian reason, if not more: For albeit God so loved
the World, even the whole World, that he gave his only begotten Son that
whosoever believes in him should not perish but have Life Everlasting: which
gives a fair light of exposition to those places where Christ is said to have
dyed for the sins of the World, yea of the whole world, to wit, in this manner,
that whosoever believes in him shall not perish but have everlasting life. yet
the Scripture speaks as often of Christ's death in a restrained sense, as where
it is said Christ gave himself a ransom for many. And that his blood was shed
for his Apostles, and for many, for the remission of their sins. And that
Christ should save Gods people from their sins. And that God has purchased
his Church with his blood; And Christ gave himself for his Church. And that he
is savior of his body; And that he dyed for the elect. And in the 17 of John,
our Savior would not pray for the World, but only for those whom God had at
that time given unto him; and who afterward should believe in him through their
word; And look for whom he prayed with exclusion of the rest for their sakes he
sanctified himself: Now that this is spoken in reference to the offering of
himself up unto God, upon the cross, it was the joint interpretation of all
the Fathers whom Maldonate had read as he professes on that place, and there
reckons up a multitude of them. Then again, Christ's death and passion (we
know) was of a satisfactory nature; and therefore if he dyed for all, he
satisfied for all the sins of all men; why then are not all saved? Why is any
damned? Is it just with God to torment with everlasting fire, for those sins,
for which he has received satisfaction; and that a more ample one, then man's
satisfaction can be, by suffering the torments of Hell fire? For therefore it
shall never end, because it shall never satisfy. Again, how many millions
were at that time dead and in hell fire; and did Christ satisfy for their
sins by his death upon the Cross, and they continue still to be tormented?
Again, the obedience of Christ in general, is of a meritorious nature, even
meritorious of everlasting life; Now if Christ has merited everlasting life
for all and every one, how comes it that all and every one do not enjoy
Everlasting Life? Shall not God the Father deal with his own Son according
to the exigency of his merits, whether it be that they are so meritorious in
their own nature; or by the constitution of God; either merely, or jointly
with the dignity of their nature, in reference to the dignity of the person who
performed them, as being not only man but God, even the eternal Son of God one
and the same God with his Father, Blessed for ever. Now it can be made good
that all sins of all men are fully satisfied for, by the death of Christ, and
that Christ has merited in better manner Everlasting Life for all and every
one, then they could have done for themselves, although they had passed the
whole course of their lives, as free from sin as the very elect Angels; this
I confess is a comfortable doctrine with a witness; though God leave men to
themselves and to the power of their own free wills to do what they list. And
I see noe reason, but that in the midst of all Riot and excess, they may be as
confident of their Salvation, as if they had all faith; as of certain
Lutherans it is written, as I saw in a letter of an English Divine written from
Rome. I make no question but their answer will be, that albeit Christ has thus
satisfied for all sins of all and every one, and merited Eternal Life for
all and every one, yet the benefit of his merits and satisfaction by Gods
Ordinance shall redound to none, but such as believe, and repent, and persevere
therein unto death. And what comfort can herehence arise to an afflicted soul,
unless she do believe and repent? If she do believe and repent, our Doctrine
gives assurance to such of their election, the Arminian does not. Here I
presume they will say, that every one may believe if he will, repent if he
will; and may they not as well say, that every soul afflicted with despair,
may leave of to despair if they will, and consequently leave of to be
afflicted if they will? And I confess this way of consolation has a very
short cut, if the afflicted soul would harken unto them. Especially considering
that I do not find, that in these their discourses they take any notice of any
sin to hinder this, no not so much as of the sin against the Holy Ghost, or
of that sin which St John calls a sin unto death. But I do much doubt
whether this were the manner of comfort which the Prophet Esaias thought himself
enabled for by Gods grace, when he said, The Lord God has given me the Es. 50.
4.
tongue of the Learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to
him that is weary: he wakeneth Morning by Morning, he wakeneth mine ear to
hear as the learned. Wherefore let me make bold in behalf of the Patient, to
move unto you a question: Does not the Scripture teach us that faith is the
gift of God, that repentance is the gift of God? Ephesians. 2. 8. Phil. 1. 29.
Act: 11. 18. 2 Timothy: 2. 25, How then is it possible for me to believe and
repent, unless God give me the grace of faith and repentance? I presume you
will answer, that God gives faith and repentance, first, in as much as he gives
all men power to believe and repent, And secondly, in as much as he concurres
with them to the act of faith and repentance in case they will. But I pray thee
tell me, is not the will to repent also the gift of God? And if I have not as
yet the will to repent, how is it possible I should repent? Can any man repent
without a will to repent? Is not repentance chiefly the charge of the will? But
you will say (I suppose) that even this will to repent God is ready to work in
me, if I will repent. But in case a man will repent, what need has he of any
Divine assistance to cause in him this will to repent, seeing he has it
already? Lastly, does not God give a man a power to refuse to believe, to
refuse to repent if he will? And is he not as ready to concur with him to any
sinful act if he will, and to work the very will also of doing it in case he
will? And are not these then the gifts of God as well as others? To conclude,
what think you of the gift of faith, has Christ merited it for us or no? It
seems by your Doctrine he has not; as when you teach that albeit Christ has
satisfied for all, merited Everlasting life for all; yet the benefit of Christ
obedience and death, is by the ordinance of God applyable to none, but such as
have faith: whereby it appears, that you do not make faith to be any of those
benefits, which redound unto us by the obedience of Christ. For though it be
decent to say, that salvation as a benefit procured by Christ's obedience, can
redound to none but to such as believe; yet it is very indecent to say, that
faith it self, as a benefit of Christ's death, shall by the ordinance of God
redound to none but to such as believe. And indeed the Remonstrants now adays,
do openly profess, that Christ merited faith for none. And they are to be
commended In Censura Censurae. p. 56.
for dealing ingenuously, and confessing that, whereunto the Genius of their
Tenet does carry them. Our Arminians deal not so plainly: but as they pretend
that faith and repentance are the gifts of God; so they pretend that Christ
merited them for us, to wit, he merited universal grace for all and every one,
whereby every man may believe if he will, and repent if he will. And how
comfortable this particular is, I have already showed; for it is as much as to
say, you may cease to despair if you will, you may cease to be afflicted if
you will. Secondly, Christ merited, that God should concur to the working of
faith and repentance in them, provided that they would work it in them selves.
Yea the very will to believe and repent, God will work in them modo velint. So
that still the resolution of all comfort, is into a man's own free will; For
God gives not faith and repentance to whom he will, or according to the mere
pleasure of his will, but rather according to men's works. And this direct
Pelagianisme, condemned so many hundred years ago, is that most comfortable
doctrine of Christianity, which our Arminians do afford. And this discourse as
touching the universality of Christ's death, may be applied also to the
universality of Gods love, which ends in this, that all men shall be saved if
they do believe; and that every man may believe if he will; and that God is
ready to work faith and repentance in them, provided that they will be as
ready to work it in themselves.

3. And now I come to this Authors third Topic place of consolation, drawn
from the universality of the Covenant of grace. Now this is as strange as any
of the former, or rather much more, and when the Covenant of grace is so much
enlarged, we have cause to fear that it is confounded with the Covenant of
Works. And indeed if it were true, as some of this sect profess, namely, that
there is an universal grace given to al for the enlivening of their wills,
whereby they are enabled to will any spiritual good whereunto they shall be
excited; and to believe if they will, and from the love of temporal things to
convert themselves to the keeping of Gods Commandments if they will; I see no
reason but that the Law is able to give life, though the Apostle supposes the
contrary; and the way is as open unto man for justification by the works of
the Law as it was unto Adam in the state of innocence. And if the Covenant of
grace be universal, and ever was, for that I take to be this Authors meaning,
then God was no more the God of Abraham, and of his seed, then of all the
World; nether was the people of Israel more the Lords portion then any other
Nation of the World: yet Moses was sent unto Pharaoh in their behalf with this
Message; Thus says the Lord, Israel is my son, my first borne, wherefore I
say unto thee, Let my son go that he may serve me; if thou refuse to let
him go, Behold I will slay thy son even thy first borne Ex: 4. 22, 23. Thus
God accounts them albeit they were miserably corrupted with Idolatry; as it
appears. Ez: 20. 6. In the day that I lift up my hand upon them, to bring them
forth of the Land of Egypt; 7. Then said I unto them, Let every one cast a way
the abominations of his eyes, and defile not your selves with the Idols of
Egypt; for I am the Lord your God. 8. But they rebelled against me, and would
not hear me; for none cast away the abominations of their eyes; neither did
they forsake the Idols of Egypt: then I thought to pour out mine Indignation
upon them and to accomplish my wrath against them in the midst of the Land of
Egypt; 9. But I had respect unto my name that it should not be polluted of the
Heathen. So he proceeded in despite of their sins, to carry them out of the
Land of Egypt; and brought them into the wilderness and gave them Statutes,
and Judgments, and his Sabaths; v: 10, 11, 12. But they rebelled against him in
the Wilderness, whereupon he thought again to pour out his indignation upon
them in the Wilderness to consume them v. 13. But he had respect unto his
name, v. 14. amd his eye spared them and would not destroy them v. 17. And
again, when their Children provoked him by rebelling against him, whereupon he
thought of pouring out his Indignation upon them v. 21. Nevertheless he
withdrew his hand, and had respect unto his name v. 22. Then as touching the
generation of that present time he professes he will rule them with a mighty
hand v. 33. And the issue thereof is no worse then this, I will cause you to
pass under the rod, and bring you into the bond of the Covenant v. 37, And
again, mark with what a gracious promise he concludes v. 43. There shall ye
remember your ways and all the works wherein ye have been defiled, and ye
shall judge yourselves worthy to be cast of for all your evils, which you have
committed 44. And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have respect unto
you for my names sake and not after your wicked ways, nor according to your
corrupt work, O ye house of Israel, says the Lord God. Here is the peculiar
fruit of the Covenant of grace, to master their iniquities, to bring them unto
repentance, and to deliver them, from the dominion of sin and Satan. If God
perform this Grace to all and every one throughout the World, then is the
Covenant of grace universal, and all and every one are under it, but if there
be few, very few, over whom sin has not the dominion, then certainly very
few are under the Covenant of grace. For the Apostle plainly signifies this,
to be the fruit of the Covenant of grace; where he says, Sin shall not have
dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law but under grace, Rom: 6. 14.
And the like we have, Heb. 8. 8. I will make with the House of Judah a new
Testament. 9. Not like the Testament that I made with their fathers, in the day
that I took them by the hands to lead them out of the Land of Egypt: For they
continued not in my Testament, and I regarded them not, says the Lord. 10. For
this is the Testament that I will make with the House of Israel, after those
days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws in their mind, and in their heart I
will write them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. 11. And
they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother saying,
Know the Lord: for all shall know me from the least of them to the greatest of
them. 12. For I will be merciful unto their unrighteousness, and I will
remember their sins, and their iniquities no more. According to this Covenant
proceed those gracious promises, whereof the Scriptures are full. I have seen
his ways, and I will heal them. Es: 57. 18. I will heal their rebellions.
Hos. 14. 5. The Lord will subdue our iniquities. Mich. 7. I will circumcise
your hearts, and the hearts of your children, to love me with all your heart,
and with all your soul Deuteronomy 30. 6. I am the Lord your God which sanctify you,
etc: And therefore these comforts which here are so much magnified, as only and
fully sufficient for the releeving of an afflicted soul in the hour of
temptation, are but so many lies (to speak in the Prophets phrase) that this
Author holds in his right hand; and if through the illusions of Satan he take
hold of them, they may cast him into a dream, like unto the dream of an
hungry man, who eats and drinks and makes merry, but when he awaketh his
soul is empty. For all these comforts so magnificently set forth, have no
force, save in case a man believe them now, if a man believes, our doctrine
can assure him of Everlasting Life; and so of his election, which the Arminian
cannot. For we teach that which our Savior has taught us, He that believes
in the Son has Everlasting Life; and he that obayeth not the Son shall not
see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him: But as for the performing of
faith, they leave that unto man, together with Gods concurrence. And in like
sort for the maintenance of their faith, they teach a man to put his trust in
himself with Gods concurrence, as if otherwise a man's condition were
uncomfortable, and the way were open to desperation. But what does Austin
answer to such like discourses of old, de Predest: sanct: cap: 22. An vero
timendum est, ne nunc de se homo desperet, quando spes ejus demonstratur
ponenda in Deo, non autem desperaret si eam in se ipso superbissimus and
infelicissimus poneret? Is it to be feared, least a man despair, when it is
proved, that a man's hope is to be placed in God, and that he is free from
despair, in case he place his hope in himself, most proudly, and most
unhappily?

As for that which he cites out of Melancthon, it is every way as much to the
purpose as that which he cited out of Calvin in the first Section. Melancthon
says we must judge of Gods will by his Word; so says Calvin, his words are
these; Qui recte atque ordine electionem investigant qualiter in verbo
continetur, eximium inde referunt consolationis fructum. To enquire after a
man's election in the Word is the way to reap singular consolation; But they
that enquire after the eternal counsel of God without the Word in exitialem
abyssum se ingurgitant; they plung themselves into a gulf of perdition. Yet
when Melancthon says, multa disput antur durius, the comparative there is not
to be rendered as this Author renders it more harshly, but rather thus, somewhat
harshly. And of Melancthons concurrence with Calvin, in the doctrine of
predestination, as touching the substance of the doctrine, I have formerly
showed out of his own Epistle, who professes that he differs only tradendi
ratione in the manner of delivering it; and of his own, professes that they
are of a popular nature, thus, Mea sunt (...) and adusum accommodata; as it
were woven with a thicker thread, and fited to use and practice. No man doubts
but that as Melanchton says it is Gods immutable commandment to hear the
Son, and to assent to the promise; and the promise is universal, to wit, that,
whosoever believes shall be saved: Therefore let us not seek election besides
the Word; it is a grave counsel, and well becoming Melancthon; and Calvin
gives the very same council, in the very Book, Chapter, and Section last
related by this Author. But he saw it fitter for his turn to represent
Melancthon professing as much, rather then Calvin. We nothing doubt but God
will perform that he has promised; and therefore whosoever believes shall be
saved according to our doctrine, not so according to the doctrine of Arminians;
who maintain that a man may totally and finally fall away from faith. Rogers
upon the Articles of the Church of England, Art. 17. Not only acknowledges
this universality of Gods promises, according to the Tenor of that Article; but
concludes herehence That they are not to be heard that say, that the number of
the elect is but small; and seeing we are uncertain whether we be of that
company or no, we will proceed in our course as we have begun; and accounts
all such adversaries of this truth, touching the universality of Gods promises:
and let every sober man judge whether this Author does not justify this their
discourse, whom he accounts adversaries to the truth of that Article in that
particular. The same Rogers in his 8 proposition, as touching the comfortable
nature of predestination, writs thus, This doctrine of predestination is to the
Godly, full sweet, pleasant, and comfortable, because it greatly confirms
their faith in Christ, and increases their love toward God. But (says he) to
the wicked and reprobate the consideration hereof is very sower, unsavory, and
most uncomfortable, as that which they think (though very untruly and sinfully)
causes them either to despair of his mercy being without faith; or not to
fear his justice being extremely wicked; whereas neither from the Word of
God, nor any confession of the Church can man gather that he is a vessel of
wrath, prepared to damnation. What more contradictions to this Authors
discourse of the uncomfortable condition of predestination, according to our
way; yet who was this Author? was he at any time accounted an innovatour in
this Church? His books dedicated to Archbishop Bancroft, writing upon the
Articles of the Church of England; perused, and by the lawful authority of the
Church of England allowed to be public. And because some choosing to play at
small game rather then sit out, may say, that he speaks not a word of absolute
election, or absolute reprobation; let his 5. Proposition be observed, which is
this, Of the mere pleasure of God, some men in Christ Jesus are elected, and
not others unto salvation: this he prooves by that Romans 9. 11. That the purpose
of God might remain according to election. And that Ephesians. 1. 5. Who does
predestinate us according to the good pleasure of his will: And that 2 Timothy 1.
9. Not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace:
And that Exodus 33. 19. And Romans 9. 15. I will show mercy to whom I will show
mercy: And as touching the other part of not choosing others, that of Solomon
Prove. 16. 4. The Lord has made all things for his own sake, yea even the
wicked against the day of evil. And Romans 9. 21. Has not the Potter power over
the clay to make of the same lump one vessel unto honor, and an other unto
dishonor. And coming unto the Errors, and adversaries of this truth. Hereby
(says he) is discovered the impiety of those men which think that, 1. Man does
make himself elegible for the Kingdom of Heaven, by his own good works and
merits; so teach the Papists. 2. God beheld in every man whether he would use
his grace well, and believe the Gospel or no, and as he saw man, so he did
predestinate choose or refuse him. 3. Besides his will, there was some other
cause in God, why he chose one man, and cast off another, but this cause is
hidden from us. 4. God is partial and unjust for choosing some, and refusing
others; calling many and electing but few. The other place alleged by this
Author of Melancthon, partly repeates the same matter concerning the
universality of the promises, (no mention at all with him either of the
universality of Gods love, or of the universality of Christ's death, or of the
universality of the Covenant of grace) partly opposes it to dangerous
imaginations of predestination; and what are these but such as proceed without
the word. For without doubt it is to be understood in opposition to that which
he formerly delivered, advising us to judge of the will of God by his express
Word; and all one with seeking election extra verbum formerly specified: of
both which Calvin speaks more at large in that very place aleadged by this
Author in the first Section of this last sort of Arguments; And there Calvin
commends the one as a most comfortable course, and sets forth the danger of the
other in far more emphaticall manner then Melancthon does, and therewithal
discovers the true Balm of Gilead, wherein it consists, in the same manner
that Melancthon does, and more fully: but it served not this Authors turn to
represent Calvin thus discoursing, though he could not be ignorant there of, if
himself read the place, which he alleges out of Calvin and took it not
upon trust at another hand. By the way I observe he makes the universality of
the promise, mentioned by Melancthon, all one with the universality of the
Covenant of grace mentioned by him. As if the Covenant of grace consisted only
in this, Whosoever believes shall be saved; and accordingly you may guess of
his meaning as touching the universality of Christ's death, namely, that the
benefit thereof shall redound to all that believe; as good as in plain terms
to profess, that Christ dyed not to procure and merit faith for us, which the
Remonstrants do now adays openly profess; but I do not find that our
Arminians hitherto dare to concur with them therein. And in like manner the
universality of Gods love is to be understood; namely, of willing salvation to
as many as believe, not of willing grace unto them, at least not of any meaning
to bestow faith and repentance upon them. Yet not any will yet show themselves
so ingenuous as to confess in plain terms, that God gives not faith and
repentance to any man, but leaves that to be wrought by the power of their
wills, pretending that God has enabled all men with a power to believe. And
indeed if faith and repentance be a gift, and special gift of God; it is
strange that God should bestow them upon us extra Christum, not for Christ
sake; And whence it follows that those gracious promises of circumcising our
hearts, of sanctifying us, of writing his law in our mind and inward parts, and
his fear in our hearts; never to depart from him, of healing our ways, our
backslidings, our rebellions; of taking away the stony heart out of our bowels
and giving us a heart of flesh; and causing us to walk in his statutes, and
keep his judgments, and do them, are nothing belonging to the Covenant of
grace in this Authors judicious consideration. And to conclude, if all men be
under the Covenant of grace, what force or substance at all is there in that
promise which God makes unto his people of Israel, namely, that he will cause
them to pass under the rod, and bring them unto the bond of the Covenant. As
also in that Ezekiel. 16. 60. I will remember my Covenant made with thee in the
days of thy youth, and I will confirm unto thee an everlasting Covenant. 61.
Then shall thou remember thy ways and be ashamed, when thou shall receive thy
sisters, both thy elder and thy younger and I will give them unto thee for
Daughters, but not by thy Covenant. 62. And I will establish my Covenant with
thee, and thou shall know that I am the Lord. I come to the consideration of
the reasons why these grounds are (pretended to be) able to healpe in such a
case, 1. Because they are directly contradictory to the temptation; a will to
save all, a givinig of Christ to death for all, and an offer of grace to all,
cannot possibly stand with an absolute anticedent will, and intent of casting a
way the greatest part of mankind, or indeed any one man in the world.

To this I answer. 1. Though they be contradictory to the temptation, yet if
they carry manifest evidence of notorious untruths in their foreheads,
delivered as they are without explication, what true comfort shall an afflicted
soul receive therehence, when by embracing them he shall but hold a lie in
his right hand? For do not these comforters themselves acknowledge, that God
has from everlasting decreed the damnation of the greatest part of men? Yet
they would have a poor afflicted soul believe that notwithstanding this he
wills the salvation of all, even of them whom he has appointed unto wrath; it
is the Apostles phrase 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. To endeavor to persuade them of this,
what is it but to make a sickly creature to feed on fire, or digest Iron, as if
that could ever turn into good nourishment. In like sort to persuade him that
Christ has made satisfaction for all the sins of al me^, and merited salvation
for all and every one; when, notwithstanding Christ's merits of their salvation,
the greatest part of the world shall not be saved; And notwithstanding Christ's
satisfaction for their sin, they must be put to satisfy for them, and that by
suffering the torments of hell fire, and that for ever. 2. Let these points be
explicated, and then no comfort at all will appear therehence to an afflicted
soul in some case; As for example, when they shall understand that Gods love
tends only to the saving of them in case they believe, and repent, and mortify
the deeds of the flesh, and persevere in such like gracious courses unto death:
alas what comfort is this to a sick soul, when he feels in himself no power
to believe, no power to repent, no power to any spiritual good, contrary wise
prone to evil, either not taking delight in Gods Word, or nothing profiting by
it; Will it suffice to out face them herein, and tell the^ they have power to
believe if they will, to repent if they will to mortify the deeds of the flesh
if they will; to crucify the affections and lusts if they will, yea to have
victory over the world if they will, and to quench all the fiery darts of the
Devil if they will? And withal that their wills are enlivened to will any of
all these, yea to will all these, and any other spiritual good whereunto they
shall be excited? Whereas the Scripture teaches us, that men are dead in
sin, before the time of their effectual calling; and that such was the
condition of the Ephesians, before the Gospel was Preached to them, and they
converted by it; and that till they embrace Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 2. last.
the Gospel, all men are led captive by the Devil, to do his will. 3. What
poor comfort is this to persuade a man, that he is no absolute Reprobate; when
upon the same grounds, namely, that the number of Reprobates is far greater
even an hundred for one, then the number of Gods elect, he may still be
perplexed with doubts and fears, yea and with as strong an apprehension that
he is a Reprobate. And amongst all the examples that I have lighted upon, of
desperation upon this ground, they have not proceeded according to this
distinction of reprobats absolute or not absolute, but simply upon an
apprehension that they were Reprobates, and that not upon the consideration of
the small number of Gods elect, and the vast number of Reprobates, but upon the
conscience of some sin or other, which they conceived to be unpardonable, a
sin unto death, a sin against the Holy Ghost, and that particularly
consisting in opposing Gods truth, or blaspheming it, or making war against
it: which I would this Author might be pleased well to consider before his feet
be too much fastened in the mire, and there be no getting out of it. His second
reason follows. 2. Because they convince the tempted that he cannot be in
that condition in which he supposes himself to be, for two contradictoryes
cannot be true. This is no new reason at all, but a mere application of the
reason formerly delivered. But this Author considers not how he marres his own
course of consolation, casting his spiritual patient to believe hand over head
things directly contradictory, as namely, that God wills the Salvation even of
those whom he has from everlasting ordained unto damnation; and is not his
patient like to take much comfort in this speculation; namely, that albeit he
be one of those whom God hathordained to condemnation, yet he wills his
Salvation. What a poor comfort is it to conceive that though God will have him
to be damned, yet not inevitably; whereas Gods will is as effectual in
bringing contingent things to pass contingently, as in bringing necessary
things to pass necessarily: so rain to morrow is a contingent thing, yet God
can bring it to pass as infallibly, though in a contingent manner, as he
brings to pass the rising of the sun. What comfort to a poor afflicted
soul, that though God wills his condemnation, yet not absolutely but
respectivly; (for these terms alone do stand in proper oppositio^ in the
judgment of Arminians) to wit, that he will not damn him but for his sin. As
for the consolation here ministered, that God would have all and every one (for
unless it proceed in that sense it is nothing to the purpose,) to be saved,
redeemed, and called to repent and believe; this is full of collusion: First in
mixing many things together of a different nature; For as for the two first,
that will, they have to proceed merely conditionally, to wit, in case they
believe and repent; manifestly implying, that the divine gift of faith and
repentance, is no benefit of Christ's redemption, nor any of those good things
which Christ has merited for us. Now as for the rest he was ashamed to
profess in the same Tenor, that God would have all to believe and repent but
only called to believe and repent. But seeing it is apparent that all are not
called, I presume this calling is to be understood also not absolutely but
conditionally; Now the condition thereof certainly is not faith and repentance,
but somewhat else, which he expresses not. And is it not requisite the patient
which is to be raised and releeved should be acquainted with this condition,
which yet is no where mentioned (as I remember) throughout this discourse? But
be it that God will have this poor soul to be saved and redeemed in case he
believe and repent; Unless God also wills his faith and repentance, what
door of hope or consolation is opened to the poor, soul yet dwelling in the
valley of Achor? I wonder not a little what he meant to say only, God we will
have all to be called, to believe and repent, and not to speak home and say,
God will have all to believe and repent For what? Does he not indeed
acknowledge faith and repentance to be the gifts of God; and if he does give
them, did he not from everlasting will to give them? will you give me leave to
guess at the mystery of his meaning in this? Had he said, God will have all to
believe and repent, as he says, God will have all to be saved and redeemed;
like as their meaning is well known as touching Gods will to save, namely,
upon condition and that condition also is well known to be faith and
repentance: In like sort had he said God will have all to believe and repent,
he saw belike this would have brought upon him more trouble then he would well
brook; to wit, by demanding whether God will have all to believe and repent
absolutely or conditionally: Not absolutely I presume, least so they should
grant election unto faith and repentance to be absolute; Therefore they must be
driven to show upon what condition God will have men to believe and repent,
that is, upon that condition God does bestow faith and repentance upon men. Now
they are very loath to come to this. But is it not fit that the soul which is
to be comforted upon this ground should be thoroughly acquainted with this
condition? For it is a vain thing to discourse of a power in man to believe and
repent, and to say it is given them by the grace of God, considering that the
Scripture is not more pregnantly averse from countenancing any such power
granted unto all; as it is clear, it professes faith and repentance to be the
gift of God, and consequently no man can exercise that pretended power without
a farther grace, whereby God gives faith it self, and repentance it self, and
not only a power to believe, and a power to repent. Therefore it is very
necessary for an afflicted soul, that is to be comforted upon this ground; to
have this mystery revealed unto her, namely, upon what condition God will give
one faith and repentance. But this Author keeps himself close in this point,
and budgeth not for fear, belike of discovering some mystery of iniquity on
their part. But whiles he conceales this, does he not play the part of a proper
Mountebanke, when he pretends the selling of Balm, and sovereign oils, when
indeed he means only to juggle and collude with his spectators? And there is
good reason why he should conceal this, or rather I doubt whether he that
shows himself on the stage herein, is sufficiently acquainted with the
mystery himself; For whereas they cannot endure, that God should absolutely
dispense the grace of Faith and repentance to whom he will, but upon a
condition to be performed on man's part: Hence it manifestly follows, that the
grace of faith and repentance is collated by God, according to men's works,
which is plain Pelagianisme, and condemned above 1200 years ago, in the Synod
of Palestine, and in no Orthodoxe Synod or Council reversed or retracted ever
since. Another reason there is of this concealment, and that is to prevent the
manifestation of the strange absurdity of their Tenet, discoverable by the
light of nature; For the condition of Gods working faith and repentance in us,
is this, modo nos velimus credere and resipiscere; as much as to say, as many
as will believe shall believe, which is as true of the most sinful act that is
committed by man, that God gives it in the same manner. And more then this they
dare not deny, but that (...) velle is the gift of God, but modo velimus,
whereby it comes to pass, that the act of willing is the condition of it
self, and consequently, both before and after it self. And these shameful
issues do justly befall them, because they abhor to profess, that God
causes us to walk in his statutes, and to keep his judgments, and do them.
The course that Junius took to quiet her conscience, who thought she was damned
for neglecting to go to Mass, by proving unto her that the Mass was a mere
wilworship, was fair and reasonable, but the course this Author takes to
comfort an afflicted soul, I have showed to be most unreasonable. Absolute
reprobate has a different sense, according as it is differently applied, If
applied unto damnation, or the denial of glory; we utterly deny that either
the one is inflicted, or glory is denied absolutely, but merely upon
supposition of sin. But applied to grace, we willingly confess, that God
does absolutely give the grace of regeneration, the grace of faith and
repentance, to whom he will, according to that of Saint Paul, He has mercy on
whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth. Romans 9. 18. compared with Romans 11.
30. Where to show mercy, is apparently to bring men unto faith; neither can it
have any other sense, Romans 9. 18. being set in opposition to hardening; and in
reference to the objection rising therehence, in the words following. Thou will
say then, why does he yet complain, for who has resisted his will: v. 19. And
while this Author denies that faith and repentance are given according to the
good pleasure of Gods will, which is to give them absolutely; he must be driven
to confess, that they are given conditionally: and if a man will take any
comfort therehence, he must be acquainted with the condition, which yet this
Author, undertaking the office of consolation upon this ground, does from the
first to the last conceal, as if he feared to discover the shameful
nakedness of his cause, which I have adventured to display, and whereof I
desire the indifferent reader would judge. So that indeed this discourse is a
new snare rather, to entangle a poor soul in sadness and heaviness
inextricable, fowler-like, then any true office of consolation, where she may
escape as a bird, out of the first snare of the Fowler, by breaking it and
delivering her.

Indeed these grounds of hope and comfort, a Minister cannot make use of, that
holds absolute Reprobation. What sober man would expect he should: but such a
one is never a whit the worse comforter for that; For as for these grounds, I
have already discovered them, to be void of all truth, of all sobriety. For if
men be not absolutely Reprobated from the grace of faith and of repentance, but
conditionally, (For as for the denying of glory, or inflicting damnation, we
utterly deny that God has decreed that they shall have their course absolutely
according to the mere pleasure of his will, having made a Law according
whereunto he purposes to proceed therein) it became this Author, performing
the part of a Comforter on this ground, to make known the condition which he
utterly declineth. And with all I have showed the reasons of his carriage thus
in Hugger Mugger, to wit, that their shameful Tenets might not break forth,
and be brought to light, We abhor to say that God gives the grace of faith
and repentance according to men's works; We abhor to say that God works in
men the act of believing and repenting, provided they will believe and repent;
or that he works in them the (...) velle of every good work modovelint. But
our comsolations proceed, as I have showed, in this manner, If any man man does
believe and repent, we can assure such a one by our doctrine that he is an
elect of God; this Arminians by their doctrine cannot, as who maintain that a
true believer may fall a way from grace and be damned; which is to hold the
souls of the best children of God upon the rack of fears, and terrors, and
tortures continually, and make them walk as it were upon pinacles of the
Temple; for they have no assurance of steadfastness, but in their own wills,
to keep them from dropping into Hell fire, which burns under them. If men
do not believe and repent; we will enquire into the cause of their fears and
grounds of their apprehentions that they are Reprobates; and show that they
have no just cause for such apprehensions whether it be the conscience of their
sin; or want of faith that does affright them; For as much as the holiest me^
living before their calling, had as great cause to be affrighted as they; yet
had they thereupon conceived themselves to be Reprobates, this had been but an
erroneous conceit. If perhaps it be not the conscience of sin in general,
that affrights them, but rather the conscience of some sin in special, which
they conceive to be a sin unto death, or a sin against the Holy Ghost,
which they conceive to be unpardonable; we will confer with them thereabouts,
and try whether they understand aright the nature of that sin, and endeavor
to scatter those mists of illusions in this particular, which Satan has
raised, desiring to swallow them up in desperation; if it do not prove to be a
sin against the Holy Ghost, we will set them in a course to get the spirit of
faith and of repentance. For albeit God alone can give them, yet seeing his
Word is a Word of power, even a voice that pearceth the graves; we willperswade
them to give themselves to be wrought upon by Gods Word, and we will pray for
them who yet want spirit to pray for themselves. And albeit they cannot prepare
themselves in a gracious manner to the hearing of Gods Word, yet let them come;
and when they are come let his Word work; yet if forthwith we have not that
comfortable experience of Gods goodness toward us, let us not give over to
wait at the lords gates, and to give attendance at the posts of his door. Give
him leave to be the Master of his own times, let us not prescribe unto him; We
know his course is to call some at one hour of the day some at an other, and
at the very last hour he calls some. This is the way of consolation that we
take. We do not take any such course as this Author at his pleasure obtrudes
upon us, that God would have all to be saved, and that Christ died for all; I
have already set forth this Authors collusions in his triple universality of
Gods love, Christ's death, and and of the Covenant of grace. We rather will
exhort him to believe, and herein we will take such course as God in his Word
has directed us unto; and we will pray unto God that his Word may be, as the
rain that comes down, and the snow from Heaven and returns not thither,
but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth, and bu^d hat it may give
seed to the sower, and bread to him that eats. So his Word may be that goes
out of his mouth, it may not return unto him void, but accomplish that which
he will, and proper in the thing whereto he sends it, And remove all vain
grounds of apprehensions of terrible things against themselves; What if a great
many be reprobated from grace, and shall never have any part in Christ? it does
not follow that this afflicted soul is any of them; what one is there of the
children of God which was not sometimes dead in sin: and if pangs of
childbirth go before the delivering of a child into the world of nature, why
should it seem strange that pangs of childbirth are suffered before a man be
brought forth in to the world of grace? And these fears and terrors wherewith
this poor soul is perplexed, may be unto her as pangs of childbirth, to bring
her forth into a new world. We say that by Gods Word we are to conceive that ye
are elected upon our faith and repentance; Thus Paul concluded the election of
the Thessalonians. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3, 4. And 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Thus Melancthon would
have us seek it; but by the Arminian doctrine it is in vain to seek after
it, for as much as none can find it. We acknowledge that as our Savior says,
Few are chosen, therefore we admonish every one, to strive to enter in at the
straight gate. This was our Saviors exhortation, delivered by way of answer to
a question made unto him by his Apostles, Whether there were but few that
should be saved. We teach that Christ has died for the people of God, for the
elect of God, for his Church, for his body, not only to make satisfaction for
sin, and to procure salvation for them, in case they believe, but to procure
also the Holy Spirit for them to make them believe and repent, etc. And this is
wrought by the word, which is the sword of the spirit. We take not the course
he obtrudes upon us; We make no such distinctions for the consolation of the
afflicted as he faignes: We deal plainly, and spare not to profess, that
albeit salvation is open to all that believe, and that by the ordinance of God;
yet that no man is able of himself to believe or repent, for as much as the
Scripture testifies, that all are dead in sin in the state of nature, and led
captive by the Devil to do his will; and that the very Law of God, does
strengthen sin, such being the course of man's corruption, that the more he is
forbidden this or that, the more it provokes him to transgress, taking
occasion by the law to work in man's heart all manner of concupiscence; this is
our course, to beat down the pride of man, and beat out of him all conceit of
ability to do any good, as of himself; and so to cast him down at the feet
of Gods mercy. Yet God is able by his grace to quicken him; and being brought
up in the Church of God, wherein is the balm of Gilead able to heal our ways
be they never so sinful and that that is administered, not according to the
vile works of men, (as if they had, any power to prepare them for the
participation of Gods grace,) but of the mere favor and good pleasure of God,
Who calls (as the Apostle speaks 2 Timothy 1. 9.) with an holy calling, not
according to our own works, but according to his own purpose and grace; And
that for the merits of Christ, who has merited not only pardon of sin and
salvation for all that believe, but faith also, and regeneration for all his
elect; and being as we are members of Gods Church, we have no cause to
despair, but sooner or later God may call us as continually he does some or
other, and we know not how soon our turn may come. And as for Gods purpose
touching the performance of the condition of faith; we plainly profess, That
God purposed to give faith and repentance only to his elect, according to that,
Act. 13. 48. As many believed, as were ordained to everlasting life; And Acts
2. last. God added daily to his Church such as should be saved. Now hear I
pray their doctrine on the other side, which set out our manner of consolation,
devised most ridiculously at their own pleasure, so to expose our doctrine to
scorn. Does God purpose to bestow faith and repentance upon any other besides
his elect? This they must avouch if they contradict us, and that he purposes
to bestow it on all and every one; but how? Not absolutely on any, that is, not
according to the mere pleasure of his will; how then? Surely conditionally, to
wit, according to men's works; that so not Semi-Pelagianisme only, but plain
Pelagianisme may be commended unto Gods Church for true Christianisme. And what
is that work in man, whereupon God works faith or repentance in them? Surely
the will to believe, the will to repent. So that if all men will believe, will
repent, then in good time through Gods grace they shall believe, they shall
repent; and if this be not to crown Gods grace with a crown of scorns, as
Christ himself was crowned with a Crown of Thorns, I willingly profess I
know not what it is. We utterly deny that God has two wills, one contrary to
the other. We acknowledge that in Scripture phrase Gods commandment is called
his will, as, This is the will of God even your sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3.
But this is not that will of God which the Apostle speaks of, when he says,
Who has resisted his will, Romans 9. 19, For his will of commandment is
resisted too often. But the will he speaks off, there is the will of Gods
purpose and decree, whereof the Psalmist speaks, saying, Whatsoever the Lord
will that has he done both in Heaven and earth. Now suppose God command
Abraham to sacrifice his son Isaac, and yet decrees that Isaac shall not be
sacrificed, both which are as true, as the word of God is true, yet there is no
contradiction. For as much as his commandment signifies only Gods will, what
shall be Abraham's duty to do, not what shall be done by Abraham; On the other
side Gods decree signifies what shall not be done by Abraham. Now what
contradiction I pray is there between these, It is Gods will that it shall be
Abraham's duty to sacrifice Isaac, but it is not Gods will that Isaac shall be
sacrificed by Abraham; for as much as when Abraham comes to the point of
sacrificing Isaac, the Lord purposes to hold his hand. In like manner God
commanded Pharaoh to let Israel go; It was his will then, that it should be
Pharaohs duty to let Israel go; but withal he to^d Moses that he would harden
Pharaohs heart, that he should not let Israel go; whereby it is man i^ est,
that God decreed that Israel should not be dismissed by Pharaoh for a while,
and that (as is signified in the Text) to make way for his judgments to be
brought upon the land of Egypt, whereby God meant to glorify himself, as in
the sight of Pharaoh, and of his Egyptians, so in the sight of the children of
Israel, and of the bordering Nations; No contradiction at all in this, no more
then Gods word is found to contradict it self. And nothing but ignorance makes
our adversaries so bold as to impute contradiction to us in this. We grant
willingly that God did intend that most should never believe and repent; For as
much as he intended to deny the gift of faith and repentance unto most, as it
is apparent he does; neither dares any Arminian deny it. Only they feign, that
God would give faith and repentance unto all, in case they would prepare
themselves; which not only includes manifest Pelagianisme, but over and above
ends in nonsense, as I have but erst, and often times before, made as clear
as the Sun. Gods eternal rejection of many thousands, which is impossible to
be avoided, (for how is it possible, that what was from everlasting, should be
avoided by man or Angel, who are brought forth in time, not to have been from
everlasting?) though it be all one with the answers of the tempted, and is
contradictory to the comforts, which this Author devises out of his own
brain, and proposes too in a most colluding manner, as before I have showed;
and withal not so well sorting with the manner of comforts which he feignes,
and at mere pleasure obtrudes upon us, (which yet he cannot evacuate without
betraying the shameful nakedness of his cause, when denying God to bestow the
gift of faith and repentance absolutely on whom he will, and according to the
mere pleasure of his will, he is driven to manifest how he takes sanctuary in
Pelagianisme, maintaining the grace of faith and repentance, to be conferred by
God on men according to their works; and that in a most unsober manner, as I
have showed at large;) yet notwithstanding is this eternal decree of God
concerning the rejection of man, nothing contrariant to better grounds of
consolation ministered by our doctrine, then any can be ministered by Arminians:
as who do not so much as undertake to minister better comfort to any, then
such as is common to them with Reprobates. But as for all those that are
brought up in the Church of God, who we can assure them that there is no cause
(excepting guilt of that sin which is unto death, or which is against the
Holy Ghost) why any of them should conceive themselves to be Reprobates; nay
the affliction of conscience being the most ordinary means, whereby God does
prepare men for a comfortable translation out of the state of nature, into the
state of grace; they have cause to conceive comfort in this, that these fears
and terrors may be as pangs of childbirth, to deliver their souls into the
world of the sons of God; and this valley of Achor, a door of hope; and this
Bethany (a house of sorrow or mourning) the highway unto the vision of Peace;
as Bethany was commonly taken by our Savior in his way unto Jerusalem. For
conclusion, we have heard a strange cracking of thorns in this, but all proves
but a squibbe; their best light of consolation, goes out in an unsavory snuff
of Pelagianisme. Let us remember, though Thunder, and Earthquakes, and
Lightning, have their course in the vain imaginations of men, yet God is still
and ever will be, in the small voice of his word. Let us give Gods truth, the
glory of our consolation; As for Error, and that dangerous error in defacing
the glory of Gods grace, let us never seek any comfort therein, and let them
that love it, take what comfort in it they can; I do not envy them, but rather
pity them; I would their hearts served them to have compassion upon them
selves.

DISCOURSE. SECT. IV.
SEcondly, it leaves a Minister weak grounds only, and insufficient to quiet
the tempted, and therefore it makes him unable to comfort. His grounds that are
left him are insufficient, because they cannot convince, and make it evident to
the understanding of the tempted, that he is not that which he fears (i. e.) a
Reprobate: out of temptation probabilities will uphold a man's hopes, (as they
did Manoahs wife: Judge. 13. 22, 23. If the Lord would kill us he would not have
received a burnt offering at our hands, nor showed us all these things;)
because men are not so mistrustfull then: but in temptation men are very
suspicious and incredulous, like Jacob, who would not be persuaded that Joseph
was alive, and a great man in Egypt, till he saw the Chariots that were sent to
fetch him thither, Genesis 45. 25. And like Thomas, who would not believe that
Christ was risen till he saw the print of the nails and spear. John 20. 25.
They will not believe any thing that is said for their comfort, till it be made
so apparent, that they have nothing to say to the contrary. My self have known
some, who in their temptations have often put their comforters to their
proofs, to their protestations, nay to their oaths too, before they would
believe their words of comfort. And in this temptation, men are so strongly
possessed with a fear of the greatest evil in the World, eternal rejection
from God, that they will not easily, without manifest conviction, believe the
contrary. But such grounds as these, a Minister that holds absolute reprobation
has not, he can say nothing that is able to make it appear infallibly, and
unavoydably to the tempted, that he is no absolute reprobate.

All that he can say is, Be of good comfort, you are a believer, you are a true
repenting sinner; therefore no reprobate; for faith and repentance are fruits
of election, and arguments of a state contrary to that which you fear. But
this the tempted will deny, he will say that he is no believer, etc. And how
will the Minister convince him that he is? He must prove to him by the outward
acts of faith and repentance, (for they are only apparent to him,) that he does
repent and believe, but this proof is not demonstrative, does not convince
him, because opera virtutum simulari possunt, the external acts of says,
repentance or any other grace, may be counterfeited; The Devil may seem to be
an Angel of light, Wolves may go in Sheep clothing; Judas may make the
World believe by his Preaching and following Christ, that he is a true Apostle;
And Simon Magus (though he remain in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity,) may be thought by his receiving of Baptism, to be a true believer;
And so may any Hypocrite by some exterior act, of faith and repentance, cosen
the best discerner of spirits among men, and gain the opinion and esteem of a
true penitent and believer. Actions externally good or good in appearance, may
be evil indeed for want of a good rule, a good manner, a good end, and some
other good circumstances, with which an action which is good must be clothed
[For bonum non oritur nisi ex integris.] and so by consequence cannot certainly
prove the man that does them to be a good man, or to have the grace of faith,
repentance, or any other, truly planted in his heart.

Which being so (I say) that the Minister cannot, by the eternal acts and
fruits of faith and repentance, which he sees come from him, make it evident
to the tempted (for the silencing of all replies) that he is (without doubt) a
true believer, and a true repentant, and consequently no reprobate. For still
the tempted may say, You may be deceived in me, for you can see not a whit more
in me, then has been seen in many a Reprobate; If this be all you can say to
prove me to be none, I am not satisfied, I may be a Reprobate, nay I am a
Reprobate, and you are but a miserable comforter, a Physician of no value.

This that I say Piseator does ingeniously confess, where he says, that no
comfort can possibly be Piscat. contra Shafman de praedest. These. 85.
instilled into the souls of Reprobates afflicted with this temptation; Whence
it follows, that the greatest part of men, must bear their burden (if they
fall into this trouble) as well as they can; the Gospel cannot afford them any
sound comfort.

2. That the elect in this case may be comforted, but it must be this way, viz.
by their feeling of the burden of sin, and their desire to be freed from it
by Christ; which proofs (as I have said) are but only probable not infallible
arguments of a man's election, and therefore unsufficient comforts.

And in the end of the same Thesis, where he says, That a man should reason
thus with himself, Grace is offered to some, with a mind of communicating it
to them, therefore it may be that I am in that number; he implies that the
doctrine of absolute Reprobation, which teaches this communication of grace to
some few only, affords but [a fieri potest] a peradventure I am elected, for a
poor soul to comfort himself withal.

TWISSE. Consideration.
IN the last place we are to consider how truly he affirms that our doctrine
leaves a Minister none but weak grounds, and those insufficient to quiet the
tempted.

And whereas he says We cannot conceive, and make it evident to the
understanding of the tempted that he is not (that which he fears) a Reprobate;
we willingly acknowledge it. For not to be a reprobate is to be an elect. Now
how can any Arminian convince and make it evident to the understanding (I do
not say of the tempted, but) of one that is a believer, and walks on
comfortablely in the ways of Godliness; is he (I say) able to convince such a
one, and make it evident unto him that he is one of Gods elect? I do not think
they dare profess that they presume they can; or make it evident to their own
understanding, that themselves are of the number of Gods elect. How
unreasonable then is this course, to require of us to convince a man, that
acknowledges neither faith nor repentance in him, (for this is the condition
of a man tempted, as himself fashioneth it;) and to make it evident to his
understanding that he is an elect and no reprobate; when himself cannot
convict him that believes of this; no nor their own consciences neither,
notwithstanding all their confidence, that they alone are in the right way of
salvation. Was there ever heard a more unreasonable course then this? Again,
to fear to be a reprobate, or least he be a Reprobate, is one thing, to
persuade himself that he is a Reprobate, and to despair thereupon, is another
thing. We say, and that according to our Doctrine, that there is no cause why
any man (who has not sinned the sin unto death, the sin against the Holy
Ghost) should persuade himself that he is a Reprobate and despair thereupon;
we do not say there is no cause of fear. In as much as he has no evidence of
his election, there is just cause to fear; but then again, seeing he neither
has nor can have any evidence of his reprobation (excepting the guilt of the
sin against the Holy Ghost) he has every way as good cause to hope. And for
the comforting of such a one, I would make bold to tell him that there is more
hope of such a one as himself, then of those who go on in the ways of their
own heart, and in the light of their own eyes without all remorse and check
of conscience, without fear or wit, not considering that for all these things
God will bring them to judgment. And toward such I would think it fit to use
all means and motives to make them fear. The Apostle seems to me to take the
like course with better men then such, even with such as went on in a fair and
comfortable profession of Gospel; namely to make them fear and suspect
themselves, as when he says, Prove your selves whether you are in the faith,
examine your selves. Know ye not that Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates.
2 Cor. 13. 5. And for good reason; for as Paul was jealous over the Corinthians
with a Godly jealousy, for fear, least as the Serpent beguilde Eve through his
subtilty, so their minds should be corrupt from that simplicity which is in
Christ. 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3. And in like manner entertained fear, least when he
came he should not find them such as he would, and that he should be found unto
them such as they would not etc. 2 Cor. 12. In like manner I should think it is
good for a man to be jealous over himself with a godly jealousy, least their
minds should be corrupt, their ways corrupt, more then they are a ware of, and
there upon give themselves to the examining of themselves and to the searching
and trying of their ways whereunto the Holy Ghost exhorts us, Lament. 3. 40.
And there is good comfort to be taken in such a jealousy, such a fear, such a
course; For we find that the spirit of bondage making us to fear, is the
forerunner of the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father, Romans 8. 15.
Certainly they are in better case, and nearer to the Kingdom of God, then
such as fear not, yet is their no cause of despair, for as much as the elect
of God had no evidence of their election before their calling; Nay, after their
calling they may be much afflicted with the fears and terrors of God,
thinking themselves to be in worse case, then indeed they are. David found
cause to pray that God would restore him to the joy of his Salvation; yet
Bertius would not say that David was fallen from grace, and that propter graves
causas; yet who has written more eagarly to maintain that Saints may fall
away from grace then Bertius? But this Author bears before him such a spirit
of confidence, as if he would have all men ordered by his rules. When Manoahs
Wife, Judge. 13. 22, 23. discourses thus, If the Lord would kill us he would
not have received a burnt offering at our hands, nor showed us these things; He
does obtrude upon us that Manoahs Wife had no faith, but only a probability of
this; that is his gloss; yet this acceptance of a burnt offering at their
hands was manifested by no less then a miracle; and the difference between
Abels offering and Caines offering is laid down to be this, that The Lord had
respect to Abel, and to his offering; but unto Cain and to his offering he had
no regard. Genesis 4. 4, 5. And David's prayer for acceptance, and finding favor
at the hands of God is set down in this manner, amongst other particulars, Let
him remember all thine offerings, and turn thy burnt offerings into ashes,
Psalm, 20. 3. Yet why should he conceive that Manoah and his Wife were not in
temptation, and that a very sore one, stre^gthened with the expres word of God,
namely, that No man can see God and live; which in these days was generally
received amongst the^ and applied by the^ in this particular. For Manoah said
unto his Wife, we shall surely dye because we have seen God; and could a
probability to the contrary put by such a temptation as this? How was the great
Prophet Esaias exercised with this when he cried out, Woe is me, for I am undone,
because Esaias 6.
I am a man of polluted lips, and dwell in the midst of a people of polluted
lips, for mine eyes have seen the King and Lord of Hosts. What temptation has
he that thinks himself a reprobate like unto this, excepting still the guilte
of that sin which is unto death? What ground of Scripture can they represent
to prove that they are reprobates; as those Ancients had ground for this, that
they must dye who had seen God? It is one thing to be in temptation, it is an
other thing to yield to the temptation, and to be overcome with it; and that
upon no ground, which yet this Author confounds, as a course very propitious
for his turn, and suitable with the part that he acts. As for Jacob, the
cause was this, he that now enjoyed as it were, the death of Joseph for many
years; his sons pretending they knew not what became of him; yet brought his
Coat imbrued with blood unto their old Father, who there upon conceived some
evil beast had devoured him; and who could expect that at the first hearing he
should believe now the report of the same sons to the contrary; especially
considering how those brethren of Joseph were astonished when Joseph himself
told them, saying, I am Joseph, does my father yet live? for the text says,
his brethren could not answer him, for they were astonished Genesis 45. 3.
at his presence. And though Jacob at the first believed not the report, they
made to be true, yet neither is it said, or likely, that he believed it to be
false. But the Text says, his heart failed him, denoting a condition between
hope and fear, as the Geneva notes in the Margent. As for Thomas his
incredulity, which he ascribes unto a temptation; v. 26.
he may as well ascribe the infidelity of Turks and Jews unto a temptation.
The person tempted here represented does not say (I hope) as Thomas did, Except
I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of
the nails, and put my hand into Ioh. 20.
his side I will not believe it. And what power do Arminians attribute unto
temptation, do they ascribe more unto it, then to the operation of God which
with them extends no farther then this, as touching grace, then to excite them
to believe, which yet they may resist if they will? And may they not also
resist the Devils temptations if they will? Especially considering that in
persuading them that they are Reprobates the Devil proceeds upon no ground,
which is not common to every one of Gods elect, when he says They will not
believe any thing that is said for their comfort, till it be made so apparent
that they have nothing to say to the contrary. It seems this Author has had
some extraordinary experience of the condition of persons tempted, I had
thought the condition of persons (not tempted only, but) giving way to the
temptation, had been for the most part unreasonable, until it pleases God to
bring them to their right wits: and like as fears property is to betray the
succors that reason offers; so is the Devils practice to take them off from
attending that to they cannot answer, and holding them to their uncomfortable
conclusions, in despite of the weakness of their own premises and strength of
contrary principles; Excepting the case of finning against the Holy Ghost,
which was the case of Francis Sptra, and accordingly his conclusions were most
true as his premises strong; and his comforters had little or nothing to say to
the contrary. And in such a case the only course to quench the fiery darts of
desperation, is to enquire diligently about the matter of fact, whether he has
committed any such sin as he lays to his charge; and thereupon to discourse
of the nature of that sin, which is commonly called a sin unto death, and
not only so, but a sin against the Holy Ghost, which our Savior pronounces
to be unpardonable; and the Apostle signifies as much, when he says that in
such a case, there is no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful expectation
of fire. And it may be, this Authors discourse, runs with reference to such
examples as this of Spira, but fashioned at pleasure to serve his turn, as
formerly he did set down the story out of Coelius Secundus and Calvin as he
said, but without any quotation of the place where. But to enter upon a
comparison between their doctrine and ours, and that upon supposition of this
rule delivered by him. I say first, that by our doctrine, we can make it so
evidently appear, that the tempted has no ground at all to conceive himself
to be a reprobate, whatsoever his condition be, (except guiltiness of the
sin against the Holy Ghost) I say we can make it so evident, that neither he,
nor any Arminian, can say any reasonable thing to the contrary; not denying but
that they may say enough to the contrary in an unreasonable manner. And my
reason is, because whatsoever his condition be, it is no other then is incident
to one of Gods elect. Secondly, I say, as touching the Arminian doctrine, two
things; The first is this, There is no condition of man so holy in this life,
as whereby any man can have any assurance, by Arminian doctrine, that he is an
elect of God, and consequently no reprobate, much less can they give any
assurance to any man in the time of temptation (as this Author speaks of it)
that he is no reprobate. The Second is this, Arminians can give assurance to no
man that he is no reprobate; for as much as all their grounds of comfort are
common to the reprobate as well as to the elect: wherehence it manifestly
follows, that their doctrine can afford no better comfort then a reprobate is
capable of. For their grounds are universal as they profess, that is common
to all, to wit, as touching the love of God, that it is common to all; as
touching the death of Christ, that he dyed for all; as touching the Covenant of
grace, that it also is common to all. And if this will comfort any man, namely,
to be assured, that he is in as good a case as any Turk or Saracen, or any
reprobate in the World, I find this Author is ready to assure them hereof, and
rather then fail he will swear it, though I never heard matter of faith put
to be tried by man's Oath till now: I had thought only matters of fact, had been
tryable and assurable by Oath, not matter of faith. Yet I will not spare to
profess, that though they should swear either of these universalities to be
true, I would no more believe them then I would believe the Devil. For the
Apostle advises, saying, Though that we or an Angel from Heaven Preach unto
you otherwise then that which we have Preached unto you, let him be accursed.
Gal 1. 8. But let us examine the comfortable nature of these universalities,
whether they be such as a sober man can say nothing to the contrary. I begin
with the universality of Gods love; the comfort herehence proceeds thus, as I
conceive; God loves all, wills all to be saved, therefore thou art no
reprobate. Now consider whether I may not soberly say to the contrary, that by
the same reason there is no reprobate in the World, or ever was; whence it
follows, that I have no more comfortable assurance that I am no reprobate,
then I have assurance that there is no Reprobate at all in the World. Secondly,
would you have me believe hand over head, that God would have all to be saved
without distinction; may not I soberly inquire, whether your meaning be, that
God will have all and every one to be saved, whether they believe or no,
whether they repent or no; or only thus, That God will have all to be saved in
case they believe and repent, not otherwise. Now this is our doctrine, as well
as yours, grounded upon this Scripture, Whosoever believes shall be saved. Now
does this doctrine assure any man that he is no Reprobate, nor of the number of
those whom God has rejected from salvation? Perhaps you will say, it is
sufficient to assure him, that he is no absolute reprobate, and that so this
Author is to be understood, though hitherto in this Section he delivered it
simply. Admit this, Now judge I pray you, whether I may soberly oppose against
it thus; Although I am no absolute reprobate, yet if I am a reprobate, and may
be as much assured of it, as that there is any reprobate in the World, what
comfort can arise to my poor afflicted soul from hence. Again consider, that
neither we who oppose Arminians, do maintain that God has ordained to deny
any man salvation absolutely, but only conditionally, to wit, in case he dye in
sin without faith, without repentance. But suppose I am persuaded, that God
has rejected me from the grace of faith and of repentance, what comfort can
you Arminians administer to my sick soul in this case? For dare you deny faith
and repentance to be a gift of God? So then if I conceive my self to be a
reprobate from grace, will you comfort me by saying, that I am no absolute
reprobate from grace? Then belike God has determined to give or deny grace,
not according to the mere pleasure of his will, but according to men's works;
And have you no better balm of Gilead to administer to a sick soul, then to
take sanctuary in such a Doctrine as is direct and flat Pelagianisme? In the
same sober manner we shall have somewhat to say against that comfort that is
reached forth to an afflicted soul, from the universality of Christ's death;
Thou doubtest thou art a reprobate, but be of good cheer, for Christ dyed for
all and every one; as much as to say, thou have no more cause to believe that
thou art a reprobate, then to believe that there is any reprobate in the world.
Secondly, be of good cheer, for albeit thou art a reprobate, and God
foreseeing thou will dye in sin, has from everlasting ordained thee to
condemnation, as well a Judas that betrayed Christ; yet I can assure thee, thou
art no absolute reprobate no more then Judas was. And whereas it may be thou
art verily persuaded, that he that believes and repents, and perseveres herein,
shall not be damned, for as much as all confess, that God has not ordained
that damnation shall be inflicted absolutely, according to the mere pleasure
of God, but merely according to men's works; but all thy fear is, least thou
art reprobated from grace, and that absolutely; considering that God (as it
seems) in the giving and denying of grace proceeds merely according to the
mere pleasure of his will, because the Apostle says, He has mercy on whom he
will, and whom he will he hardneth. Romans 9. 18. Yet be of good cheer, for I
can assure thee, that is nothing so; but as there are no absolute reprobates
from glory, and unto damnation, so there are no absolute reprobates from grace,
but merely conditionally it is that men are reprobated from grace, like as
merely conditionally God does elect men unto grace: And to speak in plain
terms without dissimulation; God gives faith and repentance unto men,
according as they dispose themselves thereunto, for want of which disposition,
he denies it unto others. And if thou desire to be more particularly informed
in this mystery for thine unspeakable consolation; know for certain, that if
thou will believe and repent, thou shall believe and repent. And albeit in the
Synod of Palestine, anno 415. it was concluded, That grace is not given
according unto merits, and Pelagius was driven to subscribe thereto, for fear
of excommunication too, in case he had refused it; yet take this comfortable
mystery along with thee; that this was but a fruit of the Predestinarian
Heresy; which that very year if thou markest the story well, had his
original, and was brought forth into the World. And lastly, as touching the
universality of the Covenant of grace, that is as comfortable as the former;
for all are under it, and therefore thou amongst the rest, and consequently
thou art no more a reprobate then any other; certainly no absolute reprobate,
for there are none such; Judas was not, and therefore thou may assure thy
self thou art not. And indeed there are none that maintain, that God decreed,
that any man should be denied glory or damned absolutely, but only
conditionally, to wit, in case he finally persevere in infidelity or
impenitency: And whereas thou may fear least thou art absolutely reprobated
from grace, to wit, from the grace of faith and repentance; take heart and
fear no colors. For albeit it be fit to confess, considering the times that
faith and repentance are the gifts of God, yet know that God does not dispense
them, according to the mere pleasure of his will, but according to men's
works, whatsoever some men cry out to the contrary, charging us with
Pelagianisme; but if thou art wise thou will take comfort in this, as in true
Christianisme. As for those that maintain absolute reprobation, none of them
is able to make it appear unto thee, that thou art no absolute reprobate. And
I willingly confess, that if faith and repentance be not evidences hereof, we
are not able to make it appear, either to others that they are not, or to our
selves that we are not Reprobates. But by the way it is manifest, that this
Author by his grounds, can give no assurance of election, no not to a believer
no certainty of salvation; and yet he pretends to be a comforter, when he
leaves him in doubt whether he shall be saved or damned; yet upon this pillow
Arminians sleep sweetly, and presume that others may sleep sweetly also, that
they are not absolutely reprobates; And no marvel; for even in the course of
the holiest conversation, their doctrine can administer no assurance either of
election or salvation. But perhaps they will say, though they can give no
assurance of election absolute by their doctrine, yet they can give assurance
of election conditional. But wherein I pray does this consist? Forsooth in
this, that if they finally persevere in this their holy conversation, they
shall be saved. But I pray consider, Does not our doctrine afford the same
assurance as well as theirs? It cannot be denied, but that it does, and more
then so; for our doctrine gives assurance of perseverance in the state of
grace, to them that are once in the state of grace; the Arminian does not. And
the Apostle assures the Thessalonians, that upon his knowledge they were the
elect of God, and that from the work of their faith, the labor of their love,
and the patience of their hope. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3. 4. And that the man of sin
shall not prevail over them. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Because they are elect; whereof
also he was assured (as there he signifies) by their sanctification and faith.

It is true the outward acts of faith and repentance may be counterfited: And
it is as true, that whether they be counterfeited or no, it may be discerned;
otherwise why should the Apostle be so bold as to profess, and that by
observation of their works, that he knew they were elect of God. 1 Thessalonians. 1.
4. The Devil may transform himself into an Angel of light, but yet we have
a sure Word of God, whereby to discern his practices to corrupt either our
faith, or our manners, otherwise we poor Creatures were but in a very evil
case: so his Ministers also transform themselves, crafty workers as they are,
into Ministers of righteousness; but St Paul discovered them and warned the
Corinthians of them; Wolves may go in sheep clothing, but our Savior
assures us that we shall know them by their fruits; none more proper fruit of
a false Prophet then his false doctrine; And we have a true touchstone to
discover that, and make the Devils claws to appear in their proper form and
colors. And we know how soon Simon Magus discovered himself to be in the
very gall of betternesse, and bond of iniquity. Yet I nothing doubt but we may
be deceived; but most commonly it comes to pass that Hypocrites are the
greatest deceivers and coseners of themselves; and it is not their condition to
be exercised with fears least they be Reprobates, and to confess that their
faith, their repentance is counterfit. It is most likely they deal without
Hypocrisy in this.

But when any do lay such sins to their own charge, we will not take them at
their word, but we will inquire upon what grounds they deliver this and we will
inquire whether now they are well pleased with this their former Hypocrisy; If
so, what cause is there, why they should be disquieted in themselves upon the
consideration of that wherein they are well pleased? But if it be their sorrow,
if this cause heaviness of heart unto them; here we have a double evidence of
some sparks of grace in them; First in confessing their former Hypocrisy.
Secondly in being humbled with sorrow in the consideration of it; Now God has
promised, that if we confess our sins, God as he is faithful and just will
forgive them. And if they are humbled in the consideration of it, and tremble
at the apprehension of Gods judgments against Hypocrites, they are so much the
fitter for God to take up his habitation in their contrite heart and humble
spirit Es. 57. 15. And Es. 63. 2. I hope there is no miserable consolation in
all this; To minister this Physic is to be a Physician of some value. And
certainly whatsoever was our former course, whether in the way of profanesse,
or the way of hypocrisy, when God brings us to consider it and to confess it,
and to be acquainted with his fears, and terrors here upon, we have cause to
conceive good hope, that God is now in a gracious way to draw them nearer unto
him, who before were strangers from him. Certainly we will be bold to tell
them, that there is no just cause why they should despair.

I come to the last particular he insisteth upon; and that is Piscators
confession; which because he conceives it serves his turn, therefore he
ascribes unto him ingenuity in this. But what says Piscator? That no comfort
can possibly be instilled into the souls of Reprobates. Piscators words are
these, Reproborum anxiis animis nulla consolatio instillari potest. This Author
adds Possibly to make it the more weighty as he thinks. We acknowledge God to
be the God of consolation, and his spirit alone to be the comforter, and if God
will not give them Christ, surely they can have no true consolation in Christ;
which yet depends merely upon supposition of the will of God; like as none but
God can give rain; and if it be his will it shall rain to morrow or not
rain, either shall come to pass according to his will, and it is impossible
it should be otherwise then he wills; yet is rain a contingent thing, and
God will have it come to pass contingently, that is, so as with a possibility
to the contrary. Now that God gives not all unto Christ, our Savior
professes, John. 17. Thine they were and thou have given them unto me; and
afterward, for their sakes I sanctify my self, This is spoken in reference
unto the offering up of himself unto his Father upon the Cross, as Maldonate
acknowledges to be the interpretation of all the Fathers, whom he he had read.
He dyed we confess to procure Salvation for all that believe; but did he dye
to procure faith for all? If so, then either absolutely or conditionally. If
absolutely, then all must believe and be saved. If conditionally, to wit, upon
condition of some disposition of man, then it follows that Christ has merited
that faith should be conferred on men according to their works, which is
manifest Pelagianisme. But what is this to the purpose, namely, that comfort
cannot be instilled into the souls of Reprobates? The question is of
comforting the Tempted, not supposing them to be reprobates. For what ground
have we to suppose any man to be a Reprobate, considering that there is no
evidence hereof, but either the committing of sin against the Holy Ghost or
final perseverance in infidelity or impenitency; and is it to be expected that
Christian doctrine should afford any consolation unto these? But out of the
case of sin committed against the Holy Ghost there is no cause why any man,
living in the Church of God, should despair, or conceive him self to be
Reprobate; albeit, until he believe in Christ, we can assure him that he is
one of Gods elect; whereof the Arminian doctrine can give no assurance albeit
men do believe, and albeit an Angel from Heaven should assure them that their
faith is a true faith. It is true Reprobates must bear their burden of
discomfort that know themselves to be Reprobates; but who are they? For my part
I know none, nor do I know any reason why any man should conceive himself to
be of that number, unless he has sinned against the Holy Ghost, and let them
look to that who oppose the truth of God, and blaspheme it against their
conscience. Therefore to talk of a burden that is to be borne by we know not
whom in particular, no nor they themselves who are of that number, is a very
vain discourse.

2. As for that which Piscator says of the elect, it is to be understood only
at such a time as when they begin to feel the burden of sin; which is not
always with the first, nor at the same time in all. As for that he says of
feeling the burden of sin, and a desire to be freed from it by Christ, that
they are only probable not infallible arguments of election. I answer, First it
is better to have probable arguments of election then none at all; neither am I
privy to any probable argument of a man's election that may be attained to by
the doctrine of Arminians. Secondly a man may have good ground of consolation,
though he has not yet any infallible argument of his election; First in as
much as Christ calls and encourages such a one to come unto him, saying,
Come unto me all ye that travail, and are heavy laden. Blind Bartimeus was not
a little comforted when it was told him, that Christ called him; how much more
when we hear him calling us; Secondly in as much as he does not only bid us to
come unto him, but promises that he will ease us, and what is that but that he
will comfort us. And it is no small comfort to be in the way to the obtaining
infallible arguments of a man's election. Lastly, to desire to be freed from
sin by Christ's, is it any less then to hunger and thirst after
righteousness; And has not our Savior pronounced all such blessed, and
promised they shall be filled? That the grace of Salvation is communicated to
some few is a thing with out question; For if but few be chosen as our Savior
professes, undoubtedly there are but few that are saved. And directly our
Savior signifies as much, when he answers to the question proposed by his
Disciples (whether but few shall be saved) in this manner, strive to enter in at
the straight gate etc: and for a man to conceive that it may be he is one of
the number of Gods elect, is enough to keep him from despair, and from
conceiving that he is a Reprobate. Secondly, this is spoken of him that is yet
but in the way to the state of grace: Whereas by the Arminian doctrine he can
have no better asurance, though he be in the state of grace. Lastly, Piscator
gives to understand that this doctrine does afford this comfort, to wit, in the
apprehension of a possibility that he is elect; he does not say that it affords
but this: Nay, by his doctrine he manifests how the way is open to a far
better consolation then this, to every one that groans under the burden of
sin, and desires to be freed from it by Christ, which he expresses and
concludes in this manner, Whosoever feels the burden of his sin desiring to
be freed from it by Christ, and craving the grace of God, him Christ will ease
and save. Mat. 11. last. But thou feel the burden of thy sins, and
desire to be freed from it by Christ, and cravest the grace of God, etc. For
in this case he conceives there is a difference between such a one and a
Reprobate. For Reprobates in such a case, feeling the burden of their sins,
do not seek the grace of God, but rather fly from him as from a severe judge;
as he shows by the instances of Cain and Judas. And indeed until there be in
man some better condition wrought then in a Reprobate, what ground have we to
conceive better of him then of a Reprobate, Nor that he is to be concluded to
be a Reprobate, but both our judgment concering him and his judgment
concerning himself is to be suspended; considering that there was a time when
the best of Gods children were in such a case, yet afterward it has appeared
that even in that former uncomfortable condition, they were the very elect of
God, and in like manner as comfortable may be the condition of these, we know
not how soon; For God calls some sooner, others latter.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 27. read affect: p. 4. l. 15. r. so also to regenerate himself,
and indeed as we are commanded to believe, so etc. p. 10. l. 20. r. that
desert. p. 11. l. 43. r. first. p. 13. l. 57. alleged, acknowledging. p. 15.
l. 36. amica. p: 17. l. 42. but by. p: 21. l. 2. course. p: 25. l: 32. thee. p.
26. l. 1. manner. ib. l: ult. of paena. p: 27. l: 33. Then. p: 31. l. 19. have
God. ib: l. 56. did not. p: 33. l. 47. in his. p: 34. l. 24. proposito. p: 35.
l: 2. concession. p: 37. l: 7. so he decreed to bestow it on whom he will. p:
39. l: 12. positions. p: 40. l: 33. addicitis. l. 41. oderit. p: 43. l: 43.
Anianus. l: 58 praeveniri. p: 45. l: 34. loath. p: 47. l. 53. gratiam. p: 48.
l: 21. libro. p. 51. l. 34. conditionality. p: 53. l: 20. diluatur. l. 53.
neque enim. p: 56. l: 26. labitur. p: 59. l: 1. peace. l: 23. as that. p: 62.
l: 19. pejores. l: 35. coram rudioribus, p: 63. l: 5. D. Andreas. l: 49.
suspected. p: 65. l: 12. bespeake. p: 66. l: 39 have not. p: 68. l. 23. too
bright. l: 54. finding out. p: 70. l: 44. Saturn. p: 73. l: 44. premit. p. 75.
l. 22. dele de. l. 47. necessarium fore. p: 76. l: 26. puritate tutius, nihil
ad discendum veritate facilius. p: 77. l. 4. or any. p: 78. l: 46. conciliare.
p: 80. l: 12. but by. p: 82. l: 39. worthily. p: 84. l: 15. of other. ib. l:
17. of any. p: 89. l. 50. or to Beza and his brethren accusing Lutherans of
those errors. p. 92. l. ult. libero. p: 93. l. 6, 7. facite. p: 94. l: 1.
necessarily. p: 95. l: 8. resolves it. p: 97. l: 41. vessels on. p: 98. l: 41.
a Zenone. p: 99. l. 2. scio. p. 108. l. 20. po. sit. l. 32. addition. p: 109.
l. 33. distinguish. p. 110. l. 20. the two. p. 112. l: 59. voluisse. p. 117. l.
7. patientiam. p: 119. l: 5. or the. p. 136. l: 7. then he. p: 140. l. 30. and
non omnipotent. p: 142. l. 4. quiddam. l. 13. nasceretur. l. 39.
Supralapsarian. p: 143. l: 5. stroke. p: 147. l: 52. as Lord. p. 151. l: 5.
more largely. p. 162. l: 2. conceited. p: 199. l. 26. this belike. p: 201. l.
20. filth. p. 202. l. 12. patientiam. p: 244. l: 51. apostatarum. p: 207. l.
27. definition of. p: 210. l: 50. it does end in a will conditional; p. 211.
l. 39. poor fish. p: 221. l: 27. by this have all the godly at all times
encouraged themselves to well doing, as we may see generally. Phil. 3. 20.
Colloss: 1. 5. Tit. 2. 12, 13. and particularly, Heb. 11. Abraham etc- p: 223.
l. 31. lame post. p: 224. l: 1. good ways. p: 229 l: 10. absolutely? l: 59.
histrionicall. p. 230. l: 11. quosdam. l. 31. law of. p. 233. l: 1. burning of.
l. 14. employed. p. 234. l: 12. yet his. l: 30. was it. p: 236. l: 52.
premises. p. 237. l. 36. vel accepta perseverantia. l: 49. dele its. l. 54.
ista cum. p. 240. l: 5. is there. p: 242. l: 21. a certain. l: 22. there he
gives and works faith in that one, and not in another. p: 243. l: 48.
praecepta. p. 248. l. 58. proposes this. p. 249. l. 9. is this. p: 253. l: 30.
fatum. p. 254. l. 4. morietur. p. 256. l. 14. and persovere. l. 23.
indifferent. p. 259. l. 23 if they had we. p. 260. l. ult. heresy. p: 264. l:
17. dele them. p: 270. l. 37. (...) p. 273. l: 39. purposes thus. p. 275. l.
3. marcuerat. p. 277. l: 11. did rest. p. 282. l. 6. if it. l: 15. from Breame.
l. 42. change of. p. 287. l: 57. upon what p. 291. l. 34. dele who. p. 292. l.
36. external. p. 298. l. 7. comforter and that all the consolation which he
ministers is in Christ and if. l: 30. we cannot. p. 299. l. 19. not that.

THE SECOND BOOK, BEING AN EXAMINATION OF Certain passages inserted into Mr
HORD'S discourse (formerly answered) by an Author that conceales his name, but
was supposed to be Mr MASON Rector of Saint Andrews Undershaft in LONDON.



OXFORD, Printed by H. HALL for TH. ROBINSON. 1653.

TO THE READER.
THe Author of this Treatise was persuaded to Pen the reasons of his opinion
against absolute Reprobation, that he might satisfy a worthy friend of his,
who required it. What satisfaction that learned Gentleman, his friend, has
received by these reasons, I know not: but sure I am, they have given good
content to some others, who have read them, and do still desire a Copy of
them for their farther use. To ease whose pains in transcribing this Treatise,
it does now appear in this form. If any of contrary opinion, shall undertake
to answer or refute it; I wish, he would set down his opinion and reasons with
that perspicuitie and modesty, that our Author has set down his. Such a
course of disputing will gain more credit to himself and his cause, then
voluminous Vagaries about impertinent things If any shall use railing speeches,
or unnecessary diversions from the cause; I shall ever interpret that to be a
strong sign of a weak cause: or, at least, I shall think it to be an argument
of an obstinate mind, who neither knows how to yield to the Truth, nor to
defend his error. I hope the Reader, who loves his own salvation, will be a
more indifferent Judge in a question, which concerns him so nearely. And so I
leave him to God's blessing.

THE PREFACE.
WHen first I lighted upon a treatise entitled (God's love to mankind) and
read a little way in it, I had reason to be acquainted with it; though the
Authors face I had never seen: Upon the first relation of the change of his
opinion in certain controversies, as he pretended; I was entreated to confer
with him thereupon by word of mouth: My answer was, that it was more fit to
confer in writing, and if he would be drawn to communicate the reasons of
his pretended change; I should willingly take them into consideration. This
motion was made in the year 1631. being then at London; the year following in
the month of July (as I remember) was the discourse of Mr Hord's sent unto me,
and I was urged upon my former promise to make answer thereunto. At that time I
had another business under my hand, which I could not dispatch in less then
two months space or more: but I was wished to take my own time. As soon as I
was free from my former task, I set hand to this, and returned my answer
thereunto, unto the Gentleman that set me on work, about the end of Hillary
term Anno Dom: 1632. But observing the bulk of the treatise now in print,
twice as big, as that in manuscript or more. I expected a reply to my former
answer; but upon perusal, I found nothing less, whereat I wondered not a
little, having never heard of any such treatise until the last summer, 1635:
for surely they had time enough to answer it. To help the credit of their
cause in this; it seemed good unto them to raise a mist, that their absurd
carriage might not be discovered, to wit: by antedating the print thereof,
which yet was but newly found creeping in corners. Another devise there is by a
large interpolation and addition, here and there foysted into the body of the
former discourse, and yet not all at once, but by paths, a great part of it
being but lumber; and the adding of more testimonies, as if the matter were to
be carried by number and not by weight, or as if the Author of them were
willing to make ostentation of the (...), and fulness of his common place
book. Only the upper way of our Divines maintayning the absoluteness of God's
decrees is here inpugned at large, with the Authors best strength I doubt not;
which task was omitted by Mr Hord: And besides there is one Divine attribute
more here mentioned, in contradiction whereunto the Doctrine of our Divines is
pretended to proceed, and the prosecution hereof amongst the rest is here set
down, by way of superfaetation upon the former, not only that so the argument
might be the more complete, but also to cast a color; that this discourse of
Mr Hord's has not as yet been answered. It may be it would feign have showed
it self unto the world in this masculine shape and vigor before this time, if
Doctor Duppa while he was Vicechancellour at Oxford would have given way to the
printing of it, if it be true as I have heard, that it was offered unto him to
be licenced for the press. Doctor Potter also of Queens College performed a
freindly part to some body in checking the Stationers for selling the copies of
it, forwhich courtesy, I do account my self so much in his debt as that comes
to; and should much more, had he sent me one of the copies, as he did noe less
then six on the same day to his friend Doctor Aigleonbee; as the Bookseller
confessed to a Scholar a friend of mine. Well Mr Hord's treatise is at length
come to the Press, and shows it self in public without shame, though I
thought it had been sufficiently confounded almost three years ago; yet this
Mistres blushes not, though dares not open her mouth to clear her reputation
in any one particular of that which I laid to her charge, manifesting her to be
no Daughter of God's truth, but a mere Bastard, begotten by a carnal wit,
upon a specious pretense by miserable deflowring and adulterating the word of
God; one builds a wall as the Prophet speaks, and another daubeth that with
untempered mortar. Mr Hord is well known to be the Author of the first by me
formerly answered. But what Mason's hand was used in the addition, that is
concealed; but that may break out into pregnant evidences before we have gone
through with it.

The Prefacer at the first chop begins with a notorious untruth, and that in
more particulars then one; for first, whom does he mean by the Author of this
Treatise? M. Horde? That which M. Horde sent to his worthy friend is yet to be
seen, containing not half so much as this; it was not above 30 leaves
manuscript, and that not closely, but written at large; And this contains 55
leaves in print. But it may be M. Horde has since enlarged his own discourse,
and so continues to be author of it, not in part only, but in the whole. And I
confess it may be, he is as much the Author of the one as of the other; if it
be true as some have told me of the very first, sent to his friend indeed,
namely that it was the very strength of M. Mason; him I know of old, and
should be acquainted with his sufficiency, though it was a long time ere I had
so much as heard of his zeal for the Arminian cause, and after I heard so
much, it was yet longer ere I could believe it, until I saw it under his own
hand: And whereas M. Horde coming to his second convincing Argument, as he
calls it, drawn from Attributes Divine, lays down certain premises, the
second whereof is this; That justice, mercy, truth, and holiness, in God are
the same in nature with these virtues in men, though infinitely differing in
Degrees. I willingly confess I stood amazed, and albeit I conceived it, and
do conceave it to be one of the absurdest positions that ever dropped from the
pen of a School Divine; yet the adventure was so great in my judgment, that I
was apt to imagine that it proceeded not from a vulgar spirit. This conceit of
mine was improved by the reasons he brings to justify so strange a Paradox:
for they are plausible and make a fair show at the first, like the fruit of
Sodom; but crush them once, come to the Scholastical discussion of them, and
forthwith In Cineres abeunt and vagam fuliginem, they vanish into smoke and
emptiness. A second untruth is this, that he says, The Author was persuaded
by a worthy friend to pen the Reasons of his opinion against absolute
reprobation; for he was only put upon showing reasons of the change of his
opinion in the controversies of late debated between the Remonstrants and their
opposites, as M. Horde himself confesses in his Preface. M. Horde indeed is
willing to draw the matter unto the consideration of Gods decrees, as if that
were the maine Thing enquired after.
(...) most absurdly, and quite contrary to the doctrine of Augustine, who
shapes the decrees of God in conformity to the doctrine of grace; and
accordingly to certify the Massilienses in the doctrine of Praedestination, he
thinks it most fit to begin with proving that Faith is the gift of God, yea the
very beginning of it. Now he liked not to follow Austins course, and in the
first place to deal upon the point of grace. And herein he savours of M.
Masons spirit, for that is his course, as I have seen under his hand; yet
suppose that this be the maine thing, controverted, namely the quality of Gods
decrees, whether they be absolute or conditional only. How does he satisfy
his friend, or perform the promise made in letting election pass untouched,
and dealing only upon reprobation? And this I know also to have been M. Masons
genuine course, far worse then the Remonstrants in the Synod of Dort, for they
made a motion, that they might deal upon reprobation in the first place, and
then upon election, wherein notwithstanding they were condemned in the
judgment of all foreign Divines, assistant there. But this Author and M.
Mason too, on my knowledge, affect to deal upon reprobation only. Yet I have
always been, and still am glad to see the utmost of their strength, or any
man's strength on any of the five points, and should be very glad to see what
they could say upon the point of free will, which is most congruous for them,
though they meddle not at all with grace. For even on that point I seem to have
profited more, lately by dealing with some English Arminians, then ever before,
having always acknowledged, that to be a point very obscure, like as is the
nature of original sin which was one of the three points, concerning which I
did not look to live so long, as to meet with convenient satisfaction. M. Horde
(I heard) conferred with M. Mason, about Election, and told him that the
doctrine of our Divines therein seemed very comfortable to the children of God,
whereunto M. Mason should answer, by granting that, but then adding, it was
very prone to provoke men to looseness of life. This concession was as a
shooing horn to draw M. Horde on to the Remonstranticall Tenet, nothing
doubting, but in the end to take him of from entertaining so good an opinion of
our doctrine of Election, as if it were not any such comfortable condition; and
teach him to magnify the comfortable condition of the adversaries doctrine,
depending upon a threefold cord, which as the proverb faith, cannot easily be
broken. 1. The universalitie of Gods love, 2. The universalitie of Christ's
redemption. 3. The universalitie of the Covenant of grace: Thus the comforts of
the Remonstrants are multiplied and advanced, which in the issue comes to this,
that their condition is as comfortable as any reprobates condition throughout
the world, whether Cain's or Ishmael's, or Esau's or Doeg's or Iuda's, or the
Grand Senior among the Turks, or the whole guard of his Janisaries: for God's
love is toward all, Christ's redemption extends to all, and the Covenant of
Grace belongs to all. And what comfortable creatures must these needs be, upon
so various and comfortable considerations? And the whole Nation of the
Arminians, are herein inferior to none of them all. And though they will not
be so saucie as to promise unto themselves perseverance in the state of grace;
yet they will be so bold as to promise both to themselves and to all their
Proselites perseverance in this estate of consolation, nothing inferior to any
Reprobates consolation in the world. But the mischief is, that hence it
follows, that the consolation of any of God's children, whether Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, David, or Solomon, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, the blessed
Virgin Mary, nor any other excepted, was never greater, then the consolation of
the wicked'st Christian that ever lived, whether profane or hypocritical,
Provided he did believe these mysteries of Arminian godlynes; namely that God's
love is toward all, Christ dyed for the redemption of all, and lastly that the
Covenant of Grace belongs to all; for these are the sweet and precious flowers
of consolation that grow in the gardens and writings of these Divines; to the
astonishment of the world, in considering the power and efficacy of Satan: and
that, even in the Church of God, so many should be given up to so strange
delusions. He does not know what satisfaction that learned Gentleman his friend
has received by these reasons, nor I neither; for I am not privy to the least
satisfaction he has received. But on the contrary, rather how he has found
the vileness of these Remonstranticall Tenets discovered, and the vanity of
all supports used to underprop them. Sure he is, They have given good content
to others; give we him leave to be liberal in his own commendations: we do
not know how far he dwells from neighbors: yet no marvel if they give good
content to many, who have been seasoned with the like speculations: I have seen
a manuscript with this inscription, A survey of the new Platform of
Predestination; the method of it is much like to this, and it ends with a
dialogue in the point of consolation; as if both Authors had dipped their pen in
the same inck-pot. And now to hear and see Demogorgon himself play his part,
and explicate his Mountebanck sacultie in displaying the strength of his
Opobalsamum; as he did of his Catholicon, whom the Frenchman brings in his
Satyr Mennippised, no marvel if they are well persuaded that no Pandora can
equal that for vniversalities of graces: when in the mean time they all fall
short of that unum necessarium, which yet like enough they are ready to
forswear, and profess they will turn I have read this in one of their
letters directed to a Scholar of Oxford who imparted it to me
open Atheists rather then believe it: still he keeps himself upon the
commendation of his Proselite, which cannot but reflect some sweet content upon
himself, who is the Engineer and perhaps the Spirit that animates him and sets
him on work,

For if the man such praises have,
What then shall he that inspires the knave.
He commends the Author for perspicuitie in writing and modesty, and he wishes
that whosoever undertakes to answer it fully will perform the like. For my
part I cannot change my style: but my desire is, I may discover their
fopperies, as perspicuously as I can, and I hope nothing to fail in
performance; like enough the Author of the preface as well as the Author of
the discourse desires to be gently handled and that he calls modesty, yet when
a man will have his horse to be well curried, it is not for want of love to his
horse; but because the condition of his horse requires to be so dealt withal:
I thank God, I never projected any immodest carriage; never could any
adversary move me so far; But as an excellent footeball-player of our House,
who would lay any man on his back handsomely without hurt (and he was a
Bishop's Son) being desired to show any other how to do the like; answered
with protestation that he never proceeded by any rules: but as he found his
opposite, so he Coped with him. In like sort, as I find my adversary; so I
deal with him for the present, as the Condition of his carriage to my seeming
deserves, and if I handsomely lay his opinions on the ground without doing him
any harm, methinkes I should be rather loved then hated of my very enemies for
this; As for the present my Opposite seems to have a care of my credit, for
the gaining whereof he chaulkes me out a way, to wit: by writing perspicuously,
and modestly, without voluminous vagaries about impertinent things. This he
delivers very gravely and demurely, which is in my judgment very ridiculous;
and, if I do express it and answer it as it deserves, I think, I should carry
my self decently in answering him according to his ridiculous condition, and
telling him that he does not well in showing such charity toward his
adversary, which the world will be apt to interpret, as proceeding from a
cowardly disposition. The Spaniards at the Fort of Breast, when Sr John Norris
went forth in hunting of the hare, and his hounds pursued the hare into the
very Fort, they took his hounds and hanged them up over the wall, not in spite
of so renowned a General, but to represent their feareles condition, and that
they looked for no favor at his hands. Magnanimity, not malice moved them
unto this, which magnanimity might strike fear into their Enemies, though it
did not, who took the Fort, though it cost them dear. I write with a purpose
to expose my self to the censure of the world as they shall find cause; but I
regard not the censures of an Adversary: especially in such a cause which
Bradwardine Styles, The cause of God against Pelagius. And truly I confess I
get something by this very phrase of my Adversaries Voluminous vagaries about
impertinent things: which makes me conclude, that certainly both this Author,
and his Interpolator have seen my answer to Mr Hord's Treatise, wherein I have
some vagaries I confess, to refresh my Spirit upon emergent occasions. For,
being taking of from my studies to see a stranger who desired my company; I
was suddenly instructed in a new learning of Nine causes, who never was
accquainted with above 4. before in the Universitie, and one of the nine was
finding out, of which I made good use upon my return; in finding out the
Sophestry of the Remonstrants, in certain Arguments of theirs. This liberty of
Spirit to refresh my self and my Reader, it may be this Author spites: whereas
I am persuaded I should take no offense on his part for the like; But it may be
his gravity transports him to be of the same mind with Raynold the Fox, who
having lost his own tail in a Ginne afterward he endeavors very composedly
to persuade his fellows to cut of their tails also. And to that purpose
suffered his wit to exuberate in representing and amplifying the incommodious
condition of such a member: Railing speeches, I know no reason why any man
should fear from his adversary; for such, Hierome has taught me, do defile
the Railer only, not him that is railed on. And if any man be pleased to spit
in my face that way, though I am naturally very melancholy, yet I am persuaded
he shall find little melancholy predominant in my answering him. As for
unnecessarie divisions for the cause, which he does seriously and wisely
admonish his Adversary to beware of. I willingly profess, I love to have Sea
room, and not to be confined unto straights by any sullen rules of my
Adversary; and truly I perscribe to none, but as I find him, so I frame my
self to grapple with him, as congruously as I can. If God be on my side, why
should I be afraid of any colors. Let the Devil and all his Angels of
Darkness lie in camp against me; I shall not budge: But here is danger
mentioned, which I profess, I did not project, and that is the dashing of my
self upon the rocks of my Adversaries displeasure. And his interpretation of
my courses to my displeasure. For if I do not conform to his sullen rules of
Stoicall morality, he shall ever interpret it; (I mark well the Phrase, he
comes not willingly on to make harsh interpratations, but he shall do it) as
much as to say the uprightness of his judgment and the justice of his
disposition will urge him hereunto, namely to interpret it, As a strong sign
of a weak cause, or at least an Argument of an obstinate mind: But soft and
fair, who made my Adversary my Judge; by whose interpretations I am to stand
or fall? How Imperiously does he carry himself in this; as if he were some
Bugbeare, or dreadful Adversary do I say? or Magistrate rather, see the
poverty of my wit and of my Spirit too; the one was never so inventious of any
such trick, nor the other so audacious, or immodest (if I may be so bold so to
speak) as to serve my self therewith, to scarre my Adversary, desparing by
fair ways to overcome him, and make him yield, or else his obstinacy known
to the world: for who sees not, that I have as much authority to threaten him
with the sharpness of my interpretations of him; as he to threaten me not with
the like austerenesse of his? I am willingly content the world may judge
between us, both of the cause debated and of our carriage therein throughout,
and who has the truth on his side, and shows most learning and honesty in the
maintayning of that he undertakes; I willingly confess, the five points
controverted are tender points, and the knowledge of the truth herein, merely
concerning a man's salvation; But this Author deals only upon the half of one
of them, and that most needless also: And the resolution of the Doctrine of
Election depends upon the resolution of the doctrine of Election depends upon
the resolution of an other point; namely, whether Grace be conferred freely, or
according to men's works; That it is conferred freely, and not according to
works; hereupon it is that Austin builds the absoluteness of predestination
and election, wherence it follows evidently, that as many as do maintain
the Decree of predestination to be conditional, must also in Austin's judgment
maintain that Grace is given according unto works, which was of old condemned
in the Synod of Palaestine, and all along in diverse Synods and Provincial
Counsels against the Pelagians. Now if Predestination be absolute and not
conditional; it follows that Reprobation also is absolute and not
conditional; which consequence I presume, the Author of these additions will
not deny. But as there is a great deal of craft in dawbing; so these crafty
Crowders are apt to work upon generalities and in distinctions: Reprobation we
know is as well from Grace as from glory, and God's reprobation from glory is
joined with a purpose to inflict damnation. Now as touching Reprobation from
grace, we readily profess that God has both ordained to deny grace unto some
of his mere pleasure; like as he has ordained to bestow that upon others of
his mere pleasure; and also of his mere pleasure has made such a decree. And
these Authors dare not mainifestly oppose us in this argument, lest the sower
leaven of their Pelagian Tenet manifest it self to the whole world, namely in
maintaining that grace is conferred according to works: But as touching
reprobation from Glory, and God's purpose to inflict Damnation, These Juglers
so carry the matter, as if they would make the world believe our Doctrine is,
that God decreed to deny men Glory and to inflict Damnation, not for their
sins; but merely, because it is his pleasure so to do, a most unshamefast
crimination: For albeit that God has made no law, according whereunto, he
proceeds in giving grace unto some, and denying it unto others, but herein
proceeds merely according unto his pleasure, and not according to men's
works; it being manifest Pelagianisme to affirm the contrary; yet we openly
and willingly profes (And all the Christian world knows it to be true) That
God has made a law whereunto according he proceeds in the distribution of
rewards and Punishments, namely these, Whosoever believes shall be saved,
whosoever believes not shall be damned: And according to this law, God has
decreed from everlasting to proceed in pronouncing the sentence of Salvation
and Damnation on mankind, namely to bestow Salvation not of his mere pleasure,
without all respect of the works of men, but as a reward of their faith,
repentance, and good works, and to inflict damnation not of his own mere
pleasure without any respect to the works of men, but as a due reward for
their sins never broken of by repentance. Only this decree thus to proceed in
the execution of rewards and punishments, we profess God has made according
to the mere pleasure of his will, whereby it is apparent, that these men play
the part of notable Impostours, when they abuse the world's credulity in
making them believe, that we maintain any such absurd decrees or executions of
decrees, which they obtrude upon us; and to this purpose these are willing to
take the benefit and advantage of Confusion; for it is most profitable for some
to fish in troubled waters, and to walk in the dark: But when the light of
distinction comes, this madd's them to see their impostures discovered, and
their sophistications made to appear in their proper colors. The eye of the
Adulterer (says Job) waits for the twilight, and says, no eye shall see
me, and disguiseth his face, They dig through houses in the dark, which they
marked for themselves in the day, they know not the light, but the morning is
even to them, as the shadow of death, if one know them, they are in the
terrors of the shadow of death; Now there is a course of adulterating the word
of God, and deflouring his truth every way, as abominable in the sight of God,
as the deflowring of women; yea and much more abominable; In my answer to the
former discourse, as I remember, I proposed certain arguments to prove the
absolute nature of Reprobation. This Author does not accommodate himself, nor
his Achates neither to answer so much as one of them. Thus having Prefaced
concerning these concealed Authors, and therewithal made answer to the
Preface of this Interpolator, I come to make answer to the Additions themselves.

The Answer to the Additions.
1. Some say that God of his mere pleasure antecedent to all sin in the
Creature, original, or M. Mason's Ad-Vitions page: 2.
actnall, did decree to glorify his Soveraigntie and Justice in the eternal
rejection and damnation of the greatest part of Mankind, as the end; and in
their unavoidable sin and impenitence, as the means.

2. The rest of that side thinking to avoid the great inconveniences, to which
the supralapsarian way lies open, fall down a little lower; and present men to
God in his decree of Reprobation lying in the fall and under the guilt of
original sin, laying.

3 That God looking upon miserable mankind lying in Adam's sin, did decree,
the greatest number of men (even those men whom he calls to repentance and
salvation, by the preaching of the Gospel) to Hell torments for ever and
without all remedy, for the declaration of his severe justice; This way went
the Synod.

Let the Reader observe that this Author in stating the opinion of our Divines
alleges no passages out of any of them, no nor so much as quotes the place of
any of Answer
their writings where this doctrine is to be found in the term wherein he
delivers it, that so, he may take the greater liberty to shape their opinions
according to his own pleasure; first, as touching the first observe. 1. How he
shapes this opinion. 2, the Persons to whom he imputes it; concerning the
first, the Decree is shaped as consisting of two parts; The one sets down the
end, which God intended, the other the means whereby this end is procured.

1. As touching the end, it is hard to say, by his shaping of it, whether the
manifestation of God's glory be made the end, or man's damnation; and if any
one conceaves hereupon, that man's Damnation is the end which God intended in
the opinion of our Divines, like enough this Author will be well enough
pleased with it. 2. Consider how God's Soveraingtie and Justice are coupled
together, as appearing in the eternal rejection and damnation of his
Creatures, as if both of them did appear equally in each. 3. Then rejection is
proposed without distinction and specification, that we might know whether he
understands it of rejection from Grace, or rejection from Glory. 4. And in the
fourth place, he couples rejection with Damnation, as if both were of equal
yoke; signifying Acts temporal; whereas rejection in the Common notion thereof
is all one with reprobation, and reprobation is commonly taken for an act
eternal, to wit, The eternal purpose of God to deny grace, permit sin, and
inflict damnation for sin. 5. Damnation is here brought in as belonging to
the Decree of the end; and quite left out in the Decree of the means: whereas
by the very light of Nature it is apparent, that Justice vindicative is
manifested no where more, then in the execution of punishment. 6. And lastly
Damnation in it self is no manifestation of Justice any more, then of
Injustice; unless it be executed as a condign punishment for sin; yet most
absurdly he talks of manifesting justice in man's Damnation, without specifying
the meritorious cause of Damnation; without consideration whereof, Damnation is
no manifestation of Justice, either Divine, or humane. 7. Whereas he sets forth
the Persons damned to be the greatest part of Mankind, this is only to speak
with a full mouth, and to gull a partial Reader, who may be well pleased to
have his mouth filled with an empty spoone: For the Scripture teatheth
expreslie, that even of them that are called but few are chosen; and clear
reason does manifest, that look how God may deal with one, in the same manner
it is lawful for him to deal with Millions. We love to speak distinctly, and
accordingly we say, that all God's decrees; are of doing something for the
manifestation of his own Glory. I say of doing something, for no glory of God
is manifested in Decreeing, but in executing his Decrees; As when Solomon
says, God has made all things for himself, even the wicked against the day
of evil Prove: 16: 4. So then the manifestation of God's Glory is the end of
all his actions. And accordingly if rejection here be taken for God's Decree,
no glory is manifested herein, and too absurd it is to account God's eternal
Decrees to to be means for the accomplishing of his ends: But if Rejection be
taken here for a temporal Act, to wit: Of final dereliction in sin, then
it may be a means for the manifestation of God's glory in a certain kind,
namely, his Soveraigntie; for like as God has mercy on whom he will, in not
leaving them finally in their sins; but delivering them from the power of it,
by bestowing on them the Grace of Faith and Repentance. In like manner, God
hardneth whom he will, in denying the same Grace of Faith and Repentance, and
so finally leaving them and permitting them to continue finally in their
sins, without breaking them of by repentance. So that God proceed's herein
merely according to his pleasure, for the manifestation of that Soveraingtie
which he has as a Creator over his Creatures. Even the same that the Potter
has over his Clay, to make of the same lump one vessel unto honor, an other
unto dishonor. No Justice is manifested in this difference, I mean no such
Justice as proceeds in reference to the works of men; for he does not bestow
Grace upon men, because of their good works; nor deny grace unto them, because
of their evil works; but finding men equal in the state of sin, he
bestows Grace upon the one to cure sin in them, and bestows it not upon
others. Yet God is just herein in another respect, namely in as much as he does
no other thing in all this, but such as he has a lawful power to do; As for
Damnation, that is clearly an Act temporal; and this the Lord inflicts on none
but for their sins: And like as in giving or denying grace, God manifested no
justice Compensative, but Soveraigntie, only proceeding therein merely
according unto pleasure: So in inflicting damnation and denying glory, he
manifest's vindicative Justice alone, not proceeding according to mere pleasure
herein but according to men's works, and that according to a Law which himself
has given unto men, namely this, Whosoever continues in sin without
repentance shall be damned. 2. The second part of this Decree is concerning the
means; and the means he makes to be sin and impenitency: It is very well he
took liberty to set down their opinion without specifying their words, least
they should fly in his face, and convict him of shameful slander. He that
intends the end is the Author of the means: this is universal, we say that
the permission of sin and of impenitencie is the means, and this we
acknowledge to make way, as well for the manifestation of his mercy in
pardoning sin, as of his Justice in punishing it; it being apparent that
neither mercy in pardoning, nor Justice in punishing can have place; unless
sin be permitted to enter into the world: Over and above this sin is styled
unavoidable without all distinction, such is the proper language of the
Arminian Court; we say all sins are avoydable by Grace, and that no sin can
be avoided in an acceptable manner without Grace, and here I speak not of grace
restrayning only, but of Grace sanctifying. Here if it pleased him, he might
have put in Damnation also for sin, as without all doubt a principal means
of promoting the manifestation of God's Justice; and Thomas Aquinas expressly
professes, that Reprobatio includit voluntatem permittendi culpam and
damnationem inferendi pro culpa. Reprobatition includes God's will to permit
sin, and to inflict Damnation for sin; here is the Decree concerning
means. And as for the end hereof, both Aquinas (and Alvarez after him)
professes, that the manifestation of God's glory in the way of vindicative
Justice as intended by him, as the end of all this. 2. As for the Persons here
named to take this way 1. Calvin though this Author places him amongst the
Supralapsarians, yet Lubbertus does not in his treatise of predestination, but
opposes Vorstius in this particular; Cornelius de Lapide, a Jesuit upon the
18: verse of the 9: to the Romans, agrees with Lubbertus in this; Calvin's own
words are these de praedestinatione page: 710. Cum de Praedestinatione sermo
habetur, inde exordiendum esse constanter semper docui atque hodie doceo, jure
in morte relinqui omnes Reprobos, qui in Adam mortui sunt ac damnati jure
periere, qui natura sunt filii irae, When we treat of Praedestination, I ever
taught and to this day teach, that we ought to begin it from thence; That all
Reprobates are justly left in death, who are dead in Adam, and damned, and that
they justly perish, who by nature are children of wrath. 2. Lubbertus shows
Beza also to concur in the same. 3. Piscator in a small Treatise of the
object of Predestination, annexed to his answer to Hemnigius of universal
Grace, though he makes the Decree of making all men in Adam to different ends,
and of permitting them to fall in Adam to precede the consideration of the
Corrupt Mass, as it is evident they must, Yet the Decrees of Election and
Reprobation he subordinates to the foresight of the corrupt Mass. 4. And as
for Zanchy, let but his General definitition of Predestination be considered,
it will appear that he distinguishes the particulars of the Decree of
Predestination as Piscator does.

2. I come to the second opinion; and as for the great inconveniences which
here is pretended, that the Authors thereof desire to decline. I have answered
hereunto upon, the Treatise of M. Hord, and showed that not so much to decline
inconveniences have some embraced this way, as rather because this way seems
to be more familiar and plain, and chiefly because the formal Notions of the
particulars of the Decrees of Election and Reprobation, the one in the General
seeming to be a work of mercy, the other of Justice, seem to suppose a
consideration of man in the state of misery. But supposing that some might
take this way to avoid inconveniences, yet I have showed in my answer to
Arminius, that none of these are at all avoided this way. And then again both
these opinions have I endeavored to reconcile in my Vindiciae, and withal
showed that the difference whatsoever it comes to, is but in apice logico; in a
point of logic: both sides concurring in the maintenance both of God's
Sovereign prerogative over his Creatures, to make one vessel unto honor,
another unto dishonor, by giving faith and repentance unto the one, and
denying it to others; as also in the prerogative of Grace as only effectual to
the working of men unto faith and Repentance.

2. God decrees both to Create all men in Adam, and to permit them all to fall
in Adam; These be the Divine Decrees concerning means tending to the
manifestation of his Glory in the way of Mercy and Justice; except man were
created, no Glory at all could be manifested in him; unless all were suffered
to fall in Adam, there were neither place for mercy, nor Justice: these are
general decrees concerning all; then there are special degrees of difference
to be joined to these general decrees; 1. The one is of raising some out of
sin by Faith and Repentance, and bestowing Salvation on them by way of reward
for the manifestation of God's mercy. 2. The other is of leaving others in
sin, and permitting them finally to persevere therein, and inflicting
Damnation for their sins, the end whereof is the manifestation of God's
Justice: The decree of manifesting these is alone the decree of the end, all
the rest are decrees of the means tending to these ends; whereof the two first
are general and concern all, whether Elect, or Reprobate, the rest are
special, concerning either the Elect alone, or the Reprobate alone. 3. Now
here is a color cast, as if the special Decrees did praemise the two general
Decrees: But this is a mere color, as I have showed you in my Vindiciae, 2.
And even they that take this way, maintain that God ordaines no man to
Damnation but for sin, and that both actual, as well as original, which is
utterly pretermitted by this Author. 3. The Scripture is express that of them
that are called, few are chosen. 4. It is untrue that the Synod went this way,
they meddled not at all with the ordering of God's decrees.

Mascovius also Professor of Divinity at Franekar, a violent and stiff
maintainer of the most unsavory speeches which have been uttered in this
Controversy, and one that undertook in the very Synod to make M. Mason's
Additions p. 3.
good against Lubbert his fellow Professor, that God did will sins, ordain
men to sin, and would not at all that all men should be saved. And besides
this, openly and peremptorily affirmed, that except these things were held and
maintained by them, they could not possibly keep their own ground, but must
come over to the Remonstrants; This man was not only not censured, but
publicly declared in the Synod to be pure and Orthodox, and dismissed only
with this kind and friendly motion. That he should hereafter take heed of such
words as might give offense to tender ears; and could not well down with
those who are incapable of such mysteries. For all this the Author quotes
Antidotu^ Remonstrantiu^ page: 32, this book I have not seen much less have I
it at this time in my possession, and therefore I must take it all upon Answer.
trust. And seeing this man was declared in the Synod of Dort, (as this Author
writes) to be pure and Orthodox, it seems they did not censure these speeches
of his as unsavorie speeches, but rather justified them, though with
acknowledgment, that they might give offense to tender ears, and could not
well down with those, who were as yet incapable of such mysteries; so that
this Author censureth these speeches of Maccovius for unsavory speeches,
without the least disproofe of them (yet is Maccovius, and then was, a
Professor of Divinity in the University of Franekar) In like sort by consequent
he censureth the judgment of the Synod, as an unsavory judgment, and their
approbation of Maccovius, as an unsavory approbation; Let the Reader judge of
what Spirit this Author is, and whether it may not be said of him, as Moses
said of Corah and his accomplices, ye take to much upon you ye Sons of Aaron:
Nay what if this censure of his reflects upon the very Phrases of the Holy
Ghost? The two first phrases namely, to will sins, and to ordain men to
sin, are all one: For to ordain men to sin is but to will, that such men
shall sin, or that there shall be such sins of men. Now the Scripture
frequently justifies this; for the 10 Kings to give their Kingdoms to the
Beast, what is the meaning of it, But to employ their Regal power in
supporting the Pope-dome? Now was not this a great sin? Yet the Scripture
expressly professes that is was the will of God it should be so. Rev: 17. 17.
For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to do it with one
consent, for to give their Kingdom to the Beast, until the words of God be
fulfilled. As expressly does Saint Peter testify of some men, that they are
ordained to stumble at God's word, and to be disobedient, Christ is a stone to
stumble at, and a Rock of offense even to them which stumble 1 Pet. 2. 8.
at the word, being disobedient, unto the which thing they were even ordained:
and by whom could they be ordained hereunto but by God? In like sort we know
the abominable Outrages committed by Herod, Pontius Pilate, together with the
Gentiles and people of Israel, against the Holy Son of God (for Judas
betrayed him, the high Priests suborned witnesses against him, Herod with his
Herodians despitefully used him, Pilate condemned him, the Roman Soldiers
scourged him, spit in his face, buffeted him, arraied him like a King in
scorn, and crowned him with a Crown of thorns, and last of all Crucified him
between two thieves) yet of all these the Holy Ghost testifies, That in this
doing against the Holy Son of God) they did what God had determined to be
done; The words of the Text are these, and that as delivered with one accord by
the Apostles and their fellows; for when Peter and John were let go, they
came to their fellows and showed all that the High Priests had said unto them,
And when they heard it, they lift up their voices to God with one accord, and
said, O Lord thou art the God which has made Heaven and earth, the sea and all
things that are therein, which by the mouth of thy servant David have said, why
did the Gentiles rage and the people imagine a vain thing; The Kings of the
earth assembled, and the Rulers came together against the Lord, and against his
Christ, for doubtless against thy Holy Son Jesus, whom thou have anointed,
both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel
gathered themselves together, to do whatsoever thine hand and thy Counsel had
determined before to be done. Now every one knows that to determine to be
done, and to ordain to be done, and to will to be done are all one: why does
not this Author censure these speeches for unsavory speeches, as well as those
of Maccovius? Why does not he expose this Synod of the Apostles and others to
the same censure? whereunto he exposes the Synod of Dort? Nay can it be
avoided, but that already he has done so, and that these censure^ of his must
necessarily prove the pouring forth of Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost? Seeing
the speeches are used by the Apostles, which he censureth for unsavorie, being
utteredly Maccovius; Is it not apparent that whosoever renounceth those
speeches, most also renounce the word of God? And shall it be a reproach to us
that we cannot keep our own ground, unless the Holy Ghost keeps his ground,
and maintain his own Di^lect to be savorie in spite of the vise aspersions,
that this Author or any other of his Spirit does usually cast upon it, not
sparing to term such speeches, unsavorie speeches As for the last phrase That
God would that all men should be saved, this is no Scripture; nay it does imply
a man fest Blasphemy, namely that God cannot save them: It is true, the
Scripture says that God wills that all men should be saved, but what is
meant by this note of universalities in Scripture, let Scripture it self be
Judge. The Pharisees did T^the omne olus as Austine observes not every
particular her be, to give the T^th thereof, but every kind of herb to give
the Tenth thereof; so Peter saw in a vessel let down from Heaven (...) not
every four footed beast in particular, but all manner of four footed beasts,
see Mat: 3. 5. It is said all Judea went forth to John and all the region round
about Jordan, what can the meaning of this be, but that from all parts of Judea
and the Region round about Jordan, of all sorts some went forth to John not
that there was not one man left behind in all Judea, and in all the Region
round about Jordan. And accordingly Saint Austine interpreted this place above
1200 years ago, namely that God will that of all sorts, some be saved, even
of Kings and Nobles some, though but few of such 1 Cor: 1. 27. Now this is not
denied either by Maccovius, or by any other of our Divines, only they deny it
to be the will of God, that all and every one shall be said; for if this were
his will, it would follow, first that God is not able to save them, which is to
deny the first Article of the Creed, as Austine in this very particular
disputed many hundred years ago. Secondly it would follow, that God is
changed: for certainly when he damnes men he has no will to save them. And
what is Election Divine? is it any other then the will of God ordaining unto
salvation? Now who dares say that all are Elect? Has not our Savior expressly
told us, that even of them that are called, but few are chosen? Yet might that
Synod well admonish Maccovius to take heed of such words as might give offense
to tender years, and be careful to express the same truth in as inoffensive
way as we can: And accordingly having a digression in this very Argument, in my
Vindiciae Gratiae I proposed it in this manner, Whether the holy one of Israel
without any injury to his Holy Majesty, may be said to will sin after a
certain manner: and I maintain the affirmative after this manner; Deus vult
ut peccatum fiat ipso permittente, God will have sin to come to pass by his
permission; and Bellarmine confesses that, Malum esse Deo permittente bonum
est. It is good that evil should be by God's permission, which was also the
saying of Austine long before. And that non aliquid fit nisi Omnipotens fieri
velit, vel sinendo ut fiat, vel ipse faciendo: Not any thing comes to pass,
except God Omnipotent will have it come to pass, either by suffering it, or
himself working it; And the eleventh Article of the Church of Ireland framed
in the days of King J'ames runs thus; God from all eternity, did by his
unchangable Counsel ordain what soever in time should come to pass; yet so
as there by no violence is offered to the to the wills of the reasonable
Creatures, and neither the liberty, nor the contingency of second causes is
taken away, but established rather. And Arminius himself professes that Deus
voluit Achabum mensuram scelerums uorum implere; God would have Achab to fill
up the measure of his sins, and what is it to fill up the measure of his
sins; but to add sin unto sin? And this he delivers without all
qualification.

By these instances it appears, That they of the first side can easily bear
one with another in this difference. M. Mason's Additions page: 3.
And to say the truth, there is no reason why they should quarrel about
circumstances, seeing they agree in the substance for which they both contend.
1 That the moving cause of Reprobation is the alone will of God, and not the
sin of man original or actual. 2. That the final impenitencie and
Damnation of Reprobates are necessary and unavoidable by God's absolute Decree.
Answer


The difference which this Author takes into Consideration is about the object
of Predestination; and the difference in opinion thereabouts is usually to be
observed threefold (though this Author is pleased to take notice of a
secondfold difference,) for some conceive the object of Predestination to be
mankind as yet not created; others conceive the object thereof to be mankind
created, but not yet corrupted. A third sort maintain the object thereof to be
mankind both created and corrupted. Now D. Iunius has endeavored to
reconcile the three opinions, making place for each consideration in the object
of predestination; And Piscator after him adventured on the like
reconciliation, and has performed it with more perspicuitie and with better
success in my judgment, then Iunius; And that according to three different
acts concurring unto Predestination; The first is, says he, God's purpose to
create mankind in Adam unto different ends, now this Act does clearly require
the object thereof to be mankind not yet Created. The second Act he conceives
to be God's Decree to permit all men to fall in Adam; Now this Act he conceives
as clearly to suppose the object thereof to be mankind created, but not
corrupted. The third and last Act he conceives to be God's decree to choose
some, to show compassion on them in raising them out of sin by says and
repentance, and of Reprobating others, leaving them as be finds them, and
permitting them to finish their days in sin, to the end he might manifest
the glory of his grace, in saving the one; and the glory of his Justice in
damning others. Now this third Act he supposes manifestly to require the
object thereof to be mankind both created and corrupted: Now the Authors of
these several opinions have no reason to go together by the ears about these
three opinions, but with Brotherly love to entertain one another: First,
because the difference herein is not so much in Divinity, as in Logic and
Philosophy; difference in opinion about order in intentions, being merely
Logical, and to be composed according to the right stating of the end
intended, and of the means conducing to the end; it being generally confessed,
that the intention of the end is before the intention of means conducing
thereunto. And that look what is first in intention, the same must be last in
execution. Secondly, the Authors of these several opinions about the object
of Predestination, do all agree in two principal points. 1. That all men,
before God's eternal predestination and reprobation, are considered as equal
in themselves, whether as uncreated, or as created, but not corrupted, or
lastly, whether created or corrupted. 2 That God's grace only makes the
difference, choosing some to work the^ to faith, and repentance, and
perseverance therein; while he rejects others, leaving the^ as he finds
them, and permitting them to finish their days in sin, whereby is upheld and
maintained. 1. First, the prerogative of God's grace as only effectual to the
working of men unto that which is good. 2. And secondly, the prerogative of
God's Soveraigntie in showing mercy on whom he will, to bring them to Faith
and true repentance, and hardening others; that is, not bestowing of grace and
repentance upon them And seeing they all agree in these momentous points of
Divinity, they have no cause to take it offensively at the hands of one
another, that they differ in a point of Logic. Now I have adventured, on this
argument to find out to my self, and give unto others some better
satisfaction, then formerly has been exhibited, and that by distinguishing Two
decrees only on each part, to wit, the decree of the end, and the decree of
the means: As for example, 1. On the part of Predestination and Election, I
conceive the end to be the manifestation of God's glorious grace in the way of
mercy mixed with Justice, on a certain number of men. And the Decree of the
means is to create them and permit them all to fall in Adam and to bring them
forth into the world in their several generations clothed with original
sin; and to send Christ into the world to dye for them, and for Christ's sake
first to bestow the grace of faith and repentance upon them, and finally to
save them. 2. On the part of Reprobation I conceive the end to be the
manifestation of God's glory in the way of Justice vindicative; And the decree
of means to be partly common and partly proper; the common means are to
create them and permit them all to fall in Adam, and bring them forth into the
world clothed with original sin; the special means are to leave them as he
finds them, and permit them to finish their days in sin, and so not showing
the like grace to them, which he showed to others. 1. So that the moving cause
of Reprobation is the alone will of God, and not the sin of man original and
actual; like as on the other side, the moving cause of election is only the
will of God, or not faith, or any good works, whereupon this Author is loath
to manifest his opinion; This doctrine is not only approved by Doctor Whitaker
Doctor of the Chair in the Universitie of Cambridge, and that in his Cygnea
Cantio a little before his death, but justified and confirmed by variety of
Testimonies both of Schoolmen, as Lumbard, Aquinas, Bannes, Petrus de Alliaco,
Gregorius, Arminensis; of our own Church and the Divines thereof, as taught by
Bucer at Cambridge, by Peter Martyr at Oxon: professed by the Bishops and
others, promoted by Queen Elizabeth and farther in the year of our Lord 1592:
there was a famous recantation made in the Universitie of Cambridge by one
Barret in the 37. of Elizabeth whereunto he was urged by the heads of houses of
that Universitie. The Recantation runs thus, Preaching in Latin not long
since in the Universitie Church, (Right worshipful) many things slipped from me,
both falsely and rashsly spoken, whereby I understand the minds of many have
been grieved, to the end therefore I may satifie the Church and the truth which
I have publicly hurt; I do make this public confession, both Repenting and
Revoking my Error; First I said that no man in this transi^^ie world is so
strongly underpropt, at least by the certainty of Faith, that is (unless as I
afterward expounded it) by Revelation that he ought to be assured of his own
Salvation; But now I protest before God, and acknowledge in my conscience that
they which are justified by faith have peace toward God that is, have
reconciliation with God, and do stand in that grace by faith therefore that
they ought to be certain and assured of their own Salvation, even by the
certainty of Faith it self.

2. Secondly, I affirmed that the faith of Peter could not fail, but that
other men's faith may; for as (I then said) Our Lord prayed not for the faith of
every particular man, but now being of a better and more sound Judgment
according to that which Christ teaches in plain words, Ioh. 17. 20. I pray
not for these alone, that is the Apostles, but for them also which shall
believe in me through their word; I acknowledge that Christ prayed for the
faith of every particular believer, and that by the virtue of that prayer of
Christ; every true believer is so stayed up, that his faith cannot fail.

3. Thirdly touching perseverance to to the end, I said that, that certainty
concerning the time to come is proud, for as much as it is in his own nature
contingent of what kind the perseverance of every man is, neither did I affirm
it to be proud only, but to be most wicked; but now I freely protest that the
true and justifiing faith, whereby the faithful are most near united unto
Christ, is so firm as also for the time to come so certain, that it can never
be rooted up out of the minds of the faithful by any temptation of the flesh,
the world or devil himself; so that he that once has this faith shall ever
have it; for by the benefit of that justifying faith Christ dwells in us and
we in Christ, therefore it cannot but be both increased (Christ growing in us
daily) as also persevere unto the end, because God does give constancy.

4. Fourthly, I affirmed that there was no distinction in faith, but in the
Persons believing, in which I confess I did err. Now I freely acknowledge the
Temporary faith (which as Bernard witnesses is therefore fained, (because it
is temporary) it is distinguished and differs from the saving faith, whereby
sinners apprehending Christ are justified before God for ever, not in measure
and degrees, but in the very thing it self. Moreover I add that Saint James
does make mention of a dead faith, and Paul of a faith that works by love.

5 Fifthly, I added that forgiveness of sins is an Article of faith, but not
particular, neither belonging to this man or that man, that is (as I expounded
it) that no true faithful man either can or ought certainly believe that his
sins are forgiven: But now I am of an other mind and do freely confess that
every true faithful man is bound by this Article of faith to believe the
forgivenes of sins, and certainly to believe that his own particular sins
are freely forgiven him, neither does it follow hereupon that, that Petition of
the Lord's prayer (to wit) forgive us our trespasses is needless; for in that
Petition we ask not only the gift but also the increase of Faith.

6 Sixthly, these words escaped me in my Sermon viz: As for those that are not
saved, I do most strongly believe, and do freely protest, that I am so
persuaded against Calvin, Peter Martyr and the rest, that sin is the true and
proper cause of Reprobation; But now being better instructed I say that the
Reprobation of the wicked is from everlasting, and that saying of Saint Austine
to Simplician to be most true; viz: If sin were the cause of Reprobation then
no man should be elected, because God does know all men to be defiled with it:
And that I may speak freely, I am of the same mind and do believe concerning
the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, as the Church of England believes
and teaches in the book of the Articles of faith, in the Article of
Praedestination. Last of all I uttered these words rashly against Calvin, a man
that has very well deserved of the Church of God (to wit) that he durst
presume to lift up himself above the high and Almighty God, by which words I
do confess that I have done great injury to that most learned and right good
man, and I most humbly beseech you all to pardon this my rashness, as also in
that I have uttered many bitter words against Peter Martyr, Beza, Zanchy,
Iunius, and the rest of the same religion, being the lights and ornaments of
our Church, calling them by the odious names of Calvin^sts and other slanderous
terms, branding them with a most grevious mark of reproach; whom because our
Church does worthily reverence, it was not meet, that I should take away their
good name from them. Doctor Fulke in like manner maintains that reprobation is
not of works, but of God's free will, Rom: 9: Number: 2. His words are these,
God's election and Reprobation is most free, of his own will, not upon the
foresight of the merits of either of them; for he has mercy on whom he will
and whom he will he hardens verse: 18. Yet here is to be distinguished, for
the explication of the truth, That God's decree of Reprobation may be
considered either as touching the Act of God reprobating and willing, or as
touching the things hereby willed or Decreed; As touching the Act of God
reprobating, we say as Aquinas says concerning the Act of God predestinating,
namely that no cause can be given thereof as from man, like as no cause can be
given of God's will; God's will being eternal, but whatsoever is in man being
Temporal. But as touching the things decreed or willed by Reprobation, these
are either the denial of grace, or inflicting of damnation; As touching the
denial of grace we clearly profess, that like as God of his mere will and
pleasure does show mercy on some in bestowing the grace of faith and repentance
upon them; so God of his mere will and pleasure does harden others in denying
unto them the grace of says and repentance; and thus it is that Doctor Fulke
maintains God's election and reprobation to be most free of his own free
will, not upon the foresight of the merits of either of the^; but touching the
inflicting of damnation, we maintain that God neither does inflict damnation,
nor ever did decree to inflict damnation of his own mere pleasure and will,
but altogether for sin, either original or actual: further we maintain,
that in no moment of time or nature God does decree to damn any man before he
foreseeth the sin for which they shall be damned. 2. As touching the second
we willingly grant, that by virtue of God's decree, it necessarily and
unavoidably follows, that whosoever dies in final impenitency shall be
damned, neither do I think this Author dares to avouch the contrary.

Secondly, as touching final impenitency, we willingly profess that upon
supposition of God's decree finally to harden a man and to deny a man the grace
of repentance: (It being clearly the gift of God as Scriptures testify. Act:
5. 31, and 11. 18. 2 Timothy 2 25) it is impossible that such a man should repent,
nevertheless both repentance is possible, and final impenitency is avoidable
simply (to wit) by grace 3. But this Author loves not to explicate himself,
but I suppose he secretly maintains, that every man has such a power, by
grace, whereby he may repent if he will, concerning which Tenent of his, we
nothing doubt but every man has such a power, but we deny that such a power is
grace; we say it is nature rather, and that for this reason; look by what
power a man may repent if he will, by the same power he may ref use to repent
if he will: Now if this were grace, then were grace inferior to a moral
virtue: for no moral virtue leaves a man indifferent to do good or no; to do
good or evil; but inclines and disposes the will only to that which is good;
so Justice disposes a man only to just actions, not indifferently to that
which is just, or to that which is unjust, It Is true nevertheless a man that is
just may do an unjust Act if he will, but this is not by virtue of the habit
of Justice wherewith he is qualified; But only by reason of the freedom of his
will which is natural unto him; for justice undoubtedly inclines a man's will
only to that which appears just, and so every moral virtue inclines the will
only to a virtuous Act, not indifferently either to acts virtuous, or to acts
vicious; like as on the contrary a vicious habit inclines the will of man only
to acts vicious, not indifferently, to acts vicious or to acts virtuous!
Secondly grace is supernatural, it were a Monster in Divinity to say that
supernatural grace does indifferently incline a man either to good or evil;
it is impossible it should incline a man save to acts supernatural; now every
supernatural act must needs be gracious, it cannot be sinful or evil; lastly
whosoever has a willto repent, such a one has not only a power to repent, but
actually does repent, as touching the chiefest facultiein, the change whereof
repentance does consist; for that is the will, and it is God that works in us
both the will and the deed, in every kind of that which is truly good; and
surely to have a will to repent is a good thing, if he want power, let him and
us, pray for that out of that will and desirewe have to repent, ut quod volumus
implere valeamus, that what we desire to do we may be able to do, and we have
no cause to fear that God will despise so gracious desires.

To these speeches let me add that of Remigius Archbishop of Lions, who, to
Rabanus Archbishop of M. Mason's Additions p. 5.
Mentz, objecting that Saint Austine wrote a book called Hipognosticon against
Pelagius and Coelestius, wherein he denied that Reprobates were properly
praedestinati ad interitum, predestinate to destruction, answers, that Saint
Austine said not so (but some other man) as it is supposed to purge the Church
of calumny, which some ill affected ones did cast upon it; namely that it
taught that God by his predestination did impose upon men a necessity of
perishing, and did withdraw the word (Praedestination) from the point of
Reprobates, and gave it only to the Elect, and so gave great occasion of
further Error and mistake; In this speech of his, it is clearly employed that
it was the constant Doctrine of the Church then, that Reprobates lie under no
necessitating Decree of Perdition.

Here we find inserted a passage taken out of Remigius Arcsh-bishop of Lions
his answer Answer.
to Rabanus Archbishop of Mentz, as it is to be found in the History of
Gottescalchus written by Doctor Usher Archbishop of Armach, page 107. Now that
discourse of Remigius is not in answer to Rabanus Archbishop of Mentz, but
unto Hincmarus Archbishop of Remes. And withal this Author is pleased to
geld it as he thinks good: For whereas Remigius has it thus; quasi Deus sua
praedestinatione necessitatem imponeret hominibus in suis impietatibus
permanendi, and in aeternum pereundi: This Author renders it thus; That God by
his predestination did impose upon men a necessity of perishing, leaving out
altogether the former, namely of imposing upon men a necessite of perishing in
their impieties: And every sober man may well wonder at his dealing in this,
especially seeing he has left out that which is most material and most
considerable; for neither by Austin's Doctrine nor by our Doctrine, has God
imposed upon any a necessity of perishing, but such as finally persevere in
their impieties: And will any man that is well in his wits oppose this? Sure I
am, nor Hincmarus, nor any other was known to me to oppose this in the Church
of God. Neither is there any necessity inherent in man, on whom it is said to
be imposed, but a consequent denomination to God's unchangeable or irresistible
will, to damn all such as persist finally in their sinful courses, without
breaking the^ off by repentance: All the question is about the necessity of
Reprobates persisting in their impieties, which might be objected, and as it
seems was objected against Austin's doctrine of Predestination, and by this
Author is objected against ours: now by this objection, Remigius cleares the
Doctrine of Saint Austine, professing this to be a calumnious imputation, and
such as needed not for the answering thereof, that any such course should be
taken as the Author of the book (intuled Hypognosticon) takes; (to wit) by
denying that God predestinates any to Damnation, for this necessity of
persisting in sins was not imposed upon them by predestination in their
opinion, who thereby understood no other thing then Gods decreeing of such
things which himself purposed to effect in due time; as both Remigius
manifested in these words, page 155, of the same book: Non praedestinat nisi
quae fuerat ipse facturus, quae utique omnia bona and justa sunt; And Austine
in like manner, de bono perseverantiae, cap. 17. In sua quae falli mutarique
non potest praescientia, opera sua disponere, illud omnino nec aliud quicquid
est praedestinare, so the Synod of Valens, Can: 3. Praedestinatione autem deum
ea tantum statuisse (dicimus) quae ipse vel gratuita misericoraia, vel juslo
judicio facturus erat. In malis vero ipsam malitiam praescisse quia ab ipsis
est, non praedestinasse quia ab illo non est: And that for good reason,
because, Malum non habet causam efficientem, sed deficientem, as Austine writes
De Civit. Dei lib. 12. cap. 7. But as for this necessity in sinning, this both
we and they willingly profess to flow from the sin of Adam, which God alone
can cure in man and none other, as the same Remigius acknowledges Histor.
Gottesca. page 3. Anima humana and voluntas humana sicut vere manet in morte
non diligendo, ita vere transfertur de morte in vitam diligendo: But by whom is
this translation wrought? that follows; hac dilectione non fit vere liberu^
arbitrium id est vere libera voluntas nisi illo liberante, id est libertatem
largiente, qui ait, si vos filius liberaverit, tune vere liberi eritis, and
nisi illo munere Spiritus Dei, de quo dicit Apostolus; ubi autem Spiritus
Domini, ibi libertas: By this love the will is not made free, but he freeing
it, who says, if the Son shall make you free, then shall ye be free indeed,
and not otherwise then by the gift of the Spirit of God whereof the Apostle
speaks, where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty; nay I am verily
persuaded that Hincmarus himself against whom Remigius disputes, is more
Orthodox in this argument then this Author; for thus writes Hincmarus: as is
to be seen in the same history of Gottescalchus. page 39. quosdam in Massa
peccati and perditionis just deseruit, a qua praedestinatione sua (id est in
gratiae praeparatione) occulto (sed non injusto) judicio nequaquam eripuit;
Some men God justly deserted in the Mass of sin and perdition; from which by
his predestination, that is, preparation of grace, he never delivered by
judgment secret, but not unjust, whereas this Author will have all men to be
delivered from this Mass of sin and perdition; by a certain universal
grace bestowed upon them, whereby they are put in a kind of indifferent estate
to believe or not believe, repent or not repent if they will, which Hincmarus
never acknowledged; yet this necessity of sinning, incident to all that are
brought forth into the world, in Massa peccati and perditionis, in the Mass of
original sin and perdition: is not such either in their, or our opinion, as
whereby they cannot but sin; although they would abstain from it; though
this be obtruded upon us as it was upon Remigius: whereupon he pleades for
himself, and such as were of his mind in the Doctrine of predestination after
this manner, page 53. Nemo it a sentit aut dicit quod Dei praedestinatio aliquem
invitum faciat peccare, ut jam non propriae voluntatis perversitate sed Divinae
praedestinationis necessitate peccare videatur; No man (says he) does so think
or speak, as if God's predestination made a man to sin against his will, in
such sort as he should seem to sin, not through the perverseness of his own
will, but by the necessity of Divine predestination, so say we; neither is this
impotency of doing good, any where else, but in the Corruption of the will, it
being a moral impotency according to that of Saint Austine, Libertas sine
gratia non est libertas sed contumacia; Liberty without grace, is not
Liberty, but wilfulness, and Remigius Histor: Gottescal: page 29. Exquibus
(says he) speaking of Reprobates, Nemo potest salvari, non propter violentiam
aliquam Divinae potestatis, sed propter indomabilem and perseverantem nequitiam
suae iniquitatis; Not one of them can be saved, not because of any violence of
Divine power, but by reason of the untameable and persevering naughtines of
their own iniquity, and p. 144. De Reprobis nullum salvari ullatenus
existimavi, non quia non possunt homines de bono ad malu^ commutari and de
malis ac pravis boni ac recti fieri, sed quia in melius mutare noluerunt, and
in pessimis operibus usque ad fiae^ perseverare voluerunt; not only of the
Reprobates do we judge to be saved, not because they could not be changed from
evil to good, and of evil and depraved become good and right, but because
they would not be changed into better. and would to the end persevere in wicked
works; So then they could be changed but would not: But in what respect is it
said they could be changed? was it in respect of the freedom of their wills
without grace? Nothing less; see his own words, page 34. Si dixisset
generaliter, nemo hominum sine Dei gratia libero been uti potest Arbitrio,
esset Catholicus: Had he said generally that no man can rightly use his free
will, without the grace of God, he had been a Catholic. But all the question
is about the manner how this grace does work (to wit) whether God gives men
grace to believe and repent if they will, and leaves to them to perform the
Act of faith and repentance; or whether God works the very Act of faith and
repentance, not to dispute of this point out of God's word, which clearly
teaches, that, God works in us the will and the deed, according to his good
pleasure. Philip. 3. 13. And that he makes us perfect to every good work;
working in us that which is pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ: Let us
take notice of the discourse between Hincmarus and Remigius on this argument;
that Heb. 13. 20.
till the love of God comes, man is dead; his will is dead to that which is
good; Now love is only given to the believers, posse charitatem habere naturae
est hominum, charitatem autem habere gratiae est fidelium, De praedestinatione
sanctorum, cap. 5. For thus writes Hincmarus, page 3. 113. Bonum quod agimus
and Dei est and nostrum, Dei per praevenientem gratiam, nostrum per
subsequente^ liberam voluntatem, The good that we do is both God's work and
ours; of God by Grace preventing, ours by free will following: To this Remigius
answers, and first he says, Hincmarus discoureseth after such a manner, as if
a good work were partly God's work and partly ours: And again as if the
beginning of a good work were God's, but the effect thereof of man's free
will; although as he (Hincmarus) does endeavor to temper this speech of his,
by the addition of grace, not by the fullness of it; gratiae adjunctione non
etiam plen^tudine, by the adjunction of grace, not also by the fullness of it:
So he should have done says Remigius, cum vere totum sit Dei; seeing indeed
the whole is God's work; As the truth it self says, without me ye can do
nothing: And the Apostle; what have thou that that thou have not received?
whence the blessed and glorious Martyr Cyprian has so defined it, saying, we
must glory in nothing, seeing nothing is ours: and concludes thus; Bonum itaque
nostrum totum Dei est, quia totum est ex Deo; and nihil boni nostri, nostrum
est, quia nihil boni nostri est ex nobis: Therefore our good works, are holy
God's, and noe good of ours is ours, because it is not of us; and to reconcile
this seeming contradiction, in calling it our good, yet denying it to be from
us, he concludes thus, omne bonum nostrum, and totum Dei est, donando; and
totum nostrum est, accipiendo: Every good thing of ours is wholly God's in as
much as he gives it, and it becomes ours full and whole, for as much as we
receive it.

Fulgentius is plain for it to, lib. 1. ad Monium, page 6. These whom God
foresaw would dye in sin, he decrees should live in endless punishment; I may
take in Saint Austine, and Prosper also, who are judged to be the Patrons of he
absolute Decree, as it is set down in the Sublapsarian way; even they do many
M. Mason's Additions p. 6.
times let fall such speeches, as cannot fairly be reconciled with absolute
Reprobation. I will only cite Prosper; for Saint Austine, speaks in him; he
discoursing of some that fall a way, a Sanctitate ad immunditiem, from
holiness to uncleanness; says, they that fall away from holiness to
uncleanness; lie not under a necessity of perishing, because they were not
predestinate; but therefore they were not predestinate, because they were
known to be such by voluntary praevarication.

Not long after speaking of the same men; he says, Because God foresaw they
would perish by their own free will; therefore, he did not by any
predestination lever them from the children of perdition. And again in his
answer to the twelvth objection, he has these words. God has not withdrawn
from any man ability to yield obedience, because he has not predestined him;
but because he foresaw he would fall from obedience; therefore he has not
predestined him.

They are I confess the words of Fulgentius in the 25: chapter of his first
book ad Monium, and in the very next chapter, he does express himself in
this manner Answer.
on the point of predestination unto glory; praedestinavit illos ad snpplicium
quos a se praescivit voluntatis malae vitio decessuros; and praedestinavit ad
regnum quos ad se praescivit misericordiae praevenientis auxilio redituros, and
in se misericordiae subsequentis auxilio mansuros: He predestinateth those
untopunishment, whom he foresaw to be such as would depart from him through the
fault of a naughty will; and he predestined to the kingdom those whom he
foresaw to be such as would return unto him by the help of mercy prevenient,
and would persevere in him by the help of grace subsequent; So that upon the
same ground he may as well deny predestination unto salvation to be absolute in
the opinion of Fulgentius, as predestination unto damnation: Now Vossius in his
preface to the Pelagian History, having first confessed that all Ancients
agreed in this, That God did not ordain any other unto eternal salvation,
then such who by his mere gift of grace should have the beginning of faith and
good will, and persevere in that which is good, as it was foreseen by him: In
the next place acknowledges, that Austine and Prosper and the Author of the
book de vocatione Gentium; and Fulgentius, unto this common opinion of
Catholics did add this; That this praescience Divine did flow from God's
absolute Decree to save them. This I say Vossius writes, though, I see no cause
to regard his judgment in this Argument. His distinction is very well known of
will absolute and will conditional; which will conditionate he examplifies
thus, as when God will have salvavation conferred upon a man in case he does
believe; what one of our Divines does deny a conditional will, in this sense
in reference to salvation? Now what one of the Ancients (the Pelagians
excepted) can this Author produce; that does affirm any such will to be in
God, for the bestowing of faith upon a man? For to maintain this, were in
plain Terms to maintain, that it was the will of God that grace should
bestowed according unto works: But if the grace of God be bestowed merely
according to the good pleasure of God, as Saint Paul says; God has mercy on
whom he will? By this it is aparent, that this decree is absolute, and
consequently that predestination is absolute; And thus Austine coupleth
together the doctrine of the bestowing grace not according unto works, And his
Doctrine of predestination as inseparable, each to be granted or denied
together with the other. Because this Author pretends it to be needles to cite
Austine, and sufficient to cite Prosper, adding that Austine speaks in him, to
wit, after he was Dead; such is this Authors juggling course with his Reader;
therefore I will represent Austine himself proposing the objection made by the
Massilienses, against Austin's doctrine of predestination, as it was sent unto
him by Prosper, and then answering it, not leaving it unto Prosper to answer
for him: See the objection, sed aiunt (ut scribitis) neminem posse correptionis
stimulis excitari, si dicatur in conventu Ecelesiae audientibus multis, It a se
habet de praedestinatione definita sententia voluntatis Dei, ut alii ex vobis
de infidelitate, accepta obediendi voluntate, veneritis ad fidem, vel accepta
perseverantia maneatis in fide etc. But they say (as ye write) that none can be
stirred up by the Goad of correption, if it be said in the Congregation in the
hearing of many, such as touching predestination is the determinate sentence of
the will of God, that some of you receiving an obedient will, shall come from
infidelity unto faith, or receiving perseverance shall continue in the faith:
But the rest, who continue in sinful delights, therefore you have not risen,
because the succor of commiserant grace, has not as yet raised you. But if
there be any not yet called whom God has predestined to be elected by his
grace, (or whom his grace has predestined to be elected) ye shall receive
the same grace, whereby to will and be Elect. And as for those that do obey,
if you are not predestined to be Elect, the strength of obedience shall be
withdrawn that you may cease to obey: Thus far the objection, Austin's
answer follows thus; When these things are said, they ought not to to deter
us, from confessing God's grace (to wit) which is not given according unto
works, and from confessing predestination according thereunto; like as we are
not terrified from confessing God's foreknowledge, if a man should discourse
thereof in this manner before the people; whether now ye live well or not well,
such shall ye be hereafter, as God foresees ye will be, either good, if he
foresees ye will be good; or evil, if he foresees he will be evil: for what
if upon the hearing hereof some give themselves to sloth, and from labor prone
to lust go after their concupisences; shall we therefore conceive that to be
false which was delivered concerning God's foreknowledge? And so he proceeds to
justify the truth of this doctrine which was objected against him by way of
Crimination, I say to justify it as touching the substance of it, though as
touching the manner of proposing it, he confesses that to be unreasonably
harsh in some particulars; and shows how that may be proposed in a more decent
manner, still holding up the same truth, Thus Austine was able to answer for
himself, whilst he was living; Now let us consider how Prosper answers for
him after he was dead. And first let us consider the objection it self; now it
is this, That they who are not predestinate unto life, although they live
piously and righteously, it shall nothing profit them, but they shall be
reserved so long until they perish: Now this is painely a part of the
objection made by the Massilienses and they were Galli, And it is sometimes
more harshly proposed by the Massilienses then by the Galli.
whom Prosper answers, for the objection proposed to Austine was, that,
strength of obedience should be taken from them; But in the objection of the
Galli, whom Prosper answers it is set dowe in a milder manner, thus, They
shall be reserved until they perish. Now Austine himself accomodates his
answer hereunto in particular, De bono Perseverantiae, cap. 22. 1 For showing
the unreasonable harshnessein this manner of proposing it: I wonder (says he)
if any weak man in a Christian people can by any means hear with patience
that which follows; as namely when it is said unto them, ye that do obey, if
ye be predestined to be rejected, the strength of obedience shall be
withdrawn from you that you may cease to obey; For thus to speak what seems
it to be other, then to curse or to prophecy evil after a sort; Then he
proceeds to she whow the same truth may be delivered in a fairer manner, still
holding up the truth of the doctrine of predestination; If (says he) a man
think good to speak something of such as do not persevere, and need be so to
do. What fails of the truth of this sentence if it be delivered thus? But if
some do obey, that are not predestined unto the kingdom and to glory; they
are temporary ones, and shall not persevere in the same obedience unto the
end. Then he proceeds to show how the same objection may be framed against
God's praescience, thus; Et si qui obeditis, si praesciti estis, rejiciendi
obedire cessabtis; If any of you do obey, if with all ye are foreseen to be
rejected ye shall cease to obey, whereby ye may observe, how Austine in framing
the objection, leaves out the Phrase of withdrawing the strength of obedience,
as containing a calumnious imputation, and such as Austine had nothing to do
with in the course of his opinion concerning predestination. Thus Austine has
plainly answered for himself, and needs noe other to answer for him, and his
answer proceeds without all color of prejudice to his own doctrine,
concerning the absoluteness of predestination By this let the Reajudge of the
ingenuitie of this Author, who conceales all this from his Reader, bearing him
in hand, that Austine speaks in Prosper making answer to his objection,
whereas indeed there is a vast difference between Prosper's answer for Austine,
and Austin's answer for himself: But like enough Prosper was willing to
condescend to the Galli, * and to gratify them with an answer, that in his
judgment might be more acceptable and satisfactorie unto them; To the
consideration whereof I now proceed, and therein to consider Prosper, not
Austin's mind, concerning predestination, as which he has sufficiently
manifested in answer to the same objection, as I have showed; Therefore (says
Prosper) They are not predestined, because they were foreseen to be such
hereafter by their voluntary praevarication, what will follow herence? That
foresight of sins was the cause why they were not predestined unto life? I
answer, first by denying this consequence, for it may as well follow that the
Creatours love is the cause why sins are forgiven him, for the Gospel says
of the woman, Luk: the 7. Therefore many sins are forgiven her, because she
loved much; such illations are not always causall, but very often merely
rational. Secondly, let it be causall, and that foresight of sin is the
cause of non predestination unto life, and accordingly of predestination unto
damnation, yet here I have a double answer. First it is the most general
opinion, that reprobation as it signifies a purpose to damn, and accordingly
to exclude from heaven, presupposes the prescience of sin: M. Perkins
expressly professes as much, and other Divines at the Synod of Dort; yet this
hinders not the absoluteness of reprobation, which appears in the purpose of
God to deny grace, and that absolutely to some, like as he bestows it upon
others; I mean the grace of faith and regeneration; otherwise grace should be
given according to works: Now let any passage be produced out of Prosper, or
any other Orthodox writer among'st the Ancients to show, that God in
distributing these graces unto some, and denying them unto others, did not
proceed absolutely, but according unto works; and according to this doctrine,
it is well known that Austine shaped his doctrine concerning predestination,
as it has been showed at large in the answer to M. Hord, in the first section;
secondly that there may be a cause of predestination and reprobation, Aquinas
does not deny, but how? quoad res volitas, as touching things willed, or,
praedestinatione and reprobatione praepartas, by predestination and reprobation
prepared, and in this sense Aquinas himself confesses that, foresight of
sin is the cause of reprobation, the nineth to the Romans; and see how he
explicates himself, his words are these, Lect: 3. praescientia peccatorum
potest esse aliqua ratio reprobationis ex part poenae quae preparatur
Reprobatis: in quantum scil: Deus proponit se puniturum malos propter peccata
quae a se ipsis habent, non a Deo. The foresight of sins may be some reason
of reprobation as touching the punishment, which is prepared for Reprobates, in
as much as God decrees to punish wicked men for their sins, which they have
of themselves, not of God: But of reprobation, as touching the act of God
reprobating, there can be noe more cause thereof, then there can be a cause of
God's will as touching the act of God willing. And upon this very ground it is,
that Aquinas professes that * never any man was so mad as to affirm that
there may be a cause given of predestination, as touching the p. q. 23. art: 5.
in Corp.
act of God predestinating; Let us therefore forbear to impute any such
opinion to Prosper or any other of the Ancients; which none ever was so mad as
to maintain in the judgment of Aquinas. The same answer will serve for the
next, derived out of the same place in Prosper: As for the third of withdrawing
strength of obedience; This indeed was objected unto Austine, as if in his
opinion God did so; whereas I have showed also how Austine signifies that he had
nothing to do with that, and therefore he leaves that quite out. And indeed
Austin's is clear and express, that as many as God has not predestined,
those he never bring's unto wholesome and spiritual repentance, whereby a man
is reconciled unto God in Christ. Cont: Julian: Pelag: lib. 5. cap. 4. And
consequently he never brings them to any true obedience. The whole sentence in
Prosper has no more moment then the former, and therefore admits the same
answer.

A testimony or two I will borrow likewise from some person of note, and those
Saint Austin's followers too, who lived about 400 years after Saint Austin's
time. Remigius the great Patron of Gotteschalke the zeatous M. Mason's
Additions p. 6. 7.
preacher and publisher of absolute reprobation in those times, in his answer
to that epistle, which we suppose to be the Epistle of Rabanus; saying, that
God did make the nations of the world, and that he does will that all men
should be saved; he gives such an answer as cannot stand with absolute
reprobation; This, says he, is very true, because God lays on noe man a
necessity of perishing, as he has laid on none a necessity of sinning: And a
little after he is plainer; Those whom God did fore know would live and dye in
their wickednesses for reasons most just, should perish, as himself says, Him
that sins against me, even him will I blot out of my Book. In the Valantine
Synod assembled in the favor of Gotteschalke, we may find these words;
Therefore do the wicked perish, not because they could not, but would not be
good, and by their own fault original or actual, also, remained in the Mass
of perdition; And in the end of their 3. Cannon: they pronounced Anathema to
those, that hold that men are so predestined unto evil as they cannot be
otherwise. That any should be (says the Council) predestined unto evil by
the power of God; so as he cannot be otherwise, we do not only not believe,
but also if there be any that will believe so great an evil, with all
detestation we denounce them accursed; as the Council also did.

This Author grants Remigius to be a Patron of absolute reprobation: But these
Answer.
words of his, this Author says, cannot stand with absolute Reprobation:
Remigius undoubtedly thought they could; otherwise he must have renounced the
Doctrine of absolute reprobation and the Patronage thereof, which yet he did
not; as this Author acknoledgeth: Now is it enough for this Author, to say
that these words cannot stand with absolute Reprobation and barely to say it,
without proving ought? and truly I have found such to be the imperious
carriage of this Author in manuscript, now I see it in print; But let us
endeavor to clear Remigius, by proving the Contrary: endeavor to clear
Remigius, by proving the contrary. Therefore it is well known that the Term
absolute stand's in opposition to Conditional. Now this distinction of will
absolute and will Conditional Gerardus Vossius does accommodate in respect of
the things willed of God, and gives instance of God's will of saving, which he
says is conditional: forasmuch as God purposes not to bestow salvation on
any, but such as believe, faith being by God's ordinance the Condition of
obtaining Salvation. In like sort Doctor Iackson in his book of Providence
acknowledges the distinction of voluntas antecedens, and consequens is to be
understood not on the part of God willing, but on the part of things willed:
Now the things willed in the decree of Reprobation, are two, contrary to things
willed in Election: For as in Election God does will the conferring of grace,
and the conferring of salvation; so in Reprobation God does will the denial
of grace and inflicting of damnation: Now Remigius in the passages here
produced, speaks altogether of God's will to inflict damnation, and he denies
that God's will is to inflict damnation on any man absolutely, but only
conditionally (to wit) in case of final perseverance in sin, and so say we
with Remigius: But as touching God's will to deny grace, we utterly deny that
God will have grace to be denied upon a condition, for nothing can be devised
to be the condition thereof, but sin either original or actual. And if upon
such a condition grace should be denied, it should be denied to all seeing
before grace is given, all are found to be under sin actual or original,
and consequently all should be Reprobates, even every mothers son. 2. And if
to avoid this, it be said: although all be sinners, yet grace is denied to
none, but such as want a certain particular obedience; Then upon the
performing of that obedience grace should be conferred; this is as much as to
say that Grace is conferred according unto works; which doctrine has ever
been abominated by the Orthodox in opposition unto the Pelagians. Now the
Apostle clearly makes for us in this, professing that God has mercy on whom
he will, and whom he will he hardens. Now though there passages produced out
of Remigius carry some show against absolute reprobation from glory, or unto
damnation; yet have they noe color or show of opposing absolute reprobation
from grace; As for necessity of perishing, that is merely conditional (to
wit) in case of final continuance in sin without repentance; And as for
necessity of sinning, that we confess is found in all, in state of nature,
Corvinus confesses it to be the doctrine of Arminius that, all men naturally
are cast upon a necessity of sinning. In answer to charity mistaken.
And Doctor Potter proposes it as the doctrine of the Church of England, that,
in a natural man there is no libertas a peccato, liberty from sinning; which
yet is to be understood aright, not but that it is in his power to abstain
from any particular sinful act; for no supernatural act is or can be sinful,
every sinful act must needs be an act natural; and power either to do or to
abstain from any natural Act, is not to be denied to any natural man. But it
is impossible that any natural man should abstain from any sin, or do any
natural good act (so commonly accounted) in a gracious manner, until grace
comes, so to season the heart of man as to love God, even to the contempt of
himself, and out of his love to do that good which he does, and to abstain
from that evil, from which he abstaineth. 2. But if the question be of the
manner how this necessity of sinning is brought upon the nature of man; we
say, it is not by the pleasure of God: But by the sin of Adam, according to
that of the Apostle, Rom: 5. By one man sin entered into the world, and death
by sin: for man by reason of sin was justly bereaved of the Spirit of God,
and begetting children in this Condition, he begets them after his own Image
and likeness, that is bereaved of the Spirit of God. And we hold it impossible
for a man bereaved of God's Spirit, either to do that which is good, or
abstain from doing that which is evil in a gracious manner.

2. Secondly, I come to the Synod of Valense, when they say, the wicked not
perish because they could not do good, but because they would not. These words
may seem to imply that even the wicked could do good if they would; and
truly I see noe cause to deny this: But that we may safely say with Austine;
that, omnes possunt Deo credere and ab amore rerum temporalium ad divina
praecepta servanda se convertere, si velint: Believe God if they will, and from
the love of all things temporal convert themselves to the keeping of God's
Commandments if they will; for if a man would go to Church but cannot,
because he is lame, would read in God's word, but cannot, because he is blind:
These impotencies are natural not moral: but the impotency brought upon
mankind by the sin of Adam is moral not natural. Now moral impotency is
found nowhere but in the will, or at least is chiefly there, and secondly in
the understanding also, as touching knowledge practical; and accordingly when
Scriptures testify that they who are in the flesh cannot please God, Rom: 8:
cannot repent, Rom: 24: connot believe Ioh: 12. This impotency consist's
chiefly in the corruption of their wills, noted by the hardness of heart, Rom:
2. 4. Ephesians: 4. 18. Again I have already showed out of Remigius, that a wicked
man can do that which is good, but by what means? (to wit) by grace, not
otherwise. The words are these; Si dixisset generaliter, nemo hominum sine Dei
gratia libero been uti potest arbitrio esset Catholicus; had he said generaly,
not any man can use his free will without grace, he were Catholic. And page
36: the same Remigius has these words, In infidelibus ipsum liberum arbitrium
ita per Adam damnatum and perditum, in operibus mortuis liberum esse potest, in
vivis non potest; free will so damned and lost in Adam, may be free in dead
works, in living works it cannot: Yet page 174: thus he distinguishes,
answerably to the passage alleged by this Author. De reprobis nullum salvari
ullatenus existimamus, non quia non possunt homines de malo ad bonum commutari,
ac de malis ac pravis boni ac recti fieri, sed quia in melius mutari noluerunt,
and in pessimis operibus usque ad finem perseverare voluerunt. And page 143.
Florus of the Church of Lions where Remigius was Bishop, sets down the same
truth more at large, thus, Habet homo post illam damnationem liberum arbitrium,
quo voluntate propria inclinari potest and inclinatur ad malum, habet liberum
arbitrium, quo potest assurgere ad bonum, ut autem assurgat ad bonum non est
propriae virtutis sed gratiae Dei miserantis; Nam and qui mortuus est, potest
dici posse vivere, non tamen sua virtute, sed Dei, Ita and liberum arbitrium
hominis semel sauciatum, semel mortuum potest sanari, non tamen sua virtute sed
gratia miserantis Dei, and ideo omnes homines admonentur, omnibus verbum
praedicatur, quia habent posse credere, posse converti ad Deum: ut verbo
extrinsecus admonente and intus Deo suscitante, qui audiunt, reviviscant: Man
has after that damnation (to wit) such as followed after Adam's fall) free
will, so that of his own will he can be inclined and is inclined to evil, he
has free will whereby he may rise unto a good condition: but that he does
arise to that good condition, is not in his own power; but of the grace of God
compassionating him; for of him also who is dead, it may be said that he may
live, yet not by his own power but by the power of God. So man's free will
also being once wounded, once dead may be restored, not by his own power, but
by God's grace pitying him and therefore al men are admonished, to all the word
is preached, because they have this that they may believe, they may be
converted unto God, that by the word outwardly admonishing and God inwardly
raising, they which hear may revive. As touching the last, condemning those
who say that any should be so predestined to evil by God, that they cannot
be otherwise, this Author would feign insinuate into his Reader an opinion;
That wicked men may change from evil to good of themselves; But neither does
the Council of Valens, or Remigius a chief man therein, intimate any such
thing; But only that it is in God's power by his grace to change them, and so
has changed and will change the hearts of many, namely of all his Elect, but
not of one other.

That the Remonstrants did not at that time desire that it should be talked of,
among the common people, who might have stumbled at it, but disputed of,
among'st the Judicious and Learned, who as the threshing M. Mason's Additions
p. 8. 9. 5.
Oxen who are to beat the corn out of the Husk, are to bolt out those
truths which are couched and hidden in the letter of the Scriptures. That the
doctrine which is loath to abide the trial even of learned men, carries with
it a shrewd suspicion of falsehood, the heathen Orator shall witness for me;
who to Epicurus seeing that he would not publish his opinion to the simple
people; who might happily take offense at that, answers thus. Declare thy
opinion in the place of Judgment, or if thou art afraid of the assembly there,
declare that in the Senate amongst those grave and judicious Persons. Thou will
never do it, and why? but because it is a foul and dishonest opinion. True
religion (as Vives says) is not a thing gilded over but gold it self: the
more it is scraped and discovered, the brighter and goodlier it is; and so is
the truth. Vives de Verbo sidei, lib. 1. page 16. Disputations illustrate and
set forth true opinions more then silence can; let us not fear therefore
(says he) lest our faith when it is laid open appear filthy to the beholders.
Id ib: Let fa se and superstitious religions in which there is noe soundness
be afraid of this.

The Jew is loath to reason with the Christian touching his law: And the Turk
is forbidden to dispute of his Alcoran, because their religions are brittle
like glasie broken with the least touch, Vives lib. 4. page 479. But the
Christian who is confident of the goodness of his faith fears noe
examination; but rather as much as may be, solliciteth and provokes his
adversary to the Cumbate. Truth whether it be in men or doctrines, is best
when it is uncovered.

Of the five considerations proposed in this discourse, as it was first penned
and transmitted to a friend, the fifth is changed and in the place thereof this
incerted, and it concerns Answer.
the third instance given of the Synodicall Divines in the Synod of Dort. Now
it is already showed in the answer to the former discourse how immodestly the
Author carries himself, in charging that Synod with unwillingnesse to come
to the trial, who justified their proceedings in the judgment of all the
foreign Divines there present, for whereas the Remonstrants did once and
again profess that they could not in conscience any longer stay in the Synod,
unless it were provided for, that they might treat of Election and
reprobation. And that after that manner which they had set down in their
Theses and writings exhibited to the Synod; hereupon the Sinod to give them
satisfaction herein ordered, that their opinion not only concerning Election,
but also concerning reprobation should be weighed and examined: so far forth
as they in conscience should judge to be sufficient, for the glory of God, for
the edifying and quieting of the Church and all men's consciences; but as
touching the manner of proceeding herein, it perteyned to them to consider and
ordeine as they thought good. And it became not those who where cited to
appear, to prescribe unto the Sinod. This decree being read the 40 session
conteynes the altercation here abouts, between the Synod and them. They
forsooth would prescribe to the Synod, de modo agendi; The Synod must not unto
them.

The Synod hereupon intreates the judgment of foreign divines. And they all
with one consent profess that the Synod had granted the Remonstrants as much
liberty for the defense of their cause, as in Equity could be granted and
could well stand with the honor of the Synod. And therefore there is no cause
why the decree of the Synod should be altered, or why the Remonstrants should
complain or decline the Authority of the Synod; that nothing was put upon them
burden some to their consciences: And therefore it was in vain to pretend
scruples of Conscience, as in the Session 42 there is a representation made of
their unreasonable demand; namely in the first place to deal upon reprobation
etc: whereupon the opinion of foreign divines was required; as whether it was
fit to yield unto them in this, and to treat of reprobation before they treated
of Election, who declared by concurring suffrages that course (proposed by
them) to be most unreasonable: now let the reader judge how unshamefast that
crimination is, which this Author charge that Synod with, and consequently
all the the foreign divines therein assembled, who justified those Synodicall
proceedings with their unanimous consent. Surely this Author has an high
opinion of himself, and his own sufficiencies, who thinks this Bolt of his
soon shot, more worth then the concurrent verdict of all those divines, Chosen
as eminent persons by their several Churches, and sentunto that Sinod from
many places of Christendom. Now he who in the progress of his unshamefast
discourse, spares not thus to Tax a Synod and all the foreign Divines that
assembled therein, no mervell if he forbear not to charge the Contra
Remonstrants in the Hague conference with the same Crimination, though never so
injuriously; Thus indeed the Remonstrants in the Synod of Dort, Criminate
their adversaries as appears in the Synodalia Dodcacena page: 136. In the
conference at Hague the Contra-Remonstrants deprecated that they might not be
put to deal on Reprobation, and more at large page: 159. in the same writings;
We read how Festus Hommius one of the Contra-Remonstrants in that conference
at the Hague, hereupon stood up, Exposuitque paucis quod non bona fide haec de
illis dicerentur, how unfaithfully this relation was made, se libello supplice
non fuisse deprecatos ne de reprobatione ageretur; That they did not in their
supplication entreat that no disputation should be had of reprobation* and
therewithal the truth of the matter as formerly I have set down in answer to
the former discourse, and as for Beza in the conferrence with Iacobus Andreas
in the point of predestination: It is true at the first motion he declyned it,
and he gives his reasons, 1. namely that thy were not called by the prince of
Mompelgard to dispute on this Article but on another which was expressed in the
princes letters, as Iacobus Andreas acknowledges: 2 and accordingly they had
Commission from their Church that sent them, to dispute on that whereunto they
were called and not on any other. 3. and so they came provided to dispute on
that which was expressed in the Princes letters who invited them. 4. Then
again it was in a Lutheran assembly. 5. neither would Andeas yield to Beza's
motions that the conference might be transacted by writing. 6. nor that which
was to be delivered by them should be taken by notaries. 7. Yet they offered to
propose their doctrine on that Argument before the Prince, and to hear what
Jacobus Andreas had to say against it and promised to return him an answer
thereunto; Thirdly, consider it was not predestination alone, whereof they were
unwilling at that time and in that place to confer about, But two other
Articles also, namely as concerning Baptism, and Images in Churches; why then,
does not this Author plead as well for Images in Churches, as for the
conditional nature of reprobation: as well he may upon the same ground?
Fourthly, what sottishness possesses this Author to conclude, that because
Beza at such a time, and in such a place, and upon such and such terms, did
refuse to dispute thereon; Therefore all that profess the same doctrine with
Beza do refuse to come to trial there abouts, and consequently that doctrine
is suspectable of untruth; whereas it cannot be concluded of Beza simply that
he refused to come to a trial, because once at a certain time and in a
certain place, and in a conference upon certain terms he did refuse to come
to a trial: For my part, I refuse not to come to a trial with any of them
upon any particular: But I noe way think fit to entertain a conferrence here
about by words of mouth, but rather by writing; so it will be more quietly
carried, so it will be more free from aliene discourse; so each party shall
have time both duly to weigh the Adversaries Argument and with due
consideration to put in his answer thereunto; And is it not far more decent
that the holy things of God should be handled premeditately, rather then
subitaneously? Fistly, what if Beza were of opinion that God has chosen some
unto eternal life, and passed by others without any respect had to the
personal goodness of the one, or naughtiness of the other, and that this is
Saint Paule's doctrine, Rom: 9. This was Saint Austin's opinion also as Vossius
acknowledges in his history of Pelagian heresies p. 655. Now will any man
think him well in his wits who discourses after this manner; surely Austin's
doctrine concerning election and reprobation is suspectable of untruth; Because
Beza maintaining the same doctrine some 1200 years after, was unwilling to
come to a trial thereabouts at a certain time in a certain place, namely at
Mompelgard before the Duke of Wirtenberg? Lastly, observe the strange
inconsiderations of this Author; for the Author of the former discourse
promised the Gentleman his friend to whom he wrote, to give him the reason of
his change in opinion, not in this point only of reprobation, but in the other
points also, for he perceived he was become an Arminian: Now whereas he gives
him the reason of his change in one point only, declining all the rest, does he
not manifest his unwillingnesse to deal on all the other 4 points? And may not
we conclude after this Authors manner, that this betrays no small suspicion,
that certainly his cause is weak and ill grounded in all the rest? In like
manner does this Achates carry himself, he that helps of the other to make his
task for him. It is his usual course to deal only upon the point of
reprobation, as in this place; so in a writing of his to a certain Scholar,
and as I have seen under his hand; It seems he is well conceited of his
sufficiency on this point: And truly I am very glad to see what he can say
for himself, even on the point of reprobation That which follows is to little
purpose, save to show the plerofphorie of his common place-book: and how easily
it is for him to abound, not only in things necessary, but in things
unnecessary also: Therefore he tells us what Cicero writes of Epicurus, which
may with a far better grace be retorted upon himself then upon Beza, or the
Contra-Remonstrants at the Hague conferrence; or the Fathers of Dort, how
unfacetiously it is applied unto them I have already showed, and further it is
well known both by Calvin's, and Beza's writings, and by that which was done in
the Synod of Dort, set forth to the veiwe of all the world, that they have not
concealed their opinions from the world on those points controverted; All that
are able to read and understand Latin, may soon come accquainted with them:
And M. Hord dealing only upon reprobation which is but a part of one of the
five Articles, and forbearing to meddle with Election or any other of the five,
contrary to the promise made by him unto his friend, does he not hereby bewray
consciousnesse of his own insufficiency to meddle thereon? And like enough he
has learned this wisdom from his Abettor (and this is his course) who loves
to deal in hugger mugger, and sets others on work, contented to blow the
coals; yet walks gloriously at the light of his own fire, and the sparks
that he has kindled, vaunting (as I hear) that his piece cannot be answered,
and in such terms he commends it unto the Country.

In like manner let the indifferent Reader judge, whether, that which he
produces out of Lodovicus Vives be more against us, then against the Author
himself that produces it; for both Calvin, and Beza and generally our Divines
have publicly professed their opinions, not on predestination only, but on
reprobation also, and upon all other points controverted between us and the
Arminians; whereas this Auhour sculkes and pulls in his horns as if he dared
not to be seen on other points; only declares himself upon the point of
reprobation; I mean M. Horde; but as for the other which blows quicksilver
into him, he is loath to be known, as if his occupation were with Brontesque
Steropesque and nudus membra Pyracmon, to take pains to make thunderbolts for
Jupiter, or for Mercury rather; for he is content an other should be the chief
speaker. 5ly. The Jew he says, is loath to reason with the Christian touching
his law, and the Turk is forbidden to speak of his Alcoran; But have I showed
my self loath to reason with this Brontes, in any particular difference
between us, or with any among'st them that wears a head upon his shoulders? I
trust, I never shall, as long as I breath, As for this Author, the world is
witness how deeply guilty he is in this kind, contrary to his own promise:
But he may thank his prompter that he deals in this, and he indeed had made
noe such promise to to confine him, but out of his fox-like carriage, makes
choice to deal only on this, where he hopes to meet with a favorable wind
from vulgar and popular conceits, to to fill his fails to carry him
prosperously into their affections, be his Arguments never so weak: never so
insipid. Now it is well known unto him, that my answer to the former discourse
has now been in the the hands of others for the space of two years and a
half, and not the smallest passage thereof do I find answered here. And this
seconds conscience knows whether he has not been full well acquainted with
it, before this piece of his did see the light of the press: Now because this
alone might justly prove notoriously prejudicial to the whole, see what a
dog-trick has been played, to antedate the edition thereof, as if it were
printed Anno 1633, when it has been but a few months since this has been
known unto the world, that the Reader may imagine if it please him, that this
was printed before my answer was returned to the former discourse. And to what
purpose is the discourse brought to the Bulk, which that has at present, so
many odd things being inserted thereunto; but to provide for their indemnitie
that shall say, This was never it answered, whereat I wounder not a little,
namely at the cunning and crafty carriage of this second, who for good reason
may be accounted the first, in as much as he uses the other but as a
stalking-horse to promote his own game, I say I may, and do wounder not a
little at this, for he both carries himself and others boast of him, as if he
were some formidable Creature, and Lion like to affright all others that should
deal with him, when in very truth all his performances savor far more of
the Fox then of the Lion.

And it is also disstastfull to all the Greek Churches; Moulin in his Anotomy
speaking of the Supralapsarian doctrine; says, if it should be so that God
has reprobated men without the consideration of sin, or has M. Mason's
Additions p. 10. 11, 12, 13
ordained them to sin. Yet it is the part of a wise man to conceal these
things, or not to know them rather then to utter them: because, when they are
taught and defended they fill men's heads with sceuples, and give occasion to
the adversaries to the defaming the true religion.

The same may as truly be said of the Sublapsarian way, for as I have said,
they are in substance all one; And Sir Edwin Sands is of the same mind too;
for in his most excellent book caled A survay of the page 10.
State of Religion, in the western part of the world; speaking of the deadly
division between the Luthernas and the Calvinists in Germany, he has these
words; that, though ^he Palsgrave and Lansgrave have with great judgment and
wisdom, to slake those flames, imposed silence in that part to the Ministers
of their party, hoping the Charity and discretion of the other party would
have done the like; yet it falls out otherwise; for both the Lutheran Preachers
rail as bitterly against them in their pulpits as ever, and their Princes and
people have them in as great detestation; not forbearing to profess openly,
that they will return to the Papacy rather then ever admit that Sacrementary
and predestinary Pestilence. And as for the Grecians, we learn also by Sir
Edwin Sands his relation, that they do mightily dissent from the doctrines
touching the eternal Counsels of God, which Calvin (as some conceive) first
fully revealed or rather introduced into the Christian world, and some of his
friends page 11.
and followers have seconded; as thinking it very injurious to the goodness of
God, and directly immediately opposite to his very nature, In regard of which,
on of their Bishops has written a book against it, which has been sent to
Geneva and there received.

And to say on thing more, besides this infamy among Christians, it is very
probable that among the too many scandals given to the Jews by Christians
among whom they dwell; This doctrine is not on of the page 12.
least rubs in the way of their conversion. For they think it a bad opinion
(says the same judicious and learned Gentleman) which some of great name have
seemed to hold, that God in his everlasting and absolute pleasure should affect
the extreme misery of any of his Creatures, for the showing of his justice
and severitie in tormenting them, or that the calamity, casting a way and
damnation of some, should absolutely and necessarily redound more to his glory
then the felicity of them all, considering that his nature is mere goodness
and happiness, and has noe affinity with rigor and misery.

And secondly the determination of the end does necessarily involve the means
that preceeds the end, as page 13.
if a man before determined to damnation, he must unavoidably sin else he
could not be damned.

As touching this paticular of M. Moulyn: I have addressed an answer puctually
Answer.
thereunto in my Vindiciae amongst my degressions touching predestination, yet
I am content to say something concerning the point it self and his judgment
thereupon. Reprobation has two parts, which this Author most judiciously
confounds, the one is God's decree to deny grace, the other is his decree to
inflict damnation; As touching the first, the very execution thereof proceeds
merely according to God's pleasure, howmuch more the decree it self, which is
eternal, and cannot possibly have any precedaneous thereunto; whereas the
execution is temporal, and temporal things may have somewhat precedaneous
thereunto. Now that the execution thereof is merely according to God's good
pleasure is apparent; the execution thereof being no other then the denial of
grace; And as God of his mere pleasure gives faith and repentance to whom he
will; so of his mere pleasure he denies it unto others; otherwise grace should
be conferred according unto works, which was condemned in the Synod of
Palestine, Pelagius himself subscribing thereunto above 1200 years ago, and
all along afterward it was condemned in diverse Synods gatherd together for
suppressing of the Pelagian Heresy. Now did M. Moulin think it noe wise part
to publish this doctrine, That grace is not given according unto works; but
according to the mere pleasure of God? Nothing less; Saint Paul plainly
professing that God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will, he hardens.
Come we to reprobation as it signifies God's decree to inflict damnation
without consideration of sin, our adversaries would feign shape our opinions
thus, and none more eager this way, then this Author, I mean him that is
thought to be the suggester at first, and since the Interpolator and Promotor
of all this; But this is a most notorious untruth; nay how can we maintain
this, who embrace the definition of reprobation given by Aquinas, where he
says, that repobation includes a will to permit sin, and to infer
damnation for sin, so does M. Perkins, and him have I justified against
Arminius in my Vindiciae; And not any one of our Divines does maintain that
God intends to damn any man but for sin, and final perseverance therein
without repentance. And the former point concerning the first act of
reprobation, being granted, which neither Sir Edwin Sands, nor any Lutheran
that I know, denies; the doctrine concerning this latter act of reprobation
will be found to contain noe difficulty at all, forasmuch as we utterly deny
that God either does inflict, or ever did decree to inflict damnation according
to his mere pleasure; but merely for final continuance in sin without
repentance. Now let every sober Reader consider, whether there be any
harshnesse in all this: But as M. Moulin discourses here, so did the
Massilienses of old concerning Austin's doctrine, as which they would not have
at all broached, as appears in the Epistle of Prosper. -- Yet I commend this
Author for his ingenuous confession, that the same may be said of the
Sublapsarian way. But to our prejudice he tells us that Sir Ed: Sands is of
the same mind, and therefore considering the excellency of the book, written
by him, whereunto we may add the excellency of the discourse written by this
Author; let us for the credit and transcendent sufficiency of these two,
renounce not Calvin and Beza only, (poor Snakes as they were) but the whole
Synod of Dort; and all the outlandish divines assembled there, and manifesting
their concurrance in opinion with those Synodicall Divines, yea and Fulke and
Whitaker, and the Universitie of Cambridge as they were then affected, when
they drove Barret to a recantation; Yet Sir Edwin Sands in the place produced,
betraies not his own judgment, but makes relation of the bitterness of
Lutherans in opposing Calvinists: In like manner both Jews and Gentiles did
oppose Christians even unto blood, for preaching Christ crucified, which was a
scandal to the one, foolishness unto the other. And shall the truth of
Christianity be any whit the worse thought of for this? why then shall our
Doctrine of predestination and reprobation be suspected as untrue, because the
Lutheran party, do also bitterly oppose it? especially considering, that we
with Austine no otherwise maintain predestination then as it depends and is
grounded upon this, that grace is not given according unto works, as Austine
professes to have been his opinion, de bono perseverantiae, cap. 14. And we
are ready to renounce whatsoever contradicts this: and the Lutherans
themselves profess concurrently with us, that grace is not given according
unto works. And by the way observe the Lutheran spleen is exercised not only
against the predestinary pestilence, (as they call it) but the Sacramentarie
pestilence also. That is, against their doctrine who oppose their ubiquitie and
consubstantiation, yet in the very next page the same Knight affirms, that all
the Lutherans are not carried with the same stern humor, but they only who
are called Lutherani rigidi, and that the greater part perhaps which are the
molles Lutherani, are quiet enough, neither account they otherwise of the
Calvinists, then as of erring brethren; whom the rigids have (as is said)
threatened to excomunicate as Schismitiques and Heretics. -- 3 The Grecians
are said to oppose the doctrine of Calvin in the point of predestination; yet
we know our English Divines subscribed unto the same Doctrine in the Synod of
Dort; together with all the foreign Divines there assembled, and the sum
thereof is but this, that God, both in the election of some, and preterition of
others, had noe respect to the personal goodness of the one, and personal
naughtiness of the other. And that this was the very doctrine of Austine, and
of Saint Paul also in the opinion of Austine, Vossius acknowledeth, and Austine
professes that this doctrine herein is shaped merely according to the rule so
generally received in the Church of God against Pelagians, that grace is not
given according unto merits, de bono perseve: cap. 15. -- 4. Concerning the
Jews, this doctrine of ours, this judicious (not Sir Edwin Sands) thinks it
probable that does hinder their conversation: And indeed that learned Knight
does profess, that they are opposite to the doctrine here recited by this
Author, and in the same sentence he professes them in like manner opposite to
our doctrine, in maintaining that the devil and his Angels shall be cast into
everlasting fire; for thus goes Sir Edwin's relation, as they think it a bad
opinion which some men seem to hold, that God in his everlasting and absolute
power should affect the extreme misery of any of his Creatures as here it
lies, so contrary wise, they think with Origin, that Hell in the end shall
utterly be abolished; and that the devils themselves after a long course of
bitter repentance, and punishment shall find mercy at his hands, that did
create them: But as touching our difference from this in this particular; This
Author does not express ought so much as probable, to hinder their
conversion; as touching the former he has; for that served his turn, this
does not, and his wit and wisdom being so nere of kin, noe mervaile if he
makes the one to perform service of love to the other But let me say something
concerning the opinion it self here related, as in the first place; That God
does not effect the extreme misery of his creatures in his absolute pleasure,
what is the doctrine opposite hereunto but this, namely that God decrees to
damn no man but for sin, and not according to his absolute pleasure? Now
what one of our Divines was ever known to contradict this; and to affirm that
God intends to damn many of his creatures not for their sins, but of his
own absolute pleasure? for my part I never read any that maintained this: But
we generally say that God in electing some and passing by others, as touching
the conferring of grace, proceeded and decreed, and that from everlasting to
proceed, not according to men's works, but according to his absolute pleasure;
now this was Austin's judgment as well as ours; and Saint Paul's too, in the
opinion of Austine, as Vossius acknowledges in the place formerly cited. And
Saint Paul speaks plainly, when he says, God has mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he hardens, and as plainly in saying, That, before the Children
were borne, or had done good or evil, that election might stand not of works
but of him that calls, it is said that the elder shall serve the younger, As
it is written Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, Rom: 9. 11, 12. And I
durst appeal to every sober man's consciencewhether one of these Jews in
reading this would not as redily condemn Saint Paul himself, as they condemn
us: As for the other part of the doctrine here proposed, namely that the
damnation of some should redound more to God's glory, then the felicity of them
all. I answer that it is as clear as the light, that the glory of God in the
way of vindicative justice had not at all appeared, if all had been saved, no
nor the riches of his glory upon the Vessels of mercy, whom he had prepared
unto glory, if God had not suffered with long patience some vessels of wrath
prepared to destruction, if we believe Saint Paul Rom: 9 22, 23: rather then
the Jews: and it is apparent that the Lord God, who made allthings for
himself, took this course, namely, to make even the wicked against the day of
evil, and accordingly as to show mercy on whom he will, so Prrov. 16. 4.
to harden whom he will, also Rom: 9. 18: otherwise as I have often said, grace
should be conferred according to merits, that is according unto works, which
is expressly contradictory both to the word of God. 2 Timothy: 1. 9. Tit. 3. 5. And
to the decrees of Synods and Counsels, all along against the Pelagians. ^ 5. I
willingly grant that the determination of the end does necessarily involve the
means, that not only preceed but procure the end. But I will utterly deny that
sin is the means of damnation, we say rather that permission of sin is the
means, whence notwithstanding it follows, not that sin shall come to pass
unavoidably, but rather avoidably; whether we consider the free will of man or
the decree of God; for every particular sinful act is a natural thing, and
undoubtetdly man has free will as to do, so to abstain from doing any
particular Act: and albeit God has determined that these particular sinful
Acts (instance the particular outrages committed against the holy Son of God
by Herod, Pontius Pilate, together with the Gentiles, and people of Israel,
Acts 5. 28.) shall come to pass by his permission; yet seeing withal he has
ordained the^ to come to pass contingently that follows that they shall come
to pass in such a manner, as joined with a possibility of not co^ing to pass,
otherwise they should come to pass, not contingently, but necessarily. But it
is grown to be this Authors natural genius miserably to overreach; while he
keeps himself to his own forms inshaping the opinion of his adversaries,
impatient to be beaten out of them and to have his veteres avias a pulmone
repelli, oldgrandmothers vain conceits to be pulled out of Lastly this Author
shapeth us to make damnation an end intended by God, which we conceive to be a
very shallow project; we know nothing but Gods own glory that can be this end:
And therefore even there where Solomon professes that God made the wicked
against the day of Evil: herewithall acknowledges that God made all things
forhimselfe. Pro: 16. 4.


At length we have gotten clear aboard to come acquainted with this Authors
full discourse, and not by patches, as hitherto we have done. For here he
promises to acquaint us with the reasons that have convinced him of the
untruth of absolute Reprobation as it is carried the upper way and like a
Martialist, a man at arms, he tells us they fight against it, and thus the
interpolator discourses.

The first part of the first Argument against the supralapsarians.
sect: 1.
They are drawn ab incommodo from the greater evils and inconveniences, which
issue from it naturally: M. Mason's Additions p. 14. 15. 16.
which may be referred to two maine heads. 1 The dishonor of God. 2 The
overthrow of religion and government.

It dishououreth God. For it charge him deeply with two things, (no ways
agreeable to his nature.) 1 Men's Eternal torments in Hell. 2 Their sins on
Earth.

First It charge him with Men's eternal torments in Hell, and makes him to
be the prime, principal, 2nd invincible cause of the damnation of Millions of
miserable souls: The prime cause, because it reports him to have appointed
them to destruction of his own voluntary disposition, antecedent to all
deserts in them; and the Principal and invincible cause, because it makes the
Damnation of Reprobates to be necessary and unavoydable thorough Gods absolute
and uncontrollable decree; and so necessary that they can no more escape it
then poor Astyanax could avoid the breaking of his neck, when the Graecians
tumbled him down from the Tower of Troy.

Now this is an neavy charge, contrary to scripture, Gods nature, and sound
Reason. 1 To Scripture, which makes man the Principal, nay the only cause (in
opposition to God) of his own ruin. Thy destruction is of thy self o
Israel, but in me is thine help. As I live says the Lord, I will not the
death of the wicked etc. Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye dye He does not
afflict willingly, nor greive the Children of men. To which speech for
likeneile sake I will join one of Prospers. Gods predestination is to many the
Hos: 13. 9. Ezec: 33. 11. Lament: 3. 33:
cause of standing, to none of falling. 2 It is contrary to Gods nature, who
sets forth himself to be a God merciful, gracious, long suffering, abundant
in goodness etc. And he is acknowledged to be so by King David. Thou Lord art
good and merciful, and of great Kindness to all them that call upon thee: And
by the Prophets Joell, Jonah, and Michah. He is gracious and merciful, slow to
anger, and of great Kindness. Resp: ad 12. Object: Vincent: Exodus: 34. 6.
And who says Micah, is a God like unto thee, that takes away iniquity etc.
He retains not his wrath for ever because mercy pleases him.

3 It Is contrary also to sound reason, which cannot but argue such a Decree of
extreme cruelty and consequently remove it from the father of mercyes. We
cannot in reason think that any man in the world can so far put off humanity
and nature, as to resolve with himself to marry and beget Children, that Ps:
86. 5.
after they be borne and have lived a while with him, he may hang them up by
the tongues, tear their flesh with scourges, pull it from their bones, with
burning pincers, or put them to any cruel tortures, that by Joel: 2. 13. Ion:
4. 2. Micah. 7. 18.
thus torturing them he may show what his Authority and power is over them.
Much less can we believe without great violence to reason, that the God of
mercy can so far forget himself as out of his absolute pleasure to ordain
such infinite multitudes of his Children, made after his own image, to
everlasting fire; and create them one after another, that after the end of a
short life here, he might torment them without end hereafter, to show his power
and soveraingty over them. If to destroy the righteous with the wicked,
temporally, be such a piece of injustice, that Abraham removes it from God
with an Absit, will thou destroy the righteous with the wicked? that be far
from thee O Lord. shall not the judge of all the world do right? How Gen: 18.
25.
deeply (may we think) would that good man have detested one single thought,
that God resolves upon Answer.
the destruction of many innocent souls eternally in hell fire.

Here this Author carries himself like another Ptolomeus Ceraunus; or as if
he had some chief place in the lightning legion, not by his prayers, but by
his discourse, he seems to thunder and to lighten all along. When the Lord
appeared to Elias, he was neither in the mighty wind, nor in the earthquake,
nor in the fire, but in the still and soft voice. I hope to prove all this to
be but Ignis fatuus; Mountebancks use to make great ostentation and crackes,
but commonly they end in mere impostures, and it is no hing strange, when men
opposing the grace of God, loose their own wits, and please themselves in the
confusion of their own senses. For when men are in love with their own
errors, they hate the light; yea the very light of nature in the distinct
notice of it, would be an offense unto them. Can this Author be ignorant of
that which every mean Sophister knows, that there be four kinds of causes,
Material, Formal, Efficient, Final; that he should expatiate thus in
speaking of a cause without all distinction? Is it strange that God should be a
prime cause, and principal in execution Deuteronomy. 32. 35. Ps: 94. 1. Rom: 13. 4.
of vengeance? Does he not profess saying vengeance is mine, and I will repay?
Is he not called the God to whom vengeance belongs? And are not his
magistrates his Ministers to execute vengeance temporal here in this world?
And can any sober man dout whether God be invincible whom the Apostle
pronounces to be irresistible? Again an Rom: 9. 19.
efficient cause admits farther distinction; for it is either Physical or
Moral: Physical is that which really works or executes any thing: as every
tradesman has his work, which his hands do make; so God has his work,
which he executes, and his work is judgment Ier. 29.
as well as mercy. I am the Lord which show mercy and judgment and
righteousness; for in these things I delight, says the Lord; and he would
have us when we do glory, glory in this, that we do understand and know him
to be such a God. A Moral efficient is twofold, being only of a moveing
nature, to move others to do somewhat; as namely either by persuading, or by
meriting or deserving: He that persuades moves an other to do some what; he
that meriteth, thereby moves another, either to reward him or punish him. Now
to walk in the light of this distinction, and not to please our selves by
walking in darkness; though God be the prime, principal, and invincible cause
of man's damnation in the kind of a cause efficient physical (which should not
seem strange to an ordinary Christian, who knows full well that vengeance is
God's peculiar work, as the Judge of all the world, and that he delights in
the execution thereof) yet this hinders not but that Gen: 18. 25.
man may be the cause of his own damnation in the way of a meritorious cause,
justly deserving it. Omnis poena Deum habet Authorem, All punishment has God
for the Author of it: This is a principle acknowledged both by the Arminians
and Vasquez the Jesuit; but never is punishment inflicted on any by the hands
of God, save on those who formerly have deserved it. Consider we farther, as
touching the several kinds of causes formerly mentioned; if the question be
which is the principal, Aristotle answers, that this is not confined to any
one kind of them; sometimes the material cause, sometimes the formal cause,
sometimes the efficient, sometimes the final cause is the demonstrative cause,
the cause propter quam, the cause by virtue where of the effect has its
existence; but this peculiar and special cause is described thus, It is that
whereby satisfactory answer is made to the question demanding why such a thing
is. Now in execution of punishment or condign vengeance, this satisfactory
answer is made by representing the meritorious cause, never by representing the
efficient cause: as for example, if it be demanded why such a malefactor is
executed upon the gallows; no sober man will answer, because the Sheriff
commanded it to be so, or because the Judge would have it so; but because he
robbed upon the high way, or committed some criminal fact or other, which is
capital by the laws of our land, and to be punished with hanging upon the
gallows. In like sort if question be made why devils or wicked men are
damned, is it our doctrine to refer the cause hereof to the mere pleasure of
God? Do not all confess that God inflicts damnation upon the^ merely for
their sins and transgressions wherein they have continued unto death without
repentance? Yet we acknowledge that God could have taken them off from their
sins while they lived if he would, by giving them repentance, as he has
dealt with us, and that merely of his free grace. For we willingly confess that
our sins are our own, but our faith is not, our repentance is not. When I
say our own, I mean in respect that they are of our selves; otherwise we
acknowledge both faith and repentance to be our own accipiendo, in as much as
we receive them; but they are God's gifts, and so they are his dando, in as much
as he gives them as Remigius speaks. Now what is become of this Authors
pompous discourse? Is it not the like the cracking of thorns in the fire,
making a great noise; but the light of distinction, like fire, sets an end unto
it, and makes it appear in its own likeness, and proves nothing but a squib.
For albeit God in his decree makes the damnation of reprobates to be necessary
and unavoidable; yet seeing he makes it not to fall on any but for their
sins, what color of dishonor unto God, in ordaining that Judas shall
necessarily and unavoidably be damned for betraying the Son of God, and
afterward most desperately murdering himself? If hereupon he could no more
avoid his damnation, then Astionax could the breaking of his neck, when the
Grecians tumbled him down from the tower of Troy; will any man that is not
bereaved of common sense make strange of this? It is true God did appoint both
Judas and all other wicked persons, that never break off their sins by
repentance, unto destruction, of his own voluntary disposition. For God works
all things according to the counsel of his will, and if Ephesians: 1. 11.
it pleased him he could annihilate them upon the fresh foot of any sin; or
after they have suffered the vengeance of hell fire, as many years in hell as
they lived here in sin; yea and the devils in hell; as Origin was of
opinion; and the Jews at this day are of the same by Sir Edwin Sands his
relation; whether this Author be of the same or not, I know not. And lastly we
willingly confess that the decree of God was antecedent to the deserts Ephesians: 1.
4.
of men; for reprobation is as ancient as election; and election was made
before the foundation of the world, if we believe Saint Paul rather then any
other, who either by word or deed does manifest himself to be of a contrary
opinion. Still damnation is inflicted by God only for sin, and in degree
answerable unto their sins; and only because of their sins as a meritorious
cause thereof; though God makes use of it to his own ends and the
manifestation of his own glory as Solomon professes namely, that God made all
things for himself, even the wicked against the day of evil. And Saint Paul
tells, that as the Lord suffers with long patience the vessels of wrath
prepared to destruction that Prove: 16. 4.
he might show his wrath and make his power known. So likewise another reason
hereof he specifies to be this. That he might declare the riches of his glory
upon the vessels of mercy which he Rom: 9.
has prepared unto glory. For when we shall behold the unspeakable misery
brought upon others by reason of their sins; how rich will God's glory
appear unto us, when we consider 23.
that had it not been for his free grace delivering us from sin, we had been
swallowed up of the same sorrows. And thus Alvarez writes, disput. III. The
glory of God's mercy in his elect, and in like manner the manifestation of
divine justice on Reprobates; is truly and properly the final cause why God
did permit sins both in Reprobates and Angels. And he proves it out of this
passage of Saint Paul. So Aquin: 1 p. page 23. art. 5. This is the reason says
he why God has chosen some and Reprobated others, that representation might be
made of Gods goodness toward the Elect in the way of mercy pardoning them,
and on the Reprobates in Rom: 22. 23.
the way of justice punishing them. And Alphonsus Mendoza a Scotist concurres
with them in this; and we see they make Saint Paul's doctrine their foundation.
And indeed albeit at the day of judgment there will be found a vast difference
between the Elect and Reprobates, the one having departed this life in the
state of faith repentance, the other in infidelity and impenitency, in such
sort as God will bestow on his elect eternal life by way of reward, and
inflict eternal death on the other by way of punishment; yet in conferring the
grace of regeneration, of faith and repentance upon the one, and denying the
same graces unto the other, the Lord carries himself not according to men's
works, but merely according to the pleasure of his own will, showing mercy on
whom he will and hardening whom he will; in which respect he is said to make men
in what condition he will; as Rom: Rom: 9. 18.
9. 20. Shall the thing formed say to it that formed it, why have thou made me
thus? Though indeed he makes but one sort of them after a new fashion, leaving
the other in the state of natural corruption wherein he finds them: And
likewise is compared by the same Apostle to a Potter, who out of the same lump
makes one vessel unto honor, and an other unto dishonor. But to return, I
have, I trust, sufficiently showed that in all this which he has delivered,
when things are rightly understood, and duly considered, there is nothing found
alien from the holy nature of God, no more then it is repugnant to his holy
nature to decree and execute vengeance, condign vengeance, even the vengeance
of damnation on men for their sins; in such sort that it shall unavoidably
overtake all those that break not off their sins by repentance before their
death. Nothing more agreeable to Scripture, nor to the nature of God revealed
unto us in holy Scripture then this, and consequently nothing more agreeable to
Christian reason. But as for natural reason; God forbid we should make that
the rule of our faith, as concerning the resurrection of the dead and the
powers of the world to come, the rewards of heaven, and the torments of hell,
where the worm never dies, and the fire never goes out. And may it not seem
very strange, that a Christian and a Divine, and one magnified by the Arminian
party for great abilities should undertake to prove this doctrine to be
contrary to Scripture, to the nature of God and to sound reason.

Well let us proceed to observe how well he performs what he undertakes. And
here he says. 1. That the Scripture makes man the principal, nay the only
cause (in opposition to God) of his own ruin. We answer, the Scripture makes
man the only cause of his own ruin in the meritorious cause; thus man's
destruction is of himself; But this nothing hinders God from being the cause
why vengeance, destruction and damnation are executed upon man; for he is the
God to whom vengeance belongs, and he delights as well in showing judgment,
as in showing mercy. Indeed did we maintain that God damnes the Reprobate
whether man or Angels of his mere pleasure, this Argument of his were
seasonable. We know full well that God of his free grace shows mercy; but
judgment only upon provocation, and herein he proceeds slowly too; for he is
slow to wrath, and easy to be entreated. Yet God's afflicting is not always
for sin; neither does it always proceed in the way of punishment: when we
suffer for Christ we have cause to rejoice that he counts us worthy to suffer
for his name; neither were the afflictions of Job brought upon him for his
sins, but for the trial of his faith, and to make him an example of patience
to all succeeding generations; and as for that of Ezech: I will not the death
of the wicked; It is the usual course of men of this Authors spirit thus to
render the words, whereas our last English translation renders them thus, I
have noe pleasure in the death of the wicked. Now as a man may will that
wherein he takes noe pleasure; as a sick-man takes a bitter potion sometimes
for the recovery of his health; so God may will that wherein he takes noe
delight. And whether it be meant of first or second death it cannot be denied
but God wills it; for he works all things according to the council of his
own will. Then again Ephesians: 1. 11.
if we consider the infliction of death as an execution of judgment, God not
only wills this, but delights therein also, as it is expressed. That of
Prosper is nothing to the Ier. 9. 24.
present purpose, we treating here of the cause of damnation, not of sinning;
we say God is the God to whom vengeance belongs, not to whom sin belongs.
Besides sin, as sin, has noe efficient cause at all, but defficient, as
Austine has delivered many hundred years ago. It is true, it is in Gods
power to preserve any man from any sin; it is in his power to take any man
off from any sinful course by repentance, if he will; but he is bound to none,
he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens; and in all this
he is not culpable.

In the next place he tells us; It is contrary to God's nature but what? To
damn men for their sins neverbroken offby repentance? for all our divines
maintain that God is Author of damnation to none but such; and to such God is
not merciful nor gracious, nor suffers them any longer, nor shows any
goodness toward them; while they lived he did; yea much long suffering and
patience, inviting them thereby to repentance; yea and by his; word also
inviting many; but after they dye in sin, therewithal an end is set to the
dispensation of Gods gracious proceedings with them. Much less do we deny him
to be good and merciful and of great kindness to all that call upon him. For
Gods mercy does not exercise it self by necessity of nature, but by freedom
of will; yet he hears the cry of Ravens and not a Sparrow falls to the
ground without the providence of our heavenly father, and the very Lions
roaring after their prey, do seek their meat at the hands of God: These
mercyes are temporal; but as for spiritual mercyes, for the working and
cherishing of Sanctification these are not extended unto all, but to some only,
even to whom he will. And accordingly the elect of God are called vessels of
mercy. Yet to the Rom: 9. 18. Rom: 9. 23.
execution of damnation on any he proceeds not till after death, and stays no
longer; so slow to wrath he is toward the worst, and no more slow to the best
of them. Who is a God like unto thee, says Micah, that takes away iniquity?
here this Author out of wisdom makes a stop, leaving out that which
follows and passing by the transgressions of the remnant of his heretage:
That restriction belike he did not so well brook; but having leapt over that;
he is content to take in that which follows, he retains not his wrath for
ever, because mercy pleases him: to wit, toward the remnant of his heritage,
of his people. But I hope naught of this can hinder God from being the Author
of damnation to all that dye in sin without repentance without any prejudice
to his holiness, though he retains wrath for ever against them.

We come to his reason which he calls sound, saying that it cannot but argue
such a decree of extreme cruelty. But what decree? of that whereby he has
decreed to damn all that continue in sin without repentance? For to none
other has God decreed damnation in the opinion of any of our divines. But that
which he co^mends as sound let us examine. We cannot in reason think, says he,
that any man in the world can so far put off humanity and nature as to resolve
with himself to marry and beget Children, that after they are borne and have
lived a while with him, he may hang them up by the tongues, tear their flesh
with scourges, pull it from their bones with burning pincers, or put them to
any cruel tortures, that by thus torturing them, he may show what his authority
and power is over the^. Much less can we believe that God should ordain
infinite multitudes of his Children to everlasting fire. Is it credible that
this Author himself does not believe that very doctrine which here he
impugneth Does he not believe that God has ordained infinite multitudes of
those who^ he calls Gods Children to everlasting fire? does he not I say
believe this as well as we? Does he not believe that whosoever dies in sin
without repentance shall be damned? does he not believe that God of his mere
pleasure has made such a decree? It is increedible he should not be of the
same faith in this. Are not all Gods ordinances made of his mere pleasure?
could he not both ordain and execute the annihilation of sinners if it pleased
him? and that either immediately upon the committing of sin, or after some
certain years enduring the punishment of hell fire. And as for hell fire it
self, could not he qualify or increase the tormenting nature thereof as he
should think good? All this I nothing doubt but he believes, unless with
Origin and the Jews, he be of opinion that the fire provided for the devil
and his angels is not everlasting: what madness then, what phrensy possesses
him so to dispute against us, as to dispute against himsefe? Undoubtedly this
Author would have his Reader so propitious unto him, as to understand and
interpret him beyond that which his own words do import; as namely thus, That
God has not only of his absolute pleasure made such an ordinance, that all who
dye in sin without repentance shall be damned; but rather thus; That God has
ordained that Infinite multitudes of his children shall be damned, not for
their own sins, but only out of his absolute pleasure. For this is generally
the unshamefast carriage of men of this Authors spirit. Now what one divine of
ours can he show to have maintained this? Yet this is the imputation he
charge upon us, that by our doctrine God resolves upon the destruction of
many innocent soul, eternally in hell fire. Yet this is a very Amphibologious
expression. For when were they innocent in his meaning? when they were damned?
If this be in his meaning, can he name any divine of ours that affirms this?
Or does he mean they were innocent when God entertaind this resolution? And
does not he as well as we maintain that there was a time, when Angels were
innocent though afterward they became devils; yet both then and from all
eternity God had entertained such a resolution; For his decrees were
everlasting as we say; neither has he hitherto manifested his opinion to the
contrary; whether he maintains such an opinion secretly in his breast, I know
not; If he does, and shames to declare it let him pull himself by the nose; in
the passages he produces out of Cicero concerning Epicurus, and out of Virus
concerning such like page: 9. Yet we do not say they were innocent when God
made his decree of Reprobation. I should show my self an Ignoramus to say so,
We say they were neither innocent nor nocent then, forasmuch as till the
Creation no Creature had any being but God's decree of Election (and
consequently Ephesians: 1. 4,
of Reprobation also) had its being before the foundation of the world. 2 This
manner of reasoning which this Author calls sound, I have found long a go
in Castalio, as superficiary a Divine as ever put pen to paper. And by the way
observe, all the Devils and Damned men he calls Gods Children: this is the
language of their Court. Now what Gal: 3. 26. Gal: 4. 6. Rom: 8. 14. verse. 17.
one Divine of ours maintains that any of Gods children are destinated to
eternal fires? S. Paul tells us We are all the sons of God by faith in Christ
Jesus: and because we are sons, God has sent the spirit of his son into our
hearts crying Abba Father; And that as many as are led by the spirit of God.
And if we are children we are also heirs, even the heirs of God. and heirs
annexed with Christ. And this distinction to wit the children of God, and 1 Io:
3. 10.
children of the Devil, has been ever since the fall of man, as S. John
signifies where he says. In this are the children of God known, and the
children of the Devil, whosoever does not righteousness is not of God,
neither he that loves not his brother. And anon after Io: 8. 49. Gen: 4. 26.
he gives instance in Cain and Abell. Yea and our Savior gives us to
understand the same, where he says to the Jews, Ye are of your father, the
Devil, and the lusts of the father ye will do. And whereas we read that in
the days of Enosh men began to call upon the name of the Lord; forthwith we
read c. 6. 2. (For the 5. chap. comeing in between contains only the
Genealogy of the world from Adam) of the distinction between the sons of God
Ioh. 37. 7. Mat: 2. 10.
and daughters of men, thus, the sons of God saw the daughters of men that
they were fair, and they took, them wives of that they liked. It it is true,
Adam is called the son of God in reference to creation; And noe marvel; For
he was created in the state of grace: so likewise the Angels for the same
reason. When the stars of the morning praised them, and all the Children of
God rejoiced. It is true we thus read, Have we not all one father? has not one
God made us? Piscator interprets these two interrogatories into one: As if God
in the first place were represented as a common father unto all; but our Geneva
Divines do not, but the name of father in this place they refer to Abraham.
And in not referring it unto God they have the consent of the Jewish Rabbines
Aben Ezra and David Kimhi; who yet more hansomly do refer it to their common
father Jacob, then to Abraham, the Covenant of God including all the Sons of
Jacob; not so all the Sons of Abraham, no nor the Sons of Isaak but Jacob
only. 3. Consider is it decent to conform the courses of God with the courses
of men? May not we consider in like manner against the Lord's foreknowledge, as
well as against his decree, and reason thus: what man of common humanity would
resolve with himself to marry and beget children, did he foresee their wicked
courses, and what will become of them for it, namely, to be condemned to
everlasting fire with the Devil and his Angels? what shall we therefore
conclude that God did not foresee the wicked ways and ungodly courses of all
Reprobates, that they would continue in them and die in their sins without
all faith in Christ and true repentance toward God? And if he did foresee what
would be the ends of them in case he did create them and bring them forth into
the world, yet seeing he would nevertheless create them and bring them forth
into the world, one after another in their several times and ages, shall we
brand the holy name of God, and reproach him for unnaturallnesse, and barbarous
cruelty? Rather I will say what means this Auhour so unconscionably to
corrupt the state of the question, by mentioning only the shortness of their
life, and utterly concealing the wickedness of their life, the only
meritorious cause of their torments which they suffer, and accordingly to shape
the ends intended by God, to be only the demonstration of his power and
Soveraingtie over them, without all mention of his justice; whereas we say that
in the inflicting of damnation, the chief glory which, God manifests is only
the glory of his justice proceeding herein according to a law which himself
has made (as most fit it is the Creator should give laws to his creature)
and the law is this, whosoever believes and repents shall be saved,
whosoever dies in sin without repentance shall be damned. Not one of our
Divines (that I know) maintains, that inflicting damnation, the Lord proceeds
merely according to the good pleasure of his will, in the communicating of
faith and repentance, we willingly confess the Lord proceeds merely according
to the good pleasure of his will; and it is express Pelagianisme to affirm
that grace is given according unto works. And herein this Author is very well
content to walk in the dark and conceal his most corrupt opinion most
opposite to the grace of God. But that damnation should be inflicted without
respect to sin as the meritorious cause thereof what one of our Divines can
he produce that affirms? Yet thus he is pleased to disguise our opinion (when
he finds the poverty of his strength to wage fair war) and so expose it to
the hatred of me; as if God ordained to damn men not for their sins, but of
his own mere pleasure. Thus of old the enemies of the Gospel dealt with
Christians: for first they would cloth them with bear skins, and then set
dogs upon them. All that he has to say to excuse his shameless crimination
(though so much he does not express here) is only this, that our Divines
maintain the decree of damnation to preceed the foresight of sin. Yet this
is untrue of the most part of them, who premit both the foresight of sin
original before reprobation from grace, and of sin actual before the decree
of damnation; I willingly confess for my part, that I concur with neither;
and if I should, I should withal make the decree of permitting of sin to
preceed the decree of damnation, for which I see no reason; but yet I do not
make the decree of permitting sin to follow the decree of damnation. I hold
these decrees to besimultaneous, thus, that God at once decrees both to create
men, and suffer them all to fall in Adam, and to bring them forth in their
several generations into the world, and to bestow the grace of faith and
repentance upon the one, and so to save them, and to deny the same grace unto
others, finally permitting them in their sinful courses, and so to damn them
for sin; and all to manifest the glory of his mercy to the one, and the glory
of his justice on the other, yea and his soveraingty too, but wherein? not in
rewarding the one with Salvation and inflicting damnation on the other; but
only in giving grace to the one, and not to the other. And all the difference
between our Divines is merely in apice Logico, a point of Logic To wit, as
touching the right ordering of decrees, concerning ends, and means tending to
the ends; all concurring in this, that, God has mercy on whom he will, in
bestowing faith and repentance upon them, and whom he will he hardens, in
denying the same graces unto others. Now when this Author shall fairly prove
that according to our opinion, God destroys the righteous with the wicked;
then and not till then, shall he prove that our faith differs from the faith
of Abraham. What Divine of ours was ever known to affirm that God damneth any
one that dies in repentance? Yet it cannot be denied but that temporal
judgments befall the righteous, as well as the wicked. When the Lord swept away
70 thousand with a three days pestilence in the land of Israel; was it not
possible thinks this Author, that any of God's dear children should perish by
that pestilence? To be carried away into captivity by an heathenish nation, I
should think is a greater calamity then to dye of the pestilence; yet those
who were carried away into Babylon with King Iechoniah, the Lord represents by
Ier. 24.
the basket of good figgs; and those the Lord professes that he had sent them
away into Babylon for their good. Were all damned will this Author say, that
perished in the flood? Saint Peter seems to be of an other opinion, where he
says, To this purpose was the Gospel preached, also to the end that they
might be condemned also to men in the flesh, but might 1 P. t. 4. 6.
live according to God in the spirit. Truly I do not say so much of them that
perished in the conspiracy of Corah, when the earth opened her mouth and
swallowed up the conspirators, nor them only but their wives and children also,
especially considering that inter pontem and fontem, mercy may be sought and
mercy may be found.

Sect. 2. Containing the first Objection with the answer thereunto devised, and
my reply thereupon and an answer thereunto.
M. Mason's Additons p. 16. 17.
But God say some is sovereign Lord of all creatures, they are truly and
properly his own. Cannot he therefore dispose of them as he pleases and do
with his own what he will? Object.


The question is not what an almighty sovereign power can do to poor
vassalls, but what a power that is just and good may do. By the power of a
Lord his absolute and naked power he can cast away the whole Answer.
mass of mankind; for it is not repugnant to Omnipotency or soveraingty, but
by the power of a Judge, to wit, that actual power of his, which is always
clothed with goodness and justice, he cannot. For it is not compatible with
these properties in God to appoint men to hell of his mere will and pleasure;
no fault at all of theirs preexisting in his eternal mind.

It is not compatible with justice which is a constant will of rendering to
every one his due; and that is vengeance to whom vengeance belongs, namely to
the obstinate and impenitent. God is good, says Saint Austine, and God is
just, he may without any desert free men from punishment, because he is good;
But he cannot without evil deserving condemn any man, because he is just. In
an other place also he says, If God be believed to condemn any man that by
sin deserves it not, he is not to be believed to be free from injustice. 2.
Nor is it compatible with goodness which is an inclination in God of
communicating that good which is in himself unto his creatures, as far as he
can without wronging his justice. And therefore if God be (as the Scripture
reports him) good to all; it cannot be that he should of himself without any
motive in the reasonable creature, provide for it from everlasting the greatest
of all miseries, and that before he thought of making it or bestowing any good
upon it.

As touching the Objection I hope this Author will say so too. As touching the
first, Reply.
namely, that he is the sovereign Lord of all creatures; and our Savior
Christ will say it for him, if he will not; as touching the last, namely, that
it is lawful for him to do what he will with his own. But I find noe need at
all of this consideration, to make answer to his former vain discourse: for he
may see plainly that I have made noe use of these principles: but they have
their place to justify God in other courses; namely, 1. In punishing children
for the sin of their fathers in great variety of judgments temporal; as in
the conflagration of Sodom, and in drowning of the old world. 2. In damning
many Infant children of heathen men dying in original sin unremitted; as M.
Mason in his lectures at Magdalen Hall maintained, that, the punishment of
original sin unremitted was eternal damnation. And M. Hord confesses as
much in his preface, Sect: 4. 3. Yea and in making the Soul of Christ the holy
Son of God an offering for the sins of others. But consider we his answer.

To appoint to hell, what is it but to appoint to the sufferings of the
torments of hell? Now does any of our Divines maintain that God appoints any
man to the suffering of hell torments of his mere pleasure, and not for sin?
They do not, and therefore this Authors discourse depends upon a mere fiction
devised in his own brain. 2. The distinction which here he makes is the
distinction of Arminius, who maintained that God can do that per potentiam, by
power, which he cannot do per justitiam, by justice, which I have disproved at
large in a peculiar digression on this argument in my Vindiciae; and not one of
my reasons there brought does this Author once offer to answer. And Lib. 1 p.
2. digres. 4.
this opinion of his does manifestly imply that God has a power to do that
which is unjust. 3. He supposes very judiciously to his own advantage, that
there is a justice in God toward his creature secluding the ordinance of his
will; whereas both Suarez and Vasquez opposite in other particulars concerning
God's justice, do yet agree in this, that there is no justice in God toward
his creature, but upon supposition of his will and Vindic. l. 1. p: 3. digres.
1.
ordinance as I have showed. 4. He may as well say that it is not compatible
with the justice of God to punish (as it signifies to inflict paineon) him who
is holy. For justice is as well opposite to the punishing of an Inocent, as to
the punishing of him in such a degree. And consequently God cannot in justice
put an holy man to death, much less annihilate him; which if he says, he
shall contradict Arminius. 5. If it be not compatible with God's justice to
inflict hell pains on any man, no fault of his preexisting in the eternal
mind, then either Christ suffered not the pains of hell, or was not without
fault; or lastly God was unjust in inflicting those pains upon him. 6. In the
last place observe, for all this he gives us nothing but his bare word. So that
if we give him leave he is like enough to dictate unto us Articles of belief
at his pleasure.

1 By what right is vengeance due to the obstinate and impenitent? Is it due by
any other right then by the ordinance of God? Cannot God pardon it if it please
him, yea and cure it too? And if he be pleased to punish it, cannot he punish
it as well by annihilation of the obstinate (so to set an end unto his sin as
to himself) as by condemnation of him? That of Austine is spoken in reference
to God's law, whereby he has ordained that without evil deservings he shall
not be condemned (yet Christ suffered hell pains without any evil deservings)
In respect of the like law, he shall be unjust, if he he should not reward
them, who dye in faith and repentance, with everlasting life. This is only in
respect of potentia ordinata, such a power as is ordained by his will. But as
for potentia ahsoluta, power absolute, all confess that God can annihilate the
holy Angels.

2 How does God communicate grace unto his creatures? is it not by necessity of
nature, or freedom of will? Philosophers were wont to argue the eternity of
the world by this, that Bonum est sui communicativum, That which is good is apt
to communicate it self, yea naturally and necessarily: And therefore God being
optimus the best, as well as maximus the greatest, was most communicative, and
that naturally and necessarily. If the same be this Authors opinion, he is as
Atheistical as they: But if by freedom of will he communicates his goodness,
then he communicates his goodness, as when he will, so likewise how he will,
and to whom he will. As Saint Paul expreslely professes saying, God has mercy
on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens, of such places as these this
Author Rom: 9. 18.
takes no notice, but so much the more Atheologically. Yet I am willing to take
notice of what he brings, namely, that God is good to all; And so he is in
doing them good, many and sundry ways; in maintaining their being, But he is
not in such sort good to all as he is said to be good to Israel. For he has
not dealt so with any nation, as with them. 2. It Is untrue that God
communicates unto his creatures that good which is in himself: for the Ps: 73.
1
good which is in himself is of a more transcendent nature, then to be
communicable unto creatures; such conceits are Manichaicall. God is essentally
whatsoever he is: But the Ps: 147. 20.
goodness this Author speaks of, is of an accidental nature unto us; And is
it decent and not rather abominable to transform the essence of God into an
accident, that so it might be communicated to the creature.

3. If Gods goodness incline him to communicate goodness unto the creature,
as far as he can without wronging justice, then it inclines him to
communicate holiness unto all to preserve all from sin, to bring all to
faith and to repentance, and so to save all. For how could his justice be
wronged in this?

4. When he says, tha God of himself cannot without any motive in the
reasonable creature provide for it from everlasting the greatest of all
miseries; observe what an hungry proposition this is; for will he say tht God
can provide for any creature the greatest misery save one, though not the
greatest of all without any motive in the creature? But if he can so provide
the greatest save one, why not the greatest of all? What color of reason to
put any difference in this! And if the greatest save two, why not the greatest
save one? And so we may go on till we come to the least misery, thereby to
convince the unreasonablenesse of this assertion. For in clear evidence of
truth, reason cannot discover where to make a stand.

5. And what is the motive he means, but the motive of sin? And what sin
did God the Father see in Christ the Son, that moved him to ordain his dear
Son to the suffering of hell pains?

6. And as he alleges Austine to little purpose, so to the contrary what he
writes de predestinatione and gratia is well known. Si humanum genus quod
creatum primitus constat ex nihilo; sine debito mortis nasceretur, and tamen ex
iis Creator Omnipotens in aeternum nonnullos damnare vellet interitum, quis
Omnipotenti Creatori diceret, quare fecisti sic. If mankind which is well
known, at first to be made of nothing, were born without the debt of death and
sin; Yet if the Almighty Creator, would damn some of them to eternal
destruction, who would say to the Almighty Creator, why have thou done so? And
observe his reason, Qui enim cum non essent, esse donaverat, quo fine essent
habuit potestatem For he that gave them being when formerly they had no being
had power to dispose to what end they should be. There is nothing more evident
by the light of nature then this. I willingly confess that that this book
though it go under Austin's name, yet it is thought to be none of Austin's,
and that amongst other Raynaud: in adit. ad lib. Intitul. Valerianus Integer
doctrinae labisque purus.
considerations, by reason of this very sentence in particular, which seems
unto me very harsh, and contrary to Austin's doctrine in other places. But
Raynaudus has discovered at large the vanity of this reason, and shows by
variety of testimonies the concurrence of Antiquity in bearing witness to the
same truth. And albeit he confesses the book not to be Austin's, yet he proves
that Fulgentius was the Author of it, always accounted to be an Orthodox
Father and well known to be a follower of Austin's.

Sect: 3. Containing a Reply to the second Objection, and Answer thereunto.
M. Mason's Addit. p. 17. 18. Object. 2. Perkins lib. de predestin: p. 25.
It is further objected, that we do and may slaughter our beasts for our daily
use, without any cruelty and iniquity, And therefore God may as well and much
more appoint as many of us as he pleases to the torment of hell, for his
glory, and yet be just and good to notwithstanding. For there is a greater
disproportion between God and us, then there is between us and beasts.

1 For answering hereunto we are first to premise thus much, namely that our
slaughtering of Beasts Answer.
for our daily use is by Gods ordinance, and appointment. We had not the
authority of our selves, but God of his bounty toward us, gave it us, as we
may see Gen: 9. 2, 3. Where we may observe, 1 That God delivers up all
creatures, Beasts, Birds, and Fishes into the hands of men. 2 That the end why
he does so, is that they might be meat for men, and consequently they might be
slain. Which being so, our slaughtering of Oxen, Sheep and other creatures for
our daily use is to be accounted Gods doing, rather then ours. And therefore
the objection should be made this. God may without any breach of goodness or
justice appoint brute creatures to be slain for man's use, therefore he may
ordain men to be cast into hell torments for his own use, that is for the
declaration of his soveraingty.

2 This being premised I answer further that this comparison holds not, For
there is little proportion between the Objects compared, and less between the
acts.

1 There is but small proportion between the Objects Beasts and Men creatures
of a different nature and made for a different end Beasts are void of reason
and liberty in their actions; creatures whose being svanish with their breath,
made only for the use and service of men upon earth But men are reasonable and
understanding creatures, able through the Creators bounty to discern between
good and evil, they are the very Image of Gods purity and eternity and were
made for the service of God alone upon earth, and his blessed and everlasting
society in heaven So that albeit there be a very great distance between God and
man, yet nothing so great as between God and Beasts It follows not therefore
that if God may appoint beasts to be killed of his own free pleasure for man's
use. he may with like equity and reason appoint men of his own will to
destruction, for his own use We read that God required of his people many
thousand beasts for sacrifice, but not one man The first borne of other
creatures he challenged for burnt offerings (except they were unclean beasts)
but the first borne of men were to be redeemed. Which shows that he put a
wide difference between the blood of men and beast. Besides in the 9 of Genesis
he gives men power to kill and feed upon all living creatures; but he
straightly forbids them to shed man's blood, and gives this reason of the
prohibition, Man is the Image of God; so that we may well conclude, that there
is but small proportion between the Ob^ects compared-men, and Beasts in
respect of this Act of killing and slaughrering. 2 There is far less or
rather no proportion at all between the Acts compared Killing and eternal
tormenting. A man may kill, but he cannot without barbarous, injustice and
cruelty torment his beast, and prolong the life of it, that he may daily vex
and torture it, to show what power and soverainty he has over it: so I doubt
not (though there be some that will not grant it, but charge the Arminians with
contumely against God for affirming it) I doubt not, I say, but God may kill a
man of his own free pleasure; yea and resolve him into nothing without any
cruelty and injustice; because in so doing he does but take away what he has
given him. But he cannot without both these antecedently decree to keep him
alive for ever in Hell, that he may there torment him without end, to show his
soveraingty. For this is to inflict an infinite evil upon a guiltless
creature, to whom he had given but a finite good: And so is the comparison most
unequal too, in the acts compared, and therefore proves just nothing.

Belike as many as have not the word of God, to read this Authors acute
observations out of Gen: 9. 2. 3. (For he would not seem to be any of the
blunter sort) do Repl.
sin as often as they kill a chicke to feed upon, though beasts of prey do as
much as this comes to, and more without all sin. 2 Yet M Perkins thought it
enough to take notice that commonly it is received as lawful, without
enquiring whence this authority proceeds And noe Christian doubts, but our very
bodies, and souls and all, we have from our maker. 3 Are all beasts for meat?
Or has not man power to slaughter any but for meat? Where does the Author
find this in Gen: May we not kill Lions, Bears, wolves, unless we eat them
forthwith, or powder them up, that by degrees we may make meat of them? so of
snakes, and Adders and all the Serpents that Lybia brings forth? 4 I deny that
our slaughtering of oxen is in this respect, or in any respect to be accounted
Gods doing rather then ours. For Gods appointment in this, is but of the nature
of a permission, not of a command. We may live by fruits and herbs and
Marmalads and sucketts, or butter, milk and cheese, if we think good. Were it
a Commandment, yet would it not follow that it is Gods work rather then ours.
For he commands good works and forbids evil works. Now will this Author
herehence conclude, that our good works are rather Gods works then ours. I
trow he will not 5 Therefore we keep to our own argument, and not regard his
infatuation of it, and we were in a pretty case, if we should suffer our
adversaries to shape our Arguments If they once have the grinding of our
Tools, no marvel if they soon grind out all the edge of them. We say it is
lawful for man to do all this that is spoken of, upon our fellow creatures,
and shall not God have as much power over us? Does not the Apostle himself
dispute after this manner, and make the power which God has over us, equal to
the power which the Potter has over the work of his own hands and over the
clay also. Shall the thing formed say to it that formed it why have thou made
me thus? has not the Potter power over the clay of the same lump to make one
vessel unto honor and another unto dishonor? We cannot take life from a
creature without pain, deadly pain: if we have lawful power to inflict pain
upon another creature, has not God greater power to inflict pain, yea the
greatest pain upon us, and that without all respect to sin? And that this God
can do as Lord of life and death, both Vasquez the Jesuit acknowledges, and
Medina pronounces ex concordi Theologorum sententia, by the unanimous consent
of all Divines, as elsewhere I have showed and proved by variety of
demonstration; like as Raynaudus confirms it by the concurrant testimony of
the Ancients in the places formerly mentioned. 2. In the next place he comes to
his answer, and says that the comparison holds not. And I commend this
Authors wisdom in troubling himself with no more objections, then he thought
himself able to Master. For who would not keep his shinns whole the best he
can? But I wounder he comes off no better, even then, when he makes choice of
such adversaries, as he thinks he can well grapple with.

1. Little proportion will serve turn; it is enough for us that they are all
God's creatures; and surely there is less proportion between the Creator and
the creature, then between one creature and another. Yet sure I am, every
creature that has life is more noble then a creature without life, such as a
Potters vessel is; yet look what power the Potter has over his vessel; the
Apostle tells us that God has the same power over his creature man. Secondly,
the Author was sensible of the weakness of this bowstring, and seeing it would
Rom: 9. 21.
not hold, therefore he relyes upon another, and that's his own deforming and
disfiguring our argument, drawing it from the comparison of man's power over
his fellow creatures, with God's power over us; to conclude therehence that God
the Creator has as great power over his creature; as man by God's grant has
power over his fellow creatures. From this due course of comparison which we
propose, this Author draws us to a wild comparison of the power of God over
beasts, with the power of God over man; which is not ours, but an immodest and
unshamefast fiction of this Author; and that grounded upon immodest
foundations as before has been showed. Thirdly, yet why not so great a
difference between God and man, as between God and beasts? Is not the distance
infinite? Is it possible to be less, seeing man is but finite, and God
infiinte? For still the perfection of man is but in the way of perfection
create. But God's perfection is of a transcendant nature it being uncreat:
which when Schoolmen have considered, they have affirmed that the perfection
of creatures is to be measured not by approximation to God who is, ens primum,
the first being, but by their remotion rather a non esse, from not being; As I
remember to have read long ago in Paulus Venetus, and which then seemed to me
most congruous, nither to this day do I see any just cause to oppose it. 2. I
come to the second answer; And here I find this discourse to breath the spirit
of Arminius, as truly as if it were spit out of his own mouth. Now Arminius on
this point I have answered at larg, as this Author well knows: he is content
to pass that by, and keep himself still like a Sow in beans, without raising
any noise of solving ought has been Exam: praedest. Perkin: p. 41.
delivered in proof hereof. But though he lets pass that which I have
delivered without answer, renewing only Arminius his objection; yet I will not
let this his answer to his own objection pass without a reply.

1. Therefore whereas he says there is no proportion between killing and
eternal tormenting. Imarke his cunning carriage, he does not say there is no
proportion between killing and tormenting which are two acts; and acts are
somewhat capable of proportion. And surely if he had, killing would appear to
be the worst of the two; since to kill is to torment and somewhat more, even to
destroy the being of a man. Therefore the comparison which he shapes is between
killing and eternal tormenting; that is not between two acts, as he pretends
to from the comparison, but between one act, and the eternal duration of an
other act, which is the quantity thereof in reference to time, such is this
Authors juggling. Yet notwithstanding the disproportion of these things, hence
it follows not, that killing is the more desirable of the two; considering
that many apain there is which man would be content to endure, rather then to
loose his life? So far is it from being worse, and that beyond all
proportion. Austine somewhere professing of infants pain in hell, that is poena
mitissima, the mildest pain, and such as they had rather endure then to have no
being at all. 2. But take it for an intolerable tormenting; if there be no
proportion between killing and eternal tormenting; whereas there is some
proportion between man and beast, then it were reasonable for any man to desire
to be turned into a beast rather then to be eternally tormented: now let every
reasonable creature consider, the sobriety of such a choice. 3. If only the
eternity of it makes killing to be preferred before tormenting, then it is not
to be denied, but tormenting a creature in hell fire a thousand or ten thousand
years may be performed by God upon an innocent man, only eternal torment
cannot. Yea and so ten thousand to an hundred thousand years, and so forwards
until it comes to be eternal, which indeed can never be; it being a thing
utterly impossible to attain from a beginning unto eternity by degrees. A
finite added to a finite being never able to make it infinite. And therefore to
maintain a thing infinite in quantity, Aristole has taught us that it is to
maintain a multitude of infinites (and indeed an infinite of infinites.) For if
the parts be but finite, it is impossible that the whole consisting of finite
parts can be infinite. 4. Though man cannot without barbarous cruelty torment
his beast, and prolong the life of it; Yet I hope this Author will not deny
this to be in the power of God, and that for the least sin committed by man.
And this was it that I proposed in my answer to M. Hord, to show the power of
God in such a kind, wherein it were abominable cruelty in man to exercise his
power: like as the barbarous cruelty of Tiberius is set forth by them that
write the history of his life. And the truth is, it is a very difficult point
to resolve how it can stand with justice divine thus to deal with a creature,
though a sinner. Yet I know many courses are taken to solve this difficulty,
and the best that I have met with is this in my judgment; That a man dying in
sin, his sin continues eternal (never broke off by repentance) as well as
the pain, yet this upon examination is found to have its flawes, and will not
satisfy. So that the best and final resolution is to have recourse to God's
absolute power, as a Creator over his creatures. And that absolute power will
make it good even over an innocent creature as over a creature nocent. And it
were very strange to affirm that God has not as much power over us as we have
over our beasts, namely to put them to pain, to do us service. Now if it be
lawful to inflict but one degree of pain upon an innocent creature, what
reason can be given why he cannot inflict two degrees, and if so why not three,
and so ascending to the highest degree? Then as touching the duration of it, if
he can inflict such a pain for an hour, he may as well for two hours; and for
a whole day: And if for a day he may as well for two days, yea for a week* 1
for a week he may as well for a month, and if for a month, he may as well for
two or three; if for three, as well for six; and if for six, as well for
twelve; and if for a year, as well for two; and as well for four, and so in
infinitum; from tenns to hundreds, and from hundreds to thousands For no reason
can possibly make evidence where we ought to make a stand; in such sort as that
an afliction in such a degree is lawful, and immediately after increasing
becomes unlawful. 2. Yet consider we speak not now of decreeing, but of
executing (whereas the objection proceeded concerning God's decreeing) Now
between the decree and the execution, sin may intercede by God's permission,
and that necessarily thereupon as Arminius himself confesses. But now to the
point whereon we are in present, we suppose the person to be most holy, even as
holy as the Son of God; on whom notwithstanding were inflicted, as all
confess, either hell pains, or that which was equivalent to hell pains. 3.
Yet this evil thus inflicted will never come to be infinite, still it
continues finite, though in infinitum; it being utterly impossible by addition
to make that which is finite become infinite. 4. But were it infinite, yet this
Authors caution would help us against the Author himself. For the good which
God has given such a creature, is also infinite, to wit his being. How much
more if God preserve that creature from sin, which by Arminius his cofession,
makes a man more miserable, then hell pains it self. Lastly that there is
such an absolute power in God Raynaudus justifies both out of the twelvth of
wisdoome. Cum sis justus, just omnia disponis. Ipsum quoque qui non debet
punire Austine
condemnare externum existimas a tua virtute. This reading he professes to be
corrupt and nothing coherent with the text; And the true reading ought to be
this, Ipsum quoque qui non debet puniri condemnas. And shows that this reading
is followed by Austin, q. 53. and Saint Grigory. 3. Moral: cap. 11. This also
he justifies to be Orthodox by the testimony of the Ancients. Macarius homil.
15. Deus sui juris est, quod vult facit. Si velit pro potestate and jure suo
mittit justos in Gehennam, ac peccatores in regnum. Out of Chrysostomt l. 2. De
compunctione cordis sub finem. Si te agentem quod tibi preceptum est conjicii
jubeat Dominus tuus in Gehennam, aliqua tibi datur contradicendi potestas. Out
of Austine in Psalm. 70. in the beginning Multum movet Dei amor and timor, Timor
Dei quia justus est; Amor quia misericors est. Quis enim diceret ei quid
fecisti, si damnaret justum? quanta ergo misericordia ejus est, ut justificet
injustum? Then he represents the Schoolmen maintaining the same. Ariminenses,
Camariacenses, Medina, Secarius in cap. 7. Iosuae a 39. and Lorinus in cap. 12.
Sap: v. 12. Yet is not Raynaudus of their opinion who maintains reprobation to
be before the foresight of evil works; nevertheless he is peremptory in
justifying this; And Fulgentius whom he conceives to be the Author of that
book de praedest. and gratia, which goes under Austin's name, in a little
treatise of his entitled Censura inofficiosae censurae, which is added to his
Valerianus integrae vitae labisque purus.

Sect. 4.
M. Mason's Aditions p. 18. 19. D. Twis: his Vindiciae l. 2. p. 1. Digres. 1.
But it is replied by some (who will rather speak unreasonably and against
common sense then lay down the conclusions which they have undertaken to
maintain) that it is more elegible to be tortured in hell then to want or loose
a being. For he that wants a being enjoys no good, but he that is tormented
in hell, has a being, and by consequent something that is good. If therefore
God may take away a man's being that is innocent, and turn him into nothing
for his pleasure, much more may he torment him in hell.

I am glad to see my name so often remembered by this Author in his margent;
for a long time I desired to know his way by certain evidence; for I would not
suffer my self Answer.
to be carried away with rumors; and withal I found some contradiction in the
relations I received from different persons, but at length I was so happy as to
see it under his own hand, and there to observe not his judgment only, but the
strength of his affections also. Now let the Reader observe the cunning
carriage of this Author, and how far off it is from all ingenuitie. For what
I discourse, being drawn thereunto by Arminius his excursions, that this
Author obtrudes upon me, as if the defense of the cause I took in hand had
drawn me thereunto, notwithstanding that I have professed the contrary. For
thus I write l. 1. page 1. De electione Sect: 4. page 127. In the canvasing of
this section Arminius runs out at large, saving that most of these things which
here he heaps up are aliena, and nothing pertinent to the present purpose; as
pertaining rather to the decree of reprobation, then to the decree of election.
And a little after I write thus; Hence it is that Arminius expatiates and
transfers his disputation from the point of election, to the point of
Reprobation too unseasonably: Yet wisely affecting the incolumity of his
wavering cause. By that right (says he) which God has over his creature, he
cannot ordain any man to the suffering of pain without the foresight of
sinnne. To wit that his cause might stand upright, and that this examiner might
omit nothing that tends to the making of his opinion plausible with his
propitious reader, it was needful that he should make use of some such
transition, though never so unreasonable but seeing such are the wiles and
artifices of our Adversaries to confound all Scholasticall method, it shall not
be unseasonable for me to weigh what he delivers as briefly as I can. Therefore
after I had refused Arminius on that point, where he denies, that God can do
that injustice, which he can do by power; after this manner I enter upon a new
digression concerning this point. Hitherto have I followed Arminius in his
extravagants. For M. Perkins has not proceeded so far; as to affirm that
God has power to afflict an innocent creature, neither has his Adversaries
objected any such thing unto him, as justly inferred from ought delivered by
him. So that all such have well hardened their foreheads, who faigne that our
opinion cannot well subsist without the help of so horrid and so harsh an
assertion, to wit, That it is better to be miserable, then not to be at all. It
is true, some may conceive that though this were a truth, it were to be
suppressed, rather then affirmed by reason of the harshnesse of it. Let every
one consider aright that I undertake the defense of M. Perkins, and it is he
that has uttered this harsh assertion, (namely, That God can inflict hell
pains without any demerit in the creature) out of Cameracensis: And it stood
me upon to defend M. Perkins so far as I had reason for it. Now finding the
maine argument whereby Arminius maintains the contrary (to that other, yet
more harsh proposition) to be most unsound; and even this assertion which
sounds most harsh in the ears of many, not only to be maintained by Austine
himself and and divres Schoole-Divines, but answered by many arguments, the
solution whereof was never expedited by any; have I deserved so sharply to be
censured for representing all this in the way of justifying M. Perkins, whose
defense I undertook against Arminius?

1. My words are these translated, God can annihilate the holiest creature,
which Arminius confesses, how much more is it in his power to afflict an
innocent creature, and that for ever, considering that not only according to
Schoole-divines, but also according to Austine, yea according to the truth it
self, it is more to be desired to have being under any pain, then to have no
being at all. And afterward I propose not one argument of mine own for the
justifying of this, but only represent the discourse of Austine hereupon, as it
is analized by Durandus that School Divine. Now why are not the Schoolmen
censured, as men speaking unreasonably and against common sense? Nay why is not
Austine censured as one that had rather speak unreasonably and against common
sense; then lay down the conclusion which he has once undertaken to maintain,
as well as my self? Yea and much more considering that the discourse proving
this, is Saint Austin's; and had I not added on the by these four words etiam
secundum ipsam veritatem, there had been no place at all for any censure to be
past upon me. If a man finding himself convicted by Austin's discourse shall
confess that what he writes is true, is it equity to censure him as one who
had rather speak unreasonably and against common sense, then lay down the
conclusions which formerly he has undertaken to maintain. When in the mean
time no censure is at all passed upon Austine, who alone is the player of the
game, he that stands by professing only in his judgment, he plays his game
well.

2. If Austine has spoken unreasonably and against common sense, how comes it
to pass that this censurer has not taken the pains to represent unto the
world the unreasonablenesse of his argument? This author spends his mouth
frankly in censuring, but takes no pains to free his Reader from error, by
solving arguments produced by Austin for the proof of that which this Author
conceives to be an error.

3. Nay he does not so much as answer that one argument, which here is proposed
by me. An argument which the Scoole-men use as sufficiently convincing the
truth, as Durandus and Ricardus. Yet considering the unreasonable condition of
such adversaries, who take no course to convince or confute their opposites,
but imperiously to cry them down; I have taken the pains to call to an account
both Austin's arguments and others proposed by Schoole-Divines, and to devise
with my self what answer might be made unto them, so to perform that for my
adversaries, which they show no heart to perform for themselves, and I was
borne in hand that such a digression of mine should be extant long ere this.

4 Yet by the way I wonder not a little that one thing is pretermitted. For if
I mistake not, this very Author is the man that heretofore has been very full
mouthed in censuring, not so much the doctrine it self, as a certain answer I
made to an argument brought out of Scripture against it; namely from those
words of our Savior, It had been better for that man if he had never been
born. My answer was, that it was spoken according to the judgment of man,
though indeed erroneous; and that after this manner phraseologies of Scripture
do proceed I there showed. Now this Author hereupon spared not to profess,
that if this were true he would turn Atheist. I wished that Friend of mine to
whom he spoke this, to persuade him the next time he met with him, to enquire
and consider well, whether Maldonat the Jesuit does not embrace the same
interpretation. And indeed if such protestations would carry it, this Author
would prove a very potent and formidable adversary, I have seen the like under
his own hand, namely this, As Plutarch said of the old heathens who sacrificed
men that they might pacify their gods: that it had been better with Diagoras
to say, There is no god, then to think that God is such a one that delights in
the blood of men: And hereupon he adds this Protestation, I protest unto you I
think it less dishonorable to the blessed Trinity, to say with the Atheist,
there is no god, then to feign such a God, as the decree of Reprobation
maintained by the Contraremonstrants makes him to be. This man I find is
resorted unto and consulted with by the Arminians, as if his judgment were an
oracle; and I willingly confess he deserves to be in some great place unto
them: and no place in my judgmentmore fit then to be unto the, a
protestationibus. Yet I do not prescribe but leave it to their discretion to
prefer him as they think good: but how comes it to pass, that here he is
silent in reviving the reproaches he cast upon my answer to the Scripture
before mentioned? Is it because Maldonat the Jesuit has been since found by
him to embrace the same interpretation? And he is loath to fall so foul in
censuring such as he is? Yet here he falls foul on me for professing my
approbation, not of Schoolmen but of Austin's discourse. This makes me call
to mind what was delivered of him sometimes by a London Minister; as that he
should persuade a young Divine to study Bellarmine; as also what censures
others have passed upon some writings of his. And it has been my hap to see
under his own hand such a counsel as this give^ to a friend of his. These
things have I represented unto you the rather, because I would give you
occasion to learn that in your younger days, which I have learned by late and
long experience in my self, and that in these two things. First in reading
Bellarmine and other adversaies to our Church; I have diverse times noted such
speeches in them, as to my thinking involved contradiction, or had show of
absurdity, or might either give advantage to our selves, or breed prejudice
unto them; but when afterward I came in cooler blood to weigh the words better,
and to consider the circumstances more narrowly. I found that I did mistake
their meaning, and that an itching desire to find an advantage, made me to take
shadows for substance. And the like mistake in my self I observed, when I
read the fathers, or the Scriptures, ready to interpret every thing either in
favor of mine own cause, or in prejudice of the adversaries: And concludes
sententiously thus; Nimirum ita est ingenium nostrum, facile credimus, quae
nimium volumus. If such be the genius of this Author, though he thinks not
good to spare me for Austin's sake, yet methinks he should spare me for
Richardus sake, or at the least for Maldonat's sake. This calls to my
remembrance an Epigramme which D. Hoskins my chamber-fellow in New-Colledge
sometimes made upon the fleas, (that sore troubled him as he lay in his bed.)
And the conclusion was thus;

But if there is nothing that can slack
Your rage and your correction,
Yet o remember you are black;
And spare me for complexion.
So we proceed.

Sect. 5.
M. Mason's Aditions p. 19. 20.
To the first part of this reply, namely, that it is more desirable to be in
hell, then to be nothing. I oppose three things. 1. The speech of our Savior
concerning Judas: Woe be to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed, it
had been good for that man if he had never been born Two things especially are
set forth in these words of our Savior. First the misery of Judas the betraier
of the Lord. Woe be etc. Secondly, the greatness of his misery, It had been good
etc. It is as much as if the Lord had said, Judas the traitor shall be damned,
and therefore so woeful will his condition be, that it had been good and happy
for him, if he had never received a being: good in earnest, as the Interpreters
do generally expound it, not in the opinion and esteem of weak minded,
faint-hearted-men only as some few understand it. For first let it be granted
that Scripture speaks of things sometimes according to men's opinions, yet
without reason to fasten such an expostio^ upon any Scripture, is to do, as
dunces do in the Schools, who being not able to answer a place in Aristotle
wherewith they are charged, shift it off, and say, (loquitur ex aliorum
sententia, he speaks according to the opinion of others.) 2. This scripture
cannot in reason be thus expounded. First because it is an argument and ground
by which Christ declares the truth and greatness of the misery of Judas, Woe
to the man etc And why woe? Because it had been good etc. But it were no
argument to show his woeful estate by, to say that it had been good for him,
that he had never been born in the opinion of men, who mistake the case but not
in truth. 2. because this exposition would teach and encourage men to be
Atheists and Epicures. In the second of Wisdom, we read how voluptuous men do
stir up one another to enjoy the good things, that are present, to fill them
selves with wine and ointments, to leave some token of their jollity in every
place and to practice all manner of wickedness. And what is their motive? a
false persuasion that their souls shall dye with their bodies; and that they
should have noe being after death. If this conceit would flesh them thus in
their opinions and voluptuous courses, how freely and eagerly (may we think)
would they pursue their carnal and sinful delights, if they could be but once
persuaded, that, after all their pleasure they should be in better case then if
they had noe being? Secondly, I oppose common consent. Where shall we pick out
a man, but will say (if he speak from his heart) that he were better to vanish
into a thousand nothings, then to be Aug. Epist. ad Bon. 160.
cast into hell. What is the reason why men are so afraid of hell, when they
are touched to the quick with the conscience of their ungodly lives, and the
expectation of eternal vengeance, that with Job they curse their birth day,
and wish an hundred times over that they had never been, or might cease to be,
that so they might not come into the place of torments, but because they judge
a being there to be incomparably worse, then no being any where? And why are
men who are sensible of hell fire so strongly curbed in the fear of feeling
it, even from darling and beloved sins, but because they apprehend it to be
the most terrible of terribles? Fear of being annihilated can never do that,
which the fear of hell does.

M. Mason went great bellied with these choice conceits, and therefore he will
bring Answer.
them in though it be by the cares, in spite of his own friends: like as
Arminius did before him, to vent a certain argument of his, which yet had a
very unhappy issue to the betraying of the Authors nakedness most shamefully;
and his argument was this, To be happy is better the^ simply to be; therefore
to be miserable, is worse then simply not to be; now the consequence is most
inconsequent. For therefore to be happy is better then simply to be; because,
to be happy, includes being, and adds hapines thereunto. And one good added to
another good must needs make the whole compound better. In like manner, If to
be miserable does include the evil of not being and add another evil
thereunto, the whole compound must needs be worse. But to the contrary it is
apparent, that, to be miserable does not include the evil of not being, but
the good of being rather; and consequently there is no just proportion between
misery and happiness, And therefore though to be happy is better then simply
to be (as including being, and some good thing more) yet thence it follows
not, that to be miserable, is worse then not to be; for as much as, To be
miserable, does not include the evil of not being and add some evil more to
it. Now the first that affirmed this harsh position, namely, that to be
miserable is not worse then not to be at all, was Austin, and he not only
affirms it, but disputes it, and proves it by variety of arguments, not one
whereof is answered by this Author or by any friend that I know. And from
Austin the Schoolmen have taken it, and added this one argument to confirm it
over and above those of Austine's, To turn a man into nothing is to destroy a
man's universal being; but to inflict torment upon him does destroy only
particular being, to wit, his being in ease and pleasure. Now to have a man's
particular being destroyed is not so bad, as to have a man's universal being
destroyed. Now I come to consider how this Author carries himself in
overthrowing his own fiction. For albeit the position impugned by bim, be no
fiction (for it was the opinion of Austin and of diverse Schoolmen) yet the
bringing it in here, as if it were an answer made by us to any of our
Adversaries objections (as this Author does) as if we stood in need o^ any
such aid is a mere fiction. And first he states it at pleasure to serve his
own turn, of being in hell to be more desirable, whereas the Author whom he
opposes delivers it of, esse mi erum to be miserable and misery is as well in
respect of sin, as in respect of bodily torment Nay it is confessed by
Arminius himself, That the misery of sin is greater, then the misery of
torment. So, that if it be uncouth to say, that to be under the torment of hell
is better then not to be at all; it ought to seem more uncouth to say, that it
is better for a man to be guilty of sin, then to have no being at all. Now I
do not find that this Author in all his Mountebank-like amplifications, did
take this into consideration. Again when it is said. That to be miserable is
better the^ not to be, this is to be understood aright, not as if misery it
self were desirable, but being only, though with the adjunct of misery thus,
to have a being though in misery is more desirable, then to have no being at
all And so if it beapplyed to the misery of torment, and that in hell, it ought
to be taken thus, To have a being though in hell is more desirable then to have
no being at all. And it is apparent, that in not being at all, there is nothing
at all desirable, but in being; though under the greatest pain there is
something desirable, to wit, being. Now I consider his reasons.

He objecteth the saying of our Savior to Judas. Woe be to that man by whom
the son of man is betrayed, it had been good for that man if he had never
been born: and indeed the betraying of the Son of God his Lord and master,
was a most facinorous act, especially being committed by the way of a kiss,
and with sweet words saying Hayle Master. And Schoolmen do distinguish
between, the misery of sin, and the misery of pain, in such sort that albeit
they deny the latter to be worse then not being, yet they do not reason so of
the former. But because Judas was not so sensible of the miserable condition of
the one, as of the other; therefore our Savior sets forth the woeful
condition of that state whereof he, and generally all are most sensible. Whence
we may well argue, that our Savior speaks in conformly to man's sense and
judgment, and it was not long ere the terrors of a guilty conscience took hold
of him, and he went forth and hanged himself. Yet our Savior says not, It
had been good for Judas if he had never received any being, but only this, If
he had never been borne* now being is not received in a man's birth but in the
conception rather. And undoubtedly, if Judas had perished in his mothers womb
it had been much better for him. As Arch-byshop Whitgift sometimes in the Court
of high commission said, of one that was accused and convicied o^ some foul
crime committed by him in the very house of God That better it had been, that
his neck had been broken at the first, then that he should live to be
o^scandalous to the Church of God And yet as if our Saviors words were not
enough for this Author in saying, It had been good for that man; therefore he
patcheth it out with a supplement of his own, thus, It had been good and happy
for that man, if he had never received being. So that whereas Aristotle made
happiness to consist in an aggregation of all good things this Author with
his divinity thinks good to mend Aristtotl's Philosophy, by placing happiness
in the want of every good thing very learnedly and judiciously. Vulcan who made
thunderbolts for Jupiter, when he was cast out of heaven had a shrewd fall,
and contracted such lamenesse as stuck by him ever after. So this Author who
forgeth thunderbolts and arguments for others, being fallen upon opposition to
the prerogative of God's grace and his Sovereignty over all creatures; no
marvel if his logic and philosophy halteth; and his infirmity so contracted
may increase so far, as in the end to bereave him of common sense. He
contents himsele as his manner is with saying, that Interpreters do generally
expound it as he does; some few he confesses understand it other wise, but
most concur with him, to wit, that, it is delivered in earnest; what a jest
is this as if any Interpreter was ever known to say, that our Savor spoke not
in earnest. Neither do I know any that interprets the place as he shapes it,
as if our Savior spoke according to the opinion of weak-minded faint-hearted
men only. Not one that I know puts any such difference of men under the
torments of hell. Like as the Prophet speaks of the stoutest, as well as the
weakest, Can thy heart endure, or thine hands be strong in the day that I have
to deal with thee, or the Lord rather by Ezech: 22. 14.
the Prophet. The Schoolmen suppose without difference, that the damned wish
they had never been borne, or rather that they had never been. So the Saints of
God in this life have broken forth into passionate expressions in the time of
their extremity; Maldonate on this place gives instance in many; but the
question is whether these proceed from the judgment of right reason; or
erroneous rather, through the veheme^cy of passion, whose course is as Aquinas
observes, extinguere rationem, to extinguish reason. And it is one of the three
things as Aristotle observes in his books De Anima, that hinders the mind in
her judgment. The other two are, (...) a Disease, (...) sleep; the third is
passion; how much more when passion is stirred up by the sorest disease of all
other the torments of hell fire?

1. But if I am glad to see the issue whereto he drives his discourse. For he
grants that the scripture speaks sometimes according to men's opinions: but
without reason to fasten such an expression upon any Scripture, is to do as
Dunses do etc. he gives no instance; I will supply the want thereof, and that
out of one of those dunses a follower of John Duns an eminet school-man, from
whose name schoolmen are called dunses, whom this Author was wont to
magnify; Lychetus a Minorite is the man, who is the first that I have found
hitherto maintaining that God's purpose of election of any particular man may
cease; and the purpose of reprobating the same may come in the place thereof.
So the purpose of reprobating Judas may come in the place thereof, and that
without all change in God. This is a doctrine that now a days grows in
request Penotus has taken it up without betraying from whom he had it: And
Franciscus a sancta Clara after him, and some of our Arminians I find inamoured
with it. Now this Lychetus, when he is charged with the doctrine of Scotus as
directly opposite hereunto, his answer is in part that he speaks according to
the opinion of others. Now I desire not upon better terms to contend with M.
Mason. For Austine has given many reasons to prove that simply and absolutely
not to be, is not a thing desirable, above being, though joined with never so
great misery of pain. And the Schoolmen acknowledge that Austine herein
delivers his judgment, and withal they concur with him as Scot, Biel,
Durandus, Maldonat. And it is evident that to be turned into nothing, is an
universal destruction of being; so is not inflicting of punishment, as both
Durandus and Maldonat argue the case. And saying that not to have any being at
all is better for Judas then to be in torment, here is something affirmed of a
subject that makes him of a better condition then otherwise, which has no
place, but upon supposition of a subjects existence, and that in distinction
from an attribute affirmed of him, which constitutes him in a condition of
betternes, now that that which is nothing, by reason of being nothing, should
be better the something, is one of the wildest expressions, I think that has
been heard of since the world began; And therewithal creatures began to have a
being. Again consider, take Gabriel the Arch-Angell most holy as a creature,
and let every sober man judge, whether it were better for him not to be, then
being holy as he is to be tormented in hell fire. I should think that albeit
God should torment me with hell fiire yet if he should preserve my soul from
sin and in the love of him out of the sense of his love toward me, I should
have infinitely more cause to rejoice then to complain, how weak soever I am at
this present. Thirdly, if it be better and more desirable to have no being at
all, then to be in hell fire; then this is to be uderstood of hell fire, either
without limitation of time only: or with limitation. If only it hold in respect
of everlastingnesse, then it follows it is better to be in hell fire, provided
a man shall not everlastingly continue there, then to have no being at all,
though it be for a thousand years, not only twice told; but a thousand times
over and over, and that multiplied Cubically, and yet no end of multiplication
of the time of tormenting. If it be better to have no being at all then to
suffer hell torments so long, then it is better to have no being at all, then
to suffer hell torments half so long: For no reason can be given to the
contrary; In a word it will follow, that it were better to have no being, then
to suffer hell torments one hour, or half an hour, or a quarter, or a
minute, or half a minute. For no reason can define the bounds within which it
will be better to suffer the pains of hell fire, then to be turned into
nothing, and beyond which it will be worse. But M. Mason says secondly. This
Scripture cannot in reason be thus expounded: And he gives his reason for it:
Because it is an argument and ground by which Christ declares the greatness
or truth of the misery of Judas: and I pray let every sober man judge, whether
this be not a sufficient amplification of that misery, that they shall wish
they had never been, or that they might be turned into nothing, rather then
suffer such torments. How many prefer death before this worlds misery, and so
go on to destroy themselves; will it therefore follow that death indeed,
though it should be an utter abolition of man, is not so bad as to suffer the
miseries of this world. The mistake of a damned person wishing not to be,
consists not in conceiving his torments to be unsufferable with any content or
patience, but in conceiving that by not being, he should have ease, which is a
most absurd conceit, arising merely from distraction of mind throug extremity
of anguish. So that all things rightly considered, here is no encouragement for
men to become Atheists and Epicures, unless this be an encouragement
thereunto, that their pain shall be so extreme and unsufferable, as to make
them desire, and utter they know not what, such distraction of mind and and
perturbation of judgment shall surprise them. A false persuasion that men's
souls shall die with their bodies, and that they shall have no being after
death, urges every man indifferently to take his delights and pleasures while
he may; whether this delight and pleasure be taken in courses vicious, or in
courses virtuous, because death sets an end, as to them; so to their pleasures
and delights. But if their greatest happiness, or misery does begin in joy, or
sorrow after death; and this is well known unto them: sober reason does suggest
unto them to provide for the obtaining of that happiness, and declining that
unhappiness, above all other, according to that Ladies resolution in
Sophocles, and that upon this ground (...), there I shall continue for ever.
But when he says the wicked will the more eagerly pursue their carnal and
sinful delights, because after all their pleasures they shall be in a better
case, then if they had no being. I long to have the judgment of any lewd person
throughout the world concerning this; as namely whether he takes any comfort or
encouragement to sinful courses from this; that albeit he shall be cast with
the devil and his Angels into hell fire that never goes out. Yet this
condition is a better condition, then not to have any being at all; whereas
this better condition consists only in this, that being is better then not
being; not in this, that he has any ease, or is less obnoxious to torment and
sorrow, which shall be so unsufferable, as to provoke him to wish, that he
never had any being at all. Or that forthwith he might be turned into nothing.

Secondly, I oppose common consent. Where shall we pick out a man but will say
(if he speak from his heart) that he were better to vanish into a thou and
nothings, then to be cast into hell? What is the reason why M. Mason's Addit.
p. 20.
men are so afraid of hell, when they are touched to the quick with the
conscience of their ungodly lives, and the expectation of eternal vengeance,
that with Job they curse their birthday, and wish an hundred times over, that
they had never been, or might cease to be, that so they might not come into
that place of torments; because they judge a being there to be incomparably
worse, then no being any where? And why are men, who are sensible of hell fire,
so strongly curbd and held in with fear of feeling it, even from dailing and
beloved sins, but because they apprehend it to be the most terrible of all
terribles? fear of being annihilated can never do that which fear of hell
does. And is he well in his wits that talks of a thousand nothings? I looked
whereto it would come with such like wild discourses, even to run out of
common sense at last. Answer.
Yet all this that he discourses of, for the substance of it is no other, then
Austine has taken notice of in his very argument; and shows the vanity of it,
and the error of man's imagination, conceiving the condition of being nothing,
to be a condition of ease and rest from sorrow and pain; again ask the same
men whether they would not be content to be turned into dogs, wolves, snakes,
toades, rather then to be under the torments of hell fire; ask again whether
they would not be content, to be turned into devils, so they might be free
from the torments of hell fire. Ask the Adulterour whether he would not be
content to lie with an other man's wife all his days, rather then to suffer
(shall I say) the torments of hell fire? Nay rather then dye possessed of the
joys of heaven. Ask this Author whether he would not be content to maintain
stiffly, that grace is given according to works, and that a man is justified
by his works, rather then suffer the pains of hell fire, yea though it were
against his own conscience. As for me were I a damned creature, yet according
to this judgment which God has given me considering that the glory of God's
justice is manifested in my condemnation, though extremity of pain would
transport me into as wild wishes, as this Author justifies; yet according to
right reason I should rather be content to suffer, then wish that I were turned
into a bruit beast, or into a devil, or into nothing. I think the whole nation
of sober divines would justify me in this undoubtedly God is able to work me
or any man to this resolution without sin.

2. If, because men through fear of hell and expectation of eternal vengeance
do with Job curse their birth day once, and wish they had never been;
therefore it is better to be nothing then to be in hell: By the same reason,
because they do no other then Job did, it must follow, that it was better for
Job to be nothing, then to be under such torments. But if Job's desire was an
unsober and unreasonable desire in this, why might not their desire be as
unsober and unreasonable also, proceeding not so much from calm reason, as
from the strength of passion inflamed and disordered through extremity of
torment. We know that men upon the rack do sometimes make confessions, even
against the light of their own consciences. And fear of evil sometimes
distracts as much as the sense thereof; as in him who hearing the sentence of
death passed against him at Paris, fell into a sweat of blood. And it was wont
to be said, that pejor est malo, timor ipse mali. Francis Spira in the time of
his distraction confessed as much of hell it self. And if one desire, once
having course, prove unreasonable, why should the renewing of it a thousand
times over prove less unreasonable. And let the judicious observe the hand of
God, in striking this Author with such giddiness even in this argument,
(which he conceives of all other to be advantageous to his cause) so as at
every turn to supplant himself, and to betray the shameful nakedness of his
discourse. As first, in talking of a thousand nothings. Secondly, In putting
the case of some cursing their birth day, but how? as Job did. Now will any
sober man make the like collection of Job's cursing his birth day, as this
Author does from others cursing theirs. Thirdly, and lastly in calling hell
fire the terrible of all terribles. Who sees not that this proceeds in
reference to such things, which as they are feared, so they may be felt; and
supposing a subject existing, as to fear it before it comes, so to feel it
when it is come but such is not the condition of being nothing. And when he
feignes us to conform to his crude conceptions, namely to conceive
annihilation to be a thing feared, he pleases himself in his own fictions.
He no where finds me to speak of annihilation as a thing to be feared, no more
then I speak of it as of a thing that is to be felt. Only I say that it is a
condition no way desirable by a reasonable creature, no more then the suffering
of hell fire. But whereas hell fire cannot be suffered of any unless he has a
being, here is something found desirable, to wit the continuance of being. But
in the condition of being nothing, there is not found any thing to be a fit
Object of man's desire.

The third thing which I oppose is common sense; which judges pains, when
they are extreme to be worse then death. Hence it is that Job being tormented
in his body by the Devil cursed his birth day, magnified M. Mason's Addit. 3.
p. 20. 21.
the condition of the dead, and wished himself in the grave, plainly
preferring the loss of his being, before that miserable being which he then
had. And hence it is that men even of stoutest and hardest spirits (as we see
by daily experience) would (if they might enjoy their option) choose rather to
have no bodies at all, then bodies tormented with the stone or gout, or any
other sharp and sensible disease It is a known saying grounded on this
judgment of sense. Praestat semel quam semper mori, better it is to dye once
then to be always dying. This the tyrant Tiberius knew very well, and
therefore he would not suffer those, toward whom he purposed to exercise his
cruelty, to be put to a speedy death, but by lingering torments. And Suetonius
repo^t^th of him in that chapter, wherein he reckons up his barbarous and
cruel practices; These, says he, who would have dyed through the extremity of
their torment, he used means to keep alive (nam mortem adeo leve supplicium
putabat) For he accounted death so light a punishment; that when he heard that
one Carnulius, a man appointed to torments, had prevented him, he cried out,
Carnulius me evasit Carnulius has escaped mine hands. To a prisoner entreating
him to put him quickly to death he gave him this answer, Nondum tecum redii in
gratiam, I am not yet friends with thee; accounting it a great kindness to put
him quickly to death, whom he might have tortured. Many that were called into
question did partly wound themselves in their own houses, Ad vexationem
ignominiosam vitandam, to prevent that pain and ignominy, which they knew they
should endure; And partly poisoned themselves in the midst of the Court, as
they were going to their a^^aingment for the same cause Seneca speaking of one
Mecaenas, who was so a frayd of being dead, that he said he would not refuse
weakness, deformity, nec acutam crucem, no nor the sharpest crucifying, so
that he might live still in these extreamityes, he calls his desire.
Turpissimum votum, a base, and most ignoble, and unnatural with, and censureth
him for a most effeminate and contemptible man; because in all his evils he
was afraid of that which was the end of all evils, the privation of his being
And certainly we must needs conceive and censure them to be stocks and stones,
rather then flesh and blood, who can so put of all feeling, and sense, as to
think a tormented being in hell, to be a lighter and lesser evil, then no
being at all. We know that death to such as Job was, is not only better then
extreme pains, but better then all the joys of this world; by how much to be
present with the Lord Answer.
Christ, is better then to be absent from him; and we know, says Paul, to the
unspeakable comfort of all true Christians, that when the earthly house of this
our tabernacle is dissolved we have a building of God not made with hands, but
eternal in the heavens. So that I wonder not a little at these wild
discourses of this Author. When he says that even the stoutest and hardest
spirits would choose rather to have no bodies at all, then bodies tormented
with the stone or gout, what other is this then to desire that they were
impassible; would they not desire to have no souls too? and to be without
sense like stocks and stones? But let every sober man judge whether this be a
reasonable desire; what Christian justifies Job in cursing the day of his
birth? What Martyr has not rejoiced in suffering, not natural diseases, but
the cruellest torments that most cruel, and spightfull Tyrants could devise to
be inflicted upon them? And even to suffer other evils by course of nature
brought upon us with patience, acknowledging the hand of God therein, and
submitting unto his will, justifying him as righteous in all his ways, and
holy in all his works, and condemning our selves: even this long a go has
been accounted for Martyrdom in the judgment of Chrysostom. It is true such
proverbs have had their course in most nations. (...), praestat semel quam
semper mori. And amongst us. Better eye out then allwaies aching, better one
dead then allwaies dying. But shall we take this hand over head without a
difference between a Christian and unchristian, and heathenish interpretation?
As many as had an opinion of the immortal condition of the soul, and withal
of different conditions of men in joy, or sorrow, according to the condition of
their life spent in their courses virtuous, or vicious, if they were well
persuaded of their life past, they might accordingly think it better for them
to dye then live; And it is noe less desirable to them, who had no comfort in
their life past. Bradwardine has such a meditation. Mallem non esse quam te
offendere, I had rather have no being at all then to offend thee, speaking unto
God. Yet in sinning against Bradward. lib. 2. c. ult.
him we are matter of his glory, which we are not, when we have no being at
all. Matter of his glory I say, either in pardoning sin, or in punishing it,
or both. But what sober man will justify such a saying, I had rather have no
being at all then be troubled with the stone, or gout? Is not this the proper
place for patience to have its perfect work. And if it be urged that this
holds true only in evils tolerable, not in case they prove intolerable. I
answer that surely the pain of stone or gout is not intolerable, not any in the
judgment of Paul, whose profession was this I am able to do all things (his
meaning is to suffer all things) by the power of Christ that inableth me: and
when upon his prayer Iav, 1. 4.
that the messenger of Satan might be removed from him, he received this answer
from the Lord, My grace is sufficient for thee, and my power is made perfect in
thy weakness, What is Paul's resolution hereupon, though in himself a very
weak creature? I will gladly therefore rejoice in my infirmities, that the
power of Christ may dwell in me. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecution, in anguish, for Christ's sake. For
when I am weak then I am strong. Does not this extend to the very torments of
hell suffered by our Savior for our sakes. Undoubtedly, if the glory of heaven
possess the soul, though the pains of hell seize upon the body, such a one
shall have more cause to rejoice then to complain. These courses of Tiberius I
had cause to take notice of in mine answer to M. Hord. For, whereas he
slaundered our doctrine concerning the absoluteness of God's decrees, and
conforming them to the cruel courses of Tiberius: whereupon I showed, that if
such comparisons were not odious, but allowable, we might in like manner
compare God's courses in punishing sin temporal with torment eternal, with
courses of Tiberius here specified. And because nothing has a greater show of
cruelty in Tiberius then such courses of his as these. Hence they may with the
same liberty conclude, that the divine Majesty is cruel (which is a horrible
thing to utter) and unjust in punishing men everlasting in hell fire, for
sins committed by them for a very short space in the course of their lives.
But let this Author consider, were heathen Princes more exasperate against any
then against Christians, or were more cruel courses taken against any then the
servants of God. Yet did these Christians prevent their bloody and barbarous
desires by murdering their selves? Did they not rejoice in tribulation? Yet
death they might well prefer before the sweetest life. That they might enjoy
the Lord Christ And Austine has long ago in this very argument showed, that
even in destroying themselves they aimed at being at a state of freedom from
sorrows. So far were they from affecting to have no being at all. And first,
he distinguishes of the will as it signifies an appetite natural; or as it
signifies an absolute desire. As it signifies nature or appetite natural; so
by no means can it desire to have no being. All natural desire being for
rest, but nature finds no rest in its destruction: Rest of nature supposes
its being, and adds somewhat over and above thereunto, namely freedom from
trouble, unde siquis dicat vellem non esse, magis quam miserum esse;
respondebo, mentiris, quia cum miserum nolis esse tamen vis. Thus Durand
analizeth Austin's discourse hereupon. Then he proceeds to show that the
deliberative appetite cannot affect not being, for the avoiding of evil, save
only according to erroneous reason. All which this Author takes no notice of,
but pleases himself in his own confusion. All creatures have in them,
vestigia Dei, says Luther, to wit, in respect of their being; But man is,
Imago Dei. Shall right reason suggest the destroying of this for pain's sake?
Durandus proceeds and shows how according to erroneous reason a man may
destroy himself, by reason of some present miserable condition urging him;
conceiving that thereby he shall arrive to some secret existence wherein he
shall be free, as from the good things, so from the evil things of this world.
Unde Agustinus ubi supra dicit, quod aliqui urgente miseria sese interimu^t, eo
quod confugiunt ubi melius fore putaverint. A second manner is this, the
vehemence of evil suffered may so over-cloud and trouble reason, as to make
them conceive, that to have no being at all is better then to be in misery,
which is absurd, says he; for as much as the privation of evil is not good,
but by reason of obtaining of the contrary good; but no such good can be
obtained in being nothing, howsoever men through error of judgment may faigne
it otherwise. In which case he makes choice of nothing (thinking to make choice
of something) and consequently his election is erroneous, as Austine
concludes. But Seneca is the best flower in this Authors present discourse;
and the censure which he passes upon one Mecaenas, who, so he might live,
would not care what torments he suffered. Where by the way I observed; that
albeit this Author represents the common sense of heathens only in this. Yet
all heathens were not of the same mind. Secondly, I observe that Seneca who
censureth him did look for an immortal condition after death, which it seems
was no part of Mecaenas his Creed. And upon this ground his censure might
proceed. And indeed otherwise it is very strange that he should censure him for
effeminatenes, in respect of a resolute mind to endure tortures, which we know
full well is usually accounted virile aliquid, rather then muliebre, the part
of a man, more then the part of a woman. Thirdly, I find in Austine, that this
was the opinion of Varro and the Stoics, that it became a man to destroy
himself, rather then to endure some evils, and in this doctrine of theirs, he
finds some contradiction to another doctrine of their own, which was this,
Hanc esse naturae primam quodammodo and maximam vocem, ut homo concilietur
sibi, and propterea mortem naturaliter fugiat, This is the first and greatest
voice of nature, that man should be at one with himself, and therefore
naturally flies death. And herein Austine himself acknowledges them to
deliver a truth. Now consider, is a man at one with himself when he destroys
himself? Is he not rather at odds with himself in making a man's fortitude to
be a self destroyer? If so be that deserves to be called fortitude, as there
Austine speaks: Or how can the duty of preserving a man's self, be the
greatest voice of nature, if there be found a voice of nature countermanding
it, and commanding a man to kill himself? In suffering evils there is place
for the exercise of patience, of true fortitude and magnanimity of mind: But in
the utter destruction of nature there is no place for the exercise of any
virtue: which virtue was so far advanced by the Stoics, as touching the
power of it, as to be able to descend into Phalaris his Bull, as Cicero
discourses in the last of his Tusculane questions Yet not only great evils,
for the insufferable nature of them did urge them to destroy themselves, but
meaner evils most unreasonably. What moved Cato to destroy himself, but
because he would not come under Caesar? His stout spirit could not endure
subjection. Yet he read over Plato's discourse of immortality the night before,
and felt the edge of his sword, which some censure as an argument of some
pusillanimity. The Spaniard, who was whipped through Paris never changed his
pace, affecting to maintain the reputation of spanish gravity and
resolutenesse, though he smarted the more for it. And shall not our being in
the likeness and Image of God, be preferred before not being, though conjunct
with any dolorous suffering: when this Author will have no being, to be a
lighter and lesser evil then hell pains; does he not most manifestly signify
that it is a burden more easy to be borne? Thus ere he is aware most
contradictiously he supposes that, even in not being, there is a being. For
how is it possible that an evil can be borne, and that with more ease then
some other evil, by him who has no being at all. But let him strain his wits
to devise where first pain begins to be so great, that a man's utter
destruction is to be preferred before it, seeing it is apparent that all pain
is not such.

The 6. Sect:
To the reason on which the reply is grounded, which is melius est esse, quam
non esse. It is better to be, then to have no being. I answer that it is a
Sophisme or, a fallacy a non distributo ad distributum. To be in it self is M.
Mason's Addit. p. 22.
better then not to be, but it is not universally true in all particulars.
Again it is true in some cases, and ex hypothesi, si caetera sint paria; If
there be any equality in the Adjuncts, It is so far from being simply true;
that our Savior limiteth it, and puts a case wherein it is not true but the
contrary to it is true: That is the case of Judas of which we have said
somewhat before. It had been good etc. Which words St. Hierome expounding
says; it is simply and plainly averred by our Savior, that it is better to
have no being, then an evil being. This was the judgment too of Job. Why died
I not says he, in the birth? why did the knees prevent me? and why Hierom: in.
Matt: c. 26. v. 24. Job: 3. 11. 12. 13. Eccles. 4. 1. 2. 3.
did I suck the breasts? For now should I have lain still, and been quiet, and
should have slept then and been at rest. In which words he plainly implies,
that he thought it better to have had no birth and being, then such a painful
and miserable being. This was also the opinion of Solomon. So I returned says
he, and considered all the oppressions that are done under the sun; and
behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter etc.
Wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead, more then the living which
are yet alive. Yea better is he, then both they, which has not yet been, who
has not seen the evil works that are done under the sun. The words do
clearly show that Solomon did think it better to be dead, and to be deprived of
being, then to be oppressed by the mighty, and to be without comforters, that
is then to have a miserable and mournful being.

Indeed so Hierome says, but that is not all he says. For he labors to
prevent suspicion Answer.
that Judas had some being before he was borne: which was the error of Origin.
And the words of our Savior seems to favor it as Iansenius observes. Quibus
verbis Origenianum quid significare videtur, quasi homo ille fuerit antequam
nasceretur, quia nulli potest been esse nisi ei qui fuerit. And Hierome
himself upon Eccles. 4. 3. writes that some were of that opinion; namely,
Arminas nostras antequam ad nostra corpora ista descendant versari apud
superos, and tam diu beatas esse, quamdiu coelesti Jerusalem and choro
perfruantur Angelico. Neither does Hierome there pass any censure upon the
Authors of such an opinion. Here indeed upon Mat. 26. 24, he says, We must
not hereupon think that Judas had a being before he were born, because a well
being can agree to none but such as have a being. Which argument Hierome does
not answer. For when he adds, sed simpliciter dictum est, multo melius esse non
subsistere quam male subsistere. This rather confirms the antecedent, namely,
that it had been well for Judas, if he had not been; then gives any tolerable
or colorable answer to the consequence made therehence. And is not the
authourity of Austine as good as the authourity of Hierome in this? Iansenius
embraces Hieromes exposition; but Maldonat does not, but at large disputes for
another interpretation, the very same which I delivered before I were aware of
Maldonates exposition. And Iansenius though he follows Hierome in expounding
this place, yet he professes, that both Euthymius of old, and Caietan of late
do understand this place in the same manner that Durandus does, namely, de
nativitate ex utero, of Judas his bringing forth into the world, distinguishing
his birth from his conception, ut sit sensus, after this meaning, Bonum erat
vel fuisset ei, si cum erat in utero matris suae non fuisset editus in lucem,
sed mortuus tunc fuisset; and sepulchrum ipsius uterus matris extitisset; si
enim tunc mortuus fuisset non incidisset in tantam and talem condemnationem,
quantam and qualem natus propter immensum perditionis scelus erat excepturus.
It had been good for him, if being conceived in his Mothers womb he had never
been brought forth, but then had dyed, and his Mothers womb had been his
grave. For had he then dyed his condemnation had been nothing like so heavy, as
now it is. Let me add here Maldonat's interpretation of this place which is
memorable. Of this passage some dispute subtelly more then enough how it could
be better for Judas not to have been, whereas not to be is no good; to be
damned is some good (meaning in respect of being) For he that is damned is
somewhat and every thing that is, as it has a being is good. Hierome signifies
that some though Judas had a being before he was born; and that Christ of
purpose said not, it were better for that man, if he had never been; but if he
had never been born, to signify that though he had not been born; yet he
should have had a being, and so to have had natural good things without
evil. I imagine that Hierome herin noted the Originists, whose opinion was
that as souls were from the beginning created, and each according to his
merit either to remain without a body, or to be cast into a body as into a
prison. And indeed Origin so writes on this place, as he seems not to be far
off from such an opinion. After the same manner almost does Euthinius
interpret this. But such like phrases of speech are not to be accommodated to
the subtillty of the Schools. For they speak proverbiall speeches and vulgar,
which commonly are somewhat hyperbollicall, as Job 3. 11. Why have thou brought
me out of the womb? would I had perished, that the eye might not see me, that
I had been as if I had not been, from the womb carried to the grave. And Ier:
20 14, 15, and chap: 33. Let the day perish wherein I was born. For all these
proceed not from any deliberate judgment of the mind; but by way of complaint,
whose course is to amplify evils. Christ therefore in like manner speaks of
Judas, as it was to be thought he would speak of himself being in torment. Now
it was very credible that he would say; I would I had never been born, it had
been better for me never to have been born, then to suffer these pains:
considering that Job and Jeremy most holy men have uttered the like speeches,
under far less sufferings. Add to this that Christ says not, It had been
better that Judas had not been born born; but that it had been better to him,
to wit, in his opinion and judgment: As we see it befalls many suffering bitter
evils, to prefer death before life, sorrow and pain before judgment, whereas
without doubt to live is better then to dye.

In the next place this Author says, this was also the opinion of Solomon.
Better is he then both they, which has not yet been; The words, says he, do
clearly show that Solomon didthinke it Eccles. 4. 1, 2, 3.
better to be dead and deprived of being, then to be oppressed of the mighty,
and to have no comforters, that is then to have a miserable and mournful
being. Surely Solomon was not ignorant that of them that are dead there are two
conditions; some in the state of damnation; others in the state of salvation.
To be with God in the state of salvation, we make no question but that it is a
better condition, then to be living here on the earth in the greatest
happiness that the world can afford. But to be dead and in the state of
damnation, can it enter into the heart of any sober Christian, to believe that
Solomon ever thought such a condition to be better then to live here on earth,
in the most afflicted condition that is incident to the sonns of men? And does
this Author well in coupling death with deprivation of being, as if every one,
or any one that is dead were deprived of being? Surely all the dead are not
deprived of all kind of living. For God is the Father of Abraham, Isaak, and
Jacob; And he is not the God of the dead but of the living. Again consider who
are more oppressed by the men of this world then the Children of God? For as
our Savior told his disciples The world will love her own, but because ye are
not of the world, and I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer Io: 15. 19.
persecution, says Paul, and through manifold temptations we must enter into
the kingdom of God. And our Savior forewarned his disciples, Ye shall be
hated of all men for my names sake. Now is it credible, that, this Author
should believe or conceive that ever King Solomon was of such an opinion, as to
profess, that it is better for the Children of God to be deprived of being
then to live in oppression? Consider farther, the words chiefly pertinent to
this Authors purpose alleged out of King Solomon are these, Better then they
both is he which has not yet been. Now I presume this is spoken not of such an
one, who as yet has not been; though hereafter he shall be. For such an one
may be in as great oppression when his time comes, as any other is, or has
been, amongst those that have lived before him* But rather of such an one as
never yet has been, nor never shall be Now judge whether this can admit any
sober sense, unless in a vulgar phrase, according to the intemperate
expressions which in time of oppression are uttered by men wherein as Maldonat
observes, there is allwaies something hyperbolicall, and such as must not be
examinedaccording to the subtilty of the Schools. For consider, is there but
one such that never yet was, nor evershall be; or are there many such? If many
such, how come they to differ, who have nothing wherein to differ? What a vain
imagination is it to talk of particulars that never had, or shall have
existence, to ascribe unto them a better condition then is found Tusculan,
quaest. 5.
in them, that have not being only but life also? We know Cicero has professed
and that according to the opinion of Stoics, that a virtuous man may descend
into Phallaris his Bull without any destruction of his happy condition. I have
consulted Solomo Iarhi upon this place, and he tells us what he has seen in
the Jews Midrach, namly, that there are 974 generations which have grown old
and wrinckled from the creation, who yet never were created, and belike the
Authors thereof conceive that Solomon spoke of one of these. Rabbi Aben Ezra,
proposes the question, how can any better condition be said to be unto him,
who was never created. And his answer is, that we must not wonder at such a
speech of Solomon; for such speeches have their course. (...) by reason of the
shortness or streightnes of the languages; and therefore we must express our
selves figuratively, and to speak hyperbollically is to speak figuratively. I
betake me to Mercer hereupon to acquaint my self with his judgment upon this
place. Hoc autem dicitur; says he, semper magnitudine aerumnarum hujus vitae
considerata. Coeterum Christus alia ratione habita beatos pronunciat, qui
persecutionem patiuntur propter justitiam maxim and Dei nomen; quia
spiritualia and coelestia considerat repositam illis coronam gloriae in
futurum. Noster Solomon externa tantum and praesentis vitae incommoda perpendit
quae vere hydra est. Thus he speaks allwaies having his eyes fixed upon the
greatness of the miseries of this life, but Christ in an other respect
pronounces them blessed who suffer persecution for righteousness sake,
especially and for the cause of God, because he considers spiritual and
heavenly things, the Crown of Glory laid up for them against the time to come.
Our Solomon considers only outward things and the incommodities of this life
present, which indeed is as it were a Serpent with seven heads. This is the
first expression of Mercer in his interpretation of this place, which is as
much as to say, that, Solomon speakesherein according to the judgment of a
natural man. But Mercer has yet a farther reach then this, which follows by
way of instance or exemplification thus, Sienim earum ratio habeatur ab eo qui
illas perfert, mortem peroptat, aut etiam nunquam fuisse. For when he that
suffers these miseries shall consider the weight and heavines of the^ he will be
ready to wish he were dead, or that he had never been; and no marvel: For as
Maldonat observes, even holy men of God such as Job and Jeremy, have broken
forth into such imprecations, judicio dolor corrupto, as he speaks, the pain
which they suffer corrupting their judgment, this is to speak not only
according to the judgment of a natural man, but according to the judgmet of a
man himself that suffers such miseries. Furthermore Mercer takes notice of
the School-mens discourses to the contrary, juxta Scholarum subtilitatem,
according to accurate judgmment, as Maldonat speaks. Sophisticantur nostrorum
nonnulli, praestare adhuc male esse, quam omnino non esse. Some of ours dispute
that it is better to be in an ill case, then to have no being at all. Now does
Mercer oppose this? Nothing less he rather admits it, and without
contradiction thereunto, proceeds in his interpretation Sed ut ut sit, vis
maloru^ consideratur. Buthowsoever that be, the force of the evil is
considered, to wit, as before has been showed. 1. As in the judgment of a
natural man looking no farther then to the evils of this world. And 2ly,
according to the sense and judgment of him that suffers them, Quomodo and
Christus dicebat de Judah, melius fuerat homini illi si nunquam natus fuisset
gravitatem praevidens tormentorum illius. After which manner Christ said of
Judas, It had been better for that man if he had never been borne, foreseeing
the greivousnesse of his torments. The Ancient Greeks and Latins used the like
proverb, Optimum non nasci, aut ubi natus sis, quam ocyssime aboleri. Graecum
epigramma inquit

(...)
(...)
The best condition was not to be borne; the next to dye soonest. Such were the
conceits of natural men in consideration of the evils of this world. And
Cicero is full of such passages in the first of his Tusculans questions. In the
last place I meet with a fair translation of this passage of Solomon in
Piscator, who sets his translation on the other side to the translatio^ns of
Iunius, and thus it runs. Sed beatiore^ ut risque judicabam eu^, qui non
videt facta ista mala quae fiunt sub sole. But more hapy then both I judged him
that has not seen the evil works that are done under the Sun. For albeit in
the Hebrew something more there is, which is not here expressed, to wit, which
has not been. Yet he conceives the last words to contain the fuil sense of
them; and therefore he interprets these words of those who have perished in
their Mothers womb, or in their infancy or childhood, not of those who never
had any being, perceiving manifestly the foul absurdity of such a speech
according to accurate calculation. And Mercer himself professes that both
these expressions are of the same force in Solomon, and so that is more plainly
set down in the latter, which is more obscurely expressed in the former, which
is a very usual course in Scripture.

To this assenteth Sir Fran^s Bacon in his Colors of good and evil; where
against this Mathematical position (as he cause it) that there is no proportion
between something and nothing, and that the before the M. Mason's Adait. p. 22.
23. 24.
degree of privation (...) eater then the degree of diminution; he excepteth
that it is fal^e in sundry cases, and among the est in (...); namely, when the
degree o^ diminution is more ^^^^tive then the degree of privation In this case
at (...) (...) much better then a diminution. Hence the (...) forms of speech.
Better eye out l^e (...) Make or mar etc Some evils o^ pains (perhaps) either
for their lightness because they may be well end ^e^; or for their (...) because
they are quickly over; are less: hen resolution into nothing And a man had
better for a wh^^^ (...) them, then loose (...) to be ^^d of them: because his
being may afford (...) presently, or afterward such and ^o many (...) things,
as will more then recomp^nc^ (...) pain^s. But when his pains a^^ so many and
violent, (...) no other good then a poor being, or to ^inch him, that he
cannot enjoy or Joy in the good^ that remain, it were a thousand times better
for him to have no being; and such a^e the pains of (...)* which for the^
greatness are infinite, producing many miserable weepings and waitings and
^^^^ning of teeth all symptoms of intolerable greifes, and for their ^eng^^
eternal. The wo^me never ^^eth, the fi^c is never quenched but the breath of
the Lord as a river ofbr^^*stone does kindle it forever. And therefore it is
incomparably better to cease to be, then to live in th^se torments, which
cannot be equalled by any good, which a being can make us capable of, much
less by that poor little (...) good, which is all the good the damned enjoy
in hell.

This Sophistical evasion therefore and all others of the like sert
notwithstanding. I doubt not but I may safely say, that the unavoidable
damna^^^n of so many mi^^ions, cannot be absolutely and antecedently intended
by God, without the greatest injustice and cruelty which may in no wise be
imputed unto God. Plutar^h speaking of the Pagans, who to pacify the anger of
their gods, did sacrifice to them men and wo^men; it had been much better with
Di^gor is and his fellows to deny the being of a God, then confessing a God to
think he delights in the blood of men. How much rather may we say it were
better to be an Atheist and deny God, then to believe or report him to be a
devourer of the Souls of men? The like argument is pressed by Eusebius against
those cruel and merc^^es gods of the Pagans, doubtless, says he, if there were
any foot-step or spark of goodness in them for which they might deserve to be
called good, they would be disposed to do good, and desirous to save all men,
they would love justice and take a care of men. And being such how could they
delight in their sl^ughter etc. Yea he concludes that they were devils or
evil spirits; and not Gods or good spirits, because if they were good they
would do good; whereas those that are evil use to do hurt. I will therefore
shut up my first reason with the speech of Prosper, God indeed is the Creator
of all men, but yet of no man for this end, that he might be damned; the reason
why we are created is one, and why we are damned an th^r.

The Authority of S. Francis Bacon is most aliene from the present purpose,
according to Answer.
the instance given by him, which is only of a destruction of a member, as
Better eye out then always akeing. Yet this holds not, save of such an
akeing, as is more evil and dangerous, then the sight is beneficial, but we
speak of the universal destruction of the creature. The same appears by the
generality of the exception given, as in case the decree of diminution be more
sensible (for so I conceive it should be, and not sensitive) then the decree of
privation. Whereby it is manifest that he speaks of such a privation whereof
the creature is sensible, though sensible with less smart and pain then the
decree of diminnion. Otherwise if it be taken in comparison of no sense of the
one, and some sense of the other, it would follow herehence that death is to be
preferred before a pain: For every man is sensitive of the one, no man is
sensitive of the other. I desire no fairer way to come to an issue in this
particular, then that which is here proposed by this Author. He grants that
some evil and pains, either for lightness or shortness are less then resolution
into nothing. Yet with a perhaps only As if by reason of a pain in his back, he
were in doubt to resolve whether it were better for him to be turned into
nothing, then to endure it. Is this man yet resolved whether it be better for
him to suffer Martyrdom for Christ, then to be (I do not say resolved; for as
I know no composition of nothing; so neither do I know any resolution into
nothing) turned into nothing? ^t is not credibile: How then co^es in this
parenthesis of a perhaps, was it to set a good face, upon his argument? or was
it because he saw the dangerous con^equence of this his concession, being
direct and absolute? For I find him more cunning then solid throughout like a
crafty Crowder For seeing himself confesses that some pains and Sorrows are
willingly to be suffered by every reasonable man, rather then that he should be
turned into nothing. Let us divide the latitude of pains and sorrows into a
thousand degrees, if he think good: And then let him set down unto us at which
degree it begins to make a man more miserable, the^ to be turned into nothing.
In like manner as touching the durance of these sorrows; if he says that the
suffering of hell pains for an hour, for a day, for a year does not make a man
worse, the^ to be turned into nothing. Let him define u^nto us where that
proportion of time in suffering hell begins, which makes a man more miserable
the^ to be turned into nothing Diverse Divines maintain that Christ suffered hell
pains for us: Will this Author say that this made him more miserable the^ to be
turned into nothing? Had he suffered the^ to this very day, what helhound will
dare to say it had been better for him to be turned into nothing? If S. Austin
prayed, Da Domine quod jubes and jube quod vis. Lord give me grace to do what
thou co^mma^dest, and the^ command what thou will. Pelagius spighted Austin for
this.) May we not in like manner pray Lord give us grace to bear what thou
layest upon us, and then lay upon us what thou will? Nay is it not Austins
profession that the punishe^nt of infants dying in Original sin is mitissima
and such as they themselves would not choose to be turned into nothing, to be
freed from it? And is it not in the power of God to give a man strength to bear
the very pains of hell and that without sin? Did not Christ suffer the^ without
sin, even such sorrows as the Greek Church professed in their Liturgy to be
unknown sorrows, as Bishop Andrews sometims observed in a passion sermon of
his? And if it be in the power of God to enable a man to bear the pains of hell
for an hour, a day, a year; is it not in his power to enable the^ to hold out
in suffering the^, and that without sin for the space of ten thousand years,
and that in infinitu^? Again all this while this Author takes no notice of the
misery of sin, which Arminius (his well beloved) professes to be greater the^
the misery of punishe^nt. And he gives his reason for it, becuse illud bono
divino, hoc humano oppositu^ est. That is opposite to a divine, this to a^
humane good? Will he say that it is better for a man to be turned into nothing,
then to rob, steal, take the name Exam. Praedest. Perk. p. 103.
of God in vain, profane the Lords sabbath, to ly with another man's wife, to
oppose truth against his knowledge and conscience? If this be his opinion can
he plead the common consent of the world, or the common sense of man for this?
See by the way how he virifies the being of man which he calls a poor little
entitative good God looked upon al things that he had made, and behold they
were very good, not the least fly, or e^met, or worm is excepted from the
co^mendatio, yet man was made after the Image and likeness of God. In other
creaturs are found vestigia Dei, footsteps of God, as Martin Luther observes
out of the Ancients, but man is Imago Dei the very Image of God; Yet this
Author calls it a poor little e^titative good; and barely says it, and when he
has done, wipes his lips from al sophisticatio^, and claps that upon the back
of his adversaries very authoritatively. Then the question is only of Miseria
paenae, whether it makes a man worse then annihilatio^, not in a co^plicate
condition with sin, which is the condition of the damned. Yet thus he carries
it to serve his turn; whereas in Arminius his opinion, the sinful condition of
the damned, makes them more miserable then their torments. But if the torments
of hell in themselves are able to make a man in a worse condition then to be
turned into nothing, then an holy Angel or Saint should choose rather to be
turned into nothing, the^ to suffer the tore^nts of hell. And the School
divines dispute severally of the misery of sin, and the misery of tore^nt,
and that with such different resolutions upon the point, as to maintain, that
albeit the misery of torment is not so bad as utter a^nihilation, yet the
misery of sin, is. Yet therein I willingly profess I am not of their mind.
For what? are not the Children of God sinners? Now what sober Christian will
affirm, that it were better for them to be annihilated, then to be sinners. If
you say, therefore it is not better for God's children to be annihilated then
to be sinners; because they are not only sinners, but they are in the state of
grace. I proceed farther, and demand whether God's Elect before their calling,
being yet in the state of sin, as Manasses and Saul before their vocation, were
better to be annihilated, then to be as they are. What if I am a sinner, yet
while I have any being I may mourn for my sin, I may serve God, I may enjoy
his favor in the pardoning of my sin, is not this a better condition then
not to be, which is a condition conjunct as well with the destruction of
sanctity as of sin?

But the former argument, which he takes so much pains to enervate, he calls a
sophistical evasion, and adds that so are all others of the like sort, very
magisterially and resolutely. But what those others are he does not so much as
name. Not so much as one of Austin's, whose discourse alone I proposed on this
point; together with an argument of Durand's, neither of all which does he
touch, yet I am the mark set up by him to shoot at, not Durand, not any one
of the Schoolmen, not Austin whose discourses alone I proposed. And as for the
argument here mentioned, melius est esse, quam non esse; It is better to be
then to have no being, therefore it is better to be in hell torment then not to
be. This is neither argument, nor any of those that I proposed out of Durand
and Austin. Durand's argument is, To be annihilated is an universal
destruction of man's nature, not only of his well being, but of being: but hell
pains is the destruction only of his well being not of his being. Neither is
it answerable to the argument formerly mentioned by him p. 19. which was this.
He that wants a being enjoys no good, but he that is tormented in hell has a
being, and by consequence some thing that is good. Now this argument comes
nerest to Maldonats discourse upon that of our Savior, speaking of Judas. It
had been good for that man he had not been borne. Some, says he, dispute
subtly more then enough, how it could be better for Judas, not to have Mat.
26. 24.
been; whereas not to be is no good, to be damned is some good. For he that is
damned is somewhat; And every thing that is, as it has a being, is good. And
we know that man's being is no common good but a special one, as being made
after God's own Image and likeness. And look with what judgment this Author
extenuates, being humane, calling it a poor, little entitative good; with the
same judgment he might extenuate Angelical being. For even among Angels some
have their portion in hell fire. But now he comes to his first proposition,
that unavoidable damnation of so many millions can not be absolutely and
antecedently intended by God, without the greatest injustice and cruelty. The
question is of the suffering of hell pains, whether it be worse then to be
annihilated? This Author runs upon the term damnation, which is a civil
and judicial act. Is there no difference between these? They that say Christ
sufferd the pains of hell, do they say Christ was damned? Then to speak with
a fuller mouth he puts in the damnation of so many millions, whereas if the
damnation of one may be intended by God without injustice after what manner
soever, undoubtedly the damnation of never so many millions may. Then he helps
himself with the Epithet of unavoidable added to damnation, and the term
absolutely affixed to God's intention, to no purpose that I know, but to abuse
himself and others by confusion; for fear least the truth should break forth
to their conviction. To intend damnation avoidable, what is it but to intend it
conditionally. And to intend damnation not absolutely, is all one with to
intend it conditionally. Now to intend the damnation of any man conditionally
is with this Author as much, to intend his salvation as his damnation. Yet this
he calls the intention of damnation. And Bradwardine has long ago maintained
and demonstated by evidence of reason, that there is no conditionate will of
God: And this Author will not say (I suppose) that God did intend that Christ
should suffer hell pains conditionately, or that if he did inte^d it
absolutely, he was unjust in so doing. Now both D. Iackson expressly confesses,
that the distinction of will antecedent and consequent in God* is to be
understood, not as touching the act of willing, but as touching the thing
willed. And Gerardus Vossius acknowledges that after the same manner must the
conditionate will, which is ascribed unto God, be interpreted. Now we willingly
confess that the thing willed and intended by God to Reprobates, namely,
damnation, befalls none, but in case they dye in sin without repentance. And
as already I have showed not any of our Divines maintain that God intended to
damn any man but for sin. Only the maine point of difference between us is,
as touching the conferring and denying grace, even the grace of regeneration,
the grace of faith and repentance. Herein we willingly confess that God
carries himself merely according to the pleasure of his own will, according
to that of the Apostle, He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens. Now on this point this Author keeps himself close, and earthes
himself within his own concealements, lest he should betray the bitter Leven
of Pelagianisme, in maintaining that grace is conferred according unto works,
which cannot be avoided by him, if once he comes to deal on this Argument. He
thinks he has great advantage in the point of Reprobation, and very free he is
here, but declines the point of election, and point of conferring grace, which
argues a naughty disposition, practicing by indirect courses to circumvent and
suppress the truth, rather then confer any thing for the clearing of it: yet
see his confused carriage in the very point. For when he speaks of damnation
avoidable and unavoidable, he takes no pains to manifest in what sense he
takes it to be avoidable; as whether by power of nature, or power of grace. Is
it his meaning that any man's damnation is avoidable by grace? We deny it not.
Or is it his meaning that it is avoidable by nature? we utterly deny this. But
this man counts it his wisdom not to speak distinctly, but work his
advantage upon confusion of things that differ; but let all such take heed,
least utter confusion be their end. But if it be his meaning that all men have
power to avoid damnation if they will, to wit, in as much as they have power to
believe if they will, to repent if they will: I would he would deal fairly
once, and come to this. The Scripture is express, That they that are in the
flesh cannot please God, that the natural man discerns not the things of
God, that they are foolishness unto him, Romans 8. 1 Cor. 2. 14. Ioh. 12. Romans 2
Deuteronomy. 29. 34. Phil. 1. 29. Ephesians. 2. 8. Acts. 18. 11. 1 Timothy 2 25.
neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned. That, they
cannot believe, cannot repent. Of the Children of Israel in the wilderness
that, God had not given them eyes to see, ears to hear, nor hearts to
perceive forty years. And truly we take faith and repentance to be the gift
of God. And the habits of them not to be a power to believe and repent if a man
would, but an habitual and moral inclination of them to believe, to repent.
And habits (as it was wont to be said) Agunt ad modum naturae, do work after
the manner of nature. And it is very strange that supernatural grace should
not. And long ago I have learnt in Austin, that to do good, and obey God if a
man will, is rather nature then grace. For the will alone is all in all as
touching acts moral, good or evil; and till the will be changed, we are as
far off as ever, from performing any thing that is pleasing in the sight of
God. This is the peculiar glory of God's grace, To make us perfect to every
good work, and to work in us that with is pleasing in his sight through Jesus
Christ, and this he does according to his good pleasure. For grace is not
conferred according unto Heb. 13. 21. Phil. 3. 13.
works. That was condemned as a pestilent doctrine long ago in the Synod of
Palestine, and all along in diverse Counsels against the Pelagians. How gladly
should I embrace any delineation of this Authors opinion in the point of grace
and free will, the rather, because I seem to smell who he is by this which
follows. For I remember sometime under whose hand I read it; namely, that,
Plutarch speaking of the Pagans, who to pacify the anger of their gods, did
sacrifice to them men and women, should say, It had been much better with
Diagoras and his fellows to deny the being of a God, then confessing a God, to
think he delights in the blood of men. But allbeit this supercilious and
confident professor be of Plutarch's mind in this, I willingly profess I am
not. I know no natural reason why he should delight more or less in the blood
of beasts, then in the blood of men. Only it pleased him by the blood of Bulls
and Goats to represent the delight he took in the satisfaction made in the
blood of his own Son. We know in what errand the Lord sent Abraham three
days journey, namely, to sacrifice his Son upon mount Moriah; had not God
hindered him it had been done; Abraham knew no other but that it should be done,
when he answered his Son saying, My God will provide himself of a burnt
offering. Abraham did not Genesis 22.
break forth in this man's language, to say he would rather deny there was any
God, then believe he delights in blood; neither had he delighted in blood,
though Isaak had been sacrificed, but in the obedience of his servants. Nor had
Isaac received any loss by this. For Abraham knew that God was able to raise
him from the dead. Did not Samson sacrifice himself. Christ was content to
shed his precious blood for us, and we by his grace shall be content to shed
our blood for him, and that according to his good will and pleasure. Let
heathens thus discourse who are nothing acquainted with the powers of the world
to come; but a foul shame it is for Christians to comply with them. But, how
much rather, says this Author, may we say it were better to be an Atheist,
then to believe or report him to be a devourer of the souls of men. Yet I
cannot be persuaded it is better to be an Atheist then to belive even this. For
I must not give ground to a confident Theologue for his bare protestation sake.
What is it I pray for God to be a devourer of the souls of men? Is it any
other then to be a tormenter of of them in hell fire? Now does not this man
believe that God deals so with millions of souls? Does not he profess, that,
the breath of the Lord as a river of brimstone does kindle that fire? what out
recuydance has possessed the spirit of this Cavaliere that he should flaunt it
to the world in this manner? It seems his atcheivements known so well to the
world have puffed him up, that he swells with the conceit of it: And it is enough
for him now to brave it with protestations instead of arguments, wherein having
known him so well heretofore, I cannot but wonder at the poverty of his spirit;
he will battle so long upon his credit and reputation with the world, that it
will crack at length; and he prove bankrupt: So that protest what he will no
man will trust him for a groat. Now in that manuscript of his, which it was my
hap sometime to have a view of, his protestation upon the book of that saying
of Plutarch was somewhat different, thus. I protest unto you, I think it was
less dishonor able to the blessed Trinity to say with the Atheist there is no
God, then to form such a God, as the decree of Reprobation maintained by the
Contraremonstrants, makes him to be. This protestation though it had course in
private, yet here it is changed that it might not see the light of the Press.
For it is well known that this touches nearely a whole Synod of the Church
reformed; and that countenanced by King James and diverse worthy Divines of this
Kingdom subscribing to it, some yet living, and two of them in Apice
Episcopali, in Episcopal dignity. Yet what is that doctrine of the
Contraremonstrants that he pincheth upon? It is well known that their general
tenet is that God ordaines no man to damnation but for sin; some difference
there has been, and is about the ordering of God's decrees, which is merely
apex Logicus, and what my opinion is thereabouts is well known; namely that in
no moment of time or reason does God ordain any man to damnation, before the
consideration of sin, more particularly thus; that all besides the Elect, God
has ordained to bring them forth into the world in their corrupt mass, and to
permit them to their selves, to go on in their own ways, and so finally to
persevere in sin, and lastly to damn them for their sin, for the
manifestation of the Glory of his Justice on them, and of the greater mercy on
the vessels of mercy, whom he has prepared unto glory; inasmuch as he has of
his free grace provided better for them, then for millions of others. Only as
touching the grace of regeneration, of faith and of repentance; he did not only
ordain of his mere pleasure to bestow that on his Elect, and not on
Reprobates; but in time he does of his mere pleasure confer that grace on
some; denying it to others. This doctrine is so dishonorable to the Trinity in
this Authors judgment, as that to deny there is any God at all, he thinks to be
less dishonorable: A prodigious assertion! We have the less cause to be
moved, when he preferred the annihilation of our natures, before the suffering
of hell pains. When he seems to prefer the annihilating of the blessed
Trinity, before the renouncing of his own vile fancies. As for that of
Eusebius, true it is, the god's of Paynims sought only the destruction of those
that served them, and that not of their bodies but their souls also. The true
God put Abraham once upon the sacrificing of his Son, for the trial of his
faith and obedience, but perceiving his obsequious readiness, took a course to
restrain him. Of him it it is true, He saves both man and beast, and the eyes
of all do wait upon him, and he gives them meat in due season, he hears the
cry of Ravens, and not a sparrow lights upon the ground without his providence;
The very Lions roaring after their prey do seek their meat at (the hands of)
God. Yet if he be pleased to save our souls, we have reason to submit unto him
in doing what he will with our bodies, which yet one day he will raise,
glorious bodies, when mortality shall be swallowed up of life. We acknowledge
no other end of man's creation, and of all other Divine Acts of God, but his
own glory. For even there where Solomon professes, God has made even the
wicked against the day of evil, he withal acknowledges, that both them and
all things, he has made for himself. God of his mere pleasure created all,
but of his mere pleasure he damneth none. But every one that is damned is
damned for his sin, and that wilfully committed and contumaciously continued
by them that come to ripe years. For as Austin says Libertas sine gratia non
est libertas, sed contumacia: Liberty without grace, is not liberty, but
wilfulness or contumacy. I come to the second part of his first argument.

The second part of the Argument.
Sect. 1.
M. Mason's Addit. p. 24. 25.
Secondly, this opinion charge God with men's sins on earth, and makes him
the Author, not of the sin only that entered by Adam into the world, but of
all other sins, that have been, are, or shall be committed to the worlds end.
No murders, robberies, rapes, adulteries, insurrections, treasons,
blasphemies, persecutions, or any other abominations whatsoever fall out at any
time, or in any place, but they are the necessary productions of God Almightys
decrees. The Scripture I am sure teaches us another lesson. Thou art not a God,
says David that have pleasure in wickedness. And the Prophet Esaias tells the
people, that when they did Psalm. 5. 4. Es. 66. 4. Iam: 1. 13. 14
evil in the sight of the Lord, they did choose the things which he would not.
Let no man say when he is tempted I am tempted of God. For God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man; but every man is tempted when
he is drawn away with his own concupiscence. And St. John when he had referred
all the sins of the world to three heads, the lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eyes, and the pride of life; tells us that, they are not of the Father, but
of the world. To which speeches let me add the speech of Stracides (though not
of the same authority.) Say not 1 Jo: 2. 16.
thou it is through the Lord that I fell away; for thou ought not to do the
things that he hates. Say not thou he has Ecclus. 15. 12.
caused me to err; for he has no need of the sinful man.

2. Pious antiquity has constantly said the same, and pressed it with sundry
reasons; some of which are these as follow. If God be the Author of sin,
then he is worse then the Devil; because the devil does only tempt and
persuade to sin, and his action may be resisted, but God, by this opinion,
does will and procure Prosper resp. ad Object. 11. Vincent.
by a powerful and effectual decree, which cannot be resisted. This is
Prospers argument, who to some objecting that by St. Austin's doctrine, when
Fathers defile their own Daughters, and Mothers their own Sons, Servants
murder their masters, and men commit any horrible villainies, it comes to
pass because God has so decreed. Answers that if this were laid to the
Devils charge, he might in some sort clear himself of the imputation. Quia
etsi delectatus est furore peccantium, probaret tamen sc non intulisse vim
criminum. Because though he be delighted with man's sins yet he does not, he
cannot compel men to sin: What a madness therefore is it to impute that to
God which cannot be justly fathered upon the Devil.

2. He cannot be a punisher of sin: For none can justly punish those effences
of which they are the Resp. Obi. 4. Vincent l. 1. ad Monim. c. 19. l. 2. cont.
Marcion. c. 9 Basil. Homil. Quod Deus non est etc.
Authors. This is Prospers argument too. It is against reason to say that he
which is the damner of the Devil would have any one to be the devils Servant.
This reason Fulgentius uses likewise illius rei Deus ultor est, cujus Auhor
non est. Tertullian also before them has said. He is not to be accounted the
Author of sin, who is the forbidder yea and the condemner of it.

3. He cannot be God, because he should not be just, nor holy, nor the Judge of
the world, all properties essential to God. And this is Basil's reason, who
has written a whole Homily against this wicked assertion. It is all one (says
he) to say that God is the Author of sin, and to say he is not God.

3 Upon these and the like considerations I may well conclude, that, the
opinion which charge God with the sins of men, is neither good nor true.

It is first laid to the charg of our Divines that by this their opinion, they
make God the Answer.
Author of sin; not of the first only that entered by Adam into the world,
but of all other sins, that have been, are, or shall be committed in the
world, as murders, robberies, rapes, adulteries, insurrections, treasons,
blasphemies, heresies, persecutions, or any other abominatio^s. But in all
these wastfull discourses not a word of proof. The charge is made in the first
place, the proof last. All that he labors to prove here is, that God is not
the Author of sin. Bellarmine has bestowed, or rather cast away a whole book
on this crimination, to him Arminius referrs Perkins, telling him that he
should have answered Bellarmine. I have taken some pains to perform that
task upon that motion of Arminius. I would I could receive from this Author a
reply to any material particular thereof, the rather because I understand in
part his Zeal for Bellarmine in his age, correcting the harsh exceptions he
has made against him in his younger days. And let every indifferent Reader
compare this Authors discourse, with that discourse of Bellarmine, and judge
indifferently what an hungry piece this is in comparison to that of
Bellarmines; And whether his pains had not been better bestowed in replying
upon my answer thereunto, then to add such scraps as these to that full table
of Bellarmin's provision; and whether these deserve any answer, that whole
discourse of Bellarmine being refuted throughout. Bradwardine disputes the
question, Si and quomodo Deus vult and non vult peccatum. I say he disputes it
indifferently on both sides; and let every Scholar judge and weigh, whether it
be not a very ponderous argument, and consider well his resolution, and where
he differrs any thing from our Divines in this Calvin observing how frequent
the Scripture is in testifying God's hand to be operative in abominable
courses, thereupon writes a Treatise. De occulta Dei providentia in malo; in
all which he exactly conformes himself to Scripture expressions. And these and
such like vile Criminators may as well tax God's word for making God the
Author of sin, as Calvin; who most accurately conformes himself to the
testimonies of Divine Scripture. I remember to have heard a disputation
sometimes at Heidelberge on this Argument, where Copenius the President or
Moderator made manifest, that look upon what grounds they criminated Calvin for
making God the Author of sin; upon the same grounds they might criminate the
very word of God to make him the Author of sin. For Calvine throughout in his
expressions conformes himself to the language of the holy Ghost. Yet, what one
of our divines can he produce, affirming that, God takes pleasure in sin.
Piscator confesses that, God takes no pleasure in the death of him that
dies, upon that place in Ezechiel; how much less in wickedness. And he
illustrates it in this manner: For albeit it cannot be denied, but that God
wills the death of him that dies. For he is the God to whom vengeance
belongs; yet he takes no pleasure in it. Like as a sick-man would be content
to take a bitter potion for the recovery of his health; yet he takes no
pleasure in that bitter cup. And in like manner, albeit, God hardened Pharaoh's
heart that he should not let Israel go; and as the Apostle speaks, hardens
whom he will. Whereby it comes to pass infallibly that they do not obey the
Gospel, as appears by the objection following. Why then does he complain.
For who has resisted his will? And albeit the Saints of God expostulate with
him in this manner; Why have thou caused us to err from thy ways, Es. 63. 17.
and hardened our hearts against thy fear? Yet we know that God takes no
pleasure in disobedience, or in the hardness of any man's heart, nor can be the
Author of evil, with Sir Francis Bacons distinction in the book formerly
mentioned by this Author. Non quia non Author, sed quia non mali. So that
albeit he hardens whom he will unto disobedience, and in the prophet Esayes
phrase causes men to err from his ways. Yet the Lord himself we know is
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, though we are not able
to dive into the gulf, and search out the bottom of his judgments, and no
marvel. For they are unsearchable; Yet we make no question but through Gods
mercy convenient satisfaction may be found without any such sha^efull course of
disme^bring scripture, and taking notice only of such passages as represent
Gods displeasure against sin Es. 63. 17. Romans 11.
and sinners, and dissembling all other passages which drove Austin to
confess, occulto Dei judicio, by the secret judgment of God, fieri
perversitatem cordis, the perversity of man's heart has its course, much less
by setting the^ together by the ears. And I nothing doubt but the issue will
be on the part of such, as are of this Authors spirit, either wholly to deny
original sin, or so to emasculate the vigor of it, as to profess that it is
in the power of man to cure it; or notwithstanding the strength of it, to
believe and repent if he will; which Aug: de great: and lib: arbit.
though they pretend to be wrought by a certain universal grace; Yet I nothing
doubt but we shall be able to prove that such a power is mere nature and no
grace. Be it so that wicked men in their wicked courses do chose the things
that God would not, Who would think that this Author, who makes such a flourish
should content himself with such beggarly arguments; or that the world should
be so simple as to be terrifyed with such scarcrowes? For is it not apparent
that in scripture phrase there is voluntas praecepti, a will of Es. 66. 24.
commandment, as well as voluntas propositi, a will signifying Gods purpose
and decree? So the^ though they choose the things that God willed not in
reference to his will of commandment; yet it might be Gods will, that is his
purpose that even such sins should come to pass. For was it not the will of
God that Pharaoh should not let Israel go for a while? Did he not harden him
to this purpose that so he might make himself known in the land of Egypt by
his judgeme^ts? and did he not reveal this to Moses to the comfort of the
children of Israel, and keep the^ from despair in conte^plation of the
obstinacy of Pharaoh's Lib. 1. de Amiss. gratia.
spirit, when they were assured that God had an hand in hardening Pharaoh to
stand out? And does not Bellarmine profess that malu^ fieri permit sin and
Deo bonu^ est, it is good that evil should co^ to pass by Gods permission?
And shall it be unbeco^ing the divine nature to will that which is good? And
where is it that Bellarmine affirms this? even there where he opposes the
same Doctrine of ours which this Author does. but with more learning an 100
fold then this Author betrayeth, and withal carries himself with far more
ingenuity. For he takes notice of those places of Scripture whereupon our
Divines do build, and accommodates himself to aswer them by some intepretation
that he thinks good to make of them, which this Author does not 2. But what if
there be no such text as this Author builds upon? For look what the word is,
used in the original Ps. 5. 4. the same is used Es. 66 4 Now that in Ps. 5. 4
This Author renders not that would not iniquity, but that have no pleasure
in iniquity And why then shall not that Es. 66. 4. be accordingly rendered thus.
They choose the things wherein I had no pleasure, or wherein I had no delight,
and not as he expresses it the things that I would not. Hereupon I imagined
our Enlish tranlation had thus rendered it, but consulting that, I found the
contrary. For thus they render it. They choose the things wherein I delighted
not. It is true the Geneva renders it thus: But does it become him to prefer
and follow the Geneva translation before the last and most authentical
translation of the Church of England? In like manner the practice of Geneva
must be of authority to cry us down in the point of the morality of the fourth
commandment. Were not the man well known to be sound at heart, his favorites
might well suspect him to praevaricate, in making so great a cry, and yet
yiedling so little wool. In the next place he alleges that of James. Let no
man say when he is tempted that he is temptedof God. For God tempts no man:
But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away with his own concupiscence
Ia: 1. 13. 14
Now Peter Martyr on the first to the Romans deals at large upon this place,
and disputes strangely indiscoursing of Gods providence in evil. I would this
Author had taken the pains to answer him at least, that he might perform
somewhat tanto dignum hiatu, worthy of the great gaping he makes. It is true
Bellarmine has taken him to task after a sort in his eigth chapter of his
second book de Amiss. gratiae and statu peccati. And I have replied upon
Bellarmine at large in my Vindiciae, in that large digression wherein I take
Bellarmine to task in that book of his, whereunto I refer the Reader. Yet to
say somewhat of this place before I pass. It is apparent that the Apostle in
this place does not so put off from God the works of tempting as to cast it
upon Satan; but only so as to show, that whatsoever the divine providence is
there about, either by the ministry of Satan (who is God's minister in
hardening men to precip^tate courses (I Kings the last) or otherwise, yet still
the sinner is unexcusable; for as much as he is then only tempted (effectually)
For so it is to be understood; otherwise it were not true, as it appears in
the case of Joseph tempted by his Mistress) when he is drawn away by his own
concupiscence. It is true, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and
pride of life is not of the Father but of the world, they are the members of
that body of sin which we brought with us into the world. This is propagated
unto us all by natural generation. Col. 2. 11. Gen: 5. 3. Ps. 51. 5. Ioh. 3.
11.
Holy Jacob the Son of holy Isaak a Patriach, and of holy Rebeccah a
Prophetess was borne in sin as well as Esau; and Seth as well as Cain, and
this seems to be called the image of Adam, after his fall Behold I was shapen
in wickedness, says David, and in sin has my Mother conceived me. And except
a man be borne again he cannot see the kingdom of God. This, though a
mystery, yet is nothing strange to us, whom God in mercy has reserved unto
these times or grace; But it was very strange to Nicodemus a Ruler in Israel.
This has been the condition of man ever since the fall of Adam; and arising
merely from the withdrawing of God's spirit from him, and that most justly upon
their first sin in tasting of the forbidden fruit. So that even this condition
proceeded originally, as from the sin of our first parents in the way of a
meritorious cause, so from the just judgment of God taking his holy Spirit from
him, which God was not bound to do, as appears by this, that by virtue of the
Covenant of grace which he has made with us in Christ, he does not take his
spirit from us, though too often we sin againsthim. No not from David,
notwithstanding those foul sins committed by him, at appears by his prayer
unto God; that, he would restore him to the joy of his salvation, signifying
therereby that he had lost that. And that God would not take his holy Spirit
from him, manifesting hereby that still he retained that. And considering that
God proceeded with Adam herein in the way of judgment, Austine acknowledges
Concupiscence to be a punishment of sin, as well as sin, and a cause of other
sins, in his fifth book against Julian the Pelagian cap. 3 As for that of
Siracides, say not thou, God has caused me to err. As it is true that no man
must cast the blame of sinning upon God, and think himself blameless: So it
is as true that in consideration of our own inability to stand of our selves
and prones to fall (eve^ to fall away like water spilt upon the ground that
cannot be recovered; contain it self it cannot, but it may easily
becontained) the Church does sometimes expostulate with God (such is the
liberty and (...) which he vouchsafes unto his Children) in an holy manner
saying, Wherefore have thou caused us to err from thy ways, and hardened our
hearts against thy fear; Not that this he does, infundendo malitiam, by
infusing malice into them but, non infundendo gratiam, by not infusing such
grace into them as to preserve them from sin For as Martha said unto Jesus,
Lord if thou had been here our brother Lazarus had not dyed. So may we say
if the strength of thy grace had been operative in us, we had not sined in this
or that particular. It is true God has not need of the sinful ma: much less
of his salvation or damnation. But if he will of mere pleasure manifest his own
glory, either in the way of mercy pardoning, or of justice punishing, he must
permit sin to enter into the world, and forbear that providence whereby, as he
did keep the Elect Angels, so he might have kept man also from sinning. As for
the reasons of p^o^s Antiquity to prove that God cannot be the Author of sin,
they are very needelesse in this controversy between us and our adversaries,
the question between us not being thereabouts, but rather about the manner of
God's providence. Our Adversaries so denying him to be the Author of evil, as
withal they deny him to be the Author of any good in the actions of men. We
on the contrary take care, so to maintain that God is not the Author of sin,
that withal we maintain that he is the Author of all good, both moral and
natural, and much more supernatural. Yet as I have considered the seven
reasons of Bellarmine to this purpose collected out of the Ancients; so I am
content to take into consideration the three reasons produced by this Author.
1. As touching the first to manifest how superficiarily and absurdly he carries
himself therein, observe the wildness of his reasoning besides all rules of
sobriety. If God (says he) be the Author of sin, then he is worse then the
Devil, because the Devil does only tempt and persuade to sin, and his
action may be resisted. Let all the Universities of the world be judge between
us of the shameful irregularity of this discourse. His syllogism is
hypotheticall; for the first proposition is hypotheticall and conditional. Now
all such syllogismes by the rule of all Schools must proceed either from the
negation of the consequent, to the negation of the antecedent; or from the
affirmation of the antecedent, to the affirmation of the consequent; but no
such process is made here. And indeed it should be framed thus to infer the
proposition undertaken to be proved. If God be the Author of sin, then he is
worse then the Devil; but God is not worse then the Devil; therefore he is
not the Author of sin. But this Author disputes after no such manner. But his
affection carrying him all along to cast some foul aspersion on our Doctrine
in some particular or other, and being withal in heat of passion, he does most
shamefully involve and entangle himself And indeed quite besides his present
purpose, he aims only at this to prove that our doctrine concerning God's
powerful and effectual decree, does more make God the Author of sin then the
Devil, which is utterly aliene from that he proposed in this place. Yet I am
willing to do him this favor, to help a lame Dog over the style, and to
expedite him in this Argument, whereof he cannot so dext'rously deliver
himself though quite besides the purpose. Thus therefore the argument should
proceed according to his irregular intention. If God does will and procure sins
by a powerful and effectual decree, which cannot be resisted, then is God
worse then the Devil. But by the doctrine of our Divines God does will and
procure sins by a powerful and effectual decree which cannot be resisted;
therefore by the doctrine of our Divines, God is worse then the Devil. Thus
have I endeavored to bring this argument to some shape, which had no tolerable
proportion before. Now let me show the corrupt nature of it, that the Reader
may discern what spirit he breathes, that is the Author of it in a mixture
both of ignorance and abominable profanenes. And first I begin with the major
proposition. And here first let the Reader judge whether it be not this
Authors opinion, that, God does will and procure sin by some decree, though
not by a powerful and effectual decree that cannot be resisted. For otherwise
did he acknowledge every will of God as it signifies his decree, to be
powerful, and effctuall and irresistible, what need he cumber his Reader with
such unnecessary Epithites, cast in like lumber only to trouble the course of
disputation? Now if he grants that God does will and decree sin by a powerful
and effectual decree. 1. He must contradict himself. For formerly he cited,
Es. 66. 4, to prove that men in wicked courses, do choose the things that God
would not. 2. If God does will it, but not by a powerful and effectual, and
irresistible decree, let him show what that decree is, whereby he wills sins.
Now this is commonly accounted a decree conditional; and let him speak
plainly then and tell us upon what condition it is that God does will and
procure sin in the world, and I am verily persuaded he is to seek what to
answer. 3. If God does will and decree it, it cannot be avoided, but it must
be, by a powerful and effectual decree which cannot be resisted; seeing the
Apostle says plainly speaking of his decree, that it cannot be resisted. Upon
these considerations I am persuaded, that this Author does utterly deny that
God does at all will sin, or decree that any such thing shall come to pass in
the world, and that these attributes of powerful, and effectual, and
irresistible, are used by him not for distinction sake, but merely for
amplification, that so he might speak with a full mouth. Now having brought
this Author home to himself, and delivering himself and his meaning
plainly, I am very willing to cope with him on this point. Yet what need I,
having so fully disputed the point in a certain digression in my Vindiciae
lib. 2. Digrees. 4. The title whereof is this, Whether the holy one of Israel
without any blot to his Majesty may be said to will sin. And forthwith I
answer, that, God may be said thus far to will sin, in as much as he will
have sin to come to pass. And for explication sake it is added, that whereas
God will have all the good things of the world, whether natural, moral, or
spiritual come to pass by his working of them: Only evil things he will have
come to pass by his permitting them. But this Author affects to work upon
the ignorant; and he does not affect to trouble their brains with answering my
reasons, least thereby he should raise many spirits, and afterward prove
unable to lay them. And this discourse of M. Hord's some of that sect thought
good to have it coppied out, and communicated to people in the Country, as
accommodated to their capacities, and so more fit to promote their edificatio^
in the plausible way of Arminian religion: well therefore in the proof of this
tenet, namely, that God will have sin come to pass by his permission. I prove
first by Scripture. God has put in their hearts (that is in the hearts of the
10 Kings) to fulfill his will. Now mark what is the object of God's will, in
the words following, and to agree, and give their kingdo^es unto the beast
until the words of God shall be fulfilled: now by giving their Kingdoms unto
the beast, is not to depose or dethrone themselves, or to part with their
Kingdoms, but only to submit their regal authority to the execution of the
beasts wrath against the Saints of God. Like as in the days of Popery, when
the Saints of God were by Popish Prelates condemned for heresies, then they
were delivered into the hands of the secular powers, the sherifes to burn the^
at a stake. Now this the holy Ghost makes the object of Gods will, and their
agreement thus to execute the Popes Antichristian pleasure is said to be Gods
work. For God is said to put it into their hearts to do this evil of his. Of
disobedient persons the Apostle professes that they are ordained to stu^ble at
Gods word, 1 Pet. 2. 8. 2 These. 2. 11. Romans 1. 24.
wherein undoubtedly they sin. Paul likewise testified of some that God sends
the^ strong delusions, that they should believe a lie. of others that God gave
them up to uncleanes through the lusts of their own hearts to dishonor their
own bodies between themselves. And to a Reprobate mind, to do those things
which are not convenient. Now let every sober man judge whether when God
blinded the eyes of the one and hardened the hearts of the other, it were not his
will, that those foul things which were committed by them should come to pass
by his permissio^. Then consider what the Apostles with one consent testify
concerning those abominable Acts. 4. 28.
acts committed against the holy son of God, namely that both Herod and Pontius
Pilate with the Gentiles and people of Israel, were gathered together to do
what Gods hand and his counsel had before determined to be done. This the
Apostles deliver to the very face of God in their prayers and holy meditatio^s.
And let every Christian consider, whether it the Scripture had not made mention
of this, and any one of us had used the like prayer and meditation, this Author
and all that are of his spirit, would not have been ready to spit in our faces
and cry us down for notorious blasphemers. Yet the Apostles endued with the
spirit of God feared not to be found guilty of violating the Lords holiness in
all this. Hence I proceeded to the passages of the Old Testament for the
confirmation of the same truth. As namely that whereas the desolatio^ of the
holy Land begun by the Assyrians, finished by the Babylonians, could not come
to pass without many enormous sins. Who can deny, that it was Gods will that
these things should come to pass, considering that Assure himself is
acknowledged by God to be the rod of his wrath and the staff of his
indignation, whom God would send against an hypocritical nation, and against
the people of his wrath would he give him a charge to take the spoil, and to
take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire in the streets? Hence I
proceeded to show how that it is Gods usual course to punish sin with sin. Now
when God exercises his judgments, shall not those things justly be said to
come to pass by his will, which are punishments of foregoing sins? See the
judgment of God denounced against Amaziah the Priest of Bethell. Thou say
prophecy not against Israel, and drop not thy word against the house of Isaac.
Therefore thus says the Lord, Thy wife shall be an harlot in the Cities,
Amos. 7. 16. 17.
and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword. And in like manner
Solomon says The mouth of a strange woman is a deep pit, he that is abhorred
of the Lordshall fall therein. The incest of Absalom defiling his fathers
co^cubines in a shameless manner, came it not to pass Prove. 22. 14.
by the will of God, whose word is this; Behold I will raise up evil against
thee, out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and
give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall ly with thy wives in the sight of
this sun? The defection of the ten tribes from the house of David, came it not
to pass by the will of God, when God himself testifies that it was 2 Samuel 12.
11.
his work, and not his will only? Thus says the Lord the God of Israel, I
will rent the kingdom out of the hands of Solomon, and give ten tribes to
thee, speaking to Jeroboam; here we have Gods will for it. And again the word
of God came to Semaiah the man of God saying, speak to Rehoboa^ the son of
Solomon King of Judah, and unto all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the
remnant of the people, saying, Thus says the Lotd, ye shall not go up, nor
fight against your brethren, 1 Kings. 11. 31.
the children of Israel; return every man to his house; for this thing is from
me. Here we have Gods word for it. Who can deny that the hardening of Pharohs
heart, that he should not let Israel go; the selling of Joseph into Egypt by
the hands of his unnatural brethren came to pass by the will of God? I
proceed to prove the same truth by evidence of reason. First because God
permits sin to come to pass as all confess, though he could hinder it, if it
pleased him, and that without all detriment to the free will of the creature
why then does he permit it? but because he would have it come to pass, and
accordingly permission is reckoned up by School Divines amongst the sins of
Gods will, like as also is Gods commandment. Now what God commands if it be
done, it is said to come to pass by the will of God, albeit the things that
God commands, seldom; the things he permits, always come to pass;
according to the common tenet of Divines, even Vostius and Arminius not
excepted. Again it is the common opinion of all, that therefore God permits
sin, because he can and will work good of it, which plainly supposes that
sin shall come to pass if God permits it, and consequently it must needs be
the will of God, it shall come to pass. Thirdly it is granted on both sides
that the act of sin is Gods work in the way of an efficient cause, not the
outward act only which is natural, but the inward act of the will which is
moral, even this as an act is the work of God: How can it be then but the
deformity and vitiousnesse of the act, must come to pass God willing it,
though not working it, considering that the deformity does necessarily follow
the act, in reference to the creatures working it, though not in respect of
Gods working it? Lastly all sides agree that God can give effectual grace,
whereby a man shall be preserved from sin infallibly. Wherefore as often as God
will not give this grace which is in his power to give, does it not manifestly
follow that he will not have such a man preserved from sin? To these I added
the testimony of diverse; as that of Austin. Not any thing comes to pass,
unless Good Enchiria. cap. 9. 5.
will have it come to pass, either by suffering it to come to pass, or
himself working it. If good he works it, if evil permits it, it is true of
each that he wills it. and cap. 96. It is Good, says Austin, that evil should
come to pass. And Bellarmine himself so far subscribes hereunto, as by
professing that It is good that evils shoul come to pass by Gods permission.
The same Austin confesses that The perversity of the heart comes to pass by
the secret judgment of God And again that after a wonderful and unspeakable
manner, even those things which are committed against the will of God (to wit
against the will of his commandment) do not come to pass besides the will of
God; to wit the will of his purpose. Anselme the most ancient of school
Divines in his book of the concord of foreknowledge with free will;
Considering Cont. Julian: l. 5. c. 3.
says he, that what God wills cannot but be when he wills, that the will of
man shall not be constrained by any necessity to will or no; and withal will
have an effect follow the will of man. In this case it must needs be that the
will of man is free, and that also which God wills shall come to pass, to
wit by that will of man. Now observe what in the next place he concludes hence
In these cases therefore it is true that the work of sin, which man will do,
must needs be, though man does not will it of necessity. And in his concord of
predestination and free will. In Good things God does work, both that they
are, and that they are good, in evil things he works only that they are, not
that they are evil. Hugo de sancto Victore 1. De sacr. 4. p. 13. When we say
God wills that which is good, it sounds well; but if we say God wills evil
it is harsh to ears, neither does a pious mind admit of the good God, that he
wills evil, for hereby he thinks the meaning is that God loves and approves
of that which is evil, and therefore the pious mind abhorres it, not because
that which is said is not well said, but because that which is well said is not
well understood. To these I add the testimony of Bradwardine at large. A man
reputed so pious in those days, that the Kings prospe ous success in those
days was chiefly imputed unto his piety; who followed him in his wars in
France as Preacher in the camp. In the last place I make answer to the
Sophistical arguments of Aquinas and Durandus, and the frothy disputation of
Valentianus, all of them standing to maintain the contrary. Now let every
sober Christian judge of this Authors proposition, when he says that If God
does will and procure sin etc. he is worse then the Devil. For I have made it
evident by variety of Scripture testimonies, by reason, and also with the
concurrence of diverse learned Divines; that it is Gods will that sin should
come to pass, even the horrible outrages committed against the holy son of
God were before determined by Gods hand and counsel. Now what follows
herehence by this Authors dicourse; but that the holy Apostles yea and the
Spirit of God do make God worse then the Devil. So little cause have we to be
impatient, when such horrible blasphemies are laid to our charge, when we
consider what honorable compartners we have in these our sufferings. Yet see
the vanity of this consequence represented most evidently; For albeit the will
of Gods decree be powerful and effectual and irresistible, and consequently
every thing decreed thereby shall come to pass powerfully, effectually,
irresistibly, yet this respects only the generality of the things eveniency,
not the manner how For only things necessary shall by this irresistible will of
God, come to pass necessarily: But as for contingent things, they by the same
irresistible will of God shall come to pass also; but how? not necessarily but
contingently; that is with a possibility of not coming to pass. Now the free
actions of men are one sort of contingent things They therefore shall
infallibly come to pass also by virtue of Gods irresistible will; but how? Not
necessarily but contingently, that is with a possibility of not coming to pass
in general as they are things contingent: And in special they shall come to
pass not contingently only but freely also; that is with a free power in the
Agents by whom they are acted to do otherwise. Yet there is another difference
according to the moral condition of these actions For if they are good and so
far as they are goood they come to pass by Gods working of them, but if they
are evil, and so far as they are evil they come to pass only by Gods
permitting; according to that of Austin. Non aliquid sit nisi omnipote^s fieri
velit, vel sinendo ut fiat, vel ipse faciendo. Not any thing comes to pass,
but God willing it either by suffering it (to wit in case it be evil) or
himself working it (to wit in case it be good.) And according to that eleventh
Article of Religion agreed upon by the Archbishop, and Bishops, and the rest
of the Clergy in Ireland, which is this; God from all eternity did by his
unchangeable counsel ordain whatsoever should come to pass in time; yet so
as thereby no violence is offered to the wills of the reasonable creatures, and
neither the liberty nor the contingency of the second causes is taken away but
established rather. Farther consider it is confessed by all, that God concurres
in producing the act of sin, as an efficient cause thereof not moral, but
natural. And Aquinas himself, though he denies that, Voluntas Dei est
malorum, Because indeed as Hugo de Sancto Victore observes by the will of God
is commonly understood in this case Voluntas approbans; his will approving it,
and loving it. And so it is justly denied that God does will evil things,
speaking of the evil of sin. Yet Aquinas professes, and disputes and proves
that Actus peccati est a Deo, the Act of sin is from God. Like as the Act of
walking is from the soul, though the lamenes in walking arises from some
disease in the leg. Now the Devil concurres not in this manner to any act of
sin; neither is the efficient cause thereof in the Kind of a Natural
efficient, but only Moral by tempting and persuading. What therefore? shall
we conclude as this Author does without fear or wit or honesty, that by the
confession of all men God is hereby made worse then the Devil? To what
abominable courses do the wild wits and profane hearts of these men expose
them? The greatest works of Satan in moving men to sin are comprehended under
blinding and hardening of them. Now these operations are also attributed to
God. And like enough he does usually perform them, not by the ministry of his
holy Angels, but by the Ministry of Satan and his Angels of Darkness, as we
read. 1. Kings 22. v. 21. 22. 23. Ioh: 13. 27. Acts 5. 3. What then shall the
Devil so far possess our hearts as to break forth into such intolerable
blasphemies as to conclude hereupon that God is bad, or worse then the Devil.
The providence of God I willingly confess is wonderful, and mysterious in
this, like unto the Nature of God, to be adored rather then pryed into. So this
providence to be dreaded rather then for satisfaction to every wanton and wild
wit to be searched into. Yet all confess that the Lord could hinder all this
if it pleased him, and rebuke Satan and restrain the power, and stop the
course of sin, and prevent occasions leading thereunto, but he will not, and
why? But because he knows it becomes his allmighty power and wisdom infinite,
rather exmalis been facere, quam malum esse non sinere, To work good out of
evil, then not at all to suffer evil. Lastly what means this Author to
carry himself so as to betray so strange ignorance in mitigating Satan's
operation in tempting unto sin; as if this were not sufficient to make him the
Author of sin. Especially considering the reason that moves him hereunto,
which is merely the delight that he takes in dishonouring God, and being a
desperate spirit himself to make as many as he can partakers of the same
desperate condition. For cupiunt perditi perdere, says Cyprian, cum sint ipsi
paenales, quaerunt sibi ad poenam comites; being damned themselves they desire
to damn as many as they can: And being bound in chains and kept to the
judgment of the great day, they desire to have as many companions as they can
in drinking of that cup of trembling, and sucking the very dreggs of that cup
of trembling and wringing them out. For as the Historian observes. Maligna est
calamitas, and cum suo supplicio crucietur, acquiescit alieno; Calamity makes a
man of a spightfull nature, and when himself is tormented, he takes content in
this that others suffer with him. And as the Orator observes, Nullum
adversarium magis metuas, quam qui non potest vivere, potest occidere. No
adversary more to be feared, then he who cannot live himself, yet can kill
another. This makes a coward resolute; when he must needs dye, he will fight
like a mad man, and kill all he can. I say what means this Author to carry
the matter hand over head, as if it were without question; That he is not the
Author of sin; who only is a Moral cause thereof, but rather he that is
the natural efficient: whereas great Divines carry it to the contrary. As
namely Dominicus Soto in his first book of nature and grace chap: 18. Although
(says he) there are many that think it hard to explicate, how in the hatred
of God, which has an inward and indivisible malignity, God can be the cause of
the entity, but not of the fault: Yet this is not so hard to be understood.
Then he proceeds to show how this may be. First laying for his ground what it
is to be the cause of sin, thus; In moral actions he is altogether, and is
judged to be the cause, who by a law, or help, or counsel or favor or
persuasion moves any one either to good or evil. Observe I pray the doctrine
of this School-Divine directly contrary to that which this Author supposes
without all proof. For in the judgment of Dominicus Soto, he only is to be
accounted the cause of another man's sin, who is the moral cause thereof, as
by tempting, counselling, persuading thereunto, And upon this ground he
proceeds to free God from being the Author of it after this manner. But as for
God he by all these ways moves his creatures to that which is good and honest,
and none at all to evil. Neither is the doctrine of Dominicus Soto alone; but
the common doctrine of the Divines of Salamancha, as Molina confesses in his
disputation 23. And albeit Molina the Jesuit were of another opinion. Yet
Vasquius the Jesuit professes that he was ever of the same mind with
Dominicus Soto and the Divines of Salamancha in this; In his 129 disputation
upon the first part of his Sums. As for Prosper he has no such argument. But
first observe the Objection whereunto he answers, was made against the
Doctrine of Austin; as the Author acknowledges. Whence it follows that
look how this Author charge our doctrine, after the same manner was the
doctrine of Austin charged above 1200 years ago; let the indifferent hereby
take notice of the congruity of our doctrine with the doctrine of Austin in
this particular, and the congruity of this Authors spirit in charging us with
the spirit of the Semipelagians in charging Austin after the same manner.
Secondly consider the objection there made it is this. Quod quando incestant
Patres filias, and matres filios; vel quando Servi Dominos occidunt ideo fiat,
quia ita Deus predestinavit, ut fieret. When father commit incest with their
Daughters, and mothers with their sons. Or when servants kill their Lords;
therefore this comes to pass, because God has so predestined that it should
come to pass. Consider, in this objection the fault of these abominable
courses is not laid upon those that commit them, but only upon God; as if Gods
predestination did work in such a manner, as to compel men or women to commit
such and such abominations. And so Prosper conceives the Argument to proceed,
as if this were their intention. And accordingly makes answer. Si Diabolo
objiceretur quod talium facinorum ipse Author, ipse esset incentor, were it
objected to the Devil that he were the Author of such sins, and did inflame
men to the committing of them (which indeed is the Devils course and not Gods)
yet I think, says he, that the Devil might in some sort disburthen himself
of this crimination, and talium scelerum patratores de ipsorum voluntate
vinceret, and make it appear that their own wills were the committers of such
sins. Quia etsi delectatus est furore peccantium, probaret tamen se non
intulisse vim criminum. Because though he took pleasure in the fury of
sinners, yet might he justify that he forced no man to sin. After the same
manner proceeded the 11. objection of the Galls; Quod per potentiam Deus
homines ad peccata compellit, God by his power compells men to sin. And as
touching the notion of predestination it is true the Ancients used that only
in reference to those things which were wrought by God. Nihil ergo talium (to
wit of wicked actions) negotiorum Deus predestinavit ut fieret. Predestination
being only Enchirid: c. 95.
of such things, which come to pass by Gods working of them. Yet the same
Austin professes that such things which come to pass by Gods permission (of
which kind are all manner of sins) even those came to pass God willing the^,
though not by Gods predestinating of them. And as touching Senacherib who was
slain by his own sons; the Lord professes saying, I will cause him to fall
by the sword in his own land. And upon Esa: 37. 7. Amos. 7. 16.
Amaziah the Priest of Bethel the judgment was pronounced from the Lord, Thy
wife shall be an harlot And whatsoever comes to pass it is Gods will it should
come to pass, says Austin, how much more that which comes to pass in the way
of judgment.

2 I come to his second reason to examine whether he carries himself any
thing more handsomely in that. If God be the Author of sin he cannot be the
punisher of sin. This argument is better shaped then the former; but forthwith
he tells us that he cannot be in justice the punisher of that whereof himself
is the Author. Wherein are two particulars neither of which were expressed in
his argument, the one is the application of it to the same sin whereof he was
the Author, which was not expressed in the Argument. And without this
application the Argument is of no force. For earthly Magistrates are sinners,
yet the punishers of sin in others, yea of the same kind of sin. As though
a Magistrate be a profaner of the name of God, yet he may execute the law on
them who do profane the name of God, and that justly. Then what is it that
makes a man the Author of sin? It is well known, that though it be unlawful
for a man to permit sin, if it be in his power to hinder it, yet unless God
permit sin, it cannot be committed by any, Nos certe, says Austin, sieos in
quos nobis potestas est ante oculos nostros perpetrare Scelera permittamus, rei
cum ipsis erimus. Quam vero innumerabilia ille permitit fieri ante oculos suos,
quae utique si voluisset nulla ratione permitteret. Certainly if we suffer
those, over whom we have power, to commit sin, we shall be guilty together
with them. But how innumerable are the sins which he suffers to be committed
before his eyes, which if he would, he could hinder, so that by no means they
should come to pass. Or is he the Author of sin who is the efficient cause
of the act of sin? It is Aquinas his doctrine, that, the act of sin is from
God, and that in the kind of an efficient cause; and it is commonly received to
be the first cause in the kind of efficients, subordinate to none, and all
other subordinate to him. Nay more then this Scotus professes, and after him
the Dominicans, that, God determines the will to every act thereof (though
sinful) as touching the substance thereof, but how? Surely no otherwise then
to come to pass agreeably to their nature; necessary acts necessarily, free
acts freely. So Barwardine maintains that God necessitates the will of the
creatue; but how? To perform acts thereof freely. Suppose they did maintain
that God in his omnipotency did impose a necessity upon our wills, as Suarez
imputes to our Divines that they so teach. Yet in this case Suarez the Jesuit
will justify them, that therein they deliver nothing that either does include
contradiction, or De auxil. l. 1. c. 2. number. 7.
that does exceed God's omnipotency. Neither did I ever meet any color of
reason, why God might not as wholly determine the will to any free act thereof,
as concur with the will to the producing of the same act. And that in the
concurrence of God and man to the same act, the first cause should be in
subordination to the second; or the second cause not in subordination to the
first, is against all reason, and obnoxious to manifold contradiction, as I
have showed in my Vindiciae. Whereas for God to move a creature to every lib.
2. Digres. 7.
act of his congruously to his nature, and so to determine him, is most
agreeable to reason, and nothing at all obnoxious to contradiction. And yet
notwithstanding I see noe sufficient reason to conclude these determinations,
as touching things natural, such as is the substance of every natural act,
there being a power to perform that in a natural Agent. Of supernatural acts
the case is different. It seems to me enough, that God will have this or that
evil come to pass by his permission. For when God created the world out of
nothing; what transient action of God can be imagined, when there was no matter
at all for any such transient action to work upon; God's will was sufficient
to have that to exist which before had no being: And why may not the will of
God be sufficient for the existence of the motion of each creature after it
has existence? But supposing these determinations of the creatures wills to be
necessary, if God will not determine them to good what will follow herence?
Surely nothing but evil; unless man can determine himself to that which is
good without God. For as for simple concurrence without subordination in
working, as I said before, that cannot be affirmed without palpable and gross
contradiction, as I have proved in the digression formerly mentioned, proceed
we yet farther. I know nothing does more intimately concern God's secret
providence in evil, then the hardening of the creature to disobedience. Now the
Scripture which is the very word of God, and the dictates of the Holy Ghost
does plainly and expressly teach, that albeit God commanded Pharaoh to let
Israel go, yet withal he hardened his heart that he should not let Israel
go for a long time, which refusal of his was wilful and presumptuous
disobedience. In like sort as touching obedience and disobedience to the
Gospel, the Apostle tells us plainly that, God has mercy on whom he will, to
perform the one, and whom he will he hardens, thereby exposing them to the
other. And hereupon this objection is made, Why then does God complain (to
wit, of man's disobedience) for who has resisted his will? And we know what
answer the Apostle makes hereunto. O man who art thou that disputest with God?
shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?
Has not the Potter power of the clay of the same lump to make one vessel unto
honor, another unto dishonor? Now will any sober Christian conclude herehence
that because, God hardened Pharaoh that he should not let Israel go, therefore
he is the Author of sin. The Lord has bid Shimei to curse David. Consider
what Austine writes upon this. Quomodo dixerit Dominus huic homini maledicere
David, quis sapiens and intelliget? Non enim jubendo dixit, ubi obedientia
laudaretur; sed quod ejus voluntatem proprio vitio suo malam, in hoc peccatum
judicio suo justo and occulto inclinarit, ideo dictum est, Dixit ei Dominus.
How said the Lord to this man that he should curse David; Who is wise and he
shall understand? For he said this not by commanding Shimei so to do, in which
case his obedience had been commanded; but in as much as Shimei's will through
his own vitiousnesse being evil, the Lord inclined it to this sin by his
just and secret judgment. Thus says he, The Lord uses the hearts of the
wicked to the praise and benefit of the good: so he used Judas betraying
Christ: so he made use of the Jews crucifying Christ. And how great good did
he procure therehence to all believers? Who also uses the Devil who is worst
of all, yet he makes best use of him to exercise and prove the faith and piety
of the godly. So he wrought in the heart of Absalom to refuse the counsel of
Achitophell, and make choice of that counsel which was nothing profitable. Who
may not well tremble in the contemplation of those Divine judgments, whereby
the Lord works in the hearts of wicked men whatsoever he will, yet rendering
unto them according to their merits. Then he proceeds to give other instances
of Scripture to manifest God's working in the hearts of men, and when he has
done, he concludes in this manner; His and talibus testimoniis divinorum
eloquiorum satis, quantum existimo, manifestatur operari Deum in cordibus
hominum ad inclinandas eorum voluntates quocunque voluerit sive ad bona pro sua
misericordia, sive ad mala pro meritis eorum, judicio utique suo aliquando
occulto, semper autem justo. By these and such like testimonies of Divine
Scripture, I take it to be sufficiently manifested, that God does work in the
hearts of men, to incline their wills whithersoever he will, either to those
things that are good, of his mercy, or to such things that are evil, for their
deserts, in the way of judgment, which is sometimes known, sometimes secret,
but always just. And all this he shows, to be wrought by God without
prejudice to the freedom of their wills. And why should David pray after this
manner. Lord incline mine heart to thy testimonies, and not to covetousness;
If it were not in God's power to incline the hearts of men to covetousness?
Yet I trust no sober Christian will conclude from this prayer of David, that
God by executing such a power is the Author of sin. Lastly this argument is
drawn from God's justice, so is the third, which is to confound rather then to
distinguish the reasons produced by him. We say that God cannot possibly be the
Author of sin, the necessity of his nature stands in opposition thereunto.
For first sin has no cause efficient but deficient only, as long ago it has
been delivered by Austin. 2ly, a cause deficient or defective is either in a
culpable manner, or in a manner nothing culpable. As for example, that Agent is
defective culpably, that either omits the doing of that which he ought to do;
or omits to do it after that manner which he ought to do it: now I say it is
impossible that the divine nature can be defective either of these ways, and
consequently it is impossible that he should be the Author of sin, whereas he
says this is Prosper's argument it is untrue. He says indeed it is against
reason, that God who damnes the Devil should will that any man should be a
Servant to the Devil: but forthwith he expounds himself. 1. Expounding what
that condition is of being the Devils servants, whereof the objection did
proceed. Now the objection was this, That the greatest part of men were created
for this, that they should do, not the will of God, but the will of the
Devil: Now this objection says Prosper proceeds from the Pelagians: Qui Adae
peccatum transiisse in omnes diffitentur, who deny the sin of Adam to have
passed unto all. So that, to do the will not of God, but of the Devil, is to
be in the state of natural corruption, and under the power of original sin,
whereby they are not God's servants, but the Devils; this is not the condition
of God's children in the state of Grace. Now Prosper shows how original sin
passes over all, not by the will of God; and secondly, how it passes over all
by the will of God: Not by the will of God instituente; but by the will of God
judicante: His words are these. Haec servitus non est institutio Dei, sed
judicium. This slavery of sin which came upon all by Adam's sin is not
God's institution but his judgment. As much as to say it came not upon a man by
God's first creation, but by his judgment upon him, because of his first
trangression; so that if divine judgment be the will of God; it is apparent
Prosper is so far from denying that slavery to have come upon all men by the
just will of God, as that he expressly acknowledges it. It is true as
Fulgentius says, that, God is not the Author of sin, but the revenger of
it. And it is as true that it is as just with God to punish sin with sin,
as Scripture justifies; as St. Austine observes, and improveth at large diverse
Scriptures to this purpose, in his fifth Book against Julian the Pelagian, and
third chap. Tertullian in saying, he is not to be accounted the Author of sin,
who is the forbidder, yea the condemner of it, falls directly upon the same
ground that Dominicus Soto, with the Divines of Salamancha, and Vasquez the
Jesuits, in explicating what that is which makes me to be the Author of a
moral action; as namely, by commanding, by counselling it, and persuading it;
and indeed condemnation is but consequent to a law forbidding this or that. Now
it is apparent that God in this respect ought to be accounted the Author of
every good action, but of none that is evil. For he commands only that which is
good, and counsels and persuades thereunto, but forbids and disswadeth
every thing that is evil. Of this no notice at all is taken by this Author,
neither takes he any care to show what that is, that makes any agent justly
to be accounted the Author of sin.

3 His third reason is all one with the former as drawn from God's justice and
holiness and his being Judge of the world. For it is the property of the Judge
to condemn transgressors, whereupon his former Argument insisted, and that
also was drawn from God's justice. But I remember well what the Poet coupleth
together when he says,

Accessit fervor capiti numerusque lucernis. Honesty retains the Creature from
being the Author of sin not his nature, he being peccabilis by nature, but
so is not God; It is impossible absolutely for him to be found defective any
way in a culpable manner. He may withhold Grace from any man, I speak of Grace
preservative from sin. Neither is he unjust herein; for he is bound to none.
At length he comes to prove the crimination laid upon his adversaries, as
follows.

Sect: 2.
But this opinion does so. For albeit the writers that have defended it
(Piscator and a few more of the blunter M. Mason's Addit. p. 25. 26, 27. 28.
sort excepted) have never said directly and in terminis, that God is the cause
of sin; yet have they delilivered these things; from which it must needs
follow by necessary consequence that he is so.

For they say. 1. That, as the decree of Reprobation is absolute, so it is
inevitable. Those poor souls which lie under it must necessarily be damned.
It is says Marlorate a firm and stable truth, that the man Comment in Jo. c.
15. v. 2.
whom God in his eternal counsel has rejected, though he do all the works
of the Saints, cannot possibly be saved.

2. That without sin this decree of Reprobation cannot be justly executed.
God, says Piscator, did Piscat. cont. Shalm. p, 29. These. 25.
create men for this very purpose, that they might indeed fall; for otherwise
he could not have attained those his principal ends. He means the
manifestation of his justice in the condemnation of Reprobates; and of his
mercy in the salvation of the Elect. Maccovius also says the same. If sin
had not been, the manifestation of justice and mercy (which is as much as to
say, as the damnation of Reprobates) had never been. Maceov. dis. 17. page 11.


3. That God decreed that Reprobates must unavoidably sin, and sin unto
death, that his eternal ordinance might be executed, and they damned. We grant
says Zanchy, that Reprobates are held so fast under God's almighty decree,
that they cannot but sin and perish; and a little after he says, We doubt
not Zanch. l. 5. de not. Dei c. 2. de praedest. part. 4. resp. ad post. arg:
prope finem.
therefore to confess, that there lies upon Reprobates by the power of their
unchangable reprobation a necessity of sinning, yea of sinning to death without
repentance, and consequently of perishing everlastingly. Calvin also says,
that Reprobates obey not the word of God, partly through the wickedness of
their own hearts, and partly because they are raised up by the unsearchable
judgment of God to illustrate his glory by their damnation. I will end this
with that speech of Piscator. Reprobates are precisely appointed to this evil,
to be punished everlastingly, and to sin: And therefore to sin that they
might be justly punished. Calv. l. 3. Instit. c. 24. Sect: 14.


4. That as he has immutably decreed that Reprobates shall live and dye in
sin. So he procures their sins in due time by his Almighty hand, partly by
withdrawing from them grace necessary for the avoiding Pisc. resp ad dupl.
Vorst. part. 1. p. 220.
of sin, and partly by moving and inclining them by his irresistible and
secret working on their hearts; to sinful actions. Calvin says, that men and
Devils and Reprobate-men are not only held fast in God's fetters, so as they
cannot do what they would, but are also urged and forced by God's bridle ad
obsequia praestanda, to do as he would have the^: and in the next chapter
these are the words, that men have nothing in agitation, Calv. instit. l. 1. c.
17. Sect. 11.
that they bring nothing to action, but what God by his secret direction has
ordered, is apparent by many clear testimonies. In that Section following he
says. And surely unless God did work inwardly in the minds of men, it would
not be rightly said, that he takes away wisdom from the wise. In these two
chapters Ibid. c. 18. Sect: 1.
that which he mainly drives at, is to show that God does not only behave
himself privatively in procuring the sins of men, but does also put forth
powerful and positive acts, in the bringing of the^ to pass. And in the
second book and fourth chapter after he had said, that God may be said to
harden men by forsaking them, he puts in another way by which God hardneth
them, and that he says comes a great deal Instit. l. 2. c. 4. Sect: 3.
nearer to the propriety of Scripture phrases, namely, by stirring up their
wills. God does not only harde^ men by levaing them unto themselves, but by
appointing their counsels, ordering their deliberations, stirring up their
wills, confirming their purposes by the Minister of his anger Satan. And this
he proves by the work of God on Sihon King of the Amorites* and then
insinuates the end too, why God thus hardens men in their Deuteronomy: 2. 30.
wicked courses; which is that he might destroy them. Quia perditum Deus
volebat, obstinatio cordis divina fuit ad ruinam preparatio; Because God
intends his ruin he prepared him for sin by his induration.

The sum of all these propositions is this; God who from all eternity
appointed many miserable men to endless and unavoidable torments, decreed, for
the bringing about of their intended ruin, that they should without remedy
live and dye in a state of sin: and what he thus decreed from everlasting, he
does powerfully effect in time, so governing, overruling and working upon the
wills of those Reprobates, that they have no liberty or ability at all in the
issue, of avoiding their sins, but must of necessity commit them. Thus they
teach; and therefore by just consequences they make God the Author of sin;
as it will plainly appear by these following considerations.

Poets tell us there was a time when Giants on earth set themselves to fight
against God Answer.
in heaven; and because the place of his habitation was out of their reach,
they laid mountain upon mountain hill upon hill, Pelion upon Ossa, that so
they might make their approaches unto him, and beseige him in his own fastnes:
this fable is a monument of the shipwreck of that truth among heathen-men,
which the Lord had preserved unto his Church upon record in his holy word. For
when after the great Deluge in the days of Noah, men began to be multiplied
upon the face of the earth, they consulted how they might fortify themseves
against the like inundation for the time to come; and thereupon encouraged
themselves saying, Go to let us build us a City and a town, whose top may
reach unto the Heaven that we may get us a name, least we be scattered upon the
whole earth. But how didthe Lord deal with these presumptuous adventurers? The
Poet's faign that Jupiter destroyed them with his thunderbolts; and as for one
of them Typhoeus by name, a proud fellow, he laid him fast enough under the
hill Aetna in Sicily, where he breaths out smoke and fire like the great Polan
out of a Tobacco-pipe somewhat bigger then a good Caliver. But the Scripture
tells us, how that for their saying, Go too, let us build. etc. the Lord
answered them with a Come on, let us go down and there confound their
language, that every one perceive not one another speech. This Author herhaps
is but a Pygmie for bodily presence, yet he may be a Giant for his wit, and
found (...), to fight against God in a spiritual way in the opposing of his
truth. As Gamaliel sometimes advised the high Priest with his counsel to take
heed, lest they were found even fighters against God. It is true this Author no
doubt persuades himself that he fights for God, in as much as he affects to
free him from being the Author of sin. But let not the simple Reader be deluded
with shows, but seriously consider whither all this do, which he makes about
the point of Reprobation does not clearly tend to the overthrowing of God's
free grace in election: which is so much the more foul, because he does it
underhand; as conscious to himself of his own impotency to impugn it openly,
or fearing the general opposition of our Church against him, and therefore he
practices to undermine it. And this I have found to be his course diverse years
ago in his private undertakings to draw proselytes unto him, namely to decline
the point of grace, and of election, to deal only upon Reprobation* and there
to put his concurrent to begin, as if he would have a young Divine to inform a
Sexagenarian, as I have seen under his own hand. But see the hand of God upon
him in confounding his language, as when he stands for Reprobation evitable and
avoidable, and reproacheth his adversaries for maintaining Reprobation
inevitable and unavoidable. This is the phrase of his School. For I do not
remember to have met with it any where, but in him, and his disciples: Now what
man of common sense does not observe this phrase to be appliable only to things
that are to come; but of a contingent nature; so that they may be avoided and
declined; but by no means apply able to things already done, and that more then
many thousand years ago. For what sober man could hear with patience another
discourse of the avoidable nature of Noah's flood now in these days, and to
maintain that it is at this day avoidable: what fustian like to this? Might he
not as well take liberty to discourse of the Aequinoctiall pasticrust? It was
wont to be said, that this alone God himself could not perform; namely to cause
that which is done to be not done. As Aristotle in his Eth relates a saying of
one Agatho to that purpose. Now reprobation is confessed by all to be of the
same age with election; and election was as the Apostle tells us, performed by
God before the foundation of the world And is not this Author then besides
himself, when he pleads for evitable and avoydable Reprobation. But albeit this
Author makes the worst of our opinions and expressions, yet I will not requite
him by making the worst of his, that were base and inglorious, and to be
overcome. I will therefore hearken to the Apostles counsel where he says, Be
not overcome with evil, but overcome evil with good. I will make the best of
his, and according to the distinction of God's will used in Schools; as it is
taken either quoad actum volentis, or quoad res volitas, as touching the act of
him that wills, or the things willed. So I will imagine that he speaks of
Reprobation, which is the will of God, not as touching the act of God
Reprobating and making such a decree, but as touching the thing decreed, and
this thing decreed he will have to be of an avoidable nature. Now this we
willingly grant, and utterly deny, that this any way hinders the absolutenes of
God's decree. We say with the 11 article of the Church of Ireland, that God
from all aeternity did by his unchangeable council ordain whatsoever should in
time come to pass, yet so as hereby neither the contingency nor liberty of the
second causes is taken away, but established rather. So that whereas we see
some things come to pass necessarily, some contingently; so God has ordained
that all things shall come to pass that do come to pass; but necessary things
necessarily, contingent things contingently, that is, avoidably and with a
possibility of not coming to pass. For every University Scholar knows this to
be the notion of contingency, yet will not I content my self with the article
of Ireland, for this Aquinas thus distinguishes. For 1. p. quaest. 19. art. 8.
having proposed this question, Whether the will of God does impose a necessity
upon the things willed. To this question this Author with whom I deal would
answer affirmatively, saying, it does impose a necessity on all such things, or
at least obtrude such an opinion upon us; and himself undoubtedly thinks that
in case Gods will be absolute it must cause a necessity upon all things willed
thereby, both which are utterly untrue, and this last utterly denied by Aquinas.
For first, every will of God is absolute in the judgment of Aquinas, which I
prove thus; That will which has noe cause or reason thereof is absolute: This
proposition I presume this Author will not deny: But the will of God has no
cause in the judgment of Aquinas therefore every will of God is absolute by his
doctrine: Yet this absolute will of God imposes not a necessity upon all
things willed by him, but only on some things. 1. p. 19. art. 5. and quaest.
23. art. 5. Corp.
Divina volunt as non omnibus sed quibusdam necessitatem imponit. And in the
body of that question thus he writes, The distinction of things necessary and
contingent proceeds from the Aquin. 1. p q. 19. art. 8. concl.
distinction of God's will. For when a cause is effectual and powerful to
work, the effect follows the cause, not only so far as to be brought to
pass, but also as touching the manner of its coming to pass. Therefore seeing
the will of God is most effectual, it not only follows that those things
come to pass, which God will have come to pass, but that they come to pass
after the same manner also, after which he will have them come to pass. Now
God will have some things come to pass necessarily and some things
contingently, that there may be an order in things for the perfection of the
world. And therefore for the producing of some effects he has fitted causes
necessary, which cannot fail, by which effects are brought forth necessarily:
And for the producing of other effects, he has fitted causes contingent, such
as may fail in working, from which effects are brought to pass contingently.
So that upon suspicion that God does will a thing, that thing shall certainly
and infallibly come to pass; but how? Not allwaies necessarily or
contingently. And that certain and infallible eveniency of things is called
also necessity in the Schools; but not necessity simply, but only upon
suspicion, which may well consist with absolute contingency. But to make the
point yet more clear; Let us distinctly consider the things decreed; For they
that have an evil cause delight in confusion, and fear nothing more then the
light of distinction. Now the things decreed by Reprobation are either denial
of Grace, which is joined with the permission of sin: Or damnation for sin,
according to that on Aquinas, Reprobation includes 1. p. q. 23. art. 3. in
corp. Includ it voluntatem permittendi alique^ cadere in culpam and inferendi
damnationis poenam pro culpam.
the will of permitting sin, and inflicting damnation for sin. Now both the
permission of sin, and damnation of God's part are his free acts; and
therefore come to pass freely. But upon supposition that God will deny a man
Grace, it is impossible that such a man should have grace. Secondly, secluding
grace, there is noe actual transgression for which a man is damned, but may be
avoided; man having power for that naturally; though naturally he have noe
power to perform every good act. The reason is because amongst good acts some
are supernatural, as the acts of the three Theological virtues, Faith, Hope,
and Charity: But noe sinful act is supernatural, all such are natural. Now
it is confessed on all hands that, notwithstanding man's corruption by reason of
original sin, yet he has still power and free will to perform any natural
act, and accordingly he has free power to abstain from it. So that Judas had
free will to abstain from betraying his Master; After he had betrayed him, he
had free power to abstain from destroying himself; so that as these sins of
his for which he was damned were avoidable by him, in like manner his damnation
for these sins was avoidable. And allbeit God had determined that Judas by
Divine permission should betray his Master, and destroy himself, according to
to that of Austin, Judas electus est ad prodendum sanguinem Domini; Judas was
ordained to betray his master. And that of the Apostles jointly. Of a truth
against thy holy Son Jesus both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles
and people of Israel were gathered to do what thy hand, and thy counsel had
before determined to be done. Acts: 4. 28. Yet herehence it follows only, that
it was necessary (to wit, upon this supposition, namely, of the Divine
ordinance.) that these things should come to pass, namely, both Act. 4. 28.
Judas his betraying of Christ, and Herod's mocking of him, and Pilates
condemning him, and the peoples crying out away with him, together with their
preferring of Barrabas a murderer before him, and the Soldiers crucifying
him. But how came it to pass? Not necessarily, but contingently, that is in
this Authors phrase evitably and avoidably, inas much as it was joined with an
absolute possibility to come to pass otherwise; Nor with a possibility only
but with a free power in the agents to have forborne all these contumelious
carriages of theirs toward the son of God. For both Judas had free will to
abstain from betraying him, and Herod with his Herodians could have abstained
from their contumelious handling of him, and Pilate from condemning him, and
the Priests and people from conspiring against him; and the Soldiers from
crucifying him, only they had no power to abstain from all or any of these
vile actions in an holy manner, as no man else has power to abstain from any
evil in a gracious manner, without grace: Yea without the Grace of
regeneration which alone plants in us both faith in God, and a love of God to
the very contempt of our selves, and no performance of any good or abstinence
from any evil, is acceptable with God unto eternal life, unless it proceed
from this faith and this love. That which is here produced out of Marlorate is
a strange speech, and such as I never read or heard from any before: and such,
as whereof I can give no tolerable construction. And is it fit that every
extravagant passage that is found in any Writer of ours should be brought forth
to charge our doctrine with? It were a fitter speech for a Papist who
maintaining the absoluteness of Reprobation, does withal maintain an
apostasy from grace, which we do not, If Marlorate had any such opinion he
sings therein to himself, and to his own Muses What Divine of ours maintains
that God has decreed to damn any man otherways then by way of punishment for
sin continued in unto death without repentance? Had he spoken of Good works
moral only, it is true any hypocrite is capable of them; and none taste deeper
of Damnation then hypocrites. But as for the work of true faith and true
repentance; it is the general profession of our Divines, that as faith and the
spirit of repentance once given, never fail, so they shall infallibly bring a
man unto everlasting life, and free him from condemnation. But any thing serves
this Authors turn to vent his stomach: And I am persuaded, there is not one
more of all our Divines that he can show to concur with Marlorat in this. And
if there were is it fit their improvident and inconsiderate expressions should
be cast in their teeth that avouch them not, but rather conceive them to be
void of all sobriety? Brentius apud Marloratum in illud, Ioh. 15. 2. Omnem
palmitem in me non ferentem fructum tollet, etc. Caeterum haec sententia
occurrit curiositati carnis quae solet argute, magis quam reverenter de
praedestinatione disserere, and pro suo ingenio colligere nullum a Domino ad
vitam aeternam electum posse damnari, etiamsi pessime vivat. Nullum item a
Domino ad ignem aeternum deputatum posse salvari etiamsi optime vivat; se
itaque velle pro sua libidine vivere. Ut ut enim solicit lahoret, non tamen
posse decretum Dei infringere. Respondet hic Christus, Omnem palmitem, etc.
qnod dicitur. Quid ad te de occulta Dei praedestinatione? Hoc tu videris, ut tu
in me maneas, and fructum feras, reliquae dispensationi and prudentiae Dei
committenda sunt. Nam etiamsi videar is ad aeternam salutem praedestinatus, non
tamen fructum feras, abjicieris in ignem tanquam infructuosus palms. He
instances in Saul, then whom there was not a better man in Israel. That which
is here cited out of Marlorat his Expositio Ecclesiastica, it is set down as in
Calvin's Commentary: but no such thing is found in Calvin. And it may be that
is the fault of the Printers mistaking. And Marlorat's own exposition succeeds
in a few words thus. Quae ideo dicuntur non ut fideles inde ansam arripiant de
sua salute dubitandi sed ut carnalis securitas and ignavia ab hominibus
tollatur. And the next sentence whence this question is taken seems to cohere
with this, though a great C. as if it were Calvin's comes in between, and it
begins thus. Certum est enim decretum Dei a nemine infirmari posse; quia Deus
non est ut homo qui poenitentiam agat, and retractet sententiam semel decretam.
Then follows the passage here alleged, and at the heels of it these words:
Time igitur, and in solam Domini eligentis manum respice ut salutem per Dominum
nostrum Iesum Christum assequaris. Undoubtedly Marlorat approves of Brentius
his exposition, otherwise he would not have placed it in his Expositio
Ecclesiastica. Now Brentius brings in the very saying for which Maldonat is
criminated, as the objection of some carnal person. Therefore when Marlorat
seems to justify such a saying, it must be in another sense; and that either
of good works in show, of which Brentius also observed, that such might have
been found in Saul: Or of works in distinction from faith. And accordingly he
concludes with exhortation fear: that is not to be secure, how good soever his
works are; but to have an eye to God and trust only to him, that so he may
obtain salvation through Jesus Christ. Calvin in Ioh. 15. 6. Arescere dicuntur
instar emortua sarmenta quae a Christo resecta; su^t quia sicuti initiu^
vigoris ab ipso est ita and continuus tenor. Non quod ex electis aliquem
contingat unquam execari: sed quia multae hypocritae in speciem ad tempus
florent and virent, qui postea in reddendo fructu spem domini frustrantur. They
are said to to wither like a branch cut off, such as are cut off from Christ:
because like as the beginning of their vigor is from him, so also their
continuance. Not that at any time it falls out that any of Gods Elect is cut
off, but because many Hypocrites carry a fair show for a time as if they were
green and flourishing, who afterward in rendering fruit make void the Lords
Expectation.

2. The decree of Reprobation as touching one part of it, cannot be executed
without sin; For it is a decree of inflicting damnation for sin, so that there
is no place for damnation, where sin and that as a meritorious cause preceeds
not. I had thought this Author needed not to run out to Piscator and
Maccovius for proof of this; neither Arminius nor the Author is of any other
opinion I am confident, then that the decree of damnation cannot be executed on
any without the precedence of sin in the party who is to be damned. But there
is another part of Reprobation For as Aquinas speaks, it includes the will of
permitting sin. Now the execution of this decree, which consists in the
permitting of sin, does not require the precedence of sin. For when God first
permitted the Angels to fall, this permission of his did not require any
precedence of sin in them; nor the permission of Adam to fall; it cannot be
said without manifest contradiction, that it did. For before the first sin
there was no sin. Piscator says that, God created men for this very purpose
that they might fall; he says, hoc consilio, which is as much as to say, with
this purpose, not, for this purpose; to wit, to permit them to fall; And God
purposing this, purposed that they should fall by his permission. For Arminius
confesses that in case God permits a man to will this or that, Necesse est ut
nullo argumentoru^ genere persuadeatur ad nolendum. It must needs be that no
argument shall persuade him to will that, which God permits him to will. And
that it is good that evil should come to pass by God's permission, both
Austine has affirmed, and Bellarmine subscribed. And shall it not be lawful
for God to will that which is good? Undoubtedly neither justice punishing, nor
mercy pardoning, can be manifested without sin, either to be punished, or
pardoned, or both: neither is it credible to me that this Author thinks
otherwise. And is not the manifestatio^ of God's mercy on some, and his justice
on others, the supreme end of God's providence toward mankind, and
consequently by the most received rules of Schools first intended, even before
the permisson of sin? For if the permission of sin were first intended,
then by the same rule of Schools, it should be in the last place executed;
that is, God should first manifest his mercy and justice in pardoning some, and
punishing others, and afterward suffer them to sin; such is the learning and
judgments of these Divines. And as for the foresight of sin, it is apparent,
that it presupposes God's purpose to permit it; and more then that, it
presupposes the fruition of it. Now it is well known, that sin in its own
nature is merely possible. How comes it to pass, that from the condition of a
thing merely possible, it has passed into the condition of a thing future?
This cannot be done without a cause; and that cause must be eternal; for the
effect was eternal. For from everlasting sin was future; for from
everlasting God knew it to be future. Now there is nothing everlasting, but God
himself, therefore he must needs be the cause of this transition whereby a
thing merely possible in its own nature became future. And therefore, either by
his knowledge he was the cause thereof, or by his will and decree. Not by his
knowledge; for that rather supposes the^ to be future, then makes them such.
It remains therefore that the will of God, and that alone makes every future
thing to pass out of the condition of a thing merely possible, into the
condition of a thing future, and that from everlasting. Let this Author
satisfy this argument, and I will ease him of all further pains, and lay down
the bucklers before him.

3. It is untrue that by our Doctrine Reprobates do unavoidably sin. I have
already demonstrated the contrary. For as I said, Malum semper habitat in
alieno fundo, every actual sin is a natural act; a work of grace may be
supernatural as touching the substance of the act, so is not the work of
sin, but allwaies natural. Now no Christian that I know affirms that a man
in the state of sin is bereaved of free will in things natural. Nay we
generally confess, he has free will in things moral, only as touching things
spiritual he has no freedom left therein: therefore as I said before, Judas
might have naturally forborne to betray his Master; naturally forborne to
destroy himself. If some object, the common opinion of Divines is, that in a
state of nature there is noe liberty for sin. I answer; first out of
Aquinas, that this is to be understood of sin in general, Thom: 1. part q.
23. art. 3. ad tertium.
not of any in particular: Licet aliquis non possit gratiam adipisci qui
reprobatur a Deo, tamen quod in hoc peccatum vel illud labatur ex ejus libero
arbitrio contingit. Though a man that is reprobated of God cannot obtain
Grace, (for how should he obtain it if God will not give it? will they say
that Grace is given according unto works?) yet that he falls into this or that
sin, this is a contingent thing, and proceeds from his own free will. So say
I every sinful act committed by man in the state of natural corruption, is
committed freely in such sort that he might have abstained from it, but I do
not say that he could abstain from it in a gracious manner. But whether he does
that which is good, he does it not in a gracious manner; so that still he
sins more or less, and all by reason that as yet he has neither faith in
God, nor love of God, which are the fountains of all gracious actions, both in
doing that which is good, and in abstaining from that which is evil. As for
Zanchi's saying, That God holds Reprobates so fast that they cannot but sin.
This act of God is no other then his denying them grace to break of their
sins by repentance, and to turn unto God. Now the Apostle professes that
as, God has mercy on whom he will, so he hardens others, even whom he will,
in denying this grace unto them. And mark what objection he shapes hereupon,
thou will say then why does he yet complain? (to wit of men's disobedience:
for of nothing else does the Lord complain.) For who has resisted his will?
Observe the chains wherewith God holds them fast irresistably, to wit the
chains of obduration. Let the Author therefore charge St. Paul as well as
Zanchy for making God the Author of sin, and indeed he might have abounded
in passages out of holy Scripture alleged to the same end, whereunto he
alleges these out of our Divines; yea and Papists too. But Piscator, Zanchy,
and Calvine, these are his proper marks to shoot at, ever since he learnt in
his age to correct the errors of his youth in taking frivolous exceptions
against Bellarmine. As for a necessity of sinning brought upon all by the sin
of Adam. Arminius acknowledges it, and this Arminius is acknowledged by
Corvinus in his answer to Lilenus. Only God takes it away from his Elect at the
time of their calling and regenerating, and leaves it upon the rest; and who
can say black to the eye for this? Will we not give him liberty to have mercy
on whom he will, and harden whom he will? Then let us fly in the face of Paul
as well as Calvine and Zanchy for so plainly teaching this. The hardness of
men's hearts is the immediate cause why they obey not God's word; But there is
another cause also that our Savior takes notice of, and that is this; That God
does not regenerate them, or has not elected them. Of this our Divines may
well take notice, because Moses before has done the like. The Israelites
profited neither by hearing of God's word, nor by the seeing of his mighty
works, I say by none of these did they profit unto repentance; and what was
the reason hereof? Surely the hardness of their hearts, as Moses signifies,
Thou art a stiff-necked people. Yet he takes notice of another cause and that
is this, Yet the Lord has not given our hearts to perceive, nor eyes Deuteronomy. 9.
6.
to see, nor ears to hear unto this day. So our Savior in the Gospel; He
that is of God hears God's words, ye therefore hear them not, because ye are
not of God Now to be raised up in Deuteronomy. 29. 3. 4.
Calvin's Phrase, to illustrate God's glory in their damnation, is no other
then to be brought forth into the world, and not to be borne of God, that is,
to have the grace of regeneration denied them, and consequently to be suffered
to go on in their sins; and lastly to be damned for their sin, to the
manifestation of the glory of God's justice. Solomon says as much, The Lord
made all things for himself, that is for the manifestation of his glory, even
the wicked against the day of evil. And St. Paul Rom: 9 by showing mercy
toward some, signifies how God forms some after one manner, by hardening
others Prove. 16. 4.
he forms them after another manner comparing the 18. v. with the 20. And in
the 21. He justifies God in this, and that in reference to different ends,
which are the manifestation of his glory different ways, saying, Has not God
power over the clay of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and
another unto dishonor. And verse 22. What if God to show his wrath and to make
his power known, suffered with long patience the vessels of his wrath prepared
to destruction. v. 23. And that he might declare the riches of his glory upon
the vessels of mercy which he has prepared unto glory? What one of our
Divines expresses himself in this argument more fully, or more liably to
carnal exceptions following the judgment of flesh and bood, then St. Paul does
in this? Here by the way as touching Piscator, I must fetch after mine answer
in his behalf, to that which in the entrance to this Section was delivered of
him, and overseen by me. For this Author confessing that our writers have
never said directly in terminis, that God is the cause of sin, which
introduction of his is the very same which Bellarmine uses, opposing our
Divines on this very argument, lib. 2. Deamissione gratiae and statu peccati.
cap. 4. Afterward by a parenthesis brings in an exception of Piscator, and
some other of the blunter sort, without naming one of them. And though he name
Piscator yet he quotes no place; for if he had, he should withal direct his
Reader to the grounds whereupon Piscator affirms this, namely that, God is the
cause of man's fidelity. And it is the very place formerly mentioned in these
words. He that is of God hears God's words, ye therefore hear them not
because ye are not of God now what reasonable man can deny, but that it is a
sin not to hear God's words; then does not our Savior plainly profess, that
the true cause hereof is, because they are not of God? Now if to be of God in
this place does signify God's Election, then the cause of their sins hereby
is made God's not electing of them. But if this phrase, To be of God, signify
God's regenerating of them, as I think it does, then God's not regenerating of
them is made the cause of this their disobedience in not hearing God's word's:
and indeed the evil of sin has noe efficient cause but deficient only, as
Austine has delivered long ago. And God is not bound to any, either to elect
him, or regenerate him; so that in failing to regenerate man, he does not
deficere, or fail in any culpable man ner: now let every indifferent Reader
judge, whether here be not, Dignus vindice nodus a knot worthy to be loosed;
and it will require some worth of learning in him that solves it. And is it
decent for this Author to censure a man for a conclusion made by him out of
the word of God, without showing the faultiness either of his interpretation
thereof, or of his consequence framed therehence? So that this Author's wit and
cunning is more to be commended in not specifying the place where Piscator
delivers this doctrine, then either his learning or his honesty. He was loath
to raise spirits, and afterward to prove unable to lay them. Therefore thus I
answer in behalf of Piscator; though God her by me made the cause why so^e
hear not God's words, to wit, in as much as he does not regenerate the^, nor
give the eyes to see, nor ears to hear, and an heart to perceive according to
that of Moses. Yet he does not make God any culpable cause, neither indeed is
he any culpable cause, while he fails Deuteronomy: 29. 4.
to perform so gracious a work toward the^: the reason whereof is this. He
and he alone is a culpable cause, who fails in doing that which he ought to
do: ut God all be it he does not regenerate a man, yet he fails not of doing
that which he ought to do. For it is no duty of his to regenerate any man; for
he is bound to none. Now to be the Author of sin is not only to be the cause
thereof, but to be a culpable cause thereof. Undoubtedly God could preserve any
man from sin if it pleased him, and if he does not, he is nothing faulty.
Secondly I answer that in true account, God is only the cause, why our
natural infidelity is not healed, our corruption not cured. Like as a
Physician may be said to be the cause why such a man continues sick in as much
as he could cure him, but will not: So God could cure the infidelity of all,
but will not. Only here is the difference, the Physician may be a culpable
cause, as who is bound to love his neighbor as himself; but God being bound
to none, is no culpable cause of man's continuance in sin, and in the
hardness of his heart, albeit he can cure him, but will not. As for Piscator's
saying here mentioned, Reprobates are appointed precisely to this double evil,
to be punished everlastingly, and to sin; and therefore to sin that they
may be justly punished. Hereing are two things charged upon Piscator. 1. That
Reprobates are precisely appointed by God to perish everlastingly. To this I
answer that noe Arminia^ that I know denies Reprobates to be appoinby God to
everlasting damnation. All the question is about the manner of appointing them;
namely whether this appointment of God, proceeds merely according to his mere
pleasure, or upon the foresight of sin. We say it proceeds merely according
to the good pleasure of God, and not upon the foresight of sin preceding. And
this we not only say, but prove thus. If reprobation proceed upon the foresight
of sin, then it were of men's evil works. Now look upon what grounds the
Apostle proves, that election is not of; good works, upon the same ground it
is evident that reprobation is not of evil works: for the argument for the one
is this. Before Jacob and Esau were borne or had done good or evil; it was
said to Rebekah the elder shall serve the younger, therefore election is not of
good works. In like manner thus I reason concerning Reprobation, Before Jacob
and Esau were borne or had done good or evil it was said to Rebekah, the elder
shall serve the younger, therefore reprobation is not of evil works. 2. If
God does ordain any man to damnation upon foresight of sin, then this sin
foreseen is the cause of the Divine ordinance; but sin foreseen cannot be the
cause why God ordained man to damnation; as I prove thus. If it be the cause
then either by the necessity of nature; or by the ordinance of God; not by
necessity of nature. For undoubtedly God if it pleased him could ordain to
annihilate them for their sins, instead of punishing them with eternal fire.
Nor can it be the cause of any such decree by the free ordinance of God. For if
it were, mark what intolerable absurdityes would follow, namely this, That God
did ordain that upon the foresight of sin he would ordain men unto
damnation; whereby God's eternal ordination is made the object of God's
ordination; whereas all know that the Objects of God's decrees (which are all
one with his ordinations) are things temporal, not things eternal. 3. If the
foresight of sin goes before the decree of damnation, then the decree of
permitting sin goes before the decree of damning for sin; that is the
permission of sin was first in intention, and consequently it ought to be
last in execution; that is, First man should be damned for sin, and not till
afterward permitted to sin. The second thing charged upon Piscator is this,
that, Reprobates are precisely appointed to sin. Now here the crimination
grates not upon the manner of being appointed thereunto; otherwise a way could
be opened for a progress in infinitum. Now why should it be any more a fault
in Piscator to say of some that they are appointed to sin; then in Peter to
say of some that they are appointed to disobedience: or in all the Apostles to
profess that all the outrages committed by Herod and Pilate, by the Gentiles
and people of Israel were such as Gods hand and his counsel had before
determined to be done? or why does Piscator make God to be the Author of sin
in this, more then Peter and all the Apostles? And considering this man's
unconscionable carriage in this, let the Reader take heed how he suffers
himself to be gulled by this Author, and drawn to censure such speeches in
Piscator, as making God the Author of sin, when hereby he is drawn ere he
is aware to pass the like censure on the Apostles? And the holy Ghost
himself, whose expressions are the same for substance with the expressions of
Piscator. It is farther observable that Piscator says, That Reprobates by
reason of this Divine ordination do sin necessarily. I answer, Piscator was
an excellent Scripture Divine, but noe School-divine; and therefore noe
marvel if he want the accuratenesse of Scholasticall expression. Yet I salve
him thus. They sin necessarily Ephesians: 28.
upon suspicion that God will have them to sin by his permission; but this is
noe necessity simply so called, but only secundum quid. But God decrees the
manner of things coming to pass, as well as the things themselves; as before
I showed out of Aquinas. So that all be it it must needs be, that sin come
to pass, in case God has decreed it shall come to pass; yet if the question
be, after what manner it shall come to pass, I answer, not necessarily, but
contingently and freely, that is not only with a possibility of not coming to
pass, but with a free power in the creature to abstain from that sin which is
committed by him. For God ordained that every thing that does come to pass
shall come to pass agreably to the nature thereof, and accordingly moves every
creature to work agreeably to their natures. Necessary agents, necessarily,
contingent agents contingently. Free agents freely. And as formerly was
mentioned, every sinful act is a natural act; and a man has free power even
in the state of corruption either to do, or to leave undone any natural act.
And Piscator in other places dealing with Vorstius, clearly professes as I
well remember (though the the place come not to my memory) that wicked men do
commit those things freely which are committed by them. And it is an excellent
saying of Austine, that, Libertas sine gratia non est libertas sed contumacia,
Liberty without grace, is not liberty but wilfulness; and indeed they show
too much will therein, rather then too little: and in denying liberty to them
that want grace, he speaks of liberty moral, which is only unto true good,
not of liberty natural, which has place only in the choice of means, and is
inseparable from the nature of man: But true morality sets a man's soul in a
right condition toward his right end.

4. It may be this Author could not be so inconsiderate as not to perceive
that even those expressions concerning Gods decree, which he criminates in our
Divines are Scripture expressions; therefore to help his cause here he imputes
unto them, that they maintain that God decreed this immutably; as if himself
could be content to grant that these things are decreed by God, but not
immutably. And would this Author have the will of God to be of a mutable
condition, like unto ours? I am confident he dares not profess so much; for
albeit he licks his lips at a conditional decree, yet how does he conceive
this to be mutable? For to resolve to save men upon condition of faith, and
repentance, and perseverance; and damn others in case they continue in
infidelity and impenitency; if accordingly none be saved but such in whom faith
and repentance, and final perseverance therein is found, none damned but such
as persevere in sin unto death; what change is there in all this? Unless
this be it, that God did not resolve to save any particular person until his
final perseverance was accomplished; And so God may be said in process of
time, to change from not willing to willing one man's salvation, and another
man's damnation: In which case God's decree also should not be eternal, but
begin in time. Again as touching that which follows of of God decreeing that
Reprobates shall live and dye in sin. I answer, to decree not to regenerate
Reprobates, is to decree that Reprobates shall not be regenerated, for they are
not able to regenerate themselves; and to decree that they shall not be
regenerated, is to decree that they shall live and dye in sin, by God's
permission, he resolving never to show such mercies to take them of from their
sinful courses by repentance. And so long as they are not borne of God, they
will not hear his words, as our Savior testifies saying, Ye therefore hear
them not, because ye are not of God. As for sin procured by the hand of God,
which he obtrudes upon our Divines; not one passage does he produce for that.
Yet as I remember I have read such an harsh expression in Piscator dealing
against Io. 8.
Vorstius, which at this time does not come to my remembrance; but withal I
remember that Piscator being charged therewith by Vorstius, forthwith
represents certain passages of Scripture concerning Gods's providence in
evil, and appeals to the judgment of every sober Christian, whether to do
that, which therein is attributed to God, be not to procure sin. It is apparent
that Joseph acknowledges, that the Lord sent him into Egypt, yet was this
brought to pass by the parricidiall hands of his brethren. And it is no less
plain that God hardened Pharaohs heart that he should not let Israel go And
by Arminius his Definition of effectual grace, it is evident that by Gods
denying it, sin does follow infallibly. And so likewise upon Gods permission of
willing this or that, he professes that it must needs be, that by noe kind of
argument shall such a one be persuaded to nill it. I come to the means whereby
he is said to procure it. The first is, by withdrawing grace necessary for the
avoiding of sin. Now of this he gives no instance out of any of our Divines. 2
I know no grace which this Author accounts necessary, that any of our Divines
teach to be withdrawn by God. 3 God indeed does not determine their wills to
that which is good; but this Author does not account any such determination
necessary to the avoiding of sin. 4 Prohibition, denuntiation of judgment,
dehortation and such gracious actions, God does neither withdraw, nor withhold
from the wicked, who are partakers of this grace as well as Gods children, as
often as they meet in the same congregation for the hearing of Sermons.

5. An effectual restraint from sin, I know none but the fear of God; yet
this he withdrawes not from the wicked; for they never had it; nor from the
children of God; only he does not stirrre it in them at all times, so often as
he suffers them to sin, which yet may be to gracious ends. As I for the
confirmation of their faith, that nothing, no not sin shall separate them from
the love of God; when they shall find the goodness of God minding them of
their errors, and bringing them to repentance. 2 As also to make them smart
for their former security and wantonness in beholding the uncomfortable issue
of it. 3 To provoke them to walk more carefully and circumspectly for the time
to come, standing upon their guard, and keeping the watch of the Lord. 4. To
cure their pride, according to that of Austin. Audeo dicere, Utile est superbis
in aliquod apertum manifestumque cadere peccatum. I am bold to speak it, It is
good for a proud man to to fall into some open and manifest sin. I come to the
second stay, whereby he objects to our Divines that they maintain that God
procures the sins of men, and that is by his moving and inclining them by his
irresistible and secret workings on their hearts, to sinful actions. To which
I answer first that not any of the passages alleged by him out of Calvin (who
alone makes totam paginam in this of his) makes mention of Gods irresistible
working; or of moving or inclining unto sinful actions. And let every sober
man judge whether a bridle is fit to urge men to action, and not rather to
restrain from action, and this is the force of the first Quotation. But this
Author through heat corrupting his imagination took a bridle for a spur.
His second testifies only this, that man does nothing but what God decreed, and
by his direction appoints; and this also upon pregnant testimonies of
scripture; never undertaking to show Calvin's interpretation to be false, or his
accommodation of them to be incongruous. In the third he grants that God works
in the mind of men. In the 4. he says that God stirrs up the wills, and
confirms the purposes of wicked men for the execution of his judgment by Satan
the minister of his wrath. Where consider he does this by Satan, that is he
gives them over to Satan for this; so that it is Satan that stirs up their
wills and confirms their endeavors, by Gods permission without restraint
either immediate or mediate by the ministry of his good angels; and all this
is but to execute Gods judgments. And that it is just with God to punish sin
with sin, both scripture testifies in diverse places, and Austin confirms with
variety of Scripture testimonies, in his lib. 5. contra Julian: Pelag: cap. 3.
The last is that God's work it is to harden man's heart, and thereby prepare
him to destruction? And let every sober reader that is not willing to be
cheated both of his faith and honesty all at once, examine these places in
Calvin, and the Scriptures whereby he proves that which he affirms; and let
him but ask the Author these questions. If Calvin delivers nothing in all
this but what he proves out of Scripture, why is he found fault with more then
the word of God. If Scripture be mis-alleadged and mis-understood by him, why
do not you confute him? 2 Though Calvin in all this makes no mention of Gods
inclining wicked men to sinful actions; yet Austin does as before I have
showed, and that by, variety of Scripture testimonies. And if this be to make
God the Author of sin, why has he not so much ingenuity as to confess at
least in the close of all, that Calvin makes God the Author of sin, no more
then Austin does; and neither of them more then the word of God does, and
therewithal renounce the Scriptures and turn Atheist. 3 As the Lord hardened
the heart of Pharaoh to his destruction, so did he the heart of Sihon also
Nowsee what Cardinal Caietan writes upon thisvery place. Utramque homines
parte^ (spiritum and cor, hoc est superiorem and inferiorem) male dispositam
Deuteronomy: 2. 30.
a Deo intellige negative penes dona gratuita; positive autem quoad judicium,
inclinationem and prosecutionem boni sensibilis. Ita quod Deus spiritum Regis
durum (hoc est non cedentem petionibus) reddit, and non dando ei gratiam
acquiescendi, and coo operando eidem, ad affectum securitatis and boni proprii,
and similiter roboravit cor ad affectum boni, victoriae, and hujusmodi. Each
part of King Sihon, his spirit and heart, that is the upper and lower part
being ill disposed by God (understa^d this negatively) as touching gifts of
grace; but positively as touching his judgment, affection, and prosecution of a
sensible good. So that the Lord made the Kings heart hard; that is not to yield
to the request made, both by not giving grace to rest satisfied, and by
cooperating with him, to the affecting of security and his own good. And in
like manner he hardened his heart to the affecting of victory, and the like. I
have not heard that this my opposite has been ever ready to censure Caietan
for making God the Author of all this; yet noe passage I am persuaded
throughout all Calvin's works can be found comparable unto this. Yet was
Caietan noe Jesuit, he need not spare his censures.

I come to the sum of that which he has delivered in a whole leaf. The first
whereof is this, that we teach, That God appointed many miserable men from all
eternity to unavoidable torments Now that God appointed many fom eternity to
everlasting torments, this Author acknowledges as well as we. As for the
avoidable condition of them, it is confessed on both sides, that they are
avoidable only by breaking off their sins by repentance before their death;
and by this we acknowledge them to be avoidable of all and every one, as well
as they. But we say God does not grant this grace to all. For he is not bound
to give it to all, noe nor to any; but he vouchsafes this grace to whom he
will, and he denies it to whom he will, and this St. Paul has taught us,
where he says, God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth.
The second is, that we teach, that God to bring about their intended ruin,
decreed that they should without remedy live and die in a state of sin. To
this I answer, that it is a most absurd conceit, to make the tormenting of any
man God's end. We have learnt of King Solomon that, God made all things for
himself; here is the end of his actions, the manifestation of his own glory
And albeit, he made the very wicked also against the day of evil; yet the end
thereof was, for himself, as formerly specified, that is for the manifestation
of his just wrath, and that God has power without any difference in the
matter, to make some vessels of wrath, and some of mercy, as he thinks good.
The Apostle plainly teaches us, where he says, Has not the Potter power
over the clay of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another
unto Rom: 9. 21.
dishonor. And if any man's wicked proud heart make insurrection against this
truth, the Apostle has taught us to stop his mouth with this, shall the the
thing formed say to him that formed it why have thou made me thus? Shall not
God have as much power over the mass of mankind, as the Potter has over the
clay? So that this is God's end not man's damnation, but his own glory. Haec
loquendiratio says Calvin, this manner of speech, finem creationis esse
interitum aeternum, the end of man's creation is his everlasting destruction,
nusquam Call: opuse: 735.
apud me occurret, shall never be found in my writing. So Beza in his questions
and answers, I say God has ordained not judicio, for judgment, but, judicio,
for just judgment, that is to manifest his justice upon them. Secondly, we deny
that God suffers them to persevere in their sinful courses without giving them
grace to repent, to the end that he may damn them; But with Alvarez every way
standing as much for absolute Reprobation as Calvin; that God suffers them to
sin, and to persevere therein, and damnes them for their sin, to this end,
namely, for the manifestation of the glory of his justice. And as for this
Author's opinion in premising the foresight of sin to the decree of damnation,
I have already represented the manifest absurdity thereof, as namely in this,
that seeing God cannot foresee sin, unless he first decree to permit it, it
follows that by his opinion, the decree to permit sin must preceed the decree
of damnation, that is sin is first in intention, and then damnation. Whence it
follows that if sin be first in intention, it must be last in execution; and
consequently men shall be first damned for their sin, and after that suffered
to commit sin; this is the glorious issue of the premises of this Author. His
third and last is, that by our doctrine, God for the effecting of all this
powerfully does so govern and work upon the wills of Reprobates, that they
have noe liberty or ability at all in the issue of avoiding their sins, but
must of necessity commit them To this I answer, that no other power is
requisite for the effecting of all this; then 1. To suffer all men to fall in
Adam, 2. To bring forth all men in original sin, which alone deserves
damnation as Mr. Hoord confesses, and as this Author sometimes read in his
Lectures at Magdelen Hall. 3. Not to regenerate Reprobates, but to suffer them
finally to persevere in their ungodly courses, without giving them grace to
break off their sins by repentance. 2. Yet we deny, that all power and ability
is taken from Reprobates to avoid actual sins: We grant willingly, neither
Elect, nor Reprobate, have any power to avoid sin original, all of them
being conceived and brought forth into the world in the corrupt mass. But as
for actual sin, not only regenerate have power to avoid that, and that in a
gracious manner; but every Reprobate has power to avoid that in a natural
manner. My reason is because though a good work may be an act supernatural;
yet a sinful work cannot be so, but every actual sin is an act natural for
the ground and substance of it But every natural and carnal man has power
freely, either to do any act natural or to abstain from doing it, though
when they abstain from doing it, as from committing murder, adultery, theft,
slander, or the like, they never abstain from it in a gracious manner: Like
as any moral good work, they have liberty to do, but they cannot do it in
a gracious manner. This proceeds merely from the Spirit of regeneration; which
Spirit of regeneration the Lord never bestows upon any Reprobate.

Sect: 3.
Thus they teach, and therefore by just consequence they make God the Author
of sin; as it will plainly M. Mason's Addit. p. 28. 29.
appear by these following considerations. 1. It is ordinary to impute sin to
those who have not so great an hand in the production of it, as has the
Almighty, by the grounds of this opinion. For first, the Devil is called the
Father of lies, and by the like reason of all other sins. And therefore he
that commits sin, is said to be of the Devil, and to be the child of the
Devil. And sin is called the the work of the, Devil, which the Son of God
appeared to loose. And why is the Devil so called, but because he does egg
and Jo: 8. 4. 4. 1 Io: 3. 8. 10. v. 8.
allure men by inward suggestions and outward temptations to fall into sin?
This is all he does or can do. But God does much more, if he necessitate, and
by his decree first; and next by his powerful and secret working in the souls
of men, determine their wills irresistibly to sinen. For to determine is
infinitely more then barely to persuade; for as much as sin must needs follow
the determination, but not the persuasion of the will. God is therefore a truer
cause of sin, by this doctrine then the Devil. 2. Wicked men are esteemed
Authors of their own offenses; because they plot, purpose, choose, and commit
them, and are immediate Agents in the acting of them. But God by this opinion
does more: for he overruleth the projects and purposes of wicked men, and by an
uncontrollable motion proceeding from an immutable decree, carries all their
deliberations, resolutions, choices, and actions precisely that very way; so as
they cannot chose but do as they do, whatsoever they may think to the
contrary. They have indeed (potentiam in se liberam) a power in it self free
to chose what they refuse, or to refuse what they chose, to determine
themselves this way or that way, as likes them best; but they have not
(Liberum usum) a free use of this their power. God does determine their will
before it has determined it self, and makes them do those only actions,
which his omnipotent will has determined, and not which their wills out of any
absolute dominion over their own actions, have prescribed. More rightly
therefore may God be called the Author of those offenses. For deeds whether
good or bad are owned more truly by him that overruleth them, then by the
servile instruments that only execute and do them.

3. Wicked counselors and they who allure and advise men to sin, are
accounted by God and men to be the causes of those sins to which they are the
perswaders, and have been punished for those misdeeds which others through
their instigations have committed. Jezabell Ahab's wife was reputed and
punished as the murderer of Naboth; because she counseled and contrived the
doing of it as we may see, 1 Kings 21. 23. 25. But what is counselling to
enforcing? Evil counsels may be refused, but an allmighty power cannot be
resisted. God therefore that uses this (according to their doctrine) in the
production of sins, is much more an Author of them, then he that only uses
the other.

After two leaves spent, first in the charge; and secondly in proving that God
is not the Author of sin in a fumbling manner, and thirdly in representing the
doctrine of our Divines Answer:
at pleasure, now at length he comes to make it plainly appear, that by just
consequence they make God the Author of sin, as he says, will plainly appear
by certain considerations following: which in few words come but to this in
general, namely, that God does more then the Devil, or wicked counselors in
alluring and advizing others to sin, more then wicked persons in acting of
their own sins. But by this discourse of his, he is as far off as ever from
proving that we make God the Author of sin. For consider, either by doing more
he understands, that God does the same which the Devil and wicked me^ do; and
more: or though he does not the same, yet he does that which is more then that.
If his meaning be that God does the same which the Devil and wicked men do,
this is notoriously untrue, considering the^ as tempters, and advizers, and
perswaders unto sin. For God on the contrary forbids sin, persuades to
repentance, to obedience both by his word and by his spirit; and indeed the
spirit works not, but by the word which is called the sword of the spirit; All
holiness of life is comprised within the compass of ten commandments; these
were given by the Lord from mount Sinai, pronounced by the sound of a trumpet;
to these the Lord calls his people saying, stand in the ways and behold, and
ask for the old way, which is the good way and walk therein and ye shall find
rest unto your souls. For the transgression of these the Lord expostulates
with the^, Hear o heavens and hearken o earth, I have nourished and brought up
a Ier: 6. 16.
people, and they have rebelled against me. When they have gone astray he
exhorts the, and that most pathetically to return by repentance, by promise of
salvation, and threatening judgment Esa. 1.
if they do not repent. O Jerusalem wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou
may be Ier: 4. 14.
saved, how long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within thee? I have seen
thy adulteries, and thy neighings, the filthiness of thy whoredom on the
hills, in the feilds, and thine abominations. Woe unto thee o Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? When shall it once be? And to provoak Ier: 13. 27.
them the rather unto repentance, he represents himself unto them as easy to
be entreated, as slow to wrath, and one that by his patience and long suffering
leads them to repentance. And to this end he gives charge to his Ministers,
namely, by representing the gracious nature of God to admonish them of their
sins, to call them to repentance, to obedience. And to this purpose to
represent his promises which he has annexed unto godliness, both the promises
of this life, and the promises of a better life that is to come. Yea and his
threats also both of judgments in the world to come, to the casting both of
body and soul into hell fire; and thereupon to exhort us to fear him above
all others. And judgments of this world, as, famine, pestilence, and the sword
of the enemy, To deliver them over into the hands of beastly people, skillful
to destroy; To send Serpents, and Cockatrices among them that will not be
charmed, and that shall sting them; and that without all mercy. Surely these
are not the courses of Satan or wicked counselors. Therefore they do not as
God does, neither does God do that which they do and more also. 2. If it be
said that albeit the Lord does not as the Devil does, and wicked men do in
persuading them to sin; yet he does that which is more then this. I answer,
that nevertheless he cannot be accounted the Author of sin, in case the
doing of this alone does constitute an Agent the Author of sin. Now as
formerly I have showed this was the opinion of Dominicus Soto, and of the
Divines of Salamancha: yea and Vasquez the Jesuit professes, that he was ever
of that opinion. Again if to do more then this, be to become the Author of
sin; both this Author and all that are of his Spirit do maintain as well we,
that God does that which is far more then this. For I presume he will not
deny, but that God is he, and he alone, who does support our natures in the
committing of sin; and who maintains our senses in their vigor and
quickness, without which we could take noe pleasure in sin, and that concurres
to every act of sin, in the way of cause efficient, not morally, which alone
makes one to become the Author of sin, by the judgment of Divines formerly
mentioned; but physically and naturally, which no creature can do, namely
become a natural coefficient cause to the act of another man's will. Nay which
is most considerable, I presume this Author has so much accuratenes in
School-learning, as not to deny that when the Devil tempts us, or wicked
counselors do tempt us to sin, God concurres with them in this act, and that
in the kind of a cause efficient physical. For in him we live and move and
have our being; what is Act: 17. 28.
it to have our being from him, but that he is the Author of it in the kind of
a cause efficient? In the same sense do we live in him, and in the same sense
do we move in him. It stands us upon as much to maintain this, as to
maintain that God is our Creator. For unless all things do subsist in him
neither were all things created by him. Now this is a great deal more then to
persuade. For a weak man is able to persuade, but noe creature is able to
perform these parts which God does in the act of every thing created by by
him. So that hereby the Reader may evidently perceive, that the discourse is as
far off as ever, from proving God by this Doctrine of ours to be the Author
of sin, any more then he is constituted the Author of sin by the doctrine of
this Interpolator. But I am content to examine the things he proposes
particularly and severely.

1. The Devil, says he, does only allure men by inward suggestions, and
outward temptations to fall into sin: But God does much more if he do
necessitate, and by his decree first; and next by his powerful and secret
working in the souls of men, determine their wills irresistibly to sin. For
to determine is infinitely more then to persuade. Now to this I have already
answered by showing. 1. That albeit God does more then this, yet seeing he does
not this: if the doing of this alone constitutes one the Author of sin, as
many great Divines have concurrently maintained; still God is free from being
the Author of sin. This Author barely supposing, not once offering to prove
the contrary. 2. Himself confesses that God concurres to the act of every
sin, and that in the kind of a cause efficient natural. And I may be as bold
as to say of this, that it is infinitely more then to persuade; like as he
says of God's determining the will and necessitating thereof. Now I proceed to
a more particular examination of his discourse. And here first I wonder not a
little at this Author's distinction of the Devill's inward suggestion from his
outward temptations. For I confess freely I know noe outward temptation of
Satan, distinct from his inward suggestions. Outward occasions and provocations
to sin I know none wrought by Satan, any farther then as he in some cases is
God's instrument, as in afflicting Job. For surely God has not given over the
world, or any part thereof to the government of Satan; this is in his own hand
still; and hereby occasions and opportunities are offered from time to time for
a man to advantage himself in sinful courses, either in the way of profit, or
satisfying his unclean lusts. And Arminius confesses that the administration
of Arguments and occasions, which provoke to such an act, as cannot be
committed by the creature without sin, if not by Gods intention, yet at
Disput. theol. page 108.
least according to the creatures affection, and often according to the events
that arise therehence. This administration, I say Arminius confesses, does
belong to the Divine providence. And these arguments, he says, are objected
and there to the mind (of man,) or to his senses outward or inward; and that
either by the mediate work of the creatures coming between, or by God's
immediate action. And that the end of this Divine administration is to make
trial whether the creature will abstain from sin, even then, when it is
provoked thereunto. As, for the trial of David, was Bathsheba going ^o^th to
wash her self objected to David, whereupon he was inflamed with lusts Joseph
was not, though far more strongly solicited by the temptations of his wanton
Mistress. Secondly, to necessitate the will or determine the will are noe
phrases of our Divines. The first is used only by Bradwardine (as at present I
remember) sometimes Archbishop elect of Canterbury; The other is that phrase
of the Dominicans. Now they are of age and able to answer for themselves. Why
does not this Author answer a chapter or two in Bradwardine, a chapter or two
in Alvarez, where they dispute this and resolve the question affirmatively.
Surely hereby he should perform a work more worthy of a Scholasticall Divine,
then by so hungry a discourse as this. Secondly, consider neither Bradwardine
maintains that God necessitates; nor Alvarez that God determines the will to
sin, but to every natural act, in which kind of acts sin is to be found:
Why then should this Auhour carry himself thus in his crimination? We know sin
is merely privative in the formal notion thereof; an obliquitie such as
concerning which, Austine has long ago deliverd, that it has noe efficient
cause, but deficient only. And diverse ways Divines have showed how God may be
the author of the act, yet not the Author o^ the sin, and illustrated it by
various similitudes. As of a man riding upon a lame horse, he makes him go,
but does not make him halt. The sun shining upon a dung-mixton, makes it
evaporate, but does not make it stink. The sun makes flowers to evaporate and
send forth their favors as well as a dung-mixton; but that the one evaporates
a sweet odor the other an unsavory, is from the nature of things themselves on
which the sun beats. In like sort the Sun by the heat thereof provokes all
things to engender according to their kinds, even frogs and toades and snakes,
as well as other creatures profitable for the use of man in the way of food;
yea of vipers flesh good use is made in the way of physic. And God knows how
to make good use even of the sins of men. and of the rage and malice of
Satan. If an underw-heele being out of his place, the upper wheel in a jacke
or clock will set him going in a wrong way, as well as all the rest in a right
way; his motion is from the upper whele, his irregular motion from himself. A
good Scribe meeting with moist paper will make but sorry work The writing is
from himself, the blurring from the moistness of the paper on this very
question whether the act of sin be from God, Aquinas maintaining the
affirmative, illustrates it by a distinction of the halting motion of a lame
leg; the motion, says he, is from the soul, the (...) is from the
imperfection of the Organ, the infirmity of the leg. Yet this Author
carries it hand over head, as if to be the Author of the action, were to be
the sin; not considering that himself maintains, that God is the Author of
the action, and that in the kind of a cause efficient natural. Thirdly, when
Bradwardine maintains that God necessitates the will to every good act
thereof, he withal professes that he necessitates it ad liberum actum suum
that is to work every act thereof, freely. So when Alvarerz maintains that
God determinates the will to every act thereof, he withal maintains that God
determines the will to work free ye and so Aquinas. For when he works upon
contingent causes, he moves the^ to bring forth their effects contingently;
like as when he works upon necessary causes, he moves them to produce their
effects necessarily. And like as to move contingent causes to produce their
effects contingently, is to move them to produce their effects with a
possibility to the contrary. So to move free causes, to produce their effects
freely, is to move them to produce their effects with an active power to the
contrary. But to proceed, whereas he says, that sin must needs follow the
determination; it is as true. 1. In this Author's judgment, that it must needs
follow upon God's co^currence to this act. If he say that this concurre^ce is
necessary to every act, I answer, it is necessary to the substance of every
act, but not at all required to the sin; though this Author carries it
blindfold after this manner. Secondly, so say we is determination required to
the substance of every act. And Gods concourse with the creature is not
coordinate, like as one man concurres with another in moving a timber logge,
which is the expression of the Jesuits, thereby manifesting the vileness of
their opinion, as we can demonstrate, and that more ways then one by evident
demonstration, as I have already showed in my Vindiciae. Let this Author
answer Lib. 2. digres. 7. and 9.
those digressions if he can, I am confident he will never answer them while
his head is hot; nor all the Rabble of the Arminians. We know God is the first
cause, and all other are but second causes in comparison to him. Yet we
willingly confess that the providence of God is wonderful and of a mysterious
nature in this; but such as whereunto the Scripture gives pregnant testimony,
as scarce to any thing more. So jealous he is least his providence should be
denied in evil, wherein indeed it is most wonderful; and he takes unto
himself the hardening of men's hearts, and blinding of their minds, and
prostituting them to abominable courses, even to vile affections and thereby to
punish sin with sin, as Rom: 1. Therein says the Apostle, they received the
recompense of their error. This has Austine also by Scripture suggestion
testified at large in his book. De gratia and Libero arbitrio in two large
chap: and likewise in his fifth book against Julian the Pelagian and third
chap: this also the Adversaries have been driven to confess in a strange
manner, as to give instance first in Bellarmine whose words are these. God
says he, praesidet ipsis voluntatibus easque regit and gubernat, torquet and
fl^ctit in iis invisibiliter operando, ut licet vitio proprio malae sint, tamen
a divina providentia ad unum potius malum quam ad aliud, non positive, sed
permissive ordinentur. God is president over the Wills, and so rules and
governes, wrests and turns them, working invisibly in them, that albeit through
their own fault they are evil, yet by the divine providence they are ordered
to one evil rather then to another, not positively but permissively What one
of our Divines has said more then this comes to, or so much, professing that
God rules and governes the wills of men by his invisible operation, ordering
them to one evil rather then to another which St. Austine calls inclining
them? And the Prophet David we know prays, that God would incline his heart
unto his testimonies and not to covetousness, arguing thereby that God has
power to incline a man's heart to covetousness. But Bellarmine says more then
this, in saying that, God wrestes and bends them, torquet and flectit; those
are his words; although he seems to blast all this in the end by saying that
this is done permissive, by permission, in flat contradiction to himself,
whose express purpose is to show that God does not only suffer wicked men to
perform evil acts, and to desert the godly, but somewhat else also, namely,
to rule and govern their w^lls, to wrest and bend them by an invisible working
in them, to commit one ev^^^ rather then another. Secondly consider their
general doctrine of congruous grace, standing in a necessary conformity and
correspondency to another vile doctrine of theirs concerning the foreknowledge
of God, called by them Scientia media By this doctrine of theirs God foresees
in what ease and by what motives man being moved to abstain from this or that
sin, he will abstain from it: And again in what case and after what manner
being moved to abstain from sin, he will not abstain from it And God makes
choice at his pleasure how to move him, whether after such a manner in which
case he foresees he will abstain from sin; or after another manner in which
case he foresees he will not ab^^aine. Now who is so blind as not to observe,
that as often as a man sins, it is the will of God, that is the decree of
God he shall sin, by the very grounds received by our Adversaries. Thus much
as touching my first answer concerning the necessary con^equence of sin upon
God's operation to be acknowledged by our Adversaries, according to the tenor
of their own doctrine, as well as by us. 2. My second answer is this. Albeit
God determines the will to any virtuous act, morally good; whether in the way
of doing some moral good, or in the way of abstaining from some motall evil;
yet unless God give man some faith and love, as fountains out of which every
moral work must proceed, that it may be acceptable with God; such an one
shall necessarily sin, though not as touching the act done, yet as touching
the manner of doing; for as much as without true faith and love he can neither
perform any moral good work, nor abstain from any moral evil work in a
gracious manner. Now let every sober man judge, whether God be bound to give
every man faith and love, without which all is one as touching the preserving a
man from sin in general, whether the will of man be determined by God, to an
act morally good, or morally evil. In each of which God determines the will
only to the substance of the act: So that whether God cooperates to the
substance of the act or not, and whether this cooperation be by way of
determining the will or not; still there will be a necessary consequence of
sin to every act of man, if God does not bestow the spirit of regeneration
upon him, which spirit of God we know was given to our first parents; though
not under this notion of the Spirit of regeneration, and whereof they were
justly bereaved upon the first sin committed by them; And because all we have
been derived from them since their fall, therefore we have received our natures
from them deprived of the Spirit of God, and therein continue until such time
as it pleases God for Christ sake, to restore it unto us, which he does in
regenerating us. Thirdly, and lastly upon the very permission of sin, it
follows necessarily that sin shall be, by the doctrine not of Piscator only,
but of Vorstius and Arminius also; yea and of the learned amongst the Papists,
as Navarettus and Penottus: And the very definition of Permission of sin by
Arminians justifies it; as also the Jesuits doctrine concerning gratia
congrua. For if God will not afford that grace, upon the grant whereof men will
abstain from sin, as God well knows; but such a grace, upon the grant whereof
man will abstain from sin, which also is well known unto God; does ^t not
manifestly follow that such a one shall sin, though not sin necessarily,
but contingently and freely. 2. In the next place he tells us that wicked men
are esteemed Authors of their offenses: Now by the way this is not so; To be a
sinner is one thing to be an Author of sin is another thing. And to be an
Author of sin is in reference rather to another sin, then to ones own.
And Martinius tells me that, Author est cujus autoritate and sententia aliquid
fit, cujus testimonio ut aliquid credamus, adducimur. Qui hortatur ut fiat.
Itaque authorem and dissuasorem Cicero opponit. He is the author by whose
authority and judgment a thing is done, by whose testimony we are induced to
believe ought; who exhorts to the doing of ought. And therefore Cicero makes
Author and disswader opposite. But to proceed with this Author who set the
Printer on work for the edition of this piece. Men, he says, do plot purpose,
choose and commit offenses, and are immediate agents in the acting of them. But
God by this opinion does more; for he overuleth the projects and purposes of
wicked men, and by an uncontrollable motion, proceeding from an immutable
decree, carries all their deliberations, resolutions, choices, and actions
precisely that very way, so as they cannot choose but do, as they do,
whatsoever they may think to the contrary. To which I answer, that it becomes
every man to give the Devil his right, and and not make him worse then he is,
nor wicked men neither. Now noe wicked man does will or choose sin as sin
Nemo vult esse incontinens, says Aristotle, although they do such things as
do sufficiently evidence their incontinent disposition. For the object of the
will is only good; neither can any thing be willed by man, but, sub ratione
boni, under the show of good: whether this good be in the kind of profit, or in
the kind of pleasure, or in the kind of honesty. So Lucretia when she killed
her self, she did it for the preservation of the integrity of her mind in the
opinion of the world, and that they might know that she consented not unto
Tarquinius; but was forced by him. So then the act is it they do or choose to
do for some motive or other, which whether it be pleasure or profit, or credit
they get thereby, that makes not the act sinful, but only that it is against
some law or other, forbidding it And this act, (all sides confess) is the
work of God, as well as the work of man; as in whom we move, like as in him
we live, and have our being. And Bradwardine maintains that of every act of
the creature God is a more immediate cause then the Act: 17.
creature it self, who^e act it is. This he proves of the creatures
conservation, of the creatures action, of the creatures motion; and to this he
proceeds by certain degrees. And in all l. 1. c. 2. 3. 4.
this God does not transgress any law, as man does too often in the performing
of many a natural act, and only in performing acts natural is sin
committed, never in performing any act supernatural; all such acts are in a
peculiar manner the work of grace 2. God overruleth no man's good projects or
purposes, otherwise then as when accepting their intentions he will not have
them put such in execution because perhaps he has reserved that for another
time and person. As when David was purposed to build God an house, and was
encouraged therein by Nathan: yet the Lord sent Nathan shortly unto David to
give him to understand, that he reserved that work for Solomon his Son; yet so
well accepting David's purpose that he promised to build his house. But if God
at any time overruleth the wicked projects and purposes of men, whether good or
evil, let us bless him rather for this then curse him; by cursing them that
maintain this good providence. Yet in overruling them, whether he does it
immediately, or by the ministry of his good Angels; not by working immediately
upon the will, as this Author dreameth. For that is not the way to work
agreably to the reasonable nature of man (though so he work also by general
influence affoarded common to all agents) but by representing to the
understanding congruous motives to divert them from that they do intend;
whether in a gracious manner, as he diverted David from his purpose to massacre
the whole house of Nabal; or only in a natural way, whereby he diverts wicked
men from their ungodly designs, by representing the danger thereof, to make
them fear, and so to restrain them. Will the Devil himself be over prone to
blaspheme God for this? yet in this alone he does more then either the Devil
or man can do; though this be not all that he does. For he does cooperate to
every design and execution of the creature, be it never so abominable; which
neither man, nor Angels can do. And he has power to give over unto Satan,
and to harden any man, and that more effectully then any Devil can do. The
Devil could not say with truth that He would harden Pharaoh's heart, that he
should not let Israel go. Nor when he had let them go, I will harden
Pharaoh's heart that he shall follow after them, to bring them back. The Devil
could not say in truth, as the Lord did to David, I will take thy wives before
thine eyes, and give them to thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives in
the sight of the sun. Nor as he said to Jeroboam, Behold I will rent the
kingdom out of the hands of Solomon, and will give ten tribes to thee. Nay the
very permissio^ of sin so as whereby it shall infallibly come to pass, is not
in the power of any creature, but in God alone. And shall it follow, that
because God does more, both as touching the act it self, and touching the
sinful condition of it, then any creature can do, therefore God is the
Author of sin? whereas when God moves a man or carries him on to any good
moral works, whether in doing that which is virtuous, or abstaining from that
which is vicious, this man shall certainly sin, though not in so great a
degree, unless God be pleased over and above to regenerate him, and to bestow
faith, and love on him, for as much as in this case, though he do an act
virtuous, yet shall he not do it in a gracious manner. and though he do
abstain from an act vicious yet he shall not abstain from it in a gracious
manner. Let this man therefore proceed, and maintain (if he thinks good) that
except God does bestow the spirit of regeneration upon all and every one
throughout the world, he is the Author of sin, not only when he moves them
to such acts which are evil, but also when he moves them to the doing of such
as are virtuous, or to the abstaining from those that are vicious. As for his
phrases noe wise man will regard them, but only such as are content to feed on
husks for want of better food. As, when he talks of motion uncontrollable,
which makes a noise, as if men's wills would control his motion, but cannot:
whereas God as the first mover moves the creature most congruously unto his
nature; without which motion of his the creature could not move at all. The
like noyses makes the phrase immutable decree; as empty things many times give
the greatest sound: whereas by virtue of God's immutable decree it is, that it
cannot otherwise be; then that as necessary things cannot but come to pass
necessarily; so contingent things cannot but come to pass contingently, and
the free actions of men freely. But by the way he manifest's how he licks his
lips, at a Mutable decree of God, even of that God with whom, as St. James
speaks, there is no variableness, nor shadow of change. He does acknowledge,
we maintain, potentiam in se liberam; but then he says, we do not maintain,
liberum usum; a most absurd distinction. For noe power deserves to be styled
free, save that it is of free use and exercise. And what a prodigious thing is
it to affirm, that it is not within the almighty power of God to cause that
this or that shall be done by a reasonable creature freely: this is it that
Bradwardine proposes to the judgment of all to consider, whether it be not an
unreasonable thing to deny this unto God. God does determine their will before
it has determined it self, and makes them do those only actions, which his
omnipotent will has determined, and not which their wills out of any absolute
dominion over their own actions, have prescribed. Thus he relates the opinion
of our Divines; whereas neither determining, nor necessitating (as I said
before) are the expressions of our Divines, but of Papists; yet he lays not
this to the charge of Papist's: Noe nor to the charge of Bellarmine, for saying
that God does not only rule, and govern, but wrest and bend them, and that to
one evil rather then to an other. If Scholars of our Universities use any such
phrases, it is no other then they find in use among School-divines. It is true
indeed Jesuits oppose the Dominicans in this. This Author sides with the
Jesuits, but why does he not take to task any one chapter in Alvarez on this
point to answer, to overthrow their grounds, which are no other then the very
word of God, and clear reason does justify. And the ground of the Jesuits in
opposing, is merely an invention of their own, concerning a certain knowledge
of God called a middle knowledge; a vile invention, and a palpable untruth, and
controulable of manifest contradiction. For they suppose a thing knowable by
God, as future, before God's will has passed upon it to make it future, being
in it is own nature merely possible; and consequently cannot pass out of the
condition of a thing merely possible, into the condition of a thing future
without a cause. Now noe cause can be devised hereof with any color of reason,
but the will of God. For first, the cause hereof must be eternal, seeing the
thing it self, of the cause whereof we dispute, is eternal to wit, the
fruition of any thing. This I say was eternal, for it is known with God from
all eternity. Now there is noe eternal cause to be found, but in God alone,
therefore the cause why things merely possible in their own nature, became
future, and that from everlasting, must be found in God alone. Therefore it
must either be the will of God; or the knowledge of God that did make it
future; and seeing the knowledge of God rather supposes them to be future, then
makes them so; what remains but that the will of God must necessarily be the
cause hereof? Nay consider whether the Jesuits themselves do not manifest
more ingenuity by far, then this boisterous Theologue, that thinks to carry
all with the blast of his words, the resolution of whose arguments generally,
neither having the word of God for their ground; nor any confessed principle of
reason. Whereas not the greatest, Angel of God will take upon him such an
authoritative manner of discourse. For did we grant, that God by his Allmighty
will did impose any necessity upon our wills. Yet Suarez confesses that
Suarez: de auxil. lib. 1. c. 2. number: 7.
so to work, does neither involve any contradiction, nor exceed the Allmighty
power of God: Whereas we are ready to prove and have already proved, that their
doctrine of God's concourse without subordination of the second causes to the
first, implies flat contradiction We say the wills determination of it self is
the work of God, otherwise faith and love and every gracious act shall not be
the work of God. Again the wills determination of it self, is no other then
the wills operation; and this Author that opposes us dares not deny the wills
opperation to be the work of God. But what School divine can he produce that
delivers himself in so absurd a manner; as to say that God first determines
the will, and that afterward the will determines it self; especially speaking
of such actions of the will as are produced by the power of nature? The wills
determination of it self, we say, is the work of God moving the creature
agreably to the nature thereof; that is to be carried necessarily to that which
is it is end, and appears to be good in genere convenientis: and freely to the
means, which appear to be good, in genere conducentis, as fit to pronounce
the end intended. All confessing (Durand excepted) that God works the act; the
question whether he works the act absolutely, the will a second agent
subordinate unto God, as to it is Creator? Or conditionally, modo vellimus,
provided that we will it, God the first agent subordinate to the will of the
creature? This Author will have it to be wrought by God, that is
conditionally, in dependence upon, and expectation of the operation of the
creature, which we say is most absurd First because thus the first agent is
made subordinate to the second agent, which is most unaturall. Secondly,
observe a manifest contradiction. For the question is about, actus volendi, the
act of willing, in man. Now if God produce this act upon supposition, that man
produces this act, then the same act is produced by God upon supposition, that
it is produced by man. If it be produced by man, what need is there of God's
producing it by way of supplement? Thirdly, by this means the thing is made
the condition of it self. For hereby it is said, this act is made upon
condition that it does exist; and so the self same thing shall be before and
after it self. 4. Thus man's production of the act shall be noe work of God,
which holds off faith and repentance, as well as of any natural act, in this
Authors opinion. Fifthly, It is not possible the will can produce the act
unless God produces it, If then God does not produce it unless the will does
produce it, in this case there shall be noe act produced. For if I go not to
London unless you go with me; nor you go to London unless I go with you;
here is no going at all till one says I say I go, and his resolution carries
the other with him if the others depend thereupon. 6 Whereas to help at a dead
lift the Jesuiticall doctrine of, Scientia media, middle knowledge, is called
in after this manner; God foreseing that at such an instant the will of man
will produce such an act, if God be pleased to concur; and upon this
foreknowled^e God resolves to concur This doctrine I have already confounded
by showing the apparent falsity of this supposition. For seeing the wills
producing such an act at such an instant, is a thing merly possible in it is own
nature, and no more future then not future; It is impossible that this should
pass out of the condition of a thing merely possible into the condition of a
thing future without a cause: And noe cause hereof can be but the will of God,
as I have often proved. It follows that the wills producing such an act,
depends rather upon the will of God to have it produced, then on the contrary,
that Gods producing such an act, dependes upon the creatur's will to produce
it. As for that which follows of the absolute dominion that the will of the
creature should have over it is action (I presume he means independent) it
sounds more like the voice of the Devil, then of a sober Christian. Yet it is
more then I know that Lucifer himself challenges any such absolute Dominion
over his actions unto himself; If he does, I know noe greater sin that he
or the creature can be guilty of; unless in case gross ignorance does excuse
it. To deny God to be* the first Agent is to deny his Godhead; and if he be,
primum agens, he must be primum liberum too, the first free agent. And to make
our selves to be prima libera, the first free agents, what is other then to
advance our selves into the very Throne of God's Soveraigntie; and do we not
fear least his wrath smoke us thence. And if all this that he contends for
were granted him, that nothing but mere necessity were found in the motion of
men's wills; yet Suarez will justify us from speaking contradiction, or
delivering ought that exceeds the compass of God's omnipotency. And what if
all the world were innocent, yet God should not be unjust in casting the most
innocent creature into hell fire; as Medina professes, and that by the
unanimous consent of Divines, and Vasquez the Jesuit acknowledges this to be
in the power of God as he is Lord of life and death, and in the last chapter of
the book, de praedestinatione and gratia which goes under Austin's name, there
is an express passage to justify it. And albeit that work be not Austin's,
yet it is lately justified to be the work of a great follower of Austin's, and
as Orthodoxe as he; namely, the work of Fulgentius as Raynaudus the Jesuit
has lately proved, and justified that passage also; together with that which
is usually brought by School-Divines to prove it out of the twelfth Raynaud: in
in Vindcationi.
chapter of Wisdom, and shows the right reading, as followed by Austin and
Gregory. And withal represents a pregnant passage taken out of the fifteenth
Homily of Macarius to the same purpose. And out of Chrysostom in his 2. De
compunctione cordis, about the end thereof. And out of Austin upon Psalm the
seventieth, about the beginning. And to these he adds Ariminensis,
Cameracensis, Serarius, and Lorinus, all maintaining the same. And this is
evident by consideration of the power, which it pleased the Lord to execute
upon his holy Son, and our blessed Savior, and by the power which he gives us
over brute creatures. This I say, if all that he contends for were granted,
should rather be concluded therehence, namely, that in this case the creature
should be innocent, then that God should be the Author of sin; especially
considering that God performs in all this noe other thing then belongs unto
him of necessity; as without which his moving of the second causes, it were
impossible the creature should work at all, which we have made good, by
showing the manifest absurdity of their contrary doctrine, who maintain a bare
concourse Divine either in subordination unto the agency of the creature, or
without subordinating the operation of the creature, to motion Divine. But we
do subordinate it, as without which the second cause could not work at all,
and by virtue whereof it does work, and that freely, so far forth as liberty
of will is competent to a creature; but not so as to make the creature compeere
with his Creator. Let man be a second free Agent, but set our God that made us
evermore be the first free Agent; least otherwise we shall deny him the same
power over his creatures, that the Potter has over the clay of the same lump
to make one vessel unto honor and another unto dishonor. This power in my
maker, the Lord has given me eyes to discern as taught us in his holy word,
and an heart to submit unto it; and to his providence in governing my will,
even in the worst actions that ever were committed by me, without any repining
humor against his hand; though I think it lawful for us in an holy manner to
expostulate with God sometimes in the Prophets language and say, Lord why have
thou caused us to err from thy ways and hardened our hearts against thy
fear? Which yet I confess he brings to pass at noe time, infundendo
malitiam, by infusing any malice into me, who naturally have more then enough
of that leaven in me; but, non infundendo gratiam, not quickening in me that
holy fear, which he has planted in me, of which grace I confess willingly, I
have a great deal less then I desire, though the least measure of it is a
great deal more then I do or can deserve. Neither shall I ever learn of this
Author after his manner to blaspheme God if at any time he shall harden my
heart against his fear. Though this Author speaks commonly with a full and
foul mouth, yet his arguments are lanke and lean; and of noe substance but
words. As when he says that, God overrules men's wills by our opinion. Now
to overrule^ a man is to carry him in despite of his teeth. We say noe such
thing but that God moves every creature to work agreably to it is nature,
necessary things necessarily, contingent things contingently, free Agents
freely; though nothing comes to pass by the free agency of any creature, but
what God from all eternity, by his unchangable counsel has determined to come
to pass. As the eleventh Article of Ireland does profess by the unanimous
consent of the ArchBishop, Bishops and Clergy of that Kingdom, when those
Articles were made. So I speak warily and circumspectly, the rather because
one Doctor Heylin does in a book entitled, The History of the Sabbath,
profess, Chapter 8. page 259. That, that whole book of Articles is now called
in, and in the place thereof, the Articles of the Church of Ireland confirmed
by Parliament in that Kingdom. Anno 1631. A thing I willingly confess at
first sight seemed incredible unto me; namely, that Articles of Religion
agreed upon in the days, of King James, should be revoked in the days of King
Charles; but expect to hear the truth of that relation. For the Author
thereof has never as yet deserved so much credit at my hands, as to be
believed in such a particular as this. But to return, this Authors text is
nothing answerable to the margent. For first, imperare to command, is one
thing, and to overruled is another thing: though he that does, imperare command
ought, is commonly accounted the Author thereof, as a cause Moral, from whom
comes the beginning of such a work. But utterly deny that God commands evil,
and the truth is we acknowledge noe other notion of evil then such as the
Apostle expresses in calling it (...) an incongruitie to the law of God, which
law commands somethings and forbids other things. I come to his third reason.
3. I grant wicked counselors and perswaders are deservedly accounted the
Authors of sin: The common use and acception of the words as I showed in
answer to the first, is observed to denote such. Therefore Cicero makes Author
and disswader opposite; and by law they are punishable in the same degree with
the Actors. But God is noe counselor or perswader to any lewd course, but
forbids it, and disswades it, and that with denuntiation of the greatest
judgments among trangressours. 2. I willingly confess that councelling is
far inferior to enforcing; yet in Scripture phrase earnest entreaty, or
command is oftentimes expressed by compelling as Mat, 14. 22. Mark: 6. 45. Luk:
14. 23. Gala: 6. 12, and 2. 14. 1 Samuel: 28. 23. 2 Chronicles: 21. 11. And noe
marvel for hereby many times men are drawn full sore against their wills to
do that which they would not. It is true God's power cannot be resisted, but
neither has any man any will to resist that motion of God whereby he works
agreeable to their natures, then indeed there were place for resisting. If the
Lord carries on a covetous person, such as Achan to covet a wedge of gold and
a Babylonish garment, and coveting it move him accordingly to take it, and
convey it away secretly, and hide it in his tent, what resistance does he make
in all this? Or what is done in all this less agreably to his covetous
disposition, then to the disposition of Toades and Addars, when he moves them
according to their nature to sting and poison? So he moved the Babylonians
compared to Serpents and Cockatrices to sting a wicked people. Do not the
Scriptures Ier: 8. 17.
plainly profess that God did send them? Is not Assure in this respect called,
the Rod of God's wrath and the staff in his hand? Was it not called the Lords
indignation? Es: 10. 15.
Is he not compared to an axe and a saw, shall the axe boast it self against
him that heweth therewith? Or shall the saw extol it self against him that
moves it? Still he confounds the act with the sinfulness thereof, speaking of
God's producing sins; whereas sin is never produced, it being only an
obliquity consequent unto the act of such a worker as is subject to a law. And
our Adversaries confess that God is the cause of the act; as well as we. Yet
will they not hereby be driven; to profess that in producing the act he
produces the sin. As for that which he speaks of Enforcing, we may well pity
him, that when he wants strength of reason, he supplies that by phrases. We
deny that God inforceth any man's will. Nay it is the general rule of
Schools, that, voluntas non potest cogi, the will cannot be forced: We
maintain that every act of the will, especially in natural things (such as a
sinful act must needs be: for only gracious acts are supernatural) is not
only voluntary (which is sufficient to preserve it from being forced) but free
also, by as much liberty as the creature is capable of, only we deny that the
will of man is primum liberum, a first free agent, that is the prerogative of
God alone, the first mover of all, and the supreme Agent thus: I have
dispatched my answer to his first reason consisting of three parts I come unto
the second.

Sect: 4.
If we could find out a King that should so carry himself in procuring the
ruin and the offenses of any Subjects, as (by this opinion) God does in the
affecting of the damnation and transgressions of Reprobates, M. Mason's Addit.
2. p. 29. 30.
we would all charge him with the ruin and sins of those his Subjects. Who
would not abhor, says Moulin, a King speaking thus. I will have this man
hang^d, and that I may hang him justly, I will have him murder or steal. This
King says he should not only make an innocent man miserable, sed and
sceleratum, but wicked too, and should punish him for that offense (cujus ipse
causa esset) of which himself was the cause. It is a clear case, Tiberius, as
Suetonius reports, having a purpose to put some Virgins to death, because it
was not Molin. Anat. c. 12. de praedest. page 37.
lawful among the Romans to strangle Virgins, caused them all to be deflouered
by the hangman, that so they might be strangled. Who will not say that
Tiberius was the principal Author of the deflouring of those Maids? In like
manner (say the Supralapsarians) God has a purpose of putting great store of
men to the second death; but because it is not lawful for him by reason of his
justice, to put to death men innocent Sueton. vit. Tib. cap. 61.
and without blame, he has decreed that the Devil shall defloure them, that
afterward he may damn them It follows therefore that God is the maine cause
of those their sins. If a King should carry himself as God did in hardening
Pharaoh's heart that he should not let Israel go; and when he had let Israel
go, to harden his heart that he should follow after them; we would acknowledge
such a one, not to be man but God. And then surely Answer.
whatsoever our Arminians would think of such a one, we would think noe
otherwise then Solomon did of him of whom he professed, that, he made all
things for himself, even the wicked against the day of evil. If God does but
permit a man to will this or that, necesse est, says Arminius, it must needs
be, ut nullo argumentorum genere persuadeatur ad nolendum, that noe kind of
argument shall persuade such one to abstain from willing it. And I hope
Arminius has as great auhority with this Author, as Mr. Moulin deserves to
have with us. Noe King has power to dispense any such providence as this. St.
Paul tells us plainly, that, God has ordained some unto wrath; and as he has
made of the same lump some vessels unto honor, so has he made other
vessels unto dishonor. The Lord professes that he kept Abimelech from
sinning against him. Thus the Lord could deal with all if it pleased him; Why
does he not? is it not for the manifestation of his own glory? For to this
purpose he has made all things. And that, he suffers with long patience
vessels Gen: 20. 6.
of wrath prepared to destruction. And what to do does he suffer them? But to
continue and persevere in their sinful courses without repentance; the Apostle
plainly tells us that it is, to declare his wrath and make his power known.
This is not the voice of any Doctor of ours now a days, but of St. Paul. And
shall Mr. Moulin be brought in to affront St. Paul? For recompense let the
Jesuits be heard to whom the nation of the Arminians are beholden for their
principal grounds; Wherefore does God give effectual grace unto one and not
unto another, but because he has elected the one and rejected the other? And I
appeal to every sober Christian, whether the absoluteness of reprobation does
not as invincibly follow herehence as the absoluteness of Election. But
touching Mr. Moulin, I have heard that Doctor Ames sometimes wished that he had
never meddled in this argument. I am not of Doctor Ames his mind in this; though
it were I think most fit every one should exercise himself in those
questions, wherein by the course of his studies he has been most conversant;
so should the Church of God enjoy, plus dapis and rixae multo minus,
invidiaeque. I do admire Mr. Moulin in his conference with Cayer as also upon
the Eucharist, and on Purgatory, he has my heart when I read his
consolalations to his Breathren of the Church of France; as also entreating of
the love of God. I would willingly learn French to understand him only, and
have along time desired, and still to get any thing that he has written. I
highly esteem him in his Anatomy though I do not like all and every passage;
yet but few are the passages wherein I differ from his opinion. I have been
very sorry to observe how by his doctrine in the point of reprobation he
overthrowes his own Orthodox Doctrine in the point of Election. I would he
would answer Sylvester who has replied to his admirable letters written to
Monsieur Balzak. I could be well content, were I once free, to supply what is
wanting to Waleus his Apology for him against Corvinus. But to the point, the
passage here proposed by him is I willingly confess somewhat harsh. I will
have this man hanged, and that I may hang him justly I will have him murder or
steal. But compare it with that of St. Paul formerly mentioned, God suffers
the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, that he may declare his wrath,
and make his power known. And that of Eli's children, They obeyed not the 1 Samuel: 2. 25. 2 Chronicles: 25. 20. Ier: 52. 3.
voice of their Father, because the Lord would slay them. And that Amaziah
would not hear: For it was of the Lord that he might deliver them into his
hands, because they sought the Gods of Edom. And that of Jeremiah Doubtless
because the wrath of the Lord was against Jerusalem and Judah, till he had cast
them out of his presence, therefore Zedekiah rebelled against the King of
Babel. And observe how near Mr. Moulin is to expose these holy passages of
Scripture and the doctrine contained in them in like manner unto scorn, ere he
is aware. And let him soberly consider, and without any humor of complying
with our Adversaries out of a desire to charm them who will not be charmed, to
what end God does finally permit some to persevere in sin, and can he find
any other but this, for the manifestation of the glory of his vindicative
justice in their condemnation? And without any desire to charm, I have showed
plainly, that God does not permit any man to sin, and finally to persevere in
sin to the end that he may damnethem: But that he both permits them finally in
sin, and damnes them for their sin, for the declaration of his wrath and
power on them; and also that he may declare the riches of his glory, upon the
vessels of his mercy, whom he has prepared unto glory: If he put a difference
between permission of sin, and a will that they shall sin; I would entreat
him not to stumble at this. For what difference between God's will to permit
man to sin, and to will that man shall sin by his permission: And the
tragical acts committed on the holy Son of God by Herod and Pilate, the
Gentiles and people of Israel, the Apostles say not they were permitted by God,
but that they were predetermined by the hand and counsel of God. Mr. Moulin's
Act: 4. 28.
care is to avoid harsh expressions; and it is a commendable care. For why
should we causlesly expose the truth of God to be the worse thought of, and
provoke men to stumble at it by unnecessary harshnesse? Yet I find the
Scripture it self delivered by the holy Prophets and Apostles is nothing so
scrupulous. Malim dicere, says Mr. Moulin, I had rather say, Deum non
decrevisse dare alicui gratiam, qua convertatur and credat; that God has Anat:
p. 23.
decreed not to give some one grace whereby to be converted and believe; quam
dicere eum decrevisse ut homo sit incredulus and impoenitens, then to say God
has decreed that man should be incredulous and impenitent. And he gives his
reason thus. Vox enim decernendi aptior est ad ea designanda, quae Deus statuit
facere, quam ea quibus statuit non mederi. For to decree is fitter to denote
such things as God has purposed to do, then such things as he has purposed
not to cure. And indeed the Ancients in this sense take the word
predestination, to be only of such things as God himself purposed to work; as
Grace and Glory, and the damnation of impenitent sinners. But if God decrees
not to cure impenitency and infidelity in some; judge whether upon this ground.
it may not well be said, that God decrees that the impenitency and infidelity
of some shall continue uncured And Mr. Monlin confesses that God decreed that
the Jews should put Christ to death. His words are these, Deus vetuit
homicidium, idem tamen decrevitut Iudaei Christum morte afficerent. God forbad
murder yet Anat: p. 16.
he decreed that the Jews should kill Christ. Yet by the way consider, God
has no need of the sin of man, that he may put him to death justly. For
undoubtedly God could annihilate any creature that he has made, the most holy
Angels without any blemish to his justice. Yea by power absolute he could cast
the most innocent creature into hell fire, and continue yet just still, as
formerly has been showed, and Raynaudus justifies, and represents variety of
testimonies for this, not only of School-divines, one of whom professes that
it is concors omnium Theologorum sententia, the common opinion of Divines; but
of the Ancient Fathers also. And therefore though to strangle Virgins was not
lawful for Tiberius; yet a greater and more severe work then this is lawful
for God. Neither does God command any impure course to any, but under pain of
eternal damnation forbids it. But as he hardened Pharaoh's heart that he
should not let I srael go; so can he harden any man's heart to do as foul a
work as this. And St. Paul testifies that he gave up the heathens to their
hearts lusts, unto uncleanes, to defile their own bodies between themselves,
which turned the Rom: 1. 24.
truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature forsaking the
Creator, who is blessed for ever amen For this cause God gave them up to vile
affections; for even the women, did change v. 26.
the natural use into that which is against nature. And likewise the men left
the natural use of the women, and burned in their lusts one toward another,
and man with man wrought filthiness. v. 27.
And this is noted by the Apostle to have been a work of judgment. For it
follows, they received in themselves such recompense of their errors as was
meet. I grant Tiberius was the principal Author of deflowring those Maids.
For he commanded it, and that, as I have showed, makes a man the Author of a
crime, both out of School-divines, and out of Orators; but God gave no such
command to these heathens thus to defile themselves. And this Author doubts
not, but God cooperates to the substance of every act; notwithstanding the
absoute dominion of the will over her actions, for which he pleades. And it
cannot be denied unless the word of God be therewithal denied, that, in him
we move, as well as in him we live and have our being. And though God gave not
commandment to Absalom. to defile his Fathers Concubines, yet he tells David
saying; I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them to thy neigbour,
and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this Sun. For 2 Samuel, 12, 11
thou did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, and
before the Sun. It is utterly untrue which this Author obtrudes upon us, as if
we thought it unlawful, for God by verse. 12.
reason of his justice to put to death men innocent and without blame. Was any
more innocent then the Son of God? yet he gave him to suffer somewhat more then
the death for the sins of men. Neither must we be gulled with his phrases of
the Devils deflouring of men, when by him they are carried away into
abominable courses, so as to oppose Scripture and blaspheme God, the language
of the holy Ghost being this that all the outrages committed upon the holy Son
of God by Herod and Pontius Pilate, the Gentiles and people of Israel, were
such as, God's hand and counsel had before determined to be done. And the like
cruelties or worse were executed upon the Saints of God by their Kings, who
employed their sovereign power in execution of the beast's behests; yet this
is called the will of God. God has put into their hearts to fulfill his will,
and to agree to give their kingdoms to the beast until the word of God be
fulfilled. And the truth is if God permit such abominable courses and hardens
men's hearts, occasion being offered they will commit them, according to the
common proverb. He must needs go whom the Devil drives. And the very
definition of the permission of sin given by Arminius does convince this,
though he carries himself very superficiarily explicating God's providence in
this, and the nature of obduration; which I have prosecuted at large in my
Vindiciae, in answer to Bellarmine, especially where I treat of the abduration
of Pharaoh chap: 11. Neither do we make damnation Lib. 2, Digr: 2.
the end whereunto God permits sin; but both permisson for sin and
damnation for sin, we make the means tending to another end, namely, the
manifestation of God's glory in the way of justice vindicative, which in
Scripture phrase is called the declaration of his wrath. And to make God the
Author of sin by these courses, is clearly Rom: 9. 22.
to charge the holy Ghost with blasphemy, seeing the holy Ghost gives clear
testimony to all this in the word of God.

Sect. 5.
That God is the Author of men's salvation and conversion, all sides grant;
and yet he does noe more in the procuring them then these men report him to do
in the Reprobates impenitency and damnation The M. Mason's Addit. 3. p. 30. 31.
salvation and conversion of the Elect, say they, he has absolutely and
antecedently, without the foresight of any deserving of theirs, reselved upon,
and by irresistible means in their several generations, draws them to
believe, repent, and endure to the end, that so they might be saved, and his
absolute decree accomplished. On the other side, the damnation, the sins, and
the final impenitency of Reprobates, he has of his alone will and pleasure
peremptorily decreed; this his decree he executes in time drawing them on by
his unconquerable power and providence from sin to sin, till they have made
up their measure, and in the end have inflicted on them that eternal
vengeance, which he had provided for them. What difference is here in the
course which God takes for the conversion and salvation of the Elect, and the
obduration and damnation of the Reprobates? And therefore what hinders but
that God (by their grounds) may as truly be styled the prime cause and Author
of the sins of the one, as of the conversion of the other?

The Fathers thought it a plain case; and therefore they did make sin an
Object of prescience, and not predestination and bent the most of those
arguments by which they refuted this foul assertion, against an absolute,
irresistible and necessitating decree. as I could easily show, but that I fear
to be over long. Only I will cite some few of those Author's words whom the
learned and reverend Bishop has alleged in favor and for the defense of the
Predestinarians, and the maintainers of Gotteschalk's opinion The Church of
Lyous in their answer to the positions of Johannes Scotus, which he framed
against Gotteschalke has these words, Whosoever says, tthat God has laid a
constraint, or necessity of sinning upon any man, he does manifestly and
fearfully blaspheme God, in as much as he makes him, by affirming that of him
to be the very Author of sin. Remigius Arch. Bishop of that Church
explaining the Churches opinion in that point of prescience and predestination
in seven several rules; in the fifth of those rules, he has these words to the
same purpose. God, says he by his prescience and predestination, has laid a
necessity of being wicked upon noe man. For if he had done this, he had been
the Author of sins. And thus in my judgment does it plainly appear that by
absolute Reprobation, as it is taught the upper way, God is made to be the true
cause of men's sins.

Observe the false carriage of this Author, That God is the Author of men's
salvation Answer.
and conversion, he says, all sides grant; as if there were noe difference
between Arminians, and the Orthodox; between him and us in this. We say God
works faith and regeneration in us, and that for Christ's sake. The
Remonstrants in their Censura censurae, in express terms deny that Christ
merited faith and regeneration for us; and judge by this indifferently, whether
they make faith and regeneration to be the gift of God. Or when they do in
terms profess this (as Epicurus, verbis Deos posuit, re sustulit) whether
they do not equivocate. Ask this Author in what sense he makes God to be the
Author of man's conversio^, whether any otherwise the^, 1. In giving men power
to believe if they will to repent if they will. 2. In persuading unto faith and
repentance. 3. In concurring with man to the act of faith and repentance. Now
as touching the first, that mere nature and not grace, Deo credere and ab amore
rerum temporalium ad divina praecepta servanda se convertere omnes possint si
velint, says Austin, All men can, if they will, believe God, and from the love
of temporal De Gen: cont. Manich. l. 1. cap. 3.
things convert themselves to the keeping of God's commandments. Now this is
noe more, then, posse fidem habere, posse charitatem habere, to be capable of
faith of charity, and this is, naturae hominum, of the nature of man; As Austin
testifies in another place, where he says posse fidem habere, posse charitatem
habere, naturae est hominum, fidem habere, charitatem habere, De praedest.
Sanct: 1. c. 5.
gratiae est fidelium. To be capable of faith and charity, is the nature of
man, but to have faith and to have charity is the grace of the faithful.
Consider in reason; supernatural grace is not in reason to be accounted
inferior to a moral virtue; but so it will prove, if it be but a power to be
good if we will. For moral virtue does not give a man a power only to do good
if he will, but it inclines and disposes the will unto virtuous actions. So
justice is not an indifferency of condition leaving it to man whether he will
be just or not; but it makes him just, and so disposoth him to just courses.
Again if grace supernatural does only give power to believe if one will; this
being a free power, it is indifferent as well not to believe, as to believe; as
well not to repent, as to repent. For liberty is always to act opposite;
whence it will follow that by virtue of supernatural grace a man is disposed
not more to faith, then to infidelity, not more to repentance then to
hardness of heart and Impenitency. 4. Consider, a man has noe need of
supernatural grace to enable him to refuse to repent, seeing naturally he is
sufficiently disposed hereunto; and necessarily by reason of that natural
corruption which is hereditary unto him. By all this it is apparent, that a
power to believe wrought in a man by supernatural grace, is not a free power
working freely; but rather a necessary power working necessarily; like unto the
condition of a moral virtue, which restraines man's natural indifferency to
good or evil, and disposes him only to good. And consequently as many as
maintain no other power to be given unto man by grace, then to believe, if a
man will; they deal like Pelagians, who called that which was merely natural,
prevenient grace. Lastly if God be the Author of man's conversion, because he
gives him power to convert, if he will; he may as well be called the Author of
non conversion, and perseverance in sin, because God gives power not to
convert, and to persevere in sin, if he will. 2. As touching the second, If
God be the Author of man's conversion, because he persuades thereunto, then
certainly he is not the Author of sin, because he persuades not thereunto.
3. If God be the Author of conversion, because he cooperates thereunto, then
certainly he may be as well said to be the Author of every sinful act. For
that he does cooperate thereunto, I am very confident this Author will not
deny. Now I could earnestly entreat the Judicious Reader to examine well this
Author's opinion in these particulars, and compare them with his former
discourse, that he may have a clear way opened unto him to judge with what
conscience he carried himself in his former discourse, imputing unto us that
we make God the Author of sin; albeit in treating of God's providence in
evil, we generally have the express word of God before our eyes; and in our
explication thereof do rather qualify the seeming harshnesse thereof, then
aggravate it. For undoubtedly by the tenor of his discourse, look upon what
grounds he denies God to be the Author of sin, he must withal deny God to
be the Author of faith, of repentance, of conversion; And look upon what
grounds he makes God the Author of conversion; upon the same grounds he must
make God the Author of sin: As in case to give power to believe, if we will;
and to cooperate with us in the act of faith, be to make him the Author: Or if
only upon persuading us to believe, God is said to be the Author of faith;
then it follows as a sufficient Apology for us, that we make not God to be
the Author of sin; seeing none of us conceive him to be a perswader of any
sinful act; but rather a disswader and forbidder thereof and that upon pain
of eternal damnation. But on the contrary we make a vast difference between
God's operations in sinful actions, and God's operations in actions gracious.
As first, every sinful act is always within the compass of acts natural;
noe supernatural act is or can be a sin. Now to the producing of any act of
morality, every man notwithstanding his corruption has in him a natural
power. But there is noe natural power in man to the performing of an act
supernatural. God must inspire him with a new life called in Scripture, the
life of God; and make him after a sort partaker of the divine nature; and give
his own Spirit to dwell in him, in such sort, that, being crucified with
Christ, Ephesians: 4. 18. 2 Pet: 1. 4. Gal: 2. 20. Rom: 8. 11.
we hence forth live no more, but Christ lives in us. These supernatural acts
are but few according to the three Theological virtues, Faith, Hope, and
Charity, whose offsprings they are; the love of God to the contempt of our
selves hope in God to the contempt of the world, as touching the worst it can
do unto us: and faith in God, to the quenching of the fiery darts of the
devil. As for all other good acts, in the producing of them, God has a double
influence; one common as they are acts natural, touching the substance of
them; another special as touching the gracious nature of them, proceeding from
faith and love. But as touching evil acts, he has noe influence in the
producing of them, but that which is common, and to the substance of the acts;
none at all as touching the evilnesse of them, the reason whereof is that which
was delivered by Austin long ago. Malu^ non habet causam efficientem sed
deficientem, Evil has no cause efficient, but deficient only. And it is
impossible that God should be defective in a culpable manner. The creature may,
the Creator cannot: And the ground of the creatures defective condition is
accounted to be this, that he was brought out of nothing, and consequently of a
frail condition. And it is received general as a rule in Schools, that a
creature cannot be made, impeccabilis per naturam, that is such a one, as by
nature cannot sin. This was delivered long ago by Anselme one of the first
of School-divines; In evil things God does work, quod sunt, that they are;
non quod mala sunt, not that they are evil; But in good things God does work,
Et quod sunt, and quod bona sunt, both that they are and that they are good.
Here this Author sets down our opinion concerning Election and Reprobation at
his pleasure. We say with Austin that, predestination is the preparation of
grace, that is the Divine decree of conferring grace; And both he and all
confess, it is also the decree of conferring glory. And because in making of
this decree, God had respect unto some only, not to all, both men and Angels,
therefore in this consideration it is called the decree of Election, in
distinction from the decree of reprobation. Now this grace is of a double
nature; for either it is grace custodient from sin, and the decree of
granting this was the election of Angels, called in holy Scripture, The elect
Angels; or grace healing, after men have sinned, and the decreee of granting
this is the election of men, commonly in Scripture called God's Elect, in
reference unto this. It is farther to be observed that Austin grounds the
Orthodoxe doctrine of predestination and election upon the Orthodoxe doctrine
concerning grace. And the absoluteness of the one he built upon the freenes of
the other, in not being given according unto men's merits. As it appears, de
bono perseverantiae cap. 15. Where having proposed some exceptions of the
Massilienses made against his doctrine of predestination, coming to make
answer thereunto, he begins thus, Ista cum dicuntur, says he. ita nos a
confitenda Dei gratia, id est, quae non secundum merita nostra datur, and a
confitenda secundum eam predestinatione sanctorum deterrere non debent When
these things are objected, they must not deter us from confessing God's
grace, I mean such a grace as is not given accordiog unto works; nor from
confessing the predestination of Saints according thereunto. Now if the
absoluteness of predestination be grounded upon this, that, grace is not given
according unto merits, (the scripture phrase denies it to be given according
unto works. But Bellarmine acknowledges that in this Argument, merits and
works are taken by the Ancients in one and the 2 Timothy: 1. 9. Tit: 3. 5.
same sense.) it follows that as many as deny the absoluteness of
predestination must therewithal maintain, that, Grace is given according to
men's merits or works. And the reason is evident: For if God does not give
grace according unto men's works, but of his mere pleasure decreed to give
grace unto some, and not upon consideration of their works. And this is to
elect absolutely, and antecedently without the foresight of any deserving, yea
of any works; though by that expression which this Author uses he does
sufficienty manifest, that his opinion is, that God elects not only upon the
foresight of men's, works but upon the foresight of men's deservings. It is
farther considerable to prevent the reaches of such crafty foxes as we have to
deal with, whose course is in joining the decree of conversion and salvation
together, to translate that which belongs unto one, unto the other most
unreasonably: For albeit God proceeds according to the mere pleasure, and
without all respect to works, in conferring grace, and decrees accordingly to
confer it: Yet he proceeds not merely according unto pleasure, and without
all respect of works in conferring glory; but according unto a Covenant which
is this, whosoever beleiveth shall be saved, and accordingly he bestows the
kingdom of heaven by way of reward for faith, repentance, and good works.
This has Christ deserved at the hands of 1 Pet: 1. 9. Mat: 25.
his Father that our weak performances should be thus rewarded. Lastly, it is
farther to be considered that God, as he thus bestows salvation by way of
reward of our faith, repentance etc; so from everlasting he did decree to
bestow salvation, namely, by way of reward. Not that either faith, or
repentance, or good works, any or all of these were the cause (least of all
the deserving cause) of God's decree, or antecedaneous to his decree; but of
his mere pleasure decreed both to give the grace of faith and repentance, and
to bestow eternal life by way of a reward thereof, as may farther be proved
and that clearly diverse ways. 1. By the Apostl's discourse; where he
discourses after this manner, Before Esau and Jacob were borne, or had done
good or evil, it was said that the Elder shall Rom: 9. 11.
serve the younger; therefore election is not of works: But if election did
proceeed upon the foresight of faith, repentance, and good works, or any of
them, then it might justly be said, that it were of faith, repentance, or good
works or of all of them; And the force of the Apostles argument extends to
conclude, that election is noe more of faith or of repentance, then of works;
not only because faith and repentance are works, and so accounted in Scripture
phrase, as it appears. Io: 6. 29. But cheifely because before men are borne,
they are incapable of faith and repentance, as of good works. 2. If faith were
a motive cause unto election, then either it were so of it is own nature, or by
constitution Divine: not of it is own nature as it is apparent. If by
constitution divine, mark what strange absurdities follow; namely this, that
God did ordain, that upon the fore sight of faith, he would ordain men unto
salvation, whereby God's eternal ordination is made the object of his
ordination, whereas the Objects of God's decrees are always things temporal,
never any thing that is eternal. 3. It cannot be said that God gives
salvation to the end he may give them faith, but it may far more congruously
be said, that God gives faith to the end that he may save them; therefore the
intention of salvation is rather before the intention of giving faith, then the
intention of giving faith is before the intention of giving salvation. Or
better thus, if God foresee faith before he decrees salvation, then the
intention of giving faith (without which God cannot foresee faith) is before
the intention of giving salvation; and consequently the giving of faith should
be the last in execution; that is men shall first be saved, and afterward have
faith bestowed upon them, to wit, in another world where they live by sight and
not by faith. I come to the decree of reprobation; the Objects whereof are two,
proportionable to the two objects of election or predestination. The first is
permission of sin, the second is, Damnation for sin, according to that of
Aquinas, Reprobatio includit voluntatem permitendi culpam and damnationem
inferendi pro culpa. Reprobation includes a will to permit sin, and to
inflict damnation for sin. The first object of reprobation I say is,
permission of sin; not Sin as this Author would have it, but permission of
sin: Because these decrees, to wit, of permitting sin, and inferring
damnation for sin, are decrees of means conducing to a certain end. For
like as in election God decrees to bestow faith, repentance, and obedience on
some, and to reward it with everlasting life for the manifestation of his glory
in the way of mercy mixed with justice: So in Reprobation he decrees to permit
others to sin, and finally to persevere therein, and to damn them for their
sin to manifest his glory in the way of vindicative justice. Now whosoever
intends an end must also be the Auhour of the means conducing to that end. Now
God, though well he may be the Author of permission of sin, yet he cannot be
the Author of sin: Albeit upon God's permission of sin it follows that
sin shall exist. Now to permit sin is all one with denying grace, whether
it be grace Custodient to preserve from it, or grace healing to pardon and cure
it after it is committed. Now like as the Lord has mercy on whom he will in
pardoning their sin, and healing it by faith and repentance: So he hardens
whom he will by denying faith and repentance. So that as God of his mere
pleasure grants the grace of faith and repentance unto some; so of his mere
pleasure he denies it unto others. And so in Reprobation he decrees of his
mere pleasure to deny it. But albeit the Lord of mere pleasure proceeds in the
denying of faith and repentance, whereby alone sin is cured, and so of mere
pleasure suffers some finally to persevere in sin, yet in inflicting
damnation he does not carry himself of mere pleasure without all respect to
men's works; but herein he proceeds according to a law which is this,
whosoever believes not, and repents not, shall be damned. And like as God
damnes noe man but for his final perseverance in sin. So from everlasting he
did decree to damn noe man, but for his final perseverance in sin. So that
by virtue of the Divine decree of reprobation, sin and final perseverance
therein is constituted the cause of damnation; but by noe means is it
constituted the cause of the decree of reprobation; neither does the foresight
of sin precede it. For first, like as upon this doctrine, that, Grace is not
given according unto works, the absoluteness of predestination is grounded in
the judgment of Austine as by necessary consequence issuing there from: In like
sort upon this, that grace is not denied according unto men's works, as
necessarily follows the absoluteness of Reprobation. Secondly, look by what
reason the Apostle proves, that Election is not of good works, namely because,
before the children were borne or had done any good, it was said the Elder
shall serve the Younger; by the same reason it evidently follows that
reprobation is not of evil works, because, before they were borne or had done
good or evil, it was said the Elder shall serve the Younger, Esau's
reprobation being as emphatically signified under his subjection to Jacob his
younger, as Jacob's election was designed by his dominion over Esau his Elder
brother. 3. If sin be the cause of the decree of Reprobation, then either of
'its own nature, or by constitution divine. Not by necessity of nature; for
undoubtedly God could annihilate men for sin, had it pleased him. If by
constitution Divine, mark what absurdity follows, namely this, that, God did
ordain that upon foresight of sin, he would ordain men unto damnation. 4.
If foresight of sin precedes the decree of damning them for sin, then the
decree to permit sin much more precedes the decree to damn them for it, as
without which there can be noe foresight of sin; and consequently permission of
sin is first in intention, and then damnation; and therefore it should be last
in execution; that is, men should first be damned, and afterward permitted to
sin, to wit, in an other world. 5. And lastly Reprobation is the will of God;
but there can be noe cause of God's will, as Aquinas has proved; much less
can a temporal thing be the cause of God's will, which is eternal. Upon this
ground it is that Aquinas professes, Never any man was so mad, as to say that
any thing might be the cause of predestination, as touching the act of God
predestinating. So may I say, it were a mad thing to maintain that any thing
can be the cause of Reprobation, as touching the act of God reprobating. For
the case is altogether alike; the will of God being alike incapable of a cause
in both, whereas this Author says, that, God by our opinion does draw men on
by his unconquerable power from sin to sin; it is mere bumbast. All men being
borne in sin must needs persevere in sin, unless God gives grace to regenerate
them. For whether they do that which is morally good, they do it not in a
gracious manner; or whether they abstain from evil, they do it not in a
gracious manner. He that is of God hears Io: 8. Corvin. defens. Armin. page:
39.
God's words, ye therefore hear them not says our Savior, because ye are
not of God. Arminius acknowledges and Corvinus after him, that all men by
reason of Adam's sin are cast upon a necessity of sinning. He asks what
difference is there in the course which God takes for the conversion of the
Elect and obduration of Reprobates; and I have already showed a vast
difference; and here in breife I show a difference; He has mercy on the one in
the regenerating them, and curing the corruption he finds in them, he shows
not the like grace to others, but leaves them unto themselves; as touching the
evil acts committed by the one, he concurreth as a cause efficient to the act
which for the substance of it is naturally good. For ens and bonum
convertuntur, every thing that is an entity so far is good, but he has no
efficiency as touching the evil, as which indeed can admit no efficiencie, as
Austin has delivered of old, Man himself is only a deficient cause of sin, as
sin, and that in a culpable manner, which kind of deficiency is not incident to
God. But to every good act he concurres two manner of ways and that in the
nature of a positive efficient cause in both, namely, to the substance of the
act by influence general, and to the goodness of it by influence special and
supernatural.

It is true the Fathers made sin the object of prescience, not of
predestination; the reason was because they took predestination to be only of
such things which God did effect in time; Now sin is none of those things that
come to pass by God's effection, but only by God's permission. And that such
was the notion of predestination with the Fathers, I prove first out of Austin.
In sua quae falli mutarique non potest praescientia opera sua futura disponere,
De bono perseveran: c. 17
illud omnino nec aliud quidquam est praedestinare In his foreknowledge, which
can neither be deceived nor changed to dispose his own works, that is to
predestinate and nothing else. And sin, not being the work of God, no marvel
if it come not under predestination. Secondly, out of the Synod of Valens,
Praedestinatione autem Deum ea tantum statuisse Con: 3.
dicimus quae ipse vel gratuita misericordia, vel justo judicio facturus erat.
We say that God by predestination ordained only such things as himself would
work, either of his free mercy, or in just judgment. Again it is as true that
they made even sin it self the Object of God's will, witness that of Austin.
Non aliquid fit nisi Omnipotens fieri velit, vel sinendo ut fiat, vel ipse
faciendo. Not any thing comes to pass but God Allmighty willing it, either by
permitting it or working it. So the eleaventh article of the Church of Ireland;
So Arminius Enchirid. 95.
Deus voluit Achabum mensuram scelerum implere, God would have Ahab to fulfill
the measure of his sins. So scripture often mentioned. And Austin gives the
reason of it, malum fieri bonu^ est, it is good that evil should be.
Bellarmine confesses as much, namely that, Mala fieri Act: 4. 28. Rev: 17. 17.
Deo permittente bonum est, It is good that evils should come to pass by
God's permission. And shall not God have liberty to will that which is good?
When he says of the Ancients, that, They refuted this foul assertion of an
absolute, irresistible and necessitating decree as he could easily show, but
that he fears to be overlong. It is nothing but froth; It is not the first
time I have had experience of such like Pyrgopolinices eloquence of his.
Bradwardin has demonstrated that the will of God is absolute throughout
speaking of his decree, and none conditional and his demonstration is this, If
there be any will of God conditional, then the condition whereupon it proceds
must be willed by God or no; to say it is not, is to acknowledge some things to
exist in the world, in the producing whereof, God has noe hand, which is
generally disclaimed; And Durand, who affirms some such thing, is opposed
generally, and indeed his arguments are very slight. But if God does will that
condition; then either he wills it absolutely or conditionally; If absolutely,
then the cause is gained. For then that which was first willed, was willed also
absolutely not conditionally. As for example, if God wills a man's salvation
upon condition of faith, if withal God's will be, and that absolutely to give
him faith, it follows that God wills that man's salvation, and that
absolutely. If it be answered that the condition is willed not absolutely, but
upon another condition; of that other condition I enquire whether God willed it
or not. If noe, then something is produced in the world, in the production
whereof God, has no hand, which is very inconvenient; If you grant that he
willed that also, I farther demand whether he willed it absolutely or
conditionally? If absolutely then all that depended thereupon were absolutely
willed, and so the cause is obtained. If you say this condition was willed also
conditionally, so a way is made to a progression in infinitum, which is a thing
unsufferable by the consent of all. And as many as are put to give instance
will forthwith manifest the nakedness of their cause. This demonstration of
Bradwardine I sometimes represented to this very Author in our private walking
and communication, and he professed it was a very ingenious argument. As for
the other term Irresistible this manifests this Author's meaning, that some
will of God, speaking of his decree, is of a resistable nature. Whereas St.
Paul to the contrary plainly gives us to understand that God's will is
irresistible; and the Psalmist says, that the counsel of the Lord shall
stand. And my counsel shall stand, and I will do whatsoever I will. And
therefore his decrees are resembled to mountains of brass. As for the lost
term necessitating. For the Gentleman paies us in words, for want of better
coin, not considering that words are Es. 46. 10. Zach: 6.
but wind, he would cheat his Reader by this, presuming he would be so simple,
as to believe that God by this decree of his takes away the liberty of the
creature, but it does not; nor any contingency, as the eleaventh article of
Ireland does particulate: and Bradwardine who peculiarly uses this phrase,
understands hereby noe other necessity then upon supposition, which Alvarez
shows by general concurrence of School-Divines, that it may well stand with
absolute contingency and liberty, it being noe other necessity, then that which
is called, secundum quid, in some respect; And such a necessity Arminius
makes consequent to permission: and Bradwardine is express that God
necessitates the will to produce a free act. And he nothing differs from
Aquinas his doctrine, where he maintains that God's will imposes noe
necessity upon the creatures will; because he ordaines both necessary things
come to pass, necessarily, and contingent things, contingently, that is with a
possibility to the contrary; and likewise free actions freely, that is with a
free active power in the Agent to do otherwise. But come we to the
consideration of the passages produced out of the Ancients. For I presume they
are the choicest. For though he feared to be overlong, and therefore could not
exhibit all; yet therefore it behooved him to represent the best. And I believe
he could produce more of this nature. For I have been an eye witness of it under
his hand now four years ago. And though he produce them not, I hope to do
it for him ere we part, to show how little I fear his concealements, and
somewhat of the Predestinarians also, being glad of such an opportunity to
discover the wildness and precipitation of his judgment touching that which is
called the predestinarian heresy here touched by him.

The first is a passage taken out of the Church of Lions, denying that God has
laid a necessity of sinning on any man. Another out of Remigius; both
represented (yea and many more of this nature) by that most reverend and most
learned Archbishop of Armagh Doctor Usher in his history of Goteschalk, 138.
and 173. To these I answer. First these Ancients are about 850 years after
Christ; yet marvailous orthodoxe considering those times in the point of
predestination. And let no man think that they deny a necessity of sinning laid
upon all by original corruption, the consequent of Adam's prevarication. If
they were of any other opinion, should it become us to follow them in this?
Doctor Potter acknowledges it as the doctrine of the Church of England, that
libertas a peccato, liberty from sin, is not incident to a natural man; it
is true he desires to quash it by saying there is yet in man, Libertas a
necessitate, a liberty from necessity; but from what necessity? From the
necessity of sinning? If so, why should he then deny a liberty from sin; yet he
never takes any pains to clear this from contradiction, but blindfoldly
follows Bernard, without caring much to understand him. And he looks to be
pardoned because Vossius did so before him. M. Fulke, in his answer to the
Rhemish Testament, usually distinguishes between libertas a peccato, and
libertas a coactione, liberty from sin, and liberty from constraint; and
denying all liberty from sin to a natural man, yet grants unto him a liberty
from coaction. I have taken some pains to show Doctor Potter's superficiary
carriage in this, and to clear Bernard; which it may be I will add to this by
the reason of the homogeneous nature of it. In the mean time liberty from
sin is utterly denied to a natural man, and that by the doctrine of our
Church. And noe marvel seeing Arminius himself, and Corvinus, those great
patrons of natures power, do acknowledge this, as before I mentioned; only they
say God is ready to remove this necessity of sinning from all, and every one.

2. But the meaning of Remigius and the Church of Lions is the same with that
of Prosper formerly mentioned, in his answer to the objection of Vincentius,
where he confesses, Hominem non redemptum Diabolo esse captivum, a man not
redeemed is captivated by Satan; and that, creatura peccatrix poenalem
dominationem Diaboli merito patitur, cui (relicto vero domino) sponte se
vendidit. The creature sinning deservedly suffers the dominion of Satan by way
of punishment, as to whom he sold him self voluntarily. Haec quippe servitus
non institutio est Dei sed judicium. This slavery of man to Satan is not God's
institution but judgment; that is God brought it upon him not of his mere
pleasure, but in the way of judgment. Like as Aug. cont. Julian: Pela: l. 5. c.
3.
Austin in like manner acknowledges, concupiscense to be, not sin only, but
the punishment of sin also. So Remigius and the Chuch of Lions say; that God
imposed it not on Adam but man falling from God brought a necessity of sinning
upon him, and upon all his race; God hereupon justly withdrawing his holy
Spirit from him.

2. Why he should allege the first passage under the name of the Church of
Lions, I know not; The reverend Bishop acknowledges Florus to be the Author
thereof, a Deacon of Lions page 126. Although the same Reverend Bishop
acknowledges that other book also that goes under the name of the Church of
Lions now extant in the Bibliotheca Sanctorum Patrum; and wherehence Vossius
communicates unto us his excerpta, was written by the same Florus page 115. He
had more reason to father his next passage, which he produces out of Remigius
upon the Church of Lions. For albeit Maldonat cites the book entitled Liber
de tribus Episcoporum epistolis (whence this passage is taken under the name of
Remigius) yet he who set it forth ascribes it to the Church of Lions, and that
by the direction of the Copy, which was in the hands of Nicholas Faber, as
appears Goteschalc: hist: 170. But none do I find to ascribe this work of
Florus to the Church of Lions, though the Author of another book under that
title, the Bishop acknowledges to be Florus.

3. Florus acknowledges that the very Saints of God are under a necessity of
sin in a sort, p. 149. In Sanctis licet sit liberum arbitrium jam Christi
gratia liberatum atque Sanctum; tamen tanta est illa sanitas, ut quamdiu
mortaliter vivunt sine peccato esse non possint, and cum velint atque
desiderent non peccare non possu^t tamen non peccare. In the Saints of God
though there be freedom of will, as freed by the grace of Christ, and made
holy, yet this health is such, that as long as they carry this mortal body
about the^ they cannot be without sin: and though they would and desire to be
without sin, yet they cannot be without sin. This I conceive is spoken in
respect of the flesh lusting against the Spirit; and of the law in our members
rebelling against the law of our mind, and leading us captive to the law of
sin. How much more are the wicked in bondage Rom: 7.
to sin and Satan, as the same Florus shows page 142? For whereas Scotus
taught, that a man had not lost his liberty, but only the power and vigor of
his liberty. Florus opposes him thus, Non recte dicit, quia nec sentit, he
says not well, because he thinks not well; sed sicut vigorem and potestatem
libertatis, ita ipsam perdidit libertatem, ut jam ipse ad verum bonum unde
cecidit liber esse non possit. As he has lost the vigor and power of his
liberty; so he has lost liberty it self, insomuch that unto true good, from
whence he is fallen, he cannot be free; to wit, until he be freed by the grace
of Christ. In like manner Remigius discourses also, gra^ting free will only to
evil, p. 36. In infidelibus id ipsum liberu^ arbitriu^ ita per Adam damnatum
and perditum, in operibus mortuis liberum esse potest, in vivis non potest. In
infidells free will it self, so damned and lost in Adam, may be free in dead
works, cannot be free in living works that is, is not free to produce works
belonging to a spiritual life. So that they unanimously confess that in
respect of original sin, there is a necessity of sinning, but this is rightly
to be understood; namely thus, that true good they cannot do, so that
whatsoever they do is evil, only that it is free unto them to do this or
that evil, which is most true. Secondly, thus far they qualify this
necessity of sinning, that never any man is carried by the Divine providence,
so as to sin whether they will or no. For albeit Rabanus charged them, whom
he opposed herewith, page 53. Si enim secundum ipsos qui talia sentiunt, Dei
praedestinatio invitum hominem facit peccare, quomodo Deus justo judicio,
damnat peccantem, cum ille non voluntate, sed necessitate peccaverit. For if,
according to them who think such things, God's predestination makes a man to
sin against his will; how does God in his just judgment damn him that
sins, when he sinned not voluntarily but necessarily? Thus they criminated
their adversaries: but Remigius answers on their behalf, who were thus falsely
accused Nemo ita sentit aut dicit quod Dei predestinatio aliquem invitum faciat
peccare, ut jam non propriae voluntatis perversitate, sed divinae
praedestinationis necessitate peccare videatur. No man so thinks or speaks,
that God's predestination makes a man to sin against his will; so that a man
should seem to sin, not by the perversitie of his own will, but by the
necessity of divine predestination. But this is the work of Divine
predestination, that he who sins willingly, and perseveres willingly in his
sins, shall against his will be punished. And the truth is taking
predestination as it signifies preparation of Grace, or God's decree to
confer this, rather God's not predestinating a man, or not giving grace, and
not making him to be of God, is the cause why a man sins, according to that
of our Savior. He that is of God hears God's Jo: 8.
words* ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. Yet this is
rightly to be understood. for God's not conferring regenerating grace is rather
the cause why their natural corruption is not cured, the^ that they go on in
their sinful courses: for naturally carnal men are prone enough to sin, and
in this course they necessarily continue, until God changes their hearts;
necessarily I say, but not against their wills. For sin is as a sweet
morsel, which they roll under their tongue. This may suffice for answer unto
these passages, and withal to represent the vanity of this Author's
discourse, endeavoring to brand our doctrine with making God the Author of
sin; more of this hereafter; For I am acquainted with that which he here
conceales, and with certain adjuncts thereunto, both touching the opinion of
the Church of Lions concerning falling from grace; as also this Authors bold
adventure in two particulars in justifying Vossius, citing the confession of
Pelagius as one of Austin's sermons; as also defending him in the point of the
predestinarian heresy, which Doctor Usher maintains to be a mere fiction of
the Semipelagians to bring Austin's doctrine thereby into disgrace. But Vossius
conceives that there was indeed such an heresy, and that the Monks of
Adrumetum were the Authors of it. And this Interpolatour takes Vossius his
part, and labors by certain arguments to make it good against he judicious
observations of that most reverend and learned Archbishop of Armagh. It may be
I shall represent my answer thereunto by wa^ ^^ digression; but first I must
dispatch my answer to this I have in hand.

Sect: 6.
Many distinctions are brought to free the Supralapsarian way from this
crimination all which (me thinks) M. Mason's Addit. p. 31. 32, 33, 34.
are no^ better then mere delusions of the simple and inconsiderate, and give
noe true satisfaction to the understanding. There is say they a twofold decree.

1. First an operative, by which God positively and efficaciously works
allthings. 2. A permissive, by which he decrees only to let it come to pass.
If God should work sin by an operative decree, then he should be the Author
of sin, but not if he decree by a permissive decree to let it come to pass,
and this only they say they maintain. It is true that God has decreed to
suffer sin; for otherwise there would be none. Who can bring forth that which
God will absolutely hinder? He suffered Adam to sin, leaving him in the hand
of his own counsel, Ecclus. 15. 14. He suffered the nations in time past to
walk in their own ways Act: 14. 16. And daily does he suffer both good and
bad to fall into many sins; And this he does, not because he stands in need of
sin for the setting forth of his glory; for he has noe need of the sinful
man. Ecclus. 15. But partly because he is (summus provisor) supreme moderatour
of the world, and knows how to use that well which is ill done, and to bring
good out of evil; and especially for that reason which Tertullian prelleth,
namely, because man is made by God's own gracious constitution, a free creature
undetermined in his actions, until he determine himself; And therefore may
not be hindered from sinning by omnipotency, because God uses not to repeal
his own ordinances.

2. It is true also that a permissive decree is noe cause of sin, because it
is merely extrinsecall to the sinner, and has noe influence at all upon the
sin. It is an antecedent only, and such a one too, as being put, sin
follows not of necessity. And therefore it is fitly contradistinguisht to an
operative decree. And if that side would in good earnest, impute noe more in
sinful events to divine power, then the word Permission, imports, their maine
conclusion would fall, and the controversy between, us end. But first, many of
them reject this distinction utterly, and will have God to decree sin
(efficaciter) with an Energeticall and working will. Witness that discourse of
Beza wherein he a verreth and labors to prove, that God does not only permit
sin but will it also: And witness Calvin too, who has a whole section
against it, calling it a carnal Colloq Mompel: 2 part. p. 177. Call: instit.
lib. 14. c 18. Sect: 1. verse. 2.
distinction invented by the flesh, and (effugium) a mere evasion to shift off
this seeming absurdity, that that man is made blind (Deo volente and jubente)
by Gods will and command; who must shortly after be punished for his blindness;
He calls it also (figmentum) a fiction, and says they do (ineptire) play
the fools that use it. By many reasons also does he endeavor to lay open the
weakness of it, taxing those who understand such Scriptures as speaks of God's
smiting men with a Spirit of slumber and giddiness, of blinding their minds,
infatuating and hardening their hearts etc. Of a permission and suffering of
men to be blinded, and hardened, Nimis frivola est ista solutio, says he, it is
too frivilous a gloss. In another place he blames those that refer sin to
God's prescience only, calling their speeches (argutiae) tricks and quirks
which Scripture Id: ibid. lib. 2, c. 4. Sect. 3.
will not bear; and those likewise that ascribe it to God's permission, and
says, what they bring touching the Divine permission in this business will
not hold water. They that admit the word permissive, do willingly mistake it,
and while, to keep of this blow, they use the word, they corrupt the meaning.
For

1. Permission is an act of God's consequent and judiciary will, by which he
punishes men for abusing their freedom, and committing such sins day by day,
as they might have avoided; and to which he proceeds (lento gradu) slowly and
unwillingly, as we may see, Psalm: 81. 11. 12. Israel would none of me, so I
gave them up etc. Ezeh: 18. 39. Go and serve every one his Idol, seeing ye
will not obey me etc. Rom: 1. 21. 24. Because when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, therefore God gave them up unto their hearts lusts,
to vile affections and to a Reprobate mind. Rev. 22. 11. He that is unjust let
him be unjust still. In these places and many more we may see, that persons
left to themselves are sinners only; and not all sinners, but the obstinate and
wilful, which will by noe means be reclaimed. But the permission which they
mean, is an act of God's antecedent will, exercised about innocent men lying
under no guilt at all in God's eternal consideration.

2. Permission about whomsoever it is exercised, obstinate sinners, or men
considered without sin, is no more then a not hindering of them from falling,
that are able to stand, and supposes a possibility of sinning or not sinning,
in the parties permitted; but with them it is a withdrawing or withholding of
grace needful for the avoiding of sin, and so includes an absolute necessity
of sinning. For from the withdrawing of such grace sin must needs follow; as
the fall of Dagon's house followed Sampson's plucking away the Pillars that
were necessary for the upholding of it. Maccovius in two disputations,
expounding this word (Permission) circumscribes it within two acts. The first
of which is a Substraction of Divine assistance, necessary to the preventing
Colloq: Theol. disp: 9. page 10.
of sin; And having proved it by two arguments, that none may think he is
alone in this, he says, that he is compassed about with a cloud of witnesses,
and produces two. The first of them is our reverend and learned Whitaker, some
of whose words alleged by him are these, Permission of sin is a privation
of the aid, which being present, sin would have been hindered. The second is
Pareus, for saying that that help (which God withdrew from Adam) being
withdrawn, Adam could not so use his endowments, as to persevere. And this
doctrine, says he, is defended by our men, as it appears out of Pareus lib,
de great primi hominis c. 4 p. 46. Their permission therefore of sin being a
substraction of necessary grace, is equivalent to an actual effectual
procuring and working of it* For (Causa deficiens in necessariis est eficiens)
a deficient cause in things necessary is truly efficient) and so is but a mere
fig-leafe to cover the foulness of their opinion.

Here we have a very demure discourse proceeding in a positive manner,
proceeding from Answer.
one that takes upon him to be a Master and dictator of sentences; wherein
there is little or nothing sound that he delivers of his own; or to purpose
that he delivers of others. Nothing of any color of pertinency, besides what
he delivers in the last place touching our opinion of the nature of permission
of sin. And I willingly confess, The divine permission of sin is a very
obscure point, and in my judgment most come short in the explication thereof
Arminius has a large digression upon this place of Permission in general, and
of permission of sin in special: It was the first piece of Arminius, the
examination whereof I undertook only with a mind to search after satisfaction
therein. And finding noe content therein, I gave my self to enquire thereof in
a positive manner; wherein I proceeded very far, setting down in foul
papers, as they came to hand, whatsoever came into my mind thereabout, which
grew into a large proportion, and then set my self upon preconceived grounds
reasonably well disscurssed by me, to deal with Arminius some five Sections
after the beginning of his discourse on this argument, which five first
Sections I took not into examination, until I had dispatched the whole. And
having an occasion to deal upon this argument when I came to the defense of M.
Perkins his answer to the third crimination, whereupon I deal in the second
book of my Vindiciae, I thought good to digress after the second Section, and
to call a certain proposition of M. Perkins to account, which was this, Quod
Deus non impedit, ideo evenit, quia Deus non impedit. It is the third
Digression of the second book, the title whereof is this, Propositio illa
Perkinsii (quod Deus non impedit, ideo evenit, quia Deus non impedit) sub
examen revocatur. There is noe digression throughout that book of mine that
affords more variety of Philosophical and Theological contemplations, then
that; and all about the nature of permission. First, in things natural.
Secondly, in things moral. And these first in good things. Secondly, in evil
things. In the course whereof many obscurities and difficulties do offer
themselves to be cleared, and solved by distinction; where coming to an end, I
deliver my self in this manner. I perceive in how slippery an argument I
exercise my self, too much exposed to the calumny of adversaries, and too apt
to incur the dislike of good men; whereas in all my labor I aim at nothing
else, then according to my power to explicate the mystery of Divine providence
governing all things after a wonderful manner; And to dissemble nothing, but
represent all difficulties that do occur, that both my adversaries may have
at hand what to impugn; Our Divines wherein to take pains, either by way of
explication of what yet remains obscure; or by confirmation of what they shall
find to be sound yet unsufficiently proved. Now that Digression of mine being
so large, I wonder not a little that no one particular thereof is here called
to an account by this Divine. And so may others too when they shall consider
against whom this man's stomach works most. For he cannot be ignorant of my
answer to M. Hoord his proselyte, if not therein to himself. Again, the
exception here in the last place taken against our doctrine of permission, is
exactly the same with Arminius his exception against Mr. Perkins in dealing
upon the third crimination, which there I have answered at large, and that in
such manner, that I willingly profess, I was utterly to seek at this time, of
what I had there delivered; so that upon my consulting the place, the things I
there met with, seemed new unto me, in discovering many ways the inconsequence
of Arminius his discourse, which yet is the very same with this of Mr. Mason's.
Yet he has not replied upon any one line of all that I delivered there, though
they are above 600 in the second Edition of that book. But it may be he takes
that for noe better then an idle discourse (yet an answer it is to this very
exception of his) and it is enough for him to convince the justness of that
exception made by Arminius, by sound argument. And what is that but a rule
given by him, upon his own credit, without indication of the least authority to
confirm it; And though on the contrary I have diverse and sundry ways
manifested the falsenes thereof: well I am not resolved to suffer him to pass
unanswered, how idle soever his discourse may appear to be. Four distinctions
of ours he proposes to invade; not one of them is pretermitted by Arminius in
his answer unto Perkins, nor any part of that his answer pretermitted by me.
But this is written in English for the indoctrinating of the people, as I
remember what was said of M. Hoord's discourse; namely, that it was fit to be
coppied out, and communicated unto the Country. He says these distinctions
are, delusions of the simple; when he proves it, then it will be time enough to
believe it. But whereas, he says, they give noe true satisfaction to the
understanding, this is rightly to be understood, to wit, in reference to an
Arminian understanding corrupted with the leaven of Pelagidnisme. Yet is he not
privy to the understanding of all, so much as of all that are of his own Tenet.
But suppose they do not. The distinctions used by School-Divines to
accommodate God's predestination with man's free will, are many and learned,
but Caietan professes of them all that they do not, quietare intellectum,
satisfy the understanding; but what follows; Therefore says he, Ego captivo
meum in obsequium fidei; I captivate mine unto the obedience of faith to wit,
because Scripture is evident for both: And why should it seem strange that
God's providence in governing the world should be of a mysterious nature. And
however this Author may censure Caietane in this, yet Alvarez professes that
herein, doctissime, and piissime loquitur; he speaks most learnedly and most
piously. Yet permission, in the judgment of Suarez, is not merely a negation of
prohibition, but conjunct with a positive operation in concurring to the act of
sin; which Aquinas has proved to be a Deo, from God, though the obliquity of
the act be not. And the truth is, man himself is not operative in sin,
otherwise then as touching the substance of the act. For sin, as sin has
noe cause efficient, but deficient only, as Austin has long ago delivered;
neither has he been opposed herein by any that I know. Observe how with him to
hinder, and absolutely to hinder is made all one; yet to will, and absolutely
to will in God, is not all one in his opinion. I do not find that God left
Adam in the hand of his counsel. For he forbade him to eat of the forbidden
fruit, which is somewhat more then to dissuade from it. And yet to persuade or
dissuade another, is not to leave him in the hands of his own counsels. For it
is to impart unto him another counsel. Yet though we dissuade a brother, and
so not leave him in the hand of his own counsel; yet we still leave him to his
own free will. Both these I have insisted upon more at large in the second book
in my Vindiciae, Sect: 2. Digres. 3. It is true God has noe need of setting
forth his own glory, noe more then he has need of making the world; but the
existence of sin may be and is necessarily required to the setting forth of
God's glory in some attributes of his. For neither can the glory of God's mercy
appear in pardoning sin, nor the glory of his vindicative justice, (called
in Scripture his wrath, Rom: 9. 23.) in punishing sin, unless there be sin
to be pardoned, and sin to be punished: Nor the glory of his power and
wisdom in working good out of evil, unless God give way to the committing
of Evil. And if upon God's permission of sin, it be not necessary that sin
exist, then it is not in the Allmighty power of God infallibly to procure the
manifestation of his glory, either in the way of mercy pardoning it, or in the
way of justice punishing it. But seeing these reasons are not considerable with
this supercilious Theologue, it should seem likely, that look what he
substitutes in the place thereof, will prove substantial, and satisfy such
understandings as his own: And that he represents out of Tertullian, namely,
because man is made by God a free creature. This reason was represented by
Arminius before him, and that out of Tertullian, Arminius his husks are
pleasing Lib: 1. cont: Marcion.
to him. Such was the condition of the prodigal child when he forsook his
Father; the provender of Swine was acceptable to him. Yet he could not have
enough of that. Is not man a free creature to perform natural acts as well as
moral; and moral good as well as evil? Nay are not the Children of God made
free by Christ to the performance of actions spiritual? What therefore must
God only permit them to perform them, and by noe means work them to the
performance of faith, and repentance, and all manner of obedience; yea and keep
them from sinning against him, as he kept Abimelech, Gen: 20? See how this
Author displaies himself ere he was aware; and withal what the reason is why
he affects to deal upon reprobation only, not upon election or grace least his
vile opinion miserably defacing the glory of God's grace might appear with
open face in 'its proper colors. Yet it breaks forth more then he could wish,
in setting down the end why God permits sin, to wit, because men are free
creatures, therefore it becomes not God to work their wills to this or that,
but only to permit them to do what they will; if they will sin to permit
them; if they would do any good work whether it be faith or repentance, or
any other good work, or to abstain from sin, to permit that also; whereby
it is apparent that God by his opinion has noe more hand in working a man to
any good work (excepting the act of commanding and persuading the one, and not
the other) then in working them unto evil. For because they are free
creatures, therefore it becomes God to leave them unto themselves, and permit
them to do what they will, whether it be good or evil: otherwise God should
nullify his own institution in making them free Agents. Yet consider farther
how herein he contradicts the very principles of his own side, both Arminians
and Jesuits. For Arminius maintains that God can hinder a man effectually
from the committing of sin without any prejudice to the liberty of their
wills. The like do the Jesuits maintain in their doctrine of grace
effectual in the way of congruity, namely, that God can bring any man to
faith, to obedience, to any good work, and accordingly preserve him from any
sin by virtue of grace effectual, which is shaped by them in such a manner,
as to be noe way prejudicial to the liberty of their wills. But Tertullians
authority has abused his fancy, and exposed him to lay open himself in so
shameful a manner. Yet Tertullian will not serve his turn any more, then it
does serve Arminius his turn, as I have showed in my answer to Arminius lib.
1. part. prima de praedest. Sect: 7, and that at large. Secondly, the reasons
he brings for the contradistinction of decree permissive, from decree
operative, are very vain. For 1, the decree operative is extrinsecall to the
sinner, as well as the decree permissive. Secondly, neither has it any
influence at all upon the sin (as which admits noe efficient cause thereof
being of a mere privative nature) but upon the substance of the act, which I
presume this Author will not deny. Thirdly, the decree permissive is not an
antecedent only, but such as being put, sin follows of necessity, as well
as upon the position of the decree operative; that is of necessity, by
supposition, not necessity absolute. For as Aquinas has delivered and proved,
not only the things themselves come to pass by virtue of God's decree, but,
modi rerum, several conditions of them. As for example, necessary things,
necessarily; contingent things, contingently; free actions, freely; And that
thus the things permitted do always come to pass, not only Piscator with our
Divines, as Mr. Perkins, Doctor Whitaker and Pareus do avouch, but Vorstius
also and Arminius, as I have showed in my Vindiciae, lib. 2. digres. 3.
Arminius his words are these, if God permits a man to will this or that,
necesse est, it must needs be, ut nullo argumentorum genere persuadeatur ad
nolendum, that no kind of argument move him to will it. Navarettus the
Dominican professes the same, in quaest. 19. page prima art. 6. page 65. col:
1.

1. That this destinction is rejected by our Divines this Author brings no
tolerable evidence. As for Beza here it is confessed, that he acknowledges
God to permit sin, and whereas he adds that he wills it too, it is nothing
contradictory to the former. For to permit sin (speaking of permission
divine) is to will that sin shall come to pass by God's permission. And
Austin has professed of those things that come to pass by God's Enchirid. 9. 5
permission, that they come to pass, Deo volente, God willing them. And the
Scripture acknowledges as much, that the Kings in prostituting their Royal
authority, to the executing the pleasure of the Beast, did herein fulfill the
will of God. So that God's permissive decree is as effectual in its kind, as
the operative decree in 'its kind; thus far, that like as what God means to
work shall come to pass; so look what God means to permit, that also shall
come to pass. Neither do I know any Arminian or Jesuit, that denies God's
operative decree, as touching the very act of sin, by way of concurrence in
the producing of it. When Calvin will have the evil of sin come to pass,
Deo volente, God willing it, he denies not any more then Beza does, that it
comes to pass by God's permission of it. But Calvin rests not in a bare
permissions and no marvel. For the Scripture says not, that God permitted
Pharaoh to refuse to let Israel go, but plainly and energetically thus; I will
harden Pharaoh's heart that he shall not let Israel go, I will harden
Pharaoh's heart that he shall follow after them, I will rent the Kingdom from
Solomon; not I will permit it to be rented; and so throughout. Bellarmine
himself contents not himself with a bare permission, but farther says, God
does rule and govern the wills of wicked men; yea, torquet and flectit, he
wrests and bends them. And Austin often says, he enclines them unto evil. And
whereas it is farther added out of Calvin that a man is blind, volente and
jubente Deo, God willing and commanding it. Is it not express Scripture, Es.
6. 10. Make the heart of this people fat, make their ears heavy, and shut
their eyes. So that Calvin does but accomodate himself to Scripture phrase.
But when we come to the explication of this either in Christian reason, or by
comparing one place of Scripture with an other, we say that to Make their
hearts fat, their ears heavy, and to shut their eyes: And to give them the Es.
6. 10. Rom: 11. 8. Dent: 29. 4
Spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should
not hear; Is no more then, not to give them hearts to perceive, nor eyes to
see, nor ears to hear. Yet where Calvin says this, I cannot find, the
quotation here is so disturbed; but I guess the Author would refer us to
lib. 1. Institut. cap. 18. prima and secunda Sect: But I find no such thing
there, but speaking of God's providence in blinding Ahab, thus he writes, Vult
Deus perfidum Ahab decipi; God will have perfidious Ahab to be deceived. This
is plain out of the Sect: 1.
1 Kings 22. 20. Who shall entise Ahab that he may go, and fall at Ramoth
Gilead; operam suam offert Diabolus ad eam rem, The Devil offers his service
for this, says Calvin. And does not the Scripture expressly testify as much?
There came forth a Spirit and stood before the Lord, and said I will entise
him; And the Lord said unto him, wherewith? And he said, I will go out and be
a false Spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets. Calvin goes on, Mittitur cum
verse. 21.
certo mandato, ut sit Spiritus mendax in ore omnium Prophetarum; God sends him
with a certain command to become a lying Spirit in the mouth of all Ahab's
Prophets. This also the Scripture testifies as expressly, as the former; Then
the Lord said, thou shall entise him and prevail also; Go forth and do so.
Now let the indifferent judge, whether this Author verse. 22.
might not as well calumniate the Holy Ghost the Inditer of this Scripture, as
Calvin who proceeds but according unto Scripture in that which he delivers. Now
let every sober man judge whether hereby it does not manifestly appear,
Excoecari Achabum, that Ahab was blinded by the Devil, Deo volente ac jubente,
the Lord willing and commanding it; but this taken apart from the instance in
reference whereunto it is delivered, a man might suspect his meaning were, that
God commands a man to shut his own eyes, and blind himself. And judge I pray
whether to say, that this whole providence of God concerning Ahab, was no more
then permission, deserves not to be called, figmentum, a fiction, as indeed
Calvin calls it. To this he adds the joint profession of the Apostles
touching God's providence in crucifying of Christ; in Absalom's incest, the
Chaldees bloody execution in the land of Judah, and the Assyrians before them,
which in Scripture is called the work of Act: 4. 28. Act: 2. 23. 2 Samuel: 16.
22, and 12. 12.
God etc. And concludes it to be manifest, Nugari eos and ineptire, qui in
locum providentiae Dei nudam permissionem substituunt, that they do but toy
and trifle, who in place of God's providence substitute a naked permission. And
this Author does but calumniate Calvin's expression, in rendering the word
ineptire, by playing the fool. Ineptire in the propriety thereof, is in this
case to fail of fit and congruous interpretation and accommodation. And may he
not justly tax those who understand such Scriptures, as speak of God's
smiting men with the Spirit of slumber and giddiness, of blinding their
minds, infatuating and hardening their hearts of a permission, and suffering of
men to be blinded and hardened? I had thought common sense might have justified
him in this; taking Calvin aright, who denies not permission in all this, but
nudam permissionem, naked permission; as much as to say these Scripture
passages do signify more then permission; And as I have said before Bellarmin
himself does not satisfy himself with a naked permission in such like
providence divine as here is mentioned. I think he may justly say that to
explicate excecation and obduration by permission is such an explication as
will satisfy no sober man, and that such a solution is too frivolous. And as
for God's prescience, it is apparent that the horrible outrages committed upon
the holy Son of God, the Scripture testifies not to have been foreknowen only
by God, but by the hand and counsel of God predetermined also; and more then
this, clear reason does justify that the ground of God's foreknowing ought,
is his foredetermining of it, as I have often proved by invincible
demonstration.

2. Who mistakes the nature of permission most, we or this censurer, let the
indifferent judge. It is apparent that he puts no difference between permission
humane, and permission Divine. Sure I am Suarez requires to permission divine a
concurrence to the act, the obliquity whereof is permitted. And more then that
both Scotus of old without question, and the Dominicans of late, and
Bradwardine before them maintain this concurrence to be by way of determining
the will to every act thereof. But all these mistake the nature of permission,
if we believe this Author upon his word wherein he carries himself very
authoritatively, no Pope like him. Yet he is ready to give his reason for it,
though with manifest contradiction to himself, but let us consider it.

1. Permission is an act of God's consequent and judiciary will, by which he
punishes men for abusing their freedom etc. Most untrue, and manifestly
convictable of untruth by that which himself delivered but a little before in
this very Section, where he said, It is true that God has decreed to suffer
sin; for otherwise there would be none. By this it is manifest that
whenever sin is committed, there had place God's permission of sin,
otherwise there would have been no sin, therefore permission had place in the
very first sin that was committed by man, and Angels. Judge Reader with what
felicity he comes to censure and correct the mistakes of others about
permission. As Austin sometimes said of one opposing him, noverit se esse
obduratum; so may thou not say of this Author in this discourse of his,
noverit se esse excaecatum, let him take notice how himself is blinded? The
Lord giving Israel up to their own hearts lusts; he like a resolute Doctor will
have to proceed by way of mere permission. Yet the Lord says not, he permitted
Ps: 81. 11. 12,
them to their own lusts; and Rom: 1. 24, 26, 28. Observe, first look what he
permitted came to pass throughout, even to abominable courses. Secondly,
observe, the judgment of God is noted herein. They received the recompense of
their own error as was meet. What? And are God's judgments executed only by
God's permission, and that by the hands of them that are judged and punished?
Such is the accuratenes of this Authors divinity coming to correct the
mistakes of others about permission. And for the proof of all this we have
this Author's bare word without any reason or authority represented by him. As
for that of Ezechiel not chap: 18. 39, but chap: 20. 39 Go and serve every one
his Idels; this has the form of a command, rather then of a permission; but
the Lord hereby signifies, that in serving him, while they serve other Gods,
they do but profane his holy name in serving him, and undoubtedly they
provoked God more hereby, then the heathens who served not him at all, but
other Gods only. So that the Lord seems to signify, that he had rather, they
should not serve him at all, as Revelations 3. I would thou wer'st either hot
or cold, but seeing thou art lukewarm, I will spue thee out of my mouth; But
be it as the Author would have it, did here God begin to permit them? their
former disobedience was it not a consequent of God's permission? For if God had
not permitted their disobedience, surely it had not been by the Authors
discourse in the beginning of this Section. As touching that Revelations 22.
11. I hope by the same rule of this positive Theologue, not only their
continuing to be unjust, was by God's permission, but their first being and
beginning to be unjust was by God's permission also. And surely if this man's
word be of any credit, all sinners were first permitted to sin, otherwise
they had never sinned, and not the obstinate and wilful only. Were not the
Angels innocent before their first sin? was not Adam innocent before his first
sin? and did not God permit both Angels and men to sin their first sin? If
not; what truth is in this author's word, when he said, God has decreed to
suffer sin? for otherwise there would be none. And if he be not worthy to be
believed, in this his credit is cracked, and deserves not to be believed in
ought.

2. We have been more beholding unto this Author, since he came to meet with
our distinctions, then throughout all his former discourse; as I have showed
already in part, and shall discover more by God's help (not his permission
only) ere we part from this. He seems to be conscious of some thing and
fearful of giving too much advantage, as appears by his expressio^, when he
says that permission (of sin; for so he should say) supposes a possibility of
sinning or not sinning. Now this is nothing congruous to his former expressions
whereby it was made to suppose that, a man is able to stand. For to be able to
stand, is to have an active power in him whereby he is able to stand; but to
have a possibility of standing, or not sinning is not so. For though a man has
no power in himself to stand or to abstain from sin, yet if there be a
power in God to makehim stand, and to preserve him from falling, this is
sufficient to make good, that a man has a possibility of standing and
abstaining from sin. And we are willing to confess that God is able not only
to preserve any man that stands from falling, but also to raise any Hist:
Gotesch: page 142.
man that is fallen; and to make him stand. Thus Florus, Habet homo post illam
damnationem liberum arbitrium, quo propria voluntate inclinari potest and
inclinatur ad malum, habet liberum arbitrium quo possit assurgere ad bonum; Ut
autem assurgat ad bonum, non est propriae virtutis, sed gratiae Dei miserantis.
Nam and qui mortuus est dici potest posse vivere, non tamen sua virtute, sed
Dei. Ita and liberum arbitrium hominis semel sauciatum, semel mortuum potest
sanari, non tamen sua virtute, sed gratia miserantis Dei. Et ideo omnes homines
admonentur, omnibus verbum praedicatur, quia habent posse credere, posse
converti ad Deum; ut verbo extrinsecus admonente, and Deo intus suscitante, qui
audiunt, reviviscant. After Adam's fall man has free will, whereby of his own
accord he may be and is inclined unto evil, he has free will whereby he may
arise unto that which is good; but to arise unto Good is not of his own power,
but of Gods grace commiserating. For of him also who is dead, it may be said,
that he may live, yet not of his own power, but by the power of God. So the
free will of men being once wounded, once dead may be healed not by 'its own
power, but by the grace of God showing mercy. And therefore all men are
admonished, the word is preached unto all, because this they have that they may
believe, they may be converted unto God; to the end that by the word
admonishing outwardly, and God stirring them up inwardly, they which hear may
be revived. Observe by the way a manifest incongruity in saying that permission
is a not hindering them from falling, who are able to stand For they who are
permitted to fall, and not hindered from falling, are supposed to stand, and
not only to be able to stand. It seems this Author cannot endure that
Permission of sin, should consist in the withholding of a grace needful, to
abstain from sin. Whence it follows evidently that in this Author's
opinion, either God's permission of sin is not the withholding of any grace
at all; or if it be it is the withholding only of such a grace, without which
nevertheless man may keep himself from sin; and consequently, though such a
grace be granted, yet it is indifferent for him to sin, as well as to
abstain from sin; If it be no withholding of grace at all, it follows that
like as when a man sins it is not for want of grace: So when a man abstaines
from sin, it is not by virtue of any grace of God granted him thereunto; Yet
the Lord tells Gen: 20. 6.
King Abimelech expressly I kept thee from sinning against me. If he pretends
that some grace is withheld whenever a man sins, but will not say that is
was necessary for the avoiding of sin it follows that when man is permitted
to sin, he is no more apt to sin, then while such grace was denied him, and
consequently no more apt to abstain from sin when such a grace is granted
him, and consequently in granting such a grace he permits him still to sin,
as well as in denying it; and in denying he permits him to do good, as much as
in granting it; So that still it is not God that keeps a man from sin, as
often as he abstaineth from it, but merely the power of his own free will.
Whereby it is evident that this Author as well denies, that God is the Author
of any good, as that he is the Author of any evil: But man is Author of the
one as well as of the other. The power of doing good he will grant is from God,
neither can it be denied, but that the power of doing evil is from God. He
will grant likewise that God is ready to concur to any good act if man will,
and I presume he will not deny, but that God concurres also to the substance of
every evil act. The only difference that remains is this; God persuades only
to good, and disswades only that which is evil. Now this third and last
assertion we grant as well as he. Yet he lays to our charge that we make God
the Author of evil, but cares not at all how he denies God to be the Author
of any good in the actions of men, and makes noe place for any grace save such,
as is hortatory, which is performed usually by the ministry of men. Yet
consider what Bradwardine sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury Elect has
written in this kind before Luther or Calvin were borne. The title of the
fourth chapter of his second book is this. That free will being tempted cannot
of his own strength without the help of God and his grace overcome any
temptation. Of the first this, that free will strengthened with what created
grace soever cannot without another special succor of God overcome any
temptation. of the sixth this, that, That special succor of God is the
unconquerable grace of God. Of the seventh this; That no man though not
tempted, can by the strength of his free will alone without created grace or
with created grace, how great soever it be, without the special asistance of
God avoid any sin: and all these propositions he demonstrates with variety of
argument. Behold the ingenuity of this Author; He flies in the face of Calvin
and Beza, and other our Divines, for maintaining that unless God by his grace
keep and preserve a man effectually from sinning, it cannot be that he should
abstain from sin. Bradwardine maintained the same before any of these were
borne yet he says nothing to him, lets all his arguments alone; but upbraides
us for maintaining the same doctrine, without giving any reason to convict us
of our error. Add to this, which I have omitted, the Corolary of that seventh
chapter in Bradwardin formerly mentioned is this, That it is the will of God,
which preserves them that are tempted from falling, and them that are not
tempted, both from temptation and from sin. Not one of the arguments whereby
he confirms any of these positions, does this Author go about to answer. In
like manner Alvarez. Posita permissione divina infallibiliter Lib. 9. de auxil
disp: 101 p. 803. number. 7 lin: penult:
peccat homo; upon supposition of God's permission, man sins infallibly. The
proposition he intends to prove in that disputation is this, Therefore a man is
not converted because he is not aided of God. But both he and we deny that
hereupon a man sins necessarily always, but only in some cases. In some
cases it follows, as namely a man borne in sin, and in the state of
corruption, the natural fruits whereof are infidelity and impenitency, until
God affords a man the grace of regeneration, he cannot believe, he cannot
repent. They that are in the flesh cannot please God. Thou after the hardness
of thy heart that cannot repent. Therefore they could not believe. In which
case God is not the cause of infidelity, and To: 8. To: 2. Io: 12.
impenitency; but these proceed naturally and necessarily from that original
corruption wherein they are conceived and borne. God is only the natural cause
why this their natural corruption continues uncured. For none can cure it but
God, it being a work nothing inferior to the raising of them from the dead. Yet
he is no culpable cause of this. For as much as he is not bound to any, but he
has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth. So that necessarily
without the grace of regeneration, every man continues in his natural
corruption, devoyd of faith, of hope, and love. These being supernatural, and
whereunto no man can attain with out supernatural grace. In like manner,
hence it follows that no natural man can perform any moral good act in a
gracious and acceptable manner in the sight of God, because ^he fountains of
such performances, are not found in natural men. But they have a free power as
to commit any natural evil work; so to abstain from it; though not in a
gracious manner: Free power as to abstain from any virtuous act, so to
perform it also, though not in a gracious manner. They may be temperate,
chaste, just, and the like; but their virtuous actions are not truly virtues in
a Christian account, because they know not God, nor Christ, much less do they
believe in him, and perform these virtuous actions out of their love unto him.
If Maccovius, and Whitaker, and Pareus be of the same mind, and the Dominicans
with them, and Bradwardine before them all; let the indifferent Reader consider
what an hungry opposition is made by this Author, not offering to answer any
one of their Arguments, nor of mine neither, in my Vindiciae; Nor says ought
by way of reply upon any answer to the like argument of Arminius. The
resolution of all that here he delivers, determining in a rule l. 2. digrs. 3.
Criminat. 3. Sect: 2.
himself proposes, without reason or authority to justify it. A rule as here
it is applied containing a notorious untruth. For causa deficiens in no case
can be efficiens in proper speech, any more, then causa efficiens can be
accounted deficiens, unless it be understood in diverse kinds As for example,
efficiens naturaliter may be deficiens moraliter, and deficiens moraliter may
be efficiens naturaliter. An efficient cause naturally, may be deficient
morally, and so a cause deficient morally, may be efficient naturally. Least of
all can it have place in the present question, which is of the cause of sin.
For sin as sin, evil as evil, non habet causam efficientem, sed
deficientem; has no cause efficient, but deficient only; as Austin has long
ago determined; and it is a rule generally received and never that I know
denied of any. Again causa deficiens in necessariis may be culpable I
confess, and so interpretative (as they say) may be interpreted to be as good
as an efficient. As in a civil consideration it is said of the Magistrate,
that, Qui non vetat peccare cum possit, jubet. He that forbids not a man to
sin when it is in his power, or when he has authority to forbid, it is as if
he should command the committing of that sin. Now this is only in such a case,
where the necessity respects the person who is the deficient cause, as namely
in case he be bound in duty to afford help and succor to him that cannot keep
himself from sinning without the succor of an other, not otherwise. And
therefore it reaches not to God, who is not bound to preserve any man or
creature from sinning; Least of all is he bound to regenerate a man that is
borne in sin. Adam was created in all sufficiency that the reasonable
creature was capable of, without any pronenes unto evil, but rather in a
moral propension to that which was good; And his fall has brought this
corruption upon all mankind, even a necessity of sinning, as Arminius and
Corvinus confess. He wanted no power to do that which was good, or to
abstain from sin, but ever since his fall, impotency to that which is good,
and pronenesse unto that which is evil has been the natural inheritance of
all mankind. And as for the permission of Adam's fall, his sin was in a thing
naturally indifferent, the holiness of his nature not inclining him more to
abstain from that fruit any more, then to partake of it. Neither do we say
that God did withhold from Adam any grace that these our adversaries maintain
to be necessary for the avoiding of that sin which was committed by him. How
Adam himself was brought by Eve to eat of that fruit is not expressed. As for
Eve the temptation which Satan used with her, and which did prevail is
expressed: He allured her with the representation of the powerful nature of
that, to make them as Gods knowing good and evil, and he made this seem
credible by the very denomination which God gave unto the Tree, the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil. It seems not likely that she knew who it was that
spoke unto her in the Serpent, nor that she was acquainted with the fall of
Angels. Then again the desire of knowledge, is no evil thing it self, or
stands in any contradiction to the integrity of a reasonable creature: Nay
nothing more agreeable to the nature of the best, it brings such a perfection
with it. Only the error was, in affecting it this way. God did not keep the
Devil off; nor reveal unto her who it was that spoke unto her; much less his
apostaticall condition; least of all his project to supplant them. Neither did
he quicken that holy fear which he had inspired into her to resist it at the
first, and to go to her husband to acquaint him with it. She might think that
the knowledge of good and evil might make her more fit for the service of God,
then unfit. All which considered, her will being moved to seek this perfection
by tasting of such a fruit, there was no cause or reason to hinder her from
tasting it, save only the consideration of God's prohibition. For the will of
every reasonable creature is naturally apt to affect that which is good, and
though that good may prove evil in some circumstance, yet if that circumstance
be not considered, the will proceeds to affect it. How long the Devil was
exercised in this temptation we know not. Inconsideration is conceived by
Durandus to be the original of that sin of theirs; and God was not bound to
maintain this consideration quick in her, and of the danger of such a
transgression. In fine she came to a will and resolution to taste of it; to the
producing of this act, as a natural thing, the Lord concurred, as all
confess, namely to the substance of the act. The question is whether he
concurred to the effecting of it absolutely or conditionally? It was as true of
Adam and Eve, that in him they lived and moved and had their being, as it is of
us. We say God as a first cause moves every second cause; but agreeably to
their natures; Necessary agents to work every thing they work necessarily;
Free agents to do every thing they do, freely. But to say that God made them
velle modo vellent, to will in case they would will, is so absurd as nothing
more; The act of willing being hereby made the condition of it self, and
consequently both before and after it self. See what I have delivered
concerning this in my Vindiciae lib. 2. Digr: 3. and Digr: 6. of the nature of
permission, more at large, where unto this Author is content to answer just
nothing.

Sect: 7.
There are two things say they in every ill act. First, the material part
which is the substance of the action. M. Mason's Addit. p. 34. 35.
Secondly, the formal part which is the evil or obliquitie of it. God is the
Author of the action it self, but not of the obliquitie and evil that
cleaves to it, as he that causes a lame horse to go, is the cause of his
going, but not of his lame going. And therefore it follows not from their
opinion that God is the Author of sin. First, all sins receive not this
distinction, because of many sins, the acts themselves are sinful; as of the
eating of the forbidden fruit, and Readiness sparing of Agag, and the fat beasts
of the Amalekites. Secondly, It is not true that they make the decree of God
only of actions, and not of their aberrations. For they make it to be the cause
of all those means that lead to damnation and therefore of sinful actions, as
sinful, and not as bare actions. For actions deserve damnation, not as actions
but as trangressions of Gods law. 3. To this simile I say that the Rider or
Master that shall resolve first to flea his horse, or knock him on the head,
and then to make him lame, that for his halting, he may kill him, is
undoubtedly the cause of his halting: And so God if he determine to cast men
into hell, and then to bring them into a state of sin, that for their sins
he may bring them to ruin, we cannot conceive him to be less then the
Author, as well of their sins, as of those actions to which they do
inseperably adhere, and that out of Gods intention to destroy them.

This distinction of that which is material and that which is formal in sin
is commonly used by Aquinas 1. secun: q: 71. art: 6, in corp: Augustinus in
definitione peccati posuit duo, Answer.
Unum quod pertinet ad substantiam actus humani, quod est quasi materiale in
peccato; cum dicit dictum vel factum vel concupitum; Aliud autem quod pertinet
ad rationem mali quod est quasi formale in peccato cum dixit contra legem
aeternam. So then the substance of the act is the material part in sin; And
the opposition of this act to the law of God is the formal part of it, both
according to Aquinas; and according to Austin also. And q: 75. art: 1. corp. He
defines sin to be Actus inordinatus, an inordinate act, and distinguishes
the act from the inordination of it. q: 79. art: 2. He proposes the question,
whether the act of sin be from God? and in the conclusion resolves it thus, Cum
actus peccati sit ens, necessario est a Deo, Considering that the act of sin
is a thing having being, necessarily it is of God. And in the body of the
Article, Dicendum quod actus peccati and est ens, and est actus, and ex utroque
habet quod sit a Deo; The resolution is that the act of sin, is both a thing
that has being, and an act, and in each condition it has, that it is of God.
And he proves this both by authority and by reason. As for the defect of this
act, that non reducitur in Deum tanquam in causam, sed in liberum arbitrium,
that is not charged upon God as the cause thereof, but on a man's free will.
And he illustrates it thus, Sicut defectus claudicationis reducitur in tibiam
curvam sicut in causam, non autem in virtutem motivam a qua tamen causatur
quicquid est motionis in claudicatione. Like as the defect called halting is
charged upon a crooked leg as the cause thereof, and not upon the motive
faculty, though from it proceeds all the motion that is found in the halting:
Neither did I ever read any School. Divine that contradicted this distinction.
Mr. Mason does without alleging any authority for it. Yet he might have
alleged Arminius opposing after this manner, though before him, that I know,
not any.

1. We say not only of many sins, but of every sin, which has any act
therein, that the Acts themselves are sinful, because every such sin, being
actual, it is Actus cum defectu, an act with a defect, that is an act
defective. As Aquinas speaks in the place immediately before alleged, and
this defect is in respect of the law of God. As Austin defines sin to be,
dictum, factum, concupitum contra legem Dei, A thought, word, or deed against
the law of God. And this is enough I think to denominate it sinful But the
argument used by this Author is the very same which was formerly used by
Arminius, and whereunto I have answered; lib. 2. de permiss. Sect: 21, and that
after this manner. Be it so that the act it self is forbidden, and
consequently the act it self is inordinate; but what will it therefore follow
that these two are not to be distinguished, to wit, the act, and the
inordination of it? a strange liberty of disputing. A man's hand is sometimes
inordinate, as being monstrous, either having too much, or too little; as
either wanting five fingers, or having more then five: what therefore shall it
not be lawful for us to distinguish between the hand and the monstrosity of
the hand? 2. The wall it self is white; what therefore shall we not
distinguish between the wall, and the white color of it? A man himself is
virtuous and vicious; shall this hinder us from due distinguishing between the
man and his moral condition, whether virtuous or vicious; Many other arguments
are represented by Arminius which this Author touches not; yet in the place
forementioned I have shaken them all to pieces, such is the rotten condition of
them. And over and above I have proved, not that in every sin the act is to be
distinguished from the inordination of it; but that in every sin of commission
there is place for this distinction, and that after this manner. Every sin of
commission, is an act inordinate; but in every inordinate act we are to
distinguish between the act it self, and the inordination of it. And that the
act and the inordination of it are two, I prove thus. That if they are one and
the same then we may well say that the act is an inordination; but this is most
false. For nothing can be affirmed or predicated of the same thing both in the
abstract, and concrete (God himself excepted) As for example you may say of a
wall, that it is white, you cannot say of it that it is whitenes. For the wall
is in the predicament of substance, but whitenes being a color is in the
predicament of quality. 2. Again an inordination is a privation of order. But
no act is formally a privation, and consequently neither can it be formally an
inordination. 3. An entitie positive, and a term privative cannot be one and
the same formally, but two distinct notions. Now every act is a positive thing,
but inordination is a mere privation. 4. Lastly God is confessed by all to be
the cause of the act, but if the act be all one with the inordination, he
should be the cause not of the act only, but of the inordination, that is of
the sinfullnes also.

2. Observe his shifting carriage. It is our Tenet that God is the Author of
the action it self, but not of the obliquity: and himself has expressly
acknowledged this to be our tenet in the beginning of this Section Now whereas
he makes show here of proving that we make God the Author not of the action
only, but of the obliquity also, he performs no such matter; but only this,
that we make the object of God's decree, not the action only, but the
aberration also; but in all this there is no contradiction unto us; We
willingly grant that in as much as God permits sin, he will have sin come
to pass, by his permission, every good thing that comes to pass, he will have
it come to pass by his being the Author of it and effecting it; the evil
that comes to pass, he will have come to pass also, not by his being the
Author of it and effecting it, but only by his permitting of it. So that still
that of Austin holds good. Non aliquid fit nisi omnipotens fieri velit. Not any
thing comes to pass unless God will have it come to pass. And according to
the eleaventh article of religion established in the Church of Ireland, God
from all eternity did by his unchangeable counsel ordain whatsoever in time
shall come to pass; and according to the express word of God testifiing that
the ten Kings in giving their Kingdoms did herein do the will of God. And
that the horrible outrages committed upon the person of Rev: 17. 17.
the holy Son of God by Herod. Pontius Pilate, the Gentiles and people of
Israel were by the hand and counsel of God before determined to be done We say
sinful courses (not hand over head) but unrepented of, lead unto damnation,
but not as means. For they are neither man's means; for if they were, then
the end also whereunto they tend, should be intended by him; Neither are they
any means of God: For all means are the works of him that intends the end;
So is not the sin of man the work of God, but the permission of sin is his
work: And this is the means which he intends thereby to bring to pass his
intended end, which yet on the part of Reprobates is not the damnation of them,
but the manifestation of his glory in the way of vindicative justice, which in
Scripture phrase is called the Declaration of his wrath. For God made all
things for himself, even the wicked against the day of evil. And to this end
he does not only permit them both to sin, and to To. 9. 23. Prove: 16. 4.
persevere therein without repentance, but also to damn them for their sin.
And this work of God namely the permission of sin is as requisite for the
manifestation of his mercy on the part of his Elect, as for the Declaration of
his wrath, on the part of reprobates. Yet who was ever found so absurd as to
say that we make the sinful actions of men to be the means which God uses to
bring about the salvation of his Elect. So little cause have we to make use of
this distinction as the action it self and the sinfullnesse thereof, to show
in what sense it is a means which God uses whereby to bring about the
damnation of man. For we utterly deny sin to be any such means of God, but
the permission thereof only is the means whereby to bring about not their
damnation, as this Author suggesteth, but the means (together with the
damnation for sin) whereby he brings to pass the declaration of his just
wrath. But men of this Authors spirit; unless they be suffered to calumniate
at pleasure; and corrupt their opposites Tenet at pleasure, they can say just
nothing. It is true actions deserve damnation only as they are transgressions
of God's law, but we deny that these transgressions are God's means, but only
the permission of them is his means; and by permitting these transgressions,
as also by damning for them, he brings to pass his glorious end, to wit, the
declaration of his just wrath. 3ly, It is most untrue that God brings any man
into a state of sin; He brings himself into it most freely, God having no
other hand in the sin but as permitting it, that is as not preserving from
it. Indeed if he did bring men into sin, and they not rather bring themselves
thereinto, he were the Author of it. But it is well known that sin cannot
transcend the region of acts natural. All acts supernatural must needs be the
work of grace, and truly good; But every sinful act is merely natural, never
supernatural. Now never any of our Divines denied a man liberty in his
greatest corruption, unto acts natural; the Devil himself has liberty thus
far. It is true original sin is brought upon all by the sin of Adam; For
hereby the fountain of humane nature became corrupted; but in this very sin of
Adam we had an hand, if there be any truth in Scripture which testifies that,
In Ada^ we all have sinned. This is the doctrine which the Author spights,
though he be more wise then to publish to the world his spleen against it: And
I have To. 5. 12.
seen under his hand where he denies original sin to be very nominis
pecatum, sin truly so called And albeit M. Hoord makes a flourish in saying
that God might justly damn all mankind for the sin of Adam; and that also
was this Author's doctrine in the lectures which he read at Magdalen Hall; yet
I have good cause to doubt whether this be his opinion now, and not rather the
same with Pelagius his opinion, saving the difference which Pelagius did put
between not entering into the Kingdom of heaven and damnation. As for all
other sins which we call actual, they are, as I said, natural only, and not
supernatural; and therefore no man wants liberty, as to do them, so to
abstain from them; Only he wants a moral and Spiritual liberty to abstain
from them in a gracious manner, according to that of Aquinas. Licet aliquis non
possit gratiam adipisci qui reprobatur a Deo, tamen quod in hoc peccatum vel
illud labatur, ex ejus libero arbitrio contingit. Thom: 1: p. q: 23. art. 7. ad
tertiu^.
Though a man who is reprobated of God cannot obtain grace, yet that he
falls into this or that sin it comes to pass of his own free will. It is
true also even in God's providence concerning acts natural, there is a great
mystery. For as God foretold David that, his neighbor should 2 Samuel: 12. 11. 12.
lie with his wives; and though he sinned secretly, yet the Lord would do this
openly. So he foretold that, upon that Altar which Jeroboam erected, a child
that should be borne of the house 1 Kin: 13. 2. Es: 45. 13. Ezra: 1, 2 King:
23. 16. 2 Samuel: 16. 22.
of David, Josiah by name, should burn the Prophets bones. And that Cyrus also
should build him a City and let go his captives: Yet who doubts, but that
Cyrus did freely deliver the Jews out of Babylon? and Josiah did as freely
burn the Prophets bones upon the alter in Bethel, as ever they did action in
their lives? So Absalom did as freely defile his Fathers Concubines. Then
again we deny that the damnation of any man is the end that God intends, but
the manifestation of his own glory. And therefore though he has made the wicked
against the day of evil; yet both that, and all things he has made for
himself. And to this tends both the permission of sin, and the damnation of
Reprobates for their Prove: 16. 4.
sin; And in no moment of nature, are either of these intended before the
other, both being jointly means for the procuring of another end. And if
permission of sin were first in intention with God, and then damnation as
these men would have it, it follows evidently by the most generally received
rules of Schools that permission of sin should be last in execution, that is
men should first be damned, and afterward permitted to fall into sin. This
is the issue of these men's Orthodoxy and accurate Divinity.

Section 8.
The will is determined to an Object two ways. 1. By compulsion against the
bent and inclination of M. Mason's Addit. p. 35. 36.
it. 2. By necessity according to the natural desire and liking of it. God's
predestination say they, de termineth the will to sin this last way, but not
the first; It forces no man to do that which he would not, but carries him
toward that which he would. When men sin, it is true they cannot choose; And it
is as true, they will not choose. It follows not therefore from the grounds
of their doctrine that God's decree is the cause of men's sins, but their own
wicked wills. 1. The Ancients made no distinction between these two words
(Necessity) and (Compulsion) but used them in this argument promiscuously; and
did deny that God did necessitate men to sin, least they should grant him
hereby to be the Author of sin, as I have touched before, and shall intimate
again afterward. Nor did the School men put any difference between them, as
may appear by the testimony of M. Calvin, who speaking of the
School-distinction of the will's threefold liberty; from necessity, from sin,
from Misery, says, This distinction I could willingly receive, but that it
confounds necessity with coaction.

2. That which necessitateth the will to sin is as truly the cause of sin,
as that which forces it, because it makes the sin to be inevitably
committed, which otherwise might be avoided; and therefore if the Divine decree
necessitate man's will to sin, it is as truly the cause of sin as if it did
enforce it.

3. That which necessitates the will to sin, is more truly the cause of the
sin, then the will is; because it overruleth the will, and bears all the
stroke, takes from it, 'its true liberty, by which it should be Lord of it
self, and disporser of 'its own acts, and in respect of which it has been
usually called by Philosophers and Fathers too, (...), a power which is under
the insuperable check and control of no Lord but it self. It overruleth, I
say, and makes it become but a servile instrument, irresistably subject to
superior command and determination; And therefore is a truer cause of all such
acts and sins, as proceed from the will so determined, then the will is. For
when two Causes concur to the producing of an effect, the one a principle
overruling cause, the other but isntrumental, and wholly at the Devotion of
the principal; then is the effect in all reason to be imputed to the
principal, which by the force of 'its influxe and impression produces it,
rather then to the subordinate and isntrumental which is but a mere servant in
the production of it We shall find it ordinary in Scripture to ascribe the
effect to the principal Agent. It is not ye that speak, says Christ, but the
Spirit of my Father that speaks in you. I labored more abundantly then Mat:
10. 20. 1 Co: 15. 10.
they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was in me. And I live: yet not
I, but Christ lives in me says St. Paul. Gal: 2. 20. In these and many other
places the effect or work spoken of, is taken from the instrument, and given to
the principal agent; Which being so, though man's will work with God's decree
in the commission of sin, and wills the sin which it does, yet seeing what
the will does, it does by the commanding power of God's Allmighty decree, and
so it does that otherwise it cannot do; the sin committed cannot so rightly be
ascribed to man's will, the inferior as to God's necessitating decree the
superior cause.

4. That which makes a man sin by way of necessity, that is with, and not
against his will, is the cause of sin in a worse manner, then that which
constrains him to sin against his will; As he which by powerful
persuasions draws a man to stab, to hang, to poison himself is in a grosser
manner the cause of that evil, and unnatural action then he that by force
compells him; because he makes him to consent to his own death; And so if Gods
decree do not only make men sin; but sin willingly too; not only cause that
they shall (male agere) do evil; but (male velle) will evil, it has the
deeper hand in the sin.

God determines the will to sin by necessity, though not by compulsion: this
he obtrudes upon our Devines as their opinion, but quotes none, is it likely
that he who quotes Beza to Answer.
show that in his opinion, God does not only permit sin, but will sin; And
Calvin to show, that a man's mind is blinded, volente and jubente Deo; would
not quote some or other of our Divines to prove that which he obtrudes upon
them? If his common place book could afford him any such quotation out of any
one of them, to show who they be, and where they say that, God determines the
will to sin by necessity though not by compulsion. Was there ever the like
crimination made against any without naming them that say so, and the place
where, and their own words? Or has this man or any of his spirit deserved any
credit to be trusted this way? The very phrase of determining in Latin is no
word of course with our Divines in this argument. It is the phrase of the
Dominicans. But do they say that God determines the will to sin? I do not
think he can produce one of them that expresses himself so unscholastically,
so absurdly. Alvarez says that, God by his effectual decree predetermineth
second causes to work. He says that God does predetermine De aux: disp* 22
Disp. 24. Disp. 26.
the will to the act of sin, as it is an act. That the first root of
contingency is the will of God. Then to what does God determine the will in
their opinion? Is it to the act only and not to the manner of its production?
Namely, to produce it voluntarily and freely? Nothing less though this Author
counts it his wisdom to conceal this. God by his omnipotency does cause, that
man whose heart he moves to will and will freely. Again, God's general
concourse is a divine, immediate influence into second causes whereby they are,
foremoved, applied ibid. Disp: 118. page 485. ibid de aux: Disp 1^1. page 490.
^. 3.
and determined to work every one according to the condition of its nature;
The natural cause naturally; the free cause freely; as I have professedly
delivered. Disput. 18. 23. And that in such sort freely, as they can choose to
do otherwise if they will, and that in the very instant wherein they do what
they do. But come we to consider his answer.

1. Touching that which he says of the Ancients, he gives us his bare word for
it, as touching the confounding of necessity and compulsion; yet Bernard I
confess willingly, in talking of liberty from necessity, understands by
necessity coaction. He says farther, that those Ancients did deny that God did
necessitate men to sin, least they should grant thereby that God is the
Author of sin. But I do not think he can show this phrase of necessitating
the will any way to be found among the Ancients, what he has touched before I
have considered, what he shall intimate hereafter, I hope I shall not let it
pass unsaluted. And the truth is to necessitate has such an Emphasis with it
as to persuade that whatsoever a man is necessitated to do, that he does by
constraint against his will. And it is a rule commonly received that Voluntas
non potest cogi, The will cannot be forced; which is most true, as touching
Actus eliciti, the acts of the will inward and immediate, and not so of actus
imperati, acts outward and commanded. But Bradwardine who alone uses this
phrase among'st School-Divines, takes it in no such sense, but only for an
effectual operation of God upon the will moving it to work this or that, not
necessarily, but freely; which this Author most judiciously dissembleth all
along for desparing to prevail by true and substantial information of the
understanding; perturbundis affectibus suffuratur; by a corrupt proposition of
his Adversaries tenet, hopes to work distaste upon the Readers affections.
Bradwardines position is this, God can after a sort necessitate every created
will to 'its free act, and to a free cessation, and vacation from act: and has
a Corollary to this effect; That Bradw, de causa Dei l. 3. c. 1.
some kind of necesity, and liberty are not repugnant, but may consist
together. Again, God does after a sortnecessitate every created will, unto
every free act therefore, and to every free cessation Id ibid, c. 2.
and vacation from act that by necessity antecedent naturally. And he adds a
Corollary, that some kind of antecedent necessity and liberty are not
repugnant, and may consist together.

This distinction of liberty from necessity, liberty from sin, liberty from
misery, I find in Bernard, and Vossius alleges it only out of him, and the
Schoolmen might take it up after him. Bernard has many obscure passages in
the prosecuting of it, especially in reference to the two first members.
Neither does Vossius take any pains to clear them from a manifest
contradiction in show: And no marvel if Doctor Potter does not, in stating
the opinion of the Church of England in the point of free will, which he
undertakes very magnificently in his answer to charity mistaken; he was content
to be led by his blind guide: now the seeming contradiction is this. If there be
in a naturallman no liberty from sin, then is he necessarily carried into
sin; and how then is there any liberty in him from necessity? unless
necessity be taken as all one with constraint. And Bernard sometimes in that
very treatise does clearly express himself to understand thereby coaction.
And so M. Fulkes in his answer to the Rhemish testament, denying unto man
liberty from sin, yet grants unto him a liberty from coaction. And indeed
sin to the profane person is like a sweet morsel which he rolleth under his
tongue, as the book of Job speaks, he comes not constrained thereunto; but
naturally takes delight therein; and I doubt too many there be, who though they
are driven to confess, that a natural man has no liberty from sin; yet
they please themselves with a certain expression of Lindan's, that a man has
free will unto sin; hoping therehence to conclude when time serves, that a
man as he has freedom to commit it, so he has freedom to abstain from it,
and so by a back door to draw in a Tenet quite contrary to the first, namely
that even a natural man has liberty from sin. I am not sure that Lindan did
well understand his own expression, so as to know how to make it good, much
less that they are able who lick their lips at it. But of this, and the
clearing of Bernard, and of the difference between liberty natural, and
liberty moral I have else where discoursed at large. And Calvin observing this
contradiction might well blame them that confound necessity, with coaction;
whereby a way is opened to conclude, that because a man is free from constraint
of sinning, therefore he is free from necessity of sinning; whereas original
sin does necessarily incline him to sinful actions and courses in general;
though to this kind of sin in special, or to this particular, in what
kindsoever, it does not: yet by the way it is to be considered, that Calvin in
some particulars, as namely in gracious courses, did attribute so much to the
efficacy of God's operation upon a man's will, as that the actions performed
thereby though voluntary, yet in his opinion were not to be accounted free; and
indeed they are wrought in opposition and as it were in spite of a certain
principal of corruption that in part remains in the very best of God's
children. But we see no reason to the contrary, but that, when once God has
planted in us a principle of new life, of the life of grace, by the spirit of
regeneration, though all the powers thereof do incline only to that which is
good, like as the powers of natural corruption incline only unto evil, yet
the particular use and exercise of those is always free: Like as the
particular use and exercise of the powers of our corruption is allwaies free to
the committing of this or that sin according unto emergent occasions standing
in congruity to every man's particular disposition.

2. The Author keeps himself to the language of his own Court, but he should
not so imperiously put it upon his opposites to concur with him in the
language of Ashdod. We know nothing that necessitates the will to sin, but
that original corruption, wherein every man is conceived, and which we brought
with us into the world. For that makes us impatient of a yoke, like unruly
Heyfers; And nothing is more burdensome unto us in our corrupt nature, then
the holy laws of God; The statutes of Omri are not so, nor all the manner of
the house of Ahab; these are punctually observed, when God's holy ordinances
are proudly despised. God moves every creature to work agreeably to 'its
nature. Necessary Agents necessarily, contingent Agents contingently, Free
Agents freely. He does not move to any such act as is sinful, save only where
the fear of God is not at all found, or not quickened, but the motions and
suggestions of Satan entertained; nor then neither always; and that not only
in his own children, but even in the hearts of the wicked to restrain from
sinful courses in spite of Satan's temptations, by injecting into their minds
the consideration either of danger, or of shame ensu^ng, so in a natural way
to restrain from the committing of such an act as is sinful; especially when
he sees it prejudicial to the peace of his Church in general, or any member
thereof in particular; otherwise if he gives them over to Satan, and moves them
agreably to his suggestions entertained by them, as being naturally well
pleased with them, why should this seem strange to any? So that not any sin is
inevitably committed by the most wicked creature that lives upon the face of
the earth, but he has power enough (I do not say to avoid it, an absurd
phrase as if sin were a thing to be forced upon a man whether he would or no,
but) to abstain from it, though not in a gracious manner, that being in the
power of them only who have the spirit of regeneration dwelling in them.

3. In the same language he prosecutes his vile cause, giving manifest evidence
to the world that it cannot be supported without lies, nor embraced by any but
those whom God in his secret judgments has given over to strong illusions to
believe lies, It is not incredible to me that ever any Papist or Protestant
has affirmed that God necessitates the will to sin; They generally
acknowledge that evil has no cause efficient, but deficient only: The term
of God's operation is no other then the substance of the act, which as an
entity, and as an act must necessarily proceed from God, as Aquinas has
delivered. And albeit they maintain that God's concurrence to the producing of
the act does work upon the will of the creature which, from the first time
that Divines came resolutely unto the acknowledgment of this Divine concourse
to the act of sin, has also been received as I have showed in my Vinaiciae.
For Peter Lombard disputing on either side about this concurrence, leaves it
indifferent to the Reader to embrace either part: Either the affirmative that
God does concur to every act, though it be sinful or the negative. Yet I say
as many as do maintain the affirmative, do so maintain God's motion upon
the creatures will, as to move it only agreably unto it is nature, namely to
work freely not necessarily. Like as he moves necessary Agents to work
necessarily, and contingent Agents to work contingently. And if this Author
be ignorant hereof, which may well give him boldness. For who so bold as blind
Bayard? What does he other in all this but betray his own shame coming to
discourse on such an argument, as an ass comes to play upon an harp, as the
proverb speaks. But if he be not ignorant of this, what unshamefastnesse does
he manifest all along, making bold only upon the simplicity and ignorance of
his Reader to gull him, and abuse him, and draw him along to oppose the free
grace of God in predestination and regeneration, under color of making God the
Author of sin in the point of reprobation; which yet he despaires of making
good against us without notorious untruths, and that undoubtedly delivered
against his own knowledge. For what Author has he produced to justify this
that any of our Divines maintains that God necessitates the will of man to
sin? Not any that I know using this phrase Necessitate but Papists, and
among'st them none that I know but Bradwardine a man renowned in his time both
for eminent learning, and eminent piety, as appears by Sir Henry Savill's
preface unto that book of his; and he no where affirming that God necessitates
any man unto sin; but only to the substance of the act; and that not so as to
make the will work necessarily, as the phrase imports in a vulgar ear, and
unto a popular judgment (whereupon alone this Author takes his advantage most
unconscionably) but agreably to 'its nature, that is contingently and freely.
For were he able to produce any one of our Divines that affirms this, why
does he not? Is there any^hing throughout this whole discourse that more
requires he should name the man, and quote the places, where this is affirmed,
then this? Yet here we find a blank; he carries it on magnificently upon his
own bare word, which deserves no credit at our hands; And is it possible to
believe so foul a crimination without all evidence produced, unless faction
and partiallity has blinded his eyes? Should he have laid to our charge that
we maintain that God necessitates the will to any good act, and to overrule
the will therein, we should utterly deny it without distinction. It is true he
overrules the will of the flesh, but not the will of the Spirit, the regenerate
part, but moves it agreably to 'its nature, and to work not only voluntarily
but freely whatsoever it works. For albeit the regenerate part is like a
moral virtue (though as much transcendent to it, as a thing supernatural
transcends a thing natural) inclining only to that which is good; yet is it
always moved to this particular good rather then unto an other most freely.
Like as a man's natural corruption inclines a man only to evil; yet to this
kind of evil or to this particular evil, rather then to that, Man is moved
most freely. So that if we maintain not that God works a man to every good
act, otherwise then freely; let the very conscience of our enemies judge,
whether we can maintain that God necessitates the will either of men or of
Devils unto sin. For it is apparent that God has a Double influence unto a
good act. One unto it as unto an act, and that is influence general; Another
unto it as unto a good and gracious act, and that we acknowledge to be an
influence special and supernatural. But as touching an evil act, all sides
confess that God has but a single influence thereunto and that general,
namely, as it is an act, not as it is evil. And albeit this influence which we
call concurrence unto the act, be joined with an influence into the will of the
creature to move it to the producing of the same act; yet this motion is no
other the^ whereby the will is moved to work agreably to 'its nature; that is
freely. Like as all other Agents are moved by God, the first Agents to work
agreably to their natures, necessary things to work necessarily, contingent
things contingently. So that in all this there is no overruling of the will, no
liberty taken from her; but rather she is maintained and established in her
free condition, and moved agreably thereunto; like as in the eleaventh Article
of Ireland it is expressed. For after it is laid down that, God from all
eternity did by his unchangable counsel ordain whatsoever in time should come
to pass; It is forthwith added that, hereby no violence us offered to the
wills of the reasonable creatures, and neither the liberty nor the contingency
of the second causes is taken away but established rather. But because of
another claw that here is subjoyned by this Author, it is to be considered
that the liberty of the creature is not equal unto the liberty of the Creator
God himself: But like as all other causes are but second causes, God alone the
prime cause; All other Agents but second Agents, God alone the first Agent. So
likewise all other free Agents are but second free Agents, God alone primum
liberum, the first free Agent. So that no liberty of the creature does or can
exempt it from the Agency of God, In whom we live and move and have our being
what a proud thing and presumptuous were it for the creature to aspire unto
such an exemption. Who oppose us in the point of free will more then Papists?
Yet see how Alvarez disputes against this vise and presumptuous conceit, so
much maintained by the Jesuits, and after taken up by the Arminians, who live
by their scraps, as if they would be content to wash their dishes. The Jesuits
discourse thus, That the will may be free, she must have the Dominion of her
act, true says Alvarez, debet habere Dominium sui actus, Disp. 22. number: 44.
non tamen oportet quod habeat primum and absolutum Dominium sui actus, she
must have the dominion overher act, but not the first and absolute deminion of
her act. And Disput. 117, he proposes this question, Whether the will has her
dominion of her act, and what dominion this is. In the resolution whereof he
proposes three conclusions.

1. The free will of man has the dominion of her act as the next cause
thereof. In this conclusion the Divines on both sides do concur. 2. Free
will created in the actual use of Dominion and power which she has over her
acts, depends on God as of an absolute Lord, predeliberating, and
predetermining before the foreknowledge of the creatures future cooperation
what the free will, will do in particular. This conclusion is held of all
those Divines who maintain that God by his motion or effectual grace, not
only morally, but efficiently and physically does cause us to work that which
is good, and it is proved, says he by all those reasons whereby it has been
formery showed that God by his decree and effectual motion does predetermine
all second causes, even such as are free, to work, preserving their liberty
and nature 3. The dominion of her act is not first in the power of free will
created, but in the power and dominion of God, especially in respect of acts
supernatural Our meaning is that all dominion and actual use of dominion
which the created will has as causa proxima the next cause, or does exercise
over her free acts which she produces, proceeds from God, as from the
chiefest and first cause efficient, and ought to be resolved into him as into
the first Author and first absolute Lord thereof And the truth is the question
of free will, is commonly confounded though there is place of momentous
distincion. For as for free will unto good that is merely Moral, and the
resolution thereof, is according to the resolution in the point of original
sin. But free will unto actions in general under an appearance of good, this
is natural liberty; and the resolution thereof depends upon a right
understanding of God's natural providence in governing the world, and working
with all creatures in their several kinds, such operations as are agreeable to
their several conditions. The first liberty consists in disposing man aright
toward his end; like as moral virtues tend to this. But the second liberty
consist's only in the right use of the means, unto what end soever is
projected by us. The appearance of good moving herein is only, in genere boni
conducentis, in the kind of good conducing to the end propounded; whether that
end can be good or evil, right or wrong. But the appearence of good moving in
the former is only, summiboni, of our chiefest good, the enjoying whereof will
make us happy. But to return, this Author with whom I deal in present,
stands for the will of man's absolute dominion over her acts; as before he did
express; whereas Alvarez professes utterly against this, Neither do I blame
him for contradicting Alvarez in this; but for carrying himself like a
positive Theologue, nor so only, but like a peremptory Theologue contenting
himself to dictate rules to others without all proof, save this that
otherwise we make God the Author of sin. Yet this is not any express
Argument of his neither; but he obtrudes premise, upon us, which I think was
never affirmed by any Divines of these days, unless it be by some Libertines,
against whom none that I know have disputed more effectually then some of those
very Divines which here are traduced by him. But observe the vile and
abominable issue of this Authors doctrine in this particular, making man as he
is a free creature to be the Lord of his own free act; yea and to have the
absolute dominion thereof, as formerly he did expesse Sect: 3. For seeing the
act of faith, of repentance, and the like are free acts; if liberty cannot be
maintained unless a man has the absolute dominion of his own act, hence it
manifestly follows, that God does not determine the will to believe, to
repent, or to any good work, yet the Scripture professes that God is he, who
makes us perfect unto every good work, working in us that which is pleasing in
his sight through Jesus Christ. That it is God who works in us both the Heb:
13. 21.
will and the deed according to his good pleasure. So that if a man should live
Methusalch his age, and spend that whole time in a gracious conversation; yet
that God does work in him either the will or the deed of one gracious act
more, it is merely of his good pleasure; so little cause have we to presume of
perseverance in that which is good by out own strength. And again all this God
works in us for Christ his sake. Christ has deserved even this at the hands
of God his father. What then is the meaning of this, that God should cooperate
with us to the will and the deed, provided that we will? Consider the absurdity
of this (upon the supposall of the possibility of such a cooperation, which yet
by evident reason may be demonstrated to be utterly impossible.) Did Christ
merit any thing for the Angels? yet does he not cooperate with them to every
act of theirs as well as to any of ours? Nay is it possible that any act should
exist without God's operation? And is it reasonable to subject such a course of
Divine providence to the merits of Christ? Thus we see whereunto this Author
tends in this discourse of his, namely so to maintain God to be no Author of
sin, as withal to maintain that he is no Author of that which is good, no
not of faith, repentance, or any gracious act that is freely performed by any
creature man or Angel: we on the other side desire and endeavor so to carry
our selves that while we vindicate God from being the Author of evil, we may
not therewithal deny him to be the Author of any thing, that is good and
gracious; which is this Authors course, as appears manifestly in the issue.
And observe his crafty carriage fox like; Had he dealt upon predestination, and
the efficacy of grace, and therein professed plainly that faith and repentance
being free acts, every man's will has an absolute dominion over them; and
therefore God does not determine the will thereunto: For that were to make God
the Author of faith and repentance; how many thousands would have been ready
to have flowen in his face, and abhor such abominable doctrine. Therefore he
baulks that, and deals only upon reprobation; and here he lays to our charge
that we make God the Author of sin, by necessitating and determining the
will to sin (though his premises herein I have shown to be most false)
therefore he maintains that God does not determine the will so much as to the
act whereunto the sinfulness accrewes; both because man's will is free; and
because so he should be the Author of sin. And if once he can make his
Reader to swallow this, he doubts not but to take him in the point of
predestination and grace also; and make him wary to take heed of maintaining
that God determines or necessitates the will of man to any good act whether it
be of faith or of repentance, and that for fear of denying man to have the
absolute dominion over his will, to work himself to faith and repentance at
his pleasure: and secondly, for fear of making God the Author of faith and
repentance and every good act; Like as by saying that God does determine or
necessitate the will to sin, we make him the Author of sin. Behold Reader
the issue of this man's Divinity; and whether he be not leading thee into the
very chambers of death, by working thee with him to oppose the free grace of
God, both in predestination and in regeneration, and the power and efficacy
therereof in working thee to faith, to repentance, and to every thing that is
pleasing and acceptable unto him, and that through Jesus Christ. Yet we have
showed a manifest difference between God's moving the creature unto that which
is good, and moving the creature unto such acts as are evil. For in evil be
moves only to the substance of the act, whereof our Adversaries themselves
acknowledge God to be the Author, that is the efficient cause, and this he
performs by influence general. But as touching every good act, the Lord
moves not only to the substance of the act by influence general, but also to
the goodness thereof by influence special. He proceeds to tell us what
Philosophers teach concerning the condition of the will. And because it is very
absurd for a Christian to go to school to Philosophers to learn the
condition of Divine providence; he tells us of Fathers too that maintain the
same as he says, but he quotes neither the one, nor the other. Now I would
gladly know what Father has ever taught that God has no power over the will
of man to convert it, and ex nolentibus volentes facere, of unwilling, to make
men willing, to work men to faith, to repentance, to all kind of pious
obedience. And as for God's secret providence in evil, how plentiful is the
Scripture concerning this? God is said to have sent Joseph into Egypt, though
this was brought to pass by the parricidiall hands of his brethren; To tell
David, that the sword should not depart from his house, though this could not
be taken up or used, but by the free will of men; To send Senacherib against a
dissembling nation; and to profess that this proud King in all his bloody
executions upon the people of God, was but as the axe, or the saw in the hand
of God. The like is testified concerning Nabuchodonosor after him. Nay the
Prophet demands, Whether there be any evil in the City and the Lord has not
done it; speaking of the evil of punishment, though wickedly executed by the
hands of wicked men; that the Lord caused the King of Assure to fall by the
sword in his own land, though this was done by the hands of his own children.
And as in violent courses, so in impure courses the Scripture as plainly
testifies the secret providence of God to have place therein. And what does
Austin observe from the like places both in his fifth book against Julian the
Pelag: c: 3, and in his book de gratia and libero arbitrio, professing, occulto
Dei judicio fieri perversitatem cordis, that the perversity of the heart, or
will, comes to pass by the secret judgment of God; And the power that God has
over the wills of men to incline them even to evil; that is his phrase as I
have formerly showed, abundantly representing the places where he delivers
this. He proceeds not so much in Scholasticall discourse, as in rhetorical
amplification, more like a Shrew vexing him self and fretting that he cannot
have his will, then like a disputer. That which necessitates the will makes it
become but a servile instrument, irresistably subject to superior command and
determination; this action of command comes in most unseasonably, it denoting a
moral action, commanding not only things agreeable, but sometimes contrary to
the will of the person commanded. No such thing has place in God's moving of
the will of man (did he move it unto sin which yet is most false; for he
moves it only to the substance of the act.) But why should it seem strange
that the creature should be a Servant to the Creator, and his instrument, and a
servile instrument. Yet the notion of servility is very aliene from the matter
in hand, that having place only in proper speech as touching moral obedience;
that which we treat of, is rather of motions natural, and of the subordination
of the second cause to the first, the second Agent to the first. And was ever
any sober man known to oppose this with such froth of words as this Author
does? Does this Author himself think it possible that the Creature can move
it self, or perform any operation without God's concourse? I do not think he
does. Do we not live in God, have we not our being in God? And what is this
other then to say that our life and being depend on God, in the kind of a cause
efficient? And does not the same Apostle, and in the same place testify, and
that in the words of an heathen man (to show that all such did not so maintain
the (...), the (...), the (...) condition of the will, as to maintain the
exemption of it from influence Divine) profess that in God we move also? And
the truth is all the question is about the manner of this concourse divine;
whereabouts this Author spends not a word, as if he kept his breath for some
other purpose then to deal on that point, which alone is controverted. The
irresistible subjection he speaks of is no more then the bereaving of the will
of her liberty, which is most untrue For proof whereof I appeal to every man
that will but look upon Alvarez, that maintains this divine motion of will
under the notion of determining; And upon Bradwardine, who alone, that I know
maintains the same divine motion under the notion of necessitating: Whereas he
infers herehence that God is a truer cause of all such acts and sins that
proceed from the will so determined, then the will is. Oftentimes he has set
before us such Coleworts; but we have nothing but his bare word for it. And it
depends merely upon this that the action of the creature is not free. Whereas
both Bradwardin maintains that God necessitates the creature to every free act
of his; And Alvarez, that God determines the creature to work freely. Now is
it a sober course hence to infer, that the act is not free? As much as to say
it cannot but be free, therefore it is not free. And yet we know that every one
naturally is prone to sin, and in the best of God's children there is a
principle that inclines to sin. God is confessed by our very opposites to be
the true cause of the act; yet not at all the cause of the sin by his
concourse. Only they differ from us as touching the nature of this concourse;
We say God concurres to the producing of the act as it becomes not an Agent
only, but the first Agent; not a cause only, but the first cause; and man as a
second Agent, and second cause that moves in God as the Apostle testifies;
like as he lives in God, and has his being in God. But these men devise God,
and man to move to the producing of the same act, as two men in lifting a
timber logge, most indecently: And to free this concurrence from chance, they
say sometimes that God works this or that act in us modo velimus, that is,
upon condition that we will But when they consider that God works the act of
willing, as well as ought else; and are demanded to answer upon what condition
he works this what condition will they devise of this? will he say; modo
velimus, provided that we will? As much as to say, God will produce the act of
willing, provided that it be produced already by us. Others say that God
foreseeing that the will of man, at such a time will produce such an act of
willing in case God be pleased to concur to the producing of it, hereupon he
resolves to concur to the producing of it, whereby the final resolution is
rather into the will of God, then into the will of the creature, I say the
final resolution of every sinful act committed by the creature. Secondly here
is devised a thing future without all ground. For whereas the act of willing
(as for example in Judas, the act of willing to betray his Master, is it in
'its own nature merely possible not future how then did it pass into the
condition of a thing future and that from everlasting (For from everlasting God
knew it as a thing future) this could not be done without a cause? And what
cause could there be of an eternal effect, but an eternal cause which is God
alone: And in God nothing can be devised to be the cause thereof, but his will
or decree. Therefore to avoid this they must be driven to conclude that all
future things became future by necessity of nature; if not of their own
nature; yet at least by the necessity of God's nature, he producing them all
not freely, but by necessity of nature This is that Atheistical necessity
whereupon our Adversaries are cast, while they oppose such a necessity as
depends upon God's decree ordaining all things to come to pass agreably to
their natures, necessary things necessarily, contingent things contingently and
accordingly ordaining necessary causes working necessarily, for the producing
of the one; and contingent causes working contingently, for the producing of
the other; as Aquinas discourses. 1. page q. 19, in the Article whose title is
this, Utrum divina voluntas necessitatem rebus imponat, whether the will of God
imposes a necessity on things that come to pass in the world? The reason
this Author brings is a mere Socysme, saying the same over and over again; As
when he says, For when two causes concur to the producing of an effect; the
one principal overruling cause, the other but an isntrumental and wholly at
the devotion of the principal, then is the effect in all reason to be imputed
to the principal, which by the force of 'its influxe and impression produces
it, rather then to the subordinate and isntrumental, which is but a mere
servant in the production of it. To which I answer, that which he calls
overruling, I have often showed how absurdly it is imputed unto us. For how can
that be called overruling which works not the will contrary to 'its nature,
but moves it only agreably to the nature thereof. As for the cause principal,
what Scholar of any brains ever denied God to be the cause principal in any
action to the producing whereof he concurres? For is he not the first cause and
the first Agent? Are not all other second causes and second Agents? But this
Author hopes his Reader will understand this in reference only to the sin,
not to the natural act under it, whereas God as touching the sinfullnesse of
it is no Agent at all, much less a prime Agent; no cause at all, much less a
prime cause. Then secondly let God never so effectually work any creature to
the producing of an act connaturall thereunto, yet if he works the creature
thereunto agreably to its nature, that is if it be an necessary Agent, moves it
to work necessarily, if it be a contingent agent, moves it to work
contingently; if it be a free agent, moves it to work freely; then by Arminius
his confesion our cause is gained. For God shall be found free from blame, and
the creature void of excuse. Now this is clearly our doctrine, and in effect
the doctrine of all them, who say that God determines the will, as the
Dominicans; or that God necessitates the will, as Bradwardine. For they all
acknowledge hereby that God moves the creature to work freely, in such sort
that in the very act of working they might do otherwise if they would. They
confess this providence of God is a great mystery and not sufficiently
comprehensible by humane reason. Cajetan professes thus much as before
alleged, and Alvarez maintains it in a set disputation; And supposing God's
concourse as necessarily required to every act of the creature, they are able
to prove by evident demonstration, that no other concourse can be admitted,
then this whereby God moves every creature and that effectually to every act
thereof, but agreably to 'its nature and condition. And this is farther
demonstrated by God's fore knowledge, of things future. Another Arminian with
whom I have had to deal in this argument, being pressed with this reason
drawn from God's foreknowledge and urged to show how things possible became
future and that from everlasting (for from everlasting they were known to God
as future) had no way to help self but by flying to the actual existence of
all things in eternity. And I have good ground for strong presumption that this
Author with whom now I deal had his hand in that Pie, which was above four
years ago. See the desperate issue of these men's discourses; who are drawn
to take hold of such a Tenet to help themselves withal; which their best
friends the Jesuits, the Authors of Scientia media, do utterly disclaim.
And on the other side the Dominicans who embrace the actual existence of all
things in eternity, are utterly repugnant to the doctrine of Scientia media. So
that when the Jesuits are reconciled to the Dominicans in the point of actual
existence of all things in eternity; And the Dominicans to the Jesuits in the
point of Scientia media, then these men with whom I deal are like to prevail,
which I doubt will hardly be before Elias comes. Thirdly consider, if when one
cause is principal, overruling the other, the effect must be imputed rather to
the principal then to the other. It follows evidently that when the causes
do equally concur without any such overruling of one the other, then the
effect is equally imputable unto each, and consequently the sin (For such is
this Author's language in this Argument) is equally imputable to both, to God
as well as man; And he is to be accounted the Author of it, as well as man. I
appeal to every man's sober conscience that is able to judge indifferently
between us in this. But if to avoid this they deny that the concurrence is
equal, but that God's concurrence is conditional, to wit, in case the
creature will, and so man is to be accounted the Author of sin, and not God,
hence it follows, that seeing God's concurrence unto the act of faith and
repentance is of the same nature in the opinion of these men; God is not the
Author of faith and repentance any more, then he is the Author of sin, in
the language of these disputers. Or if they fly not to this, as I have found
this Author (as I guess) to deny God's concourse to stand in subordination to
man's, then my former argument is not avoided; But a third reason arises
herehence against his former discourse of God's concourse, namely, that if God
and man do equally concur unto the act of sin, then, as I have already
showed, that they are equally guilty of sin. So in the working of faith and
repentance man is as forward as God and as much the Author of his own fatih
and repentance as God is, in direct contradiction to the Apostle who says
that, Ephesians: 2. 8.
Faithis the gift of God and not of our selves. We willingly grant that God is
the principal agent in producing every act, whether it be natural or
supernatural For in him we move as Act: 17. 26.
well as in him we live and have our being But we deny sin, as sin, to be any
act but a privation of obedience to the law of God, as the Apostle defines it
to be (...), Yet let us examine that which he delivers of the principal agent,
and the texts produced by him, that we may not be carried away as he is with a
superficiary apprehension of things. And first consider) we might plead as well
for such acts as this Author calls sins, as he does for acts gracious by his
superficiary discourse. For does not Joseph comforting his brethren say unto
Gen: 45. 8.
them in like manner. Now then you sent me not hither, but God. But consider
farther in that passage alleged by him out of Mat: 10. 20. It is not ye that
speak but the spirit of my Father which speaks in you. Was not this speech of
the Apostles a free action? The labor of Paul more abundantly then of all the
rest of the Apostles, was it not a free action in Paul? ^f God determined the^
unto these actions, then freedom of will humane stands not in opposition to
determination divine; and consequently though the act be evil that is, done by
man; yet may God determine the creature to the doing of that act, without any
impeachment of the creatures liberty. If God did not determine the wills of his
Servants but only afford a simultaneous concourse to their actions, why is he
called the cause principal, since it is confessed, God does afford the like
concourse to every sinful act, as touching the substance thereof.

Again he repeates the same, when in case of divine determination, he says,
the sin cannot be so rightly ascribed to man's will the inferior, as to
God's necessitating decree, the superior cause. To which I answer again,
being drawn thereunto by his Tautologies; by the same reason it may be
inferred, that when the fire burns any combustible thing, the burning is
rather to be ascribed to God the more principal cause, then to the fire the
less principal, the first cause being more principal then the second and if
it please God so to order it, the fire shall not burn as it appears in the
three noble children cast into the furnace of Babylon, when they came forth
there was not so much as the smell of fire upon them. Secondly I answer as
before, by the same reason, when the concourse unto the sinful act is equal
on man's part, and on God's, each shall equally be accounted the Author of
that sin, and not man more then God; Now such a concourse is maintained by
this Author. Thirdly in the working of faith and repentance; since by these
men's opinions God affords only his concourse he shall be no more the Author of
man's faith and repentance then man himself is. Lastly be it granted that God
is a more principal cause then man in producing the act; yet there is no
color of imputing unto God the causality of the sin, who has no Agency
therein, by doing what he ought not to do, or not in that manner he should
do, this is found only in the creature, who being a free Agent, otherwise then
as original sin has impaired liberty, which I hope this Author will not
deny, is justly answerable for his own transgression. As for example, God
determined that Cyrus should give the Jews liberty to return into their own
land; yet this action of Cyrus was as free an action, as any that was performed
by him throughout his life. God determined that Josiah should burn the
Prophets bones upon the Altar at Bethel, yet Josiah did this as freely as ought
else: God determined that Christ's bones should not be broken, yet the
soldiers abstained from the breaking of his bones with as much liberty as
they had used, in case they had broken them. This divine providence we
willingly confess is very mysterious, and as Cajetan says the distinctions
used to accommodate it to our capacity do not quiet the understanding;
therefore he thought it his duty to captivate his into the obedience of faith.
And Alvarez in a solemn disputation proves that it is incomprehensible by the
wit of man.

4. His last is delivered most perplexedly. I can make no sense of it as the
words lie, but I see his meaning. He supposes that God by our Tenet makes a
man to sin willingly, and that he says is worse then to constrain a man to
sin against his will. Where observe how this man's spirit is intoxicated when
he delivered this. For first he calls that worse which is merely impossible,
and that by his own rules. For he holds that sin cannot be, except it be
voluntary, speaking of sin committed by any particular person. Secondly he
supposes that by our opinion God makes a man to sin, which is most untrue.
For when he acknowledges that no sin can be committed by man without God's
concourse; will he say that God by his concourse helps a man to sin? He helps
him to the producing of the act, not to the committing of the sin. And indeed
be the act never so virtuous, if it proceed not out of the love and fear of
God, it is no better then such as the Heathens performed; of which Austin has
professed that they were no better then splendida peccata glorious sins: So
that if God does not give a man these graces of his holy Spirit in every act
that is performed by him he shall sin, and not only in acts vicious; and God
is not bound to bestow these graces on any.

Section 9.
Sin may be considered as sin, or as a means of declaring God's justice in
men's punishments. God M. Mason's Addit. p. 37. 38.
does not predestiminate men to sin, as it is sin, but as a means of their
punishment. He is not therefore, say they, the Author of sin.

1. A good end cannot moralize a bad action; it remains evil though the end
be never so good Bonum oritur ex integris. ^end, manner, yea matter too must be
good, or else the action is naught. He that shall steal that he may give an
alms; or commit adultery, that he may beget Children for the Church; Or
oppress the poor to teach them patience, Or kill a wicked man that he may do
no more hurt with his example; or do any forbidden thing, though his end be
never so good, he sins notwithstanding. And the reason is because the evil
of sin is greater then any good that can come by sin; forasmuch as it is
laesio divinae majestatis, a wronging of God's majesty; and to Divino bono
opposita, directly prejudicial to the good of Almighty God as much as any
thing can be. This Saint Paul knew very well, and therefore he tells us
plainly that we must not do evil that good may come thereof. Whosoever
therefore wills sin, though for never so good an end, he wills that which
is truly and formally a sin, and consequently God, though he will sin for
never so good ends, yet willing it with such a powerful, and effectual will,
as gives a necessary being to it, he becomes Author of that which is
formally sin.

2. The members of this distinction are not opposite, for sin as sin, and
in no other consideration is means of punishment. If God therefore wills it
as a means of punishment, he wills it as a sin; his decree it determinated
at the the very formality of it.

3 This distinction fastneth upon God a further aspersion, and loadeth him with
three special indignities more.

1. Want of wisdom and providence. His counsels must needs be weak if he can
find out no means to glorify justice, but by the bringing in of sin, which
his soul hates, into the world and appointing men to commit it, that so he
may maaifest justice in the punishment of it.

2. Want of sincerity and plain dealing with men. Tiberius as Suetonius
reports, having a purpose to put the two sons of Germanicus, Drusius and
Nero, to death used sundry cunning contrivances to draw them to revile him,
that reviling him they might be put to death; and herein is justly censured for
great hypocrisy. And so if God having appointed men by his absolute will to
inevitable perdition, do decree that they shall sin that so they may be
damned for those sins, which he decrees, and draws them into; he
dissembleth, because he slaughtereth them under pretext of justice for sin,
but yet for such sins only as he has by his eternal counsel appointed as the
means of their ruin.

3. Want of mercy in an high degree, as if he did so delight in blood, that
rather then he will not destroy men's souls, he will have them live and dye in
sin, that he may destroy them, like to those Pagan Princes of whom Justin
Martyr Apol: 2, two or three leaves from the beginning says, They are afraid
that all should be just least they should have none to punish. But this is the
disposition of Hang-men rather then of Good Princes: And therefore far be
those foul enormities, and in particular this latter from the God of truth and
Father of mercies. And thus notwithstanding these distinctions, it is in my
conceit most evident that the rigid and upper way makes God the Author of men's
sins, as well as punishment. And so much for the first general inconvenience,
which arises from this opinion, namely the dishonor of God.

I willingly profess I am to seek what that Divine of ours is that says God
does predestinate men to sin, as a means of their punishment. Here this
Author is silent, names Answer.
no man, quotes no place; Like as in the former he carried himself in this
manner. The Ancients generally take predestination in no other notion, then to
be of such things which God himself did purpose to bring to pass by his own
operation, not of such things as come to pass by God's permission, Neither can
I call to remembrance any Divine of ours that talks of God's predestinating
men unto sin. But the Scripture affords plentiful testimony of God's will,
ordination, and determination, that the sins of men come to pass by God's
permission. Was it not God's will that Pharaoh's heart should be hardened, so
as not to let Israel go for a while, when he told Moses that he would harden
Pharaoh's heart that he should not let Israel go? Was it not God's appointment
that Absalom should lie with his fathers Concubines, when he denounced this
judgment against him, that he would give his wives unto his neighbor, who
should lie with them before the sun? Was it not his will that the ten tribes
should revolt from Rehoboam, when he protested of that business, that it was
from him? Was it not God's will that the Jews and Gentiles should concur in
crucifying Christ when the Apostles profess, that both Herod and
Pontius-Pilate, with the Gentiles, and people of Israel were gathered together
to do what God's hand and counsel had before determined to be done? Does not
Saint Peter profess of some that stu^bled at the word being disobedient, that
hereunto they were ordained? And Act: 4. 28. 1 Pet: 2. 8. Rev: 17. 17.
that the ten Kings in giving their Kingdoms to the beast did fulfill the
will of God, as touching this particular? But that God should will or ordain
it as a means of punishment, as if the end which God aimed at, were the
punishment, is so absurd and contradictious unto Scripture, that in my opinion
it cannot well enter into any judicious Divines heart so to conceive. And mark
how this Author shuffles herein: for first he says that sin may be considered
either as sin; or as a means of declaring God's justice in punishing it. And
why does he not keep himself unto this? especially considering, that not
permission of sin only, but the punishment of sin also are jointly the means
of declaring God's justice. And where King Solomon professes that God made the
very wicked against the day of evil, in the same place he manifests what is
the end of this; namely in saying that he made all things for himself, that is
for the manifestation of his own glory. And this glory is not only in the way
of justice; but in the way of mercy also; which this Author as his manner is,
very judiciously conceales; this attribute of mercy lying not so open to this
Authors evasion as that of justice. And is it possible God's mercy and the
demonstration thereof should have place where there is no sin? considering that
no other evil, or misery, had entered into the world, had it not been for sin,
according to that of the Apostle, By one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin. Neither are these generals the only end that God aimed at in
this, but many other particulars To: 5.
there are, whereby the glory of God's wisdom and power, and grace does
appear, by occasion of sins entrance into the world. The horrible facts of
Jews and Gentiles committed upon the person of the Son of God, were such as
whereby the Lord brought to pass the redemption of the world. if Christ had
not been crucified what satisfaction had been made for the sins of the world?
how could he have been set forth as a propitiation for our sins through faith
in his blood? and yet this is not all the glory of God that breaks forth by the
permission of sin. The punishment of one sin by another is an admirable work
of God's providence, and that more ways then one. For God can punish, and
does, one man by the sin of an other. The Assyrians and Babylonians committed
outrages enough upon the people of God, yet hereby the Lord was just in
punishing the sins of Esa: 10. Habak: 1.
his own people, Senacherib blasphemed the God of Israel, the creature his
Creator, most unnaturally, this unnaturallnes of his toward God, the Lord
avenged by the unnaturalness of his own children toward him: This was the
work of the Lord, as himself acknowledges. I will cause him to fall by the
sword in his own land. Man seeks the face of the Ruler, but every man's
judgment is of the Lord. Many unjust judgments have their course in Es: 37. 7.
Prove: 28.
the world, yet Solomon says, every man's judgment is from the Lord. It is
just with him to punish unjust courses with unjust courses, and there is mercy
in this; for no better way then this to bring men's former wicked courses to
their remembrance. As Adonibezek when the thumbs of his hands, and great toes
of his feet were cut off, then he remembered his former cruelty; and how that 70
Kings had eaten bread under his Table, having the thumbes of their hands and
feet cut off; And herein he acknowledged the just hand of God saying. As I have
done to others so has God done to me. And as many as will not in like manner
acknowledge the just hand of God in like cases, let them take heed lest
Adonibezek one day rise up in judgment against them. Thus it is just with God
by one sin of the same man to punish another. For because the Gentiles knowing
God, glorified him not as God, but were unthankful, turning the glory of the
incorruptible God into the Image of corruptible things, therefore the Lord gave
them up unto a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient.
Therefore God gave the^ up to vile affections. Therefore To: 1. 28. verse 26.
verse 24. verse 26.
God gave them up to their hearts lusts, unto uncleanes to defile their own
bodies between themselves. And what were these inconvenient things? what was
this uncleanes? Wherein consisted this, defiling of their bodies between
themselves? The text expresses it thus. For even their women changed the
natural use into that which is against nature. And likewise also the me^ left
the natural use of the women, and burned in their lust one toward another,
and man with man verse 27.
wrought filthiness. But was there any judgment of God to be observed in this?
The Apostle has discovered this also unto us in the words immediately
following thus, And they received in themselves such recompense of their error
as was meet; observe manifestly the just hand of God in all this. As for the
manner how God brought all this to pass, we answer with Austin, whether it be
modo explicabili, or inexplicabili, by a way that may be explicated by us, or
whether it be inexplicabile, the Apostle troubles not himself hereabout, his
care was only to show how great a judgment this was: and this is prosecuted
farther by Austin in the same place, Aug: contra Julian: Pelag. l. 5. cap: 3.
showing by variety of particulars, all taken out of the word of God; in the
place formerly quoted. Neither is this all the glory of God that co^es to be
manifested by the permission of sin. For he knows not only how to judge one sin
by another, but to heal one sin by Lib. 5 cont. Jul. Pelag: cap 3.
another also. Audeo dicere, says Austin, utile est superbis in aliquod
apertum manifestumque cadere peccatum, that so they may be humbled and brought
to sobriety, and pass the time of sojourning here with greater care and fear.
Now consider in how hungry a manner this Author sets down our tenet
concerning God's providence in willing, and decreeing, that sin shall come to
pass in the world by his permission; when he talks of sin being a means of
punishment, a most absurd expression, both in a sinister stating of the end,
punishment not being the end, but a means coordinate to an other end, to wit,
the manifestation of God's glory, who has made all things for himself, that
is for the setting forth of his own glory; as also in a sinister stating the
end, sin being not a means (as most absurdly he styles it) but a meritorious
cause of punishment: Like as in reference to the manifestation of his glory, it
is not the means, but the material cause thereof, But the permission of sins,
that and not sin is the means together with the punishment thereof, tending to
the manifestatio^ of God's glory in the way of justice? 1. A good end cannot
moralize a bad actio^. We grant it. But seeing it is impossible that the divine
hand can do any bad action, the end of his actions is sufficient to justify
his courses. For as Aquinas has delivered; God's wisdom is his justice. For
he is a debtor to none but to himself; and how to himself? Not otherwise then
in all things which he does, to carry himself so as it becomes himself;
Aquia: q: 23. de volunt. Dei arti^. 6.
that is to order every thing to a right end, which is only the manifestation
of his own glory. For himself is most lovely; and it is his nature to be most
loving of that which is most lovely. Now to order all things aright to their
congruous ends, is the part of wisdom. And see how extravagant this Author is
in evey one of his instances. For to steal, to commit adultery, to oppress,
to kill, is to sin, and in willing any of these, a man wills his own sin.
But the Argument we treat of, is of God's willing the sins of others; as when
God's hand and his counsel determined that those things should be done, which
by Herod, Pontius-Pilate, the Gentiles, and people of Israel were committed
against the holy Son of God; and when the Kings gave their kingdoms to the
beast herein they are said to do the will of God and when every man's judgment
is said to come from the Lord; not only judgment just, but even judgments
unjust to wit, of men, yet God has a just hand in plaguing others by the^; man
ought not to do evil that good may come thereof; but God's willing it to come
to pass by his permission is no evil at all; Nay it is good; nor so only, but
the thing willed by him is good by the confession of Bellarmine, even then when
he is opposing us in this very argument; Malum fieri Deo permittente bonum est,
it is good that evil should come to pass by God's permission: And it was
avouched by Austin many hundred years before Bellarmine was borne. And he
professes that God would never have suffered sin to have entered into the
world, had he not known that it appertained to his almighty goodness, rather
to work good out of evil, then not at all to suffer evil. Compare the
judgment of Austin with the judgment of this Author, and consider whether they
differ not as much as light and darkness. And what wisdom were it for God to
permit sin (when it is in his power to hinder it, as this Author
acknowledges in the sixth Section) if it be a greater evil. (and that to God,
as it appears by his expression of it, Laesio divinae majestatis, the hurt of
the Divine majesty) then the good that can come thereby can be? So that the
crucifying of Christ was greater in the kind of evil, then the redemption of
the world that came thereby, was in the kind of good. No man of common
discretion will permit ought (if it lie in his power to hinder it) to his own
disadvantage, unless he can make thereby, not only an equal advantage, but a
greater. But let us farther consider the superficiary speculation of this
Divine, more becoming children in the Church of God then a grave and learned
Divine. Sin, he says, is laesio Divinae majestatis, the wronging of the
Divine majesty; but in what sense I pray? Is God any thing the worse for any
man's disobedience, and transgression of God's law? Surely like as he is no way
advantaged by our obedience, so is he as little disadvantaged by our
disobedience. Yet I affect not to carry that I deliver by the authority of mine
own bare word, which is this Authors course most usually; I represent
Scripture for it. If thou sinnest, what do thou against him; yea when thy
sins are many, what do thou unto him? If thou be righteous what give thou
him, or Job: 36. 6. verse 7. verse 8.
what receives he at thy hands? Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art,
and thy rightousnesse may profit a Son of man. And in reason, look of what
nature the benefit is that redounds from the creature unto God, of the like
nature is the detrement. Now God by making the world acquires no internal
perfection unto himself, but only makes his glorious nature known, and
accordingly if the world should have an end, this manifestation should cease;
but his glorious nature should still continue the same. And as he manifests his
glory by the world, so some creatures he has made intelligent, fit to take
notice of his glory, and accordingly requires at their hands they should
acknowledge it, and that not in word only, but by their dutiful obedience; and
that for the farther manifestation of his glory, to their good and wonderful
happiness, if they obey; and their extreme sorrow and misery, if they continue
rebellious against him. So that whereas the end of all God's actions being but
the manifestatio^ of his glory, he does not loose so much as this, by the sins
of men; For he can glorify himself in their just destruction; Nay he can
manifest his glory another way; namely both the glory of his mercy in pardoning
their contempt of his majesty done unto him; which men so proud many times they
are, can hardly do; but in such a case prove implacable. Likewise of his grace
in curing it, as also his power and wisdom in procuring a strange
satisfaction to be made for it in a wonderful manner, and that by his own
blood; That so way may be made for the manifestation of his, not royal only,
but Divine magnificence in bestowing the kingdom of Act: 20. 28.
heaven upon them. So far is he from being any way hurt by the sins of men in
any true real account. And accordingly as he permits sins daily; so he offers
his free grace daily for the pardon of them; and to this tended the daily
sacrifice among the Jews, of a lamb every morning and a lamb every evening.
But why then is sin, said to be laesio Divinae majestatis? I answer this is
to be understood not of any hurt done to his majesty in it self, but as in the
minds of men, who hereby manifest their contempt of the divine majesty. And
they that do contemn him would put him out of his throne if they could, and
wish that there were no God; and the fool would feign bring his heart about to
think so. But though earthly Kings may be dethroned and sometimes have been,
yet he that sits in heaven laughs all them to scorn that rise up against
him. And bids the potsheard strive Es: 45. 9.
with his follow potsheards, not with his maker. Who will set the thorns and
briars against me in battles I would go through them and burn them together.
For God is a consuming fire. It is true Es: 27. 4. Heb: 12. 29. Zeph: 3. 5
we must neither do evil that good may come thereof; nor permit it neither, if
itlye in our power to hinder it. God neither will do any iniquity nor ca^ do,
but yet is lawful for him to permit evil that good may come thereof. Yea and
will, or decree that evil shall come to pass by his permission, as I have
proved at large in a digression to this purpose and therewithal discovered the
Sophistical arguments of Aquinas, and Durandus, to the contrary, not to speak
of Valentianus; not one part of all which large digressio^ do I find a^swered
by this Author. I have often alleged pregnant passages of Scripture to this
purpose and; Arminius confesses expressly that God would have Ahab to fill up
the measure of his sin; which could not be done but by adding sin unto sin; Yet
this is made the object of God's by Arminius. This will of God to have sin
come to pass by his permission, is effectual. For whenever God permits it,
it comes to pass, as both Arminius and Vorstius acknowledge, not Piscator
only: And amongst Papists Navarettus and Alvarez as before I have showed; Yet
God has no efficiencie in the sin, but only in the act whereunto sinfulness
adheres; and the saying of Austin is well known. Non aliquid fit, nisi
omnipotens fieri velit; Not any thing comes to pass, but that which God will
have come to pass. And the eleaventh Article of Ireland is most express for
this. I am driven to repeat the same things often; this Authors frequent
Tautologies urge me thereunto.

2. Though the members be not opposite it matters not; it is sufficient they
are disparate; the purpose of it being to show, not that God does not will sin,
but only to show under what notion he wills it. Yet it is false and absurd to
say that sin is a means of punishment. For to him it belongs to work the
means, who intends the end, but sin, as sin, is no work of God; but the
permission of it is his work, and his means, not to this end that he may
punish it, but he does both permit it and punish it for the manifestation of
his glory in the way of justice, like as he does also permit sin in others,
not to pardon it; but he both permits sin, and pardons it to manifest his
glory in the way of mercy.

3. I come to the consideration of the special indignities wherewith God is
loaded by this our doctrine as this Author pretends.

1. And indeed is God's wisdom and providence so strong, as that he is able
to find means to glorify his justice without the permitting of sin? (For
God has no other hand in sin as sin, but of permission; to the substance
of the act he cooperates as a cause efficient, as all confess.) For of what
justice do we treat in this argument? Is it of justice remunerative, or
justice vindicative? Was it ever heard that permission of sin was required to
make way for God's justice remunerative? Or is it possible that way can be made
for the manifestation of Gods justice vindicative (in Scripture called God's
wrath) unless sin be permitted to enter? For though he hates Rom: 9. 2 3.
it; yet this Author confesses that God permits it, as without whose
permission it could not enter into the world. Sect: 6. In the last place this
Author helps himself with a phrase of God's appointing men to commit it,
which he obtrudes upon us thinking to make the balance on his part the
heavier, not considering that words are but wind. We say the horrible outrages
committed upon our Savior, God foredetermined to be done; And told David that
he would give his wives unto his neighbor, who should lie with them before the
Sun; And that it was his will that the Kings should give their Kingdom to the
Beast; this we deliver according to God's word; whereas all this our opposit's
discourse is quite besides the word of God; as if he would have us take his
absurd conceits in steed of oracles. And does he not know that Austin sometimes
said that, Judas electus est ad prodendum sanguinem Domini, Judas was chosen to
betray his Master? Or will he answer that he was the first that said so?

2. To the second I have already answered, and that at large in my answer to M.
Hoord, in the preface and second Section. There I have showed how that it was
merely devislish policy in Tiberius to move him to take this course, to make
way for a grand child of his own, to bring him to the imperial throne, This
moved him to seek the death of Germanicus his two Sons, whom Augustus made him
to adopt as successors in the empire, and lest the putting of them to death
without cause might provoke the people to mutiny against him; therefore by
cunning contrivances he caused them to be provoked to revile him, that so he
might have some cause to justify his destroying of them; which yet he did not
by any public execution; he was loath to come to that for fear of raising
some tumult thereby; Fame necavit, he famished them. Now how has Satan
possessed the heart of this unhappy Divine thus to blaspheme the holy one of
Israel by comparing his ways to these abominable courses of Tiberius, not
fearing lest his tongue rot in his head while he is uttering of them? Cannot
God take the life of any man from him, be he never so innocent, and that what
way he will, even by punishment, if it please him? For is it not of God's mere
mercy that he promises, Not to famish the soul of the rightous? As for
provoking courses, is it not apparent by these our opposites confession, that
to all the provoking courses in the world God does concur, and that as an
efficient cause of every action? And accordingly he did concur with these
provoking courses used by Tiberius. And did not God profess that he would
provoke the Israelites by a foolish people, and by a foolish nation he would
anger them? How did Shimei provoke David by railing upon him; And how did David
interpret it, The Lord, says he, has bid him to curse David? Not that he gave
any such command in proper speech, but by his secret providence brought this to
pass, using to this purpose the vicious disposition which he found in Shimei,
but caused it not. And observe what Austin speaks in the like case of his
mother Monica exercised with the opprobrious speeches of her servant, Quid
egisti Deus meus? unde curasti? unde sanasti? Nonne protulists durum and acutum
ex altera anima convitium tanquam medicinale ferrum ex occultis provisionibus
tuis, and uno ictu putredinem illam praecidisti? My God what did thou? how
did thou cure her? how recover her? Did thou not bring forth an harsh
and sharp reproach out of an others heart as a medicinal instrument in thy
secret providence, and with one stroke pared away all that rottenesse? Thus
Adonibezek when his thumbes and great toes were cut off by his enemies, he
acknowledged that God had done to him, as he had done to others. And Solomon
testifies that, every man's judgment comes of the Lord. If every man's
judgment, then surely unjust judgments and not just only. And although they are
unjust as they proceed from man; yet are they just as they proceed from God.
Like as the parricide of Adramelech and Sharezer committed upon their Father
Senacherib, the Lord takes unto himself when he says, I will cause him to
fall by the sword in his own land. Yet what was David the worse for Shimei's
cursing; neither would he thereby be Es: 37. 38. 7.
urged to requite evil for evil upon his subjects; the more inexcusable were
the Sons of Germanicus for reviling their Prince Tiberius, though never so much
provoked thereunto. Neither was this fact of Tiberius a fruit of Hypocrisy,
which is the counterfeiting of holiness, justice was pretended indeed not
holiness and that through fear. For the wicked man is continually as one
traveling with child, A sound of fear is in his ears. The cunning
contrivances Job 15. 20. 21
that Tiberius used are specified by this Author, but he does not specify the
cunning contrivances that God uses by our opinion, as he obtrudes upon us
Belike he was to seek of the^, yet we express God's providence herein by no
other terms then the word of God it self does suggest unto us; Namely of
blinding the mind, of giving over to strong illusions, of hardening the heart,
of giving over unto their hearts lusts, unto vile affections, unto a Reprobate
mind. To all which is required no other thing then the not curing of that
natural corruption, and habitual vicious disposition which is found in the
wicked whether in the way of luxury, or in the way of uncharitableness, and
malice; or in the way of ambition and pride. And secondly the administration of
congruous occasions unto this their corrupt disposition, which Arminius
himself confesses to be the work of God's providence in his Theses of
providence, and which in Scripture phrase is styled the leading into
temptation; against which our Savior taught his disciples to pray. Thirdly the
giving them over to the power of Satan. And lastly God's general concourse in
moving all creatures to work agreably to their natures, necessary things
necessarily; contingent Agents contingently; and free Agents freely. But my
answer to this I have prosecuted at large in more sheets then here are leaves
in my answer to M. Hoord.

3. As for want of mercy, we willingly confess according to the tenor of
God's word (as this Author delivers himself without all respect thereunto)
that God shows no mercy in hardening them. For to harden in Scripture phrase is
opposite to God's showing mercy. And as he is bound to none; so he professes
that, He will show mercy on whom he will show mercy, and will have compassion
on whom he will have compassion. And this the Ex: 33. 19.
Apostle takes hold of in prosecuting the doctrine of election and concludes
from hence in part, and in part from God's hardening of Pharaoh, that God has
mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens, by hardening meaning such
an operation, the consequence Rom: 9. 18.
whereof is always disobedience; as appears by the objection derived
therehence in the words following; Thou will say then why does he yet
complain? (now he complains only of disobedience) For who has resisted his
will? Manifestly implying that when God hardens man unto disobedience, it is
his secret will that he shall disobey. Like as when God hardened Pharaoh that he
should not let Israel go; It was God's secret will that he should not let
Israel go for a good while: Secret I say in distinction from the will of
command, which is always made known to them who are commanded. But it pleased
the Lord to make this will of his known to Moses, though it was kept secret
from Pharaoh; yet afterward he told Pharaoh to his face by his servant Moses
saying. And indeed for this cause have I appointed thee to show my power in
thee, and to declare my name to all the world; though Pharaoh believed it not
as appears by that which follows; yet thou exaltest thy self against me,
and let them not go. But this Author together with M. Hoord goes by
other rules, which his own fancy suggest's unto him, he will have God's love
and mercy extended to all and every one, Christ's redemption to extend to all
and every one; the Covenant of grace to comprehend all and every one; and upon
these universalities he grounds his transcendent consolations; whence it comes
to pass, that Abraham the father of the faithful, was of no more comfortable
condition, then the grand Signior among the Turks: And the grand Siginior had
as good grounds of consolation as Abraham himself. Yet this not showing of
mercy on the vessels of wrath prepared unto destruction tends to the greater
demonstration of his mercy on the vessels of mercy prepared unto glory: As the
Apostle testifies To: 9. 23. And let this Author tell Saint Paul if he thinks
good, That this is the disposition of hang-men rather then of good Princes. And
this is the perpetual tenor of this Author's discourse to conform God's
courses to the conditions of courses humane. Man is bound to show mercy on all;
God is not. God is free to pardon whom he will, man is not. If we permit men to
sin in case we can hinder them, we shall be guilty with them, but how
innumerable are the sins committed in the world, which if God would hinder
could never be committed? As Austin discourses lib. 5. contra Julian: Pelag:
cap. 4 In nothing did Nero's cruelty show it self more, then in prolonging the
lives of men, that he might torment them the more. What then? Shall we tax God
for cruelty in keeping men's bodies and souls alive for ever in hell fire to
torment them everlastingly without end? See what a door of blasphemy is opened
against the just God that will do no iniquity, by this Author's unshamefast
discourse. Zeph: 3. 5.


By this let the indifferent Reader judge of this Author's present
performance, and withal take notice of that which himself has dissembled all
along touching his own tenet; namely that of every sinful act committed by the
creature, God is the efficient cause, as touching the substance of the act, as
for the sinfulness thereof we hold it impossible that God can have any agency
at all therein, or any culpable deficiency; forasmuch as he neither does ought
which he should not do, or after what manner he should not, nor leaves undone
ought which he should do, or after what manner he should do, all which are
incident to the creature who is subject to a law; but not at all to the
Creator who gives laws to others, but himself works according to the
counsel of his own will in all things. The sum is, whatsoever we deliver as
touching God's secret providence in evil, we have express scripture for us,
nothing but pretense of carnal reason against us; which when it comes to be
examined, is found subject to manifest contradiction, both as touching their
feigning things future without the decree of God; And as touching their
conditional decrees, and conditional concurrences; ours is not in any
particular; The greatest show of contradiction on our parts is in the point of
necessity and liberty; Now to clear this, as others, have taken pains, so
have I in my Vindiciae proving diverse and sundry ways, that these two do
amically conspire, to wit, the Lib. 2. digr: 5
necessity being only upon supposition; the liberty and contingency simply so
called; only it is not to be expected that there should be no difference
between the liberty of the creatures, and the liberty of God the Creator; Or
that the creature in her operation should be exempt from the operation of God;
The second cause exempt from the motion of the first; whereunto this Author
addresseth not the least answer. As for the difference which this Author puts
between the upper way and the lower in making God the Author of sin; compare
this with Arminius his profession; Namely that the same twenty reasons which he
objected against the upper way, may all of them be accommodated against the
lower way, all of them admitting of the same distinctions (which this Author
invades) to clear God from being the Author of sin.

The second inconvenience.
Section 1.
The second inconvenienceis the overthrow of true religion and good government
among men. To this, this opinion seems to tend for these reasons. M. Mason's
Addit. page, 38. 39, 40.


1. Because it makes sin to be no sin indeed, but only in opinion. We use
to say necessity has no law; creatures or actions in which necessity bears
sway are without saw; Lions are not forbidden to prey, birds to fly, fishes to
swim, or any bruit creatures to do according to their kinds, because their
actions are natural and necessary; they cannot upon any admonition do
otherwise. Among creatures endued with reason and liberty, laws are given to
none, but such as can use their principles of reason and freedom: Fools,
madmen, and children are subject to no law, because they have no liberty. To
men that can use their liberty, laws are not given neither, but in those
actions which are voluntary. No man is forbidden to be hungry, thirsty, weary,
sleepy, to weep, tolaugh, to love or to hate; because these actions and
affections are natural and necessary; the will may govern them, but it cannot
suppress them.

And so, if to deal justly, to exercise charity etc. with their contraries, be
absolutely, and antecedently necessary too, whether this necessity flow from a
principal within, or a mover without, we are as lawless in these and in the
other.

Now if necessity has no law^, then actions in themselves evil, if under the
dominion of absolute necessity are transgressions of no law and consequently no
sins. For sin is a transgression of the law.

This that I say has been said long ago. For Justin Martyr speaking against
destiny has these words, 1 Jo: 3. 4.
If it be by destiny (that is by absolute necessity; For that the Fathers do
generally call by the name of destiny;) that men are good or bad, they are
indeed neither good nor bad. A speech like to this he has a little Apol: 2. a
little beyond the middle.
after. It would seem, if this be so, that virtue and vice are nothing, but
things are judged to be good or bad by opinion only, which, as good reason
teaches, is very great injustice and impiety. And surely well might he say so.
For to what purpose was the Son of God made man, and being man made a sacrifice
for sin? Why was the ministry of the word and Sacraments ordained? To what
end are heaven and hell propounded? Why are exhortations, disswasions, or any
other means to hinder men from sin applied, if sin be nothing, but a mere
opinion?

Christ, the Christian faith, the word and Sacraments, and whatsoever according
to the Scriptures has been done for the applying of the pardon of sin, are
all but mere fables, nay very impostures, if sin be nothing. And by
consequence it is no matter at all, whether men be Christians, Jews, Turks,
or Pagans, of what religion, or whether of any religion at all. Now whether
tends this, but to the ovethrow of religion?

2. Because it takes away the conscience of sin. Why should men be afraid of
any sin that pleases or may profit them, if they must needs sin? Or what
reason have they to weep and mourn when they have sinned, seeing they have not
sinned truly, because they sinned necessarily?

The Tragedian says, when a man sins, his destiny must bear the blame.
Necessity freeth him from Fati ista culpa est: Nemo fit faio nocens.
all iniquity. Sins are either the faults of that irresistible decree that
causes them, or no faults at all. If either; then sorrow, fear, or any other
act of repentance whatsoever, may as well be spared as spent. This conceit
being once drunk in, religion cannot long continue; For the affections have
been the strongest planters, and are the surest upholders of it in the world.
Primus in orb Deos fecit timot.

I come to the consideration of the second inconvenience wherewith our doctrine
is Answer.
charged; And that is nothing inferior to the former; to wit, The overthrow of
true religion and good government among'st men. With what judgment these are
termed inconvenices I am to seek, and I wonder what mischeifes are greater
then these inconveniences; But I come to consider how well he makes good his
charge.

1. If sin be no sin certainly the opinion must be erroneous that
conceives it to be sin. I had thought there had been no predication more true
then that which is Identicall. We are taught that sin is a trangression of
God's law. That the wages of it, in the just judgment and decree of God is no
less then death even everlasting death, both of 1 Jo: 3. 4. To: 6. 23.
body and soul; That God sent his own Son, and made his soul an offering for
sin; that so he might set him forth a propitiation for our sins, through
faith in his blood. But let us Es: 53. v. 2. Co: 5. 21. To: 3. 25.
see this Author's reason to prove his crimimination. He begins with an
axiom, that, Necessity has no law; and hereupon he does expatiate with his
instances too too impertinently; a course which Bellarmine takes not, whom yet
I have answered on this very argument in my Vindiciae; least of all does he
offer to make any reply upon any parcel of my answer unto Bellarmine. Now this
axiom is not applied to Agents unreasonable, but only reasonable, by them who
treat thereof. As in case a man be driven to steal, to relieve natural
necessity; yet all confess that a man is not only unexecusable, but also not
to be pitied, if he has brought this necessity upon him; And never any sober
man that I know, denied stealth to be a free action, for all this. It is true
Lions are not forbidden to prey, nor fishes to swimne, nor bruit creatures to
do according to their kind. For they are unreasonable, and consequently not
capable of command, otherwise then by spur, or goad, or the like; nor capable
of admonition, in like sort, children before they come to the use of reason are
not capable, of admonition As neither mad men are, nor fools, such as we call
natural; But this Author is none such. For then his wit would not serve him
for opposition as it does. It is true likewise, that as man is made after the
Image of God, not as touching his part vegetative; nor as touching his part
sensitive; but only as touching his part reasonable, consisting of an
understanding, whereby he is enabled to know his superiors, and their
commands, and admonitions; and of a will whereby he is able to perform
obedience both inward and outward, it having command over all parts of the body
to set them in motion; whereupon if their Lord command them to come they come,
if to go they go, if to do this they do it; As the Centurion signified, to
our Savior the readiness of his servants to do their Masters commands.

At length he comes to conclude that, if to deal justly, to exercise charity
etc. with their contraries be absolutely and antecedently necessary too,
whether this necessity flow from a principle within or a mover without, we are
as lawless in these as in the other, by these he means acts of the soul
rational; by the other, he means acts of the soul vegetative, or sensitive.
Now we utterly deny that any of these are absolutely necessary; Nay we deny
that any thing is of absolute necessity, but the being of the Divine nature;
and the internal emanations thereof which constitute the distinction of
persons in the Trinity. For albeit some Agents created are Agents necessary,
working necessarily; yet the works which they bring forth are not of absolute
necessity, because they may be hindered in their operations; either by Angels
as some of them; or at least by the power of God, all of them. And as there are
necessary Agents working necessarily; so there are free Agents working
contingently and freely; as Angels and men. And albeit a question may be made
as touching acts supernatural, whether the creature has any free power to
perform them freely; such as are the acts of the three Theological virtues,
faith, hope, and charity, and none other, (which yet we do not deny, but grant
upon the infusion of a supernatural principle into our souls, which we count
formally the life of grace; the cause whereof we take to be the Spirit of God
given unto us, and dwelling in our hearts;) yet there deserves to be no
question, but that as touching all actions of moral virtues, and of the
contrary vicious actions, that there is a free power in man to perform them
naturally; until such time as by a vicious disposition, procured by a custom
in vicious courses a man is habitually inclined unto evil; whereby he is made
a slave to vice, and thereby has deprived himself of a moral liberty unto
actions virtuous. For like as a man holding a stone in his hand has power to
throw him or no, or to throw him which way he will; but as soon as he has
thrown him out of his hand; it is no longer free unto him whether he will
throw it or no. In like manner before a vicious habit contracted, man has
freedom moral unto actions virtuous, but not after. This is the doctrine of
Aristotle, and thus he illustrates it. For certainly the habit of virtue is
not an indifferent power Eth: l. 3. 5.
to do an act virtuous or vicious, but it is a moral propension and
inclination only to acts virtuous. So is the habit of justice a moral
propension and inclination to perform only that which is just. The like may be
said of every moral virtue in special. How much more does supernatural grace
consist not in a power to believe, if a man will, to love God if he will, to
hope and wait for the joys of heaven if he will, and if he will to refuse to
perform any of these acts, but rather an holy and heavenly habit, or weight
wrought in the soul of man, moving and swaying it only to gracious acts
pleasing and acceptable in the sight of God, which indeed constitutes a
spiritual liberty from sin, and makes a man become the holy servant of God,
willing to receive direction from him, and delighting to be ordered by him in
all our ways. On the other side with out grace a man is left in that natural
corruption wherein he was conceived and borne, which makes him a slave to sin
and a vassal to Satan led captive by him to do his will. Yet not withstanding
there remains in every one his natural liberty still, which consists only in
Ephesians: 2. 2. 2 Timothy: 2. last.
the choice of means conducing to man's end; whereas moral virtue and grace
do order the will a right toward aright end; moral virtues according to the
knowledge natural which he has of his right end natural, grace according to
the knowledge supernatural, which a man has of his right end supernatural,
which is to be rightly disposed and ordered toward God his maker; So that this
natural liberty still continues the same; As for example, he that it virtuous
so far forth as he is virtuous, continues still free; not as freedom
signifies an indifferency to perform an act virtuous vicious, but being
thereby disposed only to virtuous actions, he is free whether to exercise this
or that virtuous act, according to occasions offered; or in the same kind of a
virtuous disposition; whether he will do this or that in particular, as to
give in such a proportion, or in such a season, or to such or such persons, in
all which being of a virtuous disposition he is ready to receive directions
from the dictates of recta ratio, right reason, otherwise called wisdom. In
like manner a vicious person still keeps his natural liberty, though he has
lost his moral, and is become Servus tot dominorum, quot vitiorum, a slave to
so many Lords as there are vices in him, as Austin somewhere speaks. I say he
keeps still his natural liberty. For let him be a Robber, he still continues
free to make choice of his accomplices, of places wherein to lie in wait for his
prey, of weapons, and the like. Let him be an impure person, still he
continues free to choose whom he will corrupt, to contrive what course he
thinks best for the satisfaction of his lusts. Let him be covetuous or
ambitious, still he contintinueh free to make choice of the means conducing to
the end obtained by him. In like sort let him be regenerate, a child of God; by
this spirit of regeneration he is moved only to do those things which are
pleasing to his heavenly father, but still his natural liberty continues the
same, as whether to exercise the grace which God has given him in one kind or
in another, or in the same kind in what particular he thinks good. If he thinks
good to pray, it is free to him to fall upon the confession of his sins, or
upon thanksgiving, or upon supplication, and that either for blessings
temporal, and the releife of his natural necessities; or for grace, and the
relief of necessities spiritual; or to exercise himself in every kind of
these, and that in what order he thinks good. So likewise if he give himself
to meditation, and make choice of what matter he thinks good, as also of time
and place, in all this he is free. None of all these distinctions does this
Author take notice of, but hand over head talks of freedom to perform,
either acts vicious, or virtuous; whereas the virtuous man's will, as he is
virtuous, is inclined to virtuous courses alone; and the vicious man, as he is
vicious, is inclined to vicious courses alone, and not to virtuous. And it was
wont to be said, that, Habitus agunt ad modum naturae, habit's (whether
virtuous or vicious) they work after the manner of nature, that is naturally
and necessary, as before I have declared of a moral necessity, which still
consists with a natural liberty; either in virtuous, or vicious exercises to
make choice of particulars in respect of all variety of circumstances,
according as their reason suggests unto them in the use of means conducent to
the end intended, whether that end be good or bad. No dominion of absolute
necessity in all this; Much less is any man good by absolute necessity but by
freedom of will accustoming himself unto good actions according to the
dictates of reason. But a man that is dead in sin has no power to regenerate
himself; this work of regeneration is wrought merely by the power of God:
Like as the raising of a man from death to life, whereunto it is often compared
in holy Scripture, as also to creation; And by regeneration we are said to be
made new creatures, now as God works this in time, so from everlasting he did
decree to work it; and it was wont to be the general Tenet of Protestant
Divines in opposition unto Papists, that a man in his first conversion is
merely passive, in which particular Roffensis a Popish Bishop about an hundred
years ago opposed Martin Luther. As for a sinful or a vicious act, that is
always an act natural; For acts supernatural can neither be vicious, nor
sinful; but merely gracious. And all confess that as all men have natural
power to perform any act natural, so have they power also to abstain from
it. Only until a man is regenerate he cannot but sin; yea though he do that
which is good as touching the substance of the act, or abstain from that which
is evil in like manner; yet can he not perform the one or abstain from the
other in a gracious manner, Therefore you hear not God's word, says our
Savior to the Jews, because ye are not of God. They that are in the flesh
cannot please Io: 8. Rom: 8.
God, That all men are cast into a necessity of sinning, both Arminius and
Corvinus confess, as formerly I have showed. And Doctor Potter acknowledges
it the doctrine of the Church of England, that no natural man has libertatem
a peccato, though forthwith he nicks it, in saying they have libertatem a
necessitate, not explicating it that so he might clear himself from
contradiction, whereas Doctor Fulke usually puts the distinction between
liberty from sin, and liberty from coaction, and denying the former unto a
natural man, he grants the latter.

Now truly this Theologue takes very profitable pains to prove that sin is
not nothing; and exuberates in the proof hereof to the very solid conviction
of all those that imagine it to be nothing, if there be any such creatures in
terra Australi incognita, which is not very likely; but rather in the Lunary
world, or in the Joviall world which is waited upon with four moons, as they
that came lately from the discovery thereof, have made report unto us. But by
the way, I hope he does not juggle with us, and under color of making sin to
be some thing, labor to draw us to an acknowledgment that it is some positive
thing, as Doctor Iackson in his last book the 8th, as I take it of his
Commentaries upon the Creed labors to prove with great strength of
affections; Like as in the same vigor of resolution he professes that whether
God punishes sin necessarily or no it is not determinable by the wit of man;
but he is not over prodigal of his reasons for either. We are very willing to
grant that every sin as sin is something privative, and as touching the act
substrate, it is something positive also; And when the Apostle defines sin by
(...) if in that word the first letter be (...) privative, clearly the form
of sin is made to consist in privation, as much as to say an incongruity to the
law of God; that is a privation of congruity thereunto. Now we are come to an
end of this, let me admonish the Reader of the wisdom of this Author; All
along; he supposes that by our doctrine sin comes to pass by absolute
necessity, this I say he supposes, he proves it not, though we utterly deny,
that any such necessity is consequent to our doctrine. And this himself knows
full well. Alvarez, who maintains that God determines the creatures will to
every act thereof, even to the act of sin, utterly denies that any absolute
necessity of humane acts follows hereupon; or any necessity that stands in
contradiction to humane liberty. Bradwardine also sometime Archbishop of
Canterbury elect maintains, that God necessitates the will to every act
thereof, yet denies peremptorily that humane acts comes to pass by absolute
necessity, or by any necessity that stands in opposition to the liberty of the
creature; Only he says that some kind of necessity, and that antecedent may
well consist with the liberty of the creature. All this, this Author knows; yet
takes no pains to disprove their tenet, or answer any one of their arguments;
no nor to make good his own consequence, which is the only thing we deny in
this present argument of his. As for the other part, namely that in case sin
come to pass by absolute necessity, and without any free will in the creature,
then sin is no sin, which no man denies; This he proves at large, or at
least illustrates at large. Secondly observe he talks of things necessarily
coming to pass, not only absolutely but antecedently; whereby he seems to
grant that sins may come to pass necessarily, but not so absolutely as
antecedently, and takes no pains to explicate these his distinctions. And in
my judgment they have more need of explication, as they are accommodated to
sins coming to pass in the world, then as they are acommodated to the
eveniency of faith and repentance; Yet I imagine this word Antecedently is
brought in of purpose in reference to good actions rather then in reference
unto evil. And whether he will have this term Antecedently to be an addition
to the former term Absolutely, or only of equivalent force, I know not. But it
is the common course of these men to confound their Reader with terms proposed
without all explication. But let us endeavor to boult out the meaning of these
perplexed discourses as well as we can. Will this Author have says to come to
pass necessarily and that absolutely, but not antecedently? Or will he have
faith to come to pass necessarily, but not absolutely and antecedently? or
will he have faith come to pass not necessarily at all: If not at all
necessarily to what purpose does he clog his Reader with such unnecessary
complements, of absolutely and antecedently? If God decrees to bestow faith
upon a man, does it not, necessarily follow hereupon that such a one shall
believe? dares this Author deny it? Yet we account not this absolutely
necessary, but merely upon supposition. Neither does God's decree impose
necessity upon all things; as Aquinas has long ago disputed and proved; but
only upon some things; that is that some Agents shall work necessarily; other
Agents contingently and freely. In a word God both decrees things to come to
pass and the manner of them also; that is that some things shall come to pass
necessarily, other things contingently and freely. But God's decree, we say, is
absolute not conditional, of giving faith. And indeed all his decrees are
absolute as touching the act of God willing; as Bradwardine has demonstrated
by clear reason; and Piscator out of the word of God. But the decree of giving
faith is not absolute only as touching the act of God decreeing, but as
touching the thing decreed. For faith is not given by God to any upon a
condition to be performed by man; For if it were, then faith should be given
according unto works, that is, grace should be conferred according to men's
works. And when I consider this Author's compounding of these terms
absolutely, and antecedently, I begin to suspect that like as then a thing
comes to pass antecedently, when it comes to pass by an Antecedent decree in
this Author's language, (though most absurd.) So in his language, the things
are said to come to pass by absolute necessity, when they come to pass by an
absolute decree; the decree in his opinion being sufficient to make a thing
come to pass necessarily; and an absolute decree to make it come to pass
absolutely necessarily. This undoubtedly is his meaning, upon which I am
stu^bled are I am aware. Now let the sober Reader judge how far these odd
conceits are from all sobriety. Did not God decree to make the world, nay did
he not absolutely decree this and antecedently, not conditionally and
consequently? What therefore will it here-hence follow that the world had it is
existence necessarily, and that by the way of absolute necessity? I had thought
this had been the peculiar and incommunicable perfection of God himself,
namely to exist necessarily, and that in the way of absolute necessity. As for
all other things which are but God's creatures, they have only a contingent
existence derived originally from the free will of God the Creator. For this I
take to be the transcendent perfection of God, To be most necessarily; to work
most freely; Necessity and that absolute, being the greatest perfection of
being: So that Bradwardine conceives this to be the prime and original
perfection of God, esse necessario, to be necessarily. On the other side
freedom in the highest kind, is the greatest perfection (...) operation; and
God alone so works, as without subordination to any superior Agent; but no
creature, man or Angel so works, as without subordination to God the first
Agent, the first cause, the first free worker. Now I come (...) the second
particular of this second inconvenience. 2. And that is that our doctrine
takes away the conscience of sin; and this we willingly grant is consequent
upon the former. For if sin be no sin, there is no cause why any man should
be troubled with the conscience of sin. But all this being grounded upon a vile
and most untrue imputation never yet proved, namely that we make all actions
both good and evil to come to pass by absolute necessity, there can be no
more truth in the consequent then there is in the Antecedent. We say that every
sin that is, or ever was committed in the world is and ever was committed
freely, not only voluntarily; much less does any sin come to pass by any
absolute necessity. For albeit there be some things that come to pass
necessarily by necessity of nature, as proceeding from Agents natural, working
naturally and necessarily. Yet is no work of nature wrought by any absolute
necessity. God being able to set an end to nature and the works thereof
whenever it pleases him; and while nature continues according to the good
pleasure of God, he restraines the course thereof, or changes it as he thinks
good. How much less do the actions of men, not only in respect of God's
agency, who is the first cause, but in respect of man's agency, a second cause,
and working deliberately and freely come to pass not necessarily, but
contingently, and freely; So far off are they from coming to pass by
absolute necessity; to exist by absolute necessity being the incommunicable
perfection of God himself. But I confess this Author shows some humanity
in the proof of it, to wit, out of the Tragedian very judiciously and
learnedly. Fati est ista culpa; nemo fit fato nocens. It is the fault of fate
or destiny, and what comes to pass by destiny is no fault of man's. Yet Zeno
the great Patron of Fate, finding his servant in a fault, when his servant
excused himself upon fate, saying it was destiny that he should steal; made a
ready answer saying, Et caedo, it was his destiny also to be punished; So far
was he from justifying or excusing his servant upon any such ground, or
forbearing to punish him. And does not this Author know that Iocasta for all
her acknowledgment of fate governing all things; yet in conscience of her
incestuous courses destroyed her self in the same Tragedian? But consider,
indifferent Reader, whether this Author does not carry himself, as if he were
dealing with little children, and his purpose were not to inform them; but to
abuse and mock them. For is that all ways the faith or opinion of the
Tragedian, whatsoever he puts into the mouths of this or that Actor? Do not
they represent the absurd pretenses of some, as well as the reasonable
discourses of others? Then again who are they that maintain, Fatum, destiny?
Where has he found this maintained by any of our divines? Yet I confess this
Author deals ingeniously in one thing, to wit, in walking so fairly in the
steps of this forefathers. For thus the Pelagians accused the doctrine of
Austin, not only after he was dead, as appears by Prosper's Epistle ad
Ruffinum; but even while he was living as appears by Austin himself; Nec sub
nomine gratiae fatum asserimus, quia nullis hominum meritis dicimus Dei gratiam
antecedi: Si autem quibusdam omnipotentis Dei voluntatem placet fati nomine
nuncupari, profanas quidem verborum novitates evitamus, Aug: contra duas epist.
Pe. lag: ad Bonifacium.
sed de verbis contendere non amamus: neither do we maintain destiny under the
name of grace, in saying grace is not prevented by any merits of man. But if
some are pleased to call the will Allmighty God by the name of fa^e (or
destiny) we avoid the profane novelties of words but we do not love to strive
about words. Where observe how first the same crimination was made against
Austin's doctrine by the Pelagians, which this Author makes against ours.

2. The doctrine which the Pelagians opposed in this crimination was this,
Grace is not conferred according unto works. 3ly, Austin disavowes all
antecedency of works to the bestowing of grace, how much more to the decreeing
of grace to be bestowed on any, which yet is the beloved Helena of this Author
therefore he talks so often against an Antecedent decree. Then again it is
manifest that the greatest maintainers of destiny and sat, did not maintain
it in any opposition to the free wills of men. And Austin him self professes
that such a necessity as is expressed in these words, Necesse est ut fiat, it
must needs be that such a thing shall come to pass, contains no
inconvenience, nor is any way prejudicial to the free wills of men. His words
are these; Sienim necessitas nostra ida dicenda est, quae non est in nostra
(...), ^^detiamsi nelumus, efficit quod potest, sicut est necessitas mortis;
Manifestu^ est (...) nostras, quibus recte aut perperam vivitur, sub tale
Austin: de civit Dei l. 5. cap. 10.
necessitate non esse, Multa^^im (...), quae si nolemus, non facerimus. Si
autem illa desinitur esse necessitas, secundum quam dicimus necesse esse ut
aliquid ita sit vel ita fiat, nescio cur eam timeamus, ne nobis liv^ (...)
voluntatis auferat. If that is to be accounted our necessity, which is net in
our power, but whether we will or no, works as it can such as is the
necessity of death; It is apparent that our wills whereby we live well or ill
are not under the the necessity of fate. For we do many things, which if we
would not we should not do them. But if necessity be defined to be such a
thing as when we say it must needs be that a thing be thus, or thus come to
pass; I know not why we should fear least such a necessity should bereave us
of free will. And this Austin delivers to meet with the vain fears of those,
who placed our wills among'st those things which are not subject to necessity,
least so they should loose their liberty. Observe this well and compare it with
the present discourse of this positive Theologue, who thinks to outface Austin
with the authority of his bare word. In the words following he manifests that
he speaks all this while of necessity in respect of God's decree not simply,
but considered as irresistible; by the way making no bones of avouching some
decrees of God to be resistable, notwithstanding the Psalmist's protestation
Whatsoever the Lord wills, that has he done both in heaven and earth; And
St. Paul's emphaticall expression of the same truth, saying, Who has repsted
his will? But this Divine is a brave fellow; and thinks to carry all with his
breath. For where has he given us any reason to prove that any decrees of God
are of any resistable condition? But let his decrees be never so irresistible,
and let that be true which Austin says, that, Non aliquid fit nisi omnipotens
fieri velit; Not any thing comes to pass, unless God will have it come to
pass. Art. 11.
And after Austin the Church of Ireland in their Articles of religion. Yet if
God will have every thing come to pass agreeably to the nature and condition
thereof thus, necessary things necessarily, contingent things contingently, as
Aquinas has not only said, 1. p. q. 19. art. 8.
but proved; hereby is no impeachment to the liberty of the creature, but an
establishment thereof rather, as the Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy of
Ireland have professed in the foresaid Article; that I may show some authority
for my sayings, as this Author represents none for his, but carries himself
like a Master of Sentences, as if he were in his own sufficiency of more
authority and credit to be believed, then the Pope in a general Council: And
albeit my self after many others, and some formerly mentioned have showed in a
large digression to this purpose that necessity upon supposition, may well
Vindic: l. 2. digres. 5.
stand with contingency, and liberty simply so called. And in the first place
have instanced in necessity of infallibility consequent to God's prescience,
which though Cicero thought could not consist with man's liberty, yet
Christians have always been of a contrary opinion; until the Sect of the
Socinians arose; and Arminians are very apt to show them so much courtesy as to
bear their books after them. Secondly I have proved a necessity upon
supposition of God's decree to permit sin. For the Lord takes upon him to be
the keeper of us from sin, as Gen: 20. 6. He professes as much to Abimilech,
that he kept him from sinning against God. In case God will not keep a man from
sin, what can be expected, but that he will undoubtedly sin without any
prejudice to the liberty of his will, considering that of Austin; Libertas sine
gratia non est libertas sed contumacia, Liberty without grace, is not liberty
but wilfulness. Thirdly and lastly upon supposition of God's will; And this I
prove evidently to pass on every thing which God foreseeth as future
considering that contingent things are merely possible in their own nature; and
cannot pass out of the condition of things merely possible into the condition
of things future, without a cause: And no other cause of this transmigration
can be devised with any color of reason or probability, save only the will of
God. Neither do I find that digression of mine in any the least part weakened,
or so much as assailed by ought that this Author has delivered; Who shows
himself upon the stage, rather to brave his opposites with the bare authority
of his words, then with sound argument to dispute ought.

Sect: 2.
Because it takes away the desert and guilt of sin. Offenses if fatal, cannot
be justly punished. 2. The M. Mason's Addit. p. 40. 41. 42.
reason is because those deed for which men are punished or rewarded must be
their own, under their own power and and sovereignty, but such are no fatal
acts or events. Neither temporally nor eternally can sin be-punished, if it be
absolutely necessary.

Not temporally, as God himself has given us to understand by that law which
he prescribed the Jews Deuteronomy: 22. 25. Which was that it a Maid commit
uncleanesse by constraint, she should not be punished. His reason was because
there was no cause of death in her; what she yielded to was through compulsion,
being overborne by power; As a man that is wounded to death by his neighbor;
so was a Virgin in that case a sufferer rather then a doer. This particular law
is of universal right: No just punishment can be inslicted for sin, where
there is no power in the party to avoid it. The speech of Lipsius is but a mere
crorchet contrary to reason, (Fatali culpae fatalis poena) fatal faults must
have fatal punishments. Did magistrates think men's offenses unavoidable, they
would think it bootlesse, and unreasonable to punish them. Nay not only so,
but we see by daily experience, that Judges following the direction of reason
have very remissely punished such faults as have been committed through the
power of the head strong and exorbitant passions. Yea we may read of some who
have not thought it fit to punish such faults at all. Valcrius Maximus tells
that Popilius a Roman Praetor sitting in judgment on a woman who had in Val:
max. l. 8. c. 1. Gell: l. 12. c. 7.
a bitter passion slain her mother, because she had murdered her children
(neque damnavit, neque absolvit) neither cleared her nor condemned her And
Aulus Gellius reports of Dolabella the Proconsul of Asia, that when a woman
of Smyrna was brought before him who had poisoned her husband and son for
murdering a son of hers, which she had by a former husband; he turned her over
to the Arcopagus, which was the gravest and most renowned judgment seat in the
world; The Judges there not daring to acquit her, being stained with a double
slaughter, nor yet to punish her being provokt with just grief, commanded the
accuser and offender to come before them an hundred years after. And so
neither was the woman's fact justified, the laws not allowing of it; Nor yet
the woman punished because she was worthy to be pardoned. If wise, magistrates
have spared such offenders as have been overswayed with passions, which did but
incline, not determine them to their irregular actions; they would never have
punished any trespassers, if they had thought them to be such by invincible
necessity, Or if offenders did think that their offenses were their destinies,
and that when they murder, steal, commit adultery, make insurrections, plot
treasons, or practice any other outrageous villainies, they do them by the
necessity of Gods unalterable decree; and can do no otherwise: they would and
might comp^aine of their punishments as unjust, as Zenoes servant did; when he
was beaten by his master for a fault, he told him out of his own grounds that
he was unjustly beaten. Because he was (^fato coactus peccare) constrained to
make that fault by his undeclinable fate. The Ad^umctine Monks, misled by Saint
Austin Epist. 105. ad sixtum Presbyterum, (which he calls a book wherein he
sets down his opinion concerning Gods grace) did so teach grace that they
denied free will. And this Saint Austin confuted in his book De gratia and
liberoarbitrio. And thinking the grace of God (as Saint Austin taught) to be
such as could not stand with freedom of will, they thought that no man should
be punished for his faults, but rather prayed for that God would give them
grace to do better. Against this Austin directed his other book, De correp:
and gratia. In which discourse though it be grace that is still named, yet
predestination is included. For as Kimedontius says truly in his preface to
Luther De servo arbitrio. Between grace and predestination there is only this
difference (as Saint Austin teaches Libro de praedest. Sanctorum cap. 10.)
that predestination is a preparation of grace, and grace a bestowing of
predestination. As Zenoes servant and these Monks did, so would all men judge;
did they considerately think that men could not choose but offend. And what
would be the resultance of such a persuasion, but an inundation of the greatest
insolences, and dissolution of all good government.

Indeed if our doctrine make sin to be no sin, and therewithal take away the
conscience Answer. 3.
of sin; it is not to be marvailed, if it take away the desert and guilt of
sin: For as sin is no sin; so likewise it is as fit that the desert and
guilt of sin, should be the desert and guilt of no sin; and so no desert or
guilt at all. This Author to serve his own turn takes great libery of
discourse in talking of offenses fatal; these were called by Austin profane
novelties of words. Yet elsewhere he professes that if no other thing were
meant hereby then the divine providence. Sententiam teneant, lingua^ corrigant;
let the^ hold their orthodoxe meaning, but let the^ correct their language Now
by providence divine is meant the will of God, working every thing that is
good, and permitting every thing that is evil. And without this will of God
not any thing comes to pass in the judgment of Austin. Non aliquid sit says
he, nisi o^nipotens furi velit, vel sinen^o ut fiat, vel ipse faciendo, Not any
thing comes to pass, unless Almighty God will have it come to pass, either
by suffering it, or by Enchirid. c. 95.
(...) working of it to wit, if evil, suffering it, if good working it; but of
each he professes that God wills it The abominable outrages committed upon the
person of the holy Son of God, were such as God's hand and God's counsel sore
determined, that is as much Act: 4. 28. Rev: 17. 17.
as to say, antecedently determined to be done. And the ^en Kings in giving
their kingdoms to the Beast, are said herein to have agreed to dce God's will.
Yet this Author dares not say, that these actions could not be justly punished
Yet the maintainets of destiny (as I have showed out of Austin) denied that the
wills of men were subject to destiny; while De civit. Dei l. 5. c. 10.
this Author talks in their language, why does he not talk in their meaning?
And if he talks in our meaning why does he not talk in our language? Now
Austin farther says (is I have showed out of the same place) that they who
exempted the wills of men from all necessity, seared a vain and causeless
fear; professing that as to some necessity the will is not subject, such as is
the necessity of death, which befalls us whether we will or no. So to some
necessity it may be subject without any danger; and that necessity he
expresses to be such, as when we say, it must needs be that such a thing come
to pass. Now such a necessity and no other is granted by us as consequent to
the will of God, so that if God will give a man faith, it must needs be, such a
man shall believe; if he will give repentance it must needs be, that such a man
shall repent; If he will keep such a man as Abimelech from sinning against him,
it must needs be, that such a man shall be kept from Gen: 20. 6.
sinning against him. If God will not give a man faith, nor repentance, it must
needs be, that such a man will not believe, will not repent. In like manner if
God will not keep a man from sin, but suffer him to sin; it needs must be
that such a one shall sin. If God harden the heart of Pharaoh, so that he
shall not set Israel go, undoubtedly so it shall come to pass. If God put it
into the hearts of the Kings to give up their kingdoms to the Beast, they
shall infallibly give their Kingdoms to the Beast. If he gives men over unto a
Reprobate mind to do things inconvenient, undoubtedly being thus prostituted
by God to their own corruption from within, and to the power of Satan from
without, they shall do those inconvenient things, be they never so abominable;
yet not necessarily, much less in the way of absolute necessity, (as this
Author wordeth it, affecting to speak with a full mouth (which is a quality
natural to these Arminians, and runs in a blood) but proves nothing) but
contingently and freely, not only with a possibility, but also with an active
power to the contrary. And if freely, then surely their works are their own,
proceeding from their own power and sovereignty, but yet not supreme and
absolute dominion and independent in their operation, on God their maker. God
must have the prerogative still of being the first mover, the first cause, the
first Agent, the first free Agent; So far off are we from maintaining that
the actions of men have their being by absolute necessity; that we utterly deny
any thing in the world to have 'its existence by absolute necessity, saving God
alone, as before I have showed. Sciendum, says Durand, quod loquendo de
necessitate simpliciter, voluntas divina In first did. 46. quaest. 1.
nec imponit, nec imponere potest rebus necessitatem; nec res creatae sunt
capaces talis necessitatis. We are to know that speaking of necessity simply so
called, the will of God neither does impose, or can impose any such necessity
on things, neither are creatures capable of such necessity. But if we speak of
such necessity as creatures are capable of under the divine liberty, by causes
intermediate; it is to be said that all things do not come to pass of
necessity; but some do, and some do not. God will have some things come to
pass by the mediation of causes necessary, and those come to pass
necessarily; Others come to pass by the mediation of causes contingent, and
those come to pass contingently; Whereby, says he, it is manifest that they
say not well, who say that all things come to pass of necessity in reference
to the Divine will; because, as has been showed, in respect of the Divine
will, all things come to pass freely; and therefore speaking absolutely, they
may not come to pass, although, upon supposition that they are willed, they
cannot but come to pass; but this is only necessity upon supposition.

1. Indeed if men did sin against their wills; and virgins sometimes are
ravished, and men are slain by force full sore against their wills, they
deserved no punishment. But is it possible that a man can will that which is
evil against his will? Every ordinary Scholar in the University knows that
axiom, Voluntas non potest cogi, the will cannot be forced. Lipsius his
speech, fatali culpae fatalis poena, fatal faults have fatal punishments,
this Author says, is but a mere crotchet contrary to reason. As if he would
teach the very maintainers of fate, yea the very first to understand
themselves. For fate wherewith our doctrine is charged by our opposites is
commonly called Fate Stoicall. Now Zeno was the father of the Stoics; yet when
his servant was taken playing the theife, pleaded for himself, saying it was
my destiny to steal. Zeno answered him in his own language, that it was his
destiny to smart for it too; right in this same sense that Lipsius spoke. Yet
Zeno knew full well that he punished his servant freely. And Zeno is well
known to have been a great Master of morality for all this, which could not
consist with denying the liberty of man's will, as this Author well knows.
And Austin censureth those who feared to subject the will to all manner of
necessity, as men transported with vain and causeless fears; manifesting
thereby that some necessity may very well consist with a man's liberty.
Magistrates though they believe with Austin that, Not any thing comes Artic: 11.
to pass, unless Allmighty God will have it come to pass; And with the
Church of Ireland, that God from all eternity did by his unchangeable counsel
ordain whatsoever should in time come to pass. And with Aquinas that the
root of contingency, is the effectual will of God; yet may they well think
it reasonable enough to punish offenses; seeing that God decrees that some
things, even all the actions of men shall come to pass contingently; as well
as other things shall come to pass necessarily. For to come to pass
contingently is to come to pass avoidably; and if they be the actions of men,
freely also. It is incredible that any sober man should remissely punish faults
for the exorbitancy and strength sake of the passions, whereby they were
committed, but rather in consideration of the potent causes which raised such
passions in them, under a color of justice. And we commonly say the greater
the temptation is, the less is the sin. So Peter surprised suddenly with
fear denied his Master. Yet what says Aristotle. In some things no force is
suffecient Arist. l 30. 1.
for excuse; but a man ought to die rather any manner of death, then commit
them. For those things in Euripedes are rediculous, which moved Alcmaeon to
kill his mother. Indeed Plato Ibid.
maintained that things done through passion were not voluntary. But Aristotle
a better Master then he, disproves it, and by excellent reasons confirms the
contrary. And whatsoever Popilius the Roman Praetor judged of her, who slew her
mother, provoked by her Mothers fact in murdering her children; yet let our
laws be consulted, and the opinion of our Judges in such a case; and whether
such a one were not to be condemned; and whether Popilius his judgment deserves
to be admitted for the correction of the laws of our land, and working a
reformation in this particular. We should soon have a wild world, if every one
being provoked by the insolences of others should thrust themselves into the
throne of God for the execution of vengeance; Yet none more unfit for this,
then the daughter to execute God's vengeance upon the mother that bare her. Yet
it was wont to be held, If I forget not, that potestas patria originally was
power of life and death. But all is fish that comes to this Author's net; like
as her fact who poisoned her husband and son for killing a son of hers;
destroying two for one without all authority most unnaturally; and that not
hastily, but in a deliberate way by poisoning. And does it become Christians to
admire such heathenish courses of men nothing acquainted with the divine
providence? And was this so doubtful a case, whether so wicked a wretch
avenging her self by poison secretly given upon her husband and son for the
death of another son of hers, that the sentencing thereof should be put over
until an 100 years after? But what of all this? These wilfully affect
revenge, the execution whereof belongs not to them; but it is just with God to
punish sin with sin; one man's sin by another. As of Senacherib the Lord
professes, that he would cause him to fall by the sword in his own land, this
was brought to pass by his own children falling upon him furiously, and as
unnaturally as the actions of any of these. How was innocent Naboth used, and
by public sentence condemned to be stoned to death, and accordingly executed
by the practice of wicked Iezabel? Yet Solomon spares not to profess that
every man's judgment comes of the Lord. Never were more abominable courses
executed upon any, then upon the holy son of God: Yet these were all
foredetermined Prove: 28.
by the hand of God, and the counsel of God, as the Apostles with one voice
acknowledge. By the same providence was Joseph sold into Egypt, God working
thereby the preservation Act: 4. 28.
of them that sold him; Thus Sihon was hardened, and the Canaanites, and the
Egyptians with Pharaoh their King to their own destruction. Thus the Lord
punished David's foul sin by the murder of Amnon contrived by his own
brother; and by the sword of Absolon rising up against his own father; and by
the sword of Shimei's tongue cursing David; wherein David acknowledged the hand
of God. Thus he punished the Idolatry of the Gentiles by giving them over to
vile affections, and so prostituting them to abominable courses. What outrages
were committed by Senacherib that proud and blasphemous wretch upon the people
of God; yet is he called the rod of God's wrath and Es: 10.
the staff in his hand; is said to be God's indignation. And if God leaves any
man to his corruption, and offers occasions and temptations from without, which
are naturally apt to actuate such corruptions; and withal gives them over to
the power of Satan; what is to be expected, but that they will break forth
into murder, as in Senacherib's sons; and the Jews crucifying the Son of God;
into stealth sacrilegious, as in Achan; into adultery and that in an incestuous
manner as we see in Absalom; into insurrections, an example whereof we have in
the ten Tribes revolting from Rehoboam; into treasons as Judas betraying his
own Master; and into all manner of outrageous villainies, whereof the Scripture
makes plentiful mention, and of the providence of God therein? As for God's
determining to the act, that is nothing at all material to the point in hand,
though this Author in his crude conceits, is much intoxicated therewith; For
as much as, whether the wicked are exercised in actions good for the substance
of them; or in abstaining from that which is evil, they never a whit the more
either perform the one, or abstain from the other in a gracious manner; and
all for want of grace supernatural, which God is not bound to bestow on any.
All sides confess that Divine concourse is necessary to every act, as without
which the creature cannot move. For in God we move, as well as in him we live,
and in him we have our being. And about this concourse a question is made, to
wit, Whether God's influence be only into the act, and that upon condition,
modo nos velimus, provided that we will, is as absurd and contradictious a
conceit, as can be devised; seeing the greatest question is concerning the act
of willing: And is it possible that God shall work this act upon condition
that it be wrought by us? why, if it be wrought by us, what need is there of
God's working it? Can the same act be the condition of it self, and so both
before and after it self? To avoid this precipice others fly to God's
prescience, that at such an instant man will produce such an act of will,
provided that God will produce it, which is worse then the former. For hereby
each Agent's operation is made the condition of the other, whence no operation
at all can proceed. Then again a thing is fained to be foreseen by God as
future, which has no cause of the futurition thereof, being in it is own nature
merely possible, that is no more future indeed, then not future: And nothing
but the will and decree of God can make it pass out of the condition of a
thing merely possible into the condition of a thing future, as is made manifest
by invincible reason. Therefore we say the influence of God necessarily
required to every action, is made into the will it self moving it agreably to
the nature thereof, to do whatsoever it does, not voluntarily only, but freely
also; taking liberty aright and as it ought to be taken, that is in the choice
of means tending to an end, whether that end be a man's right end or no. For
it is confessed by Moralists that the motion of the will toward it is congruous
end, is natural and necessary, not free. But this brave Gentleman carries
himself aloft, and superciliously despising to enter into any of these lists
of argumentation; and as if the matter were conclusum contra Manichaeos,
confidently supposes, without all proof, that we maintain that all humane
actions come to pass by absolute necessity: Whereas to the contrary it is
evident that nothing in the world has it is existence by absolute necessity,
saving God alone. It Is true, God's decree is unalterable, and whatsoever comes
to pass comes to pass by his will says Austin: and the Church of Ireland; By
the effectual will of God, says Aquinas, as which, he makes the root of all
contingency; And therefore as necessary causes work necessarily by the will of
God; so by the same will of God do contingent Agents work contingently; and
free Agents work voluntarily and freely. And observe the immodesty of this
Author, he tells us what Zeno's servant pleaded for himself with his Master;
but he does not tell what Zeno answered him, that he conceales; it is enough
for him to gull and cheat poor ignorants. The Adrumetine Monks, he says,
were misled by Austin; a vile imputation cast upon that man whose memory has
been always honorable in the Church of God; and the memorial of his
opposites rots. Did Austin misleade them? did he draw them into error? If they
did mistake Austin, shall it be true therefore to say they were misled by him?
How many mistake and misunderstand God's word; what then? shall we be so
audacious and blasphemous, as to say they are misled by the word of God? Why
may not such impudent persons proceed, and say they are misled by the holy
Ghost? Then that which he says of these Monks, as misled by Austin, it is a
notorious untruth; Cresconius and Felix that came over to Austin of their own
heads to complain of some in their Monastry; laid to their charge indeed that
they so taught grace, that they denied freewill; and that this they pretended
to have learned out of Austin's book written to Sixtus the Presbyter. But
Austin was not hasty to believe this crimination: And therefore he says
disjunctively of that Monk of whom they complained, Aut librum meum non
intelligit, aut ipse non intelligitur; either he understands not my book; or
himself is not well understood by his brethren. If the information were true,
then that Brother of whom they complained mistook Austin. For Austin does not
any where so maintain grace, as to deny free will. But if that Brother
understood Austin aright in that foresaid book of his, then he maintained no
such opinion as Cresconius and Felix laid to his charge, but they rather
misunderstood him. And this appeared to be most true afterward. For Florus was
the man whom Cresconius and Felix accused, and whom Austin desired of
Valentinus the father of them, that he would send over unto him, as Coccius
acknowledges, and accordingly he was sent over to Austin, as appears in
Austin's book De corrept. and gratia cap. 1. With whom when Austin had
conferred, he found him most orthodoxe as himself professes in the chapter
mentioned, and therein much rejoiced, and withal signifies to Valentinus that
they deserved rather to be checked who misunderstood Florus. And therefore when
Austin in his Retractations comes to take notice of his book De gratia and
libero arbitrio, and the occasion of writing thereof, he sets it down not
absolutely, because of those who so do maintain grace, as withal they deny
free will, but with a disjunctive addition, thus, or because of those who
think when grace is maintained, therewithal that free will is denied. The
first was delivered in reference to the crimination made before him by
Cresconius, and Felix against Florus; but the latter was according to Austin's
suspicion at the first, which proved afterward to be a truth, as appears by
the first chapter of Austin's book de correptione and gratia; where Florus is
justified and magnified by St. Austin, and his criminators condemned. And seeing
there were none such among the Monks of Adrumetum, as the accusants pretended,
who so maintained grace, as to deny free will; therefore that also must needs
be false which follows in this Author, when he says that against them also
St. Austin wrote his other book De correptione and gratia: And the truth is
the whole buisinesse was ended and the tumult appeased between those Adrumetine
Monks, before Florus came over; as appeared by the relation made unto him by
Florus concerning the amicable composition of all things there. And Austin in
this very passage which this Author grates upon, professes that he writes not
against them; only he answers such an objection (For I conceive it to be no
other) more fully which was made by some of them formerly against Florus, and
the doctrine of Austin maintained by Florus. The relation whereof was brought
unto him by the same Florus, as it seems. But of this more at large in This
digression in his late book against. Corvinius page 174. 175. etc.
my digression concerning the predestinarian heresy, which I purpose to
subjoine to this. Austin says indeed that, Praedestinatio est gratiae
praeparatio, gratia vero ipsa donatio. Predestination is the preparation of
grace, Grace the gift it self which was prepared; not the bestowing of it: How
can it be? Can a gift temporal be the bestowing of a thing eternal? What
entertainment Zeno's servant found at his Masters hands (which this Author
conceales) I have often showed who taught no such doctrine as destiny as to
free a knave from stripes; who as so great a Philosopher had a better judgment
in the nature of fate then his servant; and himself so well thought of by the
whole State of Athenians. Yet was not Zeno so well instructed in the mystery of
Divine providence, as we are by the word of God; even from the selling of
Joseph all along to the crucifying of the Son of God; and from thence to the
Kings giving up their Kingdoms to the Beast, which should come to pass in the
latter part of the last times of the world. But let him make himself merry with
Zeno's servant, who taken in a theevish fact was content to help himself with
any pretense; but Zeno we know did not approve of his appology, but prepared a
Rod for the knaves back in despite of that. And as for the Monks, the relation
that here he makes is merely a fiction of his own brain without all ground.
Thus his foundation being ruined, no marvel if the house he builds thereon
must needs totter and fall on his ownpate.

Sect: 3.
2. Nor if this be true can sin be punished eternally, or that tribunal be
just on which the sentence of eternal M. Mesons Addit. p 42. 43. 44
fire shall be denounced against the wicked at the last day. To this I have the
fathers bearing witness generally and plainly. Tertullian has there words;
The recompense of God and evil can with no justice be given to him, who is
good or evil, not freely but of necessity. Saint Hierome says, where
necessity domineers, lib. 2. contra Maxion: Epiph: adversus baer: l. 1. haer.
5. uum. 3. Aug: l. 2. contra Faust. c. 5. Presp. ad object. 10. Vinc: Fulg. l.
1. c. 1. ad Moni. c 22. Bern: l. de great. and lib. arbit. p. 908.
there is no place for retribution. Epiphanius says, the stars which impose
upon men a necessity of sinning, may be punished with better justice then the
men themselves. We place men's nativities under no fatal constell^tions, says
Saint Austin, that we may free the will by which a man lives either well or
ill, from all bands of necessity, because of the righteous judgment of God.
Prosper speaking of the judgment of God, by which he decreed to render unto
every man according to his works, says, this judgment would never be if men
did sin by the will and determination of God. Fulgentius also says the same.
It is great injustice in God, to punish him whom he does not find, but make an
offender. This was Saint Peruards opinion too; it is only a will free from
compulsion and necessity says he, which makes a creature capable of reward
and punishment Out of these restimonies laid together may be collected three
things.

1. That the Ancients did use to call a necssity of humane actions good or bad,
by the name of destiny, from what external cause soever this necessity did
arise.

2. That they did use these two words (Necessity) and (Compulsion)
promiscuously; and therefore thought that necessity as well as compulsion did
take away the wills liberty.

3. (Which is for our present purpose) that they believed and contended that
the judgments of God on sinners could not be just, if they were held by the
Adamantine chains of any absolute necessity, under the power of their sins.

I will therefore conclude this Argument with the words of Epiphanius writing
of the error of the Pharis^es, who believed the immortality of the soul, and
the resurrection of the dead, and yet held that all things come to pass by
necessity. It is, says he, a point of extreme ignorance; or madness rather,
for him that Epiph. l. 1. adv. haer. 16. p. 35. n. 3.
confesses the resurection of the dead, and the great day appointed for the
revelation of God's righteous judgment, to say that there is any destiny, any
necessity in men's actions For how can the righteous judgment of God and destiny
comply and stand together? And (let me add) how can the belief of this and
true piety stand together? For where this persuasion that men's sins are
necessary, and that therefore there can be no righteous judgment, is rooted in
religion will quickly be rooted out.

4. It tendes to religions overthrow; because it makes the whole circle of
man's life, but a mere destiny. By it all our doings are God's ordinances, all
our imaginations branches of his predestination; and all events in Kingdoms
and commonweales the necessary issues of the divine decree. All things
whatsoever though they seem to do somewhat; yet by this opinion, they do
indeed just nothing; the best laws restrain not one offender the sweetest
rewards promote not one virtue, the powerfull'st Sermons convert not one
sinner, the humblest devotions divert not one calamity; the strongest
endeavors in things of any nature whatsoever, effect no more then would be
done without them, but the necessitating, overruling decree of God does all.
And if laws do nothing, wherefore are they made? If rules of religion do
nothing, why are they prescribed? If the wills of men do nothing, why are men
encouraged to one thing, scared from another? there? and if good endeavors and
onsets do nothing (being excited, continued, limited, controlled and every way
governed by an active, absolute, and Almighty decree, to what purpose are they
used? Who sees not plainly whither these things tend? To nothing more then to
the subversion of piety and policy, religion and laws, society and
government? This did the Romans see full well; and therefore they banished
(Mathematicos, the teachers and abetters of destiny) out of Rome. These and the
like inconveniences which come from the uppper way, did work so with Prosper,
as that he calls him no Catholic who is of this opinion. Prosp. ad cap. Gal:
Sent. 1.
Whosoever says that men are urged to sin, and to be damned by the
predestination of God, as by a fatal, unavoidable necessity, he is no
Catholic.

They did also make the Arausican counsel denounce a curse against such. That
any are predestined by the divine power to sin, we do not only not
believe, but with the greatest detestation that we can* we denounce Anathema to
such (if there be any such) as will believe so great an evil. Thus far of my
^easons against the upper and more harsh and rigorous way.

2. Undoubtedly if sin cannot be punished temporally, it cannot be punished
eternally. We have no need, I should think of the Authority of any fathers to
justify this. Where Answer.
does this Author find, that we maintain that a man is good or evil, not
freely but by necessity, that Tertullian is brought in as opposing us here? Yet
we think this is worthy of distinction: For was not Adam made by God
habitually good? Durand. I am sure, maintains that in his creation he was
endued with all Moral virtues: and this we read in Scripture, that all things
which God made were very good: and as other things were made very good in their
kind: So I presume man was made very good in his kind: and how this could be
unless he were made virtuous, I cannot conceive. So likewise man being brought
forth in the corrupt mass; when afterward he is made good either in the way
of justification, or in the way of regeneration; these are no free acts of Man,
but rather the free acts of God. I presume this Author dares not say that man
regenerates himself But as for the denomination of goodness and badnesse in
man, that arises from any actions of his, I willingly grant all such goodness
or badnesse is acquired freely, not necessarily.

And as Tertullian takes necessity, to wit in opposition unto liberty; So I
presume does Hierome too; otherwise these two Fathers were yoaked together
unequally in this place. Now we know no such necessity domineering in man, as
stands in opposition to liberty. Much less do we maintain any necessity over
the will of man, depending upon fatal constellations; And as Epiphanius, and
Austin discourse thus of necessity in reference to fatal constellations; So it
seems likely that Hierome and Tertullian did discourse of necessity in the
same sense. To sin by the will of God in Prosper is to sin by the
predestination of God, as appears both by the Objection it self, and
Prosper's answer thereunto throughout. Now predestination in the fathers
meaning is of no other things, the^ such as God purposed to work. And
accordingly we answer that no evil in the world, as evil, comes to pass by
God's will to work it; but only by God's will to permit it. And it is Austin's
express profession, that Non aliquid fit nisi omnipotens fieri velit. Not any
thing comes to pass, unles God Almighty will have it come to pass; but how?
Not all after one manner, but after a different manner; some by working them,
others by permitting them; vel sinendo ut fiat, vel ipse faciendo; either by
suffering it to come to pass, in case it be evil, or himself working it, in
case it be good. Fulgentius justifies this sense in his sentence here
alleged. For to sin by God's will in Prosper, is all one with being made an
offender (or made to sin) by God, in Fulgentius. Now we say God makes many a
man good by regeneration; but he makes none evil; only he does not cure that
natural or habitual viciousness, which he finds amongst men, in all. For He
has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens; and indeed he is
bound to none. St. Bernard clearly maintains that there is noe liberty from
sin in any natural man; and consequently every natural man is cast upon a
necessity of sinning; and therefore that liberty from necessity which he grants
to man, can be no other then liberty from compulsion; And so Dr. Fulke usually
makes the distinction run between Liberty from sin, and liberty from coaction;
and denying the one he grants the other.

That the Ancients did call that necessity, which arises from the will of God
upon the will of the creature by the name of destiny; This Author brings not
the least color of 1.
proof; neither do I think he is able to bring any, save only of the
Pelagians, who traduced Austin's doctrine of predestination by the name of
destiny. And so they traduced his doctrine in denying that grace was conferred
according to men's works; whereupon it was that he built his doctrine of
predestination, as is apparent De bono perseverantiae. c. 15. In the second I
wonder this Author observes not how he contradicts himself. For if they used
these words Necessity, and compulsion; promiscuously; does it not evidently
follow that 2.
they distinguished them not? but always took them of equivalent
signification. But I do not find that Austin took necessity of the same
signification with compulsion; when he distinguishes of necessity; saying some
necessity is such, as whereby a thing befalls a man, whether he will or no; as
the necessity of death; and to such a necessity he says, the will is not
subject. Another necessity there is, as when we say, It must needs be, that
this, or that come to pass, and he confesses plainly that the will may be
subject to such a necessity, without danger or prejudice to the liberty thereof.

3 And well they might hold that God's judgments were not just on sinners, if
they were held by any absolute necessity under the power of their sins. We say
that nothing has either existence, or continuance, by absolute necessity, save
God alone. But I guess this Author calls that necessity absolute, which
flows from God's absolute decree. Now if he will have God's decrees to be
conditional, it stands him upon to prove it, not boldly suppose it. Especially
seeing Aquinas has professed that never any man was so mad as to say that
there is any cause of God's predestination, as touching the act of God's
predestinating; and that there can be no cause hereof he proves because there
can be no cause of God's will, as touching the act of God willing, as formerly
he had proved. And Doctor Iackson in his book of providence confesses that
the distinction of God's will, into a will antecedent, and a will consequent,
is not to be understood as touching the act of God willing; but as touching the
things willed. And accordingly, seeing reprobation in it 's kind is the will of
God, as well as predestination in it is kind; it follows, that as there can be
no cause of the will of God, as touching the act of God willing; no cause of
predestination, as touching the act of God predestinating; so neither can there
be any cause of Reprobation, as touching the act of God reprobating. And look
how mad a thing it is for any man to maintain that there is some cause of
predestination, as touching the act of God predestinating. So as mad a thing it
must be every way to avouch that there is a cause of Reprobation, as touching
the act of God reprobating. And truly the Apostle St. Paul plainly manifests
that upon what ground he proves, that Election is not of good works (namely
because before Jacob or Esau were borne, or had done good or evil, it was
said, The elder shall serve the younger) upon the same ground we may be bold to
conclude, that Reprobation is not of evil works. And the same reason
manifests that faith and infidelity are excluded from being the causes, the one
of Election, the other of Reprobation; as well as good and evil works. And
both Piscator by evidence of Scripture, and Bradwardine by evidence of reason
have demonstrated, that no will of God is conditional, which is to be
understood, as touching the act of God willing. And it may be evidently further
demonstrated thus; If any thing be the cause of God's will, then either by
necessity of nature, or by the constitution of God; Not by necessity of nature,
as is evident and all confess, there being no color of truth for that;
besides such an opinion were most dangerously prejudicial to God's
sovereignty, and liberty. If therefore they say, it is by the constitution of
God, mask I pray what an insuperable absurdity follows hereupon. For seeing
God's constitution is his will, it follows that God did will that upon
foresight of this or that he would will such a man's salvation, and such a
man's damnation. And thus the act of God's will is made the Object of God's
will, even the eternal act of God's will; Whereas to the contrary it is
apparent, that the objects of God's will are things temporal, never any thing
that is eternal But as touching things willed, we readily grant, it may be
said there is a cause thereof as School-Divines do generally acknowledge. And
thus Gerardus Vossius speaks of the conditional will, which he faith the
Fathers do ascribe to God. For this is the instance which he gives thereof, as
for example, when God ordaines to bestow salvation on a man in case he believe;
here faith is made the condition of Salvation, but not of the will of God And
in like manner we willingly grant that reprobation is conditional, inasmuch as
God intends to inflict damnation on none, but such as die in sin without
repenance But albeit predestination, as touching this particular thing willed,
may be said to be conditional according as the Schoolmen explicate their
meaning; and reprobation likewise as touching the particular of da^natio^
mentioned: yet no such thing ca^ be truly affirmed either of the one or of the
other, as touching the particulars of gra^ting, or denying the grace of
regeneration, which are intended also by the decrees of predestination and
reprobatio^. For albeit God intends not to bestow salvation on any, but upon
condition of faith; nor damnation on any, but upon condition of final
impenitency and infidelity. Yet God intends not to bestow the grace of
regeneration on some for the curing of their natural infidelity and
impenitency. Nor to leave the same infidelity and impenitency uncured in
others, by denying the same grace of regeneration unto them. This I say God
does not intend to bring to pass upon any condition; For if he should, then
grace should be conferred according unto works, which was condemned in the
Synod of Palestine and all along in diverse Synods, and Counsels against the
Pelagians. So that albeit God proceeds according to a law in bestowing
salvation, and inflicting damnation; yet he proceeds according to no law, in
giving or denying the grace of regeneration for the curing of our natural
corruption; but merely according to the pleasure of his will, as the Apostle
testifies saying, He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.
And if the conferring and denying of this grace be absolute; how much more are
the decrees hereof to be accounted most absolute? And consequently that one man
is delivered from the power of his sins, whether original or habitual;
another is not, but still continues under the power of them; This I say, does,
and must needs come to pass by virtue of Gods absolute decrees. Yet no
absolute necessity follows hereupon. First because no greater necessity then
that which is absolute can be attributed to the existence and continuance of
God himself. Secondly God did absolutely decree to make the world; yet no wise
man was ever known to affirm that the worlds existence was, and is by absolute
necessity. In like sort, God did absolutely decree, that Josiah should burn
the Prophets bones, upon the Altar; That Cyrus should build his City and let
go his captives; That no man should desire the Israelites land, when they
should come to appear before the Lord their God thrice in the year; That God
would circumcise their hearts, and the hearts of their children to love the
Lord their God withal their heart, and with all their soul. To put his fear
in their hearts, that they should never depart away from him; To cause them to
walk in his statutes and judgments to do them. To work in them both the will
and the deed, according to his good pleasure. Yea to work in them every thing
that is pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ. Likewise 1 King: 13. 2. Es:
45. 13. Ex, 34. 24.
that Absalom should defile his fathers Concubines, that the Jews should
crucify the Son of God; that some through disobedience should stumble at the
word; that the Kings should give their kingdoms to the beast. Yet these
actions were done by them as freely as ever they Deuteronomy: 30. 6. Jer: 32 40.
Ezech: 37. 24. Ezekiel. 36. 27. Phil: 2. 13. Heb: 13. 21.
did ought in their lives; All these things I say by Scripture evidence were
decreed by God to come to pass; The good by God's effection the evil by God's
permission; and decreed absolutely on their parts that did them; if not, let it
be showed upon what condition on Absolon's part, he should defile his fathers
Concubines; upon what condition on the Jews part, they should crucify the Son
of God; upon what condition on their part, others through disobedience should
stumble at God's word; And upon what condition on their part, the Kings should
give their kingdoms to the beast. And if they take Arminias his way, let them
reply upon mine answer to Arminius; if Bellarmin's, let them reply upon my
answer to Bellarmine, that we may not trouble the world with out Tautologies:
If a different way from both these, I shall be glad, to be acquainted with it,
and give it such entertainment as according to my judgment it shall be found
to deserve.

So that with Epiphanius, though we are ready to concur in denying destiny,
which as before we heard out of him was a necessity derived from the stars;
yet with Austin we may still hold that the wills of men need not to be exempted
from all necessity, to maintain the liberty thereof, and he gives instance in
such a necessity as whereby we say, It most needs be that such a thing come to
pass, as no way prejudicial to man's liberty. And Arminius confesses, that
upon supposition of God's decree it must needs be that the Soldiers should
abstain from the breaking of Christ's bones; yet I nothing doubt, but this
action was as as freely performed by them, as any other. For albeit a thing
must needs come to pass which God has decreed to come to pass, yet it is
indifferent to come to pass necessarily or freely; which also God determines
according to the nature of the things themselves; namely that necessary things
shall come to pass necessarily, and contingent things contingently. And to
this purpose he has prepared different Agents, as Aquinas observes some
necessary working necessarily, some contingent Collat: cum Junto page: 83.
working contingently.

4. Still this Author harpes upon the same string imputing unto us, that we
make the whole Circle af a man's life a mere destiny; his meaning is that we
take away all liberty, which is most untrue. As for destiny it is well known
as before I have showed that this was the usual crimination, which the
Pelagians cast upon the doctrine of St. Austin; and that, because he maintained
that grace was not given according unto man's works. And what was Austin's
answer hereunto, I have showed before: Si cui voluntatem omnipotentis Dei Fati
nomine placet nuncupari, profanas verborum novitates evitamus, sed de verbis
contendere non amamus, If men please to call the will of Almighty God by the
name of destiny; we avoid profane novelties of words, but we do not love to
wrangle about words. For God to work us to faith, to repentance, to every good
work; yea to the very will and the deed, and that according to his good
pleasure (for which we have express Scripture, both in the old and new
Testament, as erst I showed) and absolutely to decree this is to make the
whole circle of man's like, as touching good courses, but a mere destiny, if we
believe this Divine; whereas if this be decreed to be done conditionally, then
grace must be conferred according to works, which is as true Pelagianisme, as
ever dropped from the mouth of Pelagius, and which himself was so^etimes driven
torenounce yet this Pelagianisme is the only true divinity, if we believe this
Author. Again if non aliquid fit nisi omnipotens fieri velit, Not any thing
co^es to pass, unless God Almighty will have it come to pass; whether good
or evil; which was sometimes delivered by Austin; and of late professed by the
Church of Ireland in the days of King James, this is to make the whole Circle
of man's life a mere Destiny; if this Author be of any credit so far as to
make his words to be received as Oracles; yet God's word is express from the
unanimous consent of the Apostles, that both Herod and Pontius-Pilate, wih the
Gentiles and people of Israel were gathered together against the holy Son of
God to do what God's hand and God's counsel had before determined to be done:
Yet were they gathered together to do such acts, as more facinorous were never
known to be done since the world began: And if we believe this Author, all
this came to pass by mere destiny: And if this be to come to pass by mere
destiny, why should we not believe it? Have we better or more complete
testimony for ought throughout the whole book of God, then for this? All
things that come to pass must needs be the issues of the divine decree; not
only such things as come to pass necessarily, by necessary Agents working
necessarily; but even such things also as come to pass freely, by free agents
working contingently, and freely, as Aquinas has proved and Austin and the
Church of Ireland acknowledged, and the word of God has justified, and clear
reason demonstrated, for as much as otherwise no future thing could be
foreknowne by God from everlasting. For nothing can be from everlasting known
by God as future, unless from everlasting it were future. But without the
decree of God passing upon it, no contingent thing can pass out of the
condition of a thing merely possible (such as it is in it is own nature) into
the condition of a thing future. So that whosoever denies God's decree to pass
upon every thing that comes to pass throughout the world, must therewithal
deny the foreknowledge thereof in the mind of God; Let but this Author avoid
this one argument if he can; but he will never answer it while his head is
hot^^ conceive I have had sufficient experience of his strength already this
way, and of the shameful issue of his adventure therein. He that said, Non
aliquid fit nisi omnipotens fieri velit, Not any thing comes to pass, unless
the Almighty will have it come to pass, said also that God so works in every
creature, as without all prejudice to their own motions. And when the Apostle
said, that In God we move, his meaning was not, that the creature did nothing,
or moved not at all. All that follows is of the same stamp a fardell of
unshamefast untruthes. Belike when God says, I will cause them to walk in my
statutes and to do them, God caused them to do just nothing. In like manner
when the holy Prophet expostulates with God in the person of the Church after
this manner, Lord why have thou caused us to err from thy ways, and hardened
our hearts against thy fear, the meaning is, why have thou caused us to do
just nothing. In like manner when God restraines offenses, he does it not by
his laws, When he promotes virtue he does it not by rewards; when he converts
sinners he does it not by sermons: when thousands were converted in one day, it
was not by the ministry of Peter and his fellow Apostles. This Authors meaning
seems to be, that unless man converts himself, it is not done by sermons.
But see how he overlasheth; when carrying the matter so as if God's decree
necessitated and overruled all by our opinion; yet most absurdly he exempts
from this divine decree man's endeavors. And who sees not that to overrule is
to carry the reasonable creature on to do contrary to his own will and
judgment. For unless he does toss strenuouslly he can prevail nothing with
any sober and indifferent Reader. In like sort to necessitate denotes such a
motion whereby the creature is carried to do a thing necessailry but this is
not Bradwardines opinion, who alone amongst Schoole-Divines, that I know, uses
this phrase of necessitating. For he says that God necessitates the creature
to his free act, and this necessity is but modall, according to that expression
of Austin necesse est ut aliquid fiat, which Austin confessed 1200 years ago
to be no impeachment to man's liberty. But because that phrase Necessitating,
is not only of an harsh sound and apt to be taken in a quite contrary sense to
that of the Author's; therefore other School-Divines, and generally our
Divines use it not. And how immodest a course is this to think to choke us
with other men's phrases, and that in a quite contrary sense to that wherein the
Author's take it? And as if he had very substantially concluded the point,
that laws do nothing, rules of religion, and men's endeavors do nothing,
whereas he has performed no part either of a Philosopher or of a Divine in all
this, but of a mere trifler; he proceeds to demand why the one are made, the
other prescribed; why men are encouraged to some things; and scared from the
other. He might as well ask what meant King Hezechiah to have any care either
of his food or of taking Physic for those 15 years which God told him, he
had added unto his life? What meant Paul to tell the Master of the ship, that
unless the Mariners were detained in the ship they could not be saved; what
meant some to trust to their swimming, others to boards and brokempeeces of the
ship to get to land, when the Lord by his Angel had told him, that he had
given him the lives of all that sailed with him? In the very days of Cicero
the Stoics were acquainted with such like arguments made against their
destiny, and knew how readily to answer them by distinguishing between Fatalia
and Confatalia, as appears in Cicero's book de Fato, and Turnebus his answer
to Ramus thereupon, more at large. Therefore this Author disputes not
logically, if he did, the vileness of his argumentation would soon appear
according to it is proper colors; but carries the matter all along in
Rhetorical flourishes, as if his wit served him for that best, whereat I
wonder not a little, that he should forsake that wherein his faculty lies
most, according to the reputation that goes of him, and trust to that wherein
his best dexterity has been accounted but inficete. If our doctrine tends to
the subversion of policy, religion and laws, society and government In the next
place we expect when he will turn stark Atheist and profess as much of the
word of God, seeing it is manifest our doctrine chiefly is founded upon the word
of God even in that which sounds most harsh unto carnal judgment; namely as
touching God's secret providence in evil, this Author not accomodating any
answer to any one of those places whereupon our doctrine is grounded. And as
for God's providence in working us unto holiness, his contrary doctrine cannot
stand without maintaining that Grace is given according unto men's works; which
is expressly contradictory to the word of God. 2 Timothy: 1. 9. Tit: 3. 5, and
opposed by the church of God as the sour leaven of Pelagianisme, from the
Synod of Palestine all along. For ask this Author wherefore God bestows
faith upon one and not upon another, and he has nothing to answer, but either
by denying plainly, that faith is the gift of God; which hitherto they are not
grown so impudent as to deny expressly; though the Remonstrants in their
Censura censurae come so far, as to deny that Christ merited faith and
regeneration for any man; Or they must answer that the reason hereof is,
because the one by some act of his or other has prepared himself for the
reception of divine influences, the other has not. Or in plain terms as one
has expressed it, that God does work in us Credere to believe, modo velimus
provided that we will believe. But does he not work also the very act of
willing? Saint Paul says he does; yea every thing that is pleasing in his
sight. And how Phil. 3. 13. Heb. 13. 21.
does he work in us this will? Is it upon condition, that we will? This is the
absurdity whereunto they are driven, still fetching in a priority of man's act
to the divine influence, working us to that which is good, yet most
preposterously. For what need is there of influence divine to make us to will
if of our selves we will already? And this also utterly overthrowes God's
prescience of things future, which can have no true foundation besides the
divine decree. As for Mathematici which were banished out of Rome, were those
Divines, or Astrologers rather? If they subjected the event of all things to
the influence of the stars, shall Austin be blamed or the Church of Ireland for
subjecting all things to the council of God's will, and that according to the
express testimony of holy Scripture both as touching good and evil; only with
this difference; good things to his will of working them, evil things to his
will of permitting them. As for Prosper's saying in the last place, we make no
contingent things throughout the world, much less the actions of men to come
to pass unavoidably, no not upon supposition of God's decree; but by virtue of
his decree both contingent things come to pass contingently, that is with a
possibility of not coming to pass; and free things freely, that is joined
with an active power in the Agent, either to suspend his action; or to do
otherwise; as well as necessary things come to pass necessarily. This I say we
avouch with Aquinas, and accordingly with him maintain the root of contingency
to be the effectual will of God. Again I have often showed that
Predestination in the phrase of the Ancients is only of such things as God
decreed to bring to pass by his effection; notwithstanding this, Austin was
bold to profess, that not any thing came to pass unless God would have it
come to pass; but evil things only by suffering them; good things by working
them, As for compulsion which is Prosper's phrase, and which this Author
corrupts rendering i^ by the urging, which is ambiguous. We deny that man is
compelled to acts supernatural; much less do we grant compulsion to acts
natural; such as are all sinful acts; yea too connaturall unto him, compared
in Scripture to sweet morsells which they roll under their tongue, as the
book of Job resembles it. By all which we may judge indifferently both of this
Author's sufficiency and modesty. Austin never said that God predestined
any man to sin. For predestination with them (as has been said) was only of
such things as God determined to work. Yet the same Austin confidently
professes of Enchirid. c. 95.
those things which come to pass by God's sufferance (and these we all know to
be evil things) that they come not to pass, unless Almighty God will have
them come to pass,

Thus far in answer to this Author's additions to M. Hoord's discourse, and
concerning the upper and more harsh and rigorous way which M. Hoord left
unprosecuted. page 49, there is a passage added, a citation out of Peter, but
it is of the same nature with the rest, and add's no strength to the argument;
and my answer satisfies it as well as the rest.

P. 52. etc. Is inserted a representation, how the doctrine of our Divines
fights with God's holiness.

Sect. 1.
It fights with God's holiness, and makes him the principal cause of sin
in the greatest number of men M. Masons Addit. p 52. 53, 54 55.
I know that the defender of it does not think so. For the maine reason which
moved the Synod of Dort, and some other Divines before and since, to bring
down predestination thus low, and begin their Reprobation after the fall, was,
that they might maintain a fatal and absolute Reprobation of men, and yet
avoid this imputation, as Doctor Twisse has noted. But what they intended (for
ought that I can see) they have not Vindic: great: l. 1 par: 1. cap. 4. initio.
compassed. For it follows evident enough, even from their conclusions too,
that of all the sins of reprobates, which are the greatest number by many
degrees God is the true and principal Author. Two things they say which taken
together, methinks, infer it. 1. That God of his own will and pleasure has
brought men into an estate, in which they cannot avoid sin, 2ly. That he
leaves the Reprobate irrecoverably in it.

1. That God of his own will and pleasure has brought men into an estate in
which they cannot possibly avoid sin; that is into the state of original
sin, which consists of two parts.

1. The guilt of Adam's transgression. 2. The corruption of nature. In both
these they say mankind is interessed, not through the force and efficiency of
natural generation, because we all derive our nature from Adam, as our first
principle; but by God's free and voluntary order and impuration. It came not to
pass by any natural means (says Calvin) that all men fell from salvation,
by the fault of our first parem. That all men Instit. l. 3. c. 23. Sect: 7.
are held under the guilt of eternal death in the person of one man; it is the
clear and constant voice of Scripture. Now this cannot be ascribed to any
natural cause it must therefore come from the wonderful council of God. A
little after he has the same again with as great an Emphasis. How is it that
so many nations with their children, should be involved in the fall without
remedy, but because God would have it so. As roundly does Doctor Twisse affirm
the same. The guilt of original sin is derived unto us only by imputation,
the filth only by propagation, and Vindic. great. l. 1. par. 1. digr. 4. c. 3.
prope finem
both these only by God's free constitution. A little before he has these
words; The fault of our nature comes rom God's free appointment For he does
not cut of any necessity but of his mere will only impute the sin of Adam to
us To this purpose he speaks a great deal more in the same place. To these
sayings Saint Bernard has the like speaking of Adam's sin he says, Adam's
sin is another, because we knew not of it; and Bern: Sermon. 1. Domi: 1 post.
8. Epiphan.
yet ours, because it was through the just though secret judgment of God,
reputed ours.

And this that they say is agreeable to reason. For if we be fallen into the
guilt of the first sin and the corruption of nature, only because we were in
Adam's loins when he sinned, and derive our being from him, then these two
things will follow.

1. That we stand guilty of all the sin^ which Adam committed from his fall to
his lives end. For we were vertually in his loins, as well after his fall as
before; and in every passage and variation of his life he was still a principle
of mankind. But where do we read that we are guilty of any other of his sins?
To the n^st sin only does the Scripture entitle that sin and misery, which
entered into the world and invaded all mankind, as we may see. Rom: 5. 15. 16.
17 etc.

2. That children are guilty of the sins of all their progenitors, especially
of their immediate parents. For they were in their loins when they sinned, and
more immediately then in Adam's. But children are not guilty of their parents
faults, nor obnoxious to their punishments, because they are their children as
we may see. Exodus: 20. 5. where God saying that he will visit the sins of the
fathers upon the children to the third and fourth generation of them hate him;
plainly implies that children are not simply charged with their fathers sins
but conditionally if they be haters of God, as their fathers were; if by
imitating their wicked parents they become partakers of their sins. In Ezech 18
14 etc. The Lord signifies thus much in his Apology against the cavil of the
Jews For first he says, that if a wicked man begets a son that seet. his
fathers sins, and does not the like, he shall not die for the iniquiry of his
father. This implies that the derivation of being Ezekiel. 18. 20:
from the patent does not render the child obnoxious to the punishment of the
fathers sin, nor consequently to the sin. For the good child is not
obnoxious, and yet the good child is equally in the fathers loins with the
bad, and equally receives nature and being from him. And then the Lord tells
them expressly thus much in two propositions.

1. Affirmatively, The soul that sins it shall die. And that it may be
known that he speaks exclusively, only the soul that sins shall dye; he
delivers his mind.

2. Negatively, The Son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither
shall the father bear the iniquity of her Son etc.

Our Savior in that woeful speech of his to the Pharisees, Fulfill ye also
the measure of your fathers. Behold Mat. 23. 32. 34.
I send unto you Prophets. etc. them ye shall kill and crucify, that on you
may come all the righteous blood. etc. Intimates apparently, that the
Pharisees were not inheritours of their fathers sins and punishments by birth;
but by the commission and imitation of their fathers sins, they came to inherit
both their sins and plagues. Miserable would our case be on whom the ends of
the world are come, if children should be guilty of all their Ancestors
prevatications. What a world of sins should we be to answer for, personal
sins, parents, progenitors sins, to a thousand past generations? A thing with
no reason to be imagined. This is the first thing

Whereas I am quoted here to give the reason which moved the Synod of Dort, and
some other Divines to begin Reprobation after the fall, namely this, to avoid
the imputation Answer.
of making God the Author of sin I doubt this Author has so long inured
himself to leasings, that it is grown natural unto him to deliver untruthes.
For first I make no mention (in that fourth Digres of mine in the matter of
predestination) of the Synod of Dort; neither indeed were they the Objects of
my thoughts in this particular. cap. 4.
That Digression of mine is spent in answering the arguments of those who
dispute against Massa nondum condita, and stand for massa corrupta, to be the
object of election and reprobation. In the first chapter I make answer to Mr.
Elnathan Parre in an English tract of his, wherein he deals upon this
argument. In the second chap: I deal with others that make choice of the lower
way; because it seems to be the easiest way, which I express in the very
words of Mr. Doctor Abbats, Bishop of Sarisbury ere he died, and I conceived
that indeed this motive prevailed with most; and therefore I thought good so
much the more thoroughly to discuss that. But do I say they took this course
to free God from the imputation of sin? Nothing less; my words are these in
the Digression cap. 2. Quod plurimos movet, illud est, nimirum quod in
sententia illa de massa nondum condita, omnia sint, ut aiunt, intricata and
perplexa, and infinitis difficultatibus involuta; in hac vero de massa corrupta
predestinationi hominum praestruenda contra clara sint omnia, and cum
Scripturarum autoritate, judicioque antiquitatis planissime consentientia;
where I mention two reasons that moved them to take this way 1. This, in that
opinion concerning the Mass of mankind not yet created, all passages are
intricate, perplexed, and entangled with infinite difficulties; but in the
opinion concerning the Mass corrupt, all things are clear. 2. This, that in
this other opinion, all things are most plainly found to agree both with the
authority of Scriptures, and with the judgment of antiquity. Now after I had
endeavored to discover the insufficiency of this plea in the second and third
chapter of that fourth Digression in the matter of predestination. In the
fourth chapter I propose mine own judgment concerning the true benefit of this
way in making the corrupt mass of mankind the object of election and
reprobation; not the judgment of others, as this Author carries the matter;
but mine own judgment. For thus I begin. Ad extremum, vis libere pronuntiem,
quid unice proficiatur ex hac nostra praedestinationis Objecti sententiae
temperatione. Dicam igitur quid sentiam. Hinc nimirum efficitur ut a lapsu
primorum parentum, decreto praedestinationis subjiciendo and subordinando
liberemur huic unice provisum esse, ab istius quasi mediae and temperatioris
opinionis assertioribus mihi plusquam probabile, aut verisimile videtur, ne
scililicet alias peccatum fieri statueretur, decernente Deo, tanquam medium ad
fines a Deo, in praedestinatione sibi praestitutos accommodatum; unde etiam
quam author peccati constituendus sit, nulla solida ratione explicari posse
videtur. In the last place, will you give me leave freely to profess, what we
profic by thus tempering our opinion touching the object of predestination? I
will therefore deliver what I think. So that herein I purpose mine own opinion
only, not the opinion of others. Herehence thus we gain that we are freed from
subjecting and subordinating man's fall unto God's decree of predestination. It
seems to me more then probable or likely, that the maintainers of this middle
and temperate openion do provide only against this inconvenience; (that is
their way does indeed provide against this, and against no other inconvenience
in my opinion) to wit, least otherwise the sin of Adam should be said to come
to pass God willing it, as a means conducing to those ends which God intended
in predestination; from whence it follows as it seems, that it cannot be
explicated by any solid reason that God is not made the Author of sin. All
which is delivered by me as my opinion, conceiving that others think so too;
namely not that God is hereby made the Author and principal cause of sin;
but that the contrary cannot be explicated by any solid reason. Now Cajetan
confesses as much, namely that in these mysteries, all the distinctions that
are used, do not quietare intellectum, satisfy the understanding; and
therefore he does captivate his own into the obedience of faith. And Alvarez
justifies him in this, professing herein that he speaks doctissime and
piissime, most learned and holyly. And in a peculiar disputation he maintains
that the mystery of Gods providence and predestination, standing with the
liberty of our wills, is incomprehensible by us in this world. Lastly,
consider, this is delivered only of the first sin of our first parents, which
this author perverts most shamefully, when he avoucheth that I should
acknowledge our Divines, many of them, to embrace this way to avoid the
imputation of making God the principal cause, not of Adams sin alone, but of
sin in the greatest number of men. And to confess a truth, if sin be made
the means for the procuring of the ends which God intends in predestination,
undoubtedly God himself should be the author of sin. For whosoever intends
any end, he, and none but he, must be author in working the means which tend
to this end. Therefore I said, only that in this case, It seems that the sin
of Adam was intended by God as the means; Whereas in truth and upon due
consideration it appears that not the creatures sin, but Gods permission of
the creatures sin, is the means whereby God brings to pass his glorious
ends. Yet not the permission of sin alone, but joined together with the
pardoning of it, and saving his elect in despite of it, is the complete means
(together with the procuring of Christ's merits) for the manifestation of Gods
glory in the way of mercy; And in like manner, not the permitting of sin
alone, but joined with the punishment of it, is the complete means for the
manifestation of Gods glory in the way of justice vindicative, which in
Scripture phrase is called, the declaration of his wrath. And whereas I said
that hereby it seemed that it could not by any sound reason be manifested, that
God was not the Author Rom: 9. 22.
of sin, by the first way, this Author avoucheth of the defenders of the
lower way which seems most temperate, that from their conclusions it follows
evidently, that of all the sins of Reprobates, which are the greatest number
by many degrees, God is the true and principal Author. Observe, this (he
says) follows evidently from their conclusions; and forthwith he tells us
that he thinks so, or, to his thinking, it does so. And why is he not the
Author of all the sins of the elect also? whereas original sin continues
in them also, they carry about them a body of death, and have cause to
complain, of a Romans 7.
law in their numbers that rebelleth against the law of their mind, and leads
them captive to the law of sin. Only there is a principle of spiritual life
in them, that renewes their repentance daily as their sins are renewed; but
they look not to be freed, from sin as long as they live in this world. But
let us examine how well he makes good that which he affirms of the sins of
the Reprobate, that God is made the Author of them by our Cornel: in Ep: ad
Rom* c. 9. 18.
doctrine, of Reprobation. I find that Cornelius a Lapide a Jesuit shapes
Calvines doctrine of election and Reprobation, this lower way, and imputes unto
him that from Reprobation, according to his doctrine, in Reprobis manat certus
and necessarius lapsus in peccata quaelibet, A certain and necessary falling
into all manner of sins, does flow in Reprobates. But not from these
principles mentioned by this Author, but rather from two other principles. The
1. that God destinated Reprobates to everlasting punishment, as to their end;
and unto sins, as to the means thereof. The 2. is that man does nothing
freely in negotio damnationis suae; but that in all things he is driven of God,
as a bowl by him that throws it, as an hatchet by him that hewes with it, and
as Clay is moved by the Potter, whom he cannot resist. This he imputes, to the
defenders of Reprobation the lower way, and particularly to Calvin. This
Cornelius denies not, for ought I know, that by the just judgment of God,
though executed according to his will and pleasure, has brought all men forth
into the world in original sin, or that any man can be recovered out of it
whiles he lives in this world. And as for these two conclusions which he
imputes to Calvin: as they are false in themselves, so they are as falsely
charged upon Calvin. Haec loquendi ratio, nunquam Calvin. de occult. Dei provid.
apud me occurret, finem creationis esse aeternum interitum. Calvin expressly
denies, that God creates any man to this end, that he may damn him; Neither is
sin any means whereby God brings a man to damnation, but the permission of
sin is Gods means, and that together with damning for sin, is the
complete means, whereby God brings to pass his end concerning Reprobates,
which is the manifestation of his glory in the way of vindicative justice,
called his wrath upon those Reprobates; and in the way of mercy upon his elect
vessels of mercy, whom he has prepared unto glory, as S. Paul plainly
teaches us. The other principle which he obtrudes upon Calvin, is as false,
and as falsely laid to his charge. In good actions he Romans 9. 22. 23.
grants the elect are so carried to that which is good, as not freely. For he
takes Liberty to consist in an indifferency to do that which is good, or no;
wherein I willingly confess he is in an error; but that reprobates do not
that evil freely, which they do, is no where affirmed by Calvin that I know
nor by any learned or sober Divine. For albeit we all concur in this with
Bernard, that no natural man has libertatem a peccato, liberty to keep
himself from sin: Yet that he is carried into this or that particular sin,
we all confess it is done freely. And the reason is evident, drawn from the
difference between gracious actions, and sinful actions. Every gracious
action is supernatural, either as touching the substance of the act, such as
are the acts of faith, hope, and love; or as touching the manner of performing
them, such as are all virtuous actions, which are not acceptable unto God,
unless they flow from the former principles, faith, hope, and love: Hereupon
there is some color, that such are not performed freely; but there is no such
color, as if man were not free in performing actions vicious; considering that
all vicious actions are natural actions, none of them supernatural. And
surely every natural man as he has power to perform any action natural; so
has he power to abstain from it. But proceed we along with our present
Author.

1 The first doctrine, that he obtrudes upon us, is such, that I little thought
there had been any difference between him and us thereabouts, consisting of
two particulars. 1. The one, that God brings all men forth into the world in
the corrupt mass, or in the state of original sin.

2 The other, that man, in the state of original sin or natural corruption
devoyd of the spirit of regeneration, is under the servitude of sin, has no
liberty from it. Now in these particulars I could not imagine that this Author
differed from us, unless with Pelagius he entertaines an affection to deny
original sin. For if all men be borne in original sin, seeing it is God
that takes us out of our mothers womb, and by whom we are brought forth into
this world, it cannot be denied, I should think, that God brings all men
forth into the world, in original sin. As for the second, Doctor Potter
confesses it as the doctrine of the Church of England, that man in state of
nature has no liberty from sin. It is true, this liberty he distinguishes
from that liberty, which is called, liberty from necessity, which he grants to
a natural man; to whom he denies the former, which cannot stand without
contradiction. For if a man has no liberty from sin he must needs sin. And
therefore Doctor Fulke upon the Remish Testament does usually distinguish
between liberty from sin, and liberty from coaction. And both Arminius and
Corvinus confess that by the sin of Adam all men are cast upon a necessity
of sinning, though God be ready to deliver us from this necessity of sinning
upon reasonable terms to be performed on man's part, which latter doctrine we
utterly renounce as manifestly breathing the spirit of Pelagius, in a
particular generally condemned in the Church of God, namely, that grace is
conferred according to works or merits. This makes me conceive that this
Author carries himself cunningly in the proposition of this doctrine which
he imputes unto us, and that he has a reach more then every one is aware of.
And indeed the phrase he uses of bringing men into an estate, is very harsh,
though applied to Adam and Eve our first parents, much more applied to their
race and posterity. For albeit Adam was created in a better state, and
afterward brought into the state of sin, and bondage of corruption: yet what
sinister judgment moved this Author to impute this unto God, rather then to
Adam himself? what if God took his holy spirit from them upon their fall,
whereupon they found themselves naked and were ashamed? was it not just with
God to do so? Does not M. Hord profess, that it were just with God to damn
all for original sin, if he would; which doctrine was delivered by this
Author in his Lectures at Magdalen Hall, my self being an hearer, and a taker
of notes from him, upon this very argument. But it may be this is to be
accounted amongst the errors of his youth, mistaking Bellermine, which now he
is to wise to correct in his age. Who brings malefactors to the Gallows, is it
the Judge or Sheriff, and not their sins rather? Yet this, though absurd
enough, satisfies him not, but withal he adds that God does this of his own
will and pleasure which phrase is prone to work a persuasion in the Reader,
that hereby is sign^^ed that God brought not man in this state in the way of
justice for his sin, but merely of his own will or pleasure; But what Divine
of ours was ever known to maintain any such prodigious assertion? Who can deny
but that the Judge condemns a malefactor unto death, and Sheriff takes order
to execute him. Now if question be made why such a man be hanged, will any wise
man refer this to the will and pleasure of the Judge or Sheriff, and not
rather to the malefactors deserts? In like sort it is God that condemns a
man, and inflicts eternal punishment upon him, but is there any color to say
that he does this of his will and pleasure, and not rather that he does it in
the way of justice provoked thereunto by men's sins? Lastly when it is said
that God brought him into the state of corruption, who would not think that
thereby were meant that God was the positive Author of this corruption?
whereas it is apparent that man himself averted himself voluntarily and
freely from God, the unchangable good; and converted himself unto the
creature, which is but a changeable good; And God hereupon taking his Spirit
from him and that most justly; left him where he found him, and that
irrecoverably, save by the grace of regeneration. Yet this phrase is more harsh
applied to the race and posterity of Adam, in whose production he has no other
hand, then that which necessarily belongs unto him, as the Author of nature,
namely, the quickening of them, and fashioning of them in the womb, and
bringing them forth into the light of this world. If from a leprous Sire there
springs a leprous fruit, shoud this seem strange? We all derive our nature
from Adam fallen from God, and converted unto the creature, and bereaved of
God's Spirit most justly for his transgression; why should it seem strange
then, that our natures should be no better then Adam's was after his fall? It
is true the propagation of original sin, has always been accounted of a
mysterious nature, as touching the manner of it, and very strange and odd
conceits have been entertained hereabouts; Some saying that the soul is
derived from the parents a strange conceit even in Philosophy not only in
peculiar reference unto the soul reasonable; but generally I find Philosophers
have entertained peculiar contemplations about Datores formarum, in a more
general way. Others have thought that the soul is defiled by the body, as a
sweet and sovereign oil may be corrupted by a naughty box; which is worse
then the former, no marvel that a bodily thing should corrupt that which is
bodily; but that a body should corrupt the soul, the one being corporal the
other spiritual is beyond comprehension: Far more probable or rather without
question that the soul rather corrupts the body. The positive inclination unto
evil is that which has troubled all and made some conceive that it could not
proceed immediately from God; For if so, then surely not impura, but pura.
Others and particularly Arimininsis, as remember, that the corruption came from
the breath of the serpent, others as Johannes Bicconius; that the soul though
coming pure from God yet knit unto the body, the Lord for the sin of Adam
gives it over to the power of Satan, who as an universal cause supplies the
place of a particular cause in the positive corrupting of it. This at the first
seemed unto me as very singular, so a very strange adventure, and that
Baccorius is a very rare School-man and more used in the Arabian philosophy
then all the rest, save such as were of his own profession. And that I take to
be the reason, why Aquinas discourses as he does of Intellectus Agens, making
it a^ticulty of the soul; and Durand discourses in such sort of that
argument, as i^ he never understood the state of the question; which I take to
proceed from this that they were so little acquainted with Averro's philosophy,
wherein Zabarell was well seen. And I find him sometimes congratulating his
good fortunes in finding that this Johannes Bacconius was in some particulars
of his mind, he does not say, he learnt it of him. But I know no School Divine
comparable to him for depth of philosophical speculations; yet am I not of his
mind in the point of original sin. I willingly confess it is one of the
three points wherein sometimes I persuaded my self I never should be satisfied
in this world* And that which most troubled me was the positive nature of it.
Wherein Cajetan is thought to discourse strangely also, even to the palate of
Pontificians; And Aquinas his definit on of it, calling it, Habitus corruptus;
has cost me no small pains in the discussion thereof. At length I conceive
there is no great cause of so much pudder to be made about it, save that
certain prejudices which we lay for grounds do cast us there upon. The
harmony of man's nature in all parts, excepting it is due subjection unto God, I
willingly confess was natural, but whether it did profluere ex principiis
naturae, either specificae, or individualis, or was caused and maintained while
Adam stood in his integrity by the special hand of God's providence; as some
Schoolmen profess finding the difficulty of maintaining the former (which
yet might be consequent naturally to it is due subjection unto God for ought I
see yet to the contrary) I dispute not. But as for it is due subjection unto God
in faith and love, and such a love as joined with the contempt of it self; I
have reason to conceive that this was not natural, as flowing from the
principles of nature either specificall or individual, though this latter I
heard sometimes maintained publicly in the University, but rather wrought in
man in his creation by virtue of supernatural grace, and the holy Ghost's
residence in him; which supernatural grace, and holy Ghost's residence had
been natural unto all his posterity, had Adam continued in his integrity. I
call it natural in as much as it had descended unto all his posterity, after
the manner of an inheritance natural. But Adam by his transgression forfeited
this blessed condition, not to himself only, but to all his posterity, being
justly bereaved of the Spirit of God, and left by the Lord where he found him;
averted a bono incommutabili, and converted ad bonum communicabile in an
inordinate manner, which conversion to the creature is positive, and not evil
in it self, but as it is joined with aversion from God; and this makes it an
inordinate conversion to the creature, not for Gods sake, that it is not out of
the love of God to the contempt of himself, which is the character of a child
of God but out of the love of himself to the contept of God, which is the
charecter of a child of this this world. So that as original righteousness
whereunto we are restored in part by the grace of regeneration, transcends all
motall virtues; so original sin transcends all moral vices and is found in
the most virtuous amongst heathen men (of whom some have been very renowned in
this kind, and great masters of their passions) as well as amongst the most
vicious. And it is hard to resolve who have been greatest enemies to the truth
of God and holiness; and generally to the holy ways of God, whether the most
virtuous or the most vicious among heathen men. I come to his second position,
which he casts upon us, as dissenting therein from himself; and it is this,
That God leaves the Reprobates irrecoverably in it. Now on this point I would
gladly know his contrary Tenet in what sense it proceeds, namely, That
Reprobates are not left irrecoverably in original sin, or in such state
wherein they cannot avoid sin. For I cannot comprehend his meaning herein.
But it was wont to be said of Africa that, semper aliquid apportat novi,
always it brings forth some new monster in course of nature. So men of this
Author's spirit: are always bringing forth some new monster in Divinity. For
what thinks he? was ever any Reprobate recovered out of original sin? Nay was
ever any child of God recovered out of it while he lived upon the face of the
earth? Or does he think himself recovered out of it, or is it in his power to
avoid it? Perhaps he will say though he cannot avoid sin original, yet he can
avoid sin actual; and so not only the children of God may if they will, but
even Reprobates also. But what? may they avoid all sin, or some only? What
one of our Divines denies that a Reprobate has power to avoid fornication? We
see heathens do avoid: it Or stealth? For heathens do so. Or murder? Even
heathens have been found very moral and that generally. But this we say; All
men in the state of nature, whether they do good as touching the substance of
the act; yet they do it not in a gracious manner; Or whether they abstain
from that which is evil, they do not abstain from it in a gracious manner;
nor can do. Nay since the fall of Adam, who ever lived free from sin, the
Son of God only excepted? Does notholy Paul profess of himself saying, I do
not the good that I would, but the evil that I would not, that do I. To will
is present with me, but I find not to perform: hat which is good. And if God
may justly damn all for sin original as Mr. Hoord affirms, why may not God
leave all irrecoverably in it; and that justly? So that herein I find my self
in a brake, not can devise with my self in what tolerable or colorable sense
he can affirm, that Reprobates are not left irrecoverably in the state of
original sin; or in such a state, in which they cannot avoid sin; I say in
what sense he can deliver this different from us, I cannot devise. For we
willingly grant that there is no particular actual sin from which a
Reprobate has not power to abstain, though he cannot abstain from it in a
gracious manner without grace, and that grace we account the grace of
regeneration; which is a supernatural principle of gracious actions, both as
touching faith in God, and the love of God, to the contempt of our selves. Now
I guess his meaning is, that no Reprobate is so left and abandoned in
original sin, but that God gives him grace to believe if he will, to repent
if he will, to love God if he will, and that above all things. I guess, I say,
that this is his meaning; but I would have him express it, that I might see it
under his hand. For till then I find noe apparent difference between him and
us, as touching these two principles from whence he deduceth, that God is
thereby made The principal cause of sin in the greatest number of men. And if
once he deliver himself fairly, and comes to this, the issue of the question
to be debated between us will be fair and clear; namely about this their
universal grace, whether all men elect and Reprobate by virtue of
supernatural grace given unto them, have power to believe if they will, repent
if they will. And against this I will dispute after this manner. First in all
this there is no difference between us excepting that this power is said to be
wrought in man by supernatural grace. For we say with Austin Deo credere, and
ab amore temporalium ad divina Aust de Gen: cont Manich: l. 1, c. 3.
praecepta servanda se convertere, omnes possunt si velint. All men can believe
God, if they will; and from the love of temporal things convert themselves to
the keeping of God's commandments if they will. For all the moment of
inclining a man to works of morallity lies in the will of man. And therefore
mark what follows in Austin, Sed praeparatur voluntas a Domino (supple ut
velit) tantumque augetur munere charitatis ut possit. But the will is prepared
by the Lord (to wit to make it willing) and so much augmented by the gift of
charity as to make it able. And I prove, that look what I supply is according
unto Austin Enchirid. c. 32.
interpreting that of the Apostle, neque volentis, neque currentis, sed
miserentis Dei; it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs but of
God that shows mercy. For he shows; that the whole both to will and run, is
to be ascribed unto God, qui hominis voluntatem bonam and praeparat adjuvandam,
and adjuvat praeparatam; who both prepares the good will of man that after he
may help it, and helps it being once prepared; where plainly man swilling
that, which is good, is made the fruit of God's preparing it; but because there
is in man a will of the flesh, resisting this will of the spirit; therefore
there is need not of grace preparing only, but of grace adjuvant and helping
also, to enable it to do what it has a will unto, whence immediately
follows, running as well as willing. And these two graces praeparant, and
adjuvant, are afterward called by the names of grace prevenient, and
subsequent, thus; Nolentem praevenit ut velit, volentem subsequitur ne frustra
velit. Him that is unwilling the Lord preventeth to make him willing, and
willing he follows him that he may not will in vain. And that this double
grace is required by reason of the reluctance between the flesh and the Spirit,
I prove out of the same Austin writing thus, Prima gratia est, Aust: de cor:
rep: and great: c. 11.
qua fit ut habeat homo justitiam si velit; secunda ergo plus potest, qua etiam
fit ut velit, and tantum velit tantoque ardore diligat, ut carnis voluntatem
contraria concupiscentem voluntate spiritus vincat. The first grace is that
whereby it comes to pass that a man is righteous if he will; The second grace
therefore is of more power, whereby it comes to pass also that a man does
will, and that so resolutely, and with such fervency loves (compare this with
that of Austin de Gen: contrae Manich: lib. 1. cap: 3.) that by the will of the
Spirit, he overcommeth the will of the flesh fighting against it. So that a
power to do good if a man will is one thing; to will that which is good is
another thing; and lastly to be able to do that which it wills is a third
thing; yet both these two last are comprehended under sic velle, which Austin
calls tantum augeri munere charitatis, to have the gift of charity ibid. cap.
12.
so much increased in him, as thus; Tantum Spiritu sancto accenditur voluntas
eorum ut ideo possint, quta sic velint, ideo sic velint, quia Deus sic
operatur, ut velint. The will of God's children is so infla^ed by the Holy
Ghost, that therefore they are able to do good, because they have a will to it
in such a manner (that is with such fervency and eagernes) therefore they have
a will to it in such a manner, because God so works, as to make them willing;
to wit, in such a manner. Secondly we say that to believe if a man will, to
repent if he will is to be accounted nature, rather then grace, which I prove
thus. Supernatural grace is not inferior to a moral virtue, but a moral
virtue does more then leave a man indifferent to do virtuously if he will; For
it inclines the will to virtuous courses only, and not vicious; Like as vice
inclines the will only to vicious courses, and not to virtuous; how much more
does supernatural grace not leave a man indifferent to do good if he will;
but inclines the will only to such things as are pleasing unto God, and not to
things displeasing unto him. Again to have power to believe if we will, is to
have power to have faith if we will; But this Austin has expressly professed
to belong to the nature of man, in distinctio fro the grace of the faithful.
Posse fide^ habere, sicut posse charitate^ habere naturae est heminu^; Aust: de
praedest: Sanct: cap. 5.
fide^ habere, sicut charitate^ habere, gratiaeest fideliu^. The nature of man
makes him to have power, to have faith, to have charity; but the grace of the
faithful makes a man to have faith, to have charity. It may be objected out of
the former place taken out of Aust: deCor: and great: c. 11, that habere
justitiam si velit, is, gratia prima; to be righteous if he will is the first
grace. I answer, Austin there speaks of the grace that Adam had before his
fall, which was this, posse si velit to abstain from eating the forbidden
fruit. And this first grace is called grace in this respect, that there was in
Adam no flesh lusting against the Spirit; So that if Adam had but a will to
abstain, he should have no cause to complain as Saint Paul does, To will is
present with me, but I find no means to perform that which is good; Now such
a posse si velit is not found in any man now a days, no not in the regenerate.
But all men that have a will to do good by the grace of God, have withal a
posse secundum quid, a power in part a weak power; but this is not sufficient
to denominate them simply able to do that which is good; unless the love of
God be increased in them, so as to overcome the will of the flesh lusting
against the spirit, as I have represented Austin thus expounding it. Thirdly
whether tends this, that all men have power to believe if they will, to repent
if they will? But to maintain that faith and repentance are not the gifts of
God, bestowed of his free grace on whom he will; but that they are the works
of man's free will, directly contradictory to the word of God expressly
professing that faith is the gift of God, and that not of our selves. So
repentance is the gift of God; yea that it is God who works in us that which
is pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ. Heb: 13 21. Ephesians: 28. Act: 5. and
11. 18. 2 Timothy: 2. last. Phil. 3. 13.
Yea both the will and the deed, and that of his good pleasure. 4ly. If all
reprobates have power to believe and repent if they will, and so consequently
to persevere if they will; how comes it to pass that not one of them does
believe, repent, and persevere; seeing it is confessed among Philosophers that
such contingents as depend upon the free will of man, are equally propendent on
either side to pass as often one way, as the other. But proceed we along with
this Author.

1. Here he grants expressly that the state he speaks of is the state of
original sin; in which state we acknowledge that man has not libertatem a
peccato, freedom from sin. And Doctor Potter toward the end of his answer
to Charity mistaken confesses it to be the doctrine of the Church of England.
Yet do not we say, but that it is in the power of any man to abstain from any
particular sin, it being but a natural act, and a man has free power to
perform any natural act or to abstain from it; so far forth as to become
very virtuous, as much as any man among the heathen, many of whom have been
renowned for virtuous conversation. Calvin in the passages here alleged has
nothing concerning, either the guilt of Adam's transgression passing upon his
posterity, or the corruption derived therehence unto them; but only of their
falling from eternal salvation in the one; that all are enthralled to eternal
death in the other; And that Adam's fall has enwrapped all in eternal death
in the third. My passages quoted, and related out of my Vindiciae are more to
the purpose: I say indeed the guilt of Adam's transgression is derived unto us,
that is to our persons by imputation; but that very sin of Adam was the sin
of our natures, as Austin speaks. Non modo natura facta est peccatrix, sed and
genuit peccatores. Not only our humane nature became a sinner, but also begat
sinners. August: de nuptitis c. 34.
And accordingly it is justly imputed unto our persons, otherwise how could it
be just with God to condemn any man for original sin; which yet is expressly
acknowledged by Mr. Hoord. And the Apostle says expressly, that in Adam all
have sinned. And Austin gives the reason of it. De Adamo omnes peccatum
originale trahunt, quia omnes unus fuerunt. All draw original sin from Adam,
because all were that one. So that I have noe cause to doubt but this Author
is of the same opinion until I find him to avouch the contrary; and so much
the rather because he finds it is the opinion of Bernard also. And that the
corruption consequent is derived to us only by propagation, I think it is
without doubt amongst all, who concur not with Pelagius in maintaining that
it is derived unto us by imitation, and so only. Yet notwithstanding it cannot
be denied, but that God might have caused the punishment of Adam's sin to
rest upon himself only, and immediately destroyed him and created another, and
propagated mankind from him. Yea supposing his ordinance of propagating mankind
from him, yet God of his mercy might have derived others from him of his mere
grace endued with the holy Ghost, if it had pleased him; like as whom he justly
damnes for sin, he might have caused them to have lived one year or more
longer, and in that time bestowed the spirit of grace upon them to break off
their sins by repentance, and from grace translated into glory. As for the
reasons here mentioned by Mr. Mason to justify that which my self and others
have delivered on the former point, I have noe cause to justify, because they
proceed from a false ground, supposing that the reason of this imputation of
Adam's sin, and propagation of his corruption unto all his posterity, is
merely built upon this foundation that we were in Adam's loins when he sinned,
which is untrue.

1 In his first reason he does miserably overlash; for we could not be guilty
of all the sins which were committed by Adam from his fall to his life's end,
no not upon the ground whereon this Author builds; so long we were not in his
Ioynes, nor any longer then till he begat Seth; for from Seth sprang Noah, and
we all from him. Neither is it credible that Adam continued to beget children
till the last year, and month, and day of his life. Indeed we no where read
that we are guilty of any other of his sins, besides the first; The reason
whereof shall be given in the next place.

2 Therefore I say, in answer unto them both, that the ground of imputing Adams
sin unto his posterity, is not only because we were in Adams Ioynes, but
because the first sin of Adam was it, that bereaved his nature of Gods image;
and so brought corruption upon himself by an aversion from the Creator and
unchangable good, and conversion unto the Creature, wherein the Lord left him,
bereaving him of his spirit; and this nature, by this sin alone so corrupt,
is the fountain of all our natures; Like as if Adam had stood, of the same
fountain of integrity we had all received incorrupt natures; so that the like
cannot be said of any other sin of Adam afterward committed by him, nor of
the sin of any other our progenitors succeding him. For as for the wicked,
they have no such spirit of God to loose; And as for the Godly, they have
indeed the spirit of God, but so as not to be taken from them by the sins
committed by them, any more then it was from David upon the committing of so
foul sins in the matter of Uriah; neither do any Godly parents propagate
their state of grace to their posterity. And Aquinas is so bold hereupon as to
profess, that, Impossible est, quod aliqua peccata parentum proximorum, vel
etiam primi parentis praeter primum, per originem traducantur. 1. 2. q. 81.
ant. 2. in corp.
It is impossible that the sins of our immediate parents, or of our first
parents, besides the first, should be derived unto posterity by propagation.
For, says he, a man generates the same with himself in kind only; not in
individual. And therefore those things, which pertain to him as a particular
person, as acts personal, he does not propagate unto his children. Now to the
nature of man, something may pertain naturally, something by the gift of grace.
And this original righteousness as a gift of grace was bestowed on the whole
nature of mankind in our first parents, which Adam lost by his first sin; so
that like as original righteousness had been propagated to posterity
together with the humane nature, so also the opposite inordination. But as for
other actual sins, either of our first parents, or of others, they do not
corrupt the nature of man, as touching that which pertaines to nature, but as
touching that which pertaines to his person; therefore other sins are not
propagated unto posterity. And this reason which Aquinas gives, was long before
given by Anselme, De conceptu virginali and originali peccato, cap. 23.

Section. 2.
2 They say that God has immutably decreed to leave the far greatest part of
mankind in this impotent M. Mason Addit. p. 55. 56, 57.
condition irrecoverab^ely, and to afford them no power and ability sufficient
to make them rise out of sin to newness of life; and this decree he
executes in time: and both these he does out of his only will and pleasure.

Of this proposition there be three branches 1. God decrees to leave them. 2.
He does leave them. 3. He does both out of his alone pleasure.


1 God, say they, has decreed to leave them without sufficient grace, and
consequently under an everlasting necessity of sinning. This is the very Helen
which they sight for, the maine act of that absolute reprobation, which with
joint consent and endeavor they labor to maintain.

Most of them cast their reprobation into two acts; A negative, which is a
peremptory denial of grace and glory to some men lying in the fall; And a
Positive which they say is a preordination of the men thus left, to the
eternal torments of hell.

Others among them define Reprobation by an act merely negative, and call it
(Non electionem, decretum quo statuit non eo usque misereri.) These our Divines
in their suffrage define; and in their explication of Suffr: Brit: art: 1. de
Repr: These. 1.
the Definition which they give, they say that the proper acts of reprobation,
as it stands opposed to election, are no other then a denial of that same
glory and grace, which are prepared in the decree of election for the sons of
God. But in this they all agree, that by the decree of reprobation, grace
necessary for the avoiding of sin, is flatly denied to reprobates. And if at
any time we hear them say, that God has gratified Reprobates with some grace,
(For so says Walaeus, reprobates are left, under the common providence Walae:
Defens: Anat: Armin: c. deRepr. Suffr: Brit: these: 4. de Reprob.
of God, and consequently under some common endowments. And our Divines in the
Synod say, Reprobates though they are not elected, yet receive many of Gods
graces;) they are to be understood of such Graces and gifts as are insufficient
to make them avoid sin, as we may see in these two cited places, and many
more.

2 God does actually, according to his eternal and unchangeable decree, leave
the Reprobates in their several times and generations without his grace, under
a necessity of final sin and impenitency.

This is the second branch of that second proposition. And this they must needs
say; For Gods decrees cannot be frustrated; what he purposed before time,
without fail he does in time. I shall not need therefore to prove, that they
say so; Nevertheless to let it be seen how positively and Categorically they
say so, I will give an instance or two. The Divines of Geneva at the Synod,
among their Theses of Reprobation, have this for one, Those whom God has
reprobated, out of the same will by which he has rejected them either be
calls not at all, or being called he renews not thoroughly by the spirit of
regeneration, ingraftcth not into Christ mystically, nor justifies etc Like to
this is the speech of Lubbert, who speaking of reprobates says; To them Act:
Syn: Suffrag: Gener: de Reprob:
either he reveals not the way of salvation, or gives not faith and
regeneration; but leaves them in sin and misery. The same author speaking
against the position of the Remonstrants (viz: That God does supply to all men
sufficient and necessary means of salvation, with an intention of saving them)
lets down this Anti^hesis, God does not administer to all men means
needful and sufficient to salvation, and that with an intention of saving Act:
Syn: Suffr. Lubbert de Reprob.
them. And to this his Antithesis Polyander, Wal^us, and Thyscus three other
professors of Divinity in the Lowcountryes did set their hands.

It is a usual course with this Author to lay unto our charge, that God has
immutably Answer.
decreed this or that; So that if we had said that all this were decreed by God
not immutably, but mutably, we should not incur the danger of his displeasure
so immutably, and unavoydably as we do. Now to decree not immutably, but
mutably, is a phrase that I no where meet with, but among men of this Authors
spirit; the congruity whereof I willingly profess, is so far from mine
understanding, as no phrase more. If they would in the name of common sense
expound themselves unto us, then we should soon consider what Answer we are to
give in. We willingly profess, that all Gods decrees are unchangeable, but of
decreeing a thing unchangeably, not any of our Divines discourse, that I know
of. We say that God decrees some things to come to pass necessarily, and some
things to come to pass contingently; so does Aquinas: and we understand his
language right well, and approve his doctrine in this particular. We willingly
confess that as God has chosen some, whom he means to deliver from that
bondage of sin, and Satan, whereinto all are cast by the transgression of
Adam. And how to deliver them? Surely by bestowing the spirit of grace, and
regeneration upon them, so to open their eyes and bring them out of darkness
into light, and from the power of Satan unto God; In few words by bestowing
faith and repentance upon them. All others he has from everlasting determined
not to show the like grace and favor unto. For we see by experience that to
many he gives not faith and repentance. And look how he carries himself
toward any persons in time, after the same manner he determined to carry
himself from everlasting. And the Scripture expressly tells us that even of them
that are called, but few are chosen; and consequently the number of reprobates
must needs be far greater, then the number of the elect. Now as many as God
has decreed to deny faith and repentance unto, we hold it impossible for
them, upon this supposition, to be recovered out of the bondage of sin and
Satan; because the Scripture in diverse places expressly tells us, that faith is
the gift of God, repentance is the gift of God; and therefore to whomsoever he
will not be so gracious, as to give faith, and repentance, we judge it a thing
impossible upon this supposition, that any of them should believe, should
repent. And more then this, as touching every particular here delivered, we
account it so apparently, testified in holy Scripture, that we wonder not a
little with what face this Author can deny it. Nay, we verily believe that he
belives all these as well as we. And the true point of Substantial difference
between us is conceled by him all along, which is an argument of no ingenuity;
but yet I bear with him in following Lysanders counsel, when the Lions skin
will not hold out, to piece it out with a fox skin; least otherwise his
Pelagian tenet would be discovered in a most palpable and gross manner. For
undoubtedly he believes that faith is the gift of God; as also that it is
impossible, that they should believe, to whom God will not give faith. But his
tenet is, that God is ready and willing to give faith to all, not absolutely,
but conditionally; to wit, in case they make themselves fit for it, by
performing somewhat on their parts. Now this is as good as in express terms
to profess, that Grace is conferred according to merits, or according unto
works: For between works and merits in this controversy there is no
difference, as Bellarmine acknowledges; And in the Epistle of Prosper to
Austin they are taken promiscuously, as of the same force and signification.
Now this doctrine is expressly contradictory to the word of God. God has saved
us and called us with an holy calling not according to our own works but
according to his own purpose and grace. The like we have, Tit. 3. 5. And in
like manner this doctrine hat: been condemned 2. Tim. 19.
in the Church of God, as the sour leaven of Pelagianisme, from the Synod of
Palestine above 1200 years ago all along; and Pelagius himself was driven to
subscribe to the Canons of that Synod of Palestine, wherein Anathema was
pronounced upon them, that do, or shall maintain, that Grace is conferred
according unto works.

If God has decreed not to bestow faith upon a man, if he has not decreed to
bestow upon him the gift of charity, it is impossible, that any work can be
done by such a one proceeding from faith and love, and consequently such a one
has no liberty from sin, and that no such liberty is found in a natural
man, in an unregenerate, is the doctrine of our Church by D. Potters
confession, a Cathedral Divine, I do not say by the constant doctrine of D.
Fulke in his answer to the Rhemish Testament, and if no liberty from sin be
found in such a one, it follows that such a one remains under a necessity of
sinning, not that every sin, whether of lying, stealing, whoring, murder, or
in any other kind is necessarily committed by him; For a natural man may be as
moral as any heathen has been, many of whom have been very famous and
renowned in the world for their morality; But whether they are exercised in
virtuous actions, or in abstaining from actions vicious, yet still they sin,
forasmuch as they neither perform the one, nor abstain from the other in a
gracious manner, out of faith and love. And therefore Austin was somewhere bold
to style them Splendida peccata glorious sins. For novimus non officiis sed
finibus discernendas esse virtutes, Virtues are to be discerned not by their
offices, but by their ends. The Helen we fight for is nothing but the word of
God, and the truth manifestly contained therein; namely concerning the
prerogative of his grace, as effectual to every good work, and most Freely
given to some and denied to others, not according to men's works, according to
that of S. Paul God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will, he hardneth.
This is a part of Gods sovereignty; And it stands all true subjects upon to
maintain the lawful Sovereignty of their Princes; how much more does it
become the creature to stand for the lawful prerogative and Sovereignty of his
Creator, especially when he proceeds herein according to the tenor of Gods
word, clear reason and the unanimous consent of all the orthodoxe in the
Church of God clearly opposing Pelagius herein from the Synod of Palestine
1200. years ago to this day.

The difference of opinions here feigned by him about the point of Reprobation,
amongst our Divines is like the feigning of a knot in a bulrush. For what is a
peremptory denying of grace and glory to some men lying in the fall, other then
a denial of that grace and glory, which is prepared in the decree of election
to the sons of God, though indeed neither of them make it a denial, which is
done in time, but rather Gods decree to deny it. For do not the latter Divines
maintain it to be peremptory, as well as the former? For what difference does
he devise between a flat denial, and a peremptory denial; and as for the
latter decree belonging to reprobation here mentioned, namely a preordination
of the man thus left to the torments of hell do not the latter Divines
acknowledge this decree to belong to Reprobation also? Only they profess that
God preordaines none to eternal torments in hell but for their sins actual
as well as original, of as many as live to ripeness of age. Now I would feign
know what Divine of ours maintains the contrary.

1. Our Divines in saying, Reprobation is, Decretum quo statuit non misereri do
manifest, that not denying grace, but the decree of denying it, is Reprobation.
Walaeus speaks of no common endowments, though that be a truth, which here is
attributed unto them; else how should they be called common endowments.

2. If he decrees to leave Reprobates without grace, and consequently under
that necessity of sinning into which all are cast by the sin of Adam; it is
nothing strange, I think that God should accordingly leave them therein;
though in a different manner, the Lord prostituting some to their own lost's
and to the power of Satan, more then others, and making some even by the
ministry of the Gospel, proficere ad exteriorem vitae emendationem, quo
mitius puniantur; as Austin some where speaks. If Gods decree cannot be
frustrated, as here is avouched; I wonder he should charge us with teaching,
that God decrees this, or that immutably. For if he should change any of his
decrees, they should undoubtedly be frustrated. Indeed we do not say, that God
decrees Hypothetically to give grace, to wit upon condition, that men will make
themselves fit for it, and for failing herein to deny them grace. And I am very
glad to observe so good correspondence in the suffrages of Protestant Divines
in the Synod of Dort, and our English also M. Mason Addit. p. 57. and 58. 59.
with them.

Sect: 3.
3. God both decrees and executes this leaving of men to themselves, of his
alone absolute will and Suffr-Brit. art. 1. de Repr. explic. these. 1. Orthodox
Ibid. these. 3. heterodox.
pleasure, This is the third branch

1 That they say so; witness the suffrage of our English Divines. We affirm
that this non election is founded in the most free pleasure of God. And that no
man lying in the fall is past over by the mere will of God, is numbered by the
same Divines among the heterodox positions; To this purpose also speak The
Palatinate Ministers. The cause of Reprobation is the most free and just will
of God. Act. Synod. Palate. these. 3. Ibid, these: 4.
That God passes over some and denies them the grace of the Gospel, the
cause is the same free pleasure of God.

Thus the Divines of Hessen; God decreed to leave some in the fall, of his own
good pleasure; The proof of this they fetch from the execution of this decree
in time. God does in time leave some of mankind fallen, and does Judic Theol.
Hassiac.
not bestow upon them means necessary to believe etc. and this out of his most
free pleasure; This they jointly affirm and prove it by this reason
especially. All men, were looked on as sinners. If sin therefore were the
cause, that moved God to reprobate, he should have reprobated or rejected all;
But he did not Reprobate all; therefore for sin he reprobated none, but for
his own pleasure, in which we must rest wthout seeking any other cause.

1. Now from these two things laid together, viz. 1. That God did bring men
into a necessity of sinning.

2. That he has left the Reprobates under this necessity, it will follow that
he is the Author of the reprobates sins.

1. Because (Causae causae est causa causati) the Cause of a cause is the cause
of its effect (if there be a necessary subordination between the causes and
the effect) whether it be a cause by acts negative, or positive. But God is the
chief or sole cause (by their doctrine) of that, which is the necessary and
immediate cause of the sins of reprobates, namely their impotency and want of
supernatural grace; therefore he is (by the same doctrine) the true and proper
cause of their sins.

2. Because Removens prohibens, etc; that which withdraws and withholdeth a
thing, which being present would hinder an event, is the cause of that event.
As for example he that cutteth a string in which a stone hangs, is the cause of
the falling of that stone; And he that withdraws a pillar which being put to
uphold a house; is the true cause in men's account of the falling of that house.
But God by their opinion withholdeth from reprobates that power, which being
granted them, might keep the^ from falling into sin: therefore he becomes a
true moral cause of their sins, In whose power it is that a thing be not
done, to him it is imputed, when it is done, says Tertullian, In cuius manu
est quid ne fiat, ei deputatur, cum iam fit.

It will not suffice to say that God by withholding grace from reprobates
becomes only an accidental, Tertul: l. 1. contr. Maccion. c. 22.
not a proper and direct cause of their sins. For a cause is then only
accidental in relation to the effect, when the effect is beside the intention
and expectation of the cause. For example; Digging in a field is then an
accidental cause of the finding a bag of gold, when that event is neither
expected not intended by the husbandman in digging; But when the event is looked
for, and aimed at, then the cause (though it be the cause only by withholding
the impediment) is not accidental. As a Pilot who withholdeth his care and
skill from a ship in a storm; foreseeing that by his neglect the ship will be
drowned; is not to be reputed an accidental, but a direct, and proper cause of
the loss of this ship. This being so it follows that God by this act and
decree of removing and detaining grace necessary to the avoiding of sin, from
reprobates, not as one ignorant and careless what will or shall follow, but
knowing infallibly what mischeife will follow, and determining precisely that
which does follow, viz: their impenitency and damnation, becomes the proper and
direct cause of their sins.

That God of his mere pleasure shows mercy on some, and hardens others is
the Answer. To. 9. 18.
express word of God. Therefore he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he
will he hardneth. Now to show mercy is to give the grace of faith and
obedience, as appears by the opposition of it to obduration, which is such as
whereupon follows disobedience; as appears by the objection following
hereupon; Thou will say then why does yet complain, For who has resisted his
will? Now God complains of nothing but disobedience. Again to give faith, is
to show mercy. For to have faith is to obtain mercy. Heretofore ye have To.
11. 30.
not believed, but now have obtained mercy through their unbelief. Where to
believe and to obtain mercy are made equipollent, and of the same
signification. And in reason, if God did deny faith, because of some
unpreparednesse in the creature, then God did expect that the creature should
first prepare himself, and make himself fit for faith, that so God might
bestow it upon him; and so grace should be conferred according to works; which
is contradictious to express testimony of holy scripture, testifying that God
has saved us and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works
but according to his own purpose and grace; and all along has been condened
in the Church of God for Pelagianisme. Thus we have been entertained with a
discourse containing nothing, but the opinion of our Divines, which none of us
deny: Yet in the proposing hereof he has wasted a whole leaf and more Now he
comes to his argument drawn from these two laid together.

1. That God did bring men into a necessity of sinning.

2. That he has left the reprobates under this necessity. Hence he concludes
that God is the Author of the reprobates sins; But this we utterly deny.
Therefore this he undertakes to prove by two reasons.

1. Because the cause of the cause is the cause of its effect, if there be a
necessary subordination between the causes and the effect. But God is the
chief or sole cause (by their doctrine) of that which is the necessary and
immediate cause of the sins of Reprobates, namely their impotency and want of
supernatural grace. For answer whereunto I say, first beginning with the minor.
1. That the want of supernatural grace is not the immediate cause of the
sins of Reprobates, nor the chief cause; much less the sole cause. And I
prove it evidently. Let instance be given in any sin committed by a
Reprobate; let it be the sin of murder, or of fornication, or of theft, or
of lying! For if it were, then every reprobate should be guilty of murder, of
fornication, of lying, of stealing For, posita causa principali and immediata
ponitur effectus; Where a principal and immediate cause does exist, there the
effect must needs exist. But it is apparent, that albeit every reprobate does
want supernatural grace, yet every reprobate is not guilty of murder, of
fornication, lying, and stealing. Secondly, If the want of supernatural grace
were the immediate and principal cause of all the sins of reprobates; then
not only every Reprobate should be guilty of committing all the sins formerly
mentioned, but at all times every one of these sins should be committed by
them; Because at all times they want supernatural grace. And the truth is,
every one of these sins may be abstained from without supernatural grace,
and for carnal respects: Only without supernatural grace they cannot be
abstained from, in a gracious manner; as namely out of faith in God, and love
to God. He that has neither faith nor love cannot abstain from these vile
courses out of faith and love. In like sort, heathen men in their generations
have been exceeding virtuous, according to the worlds account of virtue, in
moderating their passions, and ordering their conversation aright one toward
another; and all this has been performed by them without supernatural grace.
Thirdly, The immediate cause of all their sins rather of the two, is their
natural corruption, whereby they are habitually turned away from God; and
converted unto the creature in an inordinate manner. Like as the immediate
cause actionis laesae, of a natural function of the body imperfect, is the
disease or infirmity that has seized upon some part of the body; And the
Physician who is able to cure it, and will not; is the cause why it continues
uncured: But no wise man will say, he is the cause why this or that member in a
sick man's body does not perform its operation as it should. In like manner as
touching the vicious actions of the soul, the want of supernatural grace is
the cause, why those vicious actions continue uncured, because God alone by his
grace can cure them; but no sober man that is well in his wits, should say that
is the cause of vicious actions; but acknowledge rather the corruption thereof
to be the cause of these vicious actions. And indeed all moral philosophy
referres the cause of every vicious action, unto the vicious habit depraving
the will, and inclining it to vicious courses. Fourthly, Yet farther to
represent the wildness of this Authors discourse. The vicious habit it self
is not the sole cause; no nor the principal and immediate cause of a vicious
action in particular. For if it were, then that particular vicious action
should always be committed by it; So that an impure person should always
commit fornication; a Liar should always lie; a Theife should always steal;
a Murtheret should always commit murder. For it is a rule generally received,
that the immediate and principal cause being existent, the effect must needs
exist also. And indeed albeit, habits, whether good or evil, do work after
the manner of nature inclining and swaying the will to the accomplishment of
them; Yet the will of man being a free, and not necessary Agent, proceeds not
to work, but according unto judgment and occasions and opportunityes from
without. And albeit a purser that maintain himself by robbery has a fair
opportunity offered him to advantage himself to take a purse; yet if upon
consideration he finds himself too weak to go through with it, or that he
cannot do it safely, he will forbear. For albeit a vicious habit does
naturally, and necessarily incline him to a naughty end, yet in the choice of
the means conducing to this end, he is free. How much more plainly does it
appear, that the want of supernatural grace is far off from being either
the sole cause, or the immediate, or the principal cause of any sin
committed by a Reprobate. Rather of the two the intestine corruption of the
Reprobate is the cause of his sins, and the want of grace is the cause why
this corruption is not cured. Now albeit a Physician may sin in not curing a
sick person, when it lies in his power to cure him: For we are in charity
bound to do to others, as we would have others do unto us; yet God is bound to
none, I will show mercy on whom I will show mercy, Exodus 33. 19.
and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.

2. Observe how sluttishly he carries himself in the next reason taken from
removens prohibens. His rule proceeds both of withdrawing and withholding a
thing which being present would hinder an event. But he gives instance only in
withdrawing, as in cutting a string whereon a stone^ hangs; which who so does,
is the cause of the falling of the stone: And in withdrawing a pillar upholding
an house, which who so does, is the cause of the fall of that house: which is
most true in natural things, yet not the immediate cause, that is to be
referred to the nature of the stone, and house; which being heavy things do
naturally move downwards. But this Author contents not himself with
conforming the condition of Agents voluntary to the conditions of Agents
natural and necessary; but changes his terms also, and puts the phrass of
withdrawing, into the place of the former phrase, which was withholding. Now it
is true God withholds that grace from Reprobates, which he gives to his Elect;
but he withdrawes and takes no inward grace from them. Yet this phrase of
withholding is very improper; For it signifies a forcible restraint of that
which was going; Whereas God being Master of his own grace, gives it to whom
he will, and denies it to whom he will; For he is bound to none. And is it not
lawful for him to do what he will with his own? But albeit he carry himself
very sluttishly in opposing us, yet I willingly confess he carries the matter
very clearly in contradicting himself; as when he concludes, that God in
withholding that power (that is that grace) which would keep them from sin
(for this alone is our Tenet) hereby becomes a true moral cause of their
sin. I say, herein he contradicts himself very handsomely. For himself
confesses that God could hinder any man from sin, but he does not: And does
it not herehence evidently follow, that God hereby becomes the Author of
sin, yea of every sin that is committed in the world? But I see what he
will reply by the face of his discourse, namely this; He says not that God by
withholding that grace which would keep him from sin, becomes the Author of
sin; but only by withholding that grace which might keep him from sin. And
indeed so he does; but mark therewithal how sluttishly he carries himself
in 2 particulars. 1. In deviating from his confirmity to his own instances.
For each instance given is in such a thing withdrawn whereupon the event
absolutely follows; and which not being withdrawn the contrary event not
only might be, but would be; as if a string holding a stone being not broken,
the stone not only might be held, but would be held. So if the not been
withdrawn, not only the house might have been held up, but would have pillar
had been held up. But upon granting grace he does not say the creature would
have been kept from sin, but might have been kept from falling into sin.
Now what Legerdeimaine is this? And could he presume his Reader would prove so
simple and Sottish, as not to observe this incongruity? 2. He deviates from our
tenet. For we do not say, that upon granting grace supernatural the creature
may abstain from sin, if he will, but that hereby is wrought in him a will
to abstain from sin, a desire to do that which is pleasing in the sight of
God, though not in such perfection, as to work out all natural corruption
that is found within us; but that still there is sin dwelling in us; still
there is a flesh fighting against the spirit; Yea, a law in our members
rebelling against the law of our mind, and leading us captive to the law of
sin. Hence proceed the manifold and daily sins even of the children of God;
but Gods spirit is prevalent with them to renew their repentance, even for
sins of weakness, and sins of improvidence and inconsideratnesse; and to
keep from presumptuous sins, that they may not prevail over them; That it
may not be said of them, as it was of too many among the Israelites, in the
wilderness, Psalm. 19.
Their spots are not the spots of thy children. Nay, which is more, consider;
Arminius confesses that God does hinder sin in such a manner, as by granting
such a grace, Deuteronomy. 32.
whereupon they not only may, but will and do abstain from sin; but he does
not thus hinder it in all. What therefore? shall he be accounted the Author of
such sins. Yet I willingly confess, Arminius and this Author shake hands in
this, that the Reprobates have such a grace, as whereby they may abstain from
sin, if they will. Yet holy Paul confesses of himself, even then, when he
was in a better condition (I trow) then that of Reprobates, to wit, when he
wrote the Epistle to the Romans, saying, What I would that do I not, but what I
hate that do I. And again, To will is present with me, but I Romans 7. 15, 18,
19. Rom 6
find no means to perform that which is good: For I do not the good thing
which I would; but the evil which I would not, that do I. But we deny that a
Reprobate has so much as a will to do good; For such a will undoutedly
pleases God. But they that are in the flesh cannot please God.

As for the solution which he feignes to himself of his own argument, by
distinction of an accidental cause, and a proper and direct cause; that is
none of ours. This is a gambell of his own, to delude his reader. God we say
is the direct and proper cause of that sanctification which is found in his
children to the subduing of their lusts, an inordinate affections; and as
direct and proper a cause of leaving their natural corruption uncured in
others: Nor so only but of prostituting men unto their lusts, and giving them
over to their vile affections, to committ abominable things, not affording them
so much as a natural restraint from such vicious courses, which he could, and
that without any supernatural grace. And by this postitution of them, he
knows how to pay them home for their other ungodly courses, in such sort, as
they shall receive thereby such recompense of their error as is meet; as Saint
Paul has told us Romans 1. But this Author takes little notice of Gods word
thereby to inform himself of Gods providence; but roves whithin the sphere
of his own imagination, and rational discourse, (yet as corrupt as well
beseemes him who opposes the free grace of God) as if he would coin unto us
new oracles, the devises of his own addle brains. And as for Tertullians
rule, which this Author insists upon. In whose power it is that a thing be not
done, to him it is imputed, when it is done. Observe whether this Author does
not make God the Author of every sin that is committed in the world, as well
as we. For himself, in the 6. Sect. of the second inconvenience, confesses
that if God had not decreed to suffer sin, there would be none; and adds Who
can bring forth that which God will absolutely hinder. So then undoubtedly it
is in Gods power, that sin be not done. For he can hinder it; what follows
then? but that to him sin is to be imputed, when it is done, by Tertullians
rule, approved by this Author, quite contrary to the judgment and doctrine of
Austin, putting Aug: cont: Jul: Pelag: l. 5. c. 4.
this difference between man and God, the creature and the Creator; that if we
suffer others to sin, when we can hinder them, rei cum ipsis erimus; but how
many sins (says he) do we see committed in the world, which could never come
to pass if God would hinder them.

Showing how our doctrine opposes Gods mercy according to his conceit, and
coming page: 63.
to deliver things more closely, as he says, and comprehending that which he
has to say under 4. particulars: The 2. whereof this; That it was the sin of
our nature, not by generation, as I have showed, but by Gods own voluntary
imputation. The proof whereof and the confirmation of it out of M. Calvin
being set down at large in some 13. lines or more in M. Hords discourse, is
here utterly left out, which will be the more remarkable by comparing it with
what he delivers, concerning another attribute of God here inserted; and which
he pretends, also to be impugned by our doctrine, p. 54. where he seems to sup
up that which here he delivered.

Number. 3. These words are inserted. I think I may conclude with the words of
Prosper, He which says M. Mason Addit. p. 64. Senten: super 8. c. Gall:
that God would not have all men to be saved but a certain set number of
predestinate persons only, he speaks more harshly, then he should of the
height of Gods unsearchable grace. Nay he speaks that which cannot stand with
his infinite grace and mercy, especially to the sons of men.

The 8. objection of the Galls was this That God will not have all men to be
saved, but a certain number of persons predestinate. Now Prospers answer
hereunto is very large, and Answer.
it begines thus, If about the salvation of all mankind, and calling them unto
the knowledge of his truth, the will of God is maintained to be so indifferent
throughout all ages, that God may be showed to have neglected no man
altogether; the unsearchable depth of Gods judgment is hereby assaulted. For
why did God suffer all nations in ages past, to walk in their own ways when
the Lord chose Jacob to himself, and dealt not so with every nation? And why
are they now become Gods people, which before were no people of God, etc? All
this makes nothing for this Author. The next is directly against him, not only
at large; but in this very particular, wherein he alleadeth Prosper not in his
answer to this 8. objection, but in his sentence proposed afterward upon it.
For what is this Authors meaning, (in citeing him to affirm, that God not
only wills their salvation whom he has predestined, but all men also; or
at least that such as say the contrary, do speak more harshly then we ought to
speaks of the depth of Gods inscrutable grace) but to cast a color that
Prosper concurres with him; and judges that God is indifferunt to save all.
But the reason why he only saves some, and not others, is, because some prepare
themselves for grace, and accordingly he bestows it upon them: Others do not
prepare themselves, and accordingly God does not bestow it upon them. Now
prosper directly contests against all such, as maintain this opinion, and that
in two particulars. 1. In taking upon them to give the reason of Gods
judgments, and that drawn from the wills and actions of men; and which is no
less impiety, in thinking that grace is bestowed by way of reward for good
works; Or restrained from men by reason of their evil works. His words
translated run thus, But whosoever refers the causes of Gods works and
judgments throughout to the wills and actions of men, and will have Gods
dispensations varied according to the changeable condition of man's free will;
such a one professes the judgments of God to be scrutable, and his ways
such, as may be found out. And that which Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles durst
not touch, this man thinks he can unlock and make known. And that which is a
fruit of no less impiety, the very grace of God whereby we are saved, is given
by the way of reward for good works, and denied, or restrained for evil
works. So that in each particular Prosper is directly contrary this Authors
tenet. Now seeing the most part of men have not the grace of salvation, that
is, such a grace as is of saving nature. And the reason by God does not give it
them, is not in consideration of their evil works; let any other sober and
judicious Aminian be judge, whether God can be said to will their salvation (in
such a sense as we speak of it) when he denies them the grace of salvation,
and that not for their evil works sake, but (which necessarily follows
hereupon) merely according to the good pleasure of his will. And indeed in
Prospers large answer to this eighth objectionto the Galls, which takes up
almost a whole column in Austin, this Author finds nothing at all to fasten
upon for his advantage. But yet you will say in his eighth sentence which he
proposes, it is as this author alleges: I grant it; but observe his
censure well; The inscrutable depth of Gods grace may suffice to keep us from
speaking so rashly, as to say that God wills not all to be saved, but only a
certain number of persons predestinate. Where observe, first, he counts it an
harsh speech to say, that God wills not, that all men shall be saved; the
reason whereof undoutedly is this, because it is expressly contradictory 1 Timothy:
2.
to a text in Scripture. But then if we object, how can God be said to will
their salvation whom he has not predestined, to whom he will not give the
grace of salvation, and that not for their evil works sake; but according to
the mere pleasure of his will. Now Prospers answer in my judgment is this,
The depth of Gods inscrutable grace will bear us out in it; so that we need
not cast our selves upon so harsh an expression, as to deny that God will have
all men to be saved, which is contradictious to the letter of Gods word. In
effect it is, as if he should say; It is a secret. This I take to be Prospers
meaning, and herein I remit my self to the judicious; But sure I am that
Prosper is directly contrary to that opinion whereunto this Author, by virtue
of this sentence of his, desires to draw him. In like manner the Author of the
book, De vocatione Gentium, which is commonly thought to be Prospers, though
Vossius affects to entitle it unto another upon no other ground, but because he
conceits that Author, not to be so rigorous in the doctrine of predestination,
as Prosper. But let the judicious compare Prospers carriage in this particular,
with that Authors, and observe whether they do not exactly agree For that
Author holds up that text of Paul, God will have all to be saved, as Prosper
does, without assaying to clear it by interpretation as Austin does, and will
have it go for a secret; and withal he expressly concurres with Prosper in
expressing first, that God does not give grace for men's good works sake, nor
denies it for their evil works. For the ages wherein God so plentifully
communicated his grace were no better then the former. Observe farther that
Austin himself in his Enchiridion treating of this place of Paul, God will
have all to be saved, after he has given two interpretations thereof, the last
whereof interpreting it of genera singulorum, 1 Timothy: 2.
not singula generum, is most generally received, as most congruous both to
Scripture phrase in general, and in special unto this very text of Paul, as
Piscator observes, and Vossius against himself improvidently confesses. Yet
see the ingenuity of this great light in Gods Church. If any man can give any
other convenient interpretation, let him, provided we be not driven to deny the
first article of Creed, whereby we confess that God is omnipotent. And this I
conceive proceeded out of a desire to hold up the meaning of that text to the
uttermost, that the very letter of it may be applied so we might not be driwen
to so foul an inconvenience, as to say that God wills that man's salvation,
which is never saved; which is as much as to say, that such a one therefore is
not saved, because God cannot save him. Observe farther; in the days of
Hincmarus and Remigius, these controversies being revived in the cause of
Goteschalk, the church of Lions writes a book wherein it treats of the meaning
of this place of Paul, whereof he gives four expositions according to the
ancient fathers. First, That it is to be understood of genera singulorum, not
singula generum; of all sorts of men, not of all men of all sorts. Secondly,
That none is saved but by the will of God. Thirdly, That God works in us a
will or a desire that all may be saved. Fourthly, That God will have all men to
be saved, if they will; Then they propose their judgment concerning these
four expositions distinguishing between the three, first, and the last, thus,
In the three first expositions of these words, wherein it is said, that God
wills all men to be saved, no absurdity is to be found, no repugnancy unto
faith. But as touching the fourth and the last; here we are to take heed, for
it gives occasion to the Pelegian pravity, in as much as it affirms, that God,
that he may save men; does exspect the wills of men: (Now this Pelagian
pravity, is the very substance of our Authors orthodoxy whom I deal with.)
Against this error, (says the Church of Lions) we read Definitions have been
made in the ancient counsels of the fathers. This I take out of the extracts,
which Vossius has made out of that book, which goes under the name of the
Church of Lions, in his Pelagian history. l. 7. c. 4. p. 755, 756. there is an
addition of some few lines in the third Sect: concerning Gods justice, but P
65. Sect. 3. sub. sect. P. 66. and 67.
they add noe moment at all to the rest; and therefore the answer made in that
third Sect: to M. Hord may suffice. And in the same sect: and subsection
subordinate to the second assertion, which he obtrudes upon the maintainers of
the lower way; which was this, God has determined for the sin of Adam to
cast away the greatest part of mankind for ever; this Interpolation is inserted.

This is so clear a case that Calvin with some others have not stickt to say,
that God may with as much M. Mason Addit.
justice determine men to hell the first way, as the latter. See Instit: l. 3.
cap. 23. s. 7. Where against those who deny that Adam fell by Gods decree, he
reasons thus; All men are made guilty of Adams sin by Gods absolute decree
alone, Adam therefore sinned by this only decree. What lets them it grant, that
of one man, which they must grant of all men? And a little after he says It is
too absurd that these kind patrons of Gods justice. should thus stumble at a
straw, and leap over a block. God may with as much justice decree Adams sin
and men's damnation, out of his only will and pleasure, as out of that will and
pleasure the involving of men in the guilt of the first sin, at and their
damnation for it; That is the substance of his reasoning. To the same purpose
speaks Maccovius; Fromhence we may see, says he, what to judge of that
opinion of our adversaryes viz. That God cannot justly ordain men to
destruction without he consideration of sin. Let them tell me which is
greater to impute to one man the sin of another, and punish him for it with
eternal death, or to ordain simply, without looking at sin, to destruction?
Surely no man will deny the first of these to be greater. But this God may do
without any wrong to justice, much more therefore may he do the other.

As touching the assertion it self here charged upon our Divines, namely that
God has determined for the sin of Adame to cast away the greatest part of
mankind. I have Answer.
thereunto answered at large in my consideration of M. Hords discourse: Yet let
me add something by way of an apt accommodation of that before delivered to
clear the ambiguous phrase of this Author, as touching the phrase of casting
away. For it may well be doubted whether by casting away (which he makes the
Object of Gods determination) he means the act of damnation, or the act of
denying grace. If the act of damnation, it is most untrue. For Reprobates are
not damned for original sin only, but for all the actual sins that have
been committed by them; And as they are, and shall be damned for them; So God
from everlasting decreed they should be damned for them. Secondly, According to
my Tenet, in noe moment of nature is Gods decree of damning reprobates, before
the prescience, not of original sin only, but also of all their actual
sins. Indeed I do not make the prescience of sin to go before the decree of
damnation; Nor do I make the decree of damnation to go before the prescience of
sin, but I conceive them to be simultaneous. It is true many infants we say
perish in original sin only, not living to be guilty of any actual sin of
their persons; why should this seem strange, when M. Hord himself professes
in his preface sect. 4. That all mankind are involved in the guilt of eternal
death? If all are guilty of eternal death, then it were just with God to
inflict eternal death upon all for original sin; How much more is it just
to inflict eternal death upon some few, being guilty of it. Therefore observe
the foxlike carriage of this Author. For this former free acknowledgement of
the guilt of eternal death adherent to original sin in M Hords discourse,
is quite left out in this, though there it was professed with this
asseveration, I confidently believe it. For he well perceived, that this
position utterly infatuates the strength of his discourse in this place. And I
have still looked when these men will come to a plain denial of Original
sin. Now if God may justly cast all mankind away for sin original, and
that as touching the inflicting of damnation upon them for it; how much more
evident is it to be just with God to cast away all mankind for original sin,
as touching the denial of grace unto them? Now let us proceed to that which is
here inserted out of Calvin and Maccovius. Now Calvin says not that God may
with as much justice determine men to hell the first way, as the latter; He
speaks not at all of Gods decree of damnation, he speaks only of Gods decree
that Adam sua defectione periret, by his fall should be obnoxious to
destruction And he proves it by their acknowledgment, that it was by the
counsel of God, that all a salute exciderent unius parentis culpa, should
incur the loss of salvation by the fault of one parent. Hereupon he demands
saying, What lets them to grant that of one man, which they must grant of all
men. And a little after, It is too absurd that those kind patrons of Gods
justice should thus stick at a straw and leap^ over a block And whereas Calvin
says, as he relates him, that All men are made guilty of Adams sin by Gods
absolute decree alone. First, This is untrue; No where does he say, that this
came to pass by Gods absolute decree alone. If he had, I had thought this
Author would have justified him, as well as M. Hord, who in this very place
professes that Original sin is a sin made ours only by Gods appointment.
Indeed as M. Hord is now set forth in print, this passage is not found: but in
M. Hord's own copy thus it ran; M. Mason belike has gelded him; Yet that of
M. Hord's was accounted the quintessence of M. Mason's strength in this
argument; and he took upon him the propagating of the manuscripts thereof as my
self know in some particulars. Likewise the involving of men in the guilt of
Adam's sin and of eternal death, is M. Hord's phrase in one place, as before
I have showed out of the fourth Section of his preface; and that by the only
decree of God, did he express in this place. The same argument is used by
Maccovius applied to purpose (so was not that of Calvin's. As for that saying
of Maccovius, that God may ordain men to destruction without respect to any
sin of his that is so ordained, is not this manifest. 1. In the case of
annihilation? For does not Arminius confess that God can annihilate the
holiest creature that is? 2ly, As touching the suffering of hell pains. For
did not Christ suffer them by the ordinance of his Father? Or was this
suffering of his for any sin of his own? This have I proved more then once in
my Vindiciae to be in the power of God: And Medina professes as much, and that
ex concordi omnium Theologorum sententia; And Vasquez the Jesuit concurres
with Medina in the same opinion. And lately Raynaudus in his justification of
Valerianus; who proves this to have been the confession of many of the ancient
Fathers, and particularly of Fulgentius in that book of his De
praedestinatione and gratia, which goes under Austin's name. And is it not
evident by M. Hord's acknowledgment, when he says that men are made guilty of
Adam's sin, and of eternal death only by God's decree? Which passage of M.
Hord's this Author has razed out, and wipeth his lips, as if he had done no
iniquity with his Index expurgatorius; not that he has changed his opinion, as
I verily think; but because he saw what a funestous blow it gave unto his
cause in this particular: Yet is he magnified as a man unanswerable, none
daring to take the bucklers against such a Don Quixot; But let the judicious
consider this his practice well, and whether he be a man of such authority, as
deserving that they should pin their faith on his sleeve, especially
considering that he takes no notice of what I have answered to M. Hord, to
reply thereupon; and that there is scarce any thing in all this which I have
not answered in my Vindiciae; Yet he continues to clamor still; at least by
other Jack a Lents whom he sets up, but answers nothing, but that which is of
his own shaping, that making his own bed he may lie the more softly. But let
The Reader seriously consider this, that will not be gulled and cheated of his
faith, as Pope Caelestinus was of his Popedom; and remember what Austin
sometimes said, Si lupi concilium fecerunt, ut pastoribus non responderent cur
oves consilium perdiderunt, ut ad luporum speluncas accederent? If the wolves
have consulted together, Aug: Ep: 171.
and resolved not to make answer to the shepherds; why have the sheep so far
lost all good counsel, as to come to the dens of wolves?

Page: 67. Sub-Sect: 2: concerning God's justice there is a passage inserted out
of M. Perkins, but it is of no more moment then the rest. In the same
sub-section, the three causes why repobates cannot in justice be bound to
believe, are much changed from that they were in M. Hord's discourse, sent unto
his friend, which Copy was sent unto me. Yet upon better consideration I find
it is not so much changed, as at first sight I conceived. The order of the two
first reasons is changed; only in the first here some similies of exageration
are wanting, which are not wanting in the second of M. Hord's.

The second here is most altered. For whereas in M. Hord's first discourse which
he tendered to a Friend of his, the reason ran thus; Because it is God's will
they shall not believe; To wit, in our opinion it is altered here thus, from an
affirmative to a negative, It is not God's unfeigned will they shall believe;
Yet himself lays the same thing to our charge in an affirmative manner page:
78: treating of God's truth sub-sect: 2: the very last words which I answer
apart, all that page almost not being found in M. Hord's first discourse. The
words are these, Can God speak thus to Reprobates, who by his own decree shall
never repent? etc. And in this very place at length he rises to this
affirmative, thus, It may rather be said, it is God's unfeigned will they shall
not believe, because it is his will they shall want power to believe. So that I
need not to trouble my self with adding any farther answer to this, more then
I have to M. Hord and to that page 78 concerning God's truth, Sub-sect: 3.

Page: 69, and Sub-sect: 4. In dealing on God's attribute of justice; After the
Author had proposed his reasons which moved him to think that our doctrine of
God*s absolute decree is repugnant to God's justice; he proposes our answers
thereunto, which formerly were but two; but now are enlarged with the addition
of a third. The first whereof is, for the form of it, changed throughout. The
comparison of the ways of God with the mysterious attributes of God is
changed, not only as touching the form, but as touching the matter; here is no
pleading for a reasonable service of God, as there was.

His making man's understanding purged from prejudice and false principles, as
it was proposed there, purged from prejudices, corrupt affections, and
customs, as it is proposed, to be the Tribunal, according to whose judgment
interpretations of Scripture concerning what is just in the courses of God must
be allowed or disallowed, I have sufficiently canvased there; Let the Reader be
pleased to turn to it, and compare my answer to this Sub-section, and observe
how little spirit he had, so much as to question against any one piece of my
answer. Here he adds a reason of his former uncouth paradoxe, to wit that,
Justice in men and God are for substance but one, and the same thing, though
different in degree, as the greater and lesser light. I have sufficiently
profligated this in the first Section concerning God's attributes. For this
very rule he premiseth in general to the ensuing discourse of his, most
congruously; wild premises and grounds to wild discourses.

The difference he puts between the ways of God and the mysteries of
godliness I have there also refuted, showing that albeit some ways of God's
justice are agreeable to the judgment of man, as these mentioned, Es: 5. and
Ezekiel: 18, yet all are not, as there I show at large.

And lastly because he likes rational discourse so well, I am contented to
deal with him at his own weapon, by six rational demonstrations justifying
the absoluteness of God's decrees, in answer whereunto, he is content to carry
himself very judiciously, even as mute as a fish.

The second answer of ours which he brings in to reply upon, is inserted a new,
and that I come to consider in the next place as I find it set down page 10.
71. 72. M. Masons Additions.


It is answered that these decrees are set down in Scripture to be the will of
God, and therefore they must needs be just. For God's will is the rule of all
righteousness. To this answer I have these things to reply. 1. This rule in
divinity is much abused by the maintainers of absolute reprobation, and may not
be admitted in their sense and meaning. For God's will is not a rule of justice
to himself, as if things were therefore just, because he wills and works
them; but his justice rather is a rule of his will and works, which are the
expressions of his will He therefore makes decrees and executes them, because
they are agreeable to that justice which dwells in the Divine nature: as he
makes nothing which has not pot^nitam objectivam, a power of being created
without implying contradiction to himself, or any thing in him; So he wills
and does nothing, but that which may be willed and done salva justiti^, without
wrong to his justice, St. Hierome speaking of the Prophet Hoseas taking a wife
of fornication. Hos. 1. 2. Says it was done in typo, typically, not ^ ^ally
Hieron. Proem. in Hosea.
quia si siat, turpissimii est, because if it had been d^ne indeed it had been
a most foul thing. But thou will answer, says he, Deo ^ubente, nihil turpe
est, God commanding it nothing is dishonest. Thus much we say, says the
father, that God commands nothing but what is honest, but he does not by
commanding dishonest things, make those things honest which are abominable,
plainly giving us to see what he thought viz: that God does not will a thing
and of make it good; but wills it because it is in it self good
antecedently, and before the act of God's will about it.

And thus much does Zanchy (though a rigid maintainer of absolute reprobation)
not obscurely confess Zanch. l. 3. de not. Dei c. 4. q. 9 these: 2.
in his treatise De natura Dei; where he lets ^all such speeches as make
God's justice antecedent to his will and therefore the rule of it, rather then
a thing regulated by it. Neither can God will any thing, says he, which is not
just. And again, The Princes pleasure has the strength of a law, is a Rule
says he, among the Canonists. But this is true where the King is just and a
(...) nothing but what is just. In which words he plainly makes the justice of
the King am^^edent to that will of his, which must be a law. Many more speeches
he uses there to the same purpose. God's will therefore is not a rule of
justice to himself. To whom then? To us. For by it we are first to ^qua^e all
our thoughts, words, and deeds. Secondly to examine them when they are spoken,
and done. Primum in aliq^o (...) regula ^ostcricrum, and supremum inferiorum.

2ly. I reply that the^^ absolute accrces of men's in^vitable salvation and
damnation are no parts of Gods revealed will. The scriptures teach us no such
matter. And therefore to say that they are, is but a mere begging of the
question. It has always been ordinary with false teachers, to make Gods word
a father to their false opinions, that they may stand the faster and win the
greater credit. The Papists ground their Transubstantiation, and the Lutherans
their con^ubstantiation and obiquity upon the Scripture, Hoc est corpus meu^,
This is my body. And the defenders of absolute reprobation do so too. They
make their cause to be Gods and entitle his word to it; because they see it is
the surest way to defend it, being herein like to some contentious Mat: 26.
people, who being in law and having a bad cause which they are like to loose,
they entitle the King to it, that they may the better uphold it.

3ly Absolute Reprobation can be no part of Gods revealed will. The reason is,
because it is odious to right reason, and begets absurdities. For nulla
veritas parit absurda; no truth begets absurdities. Diverse truths are
revealed in Scripture, which are above, but not contrary to right reason,
whether they be matters of faith or life: Faith and reason nature and Scripture
are both Gods excellent gifts. And therefore though there may be a
disproportion, ye^ there can be no repugnancy between them. The worship which
God requires is Cultus (...), a reasonable (...). And the word of God is,
(...), milk reasonable and without guile. To: 12. 2. 1 Pet: 2. 2.


These things therefore, being laid together, it will appear to be but a mere
shift and evasion, when absolute reprobation is pr^ved to be unjust, and
therefore unworthy of God; to say Gods will is the rule of justice; this is
part of Gods revealed will, and therefore most just, whatsoever reason may
cavil, and say to the contrary.

Does not this Author observe the contradictious nature of this proposition
Gods will is a rule of justice to himself. For a rule of justice to any one is
a rule to his will, to be regusated thereby; and can the will be said to be the
rule of justice to the will without contradiction? The rule propounded was
this, God's will is the rule of all righteousness; but the other rule is the
rule corrupted by this Author, when he talks of a will, as a rule of justice
to the will. 2. But whether things are therefore just, because God wills them;
or that therefore God wills them, because they are just; undoubtedly that
which here is proposed is a truth, namely that whatsoever the Scripture sets
down to be the will of God, that must needs be just. Neither have we any need
to improve it any farther then thus. For it is well known, that our Divines in
their doctrine of predestination, and reprobation do depend on nothing so
much, as the evidence of God's word; As this Author throughout this discourse
of his depends on nothing less. And therefore he has cast himself upon a
strange practice in the former passage, namely to evacuate all our reasons
drawn out of the word of God to confirm our doctrine, pleading that the
interpretations we make of Scripture are all false, because the contrary
doctrine which he maintains, is justified before the tribunal of humane
reason purged from prejudice, and false principles, corrupt affections and
customs; Which is as much as to profess in plain terms, that to find out
the truth concerning the decrees of predestination and reprobation, we must
leave the oracles of God, and hearken to the oracles of reason, provided that
it be purged from prejudice and false principles; from corrupt affections and
customs. Now I had thought that the spirit of God alone could purge us from
such prejudice and false principles; corrupt affections and customs; And that
this spirit of God works only by the word herein, which is called in
Scripture the sword of the spirit; Yet this Author Ephesians: 6.
tells us not, where this reason thus purged is to be found; save that in
general he says; that is just or unjust which is so esteemed in the judgment
both of best and worst that stand indifferent to the entertainment of any
truth, as is to be seen in the former reason according to M. Hord's discourse.
Now who these best are but the Arminians in this Authors fancy; and the worst,
but Anabaptists or heathens; or both I know not; Sure we are none of them in
his understanding purged from false principles and prejudice, from corrupt
affections and customs; because we do not stand indifferent to the
entertainment of his tenets, which he calls Truths. 3. Where can he show that I
have made use of any such principles to answer any argument of his against us.
I do not find that any where he can drive me to this though this be the
Apostles course, as we may see To: 9. Is there any injustice with God? God
forbid, how does he prove it, but thus, because the Scripture attributes such a
course to God; I will show mercy on whom I will show mercy, and I will have
compassion, on whom I will have compassion. 4. But where has he learnt to be
so audacious as to say that, Things are not therefore just because God wills
them, but that his justice is rather a rule of his will and works? Before he
told us, that justice in man, and God were of the same nature; Now that justice
which is the rule of our will is, Justitia obligans, justice binding us to do
this or that; and is Gods justice obligatory likewise to bind him? In making
the world, I do not doubt, but God did that which was just; but was there any
justice in God obliging him to the making of the world? who sees not, what an
Atheistical conclusion follows herehence, namely that the world was from
everlasting, if not necessarily by necessity of nature; yet necessarily by
obligation of justice? otherwise for an infinite space of time wherein the
world was not made (which must needs have been if the world were not, from
everlasting) God had been and continued to be unjust. The Schools have taught
me that there is a justice of condecency consequent to all the actions of God,
noe justice of obligation precedent to it. And whereas St. Paul tells us that
God works all things according to the counsel of his will, both Alvarez and
Suarez though School, Divines of opposite families, yet concur in this that
this Counsel is, a libera voluntate acceptum, accepted of Gods free will. And
it is observable, that the Apostle calls it not the Counsel of his
understanding, but the counsel of his will And Vasqu^z and Suarez both
Jesuits, but very opposite about the nature of justice in God; yet both
concur, that there is no justice in God toward his creature, but upon
supposition of the determination of God's will. It is most true that supposing
the end which God intends, the wisdom of God directs in the right use of
congruous means; and no other justice then this his wisdom does Aquinas
acknowledge in the Divine nature. And great is the wisdom which God manifests
in the government of this world, yet the same wisdom as great as it is does
not equal the infinite wisdom of God. But of this I have disputed more at
large in my Vindiciae. Where l. 1. part. 3. de reprob. digr: 1.
this question is discussed. Whether the will of God be circumscribed or
regulated by justice? To no parcel whereof do I find the least savor of an
answer in this Author. But let us examine how well he proves his own Tenet;
And that is first by the authority of Hierome in his preface to his
commentaries on Hosea. 2. By the authority of Zanchy; whereto I answer. 1. That
if the interpretations of Scripture must be judged of before the Tribunal of
reason purged from prejudice and false principles, from corrupt affections and
customs; must not the opinions of such as Hierome and Zanchy be judged of
before the same tribunal also? 2ly, touching Hierome himself. 1. It is true
Hierome in that preface understands that command given Hosea to be only in a
Type, and for the reason here mentioned; but in his Commentary he interprets
it secundum historiam, literally. Neither was the Prophet as he says, to be
blamed in this. For he was not the worse, but he made her the better.
Praesertim especially he was not to be blamed, because he did this not
luxuriously or lustfully, or of his own will, but in obedience to the command
of God. Now let the indifferent judge whether Hierome be not as much for us
upon the text, as for our adversary in the preface. 2. Observe that Hierome is
nothing for him in the preface. For Hierome speaks there of God's will of
command, but we treat of God's will as it signifies not his command given to
man, but his own purpose and decree to do this or that himself. Judge of the
extravagancy of this Author by this, and whether his understanding be
sufficiently purged from prejudice and false principles, from corrupt
affections and customs; as to make the last resolution of our faith concerning
the ways of God thereunto, or the understanding of such as he is, whether best
or worst, or of both sizes upon a mere pretense of their indifferency for the
entertainment of truths.

We willingly grant with Zanchy that God can will nothing which is not just;
Not that hereby we make any justice to precede the will of God; but because he
has a lawful power to do what he will; And there is a justice of condency
consequent to all his actions. It is otherwise, I confess, with a man though
the greatest of men, as wise as Solomon; though vessels after God's own heart,
as David: But hence it follows not, that because in an earthly King there is
a justice antecedent to his will, therefore it is so in the King of heaven and
earth. If this Author think otherwise, let him know I am not yet sufficiently
convicted of the purity of his understanding purged from prejudice and false
principles etc. as thereinto to make the last resolution of my faith.

Yet I confess he carries himself magnificently as if he had attained to
this purgation, as when he says, That these absolute decrees of salvation and
damnation, are not part of God's revealed will; But where has he proved the
conditional decrees that he stands for, are any part of God's revealed will.
Where does he find that God decreed to bestow faith and repentance upon a man,
because of some good works of his, or deny it to others for failing of some
good work? As for salvation and damnation we plainly profess, that God
intended not to damn any man, but for sin, nor to bestow salvation on any
man of ripe years, but by way of reward of his faith, repentance, obedience
and good works. Does not he beg the question all along, when he carries his
conditional decrees in a confidentiary manner, without once offering to prove
the by any one place of Scripture? Here Iexpected he would not beg the
question, when he charge us to beg the question most insipidly; When it is
well known that our Divines are frequent in proving their doctrine out of
Scripture; which if it fail of sound proof in the judgment of his
understanding purged from prejudice and false principles; yet with no modesty;
whatsoever their judgment be) can he tax them for begging the question. For to
beg the question is not once to offer to prove what they say; which is this
Author's discourse all along. But to supply the place of arguments, he usually
foist's in a phrase at pleasure in expressing our Tenet of God's decrees; as of
Decreeing immutably and unavoidably; Or as here he speaks of Damnation and
salvation inevitable; whereas we do not use to clogge our own expressions, or
our Readers apprehensions with any such bugheares. We rather say that God
decrees all things to come to pass, that do come to pass, and that agreably
to their natures, as necessary things necessarily; and contingent things to
come to pass contingently. And surely for doctrines of faith, I think every
sober Christian has cause to entitle the King to be the Author of them, this
Author does not so much for his: Nay the Scripture to him seemed so evidently
to make for us (which I desire every wise Reader well to observe) that this
drove him to such a sluttish shift, as to except against our interpretations of
Scripture upon noe other ground but this, that the Doctrine confirmed thereby
is not consonant to the understanding of men purged from prejudice and false
principles, corrupt affections and customs, in the designing of what is just,
and what is unjust; And let every indifferent man judge whether this be not a
desperate course, carrying with it a secret acknowledgment that the Scripture
indeed does favor the way we take in the Doctrine of predestination and
reprobation. And indeed the ninth to the Romans Gerardus Vossius calls Gorgons
head whereby we think (so evident is the Apostles meaning on our side) to
turn all our opposites into stones, though such vants are none of ours; but
himself it seems had been stupefied by it, had he not timely taken hold of
Scientia media, the Jesuits invention, and as vile an invention as ever
reasonable men conceived.

3. Lastly he tells us like a resolute Sir, that absolute reprobation can be no
part of God's revealed will; and his reason is; because it is odious to right
reason. He does not show how it is contrariant to God's word; but bravely
presumes that his reason is right, as if he were of the number of that
synedrion whose understandings are purged from prejudice and false principles,
from corrupt affections and customs; and ere he is aware bewraies what he
means by reason, when he attributes hatred unto it; And I verily believe his
best reason is the strength of his affection. By the way let the Reader
observe, that he is as opposite to absolute election, as to absolute
reprobation; only he discharges his right reason and the spleen thereof
against absolute reprobation, not against absolute election. We may easily
guess the true notion of his right reason in this; his whole discourse
savouring far more throughout of the foxes, then of the Lions skin. Now I
have given him six reasons for the absoluteness of reprobation, because he
appeals to reason purged from prejudice and false principles, and not one of
them has he answered, though they went out of my hands now full three years
ago. I will adventure to give him some reasons for it also out of God's word.
For I desire to follow the crooked serpent which way soever he winds and
turns. Therefore thus I dispute, Predestination is absolute, therefore
reprobation is absolute. For if reprobation be not absolute, but proceeds
according to men's evil works, then predestination is not absolute, but
proceeds according to men's good works, whether faith or other obedience;
according to that of Austin. If Esau be hated for the merit of
unrighteousness, incipit and Jacob justitiae merito deligi, Jacob begins to
be beloved Aug: adSimplician. l. 1. q. 2.
for the merit of his righteousness; and a little before. Si enim quia
praesciebat Deus futura Esaui opera mala, propterea eum praedestinavit, ut
serviret minori; propterea praedestinavit and Jacob ut ei major serviret, quia
futura ejus bona opera praesciebat, and falsum est jam quod ait, non ex
operibus. For if therefore the Lord praedestinated Esau that he should serve
the younger, because he foresaw his evil works. For the same reason he
predestined Jacob that he should rule over the Elder because he foresaw his
good works; and so false is that which the Apostle says, not of works. Now
that predestination is absolute I prove thus. It is not upon the foresight of
faith, much less of works, therefore it is absolute. The anteceedent I prove
Romans 9. 11.
thus; That which proceeds according to the good pleasure of the Lord's will,
is not upon the foresight of faith; But predestination proceeds upon the good
pleasure of God's will; ergo, The Major proposition I prove thus. This phrase,
according to the pleasure of God's will excludes all outward causes; And no
wise man will refer the cause of a man's absolution Ephesians: 1. 5.
to the good pleasure of the judge, when a man's innocence is the cause of it.
For that is the cause of a thing, whereby answer is made to the question, why
such a thing is done; And this is the perpetual phrase of Scripture; as, Is it
not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? And, All these things
works the same spirit, distributing to every man severally as he will; and,
He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth. Mat: 20. 15. 1 Co.
12. 11. Rom: 9. 18. Col. 1. 19. Mat: 11. 26. Phil: 2, 13. Ps: 44. 3.
It pleased the father that in him should all fullness dwell. It is so o father
because thy good pleasure was such. It is God that works in you both the will
and the deed according to his good, pleasure. The Lord loved you because he
loved you. Deuteronomy: 7. 7. They inherited not the land by their own sword, neither
did their own arm save them, but thy right hand, and thine arm. and the light
of they countenance because thou did favor them.

2. My second argument is, Therefore God gives faith because he did
predestinate them; As many believed as were ordained to everlasting life; and
God added daily to the Church Act: 13. 48. Act: 2. last.
such as should be saved. (...) in this place is as much as, (...); as appears
by the equipollency of both sentences. Now hence I infer; Therefore God gives
not faith because he has not ordained them to everlasting life. For if the
affirmation be cause of the affirmation; the negation is cause of the negation.
And the Scripture as ordinarily subjoyneth the denial of grace to reprobation,
as the granting of grace to predestination. For as (...), such as perish, is
opposite to (...), such as shall be saved; And as the consequent of the one is
said to be Faith; so the consequent to the other is the denial of the same or
like grace. As for example, All they that are of God hear God's Jo: 1. 47.
Act: 2. ult. and 13. 48, 2 Co: 4. 3. 2 These. 2, 10. 13
word; so others hear them not because they are not of God; as (...), Such as
shall be saved are added to God's Church: so in whom is the Gospel hid? only
(...), in them that perish. Among whom does Antichrist prevail by all
deceivablenesse? only in them that perish. Like as for the Elect on the
contrary it is not possible they should be seduced. Mat: 24. 24, and 2 These: 2.
13

3. If predestination were upon the foresight of faith, then it should be only
upon the foresight of such a faith as perseveres to the end; whence two
inconveniences follow 1. That no man can be assured of his election until his
death, which is quite contrary unto Scripture. For Paul was assured of the
election of the Thessalonians by observation of the works of their faith, the
labor of their love, and the patience of their hope, 2. In this 1 These: 3, 4.
case none can be strengthened against the power of temptation by the assurance
of their election; But thus we are strengthened by Chist. Mat: 24. 24. by St.
Paul. Rom: 8. 29. 2 These: 2. 13.

4. Election is absolute, therefore reprobation is absolute. The antecedent I
prove; If it be neither of faith nor of works, then it is absolute, but it is
neither of faith, nor works. Romans 9, 11.
Not of works, expressly; Not of faith as appeates by the same reason whereby
Paul proves it is not of works. For the reason is this, Before the children
were borne or had done good or evil, it was said the Elder shall serve the
younger; Therefore election is not of works. Now say I we may as well conclude
therehence, therefore it is not of faith; forasmuch as before they were borne,
they were as incapable of faith as of works. The consequence I prove thus;
Look by what reason St. Paul proves, that the election of Jacob was not of
good works, because before they were borne 'twas said, The Elder shall serve
the younger; by the same reason it is evident that the reprobation of Esau was
not of evil works; the subjection of Esau unto his younger brother, as lively
representing his reprobation, as the dominion of Jacob over his elder brother
represents his election.

5. Predestination is defined by Austin to be Praeparatio gratiae, the
preparation of grace, therefore reprobation which is opposite thereunto must be
the not preparation of grace; that is God's decree not to give grace, like as
the opposite is Gods decree to give grace. Now God gives grace not according to
works. For he has mercy on whom he will And hereupon Aug: de bono persever. c.
15.
Austin builds his doctrine of predestination. Now by his doctrine
predestination is absolute as Gerardus Vossius confesses in his preface to his
history of the heresy of Pelagius; How can it be otherwise? For if God
conferres grace not according to men's works; but according to his own purpose
and grace. How much more did he decree to give it 2 Timothy: 1. 9. Rom: 9. 18.
not upon any foresight of works, but of his mere pleasure. And the Scripture
as clearly testifies, that as God has mercy on whom he will; so whom he will
he hardneth; that is of mere pleasure he denies grace to some, as of mere
pleasure he grants it unto others; And therefore reprobation grounded hereupon
must needs be as absolute, as predestination grounded upon the other.

6. Like as in Scripture phrase Faith is said to be the faith of God's elect,
election is not said to be of those that are foreseen to to believe; So the
worshippers of the Beast are Tit: 1. 1.
said to be those. Whose names are not written in the book of life; They that
are not written Rev: 13. 8 and 17. 8.
in the book of life, are described to be such that admire and worship the
beast. And the not writing of men's names in the book of life does as
significantly represent their reprobation; as the writing of men's names in
heaven. Luc: 10. 20. Rev: 20. 12: does represent their election. Thus as
formerly I gave six reasons to justify the absoluteness of reprobation,
because he pretended the absoluteness thereof was repugnant to reason; so here
I have given six more derived out of the word of God, to prove that this
doctrine is the revealed will of God, to stop his empty mouth that clamoureth
and only clamoureth that it is no part of God's revealed will. And that this
doctrine is not only conformable to right reason, but by convincing arguments
in right reason demonstrable I have already showed; And that all the
absurdities this Author blatters of, they prove to be no better then the mere
imagination of a vain thing. That which here he discourses of a reasonable
service, comes out of it is place, it belonged to the former reason in M. Hord's
treatise, and there I have answered it, and showed the absurd interpretation
that he makes of it.

He vaunts that he has proved reprobation absolute to be unjust, when he has
performed no thing less; But making only a great crack, he goes out like a
squib; and throughout meddles not with one argument that our Divines bring out
of Scripture, or reason to justify their doctrine concerning the absoluteness
of reprobation. And it is apparent that he denies the absoluteness of
election, as well as the absoluteness of reprobation, and consequently must
necessarily maintain that grace is given according to works; whereupon it was
that Austin grounded his doctrine concerning the absoluteness of
Predestination: And upon the like ground have we as good cause to ground our
doctrine concerning the absoluteness of reprobation, it being every way as
evident, that Grace is not denied according unto works, as that it is not
granted according to men's works; And the Scripture is equally as express
concerning both, where it is said that as God has mercy on whom he will, so
also whom he will he hardneth.

Page: 75. 76. Treating of God's sincerity Sub-sect: 1. There are two passages
inserted To: 9. 18.
taken out of Piscator, before the passages alleged out of Zanchy and Bucer.
For having said that, Now God's meaning is (by this doctrine) that the most of
those to whom he offers his grace and glory, shall have neither; forthwith he
gives instance in Piscator thus.

And so Piscator says, Grace is not offered by God, even to those who are
called with a meaning to give it, but to the Elect only, Gratia non offertur a
Deo singulis ^licet vocatis, animo communicandi eam, sed solis electis. In the
same book he has such an other speech; Non vult Deus reprobos credere
li^etli^gua profiteatur M. Mason's Additions, Lib. de praedest. contra Schafin.
p. 74. page 143.
se velle. Though God in words protest he would have reprobates to believe, yet
indeed he will not have them. they make God to deal with men in matters of
salvation, as the Poets feign the Gods to have dealt with poor Tantalus. They
placed him in a clear and goodly river up to the very chin, and under a tree
which bare much sweet and pleasant fruit that did almost touch his lips, but
this they did with a purpose that he should taste of neither. For when he put
his mouth to the water to drink, it waved away from him; And when he reached
his hand to the fruit to have eaten of it, it withdrew it self presently out
of his reach; so as he could neither eat nor drink. Just so deals God with
reprobates; (by their doctrine) He places them under the plentiful means of
salvation, offers it to them so plainly, that men would think they might
have it when they will, and yet intends fully they shall never have it,
withholding from them either the first grace that they cannot believe, or the
second grace that they cannot persevere. Did not those gods delude Tantalus?
yes doubtless. And if God do so with reprobates, what did he but delude them,
and dissenible with them in his fairest and likeliest offers of salvation that
he makes them? And this do Zanchius and Bucer grant by evident consequence, as
appears by a speech or two of theirs, which cannot stand with their
conclusion; and therefore I suppose fell unwarily from them.

This treatise of Piscator De praedestinatione against Schaffman I have the
second editition printed at Herborne Anno 1598. But these words according to
their quotations Answer.
here, are not to be found; the several distinct passages are distinguished by
numbers, which in all editions hold the same, not so the pages. Yet the latter
passage quoted p. 143. I meet with in mine p. 128. According to the like
difference I try whether I can find out the other, but in vain. But yet I meet
with such matter of discourse as whereunto this passage is very congruous to be
there delivered if any where; yet no such thing is there delivered as number: 74.
Schaffman's argument is this, If God calls all to salvation then he will save
all. To this Piscator answers, The proposition is false; But he calls with,
animo simplici atque vero, a simple mind and true. Sane says Piscator, as much
as to say, I grant that; but so as that he calls them with condition of
repentance and faith; Therefore as he promises salvation seriously unto them
that perform this condition, and therefore performs this promise. So on the
contrary he does seriously threaten death and damnation to them who do not
fulfill the condition, and performs unto him that commination. Then, though
God be not capable of hypocrisy yet he does not always will that what he
commands shall be always performed by him to whom he gives that command;
Whether by commanding he means to prove a man; as to prove Abraham, he
commanded him to sacrifice his Son; or because to him whom he commands, he
will not give grace to perform that command, as he deals with reprobates. And
number: 120. To Schaffman's objection which was this; God is no hypocrite, he
answers thus; But yet he gives not grace to all to perform what he commands
the^. For promiscuously he commands as well reprobates as elect to believe; as
many as he calls by the preaching of the gospel; but he gives this grace to
his elect alone according to that, To you it is given to know the mysteries of
the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. So that undoubtedly God
offers grace (to wit pardon of sin) with a purpose to communicate it to all
that shall believe, according to Mat. 13. 11.
the judgment of Piscator, neither does he offer it with a purpose to
communicate it to any unless they believe. But the grace of faith is not
offered to any with a purpose to communicate it upon a condition. For then
grace should be conferred according unto works, which is manifest Pelagianisme.
As for the other which I meet with p: 128. number: 120: take it at full, and not
as it is dismembered by this Author, who cares not how he calumniates, so he
might advantage his own cause. Schaffman's objection was, Deus est unius and
linguae and voluntatis, God is both of the same tongue and will. Whereto
Piscator answers thus, Your meaning is that God, look what he professes with
his tongue, that he wills; But this (says he) is not always true, nor in
all particulars. For by his tongue that is by speech uttered, he professed that
he would have Abraham to sacrifice his Son Isaac; yet he would not have him
sacrificed. With his tongue he professed by his servant Jonas that he would
destroy Nineveh within forty days, yet he would not so do. With his tongue by
the ministers of the Gospel he professes that he would have the reprobates to
whom he speaks among his Elect, to believe the Gospel, in as much as he
commands them so to do; yet he would not have them to believe, in as much as
he will not give them the grace of believing, without will no man can believe.
What therefore is God an Hypocrite? Away with such a blasphemy. He alone is to
be accounted an Hypocrite, who counterfeits holiness when he has none; Such
counterfeiting is not incident to God. And let the Reader observe well the
immodest carriage of this Author. Piscator when he says that God in words
professes he will have Reprobates to believe, he shows withal in what
respect he does so, to wit, quatenus mandat ut credant, in as much as he
commands them to believe. And indeed God's command is usually called God's
will, and by none more then by these our opposites. But this Author draws
this to the signification of God's will simply so called, which is the will of
purpose; And to that purpose leaves out the words whereby Piscator explicates
himself. Who knows not that God commanded Pharaoh by his servant Moses to let
Israel go? this is to profess with the tongue in Piscator's phrase, that God
would have Pharaoh to let Israel go. And God's commandment is called God's
will in Scripture. This is the will of God even your sanctification. 1 These; 4.
3.
But to speak properly it is but the signification of God's will of good
pleasure (properly called the will of God) that it should be Pharaoh's duty to
let Israel go, but withal he revealed to Moses that he would harden Pharaoh*s
heart, that he should not let Israel go. Now let the indifferent judge what
this Author has gotten by these passages of Piscator, save only the
displaying of his own immodest and calumniating courses* then he thinks to
please his Reader with the story of Tantalus; wherein there is no congruity to
that whereunto it is applied, For Tantalus a labris sitiens fugientia captat
Flumina, -- He was an hungered, and would feign eat but could not: He was a
thirst, and would feign drink but could not. God deals so with no man;
neither reprobate Jews, nor Gentiles had any desire to be partakers of the
mercies of God offered them in Christ. The Gospel was a scandal to the one,
and foolishness to the other; But to them that are called it is the power of
God and wisdom of God And as they hunger and thirst after God's
righteousness in his dear Son; so are they satisfied therewith, Let him that
is a thirst come and drink of the water of life freely. And He every one that
is a thirst, come ye to the waters, Rev: 22. 17: Esa: 55. v. 1. 2. 3.
and ye that have no silver, come buy and eat; come I say buy wine and milk
without silver and without money: Wherefore do ye lay out your silver, and not
for bread? and your labor without being satisfied? Hearken diligently unto me,
hear and your souls shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with
you, even the sure mercies of David. Here is no sending of them away empty,
which thirst after these waters of life; They all shall draw waters Es: 12. 3.
of the wells of salvation. So that here is no such dealing with them, as the
Poets feign was their Gods dealing with Tantalus. My answer to that which he
produces out of Zanchy and Bucer the Reader shall find in my answer to M. Hord.

Page 76. 77. In the point of threats and comminations; after these words, We
never read that threats are thundered out against us for original sin. In M.
Hord's discourse it is added, Or for that corruption of nature which we brought
with us into the world: But this Author leaves it quite out, with what mind
let the Reader judge, and whether he can well brook that original sin should
be styled a corruption of nature which we bring with us into the world.

Page 78. In the same second sub-section after that of Abslaon's feast, Ioab's
congy, the kiss of Judas, and the Hyaena's tears etc. There is a good passage
left out which follows in M. Hord; and in the place thereof this, which here
follows, foysted in; Let the Reader consider with himself, wherefore that
was left out; it seems he was ashamed of that calumniation. But thus it
follows here.

Nay the whole ministry (wherein God commands, offers, chideth, entreats,
lamenteth etc.) if this M. Mason's Additions.
be true, is but a mere imposture; a giving of words without any meaning of
answerable deeds; And an imposture so much the greater, by how much the show of
kindness is the heartier. For how can a good thing be offered with stronger
shows of a good meaning, then when it is offered with exhortations and
entreaties to accept it, with clear demonstrations of the excellency of it,
unfeigned wishes, that the parties to whom it is offered would accept it; and
bitter lamentations for their folly in refusing it? With all these enforcements
i^ Gods tenderof salvation to Reprobates accompanied; and therefore in show
most hearty and serious. In a word thusspeaks God, by this doctrine, to
Reprobates in the ministry.

O ye Reprobates (once most dearly beloved of me in your father Adam but now
extremely, and implacably hated; and by mine eternal and uncontrollable order
scaled up under invincible sin and misery) amend your lives and believe in
the name of mine only begotten Son. If you repent, and believe not, there is no
remedy, you must be damned; but if you repent and believe ye shall be saved;
Though your sins be as red as scarlet, I will make them to be as white as
wool. Think not that I would have you dye. For I swear, as I live, I will
not the death of him that dies. I would have no man to perish, but all to come
to repentance. I beseech you therefore be reconciled. I have cried and called
unto you; I have a long time waited upon you, that you might repent; And still
am I knocking at the doors of your hearts for entrance. O that there were an
heart in you to fear me and keep my commandments, that it might go well with
you for ever. What shall I do unto you; how shall I entreat you? will you not
be made clean, when shall it once be? Can God speak thus to reprobates, who
by his own decree, shall never repent, nor be saved, without the deepest
dissimulation?

Judge indifferent Reader whether ever more passion were showed with less
common Answer.
sense. For let the enforcements be never so great and serious in the ministry
of the word, under which all the expressions here mentioned are comprehended,
yet is it possible, that men can yield unto them obedience by faith and
repentance, unless God gives faith and repentance? For does not the Scripture
clearly testify that faith is the gift of God. To you it is given both to
believe in him, and to suffer for him: that it is the work of grace. Act. Ephesians:
2. 8. Phil: 1. 29. 1 Col. 4. 7. Ephesians: 6. 23. Act: 5. 31. Act: 11. 18.
18. 27. What have thou that thou have not received? And does not the Apostle
accordingly pray on the behalf of the Ephesians, not for peace only, but for
faith and love also from God the father and our Lord Jesus Christ? Is not
repentance also the gift of God? Him God raised to be a Prince and a Savior to
give repentance unto Israel and forgiveness of sins. Then has God also unto
the Gentiles given repentance unto life. If so be God may give them repentance.
What then? Shall this Author's not Logic, but Rhetoric whereinto his 2 Timothy:
2. last
Logic is transformed to the wonder of all that know him in the University,
like some Medusa's head, turn us into stones, and in spite of Scripture
evidence drive us to deny, that either faith, or repentance, is the gift of
God? For if it be the gift of God, is not somewhat else required to the working
of faith in us over and above all these enforcements? Not one Arminian hitherto
have I found daring to deny that faith is the gift of God: Yet ever since I
read them in their Censura Censurae to deny that Christ has merited faith and
regeneration for us, I looked when they would come to deal seriously and
sincerely; And if they have any such meaning, clearly to profess as much,
namely that faith is not the gift of God. But if this Author's meaning be that
God gives it to all that have it, and is also ready to give it to them that
have it not, provided, that they will do their own part, seeing he charge us
to make God's ways void of truth and syncerity, how comes it to pass that
this Author carries himself so subdolously and shows so little sincerity
and clearenesse in dealing plainly, and telling us that this is his meaning? Is
it because we are ready to conclude upon him that he is as errand a Pelagian,
as ever was, in maintaining that grace is conferred according to works? Why
does he carry himself and his opinions in huggar muggar if he be of that mind,
and does not plainly show himself to be a Pelagian, and prove to the world
that Pelagianismus est verus Christianismus, Pelagianisme is true Christianity?
and in the next place oppose Paul also in saying that God saved us and called
us with an holy calling not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace; and that he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
2 Timothy: 1. 9. To. 9. 18.
hardneth?

2ly, Consider further the strange infatuation of this Author, more ways then
one. For 1, inquire of him, whether after all this work of the ministry
performed by him unto reprobates, he thinks not himself bound to pray unto God
for a blessing upon his labors, whereby it may become effectual unto them,
and that upon this ground, because Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but
God is he who gives the increase. And let him express what the increase is,
which he beggeth at the hand of God, whether it be not the performance of those
duties whereunto he has exhorted them in the most emphaticall manner, that the
word of God does afford any example of. And if no more be required for the
working of man's will to that which is good (having as this Author supposes a
power to perform obedience if they will) then these enforcements which he so
much amplifies; whereto tend his prayers after all these enforcements are used?
is it that God will afford his concourse to the act? Why is this a work of
grace? Does not God afford this to the most sinful act that is, without all
prayers? And is it decent to maintain that God of himself is forward enough
to afford concourse to such acts as are evil, be they never so abominable; but
to concur with us to that which is good, he stands off and must be entreated
and solicited by our prayers earnest and fervent, otherwise he will be slack
to concur to that which is good, though nothing slack to concur to that
which is evil? Nay is it possible that man should will ought, or do ought,
and God not concur with him, to the producing both of the will and the deed?
Now I had thought prayers tended to the procuring of works of grace, such as
concourse is not, as which is performed of God 1. To sinful acts, as well as
to pious acts. 2. And that necessarily upon supposition that the reasonable
creature does ought. Consider farther, if his prayers tend only to the
procuring of God's concurrence, and this concurrence is upon supposition of
man's concurrence; let the indifferent, I say, consider the genius of this man's
prayers. For albeit the form of them runs thus, that God will convert his
hearers to faith, to repentance, and to work in them that which is pleasing in
his sight through Jesus Christ; yea to work in them both the will, and the
deed, according to his good pleasure, to circumcise their hearts, to love the
Lord their God with all their hearts, and with all their souls, to heal their
backslidings; yea as he sees all their ways, so to heal them, to cause them
to walk in his statutes, and to keep his judgments, and to do them; yea to
put his fear in their hearts, that they may never depart away from him. (For
thus he must pray, if he pray in faith built upon God's promises, we having
special promises for all these particulars;) yet his meaning is no more then
this, that as many of his Auditors as he finds willing to do ought of this,
that God will concur with them to make them willing; And as many as do
perform it, he will concur to the performance of it; as for those that are
unwilling, he will not pray that God will make them willing, though that has
been ever the Lords course toward some, as Austin often professes, And as for
that prayer of Austin, Da Domine quod jubes and jube quid vis, Lord give me to
do what thou command, and then command what thou will. Like enough he
spights it as much as ever Pelagius did. But if any are forward to hate and to
despite God's word, or the professors of his truth, he will not pray unto God
to concur with them thereunto. For he knows God's forwardness to concur
to the performance of every abominable act without his prayers: Nay in despite
of any prayers to the contrary: And does he not think it in vain for the
holiest man that ever was to pray for this? 3. Again observe he says that by
our doctrine the whole ministry is a mere imposture, and why? because it is in
show hearty and serious, but in truth nothing so. But what moves him to say
this, does not God procure hereby the conversion and salvation of millions? vea
of many of those who have crucified the Son of God; who have persecuted his
Church? Do we not believe that a time shall come wherein the Jews shall be
co^verted in spite of all their former obstinacy, and in despite of all their
blasphemies powered sorth against the Son of God? But he will say, that grace is
showed only to the Elect by our opinion. But here let every indifferent person
judge between us of the equity of this his discourse. The whole ministry is a
mere imposture; because all the inforcements wherewith the tender of salvation
unto Reprobates is accompanied is in show most hearty and serious, but endued
nothing so. For what? have the elect of God no part in the ministry? Or dates
he say that by our doctrine these insorcements are nothing hearty and serious to
them? Thou will say the Author's meaning is, that the whole ministry is a
mere imposture toward reprobates; but he says not so; but thus, The whole
ministry is a mere imposture; and afterward in giving his reason for it, he
pleads, that inforcements in show hearty and serious made to reprobates are
nothing so; and hence he concludes that the whole ministry is a mere imposture
without any distinction of persons, to whom it is a mere imposture 4. Yet I
willingly confess that it is foul enough, that God's courses should be courses
of imposture toward any even toward reprobates. But how does he prove, that
God takes any such course with reprobates? To whom has God sent his word and
vouchsafed the ministry hereof according to all the enforcements mentioned
accompanying his tender of salvation unto them? is it not unto his Church? What
is the preserment of the Jew above the Gentile? much every way, says Paul,
chiefly because unto the^ were committed the Oracles of God. And was the Church
of Jews, a Church of reprobates, Were they not the City of God, but the city
of the Devil? If these enforcements had been used to the Nativites, there had
been some color for such an imputation; but seeing (...) of God's word in all
these enforcements is used to the people of God, his precious people, chosen
out of the world to put his name among'st them; shall this ministry be so
carried, as concerning reprobates? All that he has to say for this is no
other, but that a great part, or the most part of the people to whom he sends
his prophets are reprobates. Be it so, but how does he prove that God intends
this ministry; for the salvation of reprobates; or that he intends it at all
for them? If God commands them, as he commanded Jeremiah saying, Go and cry in
the ears of Jerusalem, Thus says the Lord; they must do so without
difference. For they are not able to put a difference between the Elect and
Reprobate, to know who are the one, and who are the other. Austin was willing
to pray for all, but yet he professes, that if they knew who they were, who^
God had ordained unto damnation, they would pray no more for them, then for the
Devil himself; so that either the Prophets were not Aug: de civi: Dei lib. 21.
c: 24. si Eclesia nosset qui praedestinati sin^ ire in aeternum ignem cum diabo
lotam pro ^is non magis oraret quam pro diabolo
of Austin's mind, or else that they thought that their ministry in God's
purpose and appointment tended to the salvation only of Gods elect: But because
they knew not, who they are, therefore they prayed for all, and used their
ministerial enforcements indifferently toward all. But like enough this
Author will deny, that the Prophets were of Austin's mind; Therefore I will
prove they were in this; The Prophets were undoubtedly of St. Paul's mind; but
St. Paul was of St. Austin's mind in this therefore the Prophets also were of
St. Austin's mind. Now that St. Paul was of St. Austin's mind, and that his
ministry, though performed toward all, yet was intended for the salvation
only of God's elect, I 1 Co: 9. 19. verse: 22. 2 Timothy: 2. 10.
prove thus, Though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self a servant
unto all men that I might win the more. Observe, he does not say that he
might win all; Again, I became all things to all men that I might save some.
Who are these some at whose salvation he aims? I answer they are God's elect,
and none but they; and this I prove out of those words of his where he says,
Therefore I suffer all things for the elects sake that they might also obtain
salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. Now if his sufferings
were for their sakes, undoubtedly his whole ministry was for their sakes; for
this alone Act: 20. 23. 24.
brought his sufferings upon him. The holy Ghost witnesses in every City
saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me; But I pass not at all, neither is
my life dear unto my self, so that I may fulfill my course with joy and the
ministration that I have received to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.
5. But be it, that God intends it for Reprobates also, yet not for their
salvation; But first to take away excuse from them, as to this purpose he sent
Ezechiel. Ezekiel: 2. 3. 4. 5.
Son of man I send thee to a rebellious nation For they are impudent children;
I do send thee unto them, and thou shall say unto them, Thus says the Lord
God; but surely they will not hear neither indeed will they cease; for they
are a rebellious house, yet shall they know that there has been a Prophet
among them. Or otherwise as Austin has observed, ut proficiant ad exteriorem
vitae emendationem, quo mitius puniantur, that they may profit to an outward
amendment of their lives, that their punishment may be the less. And consider
whether in all this he does not openly invade, not so muchour doctrine, as the
manifest evidence of God's word. For it is apparent that God gives commands to
those whose hearts he means to harden, that they shall not obey those commands,
though those commands were not made in a cold manner Ex: 4. 22. 23. v. 21.
but with strongest enforcements. Thou shall say to Praraoh, thus says the
Lord, Israel is my son, even my first borne, wherefore I say to thee, let my
son go that he may serve me. If thou refuse to let him go, behold I will slay
thy son, even, thy first borne. Yet before this he told Moses saying, I will
harden his heart, and he shall not let the people go. And after this, The Lord
Ex: 9. 12.
hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he hearkened not unto them, as the Lord had
said to Moses. And hereupon the Lord deals with him in the way of greater
enforcement then before. v: 13.
For the Lord said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before
Pharaoh and tell him, Thus says the Lord God of the Hebrews, let my people go
that they may serve me, For I v: 14.
will at this time send all mine plagues upon thine heart, and upon thy
servants, and upon thy people, that thou may know that there is none like me
in all the earth. For now will I stretch 15.
out mine hand, that I may smite thee, and thy people with pestilence, and thou
shall perish from 16.
the earth. And indeed for this cause have I appointed thee to show my power in
thee, and to declare my name thoroughout all the world; Yet thou exaltest thy
self against my people, and let the^ not go. Behold tomorrow this time I
will cause to rain, a mighty great hayle, such as was Ex: 10. 1.
not in Egypt since the foundation of it was laid. And The lord said unto
Moses, Go to Pharach; for I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his
servants, that I might work these my miracles in the midst of his realm.
Here we have plain enforcements and those of great power used by the Lord, yet
still the Lord continues to harden Pharaoh's heart, and professes as much, not
fearing the censure of any vile wretch to cast upon him the imputation of
imposture throughout the whole course of his ministry. And the truth is all
the learned concur in distinguishing between, Voluntas praecepti, and
voluntas propositi; and count it absurd to infer the purpose of God, or his
will to have such a thing done from his commanding it, though this command be
joined with exhortation, expostulations, wishes, or whatsoever other
emphaticall expressions; all which the learned conclude under Praeceptum, as a
sign of God's will: And the Pelagians of old urged it no farther then as God's
precept backed with what exhortations and enforcements soever, thence to
conclude that man had power to yield obedience, but not to conclude, it was
God's will it should come to pass; and to impute desires unto God in proper
speech, which never are accomplished, what an unscholasticall course is it?
even as much as to deny him to be God, and to bereave him of his blessed
condition, by frustrating him of his desires: Whereas the time shall come, that
the Elect of God shall be so blessed, as to have no desire of theirs in vain.
Neither does the objectour introduced by St. Paul break forth into any such
blasphemy, as to charge God with any imposture in hardening To. 9. 19.
whom he will; when nevertheless the ministry of the word has course with
them as well as with any other; but rather proposes it as a thing
unreasonable, that God should complain of men's disobedince, when himself has
hardened their hearts, whereby it comes to pass that it cannot be that they
should obey God as they ought. For who has resisted his will. Yet we know what
answer the Apostle makes to stop the mouths of all such, as call God to an
account for his procedings. But o man who art thou who disputest with God?
Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?
Has not the potter power over the clay of the same lump, to make one vessel
unto honor and another unto dishonor? And wilt not thou allow as much power
unto God over thee, or over the matter whereof thou wast made, as the Potter
has power over the clay? Proud man thinks himself able enough to believe, to
repent. Now God by his passionate expressions in the Prophets discovers the
vanity of this proud conceit, and labors by their little profiting by all
these patheticall moving courses to manifest the strength of man's corruption;
And when they will not learn and receive this instruction by his works; he
tells them the plain truth of it to their faces. Ye have seen all that the
Lord did before your eyes in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh and all his
servants, Deuteronomy: 29. 2.
and unto all his land. The great temptations which thine eyes have seen, those
great verse. 3.
miracles and wonders: Yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive,
nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear unto this day. Is this the course of
imposture, when he tells them to their faces, that albeit he commands them,
exhorts them, expostulates with them, and expresses forms of desire of their
obedience in his word; yet except God gives them an heart, they cannot
perceive; except God gives them eyes, they cannot see; except the Lord gives
them ears they cannot hear: What can be more plain dealing then this? Like
as our Savior no less plainly told the Jews to their face; He that is of God
hears God's words; ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God;
Yet was he earnest and patheticall enough in exhorting them to repentance by
the ministry of John the Baptist; by his own ministry. Jerusalem, Jerusalem
that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee; how often
would I have gathered thy children together as an hen gathers her chicken
under her wings, and ye would not. Behold your habitation is left unto you
desolate. For I say unto you ye shall not see me henceforth, till that ye say,
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. I come to this Author's
Prosopopey; for the truth is his Rhetoric surmounts his Logic, whereat I
wonder not a little.

O ye Reprobates, once most dearly beloved in your father Adam. But where has
he found in any of our Divines that Reprobates were at all beloved in our
father Adam? We all hold Reprobation to be as ancient as election, which St.
Paul testifies to have been before the foundation of the world. And to ordain
to damnation I should think is to hate rather then to love; and this ordination
divine was from everlasting. And the Scripture has taught us that the divine
nature is without variableness or shadow of change. He speaks in the language
of his own Court, when he talks of sealing up Ephesians: 4. 30. 1 Pet: 1. 5. 2 Timothy:
4. 18.
under invincible sin and misery. The Scripture speaks of sealing unto the
day of redemption by God's holy spirit which gives them assurance, that they
are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation; That God will
deliver them from every evil work, and preserve them to his heavenly
kinngdome. But no such spirit is given to Reprobates to assure them of their
damnation, so to seal them up under invincible sin and misery. They are under
the power of Satan; but he has neither power nor authority to assure them of
their damnation. And albeit this Author fashions a discourse to reprobates, as
if they were a sect well known; Yet we are so far from knowing who they are,
that they are (in our opinion) neither known to themselves, nor known to Satan,
no nor to God's holy Angels, unless he reveal it unto them. If we should
have any cause to address our selves to Reprobates (which kind of case and
occasion is incomprehensible by me) we should describe them no otherwise then
thus; O ye who are not only for the present under the power of Satan (and so
are all God's elect before the time of regeneration) but will continue vassalls
unto him, even unto death, going on from sin, to sin and never breaking
them off by repentance, but continuing to despise the goodness of God leading
thereunto. Now this being only in reference to the time to come; I cannot
speak to any in present under this form absolutely, but hypothetically. For
none are Reprobates to us, but such who finally persevere in impenitency;
Therefore I cannot exhort them to amend their lives under the style of
Reprobates, but as such, who although they are under the power of sin and
Satan, may for ought I know belong to God's election, and in good time come out
of the snare of Satan; And because the ministry of the word is the only means
whereby God brings men unto repentance, and that by instruction, admonition and
exhortation; therefore I do instruct them in the knowledge of God that made
them after his own Image; and how this image of God came to be defaced in them,
to wit, by the sin of our first parents, and how hereupon we became to be
shapen in sin, and borne in sin, and therewithal children of wrath, and
such as deserve to be made the generation of God's curse; then I represent unto
them the mercy of God toward man in giving us his Son to bear our sins in his
body upon the tree, and suffer a shameful and bitter death upon the cross for
them; and that for this his Son's sake he offers unto us the pardon of all our
sins upon our repentance, and faith in Christ, and thereupon I exhort them unto
repentance: We farther say that God takes no pleasure in the death of him that
dies, but takes pleasure in a man's repentance. We do not say, neither does
the word of God say, that he wills not the death of him that dies. For
undoubtedly he wills the damnation of all them that dye in their sins without
repentance. We do not say that God would have no man to perish, but all come
to repentance. Neither does the Scripture say any such thing; For that were to
deny God's omnipotency. For seeing many there be that perish; if this were
contrary to God's will, then God's will should be resistible, and we should be
driven to deny the first Article of our Creed; As Austine has long ago argued
the case. But indeed Peter writing to them, who had obtained like precious
faith with 2 Pet: 1. 1. 1 Pet: 1. 23.
the Apostles themselves; and such as were Elect unto sanctification of the
spirit; and were begotten again to a lively hope by the resurection of Jesus
Christ from the dead; to them he writes saying, The Lord of that promise is not
slack, but is patient toward us (not to us Reprobates; God forbid that we
should so corrupt the interpretation of his words; but rather to us Elect, to
us called, to us begotten of God) not willing any to perish (to wit of us) but
all come to repentance, to wit all of us, whenever through our frailty we
turn out of the good ways of the Lord. God cries unto you by us, and calls
upon you by us; and has along time showed great patience, and long suffering,
and hereby led you unto repentance; and by his word stands knocking at the
doors of your hearts, and calling upon you to open unto him. And the more to
move you, he is pleased to express himself in the affections of a weak man,
who is not able to accomplish his desires, O that there were an heart in you to
fear me and keep my commandments; and with great passionatnesse cries out
unto you, What shall I do unto you, how shall I entreat you? As if he were to
seek what course to take, and willing to use every provocation to excite you
and stir you up, sometimes by gracious promises, as Come and let us reason
together, though thy sins were Esa: 1. Jer: 13. 27.
as scarlet etc. Sometimes by threatenings, Woe unto thee o Jerusalem, will thou
not be made clean, when shall it once be. And withal he gives us to
understand, and requires us to preach as much unto you also, even to acquaint
you with the whole counsel of God, and tell you, that as many as are ordained
unto eternal life, as many as to whom the arm of the Lord is revealed; Act:
13. 48. Es: 53. 1. Jo: 8. 27.
as many as are of God, they obey this calling, they believe, they hear God's
words, and turn unto him by true repentance sooner or later; They that do
not, it is because they are not of God. And albeit those words are the words of
Moses, O that there were an Deuteronomy: 5. 29.
heart in you to fear me! speaking to them in the name of the Lord; yet the
same Moses tells the same people plainly that The Lord had not given them an
heart to perceive, nor eyes Deuteronomy: 29. 4.
to see, nor ears to hear unto that Day. And albeit the Lord professes in
like manner by his Prophet Esaias, O that thou had hearkened unto my
commandments, then had thy prosperity Es: 48. 18.
been as the flood, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea. Yet this
very disobedience of theirs was consequent to the Lord's obduration of them, as
appears Es: 6. 9. Go say unto this people ye shall hear indeed, but ye shall
not understand; ye shall plainly see and not perceive. Make the heart of this
people fat, make their ears heavy and shut their eyes; least they see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and convert, and he heal them. Then
said the Lord how long? (should this obduration continue) And he answered
until the Cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and
the land be utterly desolate; And the Lord have removed men far away, and
there be a great desolation in the midst of the land; Yet I dare not say of any
of you, that ye are Reprobates. For God may open your eyes before you dye to
see your sins, and touch your hearts that ye may bewail them. And whenever
this blessed condition does befall you, I will stir you up to give God the
glory of it, who alone it is, that works in us that, which is pleasing in his
sight; Yea both the will and the deed according to his good pleasure. If he
never works any such thing in you, the more inexcusable are you, who presuming
of your own power to believe, Heb: 13. 21. Phil: 2. 13.
to repent; yet are nothing moved with such passionate expressions, unto
repentance. If you do believe there is such impotency in you to good, and that
it must needs continue in you, while God continues to harden you by denying
his grace, and thereupon ye except against Gods course in complaining of their
disobedience, whom he has hardened saying Why then does he complain; For who
has resisted his will? I put all such over to St. Paul to receive answer from
him Rom: 9. 20. 21. 22. As touching this Author's conclusion; Dares he himself
say that by God's decree Reprobates shall ever repent or be saved? What then is
his meaning? why does he not express himself in this particular; but most
unshamefastly earthes himself like a fox, unwilling to bring his vile opinion
to the light, which I take to be no other then this, that God's decree of
giving faith is not absolute but conditional; namely to give faith to as many,
as shall prepare themselves for it; And to deny it to none, but such as fail
to prepare for it; as much as in plain terms to profess that Grace is given
according unto works, The very filth of Pelagianisme: Yet has he no where
discovered wherein this preparation consists; that he keeps to himself, and to
his own Muses.

P. 80. I find another addition to the third Sub-section in these words.

To offer salvation under a condition not possible is in circumstance a great
deal worse. For it is a denial M. Mason's Additions. 2 Samuel 5. 6.
under color of the contrary; a denial joined with a scoff and derision; as
was that of the Jebusites, who told David that he should not enter into the
fort of Sion, except he took away the blind and the lame. Their meaning was
they would never deliver it up unto him; and because they thought it impossible
for him to take away the blind and the lame, they told him if he did so, then
they would yield it up. It was an Ironicall and scoffing denial of his demand.
If the King should make an unrepealable law that no German should be made a
Citizen of London or free Denizon of the kingdom, and then make a decree to
give some bountiful gratuities, but to the Citizens of London, or to the
subjects of the kingdom only, and to none but them; And yet for all this
should command it to be proclaimed, that he will give them to the Germans upon
concondition they will be made free men of London, or be incorporated into the
Kingdom; would not any man say that the King in this case did dissemble and
delude the poor Dutchmen? And if any should say there would be no dissembling
in it; For if they would become Citizens or subjects, they should have the
promised gratuities, a man might truly answer, that therefore the King does
counterfeit and cosen them, because he makes a tender of them upon a condition
not possible by his own decree. In like manner if God have made a decree, that
such men shall never believe, and yet offer them heaven upon condition, they
will believe, it may most truly be said that God does not only deny them heaven
but deny it with a bitter derision, which is far from that candor and
goodness that dwells in him.

M. Hord's discourse at the first went no farther then to prove, that In
substance it is all one to offer a courtesy under a condition not possible, and
not to offer it at all. Here this Author Answer.
adds that it is in circumstance a great deal worse. For he says it is a
denial joined with a scoff and derision, as was that of the Iebusites. In my
answer to the former part in M. 2 Samuel: 5. 6.
Hord I have showed that the reason why Salvation is proposed in scripture to
be obtaind upon a condition to be performed by man, is because God intends to
save those, whom he does save after a manner a greable to their reasonable
natures; Namely by instruction, in a law of works, in a law of faith, by
admonition and exhortation strengthened with promises to the obedient, with
threatenings to the disobedient. And albeit men are not able to perform this
obedience of themselves, being disabled by that natural corruption, which they
have drawn from the Loins of our father, in whom our natures received a
mortal blow, through his disobedience, and became disabled to perform any
thing acceptable in the sight of God (for they that are in the flesh cannot
please God) therefore the Lord is ready according to the covenant of grace to
circumcise the hearts of some, namely of his Elect, To love the Lord with all
their hearts, and with all their souls, to put his spirit within them, to
cause them to walk in his statutes, to keep his judgments and do them. It is
true this offer of salvation is proposed to all within the Church, whether
Elect or Reprobate; and no marvel. For the Ministers of God's word are not
acquainted with the counsels of God, as touching the election or reprobation
of any man in particular: therefore they preach unto all, but knowing full well
that this their ministry shall be effectual only to God's elect, as touching
their salvation. Therefore as they endure all things 2 Timothy: 2. 10.
for the elect sake. So for the elects sake it is that they preach the whole
counsel of God, according as the Lord himself instructed Paul saying, Fear
not, but speak and hold not thy peace; Act: 18. 9.
for I am with thee, and none shall lay hold on thee for to hurt thee. For I
have much people in this City. Who are this people but the Elect of God. Yet
God makes this use of preaching his word to all, that hereby excuse is taken
from the^. For hereby it is made known unto them That a Prophet has been among
them. As for the point of derision. First this Author prescribes unto God very
demurely, that he must not deride him. Yet will he think it lawful Ezech: 2.
5.
full for himself to mock a dog offering to give some what unto him, when
he means nothing less; but man is grown so proud that he will take it in
scorn to be mocked of any, yea of God himself, little thinking that he may
well deserve to be derided and mocked. Yet the Scripture may teach us this, and
that God will mock some, and therein deal with them according to their works;
Because I have called and ye refused; I have stretched out mine hand and none
would regard: But ye have despised all my counsel and would none of my
correction, I will also laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear
comes. Prove: 1. 24. 25. 26.
Secondly I answer that man naturally is presumptuous of his own strength to
believe, to repent; and shall God then be censured for mocking him, when he
calls upon him to believe, to repent? Dicere solet humana superbia si scissem,
fecissem, says Austin, This is the course of man's pride to say had I known
it, I had done it. If they are sensible of this Aug. de great. and lib. arbitr.
cap. 2.
impotency, can they not say with Austin, Da Domine quod jubes, and jube quod
vis; Lord give what thou biddest, and then bid what thou will? Again if God
commands nothing, but what he has power to command, as namely to believe what
he says, and to do what he injoynes; why should this be censured mockery in
reference to man's disability to perform it, when this disability is brought
upon him by the sin of Adam, in whom we all were, and in him we have all
sinned? And which is more; what means this Author To: 5.
to carry the matter thus hand over head, as to talk of an impossible
condition without all distinction? Dares he say, that faith and repentance are
possible by power of nature? Or does any of us deny it to be possible by grace?
If this be so it follows that all the question between us should be drawn to
this issue; whether God gives the grace of faith and repentance unto all; Yet
indeed the truth herein deserves to be put out of all question, it being
apparent that, Fides non est omnium, all men do not believe. Nay it is called
in Scripture the Faith of God's elect: So that the, question is about the
nature of that grace, 2 These: 3 Tit: 1. 1.
without which faith and repentance cannot be performed. Why does not this
Author express his meaning in this, and clearly profess what that grace is
whereby the conditions of faith and repentance are made conditions possible?
His subdolous carriage throughout in concealing his Tenet is sufficient to
disparage his cause with all that are indifferent and judicious. The Scripture
plainly professes that faith is the gift of God, repentance is the gift of
God; But as he carries the matter nothing less appears, then that this is
his opinion. Yet I know he dares not in plain terms oppose the clear
evidence of Scripture in this. Now if faith be the gift of God, and withal he
gives it without difference to all the^ all must believe, which is notoriously
and palpably untrue. If he gives it only to some, the^ all the rest are mocked
by God according to this Authors discourse; as often as he says unto them
believe, and ye shall be saved. And to whom he says this, to them he says
also, Oh that there were such an heart in them to fear me etc. If he says, he
gives faith absolutely to none, but conditionally, and upon the same condition
he is ready to give to all; this is clearly to confess that the grace of God
is given according to man's works. Again it is God that works in us both the
will and the deed, and that according to his good pleasure, Phil: 2. 13.
if according to his good pleasure, How can it be said that it is according to
the preparation of the creature? Then what condition can be devised whereupon
God works in us the will? If he say the grace which God gives to all, and
whereby to believe, to repent is made a thing possible unto all (For thus we
must proceed groaping after his meaning, he affecting nothing more then to
sculke and earth himself in his concealements) I answer first; The Scripture
makes no mention of any such power given to any; but to the contrary professes
of all persons unregenerate, that they cannot please God; that They cannot
discern the things of God. 1 Co: 2. 14: that They cannot believe, that They
cannot repent To: 8. Jo: 12. 40.
To: 24: that they are not subject to the law of God nor can be. 2ly. The
Scripture plainly says that faith is the gift of God, repentance is the gift
of God; It does not say that the power to believe if they will is the gift of
God. If he says by faith is meant such a power, whereby a man may believe if
he will, I prove the contrary; then all men should have faith. For in this man's
opinion, all men are endued with this power: But the Apostle plainly says
that, All men have not faith. Again faith is described to be, The faith of
God's Elect; but a power to believe if we will, this Author makes common to
the Elect Tit: 1. 1.
with Reprobates. Moreover if to give power to believe if a man will, be to
give him faith, then in as much as God gives power to sin if he will, he may
be said as well, that God gives sin. Add to this that to have power to
believe, if one will; is rather nature then Aug. de pradest. Sanctorum c. 5.
grace. For it is no more then posse fidem habere; and this is the nature of
man as Austin testifies. Posse fidem habere naturae est hominum, fidem habere
gratiae est fidelium; It Is the nature of man that he may have faith, but it is
of the grace of the faithful, that a man has faith. And indeed if faith given
us of God, did only enable us to believe, if we will; it were far inferior
to a moral virtue, which does not give man power to be virtuous, if he will;
or to perform a virtuous act if he will: but makes him virtuous, and disposes
the will to virtuous acts only, and leaves him not indifferent, whether he will
perform virtuous acts, or no. To return then, if no other grace be required
to free God from mocking and deriding his creature; surely we are as free as
our adversaries from making God to deride and mock his creature. For we are
ready to grant that all men may believe if they will, repent if they will with
Austin l. 1. de Gen: cont: Man: cap: 3. and De spiritu and liter a ad
Marcellin. cap: 32. and De praedest. in: Sanct: cap: 5. And our reason is this.
Not to be able to do that which a man will do, is impotency merely natural;
but the impotency that we speak of, which is hereditary to all mankind by
reason of the fall, is impotency moral, and resident in the will of man. For
who doubts but that the will to believe, is to believe? For credimus si
volumus: So the will to repent is to repent. For repentance in the root thereof
is nothing else but the change of the will. And Pelagius of three things
proposed. Posse, Velle, and Agere; he willingly granted the first, to wit,
Posse bonum, to be from God; but he denied the other two to be the works of
God; but of our free wills; which if he had acknowledged to be the works of
God, as well as the first Austin tells him that, ab Apostolica doctrina
abhorrere non videretur; he should not seem to vary from the doctrine of the
Apostles. And for ought I see this Author goes not one Aug: de grati a
Christi. cap. 6.
step beyond Pelagius. He acknowledges that God does persuade and exhort to
believe; so did Pelagius. ibid. cap. 10. He says also that God does concur
to the act; but so he does in his opinion to every sinful act; so that this is
but a general concourse: and what Pelagian was ever known to deny, but that
God might have as great an hand in any good act, as in any natural act? Now
since we acknowledge all this as well as he; what color has he to impute unto
us, that we by our doctrine so fashion God's providence, as to make him deride
and mock miserable people. Though the Jebusites did mock David, as this Author
gives his word for it, (though I do not find that Ribbi David Kimhi, or
Piscator count it any derision, but a plain representation of their
confidence, that David was never able to take it, such was the strength of the
tower^, that the weakest, even the blind and the lame were sufficient to defend
it.) Though withal Kimhi acquaints us with a strange story out of the Jews
Darashe, of a Covenant made between Abraham and King Abimelech, and that
concerning not him alone, but his Son and his Nephew, to suffer them quietly to
enjoy their own; And that the Nephew of that Abimelech was alive at that time
when David came to besiege that fort: And that therein the Jebusites had
erected two Images, the one blind to represent I saack who in his old age was
blind; and the other lame representing Jacob, who by wrestling with God became
lame, and in the mouths of these Images was kept the Covenant which was made
between Abraham and Abimelech. The instance he gives of a proclamation which
takes up the greatest part of this supplement (as a great part of this
Author's discourse, is spent in such insicete representations) is most
incongruous, not only to the matter whereunto it is applied, but to the parts
of it self. 1. To the matter whereunto it is applied. For it is proposed in
such a case, as men could not obtain a certain incorporation, though they
much desired it. Now such a thing is not incident to Reprobates, namely that
they cannot believe though they would For had they a will to believe,
undoubtedly that would be accepted of God. Then. 2 it is incongruous to the
parts of the Simile it self. For incorporation only is precluded unto Germans
by the unrepealable law, he feignes without common understanding. For
undoubtedly all laws of men are repealable by the same authority, whereby they
are made. And afterward the condition of obtaining certain bountiful
gratuities, by virtue of the foresaid incorporation, is proposed most
undecently, not of their being incorporated into that society, but of their
will to be incorporated. Now it is apparent that by the case feigned their
incorporation only is precluded unto them, not their will to be incorporated.
In the accommodation he says, God has made a decree (by our doctrine) that
such men shall never believe. Now what one of our Divines can be produce to
justify this? We say God has decreed not to give them grace to work them unto
faith, but to leave them unto themselves. And is not this Author of the same
opinion? Nay does he not extend it farther then we do, even to the Elect, as
well as Reprobates? We say not so, but that his elect he does not leave unto
themselves to work out their faith if they can, but works them by his grace
and holy Spirit thereunto. Himself seems to be conscious of the falsehood of
this his imputation dealing upon the point of God's justice. Sub-sect. 2. For
having there proposed three causes why Reprobates cannot justly be bound to
believe; The second of them was this in M. Hord's discourse, Because it is
impossible that they should believe; because God has decreed they shall have
no power to believe till their dying day. This reason is changed in this
Author's refining of that discourse (as indeed all these reasons are changed
by him more or less without replying upon ought that I have answered
thereunto, but only putting out, or putting in at his pleasure, to cast a show
that the former discourse of M. Hord's is not answered; such is his subdolous
carriage to undermine that truth, which he is not able to oppose in a fair
manner with any sound reason; least of all by evidence of Scripture, that
flying in his face at every turn; and therefore his best wisdom is to shut
his eyes against it.) And here he says not in representing his second reason,
that God has decreed they shall have no power to believe, to their dying day;
but thus rather; Because it is not God's unfeigned will they shall believe. But
now again in this supplement of his, he returns to the first, and says that
by our doctrine, God has made a decree that such men shall never believe. Quo
teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo. But I confess it is an honor to God's
truth, that it cannot be opposed, but in so vile a manner. Yet I have already
showed, that we deny not unto reprobates a power to believe if they will. We
deny not the ministry of the word unto them, exhorting them to believe. We
deny not but that whosoever has a will to believe, or does believe, God must
necessarily concur to the producing of that will, and that act of his. All
this we grant, which is the uttermost whereunto this Author comes; but over
and above we say, that God does not only give his elect a power to believe if
they will, and persuade them to believe; but that also he works them to
believe, and not only concurres with them in producing gracious acts, but makes
them to concur with him also; this is the grace, and this alone that he
denies to reprobates.

Page 85. Treating of the use and end of God's gifts, the Author has an
addition of some seven lines concerning the Lord's supper, but nothing at all
to purpose.

Page 87. Of the fifth Section next following; The passages out of the suffrages
of our Britain Divines in the Synod of Dort quoted by M. Hord, here they are
expressed, namely that there are certain internal works preparing a man to
justification, which by the power of the word and Spirit are wrought in the
hearts of men not yet justified, such as are the knowledge of God's will, and
sense of sin, fear of punishment. Now I have showed that these our British
Divines go much farther; and yet in their fifth Article and fourth position,
they profess of all such as are none of Gods Elect, that it is manifest they
never really and truly attain that change and renovation of the mind and
affections, which accompanies justification; nay nor that which does
immediately prepare, and dispose unto justification. And therefore the
preparation that this Author speaks of as out of them, must needs be a remote
preparation. And withal they add, that They never seriously repent, they are
never affected with hearty sorrow for offending God, for sinning, neither do
they come to any humble contrition of heart, nor conceive a firm resolution
not to offend any more. Now let every sober person judge, whether God
proceeding no farther with them then this, can be said to intend their
conversion and salvation. The other position of theirs is this, Those whom God
by his word and Spirit affects after this manner, those he truly and
seriously calls and inviteth unto conversion. I make no question, but whom
God calls, he calls seriously, and whom he inviteth unto conversion, that
is as I take it, unto repentance, he inviteth truly and seriously thereunto.
But that God intends either their conversion or salvation, I utterly deny.
For did he intend it, undoubtedly he would work it; For certainly this is in
his power. Faith is his gift, and repentance is his gift, and perseverance in
both is his gift. And unless he gives faith and repentance we hold it
impossible that any man should believe or repent. And what a monster is it in
Divinity to maintain, that God's intentions are frustrated, which cannot be
maintained without denying God's omnipotency? For no man's intentions are
frustrated, but because it lies not in his power to bring to pass the things
intended by him.

Page 88. In the next section following is inserted a sentence of Prosper which
no man denies. It is this They that have despised God's inviting will, shall
feel his revenging will, but it is rightly to be understood, namely of
despising his inviting will all along; and finally; Otherwise if they break of
their contempt by repentance, there is mercy enough in store with God to pardon
them, and his revengefull hand shall not be felt by them.

Page 89. And seventh section, concerning the use and end of God's gifts;
diverse passages of our Divines are mentioned, showing the end of God's
providence in affording his word unto reprobates. As first out of Calvin,
Behold he directs his voice unto them that they may be the more deaf; He
kindles a light, but that they may be made more blind; He gives Instit. l. 3.
c. 24. number: 13.
them a remedy; that they might not be healed. Now Calvin herein points to
that of Esaias. Go and say to the children of Israel, hearing hear but
understand not, seeing, see Esaias. 6. 9.
but perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat (or obstinate) and make
their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; least they see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert and be
healed And Calvin does but relate what the Lord says to Esaias: Ecce vocem ad
eos dirigit. Behold (by this place of the prophet Esaias) to what end the Lord
sends his prophet to speak unto them. Now if Calvin does herein misinterpret
that place of the prophet Esaias, it became this Author to except against his
interpretation, and discover the unsoundnes of it; But taking no such course,
and consequently by his silence (being an adversary) justifying his
interpretation; while he reproacheth Calvin in this particular, he reproacheth
the Holy Ghost, whose words he represents delivered unto his prophet.

The next passage is taken out of Beza in his Praelud. on the 9. to the Rom: p.
434. where he says It ought not to seem absurd, that God unto Reprobates,
living in his Church, does offer grace in his word and Sacraments. For he does
it not to this end, that they may be saved, but that they may have less excuse
then others, and at length be more greviously punished. And indeed why should
this seem aliene from the course of Gods providence revealed in his word,
testifying that the invisible things of God, to wit his eternal power and To:
1. 2:
Godhead are made manifest by his works, to the ena, men might be without
excuse. And what this excuse is. S. Austin tells us saying, It is spoken of
such an excuse, as men in their pride are wont to pretend saying, Si scissem
fecissem; had I known it, I would have done it. And Eze: 2. 5. The Lord
manifests the same end of his sending Ezech: unto the Jews. For he told him,
They would not hear. For they were a rebellious house, vet says he, they
shall know Aug: de great: and lib. arbit c. 2.
that there has been a prophet among them. And let every indifferent man
judge whether the very place in John. (If I had not come and spoken unto them,
they should not have had sin, but now have they noe cloak for their sin,) does
not justifye that conclusion which Maccovius draws therehence, namely that
Therefore God sent his son unto them, that Jo: 15. 22.
by the contempt and hatred of his son they might procure unto themselves the
greater damnation. For he professes that by his coming and speaking unto
them, all excuse was taken from them. And let every one judge whether contempt
in such a manner does not procure greater damnation. And old Simeon professes
that Christ should be set up, as to the rising of some; so to the falling of
others: And long before the Lord professes that he should be as a net, and a
snare to both houses of Israel. Yet I am not of Maccovius his mind in saying,
that God proposes his word unto Reprobates to noe other end, but this: But
certainly he proposes it not unto them to the end that they should be saved by
Es: 8, 18.
it. And let every sober man judge whether it be not better to ascribe such
intentions unto the divine nature as are fulfilled, rather then such as are not
fullfilled.

P. 94. Where he lays to our charge that our doctrine hinders piety and godly
life Sect: 2. he has this passage inserted.

It is absolutely decreed that Devils shall be damned; were it not a
fruitless thing in them by prayers tears and Addit.
endeavors to seek to alter it? It is also simply decreed that the soul of
man shall be immortal: Is it not a labor in vain for any man to use means
that his soul may be annihilated? It is ordained that the sun shall rule the
Day and the Moon the Night: that the one shall finish his proper course in a
year, the other in a month: Would not a man's endeavor to make an alteration
in these things be unprofitable and ridiculous.

Although that which I have said upon this Section in answer to M. Hord be
sufficient to Answer:
show the absurdity of this Authors discourse, yet I think good to accommodate
what there I have delivered to this also, especially to the particular instance
of Devils. And first it is a thing worthy our consideration that he says. It
is absolutely decreed that Devils shall be damned, Now if this be true, then
the divine decree concerning the damnation of Devils is an absolute decree,
now this decree is not temporal but eternal. Now if the eternal decree of
God concerning the damnation of Devils be absolute, why should not Gods
eternal decree of the damnation of men be absolute also: let him mumble upon
this argument and acquaint us with his answer thereunto when he thinks good.
When he discourses of the fruitless nature of the Devils prayers and tears
and endeavors to alter this decree, he seems to me to suppose that the
Devils are not bereaved of their free will to pray, and which were more then
wonderful in their state of innocence, to shed tears and to perform holy
endeavors; and if this were true it were unreasonable for us to deny that
Arminians had the like power left unto them. But if they have no such freedom
of will, what totter took this Author to discourse of the fruitless exercise
of such a power. Would he not think our brain were cracked, if we should tell
him how fruitless his course would be to clamber up into the world of the
Moon, seeing it is as possible for him to be Lunatic here, as well as there.
Yet if the Devils have any such freedom of will left them whereby they may
attain to holiness, their endeavors that way though fruitless in respect of
the altering of Gods decree, yet surely would not be fruitless in another
respect. For better it were by far, I should think for them to repent and
submit to the will of God in suffering Hell pains, then to blaspheme in
suffering them. But be it so, that not only Gods decree be absolute concerning
their damnation; but that their first sin did put them quite out of the way,
and is to them as death to men. Yet such is not the condition of men. And
albeit the decree of damnation both of Devils and men be absolute, yet neither
the one nor the other was decreed to be brought upon them absolutely, but upon
the Angels, in case they kept not their own habitation: upon men in case they
did not only sin, but finally persevere in sin without repentance: Though
in this respect there is no place for the repentance of Angels, yet place
there is for the repentance of men, and by repentance to avoid the wrath to
come. And lastly, the Devil knows his condition to be irrecoverable, No man
on earth knows his estate to be so. For albeit according to our doctrine a man
may be assured of his election: yet by our doctrine no man can be assured of
his reprobation. Add this hereunto, Although a man did know he were reprobated
to damnation, yet not knowing to what degree and measure of damnation he is
ordained, there is place to use his best endeavors in the way of civilitie and
morality, that his damnation may be the less. In case he did know this also,
yet place still remains to be as moral as he can. For damnation joined with a
condition of better morallity, is better then damnation joined with a condition
of less morality. This may suffice as an answer to the other instances, which
are far more wild then the first: as touching the immortality of the soul
which he says is simply decreed; and it is decreed to be immortal without any
course to be taken by man to promote the immortality thereof: But do any of
our Divines maintain that God has decreed our salvation in such sort, as to
be brought to pass without any course to be taken by men of ripe years to
promote their salvation? What proportion is there beetween immortality and
salvation. God intends salvation to no man of ripe years, but by way of reward
of faith, repentance, obedience and good works. Does God bestow immortality
upon the soul by way of reward? Was not the soul of man immortal as soon as
it was created? Is such the salvation of Gods elect? And what giddiness
possessed the spirit of this Author when he discourses of the vain labor of
any man, that should use means that his soul should be annihilated? Supposing
that such means there are, and may be used, by the form of his speech, when
he says, that it is labor in vain for any man to use such means. As for
that which follows of the Sun and Moon. An instance of the same nature has
been given in this very Section and an answer thereunto accommodated in my
refutation of M Hords discourse, which this Author could not be ignorant of, as
appears by his altering and changing it almost throughout yet takes no notice
thereof to reply thereunto, but keeps himself as still as a sow in beans,
thinking it his safest course to be silent. The truth is, God (we say)
bestowing salvation and inflicting damnation proceeds according to a law, which
he has given unto man: but not so in the giving or denying grace, not so in
showing mercy on some and hardening others, but according to the mee^e pleasure
of his will. It were far more congruous to accommodate the instances he gives
to the divine proceedings in this particular. But here he dares not budge,
least his Pelagian spirit should be manifested to all the world, in
maintaining that not only in conterring salvation, and inflicting damnation, he
proceeds according to men's works, but also in giving and denying grace.

P. 96. Two lines are inserted a little above the Latin verses, but of no
moment distinct from the rest.

P. 97. Section the 4. of the crimination last save one, where he says that
three things are usually answered to vindicate our opinion from this
crimination, but he conceales who they be, that thus answer: yet would not be
thought to feign it. And the first of these is this That many of them which
believe and defend this doctrine are holy and good men, etc. Now here comes in
that which he inserts.

The like defense to this did the Epicures of old make in favor of their
sensual and swinish doctrine, which was, that happiness consisted in
pleasure. They said that many of their Sect were honest men, and so much Tully
granted to be true, but with exception still against their doctrine. I take,
says he Epicurus himself Addit.
to be an honest man, yea and many Epicures have been and are faithful in
freindship, square and constant men in all conditions of life, ordering
themselves and their lives, not by pleasure, but by duty. But says he, this
proceeded Cic. de finibus 2. p. 107.
not from the principles of their opinion, but from their own virtuous
inclinations; and the force of honesty by their so doing appeared to be more
prevailing in them, then the force of pleasure, which they pleaded for. A
little after he has words to the same purpose; As other men's doctrines are
esteemed to be better then their deeds; so these men's deeds seem to me to be
better then their doctrine. Like to this answer of Tully to the defenders of
Epicurisme, will I shape mine.

I nothing doubt, but this Author pleased himself well in this comparison,
and others likewise of his own sect. For like lettice, like lips, yet all this
is carried with a show Answ.
of charity, in acknowledging the holiness forsooth, and goodness of their
oposites; but it ends in this comparison, right Epicurus like, whose morality
(forsooth) was pleaded to countenance his sensual and swinish doctrine. But
whatsoever our life's be, for testimony whereof we nothing desire to be
beholding to the charity of our opposites; Yet surely our doctrine concerning
the absolutenes both of election, grounded upon no other foundation then this,
that Grace is not conferred according unto works, as Austin testifies; and of
reprobation grounded accordingly upon no other foundation then this, that Aug.
de bono persever. 15.
grace is not denied according unto works; shall be found no swinish doctrine,
but the very truth of God. And let them that oppose it look well to their
ways, least they be not found goatish together with their doctrine at the day
of judgment. But how comes this Author to be so stupid in reading Cicero, and
so little understanding him; as in these words to conceive, that he professes
himself to have a good opinion of Epicurus? I confess I marked it the more
diligently, because I remember well the comparison that Plutarch makes between
the virtuous gloriation of Epaminondas his mother, and the vile gloriation of
Epicurus his mother, professing she never saw an happier day, then when she saw
her Son Epicurus generating, cum Cyzezena meretricula, operis cum Polyano
divisis; unless this were the morality of her Son, wherein she gloried that
he was not so jealous, but that he could admit a corrivall in the satisfaction
of his filthy lusts. And indeed I had also observed other where, that he was a
very temperate man, but to this end, that he might take the greater pleasure in
the flesh, his senses being the more quick, when they were not clogged and
overcome with surfeit. But come we to Cicero his judgment. He takes notice that
Epicurus was commended as Comis in amicitiis tuendis, a man of a fair nature
in maintaining freindship; yet (says he) though these things were true (for I
affirm nothing) he was not acute enough. I think this is spoken in reference
to his doctrine nothing answerable to this commendation of him. For he measured
freindship by profit, as in that very book Cicero relates. Then he takes
notice of another commendation given of him, in these words, At multis se
probavit, he approved himself to many; Et quidem jure fortasse, and truly for
good cause perhaps. This is Cicero his concession with a perhaps. But observe
what he brings in upon the back of this; Sed tamen non gravissimum est
testimonium multitudinis; but the testimony of the multitude (the many) is not
most weighty, or most considerable. For in every art or study, or any science,
or in virtue it self, every thing that is best, is most rare. Then follow the
words which this Author alseadgeth not, Ac mihi quidem videtur, quod ipse vir
bonus fuit. And to me truly it seems that he was a good man; This had been to
contradict himself, having formerly said, Nihil affirmo, I affirm nothing; he
takes into consideration what others said of him, but as for him, he would say
nothing of him neither in commendation, nor vituperation. But his words run
thus, Ac mihi quidem, quod and ipse bonus vir fuit, and multi epicurei fuerunt,
and hodie sunt, and in amicitiis fideles (For it seems indeed that he and
Polyaenus cum Cyziz^n^ meretricula were very faithful one to the other) and in
omni vita constantes and graves, nec voluptate sed consilio officia moderantes;
hoc videtur, (here comes in videtur and not till now) major vis honestatis and
minor voluptatis. He still affirms nothing of the life of Epicurus, but taking
that which others affirmed of him, and admitting it, says hoc videtur major
vis honestatis and miner voluptatis: this testimony of others concerning these
particulars did argue more force of honesty, and less of pleasure. Ita enim
vivunt quidam, ut eoru^ vita probetur refellatur oration For so some do live,
that their life is approved, but their opinions condemned And on this point
only (to wit concerning his opinion) had Cicero to deal with Epicurus at this
time; Atque ut caeteri existimantur dicere melius, quam facere: Sic ^i mihi
videntur facere melius, quam dicere. And as others are thought to speak better
then they live; So these seem to me to live better then they speak. By these
he means not Epicurus, or Epicureans, but those some, of whom he spoke
immediately before. And whether this be not the true meaning of Cicero, I
appeal to the judgment of every sober man, that shall consider his words. And
to requite this Author, and pay him in his own coin; I will not tell him what
one of his own Sect has given forth concerning one that preached in a great
place, namely that his Auditory should profess, that the Author must needs be
an Arminian, he preached so honest a sermon; Though on the contrary I have
heard of a great Arminian of Cambridge, that he should profess to a friend of
his, coming to him to confer with him, and take him off from his opinion, if
it might be, saying in the close that it was not for the honesty of their
conversation who maintained the same, that he was of the same mind; and gave
his reason for it out of his own experience, which I will not mention. But I
will make bold to represent what I have read of the Pelagians, to answer this
Author, and so to recompense him in the way of charity. For Chrysostom
places Pelagius inter viros pie ac sancte magnaque cum tolerantia viventes,
amongst men living piously and holily, and with great patience; as Vossius
observes cap: 3. hist: Pelag: and Claudius Menardus before him in his notes
upon Austin's book against Julian the Pelagian. Austin in his 106 epistle
acknowledges Paulinus to have loved him as the servant of God. And in his
retractions he professes saying, Pelagii ipsius nomen non sine laud posui,
quia vita ejus a multis praedicabatur: I made mention of Pelagius his name
August: retract. lib 2. cap. 33.
not without commendation; for as much as his life was magnified by many. Amd
in his third book De peccat: meritis and remiss: c: 1. he says, the report
that went of him was as of an holy man, and one that had profited much in
Christianity. I find likewise good commendations given of Coelestius also and
Julian the Pelagian: And I make no question but an honest and pious man may be
sowred with the leaven of Pelagianisme, in that way of Arminianisme ere he is
aware, but God may take them off from it ere they dye: Though the eager
opposers of God's truth this way, even by such as were termed Semipelagians,
Prosper spares not to call Vasa irae, vessels of wrath, in his Epistle to
Ruffinus; And the exiled Bishops of Africa in their Synodicall Epistle, style
them no better then Vasa irae, vessels of wrath. And upon the conclusion of the
Synod of Palestine what tumults were raised, and what abominable acts were
committed by the party of Pelagius, is set down in part both by Austin, in the
end of his book De gestis Pelagii, and in a certain epistle of Innocentius
Pope of Rome.

To conclude; Leviathan God's enemy is represented in Scripture, as a crooked
Serpent. It pleased King James to style Arminius sometimes the enemy of God.
And Austin I am sure styles the Pelagians, Inimici gratiae Dei; The enemies of
God's grace. And no marvel if they carry themselves like crooked Serpents,
turning and winding for their advantage. I have labored to find out the
Meanders of this Author, which I little suspected at the first, and to meet
with him. every where, and encounter him in his greatest fastness: And let the
indifferent judge whether every where he be not found to hold a lie in his
right hand. I would to God his eyes were opened, that he might see how he
forsakes his own mercies, by forsaking the fountain of living waters, to dig
unto himself pits, even broken pits that can hold no water. While he looks to
be saved by no other grace inherent, then such as whereby he has power to
believe if he will, repent if he will. A lamentable condition, that a man of
understanding, and knowledge, and good morality should be thus blinded, nothing
perceiving that this is mere nature, and not grace. But what infatuation has
seized upon the Christian world, when such discourses are magnified as sound
and excellent; yea rare pieces, and unanswerable? Let us give God the glory of
keeping us in our right wits and senses; otherwise even Flies with us shall go
for Elephants, and the very illusions of Satan shall be advanced, as strange
performances, not only of sober speculations; when they are equally estranged
both from soundness and sobriety; such as all along look a squint upon God's
word; yet seldom take notice thereof, or are conformed thereunto; but rather
proceed in manifest opposition thereunto, and withal are found clearly devoid
of all sound reason, though thereof Pelagians have always vaunted most, but
these vaunts are but wind, and prove no more substantial, then the imagination
of a vain thing.

FINIS.
An Answer to a Letter of D. H. concerning Gods Decrees definite or indefinite;
By Dr. TWISSE.
SIR,
YOur Letter has two parts, the one concerning the decree of God, especially
in comparison between a decree indefinite and definite; the other concerning
the election of Angels: Of both in order.

I.
Concerning the first, I will endeavor to satisfy you my way; and if that
succeeds not, to gratify you your own way.

My conceit of a decree indefinite, proposed digress. 3. cap. 6. you prefer
as more 1,
suitable to my manner of ordering Gods decrees. Three reasons there I proposed
why I durst not embrace that conceit.

1. The first was, because it seems to be of a more imperfect nature then is
fit to be attributed to God.

To this is answered, that we need not to attribute any such decree to God, but
only to resolve a definite decree of God into two conceits, according to our
apprehension, whereof the one is indefinite, the other definite; As in Gods
purpose to make Peter and Paul vessels of mercy, there are included two
conceits in our apprehension; the one indefinite, to wit, to make some vessels
of mercy; the other definite, to wit, that Peter and Paul shall be two of them.
You seem to approve of this.

Now I have cause to doubt of the soundness of this, for these reasons, 1. If
no such decree can be attributed to God, then in vain do we discourse of the
priority thereof before other decrees of God, which indeed are attributed to
him, and that decently. And indeed all the decrees whereof we dispute are
truly attributed unto God, though they have not that distinction one from
another in God as the like decrees are distinguished in man. And an indefinite
decree, relishing of imperfection, both in that respect cannot be decently
attributed unto God, as also because it does imply an indefinite and confuse
knowledge in God. 2. The priority of decrees in God, is only secundum
rationem, and this Durand expounds most clearly in this manner, quando ratio
unius sumitur ab altero, in 1. did. 41. q. 2. so ratio mediorum sumitur a
ratione finis. But ratio decreti definiti non sumitur a ratione deoreti
indefiniti. Because God intends such an end, therefore God does appoint such
and such means: but it cannot be said, that, because God does intend to make
some indefinitely to be vessels of mercy, therefore he does intend that Peter
and Paul shall be two of them.

2. My two other objections are these, Indefinites are before definites only
in such sort as communia are priora specialibus, and this is only prioritate
naturae generantis, non intendentis; and we speak of priority in intention, not
in the way of generation. And again, that which is first in the way of
generation, is last in intention; and therefore this makes rather against it,
than for it.

To this you answer, that rather on the contrary Universalia are priora
singularibus, non tam natura generante, quam intendente. For Homo prius
intenditur quam Socrates: Non enim species est propter Individuum, sed
Individuum propter speciem. Or, if this be not true in universalibus physicis,
yet is it in politicis sive aggregatis, which have a more resemblance to our
present matter.

To this I answer, 1. The comparison we speak of between a decree indefinite
and definite, is not the same with a comparison between the species and the
singular; but only as between singulars and singulars; singulars indefinitely
proposed as aliqui, and singulars proposed definitely, as Hic and ille, Peter
and Paul. Now though individuum be propter speciem, as that which nature
intends principally; and individua for the maintenance of the species: yet is
it not so congruous to say, that particulars definite are for particulars
indefinite, etc. The instance I gave in reducing it to a comparison between
generalia and specialia, was to bring it, as near as I could, to such a State
wherein the evidence of truth might plead for it self. As indeed it is
manifest, that generalia are only priora specialibus quoad naturam generantem,
specialia priora generalibus quoad naturam intendentem; which I delivered out
of the remembrance of my old Philosophy, as a thing which I conceived to be
without question. Zabarell de methodis lib. 1. cap. 6. Ordo naturae non unus
est, sed multiplex, vel saltem duplex: Non solum enim simplicia sunt naturae
priora compositis, sed etiam composita simplicibus, ut ex Aristotele
colligimus, in cap. 1. lib. 2. de partibus animalium: si namque ordinem naturae
intelligamus habita ratione generationis naturae, elementa sunt priora misto,
mistum animali, animal homine; quod si per ordinem naturae intelligamus ordinem
perfectionis seu ordinem scopi and intentionis naturae, homo est natura prior
animali, animal misto, and mistum elementis. But I confess the case is
different between a species and the particulars thereof, whether we consider
nature particular, or nature universal: For, as for nature particular, though
it intends and works only for a particular like it self; yet, whereas
particulars may be infinite, and it is found to have no power to produce one
particular rather then another; this consideration has puzzled many in
enquiring how it comes to pass that this particular agent brings forth this
particular effect at such a time; whereas he was indifferent to have brought
forth any one particular of many thousands in that kind. And, after Suarez in
his Metaphysics has tried many ways hereabouts, at length resolves upon
Ariminensis his invention, who reduces it to the determination of Gods will:
and this conceit, after Suarez, is embraced with great approbation by Hurtado
de Mendoza. Which because it concerns a manner of Gods concourse, and that a
very strange one, as they expound it; I have taken occasion to consider it in a
peculiar digression. So that in that case the particular produced is not
intended by nature at all (as being indifferent to any) but left to be
determined by the will of God. And as for nature universal, whose end is the
maintenance of the universe in the several kinds of the parts thereof; it
likewise, so there be particulars succeeding whereby the species rerum are
maintained, regards not at all, whether these particulars be produced or
others. But these intentions are not answerable to the intentions of God, which
are altogether of particulars, whereupon man's understanding works in drawing
therehence unities specificall and genericall, according to that of Aristotle,
Animal aut nibil est aut posterius est. And Navarrettus, writing of divine
concourse; suppo^endum est id quod solent Logici and Metaphysici dicere de
unitate universa^^ quae non est unitas positiva sed negativa: Non enim
universale est positive unum in multis sed cum reperiatur plurificatum in
multis, and non magis determinatum ad unum quam ad alterum, habet in se quandam
indifferentiam, non quidem positivam respectu multorum, atque adeo non habet
unit atem positivam; sed negative se habet ad illa multa, and consequenter, est
unum negative in multis, hoc est, habet unitatem quae non magis reperitur in
uno inferiorum quam in altero. But yet the case I say in present consists not
in comparison between a species and the singulars thereof, but between
particulars and particulars; either as indefinitely considered under the notion
of aliqui, or definitely under the notions of Hic and ille.

But you think in universalibus Politicis, as in the gathering of an Army, or
erecting of a College, the truth you speak of is more apparent, and the
resemblance more congruous to the matter in hand. Let us consider them. A
certain number of Soldiers for completing of an army I confess is intended
first, afterward a choice of persons: so the maintenance of a certain number
of Scholars is intended first, and afterward they proceed to the election of
Scholars. Here is totum per aggregationem, but it is by aggregation of parts
in a certain kind, which is of greatest consideration, to wit, of parts
succeeding one another, as a river is said to be one by succession of parts
which never return. All which parts are impossible to be subject to the
consideration of the Founder or General, because the College continues long
after the Founder is dead, and so may the Army also, one General succeeding
another by the appointment of the State. A more proper resemblance is found in
a man purposing to distribute a sum of money to a certain numbr of persons:
as, put the case, twenty pound to forty persons, as a Gentleman has dealt with
our town. The choice of such persons as are most necessitous he leaves to some
persons of trust. Now, if the Gentleman himself knew of himself every person
in the Town, and their necessitous condition; from the first undoubtedly he
would appoint, not a certain number indefinitely to receive it, but assign
rather such persons particularly on whom it should be bestowed. And in like
sort a General were it in his power to leavy whom he list, and withal knew
for certain every man's sufficiency, he would from the first resolve upon and
design, not only such a number, but such particular persons also for that
service: And, that in the ordinary course it is otherwise, this proceeds from
such an imperfection as is not incident unto God. And last of all, both the
General and the Founder have respect to fitness in them whom they choose,
which it is not in their power to procure. But God has power to provide
himself both of fitness and of persons also to that service whereto he is
pleased to design them. Yet Didacus Alvarez seems to acknowledge such an
indefinite decree, and he is gravis author I confess: And he plainly
professes, that permissio peccati prop^r quod quis damnatur est effectus
reprobationis. Whence it manifestly follows, First, that the reprobation of
Infants as many as die in original sin in their infancy, cannot premise the
foresight of original sin, because they undergo condemnation only for
original sin. Secondly, that no man's Reprobation can premise original
sin, because every man that undergoes condemnation, undergoes it not for
actual sins only, but original also: yet this tenet of his he delivers
not obiter, but maintains it eagerly by argument. As for this of an indefinite
degree, he touches only by the way, without so much as explication of his
meaning therein. And again in that discourse of his he has some other strange
conceits, as I have showed in my first digression upon election: in the
perusing whereof at this time it seems, you are. As for Beza, that which I
there delivered is merely by collection: but what his opinion was, may appear
by his own expression, De praedestinatione, in 9. ad Romans in these words,
Denique verbum istud [Faciendi] and nomen [Luti] ac [Massae] adhue informis,
manifest mihi quidem videtur declarare, Deum in hac similitudine nobis
preponi, de humanototo genere in primo illo homine, protoplasto propterea
vocato, condendo statuentem; unde Singuli homines ad finem usque seculorum
propagarentur, eo jam tum consilio, ut in unis quidem, quos jam tum in libro
vitae suis temporibus nascituros, eligendos, vocandos, credituros,
justificandos, glorificandos describebat, ad salutis decus per gratiam in
Christo evebendis: in aliis vero per contrarios gradus in aeterni exitii
dedecus just praecipitandis, gloriam suam patefaceret. In like sort Piscator
in his disputation de objecto praedestinationis, defines predestination this,
Praedestinatio est aeternum Dei decretum quo constituit condere homines ad
diversos fines speciales, nempe alios ad fruendum salute aeterna, alios vero ad
sentiendum cruciatus aeternos, seu ad aeternum exitium: itemque constituit
permittere, ut isti omnes, integri conditi, in peccatum laberentur; idque
propterea, ut quos conditurus erat ad salutem servaret ex misericordia; quos
vero ad exitium, puniret ex justitia: and denique constituit ex lapsis illos
quos conditurus erat ad salutem, servaret ex misericordia, quos vero ad
exitium, puniret ex justitia: (all which cannot be understood but of persons
definite) and denique constituit exlapsis illos quos ad salutem conditurus
erat, eligere ad hoe, ut eos ex misericordia servaret; quos vero ad exitium,
reprobare ad hoc, ut eos ex justitia puniret: (this likewise cannot be
understood but of persons definite) atque ita omnibus istis modis gloriam tum
misericordiae suae parcentis, tum justitiae punientis, tum vero imprimis
potestatis suae summae patefacere. And by these passages appears the error of
my construction both of Beza and Piscators meaning; for it was grounded upon
supposall that election in them both signified an internal act in God, the
very decree of God, which is eternal: But here it appears they took Election
for an external and temporal act, and yet distinct from vocation: of which
opinion of Piscator I have considered. digress. 2. de praedestinatione. And
here it appears that Beza had entertained some such conceit, as when he says
nasoituros, eligendos, vocandos, credituros, justificandos, etc. And indeed I
well remember him to distinguish between electio and decretum eligendi.

Yet now, to gratify you your own way: I am content to leave that which I have
said in that Digress. 3. of an indefinite decree as it lies; and to propose
the reasons II.
alleged against it only by way of disputation, not by way of assertion, and
leave it indifferent unto the Reader to judge as he shall think most agreeably.
And to confess a truth unto you, it is but lately I came to this order;
following the rigorous Tenet before as seems most consonant to reason, though
harsh to men's affections; and being but lately fallen upon it, I am apt to
conceive, that something may be wanting to the full clearing of the truth in
this point; a way whereunto I hope I have opened: yet if you shall think it
inconvenient, I shall be content to pretermit it wholly, and leave out all my
digressions of this argument, or any other.

II.
Now touching Angels, I pray let not ought that I have written make you sorry
for ought that you have delivered touching the election of Angels: And do not
you conceive of me amiss, as if I did conceive you to harbor any ill opinion
thereabouts: For I profess I do not, neither have you given me any cause; yet
from nine years of age I have known you. The first time I wrote of that, I
only said, it seemed strange unto me; my reason was, because I never knew any,
either by writing or otherwise, Protestant, or Papist, sound in maintaining
man's election by grace, but that in like sort he maintained the election of
Angels to be of grace. And whereas you professed otherwise only as an
opponent: I conceived you did it but as my self or any other Scholar will
do, to try the uttermost of another strength with whom we dispute.

But when the second time you wrote hereon, you professed to doubt whether
Arminius acknowledged any election at all of Angels; that seemed to me as
strange, because I am persuaded that no Arminian or Lutheran denies the
election of Angels: though like enough they are apt to fashion it according to
their opinion of the election of men. As for the construction of that place in
Timothy touching the elect Angels, I could not ascertain my self in what sense
it might be conceived to proceed without acknowledging their election, and I
was loath to divine at random. Now as you express your self herein more
particularly; so will I particularly make answer.

First, I grant that a conditional decree is no election. But seeing it is
impossible but God should foresee, on whose part the condition would be
performed, and on whose part not; herehence it follows, that God must
accordingly Elect the one, and Reprobate the other: and so there must be
acknowledged even an election of Angels after their manner. Like as the
Arminians, beside that conditional predestination of men you speak of, do
acknowledge a precise election of some upon foresight of their obedience, and
reprobation of the other upon foresight of their disobedience.

Touching the exposition of that, 1 Timothy 5. 21. I have consulted Hemingius, a
man as erroneous in the point of election as any Lutheran; yet he interprets
the place thus, Hos Electos ad discrimen Reproborum vocat. I grant it denotes
the dignity of their persons, but still in respect of choice: as when we say a
choice Book, a choice Jewel, as much as to say, which a man would make choice
of, and prefer before many: so the Elect Angels are so called in respect of
choice, which choice to my understanding can have no congruous reference, but
to the choice of God.

It is true we have, nothing like, such Scripture evidence touching the
election and reprobation of Angels, as of Men. But whereas in these points both
Scripture evidence and light of Christian reason do concur; so the light of
Christian reason does make it as evident on the part of Angels, as on the part
of man; namely, that nothing can possibly be the cause of Gods will or
predestination quoad actum volentis, or praedestinantis. And Aquinas, as you
have heard, professes, That never any man was so mad as to profess, that any
thing without God could be the cause of predestination, quoad actum
praedestinantis; and herein you your self agree.

Now touching Austin; I am glad you have lighted upon him. I do ^b^ not but he
shall persuade you in this point, though I could not. And first I will
accommodate an answer to your allegations; Secondly, I will endeavor to show
clearly his opinion in this point.

Your first allegation is, Caeteri autem per ipsum liberum arbitrium in
veritate steterunt; De corrept. and gratia. cap. 10.
but your self perceive it might be answered, that this might be delivered
inclusa gratia speciali. And it may be proved that this phrase of speech does
not exclude special grace: for in the same Chapter it is afterward said of
man thus, In quo statu recto ac sine vitio, si per ipsum liberum arbitrium
manner voluisset. Here you must not exclude special grace in this case; For si
manner voluisset, undoubtedly this will of his had been wrought by special
grace, as Austin manifests in the chapter following: For Cap. 11.
he distinguishes of two graces or two adjutories, the one was, ut posset
pernianere si vellet, the other was, ut vellet quod potuit; his words are
these, est in nobis per hane Dei gratiam, in bono recipiendo and perseveranter
tenendo, non solum posse quod volumus, veruns etiam velle quod possumus: Quod
non fuit in homine primo, unum enim horum in illo fuit, alterum non fuit.
Namque ut reciperet bonum, gratia non egedat, quia nondum perdider at: ut autem
in eo permaneret, egebat adjutorio gratiae, sine quo ia emnino non posset: and
acceperat posse si vellet, sed non habuit velle quod posset: nam si babuisset
perseverasset. But you bring a second place to prove that Angels could have
stood by their free will, secluding special grace, and that is this, Credimus
Dominum Deum -- sie ordinasse Angelorum and hominum vitam ut in ea prius
ostenderet quid posset eorum liberum arbitrium, deinde quid posset suae gratiae
beneficium, justitiaeque judicium. I grant the Angels had power to stand if
they would, and power to fall if they would; and this power was manifested in
the standing of the one, and in the fall of the other. But herehence it
follows not, that therefore the act of standing was not of Gods grace. But
you will say the benefit of grace was afterward manifested: And I answer, that
grace was the grace of confirmation, opposite to the Obduration of the evil
Angels; which grace of confirmation, though it were manifested after the
obedience of the good Angels, consisting in assurance that they shall never
fall; yet herehence it follows not, that their standing was not by grace,
though that grace whereby they stood was different from that grace whereby they
were confirmed: for before their obedience, so they stood, as that withal they
might fall; but since their obedience they now so stand, that they cannot fall.

Now for Austins opinion hereabouts, it is plain enough from other places. De
civ. dei, lib. 12. cap 9. aut minorem acceperunt amoris divini gratiam, quam
illi qui in eadem perstiterunt, aut si utrique boni aequaliter creati sunt,
istis mala voluntate cadentibus, illi amplius adjuti ad eam beatitudinis
plenitudinem pervenerunt. So that he does manifestly acknowledge, that the good
Angels had such an adjutorium which the wicked had not: whereupon Leonardus
Coquaeus, neither Jesuit nor Dominican, but an Augustinian, commenting, writes
in this manner: ea ratione intelligitur majus beneficium collatum Angelis honis
quam malis, etsi enim gratiam aequalem habitualem ab initio sint consecuti, it
a tamen efficax fuit motio divina et auxilium dei speciale in Angelis sanctis,
ut in Deunt toti converterentur, persisterent in bono, et beatitudinem eandem
assequerentur; non ex vi libertatis arbitrii certe factum est, ut it a
differenter afficerentur, et quod gratia fuerit efficax in his et non in istis,
Deo maxim tribuendum; et ex duobus bominibus aequaliter affectis, si unus
salvetur, alius vero damnetur, intelligo semper majus auxilium gratiae collatum
ei qui fit salvets, idque cum Augustino hoc loco, and passim, ubi de hac
materia disputat, neque totum id refero in libertatem arbitrii, quod unus velit
consentire et respondere gratiae, alius non; facit enim etiam ut velimus, et
consentiamus: neque infallibilem illam nostram consensionem puto tantum ex
infallibili praescientia Dei; imo si per impossible secludamus omnem
praescientiam dei, ipsa gratia ex se infallibiliter movet hominem vel etiam
Angelum, ut, licet non necessitate coactionis, necessitate tamen
immutabilitatis efficax ex se sit, et gratia dei magis in uno quam in altero;
et quod unus convertatur, alius non, quod uni detur auxilium efficax, in alio
sit quidem sufficiens, minime tamen consequatur suum effectum, mysterium esse
ubique docet Augustinus, at si posita aequali gratia qua unus converteretur,
alius non, id ex solo consensu vel d^ssensu liberi arbitrii penderet, nullum
certe mysterium in^sse mihi videretur. Neque hic reddit Augustinus causam eur
ex Angelis alij salvati fuerint, alij minime, quod hos deus praescierit
salvandos vel cooperaturos suae gratiae, alios minime cooperaturos; sed quia
qui salvati sunt, vel majorem acceperunt divini amoris gratiam, vel certe si
aequaliter boni creati sunt, id est, in aequali gratia, illi amplius adjuti
fuerint: adeo ut negotium salutis Angelorum benorum in majus auxilium gratiae
referat; ut, quod alij cadant et non respondeant gratiae divinae, eique non
cooperentur; id quidem ascribendum sit libero horum arbitrio: quod vero in
aliis gratia sit efficax, ade^que illi cooperentur, ipsi deo potissimum
tribuendum sit. Than which I never found a more illustrious testimony for the
prerogative of Gods grace in, and sovereignty over his creatures in any Thomist
or Dominican, that at this day has maintained the cause of God, (as
Bradwardine calls it) against the Jesuits. Neither did I ever take notice of
the place before, but by occasion of this present search to give you
satisfaction concerning the opinion of Austin; only rested contented with that
which I supposed to be the common opinion of all, that the case is the same as
touching the operation of Gods grace both in Angels and men, and Christ in
Scripture is accounted the head of Angels as well as of men. But that whole
Chapter in Austin, lib. 12. de civit. dei. cap. 9, is worth any man's reading,
where he disputes the case at large, where he has another sentence more
illustrious then the former, this; et cumid egit eorum voluntas bona ut non ad
seipsos, qui minus erant, sed ad illum qui sum est, converteretur (hence is
taken I guess that conceit of Master Hookers, that the fall of Angels was the
converting the contemplation of their mind from God upon themselves) eique
adbaerentes magis essent, ejusque participatione sapienter beat que viverent,
quid aliud estenditur nisi volunt atem quamlibet bonam, inopem fuisse in solo
desiderio remansuram (inopem remansuram, a pretty phrase unable to remain)
nisi ille qui bonam naturam ex nihilo sui capacem fecerat, ex seipso feceret
implendo meliorem, prius faciens excitando avidiorem. If you get any thing by
my conference I am glad, I assure you I get by yours, both touching the
clearing of Austins opinion hereabouts, and others concurrence also, wherein I
do much rejoice; and the rather, because, as you may observe, I have hitherto
proceeded thereupon, rather by supposition than of confirmation. Another place
to this purpose I find alleged out of his Enchirid. cap. 100. Hac sunt magna
opera domini exquisita in omnes voluntates ejus; et tam sapienter exquisita, ut
cum Angelica et humana natura peccasset, id est, non quod ille, sed quod veluit
ipsa, fecisset, etiam per eandem creature voluntatem (qua factum est quod
creator noluit) impleret ipse quod voluit, ben^ utens et malis tanquam sum
bonus, ad eorum damnationem quos just praedectinavit ad poenam, et ad eorum
salutem quas benign praedestinavit ad gratiam. But this has but a touch, and
that subject to ambiguous interpretation, the other is more full and clear. I
come unto the Theses.

You desire I would show you in a word where your error is in these, but you
may remember what one professed sometimes, namely that ad quaestionem longam
od^rat responsionem brevem, yet I will endeavor to satisfy you in this also
first, and afterward so to satisfy as I may satisfy my self also.

First therefore, my brief satisfaction as it were in a word shall consist in
two points.

1. You have but nine Theses, and the eighth is as a succinct recapitulation of
all that went before, and the conclusion there mentioned is no more than that
which every one grants, namely this; that God did decree first to produce that
subject, and afterward to work such an effect thereupon: And indeed it is an
ordinary course to confound the order of execution with the order of intention.
Zanchius his definition of praedestination I do exceedingly approve of,
answerable to this of yours, for thus it lies, Generalis, bocest, omnium
hominum praedestinatio est aeternum etc. Dei decretum, quo apud se ab aterno
decrevit, primum quidem omnes homines tum creare ad sui imaginem justos, tum ut
in peccatum a Satana tentati suo libero arbitrio labe entur, permittere: deinde
b^^ rum alios liberare, et liberatos spiritu suo comitari, et tandem aeterna
vita donari; alios tum indurare, tum aeterno exitio perdere; idque ut in illis
divina bonitas et misericordia, in istis autem divina potentia et justitia
declaretur, atque ita in omnibus deus glorificetur. Where, if you mark it
well, you shall find he makes no order between the decrees of creation,
permission of sin, liberation and salvation on the one side, of induration and
damnation on the other side, but only between creation it self and permission
of sin, and liberation it self and salvation on the one side, and dereliction
and damnation on the other side, all which he considers as means, and in the
last place notes the end of all to be the patefaction of Gods glory in
goodness and mercy on the one side, and of his power and justice on the other.

2. Again, in your first Thesis containing the maine body of your tenet, you
will have the foresight of the subject, or occasion, whereupon any thing is
decreed absolutely to be wrought, always to go before the decree it self, as
well as the decree of the end goes before the decree of the means. The
irregularity whereof as touching God (though as touching man's decrees I
confess it is right that you speak) I will show as briefly as I can before I
answer your reason brought for confirmation of it.

1. If the foresight of the subject and occasion goes before the decree of
working upon the subject; then much more must the decree of making the subject,
as also of making or permitting the occasion, go before the decree of working
upon the subject, and upon such an occasion, (for no subject whereupon God
works can be without Gods making, but it is nothing so with man, who finds
subjects whereupon to work rather than makes them) Now this is a thing
impossible. For,

1. First, nothing is first in intention but the end, and it is not possible
that the subject or occasion should be the end whereunto God works upon the
subject thus or thus:

2. Secondly, that which is first in intention is last in execution. And
therefore if the making of the subject, and permitting of the occasion
whereupon God means to work, were first in intention, it should be last in
execution, that is, God should first work upon the subject before he had made
the subject, or permitted the occasion whereupon he works.

But yet I confess if you have a reason for what you say, unless you may
receive some satisfactory answer unto that reason of yours, it will be a very
hard matter to satisfy you; Therefore I come to the consideration of your
reason, which is this.

The foresight of a thing is nothing but the consideration of it tanquam reipsa
and certo futurum.

But whosoever will resolve absolutely to work such an effect upon such a definite
subject, or to make such an use of such a particular event, must consider that
subject and that event tanquam reipsa futurum: for else his decree will be but
conditional. To this, I answer,

1. First, according to their opinion, that are accounted the most rigid
interpreters of predestination.

1. Your proposition is most sound.

2. As for your assumption, which you suppose to be true, they suppose to be
utterly untrue; as directly contrary to the most general rules touching the
order of things in intention, and execution: And Alphonsus Mendoza takes upon
him to prove at large, that the supernaturals of Peter and Paul were intended
before their naturals.

2. The only reason (saving the plausibility of the proposition it self) to
justify it, seems to be this, God cannot work upon a subject, unless the
subject first be, and that occasion also whereupon he works; therefore God
cannot intend to work upon a subject unless first he intend to produce that
subject, and permit (at least) the occasion whereupon he intends to work. As
much as to say, because I cannot ride to London without a horse, therefore I
cannot intend to ride to London, unless first I intend to get me a horse.
Whence it manifestly follows, that in execution I must first ride to London,
and afterward get me an horse to that purpose. And the confounding of the order
of execution with the order of intention, seems to be the cause why this
proposition of yours seems to be so plausible.

2. Now I will answer your proposition, according to my own Tenet in ordering
Gods decrees, which is likely to give you better satisfaction in the way of
your own apprehension. Now I grant your proposition; acknowledging that in this
case so it falls out, that he must needs consider the subject as reipsa and
certo futurum. But how, non tanquam praecedaneum (whereto your discourse tends)
but tanquam conjunctum; the reason is, because I make the decrees of creation,
permission of sin, and raising out of sin, not subordinata, but coordinata and
conjuncta. So I say in like manner, God does jointly decree to give both grace
and glory; I do not say God does decree jointly to give them, but he jointly
decrees to give both grace and glory. And so Austin defines predestination to
be praeparationem gratiae and gloriae. So that in the same moment that he
decrees glory, he considers grace not as praecedaneum in intention, but
conjunctum. So on the other side God does jointly decree final dereliction of
some in sin and damnation for sin, as Aquinas professes of reprobation, that
it includes voluntatem permittendi culpam, and damnationem inferendi pro culpa:
so that in the same moment that he decrees damnation, he considers their
final impenitency non tanquam quiddam antecedaneum, but tanquam conjunctum.
And judge you what force this has to qualify the harshnesse of Tenets
hereabouts, and what disadvantage to our opposites the Arminians, who upon the
subordination of these decrees cry out upon our Tenets and expose them to
obloquie, saying that we maintain that God does first decree to damn men, and
then to this purpose he exposes them to sin those sins for which they are
damned. And herewith they charge the Authors of Massa corrupta for the object
of election and reprobation, as well as the Authors of Massa nondum condita, or
condita, but nondum corrupta. And the twenty reasons which Arminius has given
against the Authors of Massa nondum condita; he professes that with little
difference they may be accommodated against the Fautors of Massa corrupta. All
which notwithstanding, I have considered, and I hope refuted also, both the one
way against Arminius, and the other way against Corvinus, in a Digression by it
self, which contains a whole quire of paper, one of them; but that is in my
answer to Corvinus, which is not yet perfected. Doctor Jackson my ancient
friend, partly by his traditionary writings that pass in hugger-mugger from
hand to hand, four pieces whereof as many as I could come by, I have answered;
and partly by his treatise of divine essence, withdrawing my studies another
away: yet an answer to that I hope to smith by Whitsontide; and then to return:
For in the second part which is newly come forth I find little considerable
save some few chapters touching contingency: My greatest business about him is
to understand his language. Now to draw to an end; as your first Thesis is an
acknowledgement of the eternity of Gods decrees; so the second, of their unity
both in time and nature, God willing all things uno and eodem actu. Now judge I
pray whether of the two opinions is most suitable hereunto; that which makes
the decrees of God before spoken of, coordinata and conjuncta, or that which
makes such a concatenation of them by consequents after consequents: as for
example, Gods decree of raising men out of sin presupposes the foresight of
sin; the foresight of sin presupposes the decree to permit sin; the decree
to permit sin supposes the foresight of the futurition of the creature; and
the foresight thereof supposes the decree of creation: especially considering
Aquinas his argument, whereby he proves that praedestinatio Christi cannot be
the cause praedestinationis nostrae, to wit, because God by one and the same
act predestinates both Christ and us. And withal considering that
praerequisitum will as much hinder the unity of Gods decrees as Causa. I had
thought to have gone over your Theses more exactly, but seeing the length
already spun out, I resolve to be the briefer.

3. Whereas in your third, you conceive the order of Gods decrees is to be
understood (...): I judge rather Durands instruction to be more sound, before
mentiotioned; to wit, that there is only prioritas amongst them secundum
rationem; and that he expounds thus, quando ratio unius sumitur a ratione
alterius, as ratio mediorum sumitur a ratione finis. And priority in intention
is only of the end in respect of means tending thereto, as you rightly
conceive it in your fourth Thesis.

5. Of the fifth I have already spoken enough, wherein I have labored partly
to discover the error of your argumentation, and yet withal so as to give you
satisfaction in your own way.

6. The sixth contains only an inference upon the former, and the inference
is not suitable; for your assumption in the former Theses did but contend, that
God must consider it; here you infer, that he must presuppose it; But it
follows not: For to consider it, it is sufficient that it is conjunctum; But
to presuppose it is to maintain that it is antecedaneum.

Besides it is as much peccant against the order, between the end and the
means, as the former, whereof I have spoken sufficiently.

7. Of the seventh, your reason (you confess) is the same as before, to wit,
in the fifth, which I have already considered. Neither is there any necessity
why one should be before the other: they may, nay must be both together
intended; For consider, if the pardoning or curing of sin be in intention
after the permitting of sin, then it should be before it in execution, which
were as much as to say, that God must first pardon and cure sin, before he
can permit sin. This is plainly irregular; that irregularity which you
conceive on the contrary is only in show, and rising merely from confounding
intention with execution. Better to say, God does first intend to cure sin,
and then intends to permit it; (for herehence follows a due order in
execution, to wit, first sin is permitted, and after cured) then to say, God
first intends to permit sin, and after to cure it; for herehence proceeds a
most preposterous order in execution, namely, that first sin shall be cured,
and then the being of sin permitted. And indeed when men say, God does first
intend to permit sin, and then to cure it, it seems their meaning is only
this, not that God does first intend, etc. but that God does intend first to
permit sin, and then to cure it, which is most true.

8. Like as in your eighth Thesis you do express it ere you are aware, and no
otherwise.

9. And as in your eighth, so in your ninth, you do express it most
congruously thus, we may conceive God decrees to permit the occasion first,
and afterward to make that use of it which he intends: which I say is most
congruous, constituting this priority only in execution, not in intention.

I come to your conclusions drawn from the premises.

1. Gods decree to manifest the glory of his power and goodness ad extra, is
before his decree to create mankind, because that is a decree de fine, this de
medio.

Resp. 1. Though this be a truth, yet it is not the whole truth; for it seems
by power and goodness you understand only that power and goodness which was
showed in his creation; but this was not the last end: For this end was
obtained the very first moment of Adams creation, after which Adam lived above
900 years, and all mankind since, many thousands, and every one knows, the
last end of a man's work is of chiefest consideration, when he sets himself to
make his work, neither does it become the wisdom of man to carry himself
otherwise: as Beza professes, saying, Statuere deum prius ordine causarum
decrevisse hominem condere, quam quid eo condito faceret deliberaret: (here is
the point, mark it well) is such a thing as quo nihil absurdius dici potest,
quum finis in omnis sapientis artificis mente praecedat ipsius operis
aggressionem, ut certissimum sit dei de humano genere decretum, creationem et
ipsius creationis fines omnes antecessisse; wherein he distinguishes between
finis creationis and finis hominis creati. And as the creation manifested his
power and goodness in making man out of nothing, so man by this almighty power
thus made, was made, and intended to be made, to a certain end; which cannot
be imagined to have been in any other kind than to be either a vessel of
mercy, or of wrath.

And when Solomon says, God made the wicked against the day of evil, and
withal signifies that even this also was for himself, that is, for the
manifestation of his glory, this cannot be in the way of that power and
goodness you speak of, but something else; even the making of him a vessel
wherein one day shall shine the glory of God in the way of justice and
sovereign power over his creatures.

2. And therefore it cannot be as you conclude in the second place, that Gods
decree to create mankind is before his decree to manifest his mercy or justice
in mankind. For though that be a decree to produce a subject, yet considering
that this is the decree touching the end whereto he makes him: in all reason
the decree of the end whereto a subject is made is before the decree of making
the subject to that end. And we have an express testimony of the Holy Ghost
for this, namely, that as God created all things for himself, so he created
the wicked against the day of evil for himself.

But by the way, I observe how you mistake the opinion of your opposites; as
when you say, that this decree of manifesting Gods mercy or justice, is a
decree of working an effect in that subject, for this is utterly untrue; This
were to make the decree of salvation of the one, and of damnation of the other
to be before the decree of creation. And although some such thing may be
conceived out of a superficial apprehension of it, as proposed by Beza and
Piscator; yet both in true account of that opinion in general, and mistaking
of it in special, no such thing is avouched. Nay, whereas your self
maintain, that the decree of damnation is before the decree of permission of
final impenitency (a point no way congruous to your Tenet about massa
corrupta) you have often read in my writings, that I account the decree of
damnation in no moment of time to precede the decree of permission of final
impenitency.

Then the case of Angels is utterly against this; unless you maintain the
one to be elected upon the foresight of their obedience, the other reprobated
upon the foresight of their disobedience: which I am persuaded you shall not
find any Orthodox Divine in the point of man's election, to maintain.

3. Conclusio tertia. Gods decree to permit sin is before his decree to
manifest either his mercy in pardoning sin, or his justice in punishing
sin, because that is a decree, de eventu; this a doing of something by
occasion of that event.

Resp. 1. To your reason here mentioned I have answered before.

2. There is no priority or posteriority in intention, but only in respect of
finis and media ad finem.

3. It is untrue, that the former decree is a decree of an event, and the
latter of doing something by occasion of this event. For what? is Gods
permission, the event you mean? If so; then Gods working grace may be
accounted an event also, and so Gods decree of salvation upon his working grace
shall follow upon his decree of working grace, which is manifestly
Arminianisme. Is the sin permitted the event? First, why should you call it
an event? is it because you conceive it to fall out besides Gods intention?
Arminius himself professes the contrary. The articles of Ireland profess,
that God from eternity did by his unchangeable counsel ordain whatsoever in
time should come to pass, your self acknowledge, that Gods decree of
permitting sin, is a decree de eventu: your self acknowledge, that God did
foresee that man would sin in case he did permit him to sin; which is as
much as to say stice: food did intend that sin should come to pass by his
permission: which is (...) and express profession of Austin where he says,
Non ergo aliquid fit nisi omnipotens fieri velit, vel sinendo ut fiat, vel ipse
faciendo: so that whether things come to pass Deo faciente as good things, or
Deo sinente, as evil things; still they came to pass Deo volente as Austin
professes. Now this sin is apparently the cause of the damnation of many
thousands; for as much as many thousand infants are damned only for sin
original; And therefore like as upon this sin existent, God does not take an
occasion only, but a cause of damning many thousands; so if the decree of
permitting this, be presupposed before the decree of damnation, you may say as
well, that God upon the foresight of this sin, does not only take occasion,
but a cause also, of decreeing their damnation. And this may be applied to the
reprobation, not only of infants, but of all that are damned, forasmuch as all
that are damned, are damned for original sin, only here is the difference,
such reprobates as dye in their infancy, are damned only for original sin,
but others are damned not only for original sin, but for their actual
sins also.

Again it is manifest, that the decree of permitting sin original, is no
more a decree de eventu, and Gods decree to manifest his mercy in pardoning it,
is a decree of doing something by occasion of that event: than Gods decree of
permitting all actual sins of his elect, from the first to the last, is a
decree de eventu, and Gods decree to manifest his mercy in pardoning actual
sins, is a decree of working something by occasion of that event; and I
cannot but wonder, this being again and again put to your consideration, that
you do not take notice of the equipollency of these: whence it manifestly
follows, that the decree of pardoning sins shall presuppose massam
corruptam, as well with actual sins, as sins original.

Again, if Gods decree of showing justice in punishing sin, is but a decree
of taking occasion of doing something: then Gods decree of damnation for men's
actual sins, is but a decree of taking occasion of doing something; and
consequently, by what reason the decree of punishing sin, presupposes the
decree of permitting sin original, by the same reason, the decree of
damnation, shall presuppose the decree of permitting not only sin original;
but all actual sins also.

By the same reason the decree of salvation, is but a decree of doing something
upon the occasion of faith, repentance, and good works. For if sin deserve
not to be accounted a cause moving God to resolve to punish a man with
damnation, but rather an event, by occasion where of he resolves to punish with
damnation: much less shall faith, repentance, and good works be accounted a
cause moving God to decree to save any man, but only an event, by occasion
whereof, God does decree some men's salvation.

Yet look by what reason the decree of punishing with damnation does
presuppose the decree of permitting sin, by occasion of which event
punishment by damnation is decreed, by the same reason the decree of salvation,
does presuppose the decree of giving faith, repentance, and good works, by
occasion of which events, salvation is decreed; for why should not faith, and
good works be accounted an occasion of the decree of salvation, as well as
sins are the occasion of the decree of damnation.

4. The fourth conclusion is this; Gods decree to produce the person of Peter,
is before his decree to manifest his mercy in Peter, by the reason aforesaid,
These. 8.

Resp. That eighth Thesis aforesaid made no mention of priority in decree or
intention, but only of priority in execution, by virtue of Gods decree: for
the words of that eighth Thesis are these; God decrees first to produce that
subject, and afterward to work such an effect thereupon. Not that God did
first decree to produce the subject: but only that God did decree first to
produce the subject: manifesting hereby, that your intent is, only to reason
from the order of execution, and therehence to infer the like order in
intention, which is the ordinary course of Arminians at this day. And you
signify your meaning to be this, in that eighth Thesis, though in the issue
you fail of right accommodating it; for your words are these, If any decree be
concerning the working of a certain effect in such a subject as cannot
possibly exist without the producing of that subject, then we may suppose, that
he does first decree, (thus you would say, though indeed you say otherwise) to
produce that subject, and afterward to work such an effect thereupon, which
in plain terms is to argue thus; The permission of Adams sin presupposes
the creation of Adam, therefore the decree of pe^ to create Adams sin,
presupposes the decree of Adams creation: Now this is the Resp. ^gh way to
Arminianisme, and Pelagianisme in the highest decree, as I showed you in my
first; the evidence whereof, as it seems, drove you to acknowledge it, and to
devise some other course, for maintenance of the Tenet of massa corrupta: yet
through ghout, all the reason you give, is resolved into this: for as there I
said, herehence it will follow in like manner, that because damnation
presupposes all actual sins, therefore the decree of damnation presupposes
the decree of permitting of all actual sins, and consequently, the foresight
of them. In like manner, because salvation presupposes all manner of good
works in men of ripe years, therefore the decree of salvation, presupposes
the decree of giving effectual grace, for the performing of all manner of good
works, and the foresight of them, which is direct Pelagianisme in the highest
degree. And these considerations persuade me better than heretofore, that the
maintainers of massa corrupta for the object of predestination, must be cast
upon the maintenance of Arminianisme, and Pelagianisme in the highest degree,
whether they will or no.

5. Conclusio quinta: Gods decree to permit Peter to sin in Adam, is before
his decree to manifest his mercy in Peter by occasion of this sin, ex These. 9.

Resp. 1. Your Thesis Nona I have already answered.

2. Gods decree to permit Peter to sin in Adam, is no more before his decree
to manifest his mercy by occasion of that sin, than Gods decree to permit
Peter's personal sins all his life long, is before his decree to manifest his
mercy in pardoning them. And what place you make for these decrees whether in
election, or out of election, you have no where showed.

3. God does manifest his mercy by occasion of Peter's sins both original,
and actual, not only in the way of pardoning sin, but in the way of saving
his person, in despite of sin, whence it follows by the course of your
argumentation, that the decree of permitting all Peter's sins throughout the
whole course of his life, precedes the decree of manifesting Gods mercy in his
salvation.

4. And because Gods decree of saving Peter, is a decree of doing somewhat by
occasion of Peter's faith, and repentance, and good works, it follows by your
manner of reasoning, that the decree of saving Peter, presupposes the decree
of giving Peter faith, and repentance, and good works.

6. Conclusio sexta: Gods decree to produce the person of Judas, is before his
decree of manifesting his justice in Judas his person. These. 8.

Resp. This is all one with Conclusio quarta, and admits the same refutation.

7. Conclusio septima: Gods decree to permit Judas to sin in Adam, is before
his decree to manifest his justice in Judas, by occasion of that sin.

Resp. 1. This is all one with conclusio quinta, and admits the same answer:

2. Why do you say by occasion of that sin, and not by reason of that sin?
perhaps you will say, because that sin is not the cause of Judas his
damnation (for I cannot devise any other reason) but this is not sound, for
that sin is the meritorious cause of Judas his damnation: For though he be
damned for actual sins, yet is he damned for original also? Again, many
thousand infants are damned only for original sin.

3. May you not as well say, that Gods decree to permit Judas his personal
sins, is before his decree to manifest his justice in Judas by occasion of
those sins? and consider I pray how little agreeable that is to your Tenet.

4. And if the decree of permitting Judas his personal sins, be before Gods
decree of punishing him with damnation, why should not the decree of giving
faith, and repentance, and good works, be before Gods decree of rewarding with
salvation?

8. Conclusio octava: Gods decree to manifest his mercy in Peter, or to make
Peter a vessel of mercy, (which is properly decretum electionis) is before his
decree to call Peter, to give him faith, and repentance, etc. because that is a
decree de fine, this de medio.

Resp. 1. I do not dislike the order of these decrees: but I say there is no
congruity between them, such as should be between the ends, and the means. For
there is no show of mercy expressed in giving faith and repentance; but only
employed, in as much as both faith and repentance implies, a state of misery
preceding; the permission whereof alone has congruous reference to the showing
of mercy, as the means stand in congraity to the end. Faith and repentance and
good works are means tending to another end, namely, to the manifesting of
Gods remunerative justice: for as much as God means to bestow salvation on men
of ripe years by way of reward of their faith, repentance and good works. And
it is without all contradiction, that in Peter and every elect, appears, not
only Gods mercy, but his justice also, and that in the highest degree, both in
the pardoning of their sins, and saving of their souls for the merits of
Christ Jesus. And God has ordained his son to give salvation. Job. 17. 2.

2. And I wonder not a little, that you should subordinate any Medium tending
to the demonstration of Gods mercy, rather than the permission of misery.

3. Especially considering, that God when he purposed to show mercy on Peter,
he purposed to show mercy on him.

1. In pardoning not only his sin original, but all his actual sins
also. 2. In saving him not only in despite of sin original, but in
despite of all his actual sins also.
Neither have you any way to avoid this, but by saying, that God made Peter a
double vessel of mercy, and that by two decrees, which I think was never
heard of since the world began.

9. Conclusie Nona; Gods decree to manifest his justice in Judas, or to make
Judas a vessel of wrath (which is properly the decree of reprobation) is
before his decree to deny Judas faith and repentance, etc. by the same reason.

Resp. Here again you err marvelously, in making a Medium most incongruous to
the end intended. To deny faith and repentance, what is it more, than not to
give it, and by faith you mean, I doubt not, faith in Christ crucified etc.
But it is clear, that God gave no such faith and repentance unto the elect
Angels; yet far be it from us to think, that this was a medium tending to
any end of reprobation.

2. The truth is, nothing but permission of sin is a congruous means to the
manifesting of Gods justice. For should God afflict a man or any creature, that
is not a sinner (as Medina maintains ex communi omuium theologorum sententia,
he can, and that in the highest degree) this shall not be in the way of Justice
vindicative, nor as Judex, but as Dominus vitae et mortis; like as man has
power to afflict inferior creatures, and that in such a manner, non quo illis
fiat mitius, sed quo nobis salubrius.

3. Gods justice in Judas is manifested no way more, than in his damnation, and
that for actual sin, as well as original; and in many thousand infants
only for original sin; and to make the permission of actual sin only,
subordinate to the decree of manifesting Gods justice, and not the permission
of sin original, is very strange. And Alvarez that gravis Anibor professes
generally, that permissio peccati propter quod quis damnatur, is effectus
Reprobationis; and therefore cannot be premised before it. And every man that
is damned, is damned for original, as well as actual sins, and many
thousand infants only for original.

As touching the order of decrees subjoyned: Had you proceeded thus, God
intended first to create, then to permit sin, then to raise some, and finally
derelinquish others, and lastly to save some, and damn others, and that to the
manifestation of his glory in the way of mercy on the one, and justice on the
other; it had been exactly agreeable to Zanchius his definition of
predestination. And your self fall upon such a course, ere you are aware, in
diverse of your Theses, as I have showed.

2. The first being apparently a decree, as concerning the end God aims at;
all the decrees ensuing, should be decrees de mediis, tending either to that
end, immediately or mediatly, which you have not explicated, neither indeed are
they capable of any such explication: Nay rather you have already manifested
your meaning to be, that the end there specified, is only the end of creation;
not so much as the end of the things created, much less of the things intended
by the subsequent degrees: yet it is set in the first place, as though all the
things intended in the decrees following, tended to the end mentioned in this
decree, besides all congruity.

3. As touching the foresight of God interposed; The first is mysterious, as
would manifestly appear, if the ground of it were opened.

You think that Angels were left to themselves, yet did not God foresee that
hereupon they would fall, nor that hereupon they would not fall; but that some
would fall, and others not fall: which Austin, as I have showed, professes
arose from hence; that they which stood, had such an adjutorium, as they which
fell had not: which if it be true, man also, had he received the like
adjutorium, had not fallen.

But be it as you will, enquire to what end God suffered him to fall,
especially this fall of his proving fatal to thousands; I say this fall only;
it was fatal to all reprobates, though not only this fall: for all reprobates
are damned for original sin, though not for that only. The second foresight
is not rightly expressed; God cannot be said to foresee what he can do: for
only things to come are said to be foreseen, things present are not: but Gods
power whereby he can do this, or that, is from everlasting present with him.

Now because you see that this order of yours is utterly opposite to that
maxim, Quod prius est intention, posterius est executione; you answer, that
that maxim holds only in respect of finis and media ad finem; and therein you
say right: But whereas therewithal you imply, that there is another order in
intention than between finis and media, herein you innovate Philosophy, and
bring in an order in intentions, that was never admitted in any Schools. I am
sure in Aquinas you found no other priority admittable, but between finis and
media. And Durand acknowledges this priority in Gods intentions, to be only
secundum rationem, and that is, quando ratio unius sumitur ab altero. But where
no such priority is found, why should we admit of any priority at all in the
decrees of God? yet if you, or any man else can make good this new Philosophy,
by any reason, I shall be ready to yield unto it.

As for the last, give me leave to say unto you in Homers language (...). If
ever it became you to retract ought, I am persuaded it well becomes you to
retract this: you were as good to say, God did permit Adams sin to no end,
for you specify none, and the circumstances of qualification stands you in no
stead: you may as well say of all the sins committed in the world, that God
does permit them to no end, for you specify none, and the circumstances of
qualification stands you in no stead: you may as well say of all the sins
committed in the world, that God does permit them to no end; yet from Austins
days it has been acknowledged, that God does both punish sin with sin,
and that by sin men are brought sometimes to reformation: Audeo decere (says
Austin) utile est fuperbis in aliquod apertum manifestumque cadere peccatum.
Were the permission of sins concurring to the crucifying of Christ Jesus to
no end? yet never was the permission of any sin of greater consequent, than
the permission of Adams sin; as whereby the whole race of mankind was
corrupted, and way made for that great work, wonderful both to men and Angels,
in the redemption of the world, by the incarnation of the Son of God, and his
passion upon the cross. God created even the wicked against the day of evil,
and that for Gods own sake, as Solomon testifies: and did he not as well
permit him to become wicked, for Gods own sake, and his glories sake? Austin of
old has acknowledged, that even malum esse bonumest, and Bellarmine after him,
Bonum est malum esse Deo permittente. Nec duhitandum est, Deum facere been,
says Austin Enchirid. 96. Etiam sinendo fieri quaecunque siunt male: Non enim
hoc nisi justo judicio sinit. And seeing the permission of Adams sin could
not be justo judicio, in respect of any sin precedent (for it was the first)
therefore it must be justo judicio, in respect of some good end intended to be
consequent. The very sin of David with Bathsheba, and against Uriah, Arminius
acknowledges to have been permitted by God to excellent ends, particular and
definite, quo diligentius seipsum observare^, peccatum suum exemplo aliorum
defleret, egregium humilitatis, resipiseentiaeque specimen, and exemplar
praestaret, and gloriosius ex peccato resurgeret Exam. praedest. page 166, 167.
Nay, your self have acknowledged out of Austin, the ends of God in this, when
you alleged out of lib. de corrept. and gratia, cap. 10. this passage;
credimus Deum sic ordinasse Angelorum and hominum vitam, ut in ea prius
ostenderet quid p^ssct eorum liberum arbitrium; deinde quid posset suae gratiae
beneficium, justitiaeque judicium. Apply this to man, first he showed what his
free will could do; wherein? but in his fall; Secondly, quid posset gratiae
beneficium justitiaeque judicium: how was this showed, but in the raising of
some, and derelinquishing others? As for the circumstances wherewith you charm
this strange saying, they serve you in no stead: man is in doubt what end to
resolve on, upon the event or non-event of something, because he knows not
whether it will fall out or no: so if God were to seek, whether upon his
permission of Adam to sin, he would sin or no; he might be uncertain what
to intend. But you suppose, that before God decreed to permit him to sin, he
knew he would sin if he were permitted. And as for the distinction of
particular and general, it cannot be accommodated to ends; for ends intended
are only particulars, for they are intended to be produced, and such things
are only singulars: like as by singular means they are produced, and actiones
versantur only circa singularia. Again, it is untrue, that Gods decree was
negative: For, as Austin says, Enchirid. cap. 100. Non utique nelens sinit sed
volens: And actus volendi is positive in God. And again, Cap. 95. Non ergo fit
aliquid, nisi omnipotens fieri velit, vel sinendo ut fiat, vel ipse faciendo.
Your self, ere you are aware, draw near to the truth, which breaks forth as
loath to be suppressed; As when you say, a man suffers an house to fall,
because he can dispose of it many ways being fallen, to his own behoof. Apply
this to God concerning the fall of Adam, permitted by him. So says Austin, Nec
sineret bonus fieri male, nisi omnipotens etiam de malo facere posset been.
Here is the general, de malo facere posse been. What are the specials in the
passage by your self alleged, they are two, ut ostenderet gratiae beneficium,
justitiaeque judicium. Now consider I pray, posse de malo facere been is not
causa adaequata, why God should permit fieri male. But only velle de malo
facere been. For this power of his extends to infinite particular sins, which
he does not permit. And Austin acknowledges both, not only the posse as you
do, when he says, nisi posset de malo facere been: But the velle also, and
that according to the specials of gratiae beneficium, justitiaeque judicium; As
appears in the passage alleged by you. For he says, Deum sie ordinasse
hominum vitam, (non quia posse^ ostendere, sed) ut ostenderet quid posset
gratiae beneficium, justitiaeque judicium. So that he plainly manifests, that
the cause moving God so to deal with Angels and men, was not his power to
show, but his will and resolution to show both the power of his grace and of
his justice: which applied to men, is showed in raising some after they are
fallen, and derelinquishing others. I conclude as Abigal said to David,
Hereafter it shall be no grief unto you, nor offense of mind, that I have been
a means to keep thee from running a dangerous course in the way of life: So
hereafter it may be no regret unto you, that Gods providence has brought you
to this conference, whereby to preserve you from running dangerous courses in
the way of faith.

You in your Letter acknowledge reprobation absolute, which is utterly
contradictory to your opinion, seeing you premise before it, the consideration
of that sin, for which men are damned: For you premise the consideration of
sin original; And many thousand infants are damned only for that, and all
that are damned are damned for that, though not only for that.

An Answer to a Discourse of D. H. about predestination; By Dr. TWISSE.
1. THe reasons why our Divines fall upon the corrupt mass, as the object of H.
predestination, is not only that which you allege (viz. because
commiseration and dereliction presuppose the corrupt mass, etc.) but also, and
much more rather, as I conceive, because the very last end of predestination
being, as you acknowledge, the manifestation of Gods glory per modum
misericordiae parcentis in some, per modum justitiae punientis in others, could
not be intended without presupposition of sin. For neither could God possibly
intend to spare any, nor justly intend to punish any, if he had not considered
them as in a state of sin.

Resp. The question is, whether Gods intention (that is, his decree) to spare
or punish, T.
presupposes sin. You think it does, and that it cannot possibly be
otherwise: I think it does not, nor can possibly be so, that any thing in man
can be prerequired to the decrees of God, yet I proposed the only special
arguments that ever I observed in sixteen years study in these points and
answered them. You perceiving the inconsequence of that argument, as it seems,
persuade your self there is another argument of more force than that: But
mark I pray with what issue; In foregoing the proof I proposed and answered,
you instead thereof bring no proof at all, but rely upon this proposition (God
could not possibly intend to spare any, nor justly intend to punish any, if he
had not considered them as in a state of sin) without all proof, as evident
of it self. And if you mark it well, you shall find, that this proposition,
is the same proposition in effect, the best proof whereof that I found, I
labored to overthrow, by showing the inconsequence thereof diverse ways. And
seeing you rely finally hereupon without proof, you beg the question, and
instead of giving a new reason, you give none at all. And the truth is, I find
many apt to be carried away with the plausible show of this proposition, and
either look not at all farther for any proof thereof, or if they do, they
proceed no farther than thus. The manifestation of mercy in sparing, and
justice in punishing, presupposes sin; therefore the decree (or intention)
of manifesting Gods mercy in sparing, and justice in punishing, presupposes
sin, which was in effect the same consequence or enthymeme, which I proposed
to answer, as you may easily perceive if you mark it well: for commiseration
and manifestation of mercy are all one. Now because this proposition is such a
witch to bewitch men's fancies to entertain it, I will endeavor to discover
the vanity of it, and that in the very decrees of men, all which are temporal,
whereas Gods decrees were eternal.

The decree of showing mercy in pardoning sin does no more presuppose sin,
than the decree of showing the power of balm in curing a green wound, does
presuppose the wound, or the decree of showing the power of a cordial against
poison, does presuppose the empoysoning of a man's body; or the decree of
advancing a subject by way of reward, does presuppose his service: or the
decree of a Patron; to present his son to a benefice, does presuppose his
fitness for it, or the decree of Solomon to bring Shimei his gray hairs unto
the grave in blood, did presuppose the offense for which this was brought to
pass; but rather from these decrees and intentions, each Author in his kind
proceeds to bring to pass every thing that is required to the accomplishment
of that end which he requires; As I prove by instance in every particular. 1. I
have known one, that to show the power of his balm, has wounded his own
flesh, and pouring his balm into it, has cured it in the space of twenty
four hours. Ask wherefore he wounded his flesh, every one sees, that both
he wounded it, and healed it with his balm, to make the virtue of his balm
known: So that his intention of manifesting the virtue of his balm, did not
presuppose the wound but drew after it, both the making of the wound, and the
pouring of balm into it, as the means tending to the demonstration of the
power of the balm. 2. So we have known another to take poison, and afterward
his cordial against it, both the one, and the other, jointly tending to the
manifestation of the virtue of his cordial. 3. A King intending to promote a
favorite, but withal to do it without envy of the Nobility, may resolve to
do it by way of reward, which purpose presupposes not good service, but
rather hereupon he will employ him in service, as in some honorable Embassage,
or in the Wars, to the end that he may have occasion to advance him upon his
service, without envy of the Nobles. 4. A Patron having a young son, may
entertain a resolution to bestow a living upon him when time serves; This
intention does not presuppose his fitness, (without which he cannot be
admitted) but because he has a purpose to prefer him thereunto, therefore he
will take order to bring him up like a Scholar, and send him to the University
to make him fit. 5. Last of all, Solomon you know upon David's admonition on his
death bed, entertained an intention to bring Shimei to his grave in blood, yet
not for his cursing of David, but for a new transgression; therefore he takes a
course to ensnare him, and bids him to build him an house in Jerusalem, and not
to pass over the Brook Kidron upon pain of death. Now it was not indeed in
Solomon's power effectually to ensnare him, and so certainly to bring upon him
the execution of death: But this is in the power of God; For let him but expose
any creature unto temptation, and derelinquish him therein, without giving him
his grace to support him, that creature shall certainly fall into sin,
otherwise if any creature can keep himself from sin without Gods grace,
then Gods grace shall not have the prerogative of being the cause of every good
action; But this prerogative of Gods grace must and by Gods grace shall be
maintained unto the end. And upon this foundation the prerogative of his
sovereign power also over his creatures in disposing of them as he thinks
good, and making some vessels of mercy and some of wrath, which Arminius
himself professes he dares not deny to be in the power of God, to wit, to
make vessels of mercy and vessels of wrath, and that ex massa nondum condita,
in his Analysis of the ninth to the Romans.

But I proceed to the form of your Syllogism.

1. The reason (you say) may be laid down Syllogistically thus: H.


1. God could not intend to pardon any without supposition of that, which is
necessarily required to make them capable of pardon: But sin is necessarily
required to make them capable of pardon; therefore God could not intend to
pardon any without supposition of sin.

2. God could not intend to punish any without consideration of that, which is
in justice required to make them punishable: But sin is required in justice
to make any person punishable; therefore God could not intend to punish any
without consideration of sin.

Resp. 1. In both Syllogismes the Minor we grant, the Major we deny, as being
in T.
effect the very same proposition which is in question; and all the evidence it
carries with it consists in the parts which have a show of an Enthymeme thus:

1. Sin is necessarily prerequired to the pardoning of sin, therefore it is
necessarily prerequired to the decree of pardoning sin.

2. Sin in justice is prerequired unto punishing, Ergo it is in justice
prerequired to the decree of punishing.

Now this is the very proof which formerly I labored to disprove, by showing
the inconsequence thereof, yet the proposition whereon you rely, either must
depend upon this proof, or upon none at all. But I will proceed with you a
little farther upon these Syllogismes you propose.

2. Sin (you say, and that truly) is necessarily required to make men capable
of pardon. And this general truth brancheth it self into two specialls:

1. Sin original is necessarily required to make men capable of pardon for
sin original.

2. Sin actual is necessarily required to make men capable of pardon for
sin actual.

Now because God does intend to pardon all the sins of his elect, not only
original but actual, committed throughout the whole course of his life, it
follows that God could not intend to pardon these actual sins without the
presupposition of them.

3. By the same reason of yours I dispute thus:

1. God could not intend to bestow salvation upon any man by way of reward
without supposition of that which is necessarily required to make him capable
of reward. But the obedience of faith, repentance, and good works, is
necessarily required to make a man capable of reward, Ergo, God could not
intend to bestow salvation on any man by way of reward, without supposition of
faith, repentance and good works.

2. As God cannot intend to punish any without consideration of that, which in
justice is required to make him punishable: so God cannot intend to punish any
in such a degree, without that which is required in justice to make him
punishable in such a degree. Now not only sin original, but all actual
sins of every Reprobate, together with their final impenitency therein, is
required in justice to make every one of them punishable in such a degree;
Ergo, could not God intend to punish any Reprobate in such a degree, without
consideration of all their actual sins.

And as men's actual sins are the meritorious causes of their damnation: so
the consideration of them shall be the meritorious cause of their reprobation,
or at least, of that decree whereby God does decree to inflict damnation upon
them in such a degree.

And by just proportion of reason, like as faith, repentance, and good works
are the disposing causes unto salvation, so the consideration of faith,
repentance, and good works shall be the disposing causes of their election
unto salvation: But you proceed, and I am content to go along with you.

3. And this reason, especially for the latter part of it, which concerns the
manifestation H.
of Gods glory per m^dum justitiae punientis, may be farther confirmed thus:
That which tends not to Gods glory simply, but only upon supposition [if sin
be] could not be intended by him simply, but only upon that supposition. For
so far and no farther does God intend any thing, as it makes for his glory:
But to punish men, or any other creatures, is a thing that tends not to Gods
glory simply, but only upon supposition (if sin be) Ergo, it could not be
intended by God simply but only upon that supposition.

Resp. You need not have mentioned the tending of this to Gods glory: your
argument T.
is in force, and greater force without it. For I hold, that to punish without
supposition of sin implies contradiction: paena being properly opposed to
praemium, and as reward formally has a respect to obedience going before, so
has punishment unto sin.

1. Now first to follow you in your own course, I reason thus; That which
tends to Gods glory not simply, but only upon supposition of obedience in
faith, repentance, and good works, cannot be intended by him simply, but upon
that supposition; but to reward with salvation, and everlasting life, tends not
to Gods glory simply, but only upon supposition of faith, repentance and good
works. Ergo, it could ot be intended by God simply, but only upon faith and
repentance.

2. But to your Major I answer; No man says, that God does intend to punish
any man but for sin. Now hereupon many (not only Arminians, but some
Orthodox also) are apt to be deceived, and to think, that these words, but for
sin, are to be referred to the Antecedent removed, which is Gods intention.
But it is not so, those words are only to be referred to the Antecedent next
before, which is to punish. And I prove it thus: When any man says, God
intends to punish man for his sin, the meaning can be no other, than if he
had said, God does intend, that punishment shall be inflicted on man for his
sin; where it is manifest, that sin is noted only as going before the
punishment, not as going before Gods intention. But as soon as this confusion
of sense is opened by distinction, then they fly to this kind of argument,
sin goes before the execution of punishment, therefore the consideration of
sin goes before the intention of punishment, which is the argument I
formerly proposed, and the inconsequence whereof I presume you do manifestly
perceive.

Now to that which follows:

4. Although the reason which you allege on our behalf be inconsequent, as
you H.
have framed it: yet I suppose it may be reduced to a true Syllogism thus:

The decree of liberation from sin, presupposes sin: election is the
decree of liberation from sin, Ergo, election presupposes sin. If you deny
the Major, I prove it thus:

That which presupposes sinners, presupposes sin. The decree of liberation
from sin, presupposes sinners: Ergo, the decree of liberation from sin,
presupposes sin; you will perhaps yet deny the Minor; but I prove it thus:
The decree of liberation from sin, presupposes some that have need to be
delivered, for else it were vain, and to no purpose: Only sinners have need
to be delivered from sin: Ergo, the decree of liberation from sin
presupposes sinners.

The like argument, and in the like form, may be framed touching the decree of
dereliction in sin: Or if you take reprobation for the decree of damnation,
it may be said thus:

The decree of damnation, presupposes some persons justly damnable, for
otherwise it were either an unjust, or at least and unwisean indeliberate
decree. But only sinners are justly damnable. Ergo, the decree of damnation
presupposes sinners, and conse quently sin. For peccatum is de formali
ratione peccatoris qua peccator est, as you know.

Resp. Every one indeed knows that peccatum is de formali ratione peccatoris,
and hereupon it is manifest that the second Syllogism gives no mite of proof
unto the T.
first. For seeing formalis ratio of any thing, cannot be separated from the
thing it self, and consequently neither peccatum from peccator; you may easily
perceive, that when we deny that the decree of liberation from sin
presupposes sin, we must therewithal necessarily deny, that it presupposes
sinners.

Your third Syllogism adds as little force unto the former, being merely
identica probatio: For every man knows, that to be a sinner, and to have need
to be delivered from sin is all one, in such sort as whatsoever is denied of
a sinner, must be denied of him that has need to be delivered from sin,
forasmuch as every sinner has need to be delivered from sin. Thus while you
decline that proof, which in my observation, alone has course, and the
implication whereof in the Major proposition is all the evidence of it; you
fall upon no sound proof at all. The truth is, if you observe, you may
perceive your Major proposition involves this Enthymeme.

Liberation from sin presupposes sin, sinners such as have need to be
delivered from sin, Ergo, the decree of liberation from sin, presupposes
both sin and sinners, and such as need to be delivered from sin.

Of any other force of proof that you give, I am not conscious.

2. If the argument formed touching the decree of dereliction in sin, be of
the like form, it will admit no doubt the same answer.

3. The Major of the last Syllogism, has a clause annexed unto it, as a
reason of it, thus, else it were in vain and to no purpose. If this reason
pleased you, you might have relied upon it, in the first Syllogism of the
three, whereas now you may perceive, they contain no proof but identicall. 2.
Your course of argumentation tends to prove, that it is impossible it should be
otherwise than you conceive, which is more than to say, it were otherwise only
vain, and to no purpose. Thirdly I answer that which is vain, and to no
purpose, is either to no end, or to no good end: But the decree of liberation
from sin, whether it presuppose sin, as you say, or not presuppose sin,
as I say, still it tends to the same end, and that a good end, to wit, the
manifestation of Gods mercy.

But I err, your meaning seems to be this, it is vain in respect that it
cannot obtain the end it aims at, unless it presuppose sin. But how do
you prove that Gods decree of liberation from sin, cannot take effect, except
it presuppose sin? you have no means to prove it but this:

Liberation from sin cannot take effect without it presuppose sin, Ergo,
the decree of liberation from sin cannot take effect without it presuppose
sin. And while you decline this way of proof, you light upon no proof at
all.

4. Touching your last Syllogism, I deny your Major, that is, I deny that the
decree of damnation presupposes persons justly damnable. Then you say it is
unjust; but I deny this consequence, and though you bring no farther reason for
your affirmation, yet will I prove my negation thus:

The decree of damnation for final perseverance in sin, no man will say, to be
unjust: But God decrees to damn no man but for final perseverance in sin,
Ergo, Gods decree of damnation is not unjust. Here I suppose you will reply,
that if God decrees to damn no man but for final perseverance in sin, then
it follows, that the decree of damnation presupposes not only sin in
general, but final perseverance; and so you may think my opinion more
dissolute than yours, and your opinion more rigid than mine. And I doubt not,
but so it will appear in the end, especially in the point of election; but yet
not for any force in this consequence.

Wherefore I answer, that this consequence is very unfound, though it has
deceived many, and though the usual course is, to content themselves with
proposing it, without all proof, thinking it needs no proof; yet will I
easily disprove it, and show the vanity of it, as already I have done the like.
Now I pray what is the meaning of this, God does not decree to damn any man
but for final perseverance in sin? has it any other meaning than this, God
does not intend, that damnation shall be afflicted on any man, but for his
final perseverance in sin goes before damnation; Ergo, the consideration of
final perseverance in sin goes before the decree of damnation. The
inconsequence whereof I have formerly showed, neither do I find any exception
you make against my course in discovering it. And by the way give me leave to
tell you, what I seem to have found in the course of my studies in these
points: Arminianisme and Pelagianisme is one of the unlearnedst heresies that
ever was, depending merely either upon principles, which they establish to
themselves at pleasure without all ground, or upon consequences, most
inconsequent; yet both their principles, and their consequences are very
plausible at first sight to judgment, and the Tenets themselves, most apt to
bewitch carnal affections. And if the Trumpets in the Revelation do contain
a prediction of heresies growing upon the Church, as most have thought, (though
now adays it begins otherwise to come about) and the star called wormwood,
as a star signifies some plausible Heresy, as Piscator conjectureth; I see
none so fit as the Pelagian Heresy to be notified hereby, though as bitter as
wormwood in opposing the grace of God; in maintaining the prerogative whereof,
how can it be but he should be zealous, that has tasted of it, and of Gods
goodness in making him a vessel of mercy, when he might have made him a
vessel of wrath. But you proceed.

5. Whereas you argue, that if election presuppose original sin, it
presupposes H.
actual sins also. I answer, it follows not: For though God has decreed to
free his elect from all their actual sins, as well as from their original,
yet he has not done it by one and the same decree: But first he has resolved
to free them from that general curse, and malediction, whereto they were
obnoxious in Adam, and this is included in their very election; afterward he
has resolved to purge them also from all their actual sins, which they
shall commit by the effectual application of Christ's merit, and this is by
another decree consequent upon their election, being one of his decrees de
mediis.

Resp. Herein you carry your self like a right Scholar, in making way out
though it be a new way. As if the decree of freeing from Original sin, were
a different T.
decree from the decree of freeing from sins actual, and before it. And
albeit the actual sins of Gods elect are many and much different, some
committed before their calling, and for many years, some committed after their
calling, throughout the whole course of their lives, yet you can be content to
make the decree of God in freeing from all these, to be but one decree; only
the decrees of freeing from actual, and from original sins must be
different decrees.

1. When you say, first he has resolved to free them from original sin, and
afterward he has resolved to purge them from actual sins, I doubt your
meaning is no more but this, God has resolved first to free them from
original sin, and afterward to purge them from actual sins. And my
reason is, because many times I have observed speeches to ran thus, when the
meaning has been but so as I have expressed. But I will manifest, that in the
execution, freeing from malediction in Adam, and purging from actual sins
go together: much less can they differ in intention; which I prove thus: No
man is delivered from the malediction, whereto he was obnoxious in Adam, but by
faith in Christ, he is therewithal freed from all his actual sins committed
before his calling: Therefore seeing they are at once freed from malediction in
Adam, and from many actual sins, it follows that God did intend at once
thus to free them; and how could this be done by different decrees, one going
before another?

2. Now I will prove, that God did at once intend to free from all sins, both
actual and original, though he did not intend, that this should be done at
once; Forasmuch as actual sins are committed successively, one a long time
after another.

God intending to give faith and repentance to his elect, did therewithal
intend to free them from all their sins, for these are the only means
whereby we are freed from sin. But God did at once intend to give faith and
repentance to his elect: Ergo. He did at once intend, to free them from all
their sins.

Against this argument, the greatest color of exception is from the
consideration of actual sins, that have their course after their calling. But
this again is as easily removed by consideration, that as sins have their
course, so faith and repentance have their course; and God intended at once to
give his elect faith and repentance, and final perseverance in both, though
perseverance cannot be had at once, that being against the nature of it.

3. Whereas you say only of actual sins, that we are purged from them by the
effectual application of Christ's merits; I hope your meaning is not, to
exclude the purgation of original sin, and liberation from malediction in Adam
from the effect of Christ's merits. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
all sin. And David repented of his original sin, as well as of his actual,
and so do we. And when in respect of the law of his members, leading him
captive to the law of sin, the Apostle cries out, wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me, etc. Immediately he comfort himself in this manner, I
thank my God through Jesus Christ.

4. When you say, that Gods decree of purging us from actual sins, is one of
the decrees de mediis, you do not tell us what you call that other decree,
whereby God decrees to free us from that general curse and malediction
whereto we were obnoxious in Adam. But by the difference you put, you leave us
to interpret it, of Gods decree de fine: Now there is no such proportion, or
disproportion between these decrees, that the decree of freeing from original
sin, or from the malediction in Adam, should be decretum de fine, and the
decree of purging from actual sins, should be decretum de mediis.

1. For the end of Gods actions is merely his own glory, according to that,
Prove. 16. 4. God made all things for himself, and that Romans 11. 4. last, from
him and for him are all things. The freeing from sin Original etc. may be a
means to this, it cannot be the end which God intends.

2. If salvation be considered as the end which God intends, as commonly
Divines consider it, (though this course of consideration has been the mother
of great perturbation, in the ordering of Gods decrees) yet freedom from sin
original, is rather a means to this: Therefore not to be accounted the object
of Gods decrees concerning the end. Again, who doubts, but that the freeing
from sin original, is as well a means of salvation, as the purging from sins
actual. Therefore the decree thereof is to be reckoned amongst the number of
the decrees de mediis.

3. Yet will not this suffice, to make the decree of freeing from sin
original, to be different from the decree of purging from sins actual, as
this is accounted a decree de mediis: unless the freeing from sin original be
the end, and the purging from sins actual a means tending to that end. For
priority and posteriority in intention, has no place, but by reason of mutual
respect between the end and the means tending to that end. But in no congruity
can it be said, that the purging us from sins actual is a means to free us
from sins original, or from that malediction, whereto we were obnoxious in
Adam.

4. If freeing from original sin be first in Gods intention, and afterward
the purging of us from sins actual; it follows, that the freeing from
original sin shall be last in execution, so that God shall first free us from
actual sins, and then proceed to free us from original sin. I proceed to the
next.

6. In like manner we say of the Reprobate: It is one decree whereby God
resolves H.
to leave them in the State of original sin, another whereby he does resolve
to leave them in their actual sins also; And although this latter does follow
always upon the former, yet the former is only properly called reprobation.
Wherefore it follows not, that if the decree of reprobation supposes
original sin, it supposes actual also.

Resp. 1. The answer unto the former may in every particular be accommodated
unto T.
this.

2. These you speak of are not different, but one decree, and the same: As I
prove thus; Gods decree to leave them in the state of original sin, is all one
with Gods decree finally to deny them faith and repentance: And Gods decree
finally to deny them faith and repentance is all one with Gods decree to leave
them in their actual sin. Also Reprobation, as it signifies Gods decree of
leaving in the state of sin, was never conceived to be other, then the decree
of denying them faith and repentance unto the end: which whether it be not a
decree of leaving them in actual sins as well as original, let any man judge.
For God by this decree of final d^r^liction, did not only decree that they
should be left in their sins before they come to the use of reason, but in
their sins committed after also, in their youth, in their middle age, in their
old age: otherwise it could be no decree of final dereliction.

7. Although God does actually damn men as well for their actual sins, as for
their H.
original: yet the foresight of original sin, being enough to salve Gods
justice in the decree of damnation, we are not compelled to grant any more, as
antecedent to that decree, but may take in the rest, as consequent rather.

Resp. As God does actually damn men as well for their actual sins, as for their
original; T.
so undoubtedly God did from everlasting decree to damn them for their actual
sins as well as for their original. For when God does actually damn them for
their actual sins, then undoubtedly he does will to condemn them, otherwise
he should damn them against his will: Now the will of God, being an eternal
action, is eternal; therefore from everlasting he did will to damn them for
actual sins: For his will to damn them, and his decree to damn them is all
one. Now I think you do not make two decrees of damnation of the same men, one
for their original, another for their actual sins: Therefore in the same
moment that he decreed to damn for sin original, he did decree to damn for
actual also.

2. If the foresight of sin be required to salve Gods justice in the decree
of damnation of men of ripe years; the foresight of original sin will not
serve the turn: For seeing God does not intend the damnation of man
indefinitely, in respect of the degrees thereof, but definitely, that is,
according to the very degree in which he will inflict damnation; It is
manifest, that foresight of original sin cannot salve Gods justice. For to
intend damnation in such a degree as is due only to sins actual, upon
foresight only of sin original, is as unjust, as to intend damnation upon
no foresight of sin at all: For even in this case you allow, that as some
degrees intended are due to sin original, upon foresight whereof alone, they
are intended; so again some degrees intended, are due only to actual sins,
upon no foresight whereof in your opinion they are intended.

3. It is very strange, that you should maintain, Gods course is justified in
decreeing to damn upon foresight of original sin, and not upon the
foresight of actual sins: whereas damnation for original sin only, is so
far from being justifiable in the sight of flesh and blood, as that it is
indeed the second degree of the greatest absoluteness of Gods power, that ever
was or shall be showed in this world, or in the world to come.

1. The first degree and greatest, was the crucifying of the same God for
others sins, being without all sin of his own. 2. The second is the damnation
of Infants, for the sin of Adam; which Adam himself, notwithstanding, we
believe to be saved.
4. I pray consider the difference betwixt your opinion and mind; you
maintain that God decreed to damn all reprobates before the foresight of any
of their actual sins: I no way like this Tenet, but maintain, that in the
same moment, that God decrees to damn any Reprobate, he decrees to damn him
for all his actual sins, as well as original sin, and final perseverance in
them; And that in the same moment he foresaw all their sins: not that the
foresight of their sins is antecedent or subsequent to, but concomitant or
conjunct with his decree of their damnation, in the same moment, not of time
only, but of nature also.

Undoubtedly actual sins are more apt to justify God in damning any man,
than sin original; yet you maintain that God decrees to damn a man,
without the foresight of that, which does more justify God in damning any man;
only you deny, that he can decree to damn any man, without the foresight of
that, which does less justify God in the actual damnation of any one.

You will have the foresight of man's actual sins to follow the decree of
damnation, which I dare not avouch, not only because it is harsh to men's
affections, but because it is repugnant in my judgment to manifest reason;
only I deny the foresight of all sins to be antecedent to this decree: I
say, it is neither antecedent to it, which is the dissolute opinion, nor
subsequent after it, which is the rigid opinion, and each of them equally
untrue; but it is conjunct or concomitant to it, in the same moment of nature:
both these degrees being the decrees de mediis, and so making up one formal
complete decree de mediis ad eundem finem tendentibus, which is the
manifestation of Gods glory in the way of justice; as I have showed at large in
my third digression, amongst those which I hear are lately brought into your
hands. But I wonder not a little what you are fallen upon in the next place.

8. As touching the election and reprobation of Angels I have nothing to say,
because H.
the Scripture says nothing. It is true, that it could not be made ex communi
massa corrupta, because there was none such; But why it might not be out of the
foresight of their personal obedience or disobedience, I know no great matter
to object. Nor will it follow, that if they were elected upon such
considerations, we must be so too: for our case is wholly different, as the
Scripture denies that of us.

Resp. Hitherto you have discoursed as it were out of the month of our Divines;
who yet as I have showed in my eighth Digression, are for the most part nothing
for T.
this opinion which you propose, being rightly understood. But in this point
not one is for you; nor ever could I observe any of our Divines that maintained
not the election of Angels, to be of as free grace as the election of men, or
the reprobation of Angels, to be of as free Sovereignty and absoluteness in
the denial of grace, as the reprobation of men.

Arminius never durst profess this which you do; but still puts it off as a
matter he has nothing to do withal, treating only of the predestination of
men: which he would never have done, had he any hope to make good that opinion,
which you seem more to incline unto, than to the contrary.

But though you see no great matter to object against it, yet others do, that
hold it absolutely impossible to be otherwise; namely impossible, that any
thing in the creature should be the cause of the will of God quoad actum
volentis; or of predestination, quoad actum praedestinantie, Insomuch that
Aquinas professes, never any man was so mad, as to maintain that there could
be any cause of the will of God. p. 1. q. 23. Art. 5. in Corp. Cum
praedestinatio includat voluntatem, sic inquirenda est ratio praedestinationis,
sicut inquiritur ratio divinae voluntatis: Dictum est autem supra, quod non est
assignare ^iusam divine voluntatis ex part actus volendi: sed potest assignari
ratio ex part volitorum, etc. Deus vult esse aliquid propter aliud. Nulius
ergo fuit it a insanae mentis, qui diceret merita esse causam Divina
praedestinationis ex part actus praedestinantis, sed hoc sub questione
vertitur; utrum ex part effectus praedestinatio habeat aliquam causam: Et hoc
est quaerere, utrum Deus praeordinaverit se daturum effectum praedestinationis
alicui propter aliquam causam.

And whereas Suarius has labored to help himself with a shifting
distinction, between causa and ratio; as if there might be ratio voluntatis
divinae from without, though not causa: and finding these terms promiscuously
used by Aquinas in his sums, flies out to his book contra Gentes, and
Ferrarienses thereupon, to get hold of somewhat therehence for his advantage;
yet I have endeavored to beat that fox out of his holes, in my third
Digression upon election.

2. Are they not called in Scripture the elect Angels? Now mark Austins
discourse; If upon the foresight of man's obedience God elect any man, it shall
not be said, Non vos me elegistis, sed ego vos elegi; but on the contrary
rather, vos me elegistis non ego elegi vos. For if election of Angels followed
upon their obedience, they did first choose God, that is, choose to obey him,
before God did choose them, that is, choose to save them.

3. If Angels were elected upon their obedience, then either by necessity of
nature this came to pass, or by the free constitution of God; It cannot be
said, by necessity of nature, Ergo by his free constitution, whence it
follows, that God did ordain, that upon the obedience of Angels he would
ordain them to eternal life. Now judge you whether one decree of God can
possibly be the object of another decree, all decrees of God being eternal;
and the objects of Gods decrees being merely temporal: as appears in the
decree of creation, preservation, redemption, vocation, justification,
sanctification, salvation.

4. No good act can be wrought but by God, and by his grace; it is he that
works in us both the will and the deed of his good pleasure; Do you not
think it is so in Angels also? otherwise what cause have they to give God
thanks for their election, as namely, if it sprang from their obedience.

But suppose you deny this; yet all confess no natural action can be wrought
(much less gracious) without Gods concourse, as the efficient cause thereof.
Now consider, does God concur modo nos velimus, which is Suarius his devise?
consider I pray you, the contradiction included in this Tenet: God is the cause
working not only (...) perficere, but also (...) velle, as they confess: Now
is it possible, that God concurreth ad velle modo nos velimus? can the same
thing be the condition of it self? It may as well be before it self. Again,
supposing we do velle, it is not possible by the power of God, that we should
not velle: for factum infectum reddere me Deus quidem potest. But this I have
farther prosecuted in a Digression by it self, proving that God does determine
the will to every act thereof, and showing the great concurrence herein, (and
upon what grounds) of school Divines, from Albertus Magnus his days
downwards. But I proceed with you.

9. To that which you say concerning infants, I think I may answer, that
although H.
there were no other thing that made way to their salvation, or damnation, but
only the fall of Adam; yet it follows not, that God decreed to permit Adams
fall, as a Medium tending thereunto. For what if he decreed to save or damn
some sine mediis, supposing them in a state immediately capable of salvation or
damnation, as by Adams fall, and their original sin contracted hereupon,
they were? yet I add farther, concerning infants that are saved; there is
somewhat else decreed to make way to their salvation, besides Adams fall:
namely an application of Christ's merit to them in baptism, or otherwise. And
for those that are damned; since their original sin makes them immediately
justly damnable, it was enough for God to decree to leave them in the state
they were, and so to damn them; there being no other remedy to bring to pass
his end in the matter.

Resp. In general observe I pray you the disproportion of your Tenet
concerning T.
Infants, and others.

God does not decree to damn Infants (as you say) but upon the foresight of
all the sin, for which they are damned; but God does decree to damn all
others, not upon the foresight of all their sins for which they are damned,
nor upon the foresight of those sins for which they are chiefly damned, and
which do justify God most in their damnation; but only upon the foresight of
original sin, for which least of all they are damned, and which does least
of all justify God in their damnation.

But I come to the particular scanning of the parts.

1. You utterly mistake my words; I said not, the fall of Adam was the only
way, or any way, for the salvation of Infants: But this I said, and say; the
fall of Adam was the only way of manifestation of Gods mercy in the salvation
of Infants: For mercy supposes misery, and the misery of Infants is only in
respect of sin original, not at all in respect of sins actual, wherein
they are nothing culpable. Now to the manifestation of Gods mercy in their
salvation, the permission of Adams fall, and their fall in Adam, was a Medium:
and I prove it thus, if God did permit Adam to sin, and these Infants in
Adam, to this end, namely to the manifestation of his mercy in their salvation;
then this permission of Adams fall, and their fall in Adam, was a Medium
tending to the manifestation of his mercy in their salvation: But God did
permit Adam to fall, and these Infants in Adam, to this very end. Ergo. I prove
the M^^^r thus; he did permit Adam to fall, and these Infants in Adam, to the
manifestation of his own glory in them: But no glory of God is more
conveniently manifested in the permission of Adams fall, and these Infants in
Adam, than the glory of his mercy in the pardoning of their sins, and saving
their souls in despite of sin: Therefore this is to be accounted the end as
much as any.

2. I nothing doubt, but that infants are saved sine mediis; I spoke not of the
Media of their salvation, but of the manifestation of Gods mercy in their
salvation: I make no question, but that they are saved, by the merits of
Christ, whether they have the ordinary means of applying Christ unto them, or
no.

3. Touching reprobate Infants, I prove the permission of Adams fall, and their
fall in Adam, was a Medium, tending to the manifestation or Gods justice in
their damnation. For if God did permit Adam to fall, and them in Adam, to this
end, namely, to the manifestation of his justice in their damnation, then this
permission was a Medium tending thereto. But to this end God did permit Adams
fall, and their fall in Adam: which I prove thus; He did permit it for the
manifestation of his own glory, as to this end he does all things. But no glory
of God is so conveniently manifested hereby, as the glory of his justice in
their damnation; unless you will say with Alphonsus Mendoza, and Didscus
Alvarez, that rather the manifestation of Gods glorious grace toward his
elect, in consideration that he could have made them vessels of wrath as well
as others, is the cause, why God does not save all, but permits a multitude to
sin, after much different courses, and damnes them for sin.

4. Since their original sin (you say) they are justly damnable; But I pray
consider, how came they to be thus justly damnable? was it only by the will of
Adam? was it not by the will of God also? That the first sin of Adam alone,
and no other, is imputed to his posterity; how could this come to pass but by
the will of God. 2. That the sin of Adam becomes fatal to all his posterity,
and not so the sin of any man else, to his posterity, how is this, but by the
will of God? 3. Could not God have derived a child from Adam in the state of
his innocence, if he had so thought good? 4. How come we to be borne in
original sin, but by the will of God, who could have destroyed Adam after
his sin, and made another Author of generation of mankind. In all this,
appears the will of God, and forces us to acknowledge the power of God over
his creatures, to dispose of them as he thinks good. But along to the rest.

10. Although we say, the fall of Adam was considered in the decree of Gods
election: H.
yet we do not say, it was preintended; (neither indeed can God properly be
said to intend any thing which he permits only;) wherefore it follows not,
upon our opinion, that the fall of Adam was the end of man's salvation, and
damnation, or that it was to be in execution after it: For the respect of Media
and Finis is, where things are intended only. But you will say, God intended
the permission of the fall, though not the fall it self, and if that were
first in his intention, the same consequents follow. I answer, it was one thing
to consider Adams fall as a thing that would be, if it were not hindered,
another thing to resolve positively to permit it. And though perhaps God did
both, yet we make the former act only, to have been precedent to his
election, not the latter.

Resp. 1. I spoke nothing of Gods intention that Adam should fall, but only of
Gods intention to permit him to fall; and showed, that if the permission of
Adams T.
fall, was first in intention, and then man's damnation, it will manifestly
follow, that in execution it shall be last; that is, God shall first damn men
for sin, and afterward permit Adam to fall into sin, and all in Adam. To
this you say, that it is one thing to consider Adams fall as a thing that would
be, if it were not hindered; another thing to resolve positively to permit it.
But this answer is to no purpose. For my argument does not depend upon the
confusion of these things, which you say do differ, and therein say truly my
argument depends upon a principle, that is tota A^ademia notissimum, and
justified also by all experience, that what is first in intention is last in
execution.

2. But what say you? do you not make the permission of Adams fall precedent
to election and reprobation? why then let us shake hands; for the case is
clear, that then the foresight of Adams fall, neither could be precedent to
election: For the foresight of Adams fall in no moment of time before Gods
resolution to permit it: For though God foresaw that Adam would fall, if God
permitted him, yet could he not foresee, that he would fall absolutely, until
God were resolved to permit him.

3. Some things you touch by the way, I may not omit, you say nothing can
properly be said to be intended, which he permits only. This is very worthy of
consideration, what think you of Adams eating of the forbidden fruit? did God
intend that or no? Perhaps you will say, that God may be said to intend that,
because he did only permit that as evil, but concurred to the effecting of it,
as a natural action. But then consider, how was it possible, that God should
intend that this act should come to pass and not the evil of it, whereas the
evil, considering Gods interdict, was inseparable from it. I should answer it
thus; As touching the substance of the act, God intended it should come to
pass, and it came to pass by Gods effection; for so God intended it should
come to pass, to wit, by his effection: But as touching the evil of the
action God intended it should come to pass, and it came to pass, but only by
Gods permission: for so only he intended it should come to pass, to wit, by
his permission.

Hereupon you may fly out, and deny that God did intend so much as the act it
self of eating the forbidden fruit.

But I pray why might not God intend and determine, that that act should come
to pass, as well as the Jews crucifying of Christ? yet what say the Apostles
with one mouth, both Herod, etc. why not as well as the Kings giving their
Kingdoms unto the beast? yet it is expressly said, that God put it into their
hearts to do his ^ill even in this, to wit, giving their Kingdoms unto the
beast.

In a word, I have a Digression to this purpose, in the second book,
Digres^^^. The title is this, A^ sanctus Israelis, etc. It is the only point
wherein I oppose Aquinas, and Aquinas herein opposes himself manifestly
against Austin, as there I show.

11. In your laying down the order of Gods decrees, I would gladly understand
H.
one thing. Whether you make his first decree de fine, to have been definite or
indefinite? I mean, whether he resolved at first, to declare his mercy upon
such and such persons as Peter, Judas, etc. or indefinitely upon some only? If
you make it indefinite, it may be, such a decree might pass upon Massa nondum
condita. But that is not the decree of election. If you make it definite, me
thinks your arguments before alleged are strong -- against it.

Resp. Your distinction is good of a decree definite and indefinite; in the
same terms you shall find it disputed of, in the third Digression of those
that are come to your T.
hands: and sound laboring to hold up a decree indefinite, but all in vain.
The truth is Massa nondum condita is not to be taken positively, but privately
rather as it denies creation and corruption precedent to Gods predestination,
forasmuch as all these decrees of creation, of permission of Adams fall, of
liberation final from sins by faith and repentance, and lastly of salvation,
are but one formal complete decree de mediis, tending to one complete end,
which is the manifestation of Gods glory in the way of mercy mixed with justice:
On the other side, all these decrees, to wit, of creation, of permission of
Adams fall, of final dereliction in sin, and lastly of condemnation for sin,
do make up but one complete decree de medijs, tending to one end, which is the
manifestation of Gods glory in the way of justice. As for the strength of your
arguments, alleged against this opinion, I remit to every indifferent man's
judgment to consider thereof.

As touching the first arguments you propose, I could gratify you thus far,
that the decrees you speak of, do consuppose sin, but not presuppose sin.
Forasmuch as my Tenet is, that in the same moment with those decrees, God does
consider their sin, but not in any moment before it. This I say my Tenet
allows me to grant, but I cannot acknowledge that any of your arguments prove
thus much.

But then again, I maintain that these decrees consuppose other sins,
as well as original; yea the decree of damnation consupposeth in the same
moment all their actual sins, yea even final impenitency; forasmuch as God
decrees to damn no man of ripe years, but for all the sins that ever he
shall commit, and final impenitency in them: whereas you maintain that God
first decrees to damn them, and then foreseeth the actual sins of theirs, for
which they shall be damned.

FINIS.
Addenda and Corrigenda.
Page 1. lin. 24 read parts. p. 2. l. 30 r. rectify ib: l. 56 r. were of. p. 4
l: 33 r. diversions from. l 54 dele. not. p. 7 l. 36 is intended p 9 l. 35
(...). p. 10 l. 16 twofold. p. 11 l. 10 and not. p. 15 l. 4 wholly God's,
because they are wholly from God. p. 16 l. 30 first showing. l. 50 this
objection. l. ult creatures love. p. 17 l. 43 world healthful l. 47 he decreed
should perish. p. 24 l. 3 judicious author. l. 4 conversion. l. 17 affect. p.
27 l 49 kind of a meritorious. p 29 l. 21 Vines. l 32 they are the sons of God.
l. 45 praised me. l. 54 we discourse. p. 30 l. 23 of men. l. 50 to the dead. ib
according to men. p. 32 l. 10 del. not. l. 19 very philosophically takes. l. 56
to some p. 34 l. 28 over man his. l. 59 that it is. p. 35 l. 8. from ten l. 53
puniri. p. 36 l. 33 unsesonable. l. 36 refuted. p. 37 l. 48 unto them. p. 39 l.
4 friend of his l. 45 at the font. p. 40 l. 16. dele if. l. 18 exposition. l.
24 Judas may cease, and the prupose of electing Judas may etc: l. 35 and in
saying. p. 41 l. 40 of being l. 45 in this. p. 43. l. 20 less evident, that
death was not desirable. l. 51 defignes. l. 54 at a being in a state, l. 56
deliberative desire. l 60 esse nolis. p. 45 l. 48 all souls. p. 53 they are.
p. 46 l. 2 pain corrupting their. p. 47 l. 2 praeoptat. l. 23 (...) p. 48 l.
5, 6 degree l. 8 degree of diminution. l 10 any pain. p. 49. l. 18 my
argument. p. 50. l. 7 in this l. 22 will. p. 51. l. 22 the corrupt. p 53. l.
33. permittente Deo. p 55 l. 1: But God by this opinion does will and procure
it by a powerful and effectual decree, which cannot be resisted p. 56 l. 5
this will. l 53 signs of p. 57 l 8 God: p. 59 l. 9 of Thomas. p. 60 l 16 as
holily. p. 61 l. 45 is just. p. 62. l. 4 restraines. ib l. 14 good works. l. 22
that therefore God. l. 28. double evil. l. 48 for it by. p. 63 l. 5 Potan. p.
64 l. 7 efficacy of. l 16 supposition. l. 18 necessarily but either necessarily
or etc. l. 19 supposition. l. 24 of Aquinas. l. 26 on Gods. Marg: pro culpa. p.
65. l. 34 quotation. l. 45 to fear. l. 48. emortui sarmenti quia Christo
resecti sunt; l. 49 multi. p. 66 l. 7 says not l. 12 nill that. l. 25
futurition. l. 47 from sin. l. 56 or whither he abstain from that which is
evil, he does not abstain from it in a gracious manner; p. 67 l. 12 this of.
l. 24 you hearts. l. 51. man's infidelity. p. 68 l. 57. manner of appointing
hereunto, for if they be at all appointed hereunto, undoubtedly they are
precisely appointed thereunto. p. 69 l. 12 supposition. p. 70 l. 28 second way.
p. 73 l. 24 as we. l. 44 severally. p. 74 l. 46 author of the Sin. l. 48 del.
good. p. 76. l. 13 will not. p. 78. l. 3 futurition. l. 29 procure. l. 30 as a
second. p: 80 l. 12 of England. l. 22 but we l. 31 against. l. 38 if he should
work them contrary to their natures then etc. p. 81 l. 7 effecting. p. 83 l.
29 of sin. p. 84 l. 24 acts. p. 85 l. 1 any natural act. l. 50 mere pleasure
as the apostle professes that God has mercy on whom he will; it is evident
that God of his mere pleasure etc. p. 86 l. 18 as incapable. p. 89. l. 59 nec
recte. p: 93 l. 30 will do p. 94 l. 2 nill it. p. 97 l. 36 the cause l. 54. my
answer. p. 100 l. 44 with their. p, 102 l. 56 and that p. 104 l. 4 Credible. p
105 l 2 agent. p. 118 l. 41 or vicious. p. 121 l. 41 will of. p. 127 l. 14 of
destiny. p. 134 l. 44 asser^oribus. l. 47 quin author l. 50 I propose. p. 140
l. 21 so as to come to pass. p 146 l. 22 pillar had not. l. 23 del. pillar
had. p. 147 l ult. why God p. 151 l. 38 and so. p. 157 l. 7 without which. p.
164 l. 56 it may. p. 186 l. 47 decrees. p. 193 l. 2 wherein it is manifest that
final perseverance in sin goes before. l. 3 But if you farther proceed to
make it good according to your usual course thus; final perseverance in sin
goes before damnation. Ergo etc p: 195 l. 35 mine. l. 54 decrees. p. 198 l. 36
is in. p. 199 l 10 and some. l. 11. privatively.

A VINDICATION OF Dr. TWISSE FROM THE EXCEPTIONS OF Mr JOHN GOODWIN IN HIS
Redemption Redeemed.

BY HENRY IEANES, Minister of Gods Word in Chedzoy.



OXFORD, Printed for T. Robinson. 1653.

TO THE Reverend and Learned Mr JOHN GOODWIN.
SIR,
I Have assumed so much boldness, as to examine some passages that you have in
your Book (entitled Redemption Redeemed) against D. Twisse: wherein I believe
that you your self will acknowledge, that I have carried my self as a fair
adversary, as an adversary only unto your opinions, and not unto your person,
which I love and honor, as in other respects so for the good and great gifts
and parts God has bestowed on you. Many of my friends have earnestly dissuaded
me from this vindicatio^ assuring me that I must expect from you instead of a
reply, nothing but a libell. But for my part, I shall hope and pray unto the
Almighty for better things of you. However I am not hereby deterred from
entering into the lists with you. However I am not hereby deterred from entering
into the lists with you, neither shall I deprecate your utmost severity in
rational argumentation, for the discovery of any thing, that you conceive to
be weak and unsound in this my discourse. You may perhaps think and say that
so small a trifle is unworthy a diversion from your more serious employments;
but for that, I am contented that the learned Reader judge betwixt us. Indeed I
had long ere this finished an answer unto your whole Book; but that there was a
general, and (as I think) a just expectation, that some in the University of
Cambridge, who dissented from you, would comply with your fair invitation of
them, to declare themselves in some worthy and satisfactory answer to the
particulars propounded in your Book: But upon their long silence (which I can
neither excuse, nor will I accuse (as being altogether ignorant of the causes
thereof) I renewed my thoughts of setting about this work, and intended in the
interim, to have annexed to this piece of D. Twisse, a Table referring unto
such passages in this, and other of his Books, as do in great part satisfy
whatsoever you have delivered, in your forementioned Treatise, in opposition
unto the absoluteness of Divine Reprobation: But from these resolutions I was
quite taken off, by certain information, that the Learned M. Kendall
(heretofore Fellow of Exeter College in the University of Oxford) has
undertaken you. But I detain you and the reader too long with Prefacing, I
shall therefore presently without more ado address my self unto the
encounter with you.

In three places you except against D. Twisse. I shall consider them severally.

To begin with the first.

Mr GOODWIN p. 25. 26. c. 2.. 20.
IT is indeed the judgment of some Learned men, that the purpose or intent of
God to permit, or suffer such, or such a thing to be done, or such Dr Twisse.
or such an accident to come to pass, supposes a necessity (at least a
syllogisticall or consequentiall necessity) of the coming of it to pass. But
that the truth lies on the other side of the way, appears by the light of this
consideration. If whatsoever God has decreed, or intends, to permit to come
to pass in any case, upon any terms, or any supposition whatsoever, should by
virtue of such an intention or decree, necessarily come to pass, then all
things possible to be, (or at least ten thousand things more than ever shall
be) must be, yea, and this necessarily. For (doubtless God has decreed, and
intends, to leave natural causes, generally, to their natural and proper
operations, and productions; yea and voluntary causes also, under a power, and
at liberty to act ten thousand things more, then ever they will do, or shall
do. For example; God intends, and has decreed, to permit, that fire shall
burn, what combustible matter soever it shall take hold of, or that shall be
cast into it, that one spark of it falling into a barrel of dried Gunpowder,
should suddenly fire it, etc. But it does not follow from hence, that
therefore every thing that is combustible in the world, shall be burnt with
fire; or that every barrel of dry Gunpowder shall be blown up with sparks of
fire falling into them. So (in the instance formerly mentioned) God had decreed
to permit the Lords of Keilah to deliver up David into Saul's hand, in case he
had stayed in their City, till Saul's coming to demand him: this is evident
from 1 Samuel 23. 12.
the Text. But it did not follow from this permissive decree of God, that
therefore these Lords must necessarily deliver up David into Saul's hand: for we
know they did it not. So likewise, God has decreed to permit any man to
destroy the life of another whom he meets with (I mean, in respect of a
natural power to do the execution) but it follows not from hence, that
therefore every man must necessarily murder, or destroy the life of his
Brother, that comes in his way. So that evident it is, that no decree of God
whatsoever, which is simply and purely permissive, does import any necessity at
all of the perpetration, or coming to pass, of the thing so decreed. God
permitted Adam to eat of every tree in the garden of Eden (the tree of
knowledge Genesis 2. 16, 17
of good and evil only excepted) and therefore certainly had decreed, or
intended this permission: yet was not Adam any ways necessitated by any virtue
or influence of this decree upon him, to eat of every of these trees; nor is
it in the least degree credible, that ever he did eat of every of them, nor
yet of any one of them, but only that, which was prohibited unto him, his
ejection out of this garden following so suddenly after this patent, or
permission granted unto him. The reason why no decree of God, that is purely
and barely permissive, either induces or supposes any necessity of the coming
to pass, of what is only so decreed, is this. First, because no such decree
does any ways interesse God to any manner of interposall, either by his
wisdom, power, or providence in what kind soever, toward the effecting or
bringing to pass of what is so decreed. So that such events, which are no
otherwise decreed by God, then thus, are in the same posture of contingency, in
the same possibility of being, or not being, wherein they would have been, had
there been no such decree at all concerning them. Secondly, neither does any
such decree in God, suppose a futurity of such a concurrence of causes simply
requisite and necessary for the bringing of things, so decreed, to pass, which
will actually bring them to pass. Though God has decreed, that a spark, or
coal of fire falling, i. e. in case it shall fall into a barrel of
Gunpowder, shall fire it, yet it does not follow from hence, that he has
decreed, that any such spark or coal, shall fall into it, without which
notwithstanding the effect decreed, viz. the firing of this powder, will not
come to pass. Or if he said, that God has decreed that such a spark, or
coal, shall fall into the said barrel of powder, now is not the decree barely
permissive, but operative and assertive, and such which engages the decreer to
interpose effectually for the bringing of the thing decreed to pass. But such
decrees as this, in matters of that nature we deny to be in God.

IEANES.
DR Twisse does grant, that Gods permission in a complicate notion, as it takes
in other acts of Gods providence, does infer the things permitted: And what
he says of Gods actual permission in time, is applyable unto his permissive
decrees before all time; for as his workings are agreeable unto his effective,
so his permissions are suitable unto his permissive decrees. But now that he
any where affirms, that the decrees of God, which are simply, purely, and
barely permissive, See the Second Book of this Treatise, from page 90. unto
page 99.
or that the bare, single, and sole permission of God, do import any necessity
at all of the perpetration, or coming to pass, of what is only so decreed, and
permitted, I utterly deny. And if you had been so well versed in D. Twisse, as
it was fit for him, that undertakes a refutation of him, you would never have
charged him with that, which he, in a whole digression, professedly impugneth;
for which, you may see, how he is taxed (though very modestly) by M.
Rutherford, in a Scholasticall disputation of his, De Divina providentia cap.
8. D. Twisse in the third Digression of the second Book of his Vindiciae etc.
examineth that proposition of Perkins: Quod Deus non impedit, ideo evenit, quia
Deus non impedit. That which God does not hinder, does therefore come to pass,
because God does not hinder it, (i.) because he does permit it: where he not
only professes his dislike of it, but also refutes it. This Section then might
very well have been spared for in it you fight but with your own shadow, and
do not at all oppose the opinion of D. Twisse, who fully accords with you in
this particular; That Gods simple and sole permissions, and consequently his
decrees, that are simply, purely, and barely permissive, are not illative of
those things which are only so decreed, and permitted.

To clear this I shall give you an abstract of this Digression.

He examineth the truth of this proposition. 1. In the matter, or object of an
act natural. 2. In the matter, or object of an act moral, good or bad.

1. First, as concerning natural actions, he hinteth a distinction, between a
proper permission of them, and a permission of them improperly so called; that
is opposed unto a natural, real, or Physical restraint, this unto a moral
restraint, which is by way of disswasion.

First then if we take permission properly, as it is opposed, unto a natural,
real, and Physical restraint, and denotes a suspension thereof, D. Twisse is
so far from affirming, that they come to pass, upon Gods single, sole, and
bare permission, as that he makes Gods positive effection (whether by way of
predetermination, or concurrence, he leaves to be discussed in another place)
requisite unto the existence of them, without which they never can exist; for
God is the principal and immediate Actio Dei Physica sive naturalis ea est,
qua concurrit cum omnibus causis secundis ad actus suos, sive influendo
duntaxat in actus ipsarum, quod placet Arminio, Jesuitarum vestigiis
insistenti; sive movendo causas secundas ad agendum, quod nobis verisimilius
videtur, quemadmodum and inter Pontificios Dominicanis, quae quidem
controversia non est hujus loci, sed suo loco repetenda. Hujus concursus divini
ratione, nobis videtur absurd dici rem aliquam ideo evenire quia Deus non
impediat. Omnis enim res, omnis actus, omnis eneitas, ideo fit, quia Deus vult
ut fiat, non permittendo sed efficiendo, idque principaliter. Etenim Deus est
causa principalis, and immediata uniuscujusque entitatis, juxta omnes fere
Scholasticos, Arminio etiam consentiente, page 177. Nec Arminianis, quod sciam,
hactenus reluctantibus. Absurd autem dicitur, Deum permittere id fieri, quod
facit ut fiat, idque principaliter ipsum efficiendo. Neque hic opus est
recurrere ad permissionem, cum omnes in rebus naturalibus agnoscant, and
amplectantur Dei efficientiam principalem and immediatam. Vind. lib. 2. page
131.
cause of all beings and entities, and therefore of all natural actions.

And again afterward. Quare ad actiones naturales quod attinet, quatenus
permissio notat suspensionem actionis naturalis, sic Deus non versatur circa
easdem dum fiunt, sed positive facit. page 132.


Secondly, if we take permission as it is opposed unto, and denotes a
suspension of, a restraint improperly so called; a moral restraint by way of
disswasion; so D. Twisse is express in denial of any necessity to be
inferred, from such a permission of the coming to pass, of what is so.
permitted. Ad actiones naturales quod attinet, quatenus permissio not at
suspensionem actionis moralis in suadendo aut dissuadendo positae, sic non
sequitur, quicquid permititur illud fit. Neque enim quod suadetur quocunque
modo, and quantumvis efficaciter, necesse est, ut fiat, nec quod dissuadetur
quocunque modo quantumvis efficaciter, necesse est, ut non fiat; Ergo multo
minus ex co quod permititur aliquid fieri, vel non fieri, sequitur necessario
oportere illud fieri vel non fieri.

Secondly, from natural actions he proceeds on to moral, and he begineth
with good and gracious actions; in which he resolves that natural permission,
hoc est, non in genere morali sed Physico, can have no place, for (says he)
this would suppose, that the creature can be carried unto actions truly good,
without any special supply or assistance of Gods spirit and grace, which we
deny can be in the state of nature entire and pure, how much less is it
possible in the state of nature corrupted: whence also (says he) it would
follow, that God does not antecedently work and cause every act truly good,
and that by a special supply, aid, or assistance.

As for Gods permission of good actions in genere morali, he refers to what
he has spoken touching the like permission of natural actions, only he
adds, that God always concurreth unto an act truly good by a special
assistance and that both as a Physical and Morrall agent: wherefore (says he)
in this gracious administration of things there is no place at all for
permission, as it is opposed unto effection or farthering; for God works,
causes, and promoteth every good work in his children; although permission
may have room there, as it simply signifies non-hindrance, for questionless
God does not hinder the good works of his people, which he himself causes
and works. Thus you see, that by D. Twisse his opinion, good works do not
follow upon Gods bare, single, and sole permission, for they cannot be
performed without the powerful operation of Gods holy spirit, which works in
us both the will and the deed.

Lastly, as touching evil or sinful actions, in them divine permission
challenges a proper and peculiar place, both as permission is opposed unto
efficiency, as also unto restraint.

First, as it is opposed unto efficiency, for the obliquity of them being a
privation, is not capable of an efficient cause.

Secondly, as it is opposed unto restraint, for God does not hinder sinful
actions many times, though it be always in his power.

But now if we speak of the permission of sinful actions, in genere morali,
or suasorio; so all unanimously affirm, that God persuades or exhorts none
unto evil: for if God should interpose his authority, by commanding, advising,
or exhorting, whatsoever should be done hereupon, would be lawfully done.

But though God himself does not exhort or persuade unto sin, yet he gives
way many times, and that justly, unto the temptations of Satan, and his
instruments; nay, he himself by his providence, lays before men outward
objects and occasions, suitable unto their inward corruptions; as a goodly
Babylonish garment, two hundred sheckles of silver, and a wedge of Gold of
fifty sheckles weight, before the covetous eyes of Achan: beautiful and naked
Bathsheba before the lustful eyes of David. Next he suffers those
corruptions, that is, either he does not cure them by his renewing grace, or he
does not bridle them by his restraining grace, but lets them have their full
swinge, without check or control: In his children he does not actuate and
rouse their graces, but lets them lie as it were in a deep sleep, etc.
Besides, he concurreth unto those motions of the soul, (as touching the entity
of them) unto which men are stirred, by view of objects, that are agreeable
unto either their unsubdued or unbridled lusts. From the complication of all
these, a particular obduration, and sinful action follows, so that you take
in also, the concourse of God, so far as concerns the substance, or matter
of such a sinful action. Now from this variety of providence going before a
sinful action, D. Twisse draws this following conclusion. Ex quib us
manifestum videtur, ex sola permissione nequaquam consequi, quod fiat aliquid;
and proinde etiam minus verum videtur illud Perkinsei, Quicquid Deus non
impedit; ideo fit, quia Deus non impedit. From which it seems manifest, that it
in no ways follows, that a thing comes to pass upon Gods sole permission,
and therefore that of Perkins seems not to be true, whatsoever God does not
hinder therefore comes to pass, because God does not hinder it.

In the next place he brings in, and answers objections.

First, This is the opinion not only of Perkins but of Piscator also.

Secondly, our adversaries (by name Vorstius and Arminius) grant it, and their
concession should be embraced, as making much for the defense of our opinion.

Thirdly, there is a reason, which at the first blush seems convincing, unto
which not only Vorstius, but also Piscator yields, and it is drawn from the
nature of Relatives: For, seeing permission and the thing permitted are
Relatives, it seems necessary, that they exist together: upon supposall then of
the permission of the coming to pass of such a thing it seems necessary, that
that which is so permitted, do come to pass. Unto these he dispatcheth an
answer severally, in the same order as they were propounded.

First, as for our Divines, he acknowledges, that they have so thought, but
truth is to be preferred before any testimony; Amicus Socrates, Amicus Plato,
magis amica veritas: For it is but reason that we should have regard unto, and
care of, only truth, that so we may (with the Apostle) say, we can do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth.

Secondly, he shows, how that for the existence of a thing, Piscator does not
acquiesce in Gods sole permission, but flies unto Gods government, and that so
powerful, as that it bows, bends, and turns the Veruntamen and hoc etiam
advertendum est; cum contra Piscatorem in hunc modum disputaret Vorstius,
Permissio in eo, cui permissio fit, nihil omnino novl per se causat aut
efficit, sed tantum vires and facultates semel illi datas, ab aliena laesione
tutas praestat, and liberum istarum exercitium eidem relinquit: imo nihil
prorsus extra ipsum permittentem efficit, nisi quod actionem hujus impedientem
cohibet, aut potius retinet, and quasi suspendit. Est enim ipsa per se tantum
decretum non impediendi: hoc est, for is non agendi. Quomodo autem is, qui non
agit, eo ipso quod non agit, aliquid extra se causet, vel alteri necessitatem
agendi offerat? Aut quomodo is qui necessitatem hanc alteri offert, eo ipso
nihil agere, sed alterius tantum actionem permittere, sive non impedire, sine
contradictione dici possit? Videas jam quomodo ad ista Vorstiana respondeat
Piscator, in marginalibus suis annotationibus. At ego (inquit) non dico quod
Deus tantum permittat ea quae permittit: Sed dico quod illa ipsa etiam
gubernat; Respons. ad Amic. Collat. Vorstii p. 231. Idem p. 131. Explicat quid
sibi velit, cum ait, Deum gubernate. Denotant (inquit) illa effectionem quandam
Dei quoad peccara, sed non denotant effectionem talem, qua Deus ipse efficiat
peccata, quatenus habent rationem peccatorum, ^en quatenus sunt peccata; sed
denotant gubernationem Dei, qua ut Creator voluntates humanas flectit quocunque
voluerit. Ex his manifestum est, Piscatorem sol^ permissione Dei minime
acquievisse, ad hoc ut aliquid consequenter fieri dicatur, sed ad gubernationem
Dei confugisse; and ejusmodi gubernationem qua voluntates humanas flectit
quocunque voluerit.
wills of men whither he pleases.

As for the concessions of Arminius and Vorstius, seeing they are erroneous, a
patronage of our opinion drawn from them is not to be valued so much, as to be
built upon. Verum tanti non est hujusmodi patrocinium, ut errone is quantumvis
propitiis innitamur assertionibus.

As for the reason, that is of no force or strength, for we may as well
conclude, that because God did from eternal will or decree to create the
World, therefore the World from eternal was created; or because God from
eternal foreknew that the World should be, therefore the World did exist from
eternal: for there is no less relation, between the willing of a thing, and
the thing willed; the decree of a thing, and the thing decreed; the
foreknowledge of a thing, and the thing foreknowne; than there is, between the
permission of a thing, and the thing permitted. And there is between them as a
relation, so also a reciprocation: whereupon it follows, that if God wills
or decrees a thing, it is willed or decreed; if he foreknowes a thing, it is
foreknown; if he permits a thing it is permitted: but as it does not follow, a
thing is willed or decreed, therefore it is actually existent; a thing is
foreknown, therefore it is; In like manner it does not follow, a thing is
permitted, therefore it is actually: and indeed if Gods mere permission did
infer the existence of a thing upon this ground, because permission and the
thing permitted are relatives, it would hold as well concerning the permission
of man, as God; But it is manifest, that it follows not upon man's permission,
that whatsoever he permits, comes to pass.

But it may be objected, it is necessary that whatsoever is willed by God, do
at some time or other, come to pass, therefore we may say the same of what is
permitted by God.

He denies the consequence, and he gives this reason for his denial, because
Gods permission is not so effectual unto the existence of a thing, as his
volition; and yet he acknowledges, that this kind of consequence is true in
natural causes, but this is not in regard only of permission, but from the
determination of a natural cause to work, unless it be hindered: as
concerning rational and free agents, this consequence, a thing is permitted to
come to pass, therefore it does come to pass, is of no Ad rationem vero quod
attinet, eam nullius esse pretii constanter affirmamus. Nam pari rationis
efficacia concludi posset, quia Deus voluit ab aeterno, sive decrevit mundum
creare, ergo mundus ab aeterno creatus est, vel quia Deus ab aeterno mundum
futurum praescivit, ergo mundus ab aeterno extitic. Etenim relatio nihilo minus
intercedit inter volitionem and rem volitam; decretum and rem decretam;
praescientiam and rem praescitam, quam inter permissionem and rem permissam;
Unde quamvis sequatur, Deus voluit mundum ab aeterno, ergo ab aeterno mundus
est volitus; Deus scivit mundum ab aeterno, ergo mundus ab aeterno est scitus;
Deus permisit aut permittit actum fieri, ergo actus est aut fuit permissus.
Attamen inde nequaquam sequetur; ergo quod volitum est, existebat, quum primum
volitum erat; aut quod permissum est, existebat, quum primum permissum est.
Dices, atqui quod volitum est a Deo, necesse est ut aliquando sit; ergo and
quod permissum, similiter necesse erit, ut sit. Imo, inquam, nequaquam
sequitur. Neque enim par est utrobique ratio, sed valde dispar; quod and
cuilibet manifestum est. neque enim permissio tam efficax est ad existentiam
rei, quam volitio. Nec tamen diffiteor hoc genus consequentiae procedere in
causis naturalibus, sed non ex sola vi permissionis, sed ex determinatione
causae naturalis ad agendum nisi impediatur. De causis vero rationalibus and
libere agentibus, nunquam obtinet hoc genus consequentiae, permittitur aliquid
fieri, ergo fit. At, inquies, sunt relata; and relata sunt simul natura.
Agnosco esse relata, and quatenus sunt relata converti ad consequentiam. Posita
ergo permissione rei, necesse est ut res sit permissa; perinde atque posita
volitione rei necesse est, ut res sit volita; item posita praescientia rei,
necesse est ut res sit praescita. Sed quemadmodum non sequitur, res est volita,
ergo est; aut res est praescita, ergo est; perinde etiam non sequitur, res est
permissa, ergo est. Quemadmodum nec sola praescientia, aut volitio rei sufficit
ad hoc, ut res existat; ita etiam neque sola permissio rei sufficit ad hoc, ut
res extra causas suas constituatur. Haec tamen ratio, fateor, imposuit
Piscatori, page 231. Ad Amic. Collat. Vorstii. Ubi sic disserit; ubi autem
permissio est, ibi etiam est factum quod permittitur. Quomodo enim dici potest
permitti illud, quod non fit? Certe pari ratione dici potest, permitti illud
quod non fit; quemadmodum dici potest, volitum esse quod tamen non fit; licet
ad existentiam rei, multo efficacior sit volitio, quam permissio. Imo quomodo
non dici possit, permitti aliquid quamvis non fiat, cum permittere nihil aliud
sit, quam neque facere ut aliquid fiat, neque ne fiat impedire. Pergit
Piscator, quippe, inquiens, haec sunt relata, and proinde simul natura. Quum
igitur Deus decrevit permittere peccata, necesse est ut illa fiant. At jam
ostendimus, ex eo quod relata sint, hoc tantum sequi, posita pern issione, rem
esse permissam; sic and posita volitione rei, sequitur rem esse volitam; and
posita praescientia rei, sequitur rem esse praescitam; at hinc minime sequitur
propterea rem actualem aliquam existentiam sortiri: ita etiam, licet posita
permissione, res merito dicatur esse permissa, at hinc non sequitur propterea
rem esse simpliciter, and extra causas suas actualiter constitui; Quod si haec
consecutio legitima esset, quod contendit Piscator, non modo ex permissione
Dei, sequeretur rem e vestigio existere; sed and ex quavis cujusvis hominis
permissione; atqui manifestum est (nec Piscator credo resisteret) ex hominis
permissione nequaquam sequi, quicquid permititur fieri, mox existere.
force at all.

The last and principal objection is concerning the permission of sin in
particular; without grace sin cannot be avoided, and the permission of sin
stands in the denial of grace: it is clear therefore that upon the permission
of sin, sin necessarily ensues.

First, he answers, this in no-wise follows from the nature of permission
in general (as some Divines, have thought) but from a peculiar manner of Gods
permission, standing in a constant denial of grace without which sin can be
shunned by none.

Secondly he distinguishes of a twofold consideration of sin, indefinite or
definite, and that either in regard of sorts and kinds, or else particular
actions.

First, he grants, that upon the permission of sin, that is, the denial of
grace, sin follows indefinitely, and in general; so that as long as God
withholds his grace, a man sins, either in doing what is forbidden, or else
in doing what is commanded in a wrong way or manner. He also sins in omitting
what is commanded, or in abstaining from what is forbidden in an unholy, and
ungratious way or manner. And this he exemplifieth both in the unregenerate and
regenerate.

First, whiles God denies to, or withholds from, an unregenerate man, his
habitual grace, or grace of regeneration; whilst he suffers his spiritual
diseases to go uncured, his corruptions unsubdued, and unmortified, so long he
cannot but sin in all his rational and deliberate, both actions and
omissions.

First, all his actions are sins of commission, either a doing of what is
forbidden, or a sinful performance of what is commanded, not out of right
principles, nor for the due and requisite end.

Secondly all his omissions are sinful, for they are either of what is
enjoined, or else if they be of what is prohibited, they are not sanctified,
proceeding from the love of God, and directed unto the glory of God above all.

Next as for the regenerate, if God deny unto, or withhold from them, never so
little a while, his actual grace, the actual supply, and assistance of his
spirit, they sin in whatsoever they perform, or forbear; And indeed it is
no wonder, that upon Gods suspending the aid of his actual grace, the
regenerate break out into sin, in whom there is a flesh always lusting
against the spirit, whose graces are imperfect, and corruptions natural, and
therefore active, upon removal of impediments; For sin in Adam followed upon
the sole suspension of actual assistance to will that good, unto which he had
an habitual fitness; and yet in him propension unto good was perfect, without
any mixture of inclination unto evil.

Secondly, he denies, that upon the bare permission of sin, sin follows
definitely, either for sorts and kinds, or particular actions. But here first,
he implies an exception of general, and comprehensive sins, that either lie
at the root of, or are concomitant unto every sin, as inordinate self-love
etc. Forte dici potest, ex carentia justitiae originalis, sequi necessario, ut
creatura feratur in amorem sui inordinate, adeo ut quicquid operatur, illud
faciat propter se, non autem propter Deum.

Secondly he desires, chiefly to be understood concerning the imperate or
external actions of sin, and such actions of the will, as are of efficacy,
purposes, resolutions, etc. For upon Gods permission, that is, not curing, or
healing, not subduing of particular sinful habits. v. g. Covetousness,
luxury, there do necessarily follow such sinful actions of the will, as are
styled usually to be of complacency, that do, quoad specificationem, for their
sort and kind, answer such habits, to wit, velleities, desires, wouldings, and
wishings, likeings, approbations, etc. A covetous man whilst under the reign
of covetousness, cannot but love, like, and covet after things which he
judges to be gainful; a luxurious voluptuary cannot but love, approve, and
long after things which he knows to be pleasant and delightful unto his
senses. Omnino videtur Deum non posse impedire, ne avarus velit and concupiscat
ea, quae videntur utilia; vel libidinosus ea, quae titillant tanquam jucunda:
nam velle and concupiscere, nihil aliud est, quam desiderare; at avarus qua
avarus necessario talia desiderat and concupiscit, alias non esset avarus, and
libidinosus qua libidinosus talia desiderat, alias minime dicendus esset
libidinosus. Lib. 2. part. 2. page 15. For habits work ad modum naturae
necessarily. A covetous person, as covetous, necessarily desires and coveteth
things profitable; a lustful or unclean person necessarily desires such
objects and actions as are unclean, etc. And yet of these too, we cannot say
that they follow merely upon his permission, secluding his concourse.

These limitations premised; let us return to consider what he denies, to
wit, that upon the bare permission of sin, sin does not follow definitely
for sorts or kinds, or particular actions. Sine gratia (says he) abstineri
potest a peccato definite quo ad certam speciem, vel etiam in individuo
consideratam. There is no particular sin, especially of commission, but may
be abstained from without grace: And therefore upon the mere and bare denial
or withholding of grace, this or that particular sin does not follow.

For first, those that are destitute of habitual grace, the grace of
regeneration, may yet be free from diverse particular sinful habits. v. g.
Covetousness, Luxury, etc.

Secondly, in those that have such particular sinful habits; those habits are
not actuated, especially by outward actions, upon Gods bare and single
permission, his sole denial of grace. This he proves by reason and Scripture.

First by reason, because the subject of an actual sin of commission, is a
natural act, and unto the performance of a natural act, Gods bare permission
is not sufficient, Malum (quod dicitur) semper habitat in alieno fundo; and
peccatum omne quod in commissione versatur, semper habet actum aliquem
naturalem substratum; adeo ut ejusmodi peccatum aliquod nunquam exeat in actum
ex sola negatione gratiae, nisi etiam aliqua alia rerum administratio siat,
secundum quam actus aliquis naturalis patretur, quae sit propria materia ta lis
deformitatis.

Secondly by Scripture, in which Gods wonderful providence working and
prostituting men unto sin, is never set forth unto us, by a sole and single
permission: But he is said, sometimes to give men up unto vile affections, unto
a reprobate mind, unto strong delusions, to send an evil spirit between men,
to put a lying spirit in their mouths, to mingle a perverse spirit in them,
etc. He told David, that he would take away his concubines, and give them unto
his Son Absolon; He told Jeroboam, that he would rent the Kingdom out of the
hands of Solomon, and give ten tribes unto Jeroboam, which was done by their
defection, and revolt from the house of Judah. Now they who think that all
these things might be dispatched, and accomplished by Gods sole and single
permission, take I confess (says he) a short cut, but they send away the
Reader, that is desirous to find out the truth, empty and void of all
satisfaction. Upon this he concludes, that as often as any thing comes to pass
according to Gods permission, so often Gods permission is not solitary or
single, but has another government of things, another administration of divine
providence, accompanying it; which he explaineth at large touching sin: unto
the performance of this or that particular sinful action, there are required a
leading into temptation, an affording of objects, occasions, and opportunities,
a letting loose of Satan, the concourse of God by way of previous motion unto
the matter, or subject of the action, a removeall of all impediments, whether
holy and gracious, or else but merely natural. The explanation of all which,
you may there see at large in this digression.

Out of this he infers a distinction of permission, into efficacious and
unefficacious, and concludes that the permission of sin is not so much
efficacious of it self, as in regard of that either obduration, or excecation,
or both, concerning either temporal, or spiritual good things, with which it
is conjoined. Hinc constare poterit permissionem peccati particularis commode
dividendam esse, in permissionem efficacem and inefficacem, and permissionem
efficacem non tam ex sese efficacem esse, quam proratione ejus, cum qua semper
conjuncta est, obdurationis, excaecationis, aut utriusque, sive quoad bona
spiritualia, sieve quoad bona temporalia.

But I shall trouble neither the Reader, nor you, with transcribing any more
out of this digression. And indeed this is enough to satisfy him, and convince
you, that you have wronged D. Twisse, in pinning upon him such an opinion,
which he opposes with far greater strength of argument, then you your self.
This is sufficient to answer this whole section; But I shall examine whatsoever
is considerable in it.

The proposition you charge upon D. Twisse is this, That the purpose or intent
of God, to permit, or suffer such or such a thing to be done, or such or such
an accident to come to pass, supposes a necessity (at least a syllogisticall
or consequentiall necessity) of the coming of it to pass.

He that is acquainted with the works of D. Twisse, knows, that this
proposition is to be understood. 1. Concerning only the permission of evil. 2.
Concerning not only Gods act, the permission of evil, but also the being of
evil by Gods permission. 3. Concerning not a single, sole, and bare
permission, but an efficacious permission, that has several acts of Gods
providence accompanying it.

First, it is to be understood only concerning the permission of evil, and
that as touching the Formal, the pravity or obliquity of it, which being a
privation is incapable of being an object of an effective decree. This I might
clear from most of those places, wherein this distinction between an effective
and permissive decree is propounded; but I shall spare to name them at this
present, and content my self, with the alleging of one place, where he
expressly puts this limitation upon the proposition we speak of, De Scientia
Media. page 133. col. 2. Non pauci sunt, non modo ex nostris, sed and ex
Theologis nobis oppositis, tam Pontificiis, quam Arminianis, qui putant,
infallibiter futurum esse, quicquid etc. Deus permittere decreverit, hoc est
autem, duntaxat in genere mali. Nam quae fiunt bona, ea fieri decrevit Deus non
tam ipso permittente, quam faciente, in quocunque genere bona fuerint, sive in
genere boni moralis, sive naturalis sive supernaturalis; summa, sive in genere
entis bonum fuit, sive in genere moris. And by this it is apparent, that your
instance in Gods decree to permit fire to burn combustible matter, is
altogether impertinent, for that is quid bonum in genere entis.

Secondly, he makes Gods permissive decree to be, not only concerning Gods act,
the permission of evil, but also the being of evil by his permission; so that
not only the permission of evil is the object of his will, but the being of it
also. Sententia Perkinsei nostrorumque Theologorum est, lapsum Adami evenisse
voluntate Dei transeunte, non duntaxat in suam permissionem, sed etiam in rem
permissam, hoc est, Deum voluisse, ut Adamus laberetur, ipso permittente.
Vindic. l. 2. part. 1. page 127. What he speaks of Gods will, to permit Adams
fall, may be accommodated to his permissive will or decree, of any other sin.

Lastly, that he speaks of not a bare, but efficacious permission, so termed,
not Formally, but by way of concomitancy, the Digression which I have
abbreviated is a proof of undeniable evidence; And I am so confident of your
ingenuity, as that I doubt not, but you will acknowledge as much: and therefore
your objection, which runs only concerning a decree that is simply, barely,
and purely permissive, is nothing at all to the purpose.

Well then, take this proposition, (the purpose or intend of God, to permit or
suffer, such or such a thing to be done, infers a necessity of the coming of
it to pass) in the sense and meaning of D. Twisse, to wit, concerning an
efficacious permission of evil; and if you can accommodate your objection unto
it, I will confess that you can work a miracle in Logic.

MR GOODWIN.
BUt that the truth lies on the other side of the way, appears by the light of
this consideration, If whatsoever God has decreed, or intends to permit to
come to pass, in any case, upon any terms, or any supposition whatsoever,
should by virtue of such an intention or decree necessarily come to pass, then
all things possible to be; or at least, ten thousand things more, than ever
shall be, must be, yea and this necessarily,

IEANES.
IF you supply the propositions that are wanting, and make this a complete
Syllogism, it will be in secundo modo Syllogismi connexi, qui tollit
consequens, ut tollat antecedens. And then your conclusion, if your Syllogism
be true for form, will be, Therefore whatsoever God has decreed, or intends
to permit to come to pass in any case, upon any terms, or any supposition
whatsoever, shall not by virtue of such an intention or decree necessarily come
to pass. And then if in your Syllogism there be not committed that fallacy,
which is called Ignoratio elenchi, never Syllogism framed in this world, was
sick of this disease; for the conclusion you infer, is no-wise opposite unto
any thing in D. Twisse. Can you (dare you) say, that D. Twisse any where
affirms, that whatsoever God has decreed, or intends to permit to come to
pass, in any case upon any terms, or any supposition whatsoever, shall by
virtue of such an intention or decree, necessarily come to pass? Consult all
his books that are extant, whether in Latin or English; and if you can prove
any such passage to be in them, either in express terms, or by just
consequence, I will acknowledge that I have wronged you, in as shameful and
public a manner as you will prescribe: and if you cannot make good, that D.
Twisse has said any such thing, it will be very agreeable unto justice, that
you make a retraction of your mistake.

The palpable grossness of the injury that you do D. Twisse, will the better
appear, if you compare the conclusion which you father upon him, with the
example you bring a little after. God intends, and has decreed to permit,
that fire shall burn what combustible matter soever it shall take hold off, or
that shall be cast into it, that one spark of it, falling into a barrel of
dry Gunpowder, should suddenly fire it; but it does not follow from hence,
that therefore every thing that is combustible in the World, shall be burnt
with fire, or that every barrel of dried Gunpowder, shall be blown up with
sparks of fire falling into them. Here you make as if the permissive decree D.
Twisse speaks of, were concerning Gods permission of things to come to pass,
not absolutely but conditionally, in such a case, upon such terms, upon such a
supposition; and as if he affirmed, that whatsoever God has decreed to permit
to come to pass, only conditionally, should by virtue of such a decree come to
pass absolutely, and necessarily. This is one of the absurdest assertions that
ever dropped from the pen of a rational man, and in D. Twisse there is nothing
sounding like it: you do very ill therefore (that I say no more) to asperse
him with it. Nay D. Twisse is so far from making a bare, permissive *
conditional decree, to be illative of the absolute existence So called in
regard of its object.
of whatsoever God has decreed to permit to come to pass conditionally, as
that he denies any such inference to be made from an effective conditional
decree. Though it were very strange (says he against Cotton page 97.) that any
thing should not be accomplished which God does will absolutely, yet surely, it
is nothing strange, that that should not be accomplished, which God does will
to come to pass only upon a condition, for the condition failing, there is no
reason why we should expect the accomplishment thereof: How often does he tell
you, that for God to decree the salvation of all men, only conditionally, in
case they believe and repent, is no more to decree their salvation, than their
damnation; for as he has purposed salvation to men upon condition of faith,
and repentance; so on the other side, it is as undoubtedly true, that God has
ordained, that whosoever, coming to ripe years, shall not believe and repent,
shall be damned: and as to decree the salvation of all men only conditionally,
is no more to decree their salvation than their damnation; so to decree to
permit a thing to come to pass only conditionally, in such a case, upon such
terms, upon such a supposition, is no more to decree the permission of it,
than the not permission of it to come to pass: what is said of conditional
propositions, is true of conditional purposes, both effective and permissive,
Nihil ponunt in esse, sc. absolute and simpliciter, and (...).

To go one step farther, D. Twisse is very unlikely to conclude from Gods
decree, barely to permit a thing to come to pass conditionally, in such a
case, upon such terms, or upon such a supposition, that therefore the thing so
decreed, shall absolutely come to pass, because if we speak of positive
things, he is clearly and constantly of the opinion, that we cannot say truly,
that they shall come to pass, so much as conditionally in such a case, upon
such terms, etc. Unless God decree not barely to permit, but to work and
effect the thing conditionated, upon supposall of such conditions, De Scientia
Media. p. 430. Ad eundem modum concedimus omnem enunciationem conditionatam de
futuris conditionatis esse necessariam, modo Deus decreverit, posita tali
condition, rem ipsam conditionatam effectam dare: quod nisi ponamus Deum
decrevisse, prorsus praeter omnem Analogiam disserit Suarez; dum prophetiarum
comminantium and promittentium eandem rationem esse vult, atque propositionum
de futuris contingentibus conditionatarum qualiumcunque, quas etiam prophetias
appellat Suarez. Now if he will not allow us to make any inference of the
conditional futurition of positive things, from a decree that is barely
permissive, and conditional, it would be very strange, if he himself should
make such a permissive conditional decree, to be illative of the absolute
futurition of whatsoever is so decreed.

And thus have I done with your conclusion, which I affirm not to be opposite
unto any proposition in D. Twisse his Books, and I hope you will pardon me, if
I presume so far, as to challenge you to prove the contrary.

In the next place, I shall make bold, to question the truth of the consequence
of your Major proposition, which is this, If whatsoever God has decreed, or
intends to permit to come to pass, in any case, upon any terms, or any
supposition whatsoever, should by virtue of such an intention or deeree
necessarily come to pass, then all things possible to be, etc. must be, yea,
and this necessarily. And the reason why I question it, is because I much
doubt, whether God has decreed, or intends to permit to come to pass
conditionally, in some case, upon some terms, or upon some supposition or
other, all things whatsoever, that are possible, all things (I say) that are
possible, (whether unto all natural or necessary, or else all free and
rational agents) that is not only such as do exist, have existed, or shall
exist for the future, but also all that are in any possibility of existence,
whose existence implies no contradiction.

And that your satisfaction unto this, may be the fuller and distincter, I
shall branch it into some particulars, which I shall entreat you to clear up
unto me.

First, there are many things that are merely possible, numberless millions
of men and Angels, which have not, never had, never shall have actual
existence: and unto these there is possible, as great a variety of both actions
and sufferings, which that God has decreed to permit to come to pass
conditionally, in some case, upon some terms, upon some supposition or other,
is not (I confess) within the compass of my Creed; but yet I shall be willing
to be instructed by you, provided that you prove what you undertake to teach me.

Now that I am not much to be blamed for making a doubt of this, will (I hope)
be confessed by you, if you please to consider.

First, that Didacus Alvarez (a very learned man) holds it to be the Resp. etc.
page 63. and 143.
more probable opinion that there are not in God conditional decrees,
concerning all future conditional contingents, which may be framed by our
understandings in infinite combinations, as well concerning things actually
existent, as also things possible, but only in comparison of those future
conditionalls, which are revealed by God, Christ, or the Prophets, etc. And he
insinuates this reason out of Ledesma, because other conditional decrees would
be in vain, impertinent, and no ways conducing unto Gods providence, and
government of the World: which reason is as well applyable unto conditional
permissive, as conditional effective decrees.

M. Rutherford (I know) argues somewhat against this, but I believe you will
not plow with his Heifer.

Secondly, that D. Twisse not only affirms but proves, that things merely
possible, are not the object of Gods decree, in his Book against Iackson p.
283. 333. and 394. Look we (says he) upon the decrees of men, the wisest of
men, were they ever known to decree that a thing may be done? But rather
supposing many things may be done, they make choice to decree the doing of such
courses, as seem most convenient: things are possible without any reference to
the decrees of God, but only in reference to his power. That is possible unto
God, which he can do, or which he has power to cause, that it be brought to
pass; As for example, before the World was made, it was possible that the
World should be made; was this by virtue of Gods decree? Did God decree it to
be possible? If he did, seeing his decrees are free, it follows that he might
have chosen whether the World should have been possible or no. His arguments
are applyable unto Gods permissive as well as effective decrees, unto his
conditional, as well as absolute decrees. From agents merely possible, pass
we on unto such as do exist in some difference of time or other, and unto them
some things are possible only in regard of an obedientiall power, some things
are possible in regard of a natural power.

First some things are possible, and that unto all sorts of second agents, only
in regard of an obedientiall power; thus it is possible for ten thousand Asses
besides Balaam's to speak, for ten thousand pieces of iron (besides that
mentioned 2 Kings 6.) to swim; it is possible for wine to be made of ten
thousand pots of water etc. Besides those six we read of John. 2. It is
possible of stones to have children raised up unto Abraham: Now that God has
decreed to permit all things thus possible to come to pass conditionally, in
some case, is as I take it false, and I shall give you my reason out of D.
Twisse his Digression, De natura permissionis. lib. 2. part. 2. page 16. col.
2. Irrationalia dicuntur permitti, quoties sinuntur ferri secundum naturam
suam, quemadmodum cum lapis sinitur ferri deorsum; ignis sinitur grassari in
domas hominum: itaque circa agentia naturalia dum versatur permissio, palam est
praesupponi, non modo propensionem, sed and determinationem ad agendum; non
sic, quoties versatur circa agentia rationalia; nam and rationales substantiae,
quando permittuntur agere, sinuntur etiam ferri secundum naturam suam; aut alia
esset ratio permissionis rerum rationalium, quam irrationalium, quod minime
videtur. Irrational agents are said to be permitted as often as they are
suffered to be carried according to their natures; as when a stone is suffered
to move downward, fire to rage upon the howses of men: So also rational
substances when they are permitted to act, they are suffered to be moved, or
carried agreeably unto their natures, quoties permittuntur sibi pro domesticae
inclinationis ratione qua libet feruntur, ib. page 11. c. 1. or otherwise the
nature of the permission of things rational and irrational, would differ in
regard of form, where as the difference between them is only in respect of the
matter about which each is conversant, as he shows presently after the words
quoted.

Again of those things which are possible unto all sorts and kinds of agents,
there are some which God has absolutely decreed to effect, or bring to pass
by his operation, some which he has absolutely decreed to hinder or restrain.
Now whatsoever God works or effects, he does not permit, as permission is
opposed unto effection, and therefore it cannot be the object of a bare
permissive decree, but of an operative or effective. Secondly, what he
hinders or restrains either immediately by himself, or mediately by second
causes, he cannot be at all said to permit, and therefore he never decreed to
permit it; more briefly, God cannot be said to decree the bare and naked
permission of that whose effection or working he has decreed; he cannot be
said to decree the permission of that, whose hinderance or restraint he has
intended, but of things possible, he has decreed the effection of some, the
restraint and hinderance of others: and therefore there are many things
possible, which he has not decreed barely to permit.

I but perhaps you will say, that though whatsoever God has absolutely decreed
to effect or hinder, he has not decreed to permit to come to pass absolutely,
yet he has decreed it shall come to pass conditionally, in such cases, upon
such terms, and upon such a supposition. But this is spoken gratis, and
therefore I do beseech you to evidence it by dint of argument, unto which if
convincing, I hope I shall submit.

But I imagine I see a back-doore, at which you intend to run away, and save
your self the labor of meddling with that work, which I have here cut out for
you, and that is the clause which you have added by way of Parenthesis in your
consequent (or at least ten thousand things more than ever shall be (Here your
consequent has two propositions in it, one universal, then all things
possible must be, yea and this necessarily; another particular, at least ten
thousand things more than ever shall be, must be, and this necessarily. And
these two propositions are propounded in a disjunctive manner, so that if the
first be routed and miscarry, the other may serve as a reserve to fly unto,
this is the shift of a diffident and fearful disputant, that knows not well
what to say or hold: and therefore beneath that acumen, which I may justly
expect from a man of your great Wit and Learning: how commendable it is, will
appear, if you take your consequent by it self, and sever it from the
antecedent, and then parralell it with others of the like nature which no man
can deny to be absurd and ridiculous; as all men are white, or at least ten
thousand times more then are black: all men are unregenerate, or at least more
then are regenerate: all men are healthy and sound, or at least more then are
sick.

But you pretend unto a proof of the consequence of your Major, we will hear
what you say.

Mr GOODWIN.
FOr doubtless God has decreed, and intends to leave natural causes
generally, to their natural and proper operations and productions, yea and
voluntary causes also, under a power, and at liberty to act ten thousand things
more, than ever they will do or shall do.

IEANES.
YOur Major is, If whatsoever God has decreed or intends to permit to come
to pass, in any case, upon any terms, or any supposition whatsoever, should
by virtue of such an intention or decree, necessarily come to pass, then all
things possible to be, or at least ten thousand things more than ever shall be,
must be, yea and this necessarily. Now how the consequence hereof is proved by
this your proposition (I confess) passes my skill. The readiest way to
examine the consequence in a connexe Syllogism, is to reduce it unto a
Categoricall, and the way of that, every ordinary Logic will inform you is,
by giving a reason of the consequence by a Categoricall proposition, and
placing it in the room of the Major in your Categoricall Syllogism. Now take
the proof that you bring of the consequence, or sequel of your major
proposition, (for doubtless God has decreed, and intends to leave natural
causes generally, to their natural, and proper operations, and productions,
yea and voluntary causes also, under a power, and at liberty, to act ten
thousand times more then ever they will do or shall do) and let it be placed
in the room of your major, and then in what Mood and Figure will you infer
your conclusion, viz. Whatsoever God has decreed, or intends to come to
pass, in any case, upon any terms, or any supposition whatsoever, shall not
by virtue of such an intention or decree necessarily come to pass.

And thus you see how weakly you impugn that proposition which is only of
your own setting up.

But let us look upon this passage in it self, setting aside the reference it
carries of a proof unto the foregoing words, if you understand Gods leaving
of natural causes unto their natural and proper operations, etc. And so also
his leaving voluntary causes under a power, and at liberty to act ten thousand
things more then ever they will do or shall do, so as to make it exclusive of
that influence which is by way of previous motion of second causes themselves,
whether natural or voluntary unto all their operations, why your doubtless
will not carry it, as long as the arguments, by which D. Twisse lib. 2. Digres.
7. proves, that God moves all second causes unto their operations, remain
unanswered by you, and you bring no proof to the contrary, but your bare word.

MR GOODWIN.
SO likewise God has decreed, to permit any man to destroy the life of another
whom he meets with (I mean in respect of a natural power, to do the
execution) but it follows not from hence, that therefore every man must
necessarily murder or destroy the life of his brother that comes in his way.

IEANES.
UNto this I oppose these following arguments. First, God withholds many bloody
minded men from actual murder, as well as he did Abimelech from committing
adultery, and unto him cannot be permitted the doing of a thing, who is
restrained therefrom; for permission and restraint are opposed privatively, and
therefore cannot be found in the same subject at once, in regard of the same
action.

Secondly, permission of the sin of murder essentially implies, a withholding
of grace effectual and necessary, for the avoydance of the sin of murder:
but God does not withhold from every man that grace, which is effectual and
necessary for avoydance of the sin of murder; And therefore he does not
permit every man to commit it.

Thirdly, permission of outward and imperate acts (as well as restraint, unto
which it is privatively opposed) supposes a propension or inclination unto
them, a purpose or desire of them in the agents unto whom they are permitted:
but there is not in every man a propension or inclination, a purpose or desire
to murder every one that comes in his way; Therefore God does not permit every
man to murder every one that comes in his way. The Major is a principle with
Arminius in his Tractate de permissione; in persona cui permittitur, duo
ponenda, actus istius respectu, Primo, vires sufficientes ad actum praestandum,
intellige, nisi impediatur: Secundo, propensio ad actum producendum, citra hanc
enim frustra permittitur actus, citra illas omnino non permittitur; nam
necessario ad actus praestationem requiruntur: utut adsint illae, nisi
propendeat persona, cui permittitur actus, ad actum ipsum, nullo fine and in
vagum permittitur. Imo nec recte dici potest, quod alicui actus permittatur,
qui actus illius praestandi affectu nullo tenetur.

But this Testimony perhaps may be of small authority with you, however his
reason deserves your consideration. D. Twisse indeed dissents from him, as
touching the permission of the elicite acts of the will, but fully agrees with
him, as concerning the outward and imperate acts thereof, Hear his own words.
Circa irrationalia agentia si versetur permissio, praesupponit, fateor,
ejusmodi propensionem etc. Agentia vero rationalia quoties concernit permissio,
eadem ratio erit quoad actus ipsorum imperatos: Neque enim proprie dicitur quis
aut permitti, aut impediri, ne faciat aliquid exterius, nisi praesupponatur hoc
ipsum velle, and intendere actu interno aut elicito: ex quo commode dicitur vel
permitti facere quod intendebat, vel ne faciat quod volebat impediri, hactenus
it aque agnosco propensionem quandam ad agendum praecedaneam esse permissioni.

Unto what Arminius and D. Twisse say, I shall add this reason of mine own.
Permission and restraint are opposed privatively, and therefore as Aristotle
has taught us: l. Categ. Cap. 10. S. 11. Sunt circa idem, Nulli rei competit
privatio, cui non possit etiam competere habitus: And therefore we call not any
thing deaf, blind, or dumb, but what is capable of hearing, sight and speech.
In like manner no outward action can properly be permitted unto a man, but what
he may be hindered and restrained from: but now a man cannot be hindered, or
restrained from the performance of an outward action, unto which he has no
propension or inclination, of which he has no purpose or desire, no more than
he can be constrained unto that, from which he is not averse, therefore neither
can such an action be permitted unto him, if we take permission properly, (as
Bannes says) as it is not nuda negatio, sed privatio.

By this time the Reader, I suppose, is satisfied, that God does not permit
every man to murder or destroy the life of every one that comes in his way;
and therefore consequently, he has not decreed or intended any such
permission. As for the limitation which you bring to qualify your assertion, it
nothing mends the matter: for I have prooved the assertion to be false in it
self, by arguments, that fear not the light of your trial or examination:
and false assertions cannot be made good by any limitations whatsoever; so much
I learned when I was a Boy from Keckerm. System. Log. lib. 2. cap. 4. Quicquid
subjecto limitative tribuitur, id vere tribuitur. But suppose this assertion
were justifiable, by some limitation or other, yet not by this, which you
bring; because this natural power to do the execution, (as you speak) is
insufficient to denominate the permission of murder; because it is consistent
with the opposite of such a permission, restraint from murder, etc.

First, because it is insufficient to denominate the permission of murder: A
natural power to perform an action is essentially requisite unto the
permission thereof, but it is not only the essential requisite thereunto, and
therefore an insufficient ground for the affirmation of it. If it be lawful to
affirm a predicate of a subject in respect of the presence of one essential
requisite unto the said predicate, when there are wanting any other things
essentially required thereunto also, as absurd propositions as are imagineable,
will be hence justified: As that beasts and plants are men, and Men beasts; for
of beasts and plants there are affirmed diverse things, which do agree unto
man essentially; and so on the other side, diverse things are predicated of men
essentially, which are also essential unto beasts and plants.

Secondly, a natural power to destroy the life of another, is consistent with
the opposite of such a permission, to wit, restraint from the murder of him: a
power to produce an act may be hindered majoris aut aequalis saltem potentiae
oppositione, says your Arminius, by opposall of a greater, or at least an
equal power: though a man have not only a power, but a will, a desire, and
purpose to take away the life of another, yet he may be restrained, not only by
fear of punishment, dictates of a natural conscience within, but also by
opposition of a greater or equal power without. Now permission and restraint
are privatively opposed, and therefore we cannot say, that an action is
permitted in regard of that which is common unto both permission and restraint,
and may be found, as well when an action is restrained, as when it is
permitted. If I should say that a blind man sees, in respect of the first
natural power of seeing; that a deaf man hears, in respect of the first
natural power of hearing; you would say that my limitation were absurd and
ridiculous: because this natural first power of seeing is found both in the
blind and the seeing; and we may say the same of the first power of hearing.
Yet this limitation is as justifiable as yours; for the natural power you
speak of, to do the execution, is found as well in the restraint, as in the
permission of murder

MR GOODWIN.
GOD permitted Adam to eat of every tree in the Garden of Eden (the tree of
knowledge of Good and evil only excepted, Genesis 2. 16, 17.) and therefore
certainly had decreed, or intended, this permission: yet was not Adam any ways
necessitated by any virtue, or influence of this decree upon him, to eat of
every one of these trees; nor is it in the least degree credible, that ever he
did eat of every of them, nor yet of any one of them, but only that which was
prohibited unto him, his ejection out of this Garden following so suddenly
after this patent, or permission granted unto him.

IEANES.
THE permission spoken of, Genesis 2. 16. was Moral or Legal, in genere officii,
not natural or Physical, in genere facti, and therefore nothing at all to the
purpose.

Mr GOODWIN.
NEither does any such decree in God, suppose a futurity of such a concurrence
of causes, simply requisite and necessary, for the bringing of things, so
decreed, to pass, which will actually bring them to pass: though God has
decreed that a spark, or coal of fire, falling i. e. in case it shall fall,
into a barrel of Gunpowder, shall fire it, yet it does not follow from hence,
that he has decreed, that any such spark, or coal shall fall into it;
without which notwithstanding the effect decreed, viz. the firing of this
Powder will not come to pass.

IEANES.
FIrst, Arminius tells you, that the absence of one necessary cause is
sufficient to denominate a restraint. Ad productionem effecti requiritur causa
integra, sufficient ad ejus impedimentum unius causae necessariae absentia.
And if this be true, then permission does imply a concurrence of causes simply
requisite and necessary, for the bringing of things so permitted to pass,
which will actually bring them to pass if they be not hindered; and
consequently a permissive decree does, though not suppose (that is not our
language) yet, infer the futurity of such a presence of all requisite and
necessary causes.

Besides Secondly, Scheibler Met. lib. 1. c. 14. t. 2. p. 2. n. 44. out of
Zabarell acquaints us, how restraint is sometimes taken privatively, pro
privatione actionis inferendae, and absence not only of one requisite and
necessary cause, but also of one necessary condition is sufficient to
denominate such a restraint: Sic distantia loci (says he) impedit ne ignis
calefaciat aliquod corpus, non quasi distantia illa habeat efficientiam, vel
influxum aliquem, sed solum distantia illa dicit privationem actionis in igne,
and passionis in calefactibili. In regard of this acception of restraint, fire
cannot be said to be permitted to burn combustible matter, unless there be an
approximation of the fire unto the said combustible matter, for distance of
place hinders the fire from burning: distance of place between fire and a
barrel of Gunpowder, does hinder the fire from firing or blowing up that
barrel of Gunpowder, if you take hinderance or restraint in such a sense as
Scheibler speaks of: Answerably unto which fire cannot be said to be permitted
to fire or blow up such a barrel of Gunpowder, between which, and it, there is
such a distance.

Mr GOODWIN.
OR if it be said, that God has decreed, that such a spark or coal, shall
fall into the said barrel of Gunpowder, now is not the decree barely
permissive, but operative and assertive, and such which ingageth the decreer to
interpose effectually, for the bringing of the thing decreed to pass. But such
decrees as this, in matters of that nature, we deny to be in God.

IEANES.
IF By matters of that nature you mean, in such contingent things as the
falling of a Spark or Coal into a Barrel of Gunpowder; why, Doctor Twisse
has an argument which he takes to be unanswerable, clearly evincing, that
whatsoever thing comes to pass, that is good with a transcendentall goodness,
or Metaphysicall, God has decreed it by an operative or effective decree. You
have it in his examination of M. Cottons Treatise etc. p. 68, 69. As also in
his Consideration of that Scoffing Pamphlet of Tilenus, viz. the Doctrine of
the Synod of Dort and Arles reduced to the practice. p. 18, 19. Nay I say more,
(says he) that every thing, which comes to pass, in the revolution of times,
was decreed by God; which I prove by such an argument, for answer whereunto, I
challeng the whole nations of both Arminans and Jesuits. It cannot be denied,
but God foresaw from everlasting, whatsoever in time should come to pass,
therefore every thing was future from everlasting, otherwise God could not
foresee it as future. Now let us soberly enquire, how these things which we
call future, came to be future, being in their own nature merely possible, and
indifferent, as well not at all to be future, as to be future. Of this
transmigration of things, out of the condition of things merely possible (such
as they were of themselves) into the condition of things future, there must
needs be some outward cause. Now I demand, what was the cause of this
transmigration? And seeing nothing, without the nature of God, could be the
cause hereof (for this transmigration was from everlasting, but nothing without
God was everlasting) therefore something within the nature of God must be found
fit to be the cause hereof.

And what may that be? Not the knowledge of God, for that rather presupposes
things future, and so knowable in the kind of things future, then makes them
future: therefore it remains, that the mere decree and will of God, is that
which makes them future. If to shift off this, it be said, that the essence of
God is the cause hereof; I farther demand, whether the essence of God be the
cause hereof, as working necessarily, or as working freely; If as working
necessarily, then the most contingent things became future by necessity of the
Divine nature, and consequently he produces whatsoever he produces by
necessity of nature, which is Atheistical: therefore it remains, that the
Essence of God has made them future, by working freely, and consequently, the
mere will and decree of God is the cause of the futurition of all things.

He speaks indeed of Gods will and decree indefinitely, but that thereunder he
comprehends an operative or effective decree, is undeniable. But the force of
this reason, you may think easily to evade, by your denial of Gods
foreknowledge: your reasons for which denial, I shall in the next place
proceed to examine.

Mr GOODWIN, page 29. cap. 3. Sect. 2.
THat Prescience or foreknowledge are not formally or properly in Quid est
praescientia nisi scientia futurorum? Quid autem futurum est Deo, qui omnia
super graditur tempora? Si enim in scientia res ipsas habet, non sunt ei
futurae, sed praesentes; ac per hoc non jam praescientia, sed rantum scientia
dici potest. Aug. lib. 2. ad Simpl. vide plura, ib.
God, is the constant assertion, both of ancient and modern Divinity The
learned Assertours of the Protestant cause are at perfect agreement with their
Adversaries the Schoolmen, and Papists, in this. Nor is it any wonder at all,
that there should be peace, and a concurrence of Judgment about such a point
as this; even between those, who have many Irons of contention otherwise in the
fire, considering how obvious, and near at hand, the truth herein is. For 1.
If foreknowledge were Properly and formally in God, then might Predestination,
Election, Reprobation, and many other Nec zelus, nec ira, nec paenitentia, nec
proprie misericordia, nec praescientia esse potest in Deo. Greg. Moral. l. 2.
c. 23.
things be properly and formally in him also; in as much as these are, in the
letter and propriety of them, as competible unto him as foreknowledge. Nor can
there be any reason given for a difference. But unpossible it is that there
should be any Plurality of things whatsoever, in their distinct and proper
natures, and formalities, in God, the infinite simplicity of his nature and
being, with open mouth gainsaying it. 2ly If foreknowledge were properly, or
formally in God, there should be somewhat in him corruptible, or changeable.
For that Quid est praescientia nisi scientia futurorum? Aug. l. 2. ad Simpl. q.
2.
which is supposed to be such a foreknowledge in him to day, by the morrow,
suppose the thing, or event fore-known, should in the interim actually come to
pass, must needs cease, and be changed; in as much as there can be no
foreknowledge of things that are present, the adequate and appropriate object
of this knowledge (in the Propriety of it) being res futura somewhat that is to
come. Thirdly (and lastly) there is nothing in the Creature univocally and
formally the same, with any thing which is in God. The reason is; because then,
there must either be somewhat finite in God, or somewhat infinite in the
Creature: both which are unpossible. But if Praescience or foreknowledge,
being properly and formally in the Creature, should be properly and formally
also in God, there should be somewhat in the Creature, univocally and formally
the same, with somewhat, which is in God. Therefore certainly there is no
foreknowledge, properly so called, in God.

IEANES.
DIverse Heathen Philosophers I have found censured for denying of Gods
Prescience or foreknowledge, as Cicero by Austin lib. 5. De Civ. Dei cap. 9.
Seneca by Aureolus 1. distin. 38. Aristotle by Vasquez and others. But that
Christian Divines either ancient or modern, (unless you will appropriate that
name unto Socinians) are so unanimous in impugning of Gods foreknowledge, is
great news unto me, and not only unto me, but unto all others, I believe, that
have read any thing in either ancient, or Modern Divinity. Hierome in his
third book Adversus Pelagianos, teaches (as Franciscus Amicus informs me)
that he who takes away Prescience from God, takes away the Godhead: Eum qui a
Deo praescientiam tollit, divinitatem tollere. As for Austin, whom you quote in
the Margent against this Prescience of God; let any one read that place but now
quoted. Lib. 5. De Civ. Dei. cap. 9. and he must needs confess, that he is a
zealous Assertor of Gods foreknowledge against Cicero, who opposes it in
favor of the liberty of man's will. And so says Austin. Dum vult facere
homines liberos, facit sacrilegos: multo sunt autem tolerabiliores (says he)
qui vel sydera fata constituunt, quam iste, qui tollit praescientiam futurorum.
Nam and consiteri esse Deum, and negare praescium futurorum, apertissima
insania est. They who make the stars the fates of men, are more tolerable
then he, who takes away the foreknowledge of things to come. For to confess
that there is a God, and to deny him to be foreknowing of things future, is a
most open madness. And again in the same place. Sed quoquomodo se habent
tortuosissimae concertationes, and disputationes Philosophorum; nos ut
confitemur summum, and verum Deum, ita voluntatem, summamque potestatem ac
praescientiam ejus confitemur. Afterward again. Religiosus aute^ animus
utrumque eligit, utrumque confitetur, and fide pietatis utru^que confirmat;
that is, both the liberty of the will, and Gods prescience. Quod vero Cicero
negat ordinem omnium causarum esse certissimum, and Dei praescientiae
notissimum, plus eum, quam Stoici, detestamur. Aut enim Deum esse negat, etc.
Aut si esse confitetur Deu^, quem negat praescium futurorum, etiam sic dicit
nihil aliud, quam ille, dixit insipiens in cord suo, non est Deus. Qui enim
non est praescius omnium futurorum, non est utique Deus. To confess that there
is a God, and to deny his foreknowledge, is to say with the fool in his heart,
that there is no God: For he, who does not foreknow things to come, is not God.
Other testimonies you may see quoted in Suarez lib. 1. De scientia futurorum
contingentium absoluta. cap. 2. Out of other places of Austin, as also out of
Fulgentius, and Anselme. But I may very well spare this labor of citing the
Ancients, seeing M. Hord, or M. Mason (I know not well which) tells us that the
Fathers did generally make sin an object of Gods prescience, and therefore
they maintained, That there was prescience in God. As for the Schoolmen they
in their Commentaries upon Aquinas. Sum. 1. p. Q. 14. Art. 13. And on Lombard
lib. 1. did. 38. 39. do generally resolve, nemine contradicente, (that I
know) That Gods foreknowledge of things to come, is a point certain de fide.
And amongst those that are called Protestants, I know none that oppose it, save
the Socinians; against whom, in this particular, you may read Stagman
Photinianis: disp. 13. And Johannes Junius in refutat: praelect. Fausti Socini,
cap. 8. 9. 10. 11. The Arminians, however now some of them walk in the
clouds, and will not speak out, yet at first the Ringleaders did not stick to
profess, that election was upon foresight of perseverance in faith, and
reprobation upon foreknowledge of perseverance in infidelity and impenitency.
D. Twisse tells us, That Gods foreknowledge of things future, is a point
assented unto by, and uncontroverted amongst all Christians; De Scientia Media,
p. 245. Extra controversiam est apud Christianos omnes, futura omnia,
quantumvis contingentia, Deo not a fuisse, idque ab aeterno; neque mirum, cum
nihil positivum aut sit, aut futurum sit in rerum natura, cujus productionem
non operetur ipse Deus, idque in genere causae efficientis, consequenterque
cujus productionem non ab aeterno decreverit, qua de re nulla fere inter
Christianos hodie, saltem eruditiores, viget Controversia. And hereupon it is
that he censureth the proofs brought by Suarez for the confirmation of it, to
be needless. Pergit Suarez in confirmatione ejus, de quo Christianus nullus
dubitat abidem. And again in his book against M. Cotton p. 69. he says, That
for men with Cicero to deny, that God foreknowes things to come, is to turn
Atheist.

But against this cloud of witnesses I foresee that you will take sanctuary in
those two terms, Formally and Properly, though none save Atheists, and
Socinians deny the Prescience of God; yet notwithstanding this, it is, say you,
the constant assertion both of Ancient and modern Divinity, That Prescience or
foreknowledge are not Formally or Properly in God. To make this good, you only
quote Austin in your Margent and Gregory, unto whose sayings alleged by you,
every Schooleman almost, that dissenteth from the Dominicans about the presence
of things in eternity, gives an answer, of which if you be ignorant, you must
needs be a very great stranger to School Divinity. You tell us next, that the
Learned assertors of the Protestant cause are at perfect agreement with their
adversaries the Schoolmen, and Papists in this assertion, That prescience or
foreknowledge are not properly, or formally in God. This is a thing which
those, that dissent from you, would in all likelihood question, and yet you
bring not so much as one instance out of either Protestant or Papist to make it
good. That there is such a peace and concurrence of judgment about this,
between Protestants and Papists, I never read or heard of before. And if you
can prove it by an induction, I will confess my ignorance. If any such unwary
passages, as you here speak of, have dropped from the pens of either
Protestants or Papists, I suppose they are to be qualified, and understood in
the like manner, that Suarez understands, and qualifieth the speech of those,
who deny knowledge to be properly and formally Ne in aequivcco laboremus,
supponendum est quid nomine scientiae significetur: non enim intelligimus
qualitatem aliquam, vel habitum, aut actum proprie factum, seu elicitum a
potentia, neque etiam cognitionem per discursum comparatam, aut aliam similem
imperfectionem includentem: in qua significatione videntur accepisse scientiam,
qui dixerunt non esse proprie in Deo, sed per Metaphoram vel causalitatem illi
attribui, id est, quia causat in nobis scientiam. Hos enim non est verisimile
intellexisse Deum ita carere scientia, ut sit prorsus stolidus: nam cum
faterentur Deum esse fontem omnis scientiae creatae, non est verisimile
credidisse Deum esse omnino inscium. Igitur, quia putarunt scientiam includere
imperfectionem, ideo formaliter and proprie in Deo esse negarunt. Illae autem
imperfectiones quasi materiales sunt, inventae in scientia humana, vel
Angelica, non vero pertinent ad rationem formalem scientiae, ut sic, quae hic
abstractissime sumitur, praescindendo a creata, and increata, and solum
significat claram and evidentem ac perfectam cognitionem, seu perceptionem
veritatis, seu objecti scibilis, sive illa perceptio fiat per qualitarem, sive
per substantiam, sive cum effectione, and receptione, sive absque his
imperfectionibus. Metaph. Disp. 30. Sect. 15. number. 2.
in God.

They take (says he) knowledge as signifying a quality or habit produced by
some power or knowledge, gained or gotten by way of discourse or inference, or
including some such like imperfection. In like manner if any either
Protestants, or Papists, have denied foreknowledge to be properly and formally
in God, they are to be understood concerning such a foreknowledge, as is found
in men, in whom it is clothed with many imperfections, from which it is
abstracted, as it is ascribed unto God. But I shall take a more particular and
distinct notice of these two terms Formally and Properly in reference unto the
attribution of foreknowledge unto God.

And first let us enquire whether foreknowledge can formally be ascribed unto
God.

The term Formally may be opposed unto either Eminently, or Extrinsecall
denominations.

First unto Eminently. Perfections are either secundum quid, in certo genere,
after a sort, in such a kind, or else simply such.

The former do so essentially imply some imperfection, limitation, or
composition, as that they cannot possibly be abstracted therefrom, and
therefore are ascribed unto God only eminently or vertually.

But now the latter do include no imperfection, or repugnancy with, or
opposition unto any greater, or equal perfection. And these perfections are
ascribed unto God Formally, as you may see proved by Suarez Met. Disp: 30.
Sect. 1. number. 8. 9. De perfectionibus ergo simpliciter dicendum est, omnes esse
in Deo formaliter, quia in suo formali conceptu nullam imperfectionem, sed
puram perfectionem involvunt, neque inter se repugnantiam includunt, unde sic
illas habere, id est, formaliter, melius est, quam aliqua earum carere, and
ideo de ratione Entis sum perfecti in tota latitudine Entis est, ut has omnes
perfectiones formaliter includat. Add in his perfectionibus non posse cogitari
altiorem modum continendi illas, quam formaliter, quia intra suam formalem
rationem, nec limitationem, nec imperfectionem includunt, neque altior gradus
Entis excogitari potest, quam ille, ad quem hae formales perfectiones
pertinent, qualia sunt vivere, sapere and alia hujusmodi.

Now foreknowledge is to be ranked amongst the perfections of this latter sort;
because it may be sequestered or abstracted from all those imperfections, as it
is found in Men or Angels. You think indeed that it will necessarily infer
mutability, but that is an imputation from which I will anon easily free it.
Besides, a perfection simply such, is defined by Anselme in Monolog. cap. 14.
Quae in unoquoque est melior ipsa quam non ipsa; that is, as Scotus expounds it
in 1. did. 8. q. 1. Ad. 1. quolibet suo incompossibili. Now the light of
nature evidenceth that the knowledge of things to come is better, and a more
noble attribution then any thing whatsoever is repugnant unto such
foreknowledge, and therefore this foreknowledge (in such an abstract notion as
we speak of) may formally be ascribed unto God.

But now this I would have to be understood as Suarez speaks of such
Respondeo, verum esse nullam perfectionem creatam, secundum adaequatam rationem
quam habet in creatura, esse in Deo formaliter, sed eminenter tantum: non est
enim in Deo sapientia creata, nam ut sic est accidens, and finita perfectio,
and idem est de caeteris similibus. Dicitur ergo Deus quasdam ex his
perfectionibus continere formaliter, quia secundum eas habet aliquam formalem
convenientiam cum creatura, ratione cujus illa perfectio secundum idem nomen,
and eandem rationem, seu conceptum formalem attribuitur Deo and creaturae,
salva analogia, quae inter Deum and creaturam semper intercedit. Quando vero
non est talis convenientia, nec formalis denominatio, sed sola efficacitas
divinae virturis, tunc dicimus intercedere convenientiam eminentialem. Atque
ita in Deo nulla perfectio est formaliter nisi vel secundum proprium conceptum
Dei, vel saltem secundum conceptum abstrahentem a Deo, and creaturis. Metaph.
Disp. 30. Sect. 1. number. 12.
kind of perfections in general.

And again afterward. Recte, etc. Intelligitur esse long diversum modum
vivendi divinae and creatae substantiae: and quod de divinis attributis
positivis superius diximus, in hoc manifestillimum esse secundum modum, quo
sunt in creaturis, non esse in Deo formaliter, sed eminenter. Esse autem in Deo
formaliter secundum modum altiorem, qui omnem imperfectionem creatutarum
excludat. Disp. 30. Sect. 14. number. 7.


They are not in God formally in such a sense, or after such a manner, as they
are in the Creatures, but they are in him formally, in a higher way and manner,
which excludes all imperfections whatsoever of the Creatures.

Secondly, formal attributions may be opposed unto extrinsecall denominations.
Now the word foreknowledge, signifies something that agrees unto God
formally, and something that is ascribed unto him only by extrinsecall
denomination.

For the understanding of which we must observe, that it is one and the same
undivided knowledge, by which God without any the least alteration, understands
things whilst future, when present, when past, and this I affirm to be
ascribed unto God formally, because it is in him, and that by way of real
identity with his Essence, and all his other attributes.

But now this knowledge undergoes several appellations, which are attributed
unto it by extrinsecall denomination, from the various condition of the things
known, so long as the things themselves are to come, it is called
Foreknowledge, when they come, co-knowledge, after they are gone and past,
after-knowledge: D. Twisse against Jackson page 313, 314. I deny not then, but
that the formal denomination of foreknowledge is extrinsecall. Gods knowledge
is so denominated in regard of its preexistence unto the thing known: but that
which is affirmed of a thing only by way of extrinsecall denomination, may be
ascribed thereunto properly, which brings me unto a second Quaere.

Whether Foreknowledge is, or may be ascribed unto God properly?

The learned Assertors of the Protestant cause, you say, are at perfect
agreement with their adversaries the Papists in this, That prescience, or
foreknowledge, are not formally or properly in God. You will not deny D. Twisse
to be a learned Protestant, and how he dissents from this assertion which you
father upon all Protestants, you may read in his book against Doctor Jackson p.
316. The question only was (says he) whether foreknowledge might be properly
attributed unto God, in respect of things to come: now I see no reason (says
he) but it may, as well as it is attributed unto man. Amongst the Papists
Suarez comes behind few modern Schoolmen, and whether he thinks foreknowledge
not to be properly in God, let his own words inform you. Lib. 1. De Scientia
futurorum absolute cap. 7. In omni etiam proprietate certissimum est scientiam
Dei, sicut and Deum ipsum, duratione antecedere omnium rerum creatarum
existentiam. But Suarez is not herein singular. For the Schoolmen generally in
their Commentaries upon Aquinas, and Lombard in the places but now quoted,
having propounded this Question, An in Deo sit scientia futurorum etc. Resolve
it affirmatively: And as at other times, so especially in determinations, and
resolutions of questions, that Rule has place: Analogum per se positum stat
pro famosiori analogato; if a word have two significations, one proper, another
improper or Metaphorical, and it be put by it self without any thing to
determine, or limit it unto the improper acception thereof, it must be taken
properly. This to be the meaning of that rule Scheibler instructed me, when I
was a Puny in Philosophy. Met. lib. 2. cap. 6. number. 17. Respondeo, illam
propositionem, Analogum per se positum, hoc est, sine aliquo addito, stat pro
famosiori, valere solum de analogo proportionis, hoc est, quod de uno
praedicatur proprie, de alio improprie, per similitudinem, vel metaphoram, id
positum sine addito significat suum principale analogatum, veluti cum de risu
loquor, intelligo eum de risu hominis, non de risu prati. Austin in lib. 5. de
Civit. Dei. cap. 9. Censures the denial of Gods foreknowledge as a madness,
as a blasphemous, and Atheistical speech etc. And this he would never have
done, if he had thought as you, that foreknowledge is not properly in God: For
that which is ascribed unto God only improperly, metaphorically, and by an
Anthropopathy, as hands, eyes, ears, repentance, grief, etc. may without
madness, blasphemy, or Atheism, be denied of God in propriety of speech.

How have the Schoolmen toiled themselves, and puzzled their readers, about the
reconciliation of Gods foreknowledge of future Contingents, with the liberty of
man's will, and the contingency of things? This was a point that Armachanus
studied for twenty years space Twisse de Scientia Media. page 402. 403.
. Now had those men been so well read in ancient and Modern Divinity as you,
they would have eased themselves of this labor. For you assure us, that it is
the constant assertion both of ancient and Modern Divinity, that prescience or
foreknowledge are not properly in God. That this was reputed in the days of
Jeffery Chawcer, a difficult, nice, and controverted matter, which no one but
an Austin or a Bradwardine could thoroughly discuss, or bolt unto the branne,
appears by the verses of the said Chawcer, related by Sr Henry Savill, in his
Epistle prefixed to Bradwardine, which I shall here insert.

But what that God before wot, must needs be,
After the opinion of Certain Clerkis.
Witness of him that any Clerk is,
That in School is great altercation
In this matter, and great disputation,
And has been of an hundred thousand men.
But I ne cannot boult it to the bren,
As can the holy Doctor S. Austin,
Or Boece, or the Bishop Bradwardin.
Whether that Gods worthy foreweting
Sraineth me needly to do a thing,
(Needly clepe I simple necessity)
Or if the free choice be granted me
To do the same thing, or do it naught,
Though God forewot it or it was wrought.
Or if his weting straineth never a dele
But by necessite conditionele.
I will not have to done of such matere.
Had you lived in those times, you could easily have put an end to all this
great altercation; provided that they would have received that which you take
here for a principle, that foreknowledge is not properly in God. For if this
be so, then all disputation concerning the reconciling of Gods foreknowledge
with liberty and contingency is frivolous, and to no purpose.

What anxious disputes have been amongst the Schoolmen for many hundred years
continuance touching the manner or the ground of Gods foreknowing future
contingents? Bonaventure maintained that God did foreknow future contingents by
the Idea's of them in his mind. Aquinas made the ground of Gods foreknowing
them to be their presence or existence in eternity. Scotus his opinion was,
that God foreknows them by seeing the determination of his own will touching
their coming to pass. Other grounds of Gods foreknowledge of future
contingents are assigned by others, which you may find mentioned almost in
every Schooleman. Bellarm. l. 4. de great: and libero Arbitrio, and before him
Occam and Ariminensis were of an opinion, that the way, or manner of Gods
foreknowing future contingents, is a point that is incomprehensible, and
unexpressible in this life. Were you called to be an Umpier between these great
Schoolmen in this thorny, and knotty Question, you, instead of unloosing or
untying this Gordian knot, would like another Alexander have cut it in pieces,
and have told them that they disputed like a company of Buzzards concerning the
ground or manner of that which may in propriety of speech be denied of God.
Your opinion you see does not so fully accord with ancient and Modern
Divinity, as you pretend, and how dissonant it is from the truth will soon be
manifested, by bringing it unto the rule of Theological truth, the Scriptures,
in which the infallible prediction of things to come, do clearly and
abundantly witness, that foreknowledge is properly in God: for prediction
presupposes prescience, it being utterly impossible to foretell infallibly
what one does not foreknow certainly. Hereupon it was that Tertullian said
Deum, quot fecit Prophet as, tot habere testes praescientiae suae lib. 2.
contra Marcion. c. 5. That God has so many witnesses of his prescience, as he
has made Prophets. This infallible prediction of things to come is so proper
and peculiar unto God, as that thereby he distinguishes himself from all
false Gods. Esaias 41. 21, 22, 23. Produce your cause, says the Lord (unto the
Idols of the Gentiles) bring forth your strong reasons says the King of
Jacob; let them bring forth and show us what shall happen. Let the^ show the
former things what they he, that we may consider them, and know the latter end
of them or declare us things for to ^ome: show the things that are to come
hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods. He that is God can show the
things that are to come hereafter, and therefore he foreknowes them; for that
cannot be foretold, which is not foreknown. And that without a Metaphor, or any
other Trope.

From Scripture go we to natural reason, and that will prove, that
foreknowledge agrees properly unto God. Arguments of this sort may be drawn,
First from the nature of foreknowledge. Secondly from several attributes of
God. Thirdly from his actual providence or efficiency.

First, from the nature of foreknowledge. Foreknowledge is a knowledge of
things before their existence. And in God there is a knowledge of things before
their existence. Thou understandest (says David) my thoughts a far off.
Psalm. 139. 2. This argument you may find in D. Twisse against Jackson. p. 314.
Till things do coexist with God, his knowledge of them, says he, is
foreknowledge of them, as well as ours. For it is before them, and only before
them; for it is neither with them, nor after them. Not with them, for then they
should coexist with God, and that from all eternity, which is most untrue; for
if they did coexist with God, then they did exist, and that from all eternity,
which is most untrue. much less is it after them, for if so, then their
coexistence with God were past: but we suppose it to be to come. And impossible
it is that the same things should at once be both past, and also to come. You
have it also in Suarez in the place before quoted. In omni etiam proprietate
certissimum est scientiam Dei, sicut and Deum ipsum duratione antecedere omnium
rerum creat arum existentiam. It is most certain that the knowledge of God, as
well as God himself, does properly or in all propriety of speech antecede in
duration the existence of all created things whatsoever, and therefore it is
properly foreknowledge. Unto Suarez who is no enemy unto Arminianisme, I shall
add D. Jackson a professed Arminian arguing after the like manner in his
Treatise of the Divine essence and Attributes Sect. 2. Cap. 8. p. 105. If God
(says he) as all grant, be before all worlds, his knowledge being coeternall
to his being, must needs be before all worlds. And Austin himself grants a
scientia a science, or knowledge in God most infallible, of all things that
have been, are, or shall be, before they are, were, or could be; for they could
not be coeternall to him, who is before all worlds, the beginning of the World
it self, and of all things in it. Now all knowledge of things not yet present,
but to come, is foreknowledge: to determine or decree things future, is to
predetermine or fore-decree them. And seeing God from eternity has both known,
and decreed the things that then were not, he is said; to have foreknown and
fore-decreed them.

Secondly, Arguments proving foreknowledge to be properly in God may be taken
from Gods Attributes; from his infinite perfection, from his infinite
happiness, or blessedness, from his unchangeablenesse.

First, from his infinite perfection: He is of all beings the best, and most
perfect, Deus optimus maximus was a title that the ancient Romans by the light
of nature gave him. Nothing then can so much as be imagined to be better then
God. But it is better to know things to come, then to be ignorant of them, And
therefore we must either deny that there is a God, or else ascribe unto him the
knowledge of things to come. This is Doctor Twisse his argument De scientia
media page 246. Verum, si Deus is sit, quo nihil melius excogitari potest, and
melius sit cognoscere futura, and quicquid co gnoscibile est, quam ignorare;
videtur hinc sequi, aut Deum prorsus negandum esse, aut scientiam futurorum
contingentium ei tribuendam.

Secondly, from his infinite blessedness or happiness, which is such as that
he has all things desirable. But if he should not have known things to come
he should be without a perfection, desirable by every intelligent or rational
nature. This was Bradwardines argument; Si Deus quaedam vera nesciret, posset
desiderare and velle scire illa; omnis enim rationalis natura naturaliter scire
desiderat, quare and cum per partem proximam habeat voluntatem universaliter
efficacem, posset illa scire and non noviter; quia tunc non semper esset
actualissimus, scientissimus, perfectissimus, beatissimus, and immutailis
penitus, contra tertiam partem and sextam: necessario ergo aeternaliter omnia
vera novit.

Thirdly, from his unchangeablenesse, which is affirmable of all his other
Attributes, and consequently of his knowledge. But now his knowledge if it were
not of things whilst they were to come, it would by actual existence of them
be enlarged, and so changed. This argument is urged by Durand, Cumel, Rada,
Suarez, and others. God knows thing whiles present, for otherwise he should be
ignorant of that which men and Angels know, therefore he knew them whiles
future, otherwise by the presence of them, something de novo should accrue unto
Gods knowledge, which cannot be without a change. Constat (says Durand) quod
Deus cognoscit contingens dum est praesens, puta Socratem currere. alioquin ego
cognoscerem illud quod Deus ignoraret: si ergo non cognoscebat hoc prius quando
fuit futurum, sequeretur quod aliquid accrevisset suae scientiae quod est
impossible. In 1. lib. Distinct. 38. Q. 3.


Suarez also argues to the same purpose. Piaeterea declaratur hoc modo; quia
vel Deus scit haec contingentia, quando ponuntar in esse, vel non: Hoc
posterius nemo dicit, quia angelus, vel homo hoc cognoscit, saltem quando sunt
prasentia: Ergo multo magis Deus: si autem nunc illa cognoscit, Ergo and antea,
quia scientia Dei augeri non potest, Ita ut aliquid novum sub illam cadat, tum
propter immutabilitatem, tum eriam quia panlatim discere, quocunque modo siat,
magna imperfectio est; Confirmatur, quia si Deus in tempore aliquid de novo
inciperet velle, imperfectionem in illo indicaret: Ergo multo magis ^^ aliquid
de novo scire inciperet. Lib. 1. De Scientia^^turorum contingentium absoluta.
cap. 2.


The last sort of arguments which I shall mention, are drawn from Gods actual
providence or efficiency. God is the cause of all things, of him (says the
Apostle) are all things, Romans 11. 36. Now he is the cause of all things by his
knowledge, and by his will.

First by his knowledge, and that practical, which is resembled unto that of
an Artificer, who has a foreknowledge of what artificial works he resolves
upon; for he has samplers and patterns of them in his Cognitio divini
intellectus (says A^uin ^^) co^paratur ad res alias, sicut cognitio artificis
ad artificiata, cum per suam scientiam fit causa rerum. Artisex autem suae
artis cognitione etiam ea quae nondum sunt artificiara cognoscir, ^orm^ enim
artis ex ejus scientia efiluunt in exteriorem materiam ad artificiatorum
constiturionem: unde nihil prohibet in scientia artificis esse formas quae
nondum exterius prodierunt: sic igitur nihil prohibet, Deum, little quae non
sunt, notitiam habere. lib. 1. contra gentes cap. 66. Deus est causa omnium
rerum and futurorum contingentium, and liberorum (says Cumel) in primam partem
Sum. Q. 14. Art. 13. Disp. 1. Per suam scientiam practicam, ergo prius scit
and cognoscit futura couringentia and libera quam producantur and fiant; sicut
artisex prius haber ideam artificiati and cognoscit rem producendam and
e^^iciendam, quam efficiat and producat pos^ea ad extra in tempore; igitur Deus
qui artifex est universorum futurorum contingentium prius cognoscit futura
contingentia, quam illa in tempore fiant.
mind.

Rada propounds this argument very briefly. Deus omnia operatur ad extra, ut
artifex vero rem, antequam illam efficiat, praecognoscit: aliter enim
irrationabiliter operabitur. Part prima. Controv. xxx. page 487.


Secondly, the will of God is the cause of all things, as is demonstrated by
Bradwardine and by Aquinas and such as Comment upon him, in prim. part. Q. 19.
Art. 4. Now the will of God is unchangeable from within and irresistible from
without, and therefore in it all things future may be certainly and infallibly
foreknowne. Bradwardine (from Esaias. 46. 10. Declaring the end from the
beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, my
Counsel shall stand) inferres the infallibility of Gods prediction from the
firmness, immutability, and unresistiblenesse of his will. The Prophet
signifies, says he, that he can therefore declare the things that are not
done, because his Counsel shall stand, and he will do all his pleasure: Quasi
velit innuere, quod per hoc annuntiet, vei annuntiare possit ab exordio
novissimum, quia omne suum consilium and volunt as immutabiliter stabit, and
siet. De causa Dei. lib. 1. cap. 218. page 224. This argument Cumel inforceth
by comparison with man's foreknowledge of things in their causes. A
Mathematician can foreknow an Eclipse of the Sun or Moon in its cause, and
therefore much more can God foreknow all future contingents in the
determination of his own will. Effectus potest evidenter cognosci antequam in
tempore producatur in sua causa, sicut Eclipsis evidenter cognoscitur in sua
causa, antequam sit, a Mathematico, and ab Astrologo: sed Deus per seipsum and
per propriam voluntatem est causa omnium Entium contingentium, and liberorum,
and praedefinit illa futura contingentia and libera. Ergo Deus per seipsum and
per propriam scientiam, quam habet, cognoscit futura contingentia and libera.


As for the testimonies you bring in the Margent, they and diverse others are
alleged generally by the Dominicans, to prove the existence of things in
Eternity, and it is very strange unto me that you take no notice of the common
answers that are usually given unto them. The place out of Gregory is
misquoted, but that might be an escape of the Printer; in my book it is,
Moral. lib. 20. cap. 25. And a little after he gives the reason why prescience
is not properly in God. Praescire dicitur qui unamquamque rem, antequam veniat,
videt: Et id quod futurum est, priusquam praesens fiat, praevide^: Deus ergo
quomodo est praescius dum nulla nisi quae futura sunt, praesciantur? Et scim^^
quia Deo futurum nihil est, ante cujus oculos praeterita nulla sunt: praesentia
non transeunt, futura non veni, uni: Quippe quia omne quod nobis fuit and erit,
in ejus prospectu praesto est: Et omne quod praesensest, scire potest potius
quam praescire. The ground upon which both Austin and Gregory deny
foreknowledge to be in God is, because nothing is future but all things are
present unto God.

Unto all these and diverse other Testimonies which occur in the Dominicans,
I shall rehearse the answers of several men.

First, Rada, Par. prim. controv. triges. Art. 2. page 493. Adomnes
authoritaies unica solutione sit satis. Dico enim quod non intelligunt sancti,
omnia esse Deo secundum rem praesentia sed secundum esse objectivum and
cognitum: omnia enim in seipso videt and intu^tur.

Secondly, Suarez gives the same answer, but he explaines himself more fully:
The Fathers (says he) speak by way of exaggeration to declare the perfection
and exactness of that knowledge which God has of things to come, for he
knows them so distinctly, and accurately, with all their circumstances, as if
they did exist actually present. This knowledge of them therefore is not so
much abstractive as intuitive, not Parres per quandam exaggerationem locuti
sunt ut declararent perfectionem scientiae, quam Deus habet de futuris; nam
illa tam clare and distinct cum omnibus circumstantiis intuetur, ac si pra
sentia actu jam existerent: ideoq, scientia illa non est abstractiva, sed
propriissima intuitio. Ad hoc ergo significandum dixerunt illam non tam esse
dicendam praescientiam, quam scientiam. Nam more humano loquendo, quae
prasciuntur, non ita clare and distinct cognoscuntur. Nam Astrologus qui
praescit suturam esse Eclipsin, non apprchendit and cognoscit illum effectum
distinct prout in re futurns est cum omnibus conditionibus and circumstantiis
eius: and ideo non habet de illo scientiam intuitivam, sed abstractivam. At
vero Deus ram distinct intuetur futurum antequam sit, sicut quando est, tamque
veram scientiam intuitivam illius habet. Quocirca in eo sensu in quo illi
patres voluerunt illam scientiam proprie appellare praescientiam; Illa
particula Prae non solum excludit realem existentiam, sed etiam praesentiam
objectivam exactam, and omnimodam ^ffectus tie cogniti.
so much prescience as science.

Thirdly, D. Twisse De scientia media page 390. gives the same answer that
Bradwardine did unto the like saying out of Boethius and Anselme above 200
years ago, to wit, That all things are present unto God in esse volito as
decreed by him, sunt ei praesentia, id est per suam insuperabilem and
immutabilem voluntatem, praesentialiter determinata, and decreta
certitudinaliter ut fiant futura. And this you may see how he cleares both out
of Austin, and Gregory.

Fourthly, Becanus gives another answer which I take to be the more satisfying:
And it is, that the scope of both Austin, and Gregory is to show, That there is
not such a prescience or fore knowledge in God, as there is in us, viz
imperfect, and conjecturall. etc. Respondeo, scopus Augustini est ostendere non
esse talem praescientiam in Deo, qualis in nobis est. Nos enim imperfecte, and
quasi per coniecturas praescimus futura: at praesentia clare and perfect
cognoscimus. Deus autem tam perfect cognoscit futura, quam prasentia. Hic
patet discrimen inter nos and Deum. 1. Quia nostra cognitio perficitur ex
praesentia rerum: non autem Dei cognitio. 2. Quia res futurae sunt Deo
praesentes per praesentiam perfectam nobis per imperfectam 3. Quia nos eandem
rem bis cognoscimus: semel imperfecte, quando futura est, and semel perfect,
quando praesens est. At Deus semel tantum, quia cognitio Dei est aeque,
perfecta, sive res futura, sive praesens sit. Nec aliud vult Gregorius; uterque
negat praescientiam in Deo, qualis in nobis est. Sum. Theolog. Seolast. part.
1. Tom. 1. cap. 10. quest. 10.


From your Testimonies I come to the examination of your Reasons.

Mr GOODWIN.
NOR is it any wonder at all, that there should be peace, and a concurrence of
judgment about such a point as this, even between those who have many Irons of
co^^ention otherwise in the fire, considering how obvious and near at hand the
truth herein is. For 1. if foreknowledge were properly and formally in God,
then might Predestination, Election, Reprobation, and many other things, be
properly and formally in him also; in as much as these are in the Letter and
propriety of them, as competible unto him as foreknowledge. Nor can there be
any reason given for a difference. But unpossible it is, that there should be
any plurality of things whatsoever, in their distinct and proper natures, and
formalities, in God, the infinite simplicity of his Nature and being, with open
mouth gainsaying it:

IEANES.
YOur Argument with open mouth gainsayeth that which no body will affirm, but
is mute in the proof of that which only will be called for, to wit, That
whatsoever is properly and formally ascribed unto God, is really distinguished
from Gods Essence, and his other attributes. If you think I do you any wrong
by this censure, reduce your Argument unto Categoricall Syllogismes, and make
the best of it you can.

Mr GOODWIN.
SEcondly, if foreknowledge were properly or formally in God, there should be
somewhat in him corruptible, or changeable. For that which is supposed to be
such a foreknowledge in him to day, by the morrow, suppose the thing or event
foreknown, should in the interim actually come to pass, must needs cease, and
be changed, in as much as there can be no foreknowledge of things that are
present, the adequate and appropriate object of this knowledge (in the
propriety of it) being res futura, somewhat that is to come.

IEANES.
Several answers unto this trite and bafled argument you may read in
Schoolmen commenting in primam partem summae. Q. 14. Art. 15. I will not
trouble you with the rehearsal of them, but shall only propound that which I
take to be most plain and obvious unto even an ordinary capacity. We must
distinguish betwixt Gods knowledge considered in it self, and the extrinsecall
denominations thereof. Gods knowledge in it self is not changed by any
variation of its objects, which are one while future, and then present, and
anon after past and gone, but it is one and the same knowledge without any the
least alteration (ex part Dei cognoscentis) by which he knows things whiles
future, when present, when past; for he knows and sees them in esse volito pro
certo aut tali tempore, as decreed to existant such a time. And to know a thing
as decreed to exist at such a time, is to know that it shall be future until
that time come; that it shall be present as soon as that time comes, and as
long as it lasts; that it shall be past as soon as that time is gone and
cease to be: Quare licet aliter atque aliter cognoscat res futuras and
praesentes ex part rerum cognitarum, non tamen aliter atque aliter ex part
cognoscentis. Nam videre aliquid apud Deum in esse volito pro certo tempore,
est and videre illud futurum esse, donec tempus illud advenerit, and praesens
esse cum primum advenerit, and praeteritum esse simulatque tempus illud elapsum
fuerit. D. Twisse De Scientia Media. page 389. And again, page 26. Praesertim
cum sub notione ista, esse voliti pro certo tempore, caeterae notiones quales
sunt esse praesens, esse praeteritum, esse futurum, mirabiliter uniantur, and
amicissime conspirent; quippe cum esse volitum apud Deum pro certo tempore sit
and esse futurum, donec illud tempus advenerit; and esse praesens simulatque
advenerit and quamdin duraverit; and denique esse praeteritum, quam primum
tempus illud esse desierit. So then you see these various considerations of the
objects of Gods knowledge in regard of futurition, presence, preterition, are
admirably united in esse volito pro certo tempore, and therefore can be no
prejudice unto the immutability of his knowledge; whence it is become a
proverb in School Divinity, that God non aliter novit facta, quam stenda. But
though Gods knowledge be in it self immutable, notwithstanding the succession
that is in the coexistence of objects with it, as a rock in a river, stands
unmovable, notwithstanding the succession in the waters that glide by it, yet
this is no hinderance, but that there may be and is a change in the
extrinsecall denominations of Gods knowledge from the variation of the objects
thereof; so long as these objects are to come, Gods knowledge of them is termed
foreknowledge; when they actually exist, then it loses the denomination of
foreknowledge, and may be called co-knowledge; and so when they are past and
cease to be, it may be called after-knowledge. Now a change of these
extrinsecall denominations do not import any change in Gods knowledge in it
self, because as Vasquez tells us, Vera mutatio non accidit nisi per veram
receptionem, aut amissionem formae realis in ipsa re existentis. A real change
is by a true and real either receipt, or loss of a real form existing in a
thing it self.

Mr GOODWIN.
THirdly (and lastly) there is nothing in the creature univocally and formally
the same with any thing which is in God. The reason is, because then there must
either be somewhat finite in God, or somewhat infinite in the creature: both
which are impossible. But if prescience or foreknowledge (being properly and
formally in the creature) shall be properly and formally also in God, there
should be somewhat in the Creature univocally and formally the same, with
somewhat which is in God. Therefore certainly there is no foreknowledge,
properly so called, in God.

IEANES.
THe Minor of this Argument reduced into form, which you place first, will be
denied by the Scotists; The Major which you put in the second place, will be
denied generally by the Thomists.

As for the Minor of this Argument put in the first place, There is nothing in
the Creature univocally and formally the same with any thing which is in God.
This the Scotists deny, as you may see in Scotus himself lib. 1. Distinct. 3.
Q. 1. Distinct. 8. Q. 3. Rada part. 1. Controver. 21. Faber Faventinus
Philosoph. Natural. Theorem. 95. And they bring such subtle reasons as you
will confess, when you read them, to be worthy of an answer. As for your
reason, they are not within Gunshot of it. For these attributes which they
affirm to be in the Creature univocally the same with those in God, are to be
understood quoad communes non proprias rations, quoad conceptum convenientiae
non discrepantiae, In such a notion and consideration as is abstracted from
finite and infinite, and so more general then either God or the creature.
Conceptus communis (says Scotus) est ex se formaliter neuter respectu eorum
quibus est communis: But the objective conceit of these attributes, which
denominate God and the creature, is common unto God and the creature, and
therefore formally neither finite nor infinite, but abstracting from both. But
perhaps my dullness cannot pierce into the depth of this argument. You may do
well for my conviction to improve it unto the utmost, and yet, if I be not
mistaken, the uttermost that you can prove thereby is, that which will not be
denied unto you by the Scotists, to wit, that nothing, no not Fns, of all
predicates one of the most abstract and transcendentall, can be affirmed of God
and the creature univocally, in regard of a physical univocation. Rada part.
1. Controv. 21. Art. 1. page 328. 333. and that these attributes which
denominate God and the creature are predicated equivocally; if we speak of a
Whereas our Author p. 125. Of the first book of this Treatise affirms, that
every thing in common attributed to God and man, is much more equivocall then
the word Canis attributed to a Star, to a Fish, to a foure-footed creature on
the earth, if he be to be understood in regard not of this Physical, but of a
Logical equivocation. I must needs confess, that I dissent from him for
reasons that I shall presently specify.
Physical equivocation, it is manifest.

First, because the objective conceit of them, as denominating both God and
the Creature is one and the same, only by the abstraction of the understanding,
and not Physically or a part rei. This you have yielded unto by Scotus in
answer unto the objection of Henricus, that Primo diversa in nullo convenient,
sed Deus est primo diversus a quacunque creatura etc. Unto this Scotus answers
lib. 1. distinct. 8. Q. 3. Deus and Creatura non sunt primo diversa in
conceptibus; tamen sunt primo diversa in realitate, quia in nulla realitate
convenient. Et quomodo esse possit conceptus communis sine convenientia in re
vel in realitate, in sequenti dicetur. Deus and Creatura (says Rada a famous
Scotist) sunt primo diversa subjective, quia scilicet in nulla realitate per
differentias contrahibili convenient, sed non sunt primo diversa objective and
quoad intellectum, sicut nec december praedicamenta, quia Ens de eis praedicatur
in quid. part. 1. controver. 21. Art. 2. page 214.

Secondly, Physically and a part rei, there is a greater distance between God
and the creature, then there is between any creatures; for it is an infinite
distance. This is all which is proved by that reason of Bannes in 1. par. Thom.
Q. 13. Art. 5. That all created perfections in comparison of uncreated, are but
painted and umbratick, the best of created beings in comparison of God are but
shadows and pictures, Esaias 40. 17. All nations before him are as nothing, and
they are counted to him less then nothing. Omnis perfectio creata comparatione
ad increatam perfectionem, est quasi depicta and umbratica, Ergo etc.

The major of your Syllogism put into form, and placed in the second place,
to wit, (If prescience or foreknowledge being properly and formally in the
creature, should be properly and formally also in God, there should be somewhat
in the creature univocally and formally the same with somewhat that is in God)
will generally be denied by Thomists, who will acquaint you with a middle kind
of predication, betwixt equivocall and univocall, to wit, analogicall,
according unto which they affirm those attributes to be predicated, which
denominate both God and the creature. In 1. part. Thom. Q. 13. Art. 5. They
instance in Ens, which is properly and formally predicated of God and the
creature, and yet neither univocally nor equivocally but analogically, analogia
quae est per attributionem intrinsecam, and not only analogia proportionis, as
laughter is affirmed of a man and a green or flourishing meadow; nor yet only
analogia attributionis quae fit per extrinsecam denominationem, as when health
is predicated of a sensitive creature in the first place, as the subject in
which it is seated, and of meats, drinks, medicaments, urines, secondarily, in
reference unto, and by extrinsecall denomination from that health which is in a
sensitive creature, unto which they are referred either as causes or tokens of
it: see Suarez, Scheibler, Morisanus, Logic: Mexic.

To make this matter more plain, I shall distinguish of a twofold acception of
Univocall; one Logical, the other Metaphysicall.

First Logical, in which it is adequately opposed unto equivocall, and so every
predicate is univocall, that is, not purely, and merely equivocall, which
imparts only its name, and not any common signification thereof. Predicates
thus Univocall, are said to be Logically univocall, because this kind of
univocation is sufficient as to Logical ends and purposes, as for the framing
a contradiction, and to be the middle term in a demonstration.

Secondly, there is a Metaphysicall acception of Univocall, in which it is
inadequately opposed unto Equivocall, that is, partly unto Equivocall, and
partly unto Analogicall. An Equivocall predicate only imparts its name, and not
any common signification thereof. An Analogicall predicate imparts both its
name and signification unto the things of which it is predicated, but
unequally, in regard of that inequality, which is of essential dependency,
secundum prius and posterius, as they say; so Ens is predicated of substance,
and Accident; analogically of substance in the first place, and primarily, as
its principal analogate; of Accident in the second place, with attribution,
order, or reference unto, and dependence upon substance.

These things thus premised, I lay down these two conclusions, against which
whatsoever you object I shall be ready to answer.

The first conclusion, Diverse attributes, which denominate God, and the
Creature, are predicated of them univocally in a Logical acception of
Univocall, as it is adequately opposed unto Equivocall; that is, they are not
predicated of God, and the Creature, merely and purely Equivocally.

For first, not only the bare words, but a common and abstracted signification
of them is found both in God and the Creature, I might instance in Ens,
substance, goodness, wisdom, justice, etc.

Secondly, because otherwise nothing can be known, or demonstrated of God by,
or from the creatures, but still there would be the fallacy of equivocation, Ex
cognitione unius aequivocati nihil potest cognosci alterius: And this is as
well against the Philosopher, who proves many things demonstratively of God;
as against the Apostle Romans 1. 20. saying, The invisible things of him from the
creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even his eternal power, and Godhead, so that they are without
excuse. This is a reason given by Aquinas. p. 1. q. 13. art. 5. Nomina quae
dicuntur de Deo and creaturis, non dicuntur pure aequivoce ut aliqui dixerunt.
Quia secundum hoc ex creaturis nil possit cognosci de Deo, nec demonstrari, sed
semper incideret fallacia aequivocationis, and hoc est tam contra Philosophum
8. Phys. 12. Metaph. qui multa demonstrative de Deo probat, quam etiam contra
Apostolum dicentem. Roman. 1. Invisibilia Dei, per ea quae facta sunt,
intellect a conspiciuntur.

This is all that the Scotists can prove by their arguments, which they bring
to prove the Univocation of Ens, as predicated of God and the creature; and
this they fully and strongly prove. And indeed if the matter be well looked
into, the contention here between the Thomists and the Scotists, is a mere
strife of words, de modo loquendi.

The second conclusion, No attribute whatsoever denominating God and the
creature, is predicated of them univocally, as Univocall is opposed unto
Analogicall: for those attibutes which do agree unto God most properly, are
predicated of God, and the creature unequally, in point of essential order; of
God primarily, and independently, of the creature secondarily, and dependently,
with relation unto God. In God they are by his Essence, in the creatures but by
participation. This I might exemplify by instancing in that which is under
debate, infallible knowledge of things to come, that are contingent, is
affirmed of God chiefly, and in the first place; of the creature only
dependently upon, and derivedly from God: whereupon an infallible, underived,
and independent foreknowledge of future contingents is incommunicable unto any
creature. James 4. 14. You know not, says James, what shall be on the morrow.

Before I take my leave of this section, I shall desire you, that whereas I
affirm, that what words are attributable unto God properly, dicuntur de Deo
prius quam de creaturis, you would be pleased to understand it in regard of the
things, or perfections signified by those words, and not barely in regard of
their imposition. This limitation Aquinas puts unto the Question. p. 1. Q. 13.
art. 6. Nomina, quae proprie de Deo praedicantur, quantum ad rem significatam
per prius dicuntur de Deo, quam de creaturis, quia a Deo hujusmodi perfectiones
in creaturas manant; sed quantum ad impositionem nominis per prius a nobis
imponuntur creaturis, quas prius cognoscimus, unde and modum fignificandi
habent.

Mr GOODWIN page 29, 30. cap. 3. Sect. 3.
IF it be objected, that this argument lies as strong against the propriety of
knowledge, as of foreknowledge in God; in as much as foreknowledge is every
whit as Properly and Formally in the Creature, as knowledge; I answer

True it is, there is no knowledge neither in God, according to the precise and
formal notion of Knowledge, or in such a sense, wherein it is found in men.
And this the first and last of the three reasons mentioned do infallibly
demonstrate. Knowledge in the creature is a principle or habit, really and
essentially distinct from the subject, or soul, wherein it resideth: yea and
is capable of augmentation and diminution therein, and of separation from its
Whereas that which is called knowledge in God, neither differs really or
essentially from his nature, or from himself, but is really one and the same
thing with him (as will farther appear in the following Chapter) nor is it
either capable of growth, or of decay, or of separation. Only in this respect,
knowledge of the two, is more properly attributable unto God, then
foreknowledge, viz. because foreknowledge in the proper notion, or formal
conception of it, includes or supposes a liablenesse to a change or expiration
(viz. upon the coming to pass of the thing foreknown; which must of necessity
come to pass in time) whereas knowledge imports nothing, but what may be
permanent and perpetual, and so is (of the two) more appropriable unto him,
who changes not.

IEANES.
HEre you plainly flinch from that which is likely to be controverted between
us: for you have not so much as the shadow of an argument to prove, that
knowledge is not in God, according to the precise and formal notion of
knowledge: but you spend a whole Section in the proof of that, wherein you are
sure to meet with no adversary at all, viz. that there is no knowledge in God
in such a sense, wherein it is found in men; why Sir, the concession of this
will no ways advantage you, or prejudice us: it is the first part of your
disjunctive proposition that calls for proof, in which, why you are so silent,
I cannot guess, unless it be, that you are conscious of the falsehood of it,
and therefore dared not to propound it Categorically, but only disjunctively;
and the truth of disjunctive propositions is salved, if but one part of the^ be
true. So the^ perhaps you thought, how ever the World went you would be safe
and secure, as having two strings unto your bow. I will say no more of this,
but that it is very unlike M. Goodwin, thus to decline the combat, and run
unto the maintenance of a fort, where you could not reasonably expect so much
as one assaylant. If you be pleased to return into the field again, and come
up roundly to a charge, I mean a proof of that which you have not yet so much
as offered, or pretended to prove, viz. That there is no knowledge in God
according to the precise and formal notion of knowledge, I shall be willing
and ready to encounter you, and I do hope that by Gods assistance I shall be
able to stand the shock of all your Argumentation.

MR GOODWIN page 105, 106. Cap. 6. Sect. 14.
IT is the sense of one of the greatest Patrons of the adverse cause, that the
precept, or injunction of God, is not properly the will of God; Mandatum Dei
non est voluntas Dei proprie dicta; quia illo non tam significet quid ipse vult
fieri, quam quid nostri officii sit facere. D. Twisse. Vindiciae Gratiae etc.
p. 171.
because (says he) he does not hereby so much signify what himself wills to
be done, as what is our duty to do. I confess that no signification
whatsoever, whether of what a man wills, or decrees to be done, or of what
is the duty of another to do, can properly be said to be the will of the
signifier: but yet that will, wherewith, or out of which, God wills or
commands us to do, that which is our duty to do, is as properly his will,
as that whereby he wills, or decrees things to be done. My will, or desire,
that my Child should obey me, or, that he should prosper in the world, is as
properly my will, as that, whereby I will or purpose, to show the respects of a
father unto him in providing for him; being as proper, natural, and direct an
act of that principle or faculty of willing within m^, whereby I will the
latter, as that act it self of this faculty, wherein I will the latter, is.
For the Principle or faculty within me of willing, how numerous or different
soever the acts of willing, which I exert by virtue of this faculty, may be, is
but one and the same. And this faculty being natural, there can be no such
difference between the acts proceeding from it, which should make some to be
more proper, and others less; though some may be better, and others worse, But
this difference can have no place in the acts of the will of God. Therefore if
the precept, or preceptive will of God, be not properly his will; neither can
any other will of his, or any other act of his will, be properly such. If so,
then that will of God, or act of will in God, whereby he wills or injoyneth
faith and repentance, and consequently, salvation, unto all men, is as properly
his will as that whereby he wills the salvation of any man. Therefore if
there be any secret or unrevealed will in God, whereby he wills the
destruction of any man, at the same time when he wills the salvation of All
men, (be it with what kind of will soever) these two wills must needs
enter-feare, and contradict the one the other. Nor will that distinction of the
late mentioned Author salve a consistency between them, wherein he
distinguishes, between the Decree of God, and the thing decreed by him;
affirming, that the thing which God decrees, may be repugnant to, or
inconsistent with, the thing which he commands; though the decree it self
cannot be repugnant to the Command Rem a Deo decretam cum re a Deo mandata,
pugnare posse dicimus; decretum vero Dei cum mandato pugnare posse non dicimus.
Twisse ubi supra
. The vanity of this distinction clearly appears upon this common ground,
viz. that Acts are differenced and distinguished by their Objects. Therefore if
the object of Gods decreeing will, or the thing decreed by him, be contrary to
the thing preceptively willed, or commanded by him, unpossible it is but that
the two acts of his will, by the one of which he is supposed to will the one,
and by the other, the other, should digladiate, and one fight against the
other. Therefore certainly there is no such pair, or combination of wills in
God, as the distinction of voluntas signi, and beneplaciti (as applied in the
question in hand) does suppose. It is unpossible that I should inwardly and
seriously will, or desire, the death of my Child, and yet at the same time
seriously also will and injoyne the Physician to do the best to recover him.

IEANES.
D. Twisse is not singular herein, diverse great Schoolmen, Aquinas, Durand,
Cajetan, Bannes, Gregory de Valentia, and many others, say the same of not only
Gods command, but all other signs of the will of his purpose or good pleasure.
The words of some few of them, shall for the satisfaction of the reader be
inserted in the Margent; and the rather, because you in the 16 Section of this
Chapter, tell us, that the Schoolmen were the first coyners of this
distinction of Gods will in Voluntatem signi, and voluntatem beneplaciti: and
how their interpretation thereof, holds intelligence (as you speak) with that
sense of D. Twisse which you here impugn, the Reader may see Vindic. Lib. 1.
page 173, Dicendum quod in Deo quaedam dicuntur proprie and quaedam secundum
Metaphoram, cum autem aliquae passiones humanae in divinam praedicationem
metaphorice assumuntur, hoc fit secundum similitudinem effectus, unde illud
quod est signum talis passionis in nobis, in Deo nomine illius passionis
Metaphorice significatur; sicut apud nos irati punire consueverunt, unde ipsa
punitio est signum irae, and propter hoc ipsa punitio nomine irae significatur,
cum Deo attribuitur. Similiter id quod solet esse in nobis signum voluntatis,
quandoque Metaphorice in Deo voluntas dicitur, sicut cum aliquis praecipit
aliquid, signum est, quod velit illud fieri; unde praeceptum divinum quandoque
Metaphorice voluntas Dei dicitur, secundum illud Matthaei 6. Fiat voluntas tua,
sicut in coelo and in terra; sed hoc distat inter voluntatem and iram, quia ira
de Deo nunquam proprie dicitur, cum in suo principali intellectu includat
passionem, voluntas autem proprie de Deo dicitur, and ideo in Deo distinguitur
voluntas proprie, and Metaphorice dicta, voluntas enim proprie dicta vocatur
voluntas beneplaciti; voluntas autem Metaphorice dicta est voluntas signi, eo
quod ipsum signum voluntatis voluntas dicitur. Aq^in. part. 1. Sum. Qu. 19.
art. 11.

Communiter dicitur quod distinctio voluntatis divinae in voluntatem
beneplaciti, and in voluntatem signi, est distinctio voluntatis in voluntatem
proprie dictam, and Metaphorice, nam voluntas beneplaciti est voluntas proprie
dicta, vel actus suus volendi, quo aliquid fibi placet, sed voluntas signi
dicitur Metaphorice voluntas Dei, eo modo quo signum nominatur Metaphorice
nomine rei, cujus est signum, ut imago Herculis vocatur Hercules

Et h^c potest esse dupliciter, uno modo ratione similitudinis inter signum and
signatum ut in exemplo jam posito; alio modo ratione proportionis quasi
arguendo, Quod ficut se habent signum and signatum in uno, sic se habeant in
alio; and sic est in proposito nostro: Quia enim in nobis ille qui praecipit,
vel consulit aliquid fieri, videtur illud velle: similiter qui prohibet aliquid
fieri, videtur velle illud non fieri; qui autem aliquid facit, vult illud
fieri, qui vero permittit aliquid fieri cum possit impedire, videtur illud
velle; ideo in Deo idem ponitur scilicet quod praeceptum, consilium,
prohibitio, operatio, and permissio sunt, vel dicuntur voluntas divina propter
dictam similitudinem vel magis proportionem. Durand. lib. 1. did. 45. Q 3.

Haec divisio divinae voluntatis in voluntatem beneplaciti, and voluntatem
signi, non est univoci in univocata, sed analogi in analogata. Nam de signo
divinae voluntatis non dicitur voluntatis nomen nisi Metaphorice, and
analogice, propter habitudinem illius ad voluntatem divinam proprie dictam.
Quam rem aliis verbis Cajetanus expressit in hac quaestione. Art. 11. Cum dixit
non dividi hic rem aliquam, sed vocem ipsam, seu nomen divinae voluntatis
Gregori de Valentia. Tom. 1. Disp. 1. Q. 19. punct. 2.


174.

Some of them profess in terminis, that the will of sign or signification, is
called the will of God only improperly, and metaphorically by way of similitude
or proportion, and therefore the distribution of Gods will into a will of sign
and will of purpose or good pleasure is not real, but only verbal, divisio
vocis; from whom they do not dissent, who say that it is divisio Analogi in
analogata. For as Scheibler a Lutheran, and of your opinion for the maine in
these controversies, observes, that they are to be understood of such an
analogy which is by extrinsecall reference and denomination. Intelligunt enim
eam analogiam, quae est per extrinsecam habitudinem and denominationem.
Voluntas enim signi vocatur voluntas extrinseca denominatione, in quantum
scilicet significat beneplacitum divinum, quod absolute est voluntas Dei, ad
eum modum quo multa dicuntur sana, per habitudinem ad santitatem animalis, quae
primo talis est: Metaph. lib. 2. cap. 3. tit. 15. art. 4. punct. 2. n. 535.

For the will of sign is called will by extrinsecall denomination, as it
signifies Gods good pleasure or decree (which absolutely is the will of God)
after the same manner that many things are said to be healthy or wholesome, in
regard of reference unto the health of a sensitive creature, unto whom health
is in the first place properly and intrinsecally attributed.

Unto these suffrages of the Schoolmen, I shall add reasons drawn from three
attributes of Gods will properly so called; It is internal, eternal,
irresistible, and Gods precept or injunction is external, temporary, and
resistible.

1. Gods will properly so called is internal in God, really undistinguished
from his Essence, whereas Gods precepts or injunctions, are external without
him, really distinguished from him.

2. The proper will of God was from eternal, the commands of God are given in
time.

From the Eternity of Gods will, I shall also draw this following Argument.

The will of God properly so called is incapable of interruption, reiteration,
and multiplication, for in eternity there is a most absolute and perfect unity
and indivisibility without any succession of parts, but now the Commands of God
may be very often reiterated and multiplied, precept upon precept, precept upon
precept, line upon line, line upon line. Esaias 28. 10. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
how often would I have gathered thy children together. Math. 23. 37.

3. The will of God properly so called is irresistible, Who has resisted his
will. Romans 9. 19. Whatsoever the Lord pleased that did he in heaven and in
earth, in the Sea and all deep places. Psalm. 135. 6. The Counsel of the Lord
must stand and cannot be withstood. By all the powers of the World and
darkness my counsel (says the Lord) shall stand, and I will do all my
pleasure Esaias 46. 10. But now Gods precepts and prohibitions are every day
violated, broken and resisted by wicked men.

Unto these reasons I might add your own confession, I confess (say you) that
no signification whatsoever, whether of what a man wills or decrees to be
done, or of what is the duty of another to do, can properly be said Praelatus
enim religiosus quandoque praecipit subdito aliquid grave, volens eum per
praeceptum ligare, and tamen nec vult, nec intendit, quod res quam praecipit
fiat; unde cum subditus parat se ad exequendum praeceptum, Praelatus revocat;
ita quod Praeceptur est direct signum voluntatis praecipientis quod velit
obligari subditum ad exequ^ndum praeceptum, sed non est direct signum quod
velit rem praeceptam impleri; talia enim praecepta sunt vel ad sumendum
experimentum de obedientia subditi, vel ad ostendendum pluribus obedientiam
unius quasi pro exemplo.
to be the will of the signifier.

But now I subjoyne, Gods precept or injunction is only a sign of his will,
and therefore however it be usually termed in Scripture the will of God Mat. 6.
10. Mat. 7. 21. Romans 12. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. It is to be understood only
improperly and Tropically; and that first Metaphorically, 2. Metonymically.

First Metaphorically, and by an Anthrop^pathy, when God commands a thing, he
carries himself as men do, when they purpose, will, desire, and determine
that such a thing should come to pass; for amongst men usually their commands
are manifestations and declarations of their purposes and desires; I say
usually, because sometimes superiors injoyne some things to inferiors only for
trial, and, upon their readiness to obey, recall and revoke such commands.
How Gods commandments and other signs of his will, are the will of God
Metaphorically, Aquinas illustrates in the place but now quoted; seeing
passions are ascribed unto God only Metaphorically, hence the signs of such
passions in us, when ascribed unto God, are called by the names of the passions
themselves. Punishment is with us a sign of Anger, and therefore Gods
punishments are termed his wrath or anger; so our commands are signs usually
of our wills, of our desires, and intentions, and therefore the commands of God
are termed in Scripture the will of God.

But I think with D. Ames, that the commandments of God are termed the will of
God, not only Metaphorically, but also Metonymically, because they are signs
of a proper will of God. Media illa (says Ames) per quae voluntas ista
r^^elatur, recte vocantur voluntas signi, non tantum Metaphorice, quia solent
inter homines indicare quid velint: sed etiam Metonymice, quia sunt vel
effecta, vel adjuncta, propriam Dei voluntatem ex part indicantia. Medul. lib.
1. c. 7. 53. And this also is observed by D. Twisse, in his consideration of
the Doctrine of the Synod of Dort and Arles reduced to the practice, p. 54. Now
we say, even Gods commandment notes the will of God also in proper speech, to
wit, what shall be our duty to do; for undoubtedly whatsoever God commands us,
it is his will in proper speech, that it shall be our duty to do it. However
then, it is the sense of D. Twisse, that the commandment of God cannot
properly be said to be his will, yet he does not deny that it signifies or
betokens the will of God properly so called, in which regard it is termed the
revealed will of God, because it reveals Gods will: all the Question is, what
will of God it reveals or signifies. D. Twisse (you see) roundly expresses
himself, that it signifies, or reveals Gods will of obligation, what he
will oblige and bind men unto; what he will have to be their duty: but it does
not at all signify the will of Gods purpose concerning what shall come to pass
actually; it does not signify Gods will of operation or permission, i. e. it
does not reveal what good God has decreed to work, what evil he has
decreed to suffer or permit in all those to whom his commands are given;
briefly, it signifies or reveals man's duty, and Gods will of obliging unto
it. Mic. 6. 8. He has showed thee O man what is good, and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God. Obad. 12. 13. 14. It does not reveal the event or issue of things
what shall actually be, by Gods working or permitting providence; This you have
asserted by Durand an ancient Schooleman, Praeceptum (says he) non semper
indicat voluntatem praecipientis, qua praecipiens velit rem praeceptam fieri,
sed illam qua praecipiens vult obligare illum, cui praecipit, ad faciendum quod
praecipitur, and hoc and semper. And a little before in the same place,
Praeceptum non est direct and semper signum quod praecipiens velit rem
praeceptam fieri, sed solum quod velit subditum obligare ad faciendum illud
quod praecipitur, and hoc clarum est in praeceptis divinis, per quae Deus vult
simpliciter nos obligare, sed non vult simpliciter rem praeceptam fieri,
alioquin semper fieret. Lib. 1. did. 47. Qu. 3. Gods command unto Pharaoh,
that he should let Israel go, signified only his duty, that he was bound to
let Israel go, not the event, that he should actually consent unto their
departure. Gods command of Cain, Judas, etc. to believe, and repent, did not
signify that God did will the actual existence of their faith and repentance,
but only that it was his purpose to bind them to faith and repentance as a
duty. And thus you have a confirmation and clear explication of D. Twisse his
meaning, against which your discourse in this Section, if it were reduced unto
Syllogismes, would not conclude with the least show of probability.

Mr GOODWIN.
BUt yet that will wherewith, or out of which God wills or commands us to
do that which is our duty to do, is as properly his will, as that whereby he
wills or decrees things to be done.

IEANES.
FIrst, here you make to will and to command terms equivalent or Synonimous
(as you do afterward to will and to injoyne) which is very unreasonable, for
it is the very thing in question, and D. Twisse affirms, that to command is to
will only improperly, and therefore equivocally. For you then to use to Will
and Command, as words of the same import and signification, before you have
proved them to be so, serves for nothing but to breed confusion, distract the
Reader, and disturb the course of Disputation.

Secondly, I confess that the will wherewith, or out of which God commands
us to do that which is our duty to do, is as properly his will, as that,
whereby he wills or decrees things to be done; for they are one and the same
will really, distinguished only ratione ratiocinat^, by their objects, in
regard of our manner of conceiving. And if any one in imitation of your
subtilty in the following part of this Section, should object, that acts are
differenced, and distinguished by their objects, therefore if the object of
that will, wherewith, or out of which God commands us to do that which is
our duty to do, be really distinguished from the object of that will, whereby
he decrees things to be done, unpossible it is, but that these two wills of
his, should be also really distinguished, I shall for answer refer them unto
Ferrariensis upon Aquinas contra gentes lib. 1. c. 77. Adverte quod ex ista
probatione (viz.) (that actus secundum objecta distinguntur) vult habere, S.
Tho. quod distinguibile proportionatum objecto est actus; and ideo si plura
objecta faciant aliquam pluralitatem, illa erit actuum pluralitas: Non autem
intendit, quod per quaecunque plura objecta plurificentur actus. Unde sensus
illius propositionis est, quod actus est id quod proprie and primo
plurificatur, quando pluralitas objectorum aliquam pluralitatem inducit. The
sense of this proposition, Acts are differenced and distinguished by their
objects, is, that if many, or different objects do infer any plurality or
distinction, it is only of acts; not that every plurality, or distinction of
objects does always argue a plurality or distinction of acts.

3. But thirdly, this concession will not in the least degree advantage you;
for the inference that you make afterward, That if the precept of God be not
properly his will, neither can any other will of his be properly such; for no
rational and Scholasticall Divine will deny Gods decree, of things to be done,
to be properly his will; and I have made it good, that Gods commandment is not
properly his will, and you bring nothing like an argument to prove the
contrary: but in the next place, you illustrate this by a comparison from the
acts of willing, proceeding from the principle, or faculty within man of
willing, let us hear what you say.

Mr GOODWIN.
Mr will or desire that my Child should obey me, or that he should prosper in
the World, is as properly my will, as that, whereby I will or purpose to show
the respects of a Father unto him in providing for him: being as proper,
natural, and direct an act of that principle or faculty of willing within me,
whereby I will the latter, as that act it self of this faculty, wherein I will
the latter, is. For the principle or faculty within me of willing, how numerous
or different soever the acts of willing, which I exert by virtue of this
faculty, may be, is but one and the same. And this faculty being natural,
there can be no such difference between the acts proceeding from it, which
should make some to be more proper and others less, though some may be better,
and others worse, but this difference can have no place in the acts of the will
of God.

IEANES.
FOr answer, I shall distinguish betwixt the Flicite acts of the will, which
proceed from the will, as their only and immediate principle, and such acts of
the will as are only imperate, that is, performed at the beck and command of
the will, but proceeding immediately from other faculties v. g. the
understanding, loco-motive faculty, the parts and members of the body, etc. as
walking, speaking, writing, and the like. Now I confess there can be no such
difference between the elicite acts of men's wills, which should make some to be
more proper, and others less: But yet notwithstanding this I affirm, that the
imperate acts of men's wills, such as their injunctions, and precepts, whether
by tongue, pen, or otherwise (to give an instance pertinent to the business
in hand) are not called properly acts of their wills; and this I shall not
dictate, but confirm by these three following arguments.

First, every act of the will properly so called, is voluntary, intrinsecally,
and of it self, but now these imperate acts of the will are voluntary only
extrinsecally, by denomination from an act of the will moveing, stirring up,
and applying the power or faculty from which they proceed unto operation.

2. Those acts which proceed from other faculties, distinguished really from
the will, are not properly acts of the will, or acts of willing (as you phrase
it) but these imperate acts of the will proceed from other faculties really
distinguished from the will, and therefore cannot properly be said to be acts
of the will, and of these faculties too.

3. The acts of the will, are not properly objects of acts of the will. The act
of willing is not properly a thing willed, a decree is not decreed. Actus
(says Suarez) qui per seipsum est intrinsece voluntarius, non comparatur ut
proprium objectum, vel effectus ad illum actum, quo est voluntarius, quia est
voluntarius seipso, and non est proprie objectum vel effectus sui ipsius: habet
ergo aliud objectum in quod direct tendat, and est effectus potentiae, a qua
elicitur, and solum per quandam virtualem reflectionem, quam in se includit,
est voluntarius: unde dici solet volitus per modum actus, non per modum
objecti. Met. Disp. 19. Sect. 5. n. 17. But these imperate actions of the will
are properly objects of the will, and things willed, and therefore cannot in
strictness and propriety of speech be said to be acts of the will.

M. GOODWIN.
THerefore if the precept or preceptive will of God be not properly his will,
neither can any other will of his, or any other act of his will be properly
such.

IEANES.
I Have searched for the premises out of which you infer this conclusion, and
I must needs profess unto you, that I can find none: it is possible the fault
may be in the dullness of my understanding, and you shall find me willing and
ready to confess as much, if you will put your argument into Mood and Figure
for me, and conclude this proposition out of any thing you have delivered in
the former part of this Section.

Mr GOODWIN.
IF so, then that will of God, or act of will in God, whereby he wills or
injoyneth faith and repentance, and consequently salvation unto all men, is as
properly his will, as that whereby he wills the salvation of any man.

IEANES.
FIrst, until you can find a Major and Minor unto your former conclusion, this
which is inferred therehence is presumed and not proved.

2. You here make Wills and Injoyneth all one, concerning the
unreasonablenesse of which, I have spoken already.

3. I wonder what you mean in talking of an act of will in God, whereby he
injoyneth faith and repentance, The injunction or precept of faith and
repentance, is an act without God, not in him, and belongs unto his will, not
formally, but effectively.

4. Your mentioning of an act of will in God, has occasioned me to think of
some thing, which for clearing of mine own meaning, and avoiding of mistakes, I
shall communicate unto the Reader: And it is carefully to put a distinction
betwixt these two expressions, To be properly the will of God, and To be
properly an act of the will of God.

That Gods decrees are properly the will of God, may be demonstrated out of
most Schoolmen; that they are properly acts of Gods will I deny, and that for
two reasons.

1. If Gods decrees were properly acts of his will, then his will were properly
a power, But his will is not properly a power, for will is ascribed unto God,
not as a power distinct from the act, but as an act not elicite but subsisting:
And here I shall give you the words and reasons of Suarez, then whom there are
few Modern Schoolmen more rational. He having proved that the will is not in
God per modum potentiae secundum rem, sed per modum actus ultimi and puri, he
propounds the doubt secundum rationem, and modum concipiendi nostrum, wherein
hear his resolution. In hoc eodem modo loquendum est, quo de intellectu and
scientia locuti sumus, quod scilicet ex part rei conceptae, non potest concipi
potentia volendi in Deo, quia non potest concipi potentia agendi vel recipiendi
ad intra. Nec fingi potest quod sit potentia ad agendum and recipiendum, non
secundum rem, sed secundum rationem; quia loquendo ex part rei conceptae
involvitur repugnantia in his terminis; nam agere secundum rationem, non est
agere, sed fingere actionem. Ex part autem modi concipiendi nostri, concipimus
in Deo aliquid ad eum modum, quo in creaturis concipimus potentiam volendi,
scilicet virtutem amandi se, ut sic, quam praescindimus ab actuali amore, sicut
de actu primo and secundo in scientia diximus.

But here I desire to be understood, as Franciscus Amicus explicates himself
touching this particular Curs. Theol. Tom. 1. Disp. 14. Sect. 1. Dupliciter
considerari potest potentia vitalis; uno modo, ut dicit distinctionem ab actu;
secundo, ut importat positivam perfectionem percipiendi aut tendendi ad
objectum; primo modo involvit imperfectionem Deo repugnantem; secundo modo
perfectionem Deo convenientem. Quare concedo in Deo esse voluntatem, secundum
positivum conceptum potentiae; Nego autem esse potentiam, secundum
imperfectionem distinctionis ab actu secundo, quam potentia ut sic per se
importat. The power of willing may be considered two manner of ways; First, as
it implies distinction from its act; and so it involveth imperfection
repugnant unto God, Secondly, as it imports a positive perfection of tendency
toward its object or thing willed, and so it may be attributed unto God.

2. If Gods decrees were properly acts of Gods will, then they should be
properly Elicite acts, but they are not properly elicite acts, but subsisting.
^nunciantur fateor (says our Author) tanquam actus a Deo eliciti, and sic dici
possunt per anthropopathiam, quemadmodum and passiones humanae attribuuntur
Deo. At eruditi probe norunt omnia decreta Dei esse unicum duntaxat actum
volendi in Deo, qui quidem actus volendi non differt realiter ab ipsa voluntate
Dei, quae quidem voluntas Dei non differt realiter ab ipso Deo, qui est actus
simplicissimus. Vind. lib. 2. p. 2. p. 101. But I return from this digression
unto M. Goodwin.

M. GOODWIN.
THerefore if there be any secret, or revealed will of God, whereby he wills
the destruction of any man, at the same time when he wills the salvation of
all men, (be it with what kind of will soever) these two wills must needs
enterfeere and contradict one the other.

IEANES.
THis you gather from what you have not at all proved, but only pretended to
have proved, viz. that the precept or injunction of faith and repentance, is
properly the will of God. And for the contrary I have brought undeniable
proofs, and therefore though there be any secret or unrevealed will in God,
whereby he wills the destruction of any man, at the same time, when he
wills or enjoyneth his faith and repentance, those two wills do not as you
say enterfeere or contradict one the other. For unto contradiction it is
required, that all the terms must be taken in the same sense and
signification; now this condition is not here observed: For that he wills the
destruction of any man, is with a will in proper speech, that he wills the
faith and repentance of all men, unto whom the Gospel is preached, is with a
will improperly so called, viz, his commandment.

Mr GOODWIN.
NOr will that distinction of the late mentioned Author, salve a consistency
between them, wherein he distinguishes betwixt the decree of God, and the
thing decreed by him; affirming, that the thing which God decrees may be
repugnant to, or inconsistent with the thing that he commands, though the
decree it self cannot be repugnant to the command. Rem a Deo decretam cum re a
Deo mandata pugnare posse dicimus, decretum vero Dei cum mandato pugnare posse
non dicimus. Tuisse ^^^ sup.


IEANES
THis is not barely affirmed, but strongly proved by D. Twisse, and of his
proofs you take no notice, but only object against what he says: This if it
be a laudable, is a very easy, and compendious way of handling a controversy,
for it would save a man the labor of that, which has still been accounted the
most difficult task in Polemicall Writers, to wit, solution of Arguments; but
I shall acquaint the Reader with what you conceal, and I do not doubt, but
upon representation thereof, he will acquit the Doctor, and his distinction,
from that vanity which you lay to his charge. Rem a Deo decretam cum re a Deo
mandata, pugnare posse dicimus; interea decretum Dei cum mandato pugnare posse
non dicimus; uirumque demonstramus. Rem a Deo decretam cum re a Deo mandata
pugnare posse, sic oftendimus; sacrificatio Isaaci and non-sacrificatic Isaici
pugnant inter se, sunt enim termini contradicentes. At harum altera fuit a Deo
mandata Abrahamo, uti docet Scriptura, simulque eodem tempore non-sacrificatio
fuit a Deo decreta, ut colligitur ex eventu. Nam Deus eam efficaciter
impedivit, ne fieret. Quare res a Deo mandata, pugnare potest cum re a Deo
decreta. Rursus, dimissio populi Israelitici ex Aegypto, and non-dimissio
pugnant inter se, sunt enim sibi invicem contradicentes: at altera, nempe
dimissio, fuit a Deo mandata Pharaoni; altera, puta non-dimissio, fuit a Deo
eodem tempore decreta. Nam and mandavit Pharaoni per Mosem and Aaronem ut
populum dimitteret; simul etiam significavit, se obduraturum cor Pharaonis, ut
non dimitteret; ergo res a Deo mandata, pugnare potest cum re a Deo decreta.

That things commanded and decreed by God, may be contradictory, the Doctor
proves by undeniable instances. The sacrificing of Isaac, and the not
sacrificing of Isaac, are terms contradictory; but the sacrificing of Isaac
was the object of Gods command to Abraham. Genesis 22. 2. The not sacrificing of
Isaac was the object of Gods decree, as appears by the event. v. 11. 12.
Therefore the object of Gods commandment, and the object of his decree, may be
contradictory. Again, the letting of Israel go out of Egypt, and the not
letting of Israel go out of Egypt are terms contradictory; but the letting
of Israel go was commanded unto Pharaoh, his not letting of Israel go was
decreed and determined by God. Exodus 7. 2, 3. and 10. 1, 2. God told Moses that
he would harden Pharaohs heart, that he should not let Israel go. Therefore a
thing commanded by God, and a thing decreed by God, may be contradictory.
Concerning the first of these instances, you say something page 451, 452. But
there is nothing argumentative in what you say, but may receive an answer from
your own rule of interpreting Scripture. page 92. 99. 108. 109. In the next
place the Doctor proves, that the commandments and the decrees of God are not
repugnant. Nec tamen decretum pugnare cum mandato, sic probamus. Mandato
significat Deus quid sit nostri officii, ut a nobis fieri debeat; decretum vero
divinum nihil aliud est, quam propositum divinum de aliquo, ut vel fiat, vel
impediatur ne fiat, idque efficaciter. Mandatum docet quid ipse probaturus sit,
si modo ab homine fiat, quid improbaturus si non fiat: decretum statuit quid
ipse facturus sit, aut impediturus, ne sit. Ista autem non pugnant; tui est
officii ut hoc facias, sed non est mei propositi per gratiam efficere ut
facias. Pari ratione potest Deus mandare alicui fidem, and resipiscentiam, and
interea apud se statuere, quod non credat, aut resipiscat, negando scilicet
gratiam efficacem, qua sola fieri potest ut credat aut resipiscat.

God by his command signifies, and shows what is our duty, what ought to be
done, or left undone by us; Gods decree is nothing else, but his purpose that
things shall come to pass, or not come to pass; the command teaches, what
God will approve or disapprove; his decree determines, what he himself will
do or hinder, etc. Now these are no ways repugnant. It is thy duty to do
this, but it is not Gods purpose to give thee grace for the doing of it: Thou
art bound or obliged to do this, but yet thou shall never actually do it:
faith and repentance are thy duty, and yet thy faith and thy repentance shall
never actually exist, or come to pass. By this that the Doctor has said it is
plain, that there is no opposition between Gods command to all that hear the
Gospel, believe, and repent, and his purpose of denying faith and repentance
unto many, nay most of them. And thus you see what the Doctor has to say for
himself, let us next hear what you can say against him.

Mr GOODWIN.
THe vanity of this distinction clearly appears upon this common ground,
viz. that acts are differenced and distinguished by their objects, therefore if
the object of Gods decreeing will, or the thing decreed by him, be contrary
unto the thing preceptively willed or commanded by him, impossible it is, but
that the two acts of his will, by the one of which he is supposed to will the
one, and by the other the other, should digladiate and one fight against the
other.

IEANES.
FIrst, here again you perplexe the disputation with talking of two acts of
Gods will, but supposing that by one of them you mean Gods decree which is in
him, and by the other his commandment which is without him, performed usually
by the Ministry of the creature, and therefore not his will properly so called,
I utterly deny the consequence of your argument, and how just and reasonable
this my denial thereof is, will appear, if you please to reduce your
Enthymeme into a Categoricall Syllogism, for then you will find the proof of
its consequence to depend on this, That whatsoever acts are differenced and
distinguished by their objects, do digladiate and one fight against the other;
and this is a proposition so grossly false, as that I am very confident you
cannot back it with so much as one, either testimony or reason. That acts are
differenced and distinguished by their objects, is a common and received rule;
but that all acts are opposite, whose objects are repugnant, is an assertion
that as yet I never so much as read or heard of in any either Philosopher or
Divine; and it is this alone will serve your turn to conclude a digladiation or
repugnancy between the Decree and the Command of God from the opposition that
D. Twisse admits to be between the things Decreed and the things Commanded.

2. If we take opposition and repugnancy as the Ramists, who divide it into
disparation and contrariety, we may safely say, that Gods decree and his
commandment are things opposite, for they are disparate; but this will no wise
prejudice D. Twisse, who speaks in the language of the followers of Aristotle,
neither will it any ways advantage you, for the opposition or repugnancy that
is between things disparate is only as touching an essential predication one
of another, we cannot say that Grammar is Logic, or that temperance in a man
is fortitude, and so we cannot say that Gods decree is his commandment, or his
commandment is his decree: not of a denominative or concretive predication of
the same subject: the same man may be valiant, and temperate, a Grammarian and
a Logician. See Scheibler Top. cap. 14. n. 7. and cap. 15. n. 19.

MR GOODWIN.
IT is impossible that I should inwardly and seriously will or desire the death
of my Child, and yet at the same time seriously also will and injoyne the
Physician to do his best to recover him.

IEANES.
IF you would hereby insinuate, that we affirm, that God does inwardly and
seriously will or desire the death or damnation of his Children, and yet at the
same time also seriously injoyne his Ministers, who are spiritual Physicians,
to do their best to recover them out of the snare of the Devil, you do
wonderfully misconceive and misreport our opinion; for we say, that unto none
has he given power, right, or privilege to be his Sons, but unto such as
believe on his name; and all those who believe, he has ordained unto eternal
life, and will keep by his power unto salvation; but of this see our Author,
In the first Book of this Treatise. p. 133. 134. 137.

What has been said is sufficient to convince him, that will not wilfully and
obstinately shut his eyes against the light, that the command of all who hear
the Gospel to believe and repent, and the purpose of God to deny faith and
repentance unto many, are not contradictory. I shall, before I discharge my
self of this Section, evince as much briefly concerning this latter purpose,
and that purpose or decree out of which the command proceeds, and which is
signified thereby.

Here we must premise, that the commandment of God does signify a decree or
decreeing will of God, though not such a decree or will as the Arminians
usually shape for themselves. 1. It signifies the decree of God concerning the
commandment it self, 2. Concerning the thing commanded.

First then, the command of God signifies Gods will or decree of the
commandment it self, of the external transient act of commanding. Ephesians. 1.
11. God works all things after the Counsel of his own will. Gods commanding
then of things in time, is a sign that from everlasting he did decree to
command them. But secondly, It signifies a will or decree of God also
concerning the thing commanded, viz, as touching the obligation to it, not as
touching the existence or nonexistence of it, it signifies, that God from
everlasting did decree, that the thing commanded should be man's duty, should be
a thing Morally good, but it does not signify or reveal, that the thing
commanded should actually exist, and be performed by every one unto whom the
command is propounded. Indeed the obedience of the elect, for whose salvation
only the commands of God are given, was both commanded and decreed, or
determined by God Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. And hence we may infer, that the command
of faith, repentance, obedience, etc. all which God has determined to be
necessary unto salvation, do imply, and reveal in a general, and indefinite
way, that God from eternity did purpose to work faith, repentance, and
obedience in those, whom he had designed to salvation. But this concession will
not satisfy Arminians, who will be contented with nothing, unless we will
grant them, that God wills and desires the faith, repentance, obedience, and
salvation of Reprobates; which we cannot do, but withal we must renounce and
disclaim Gods omnipotency, and immutability.

These things thus briefly premised, That Gods purpose or decree of commanding
faith, and repentance unto all that hear the Gospel, and his purpose or decree
to deny faith and repentance unto many, are not contradictory, is manifest:
because Gods purpose or decree of commanding faith and repentance, referres
unto the thing commanded, faith and repentance, only as concerning the
obligation to them, not as touching the existence of them; now to decree and
purpose, to bind and oblige all to faith and repentance, and to decree and
purpose, that some yet shall never actually believe and repent, cannot be
proved by any rules of Logic to be contradictory.

Before I proceed unto the consideration of your next and last passage against
D. Twisse, I shall only represent unto you, that our Author, whom you take to
be one of the greatest patrons of that cause, which you account adverse, does
dislike the accommodation of that distinction of voluntas signi and
beneplaciti, or a secret and revealed will, unto 1 Timothy 2. 4. (the place which
you have under debate,) as well as you, though, I confess, upon different
grounds. In his Book against Jackson page 534. he informs us, that neither
Calvin embraces it, nor Beza, nor Piscator, but all concur upon that
interpretation which Austin gave many hundred years ago. Peter Martyr
proposes it (says he) amongst diverse others, but embraces it not, neither
do I know any Divine of ours that embraces it. Cajetan indeed embraces it,
and Cornelius de Lapide, and Aquinas amongst other interpretations; If you take
(says he speaking to D. Jackson) a liberty to put upon us the opinions, and
accommodations of distinctions used by Papists, you may in the next place make
doubt, whether we have not subscribed to the Council of Trent. And again in
the next page 535. Neither do I like (says he) Cajetans interpretation after
this manner, when he says, Est sermo de voluntate signi, qua Deus proponit
omnibus homimbus praecepta salutis, doctrinamque Evangelii; and that for two
reasons: First, because God does not propose his Gospel to all: Secondly, if
God should propose the Gospel to all, and bid all men to believe, this is no
certain sign that God will have them to believe; like as it is no certain
sign that God will give them grace to believe, without which they cannot
believe; For it is manifest that God does not give the grace of faith and
repentance unto all that hear the Gospel, nor to a major part of them; but it
is a sign I confess that God will have it our duty to believe, by commanding
us to believe.

The interpretation of this place, which D. Twisse sticks to, is that of
Austin, that God will have some of all sorts or conditions to be saved, and he
makes it good from the coherence, as here, so in his consideration of the
doctrine of the Synod of Arles and Dort etc. p. 61. and p. 62, 63, 64. he gives
a full and satisfactory answer unto that which you call more then a Topicke
argument against this exposition, unto which why you do not reply, I cannot
but wonder, but perhaps you never read it; And yet again it is very strange,
that you, who have searched so narrowly and thoroughly into these controversies,
as you profess, should be unread in all the works of him, whom you confess
to be one of the greatest Patrons of the Adverse cause (as you call it) I will
lay down that which you call more then a Topicke argument, and compare it with
the objection of Tilenus, and then put down D. Twisse his answer unto Tilenus,
and refer it unto the Reader, whether it do not fully satisfy, that which
you suppose to be a demonstration.

M. GOODWIN. page 104.
IF it may be said that God will have all men to be saved, because he will have
some of all sorts to be saved, it may more properly and truly be said of him,
that he will have all men to be destroyed (at least in their sense, who hold an
irreversible reprobation of persons personally considered from eternity)
because not simply some, but a very great part of all sorts of men now extant
in the world, will in time perish, and that according to the decree or will of
God, the tenor whereof is, that all persons dying in impenitency, and
unbeleife shall perish: yet the Scriptures do no where say upon any such
account as this, either in terminis, or in substance, that God will have all
men to perish, and not to come to the knowledge of the truth which is somewhat
more than a Topicke argument, that God is not therefore said to will that all
men should be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth, only because he
will have some, some few of all sorts of men to be saved, and to come to this
knowledge, but simply because his will is to have all men with out exception
(viz. as they are men, and whilst they are yet capable of Repentance) to be
saved, and in order thereunto to come to the knowledge of the saving truth. (i.
e.) The Gospel.

TILENVS.
NOW if this New Evangelist do tell the Infidel that the passages of
Scripture, which say that God would have all men to be saved, are to be
understood of some of every Nation, and condition, the Infidel will reply that
then the Scripture ought with much more reason to say, that God would have all
men to be damned; because that in every Nation there are far more of these
than of them, and how that in all reason the denomination should be taken from
the greatest number.

DR TWISSE upon the Synod of Arles etc. Page 62, 63, 64.
I Deny that the Scripture ought with much more reason, or with any reason to
say, that God would have all men to be damned, although put the case that in
every Nation and condition there be more of these, than of them; and his reason
drawn from the denomination to be taken from the major part is nothing to the
present purpose. For the question here about the interpretation of Saint Paul's
phrase is only this, whether the word All be to be interpreted of all sorts, or
of all and every one; so that the rule of denomination taken from the major
part is nothing pertinent to this, The question being only, whether genera
singulorum, or singula generum be here meant, not whether some of all sorts, or
all and every one of all sorts. Which being resolved, and that hereby is meant,
genera singulorum, it may be farther questioned, whether genera singulorum do
imply every particular of these kinds, or only some of them? For it is well
known, that the phrase is indifferent to the one as well as the other, and that
genera singulorum, are equally preserved entire in some particulars, as in
many, or most, or all. Like as the Species of the Sun is maintained exactly
as well in that one Sun, which shines by day in the firmament, as if there
were twenty Suns.

Secondly, though the reason here given from the denomination to be taken from
the greater part, were pertinent, yet were it nothing pertinent to the Apostles
purpose in this place, to say, that God would have all men to be damned; For
this were no agreeable reason to move them to pray for all, for Kings, and all
that are in authority. As if the Apostle should say thus, I will have you to
pray for all, for God will have all to be damned; for says Austin, if Gods
Church knew who were predestined to be sent into eternal fire with the
Devil and his Angels, they would no more pray for such, than they would pray
for the Devil himself.

So that this Author does miserably overlash in this his subtilty, and betraies
more nakedness than any sober and wise Infidel were like to do.

Then again, the instances of Scripture are clearly against him. For when
every foure-footed beast (as the Scripture speaks) was seen by Peter in a
vision; in all likelihood they were not the most part of every kind, but the
smallest rather of every kind: and accordingly this Author might conclude, that
considering denominations are taken from the major part, therefore it is rather
to be said, that every foure-footed beast was not seen by Peter, for certainly
the major part of every kind was not; yet in this sense to speak of it, in
that case was nothing pertinent, but rather contrariant to that which
follows: Rise Peter, kill and eat..

In like sort seeing in all likelihood more people staid at home both in
Jerusalem, and in Judea, then were they who went out to John, and according to
this Authors rule, it were more fit to say, All Jerusalem and all Judea staid
at home, when John the Baptist Preached: yet was it nothing congruous, but
contrariant rather to the Evangelists scope to write so; His purpose being to
set down of what estimation was the authority of John by the confluence of all
people from all parts unto him and therefore when he writes that all Judea, and
all Jerusalem went forth unto him, the meaning can be no more than this,
namely, that from all parts of Judea and of Jerusalem some flocked unto him.

IEANES.
I come unto the third and last exception in your Book against Doctor Twisse.
page 245.

Mr GOODWIN.
HAnging upon the Cross he prayed for his enemies, and those that crucified
him, that they might be forgiven. May it not as well be inferred from hence,
that therefore all his enemies, and all such, who (in any sense) crucify him,
shall be forgiven by God; as it is argued from his praying for Peter, that his
faith might not fail, that the faith of no true believer shall fail. Doctor
Twisses notion upon the case is not so authentic; and though admitted, will
not heal the difficulty: Christ (says he) prayed for his enemies, ex officio
hominis privati, i. e. according to the duty of a private man, but for his
elect, as Mediator. This is said but not proved, nor indeed probable. For very
unlikely it is, that Christ being now in a full investiture of his great office
of Mediator, should wave his interest in Heaven, by means hereof in his
addressements unto God for men, and pray only in the capacity, and according to
the interest and duty of a private man; This would argue, that he prayed not
for them with his whole heart, nor with an effectualnesse of desire to obtain
what he prayed for. But let it be granted, yet still it follows, that
whatsoever Christ prayed for, was not simply, or absolutely granted or done;
and if whatsoever Christ prayed for, was absolutely granted, it is not
material, as to matter of impetration, whether he prayed as Mediator, or as a
private man. But the intent of Christ's Prayer for those that crucified him, was
not that all their sins should be forgiven them, much less that simply and
absolutely (i. e. without any intervening of faith and repentance) they should
be forgiven (which had been to pray for that which is expressly contrary unto
the revealed will of God) but that that particular sin of their crucifying
him should be forgivem them i. e. should not be imputed unto them, by way of
bar unto their repentance, either by any sudden or speedy destruction; or
by delivering them up to such a spirit of obstinacy or obduration, under which
men seldom or never repent.

IEANES.
THis exposition of D. Twisse proceeds upon supposition, (not grant) that
Christ prayed for all that had a hand in his crucifying; and taking this
supposition to be true, this following argument, for the proof of this
exposition, may easily be gathered out of D. Twisse. If Christ prayed for all
that crucified him, then either according to the duty of a private person, or
by virtue of his office, as he was Mediator; but he prayed not for all his
persecutors by virtue of his office, as he was a Mediator: therefore if he
prayed for them, it was only in answer of his duty, as he was made under the
Law, and a private person. The Minor which is only likely to be questioned, is
thus confirmed; some that were guilty of his crucifying, were in all likelihood
Reprobates, as is not only confessed, but proved by Arminius. Oravit (says he)
pro iis qui crucifixerunt eum, pro inimicis suis, inter quos and non-electi
fuerunt: Pincipes enim saeculi crucifixerunt illum; at plurimis illorum
sapientia Dei, and virtus quae est Christus, non est revelata. The Princes of
the World crucified the Lord of Glory. 1 Cor. 2. 8. And unto most of them the
wisdom and power of God, which is Christ, is not revealed. Now in Ioh. 17. 9.
where we have the model, rule, or Epitome of Christ's intercession, that is, of
his praying as Mediator, he disclaimes all prayer, and consequently mediation
for Reprobates. I pray not for the World, but for them which thou have given
me. Where World is taken pro turba Reproborum etc. (says D. Twisse) for the
rout or rabble of Reprobates: and he proves it thus; In his, Mundus opponitur
iis qui dantur Christo a Patre; at dari a patre, significat statum electionis.
Ioh. 6. 39. Significat enim statum bonum praecedaneum vocationi efficaci; omne
quod dat mihi pater, veniet ad me. Venire autem ad Christum, est credere in
Christum per vocationem efficacem. Vind. l. 1. p. 2. page 181. The World in
these words is opposed, unto them which are given unto Christ by the Father;
but to be given unto Christ by the Father, signifies the state of election,
for it signifies a good and happy estate or condition, precedaneous unto
effectual vocation. Ioh. 6. 37. All that the Father gives me shall come unto
me; but to come unto Christ, is to believe in Christ, by an effectual
vocation. Thus you see, that notwithstanding your pleasure to say otherwise, it
is not barely said but proved by him, that Christ prayed not for all his
Crucifyers by virtue of his office as he was Mediator.

In the next place, that Christ according to the duty of a private man, might
pray for all that crucified him, even for those of them that were not elect, is
rendered probable by two arguments in D. Twisse.

The first is, Christ's subjection unto the Law. Gal. 4. 4. He was made under
the Law: and therefore bound to fulfill all righteousness. Math. 3. 15. And
one branch of the Law, as is evident, by Christ his own gloss upon it, Math.
5. is to love our enemies, to forgive private and personal wrongs, to pray for
them which despitefully use us, and persecute us. this was a point that he
pressed much upon his Disciples in his life time, and it being a duty (though
of frequent use) yet difficult and harsh unto flesh and blood, it is not
unlikely but that he might exemplify it by his own practice at his death.

A second Argument in D. Twisse to prove that it is not improbable that Christ
as a private man, affectu humano, prayed on his Cross for all his Crucifyers,
even such of them as he knew, not to belong unto the election of grace, is
drawn from comparison of such a prayer, with the like prayer, that Christ made
in his agony in the Garden, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass
from me. Math. 26. 39. Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me.
Luke 22. 42. This bitter cup of his death and Passion, he knew full well that
he was to drink up, as a Mediator for his elect, both by his Fathers decree,
call, command, as also by his own voluntary undertaking; for to this end and
purpose he came into the World, and sanctified himself. Ioh. 17. 19. and
therefore though these words were part of a most solemn addressement unto God,
yet were they not put up by him in the capacity, and according to the duty and
interest of a Mediator for his elect. Twisse Vindic. l. 1. p. 2. page 188. And
this is enough to satisfy you, that you are out in passing your censure upon D.
Twisse his notion on this place, that it is said not proved, which I am
persuaded you would have forborne, if you had so thoroughly perused him, as it
was fit you should, before you had in public thus censured him.

Let us see in the next place, with what strength of Argument you oppose his
exposition.

M. GOODWIN.
NOr indeed is this probable, for very unlikely it is, that Christ being now in
a full investiture of his great office of Mediator, should wave his interest in
heaven, by means hereof, in his addressements unto God for men, and pray only
in the capacity, and according to the interest, and duty of a private man, this
would argue that he prayed not for them with his whole heart, nor with an
effectuallnesse of desire to obtain what he prayed for.

IEANES.
FIrst, you cannot deny but that in these words of Christ, Father if it be
possible, or if it be thy will, let this cup pass from me, Christ prayed not
as a Mediator for his elect, for so he was engaged to drink off this Cup; but
as a man naturally declining, and abhorring death, and the ignominy of the
Cross, as they are in themselves evil: and yet all your arguments, mutatis
mutandis, with due change may be applied unto this interpretation, as well as
unto D. Twisse his notion (as you call it) upon Luke 23. 34.

Secondly, in answer unto your objections, we may make use of a distinction of
prayer, brought by Suarez in tertiam partem Sum. Aquin. q. 21. Art. 4. Prayer
is nothing else but an unfolding of the will unto God. Now in Christ's manhood
there was a twofold will, one absolute and effectual, another conditional and
uneffectuall, which may otherwise be termed, a velleity, a will of simple
complacency, a will of a thing only secundum quid, in some particular respect,
according to some particular consideration: of such a will of his we read. Mar.
7. 24. He entered into an house, and would have no man know it, but he could not
be hid. Answerable unto these two acts of the will in Christ, there may be
attributed unto Christ two sorts or kinds of prayer; one proceeding from an
absolute and effectual will, and this was always heard: the other from a
conditional and uneffectuall will, and this was not always heard; such was
his prayer in his agony, let this cup pass from me: and of this sort or kind
of prayer, is that passage, Psalm. 22. 2. In reference unto Christ, understood,
O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not, and in the night season
and am not silent.

Now to apply this distinction, Christ could not pray as a private man for
those of his persecutors, for whom he did not pray as a Mediator, if we speak
of that kind of Prayer, which comes from an absolute and effectual will,
which is styled by Gregory de Valentia, Voluntas rationis undequaque
deliberatae, because it proceeds upon regard had to all circumstances: And
the reason is, because with this kind of Prayer, he never prayed for any thing,
but what he knew would be granted; for he never absolutely and effectually
willed any thing, but what was agreeable unto Gods absolute will, the will of
his decree or good pleasure, and this is all that your arguments can prove. But
yet notwithstanding this, he might pray (taking prayer for a representation of
a conditional or uneffectuall will) for the pardon of even those of his
persecutors, who he knew should be condemned, and for whom therefore he prayed
not as Mediator: or more plainly, he might express a velleity, a gracious,
merciful, and charitable desire, to have all his crucifyers pardoned, so as it
were not contrary unto Gods decree, unto which he did submit, and in which he
did acquiesce, as he did in his prayer for the removal of his Passion, not my
will but thy will be done.

An answer very like unto, if not coincident with this, may be easily gathered
out of D. Twisse; and it is, that Christ, as a private man, prayed for the
pardon of all his persecutors, taking prayer for an expression of Christ's
antecedent will, not as prayer is a representation of his consequent will.

An Antecedent will, as Alvarez explaines it, is the willing of a thing
considered absolutely, as it is in it self, abstracting from all other
considerations of it: A consequent will, is the willing of a thing considered
with all circumstances wherewith it is clothed. Thus a Merchant wills the
preservation of his wares with an antecedent will, as the preservation of his
wares is considered in it self; but he does not will it with a consequent
will, as it is considered with this circumstance, as it is accompanied with
hazard, and danger of his life. Thus also a judge with an antecedent will,
wills the life of a Prisoner, because his life is in it self, a thing good
and desirable: but he does not will it with a consequent will, as he is guilty
of Murder, incest, or any the like capital crime.

Now D. Twisse, though he reject the application of this distinction to God,
with whose simplicity and infinite knowledge several successive considerations
of one and the same thing are utterly incompetible, yet he denies not, but it
may have place in the manhood of Christ. Ratione diversarum considerationum non
nego (says he) distinctionem istam competere posse in hominem; quippe cui
variae considerationes occurrere possunt invicem succedentes: sic Christus
naturali sui conservandi desiderio ferebatur, cum a patre peteret, ut calix
transiret; at considerata voluntate and decreto patris de Calice isto ad
bibendum ipsi propinato, eidem se submittere consultum duxit. This distinction
in regard of diverse considerations of one and the same thing, may be ascribed
unto man, in whom are found several considerations of the same thing
succeeding one another: So Christ as man, out of a natural desire of
selfe-preservation, prayed that the cup of his passion might pass from him;
but the will or decree, the command of his Father, his own office, and man's
salvation being considered, he submitted himself to the drinking up of this
cup, even to the very dreggs; nevertheless not my will but thy will be done.
Luke 22. 42. If this cup may not pass away from me except I drink it, thy
will be done. Mat. 26. 42. He did not will his passion with an Antecedent will,
but he willed it (you see) with a Consequent will. Joh. 4. 34. And so he prayed
against it, as a prayer is a proposal of an Antecedent, not consequent will.

Now that Doctor Twisse resembles this prayer of Christ, for the forgiveness
of all his crucifyers, unto Christ's deprecation of his death and passion, and
makes it to be as that, an expression only of an antecedent will, a desire of
their pardon, considered absolutely in it self, abstracting from Gods decree
unto the contrary, I shall evidence by giving you D. Twisse his own words.
Vind. lib. 1. p. 2. page 188. Non dicit Molinaeus istam voluntatem Christi
hominis, secundum quam oravit pro crucifigentibus ipsum, contrariam fuisse
voluntati divinae; potuit enim fieri cum submissione voluntati Dei tacit
facta, licet non expressa, ad formulam precationis illius: pater transeat a me
calix iste; Sed non mea voluntas fiat, sedtua. And again afterward in the
same page. Annon homini sanctissimo convenit, privatam offensam remittere, and
palam protestari, se (nisi Deus aliter statuisset) percupere ut ipsis
ignosceret; de quibus tamen Deus aliter forsitan constituerit, quod and ipsi
forsitan innotescit? Annon petiit salvator, and ardenter obsecravit, ut si
possibile esset, calix transiret, cum tamen Deum aliter constituisse, ne
scilicet eum transiret calix, ipsi satis constaret? etc. Denique, Christum
illis been voluisse, ut homo erat, quos antecedaneo decreto ab omnis boni spe
ac possessione absolute exclusit Deus; hoc enim addendum fuit (licet illud
fraudulenter nimium dissimulet Corvinus) etiam haec sententia quid horrendi,
quaeso te inculcat? Praesertim cum non sic voluisse dicamus, considerata ista,
de eorum a salute exclusione, voluntate divina; sed duntaxat, si per voluntatem
Dei aliter constitutum non fuisset, and si penes ipsum esset, ut eligeret,
utrum in persecutores ipsius vindictam exerceret, aut suspenderet; pro ea quam
ut homo in omnes (etiam in injuriis remittendis) charitatem exercere debuit,
vindictam suspensam mallet quam exercitam.

And this in general unto all your Arguments, I shall say something to each of
them apart.

Mr GOODWIN.
FOr very unlikely it is, that Christ being now in a full investiture of his
great office of Mediator, should wave his interest in Heaven, by means hereof
in his addressements unto God for men, and pray only in the capacity and
according to the interest and duty of a private man.

IEANES.
Unless variation of Phrases be argumentative, here is nothing but a begging
of the question, only it is in state and good language.

MR GOODWIN
This would argue that he prayed not for them with his whole heart.

IEANES.
IF we understand Prayer in the sense but now mentioned, what absurdity is it
to say, that Christ, as a private man, prayed for the forgiveness of all his
persecutors with his whole heart, that is, as intensely, earnestly, vehemently,
and zealously as he could, in the utmost degree possible to an humane nature.
In Luke 22. 44. it is said, that Christ prayed (...) more earnestly, and his
Sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground. That
this prayer was with the whole heart of Christ, you will not deny, and yet the
former part of this prayer (if thou be willing remove this cup from me) was not
the prayer of Christ as Mediator, but only an expression of an antecedent or
conditional will and desire, like unto this his prayer upon the Cross for the
justification of all his persecutors.

There is nothing considerable which can be objected against this, but that
hereupon it would follow, that seeing prayer is a representation of the will
before God, that therefore in Christ there are two contrary wills, if he prayed
for the pardon of all his persecutors as a private man, and did not pray for
it, but rather against it, as a Mediator.

But this receives a very easy solution. To will or not to will, or nill one
and the same object, are not contrary, unless it be in respect of the same
circumstances or considerations. For Christ as a private man, out of humane
pity to wish and desire the justification of all his crucifiers, as a thing
good and desirable, if God had not decreed otherwise; and not to will, but
rather nill the justification of some of them, upon consideration that they are
not given unto him by the Father, but excluded from salvation by the will of
his decree or purpose; these indeed are diverse, but not repugnant acts of the
will, because they proceed upon general considerations, and therefore though
the object be one materially, yet it is formally diversified: Thus between
Christ's desire of declining his death, and his willing acceptance thereof,
there was a diversity, but no contrariety, because they were not in respect of
the same circumstances; he desired to decline it, as it was in it self evil,
and contrary to nature; but as the means of man's salvation, he joyfully
embraced it.

To clear this farther, I shall propound a distinction of contraries out of
Rada. Part. 3. Controv. 10. Art. 2. Contraria sunt in duplici differentia, alia
absoluta, quae a quibuscunque causis causentur contraria sunt; ut calor and
frigns, quae non dicunt essentialem ordinem, and dependentiam ad aliquid
extrinsecum, excepta dependentia ad causam: Alia sunt contraria, quae and
dicunt ordinem, and dependentiam essentialem, non solum ad suas causas, sed ad
alia extrinseca, and objecta; cujusmodi sunt scientia and ignorantia, velle and
nolle, gaudium and tristitia; quocirca non erunt contraria nisi ad idem formale
objectum comparentur.

MR GOODWIN.
THis would argue that he did not pray for them with an effectualnesse of
desire to obtain what he prayed for.

IEANES.
THis only prooves, what will easily be granted, that Christ prayed not for all
his persecutors, with a prayer proceeding from an absolute and effectual will.
But there is one thing which I shall not dissemble, but freely acquaint the
Reader with; And it is, that many great Scholars both Papists and Protestants
do deny, that the proposal, expression, or representation of a conditionll
and uneffectuall will or desire, is properly a prayer: I shall allege but
two; the first shall be a Papist, to wit, Becanus Sum. Theol. Tom. 5. cap. 17.
q. 3. Licet in Christo (says he) distingui debeat duplex voluntas; una
efficax, altera inefficax: non tamen distingui debet duplex oration, una
procedens ex efficaci voluntate, altera ex inefficaci. Nam oration si vere
oration est, semper procedit ex absoluta and efficaci voluntate orantis, nunquam
ex inefficaci. Qui enim petit aliquid fieri, efficaciter illud desiderat, and
ideo adhibet orationem, tanquam medium quoddam ad obtinendum id, quod petit;
hinc solet dici, orationem natura sua utilem esse ad impetrandum. Unde sic
concludo: qui vult aliquid voluntate inefficaci nullum medium adhibet ad illud
obtinendum; quia si adhiberet aliquod medium, jam vellet illud voluntate
efficaci: at qui orat, adhibet aliquod medium ad obtinendum, nempe ipsam
orationem: ergo qui orat, non vult voluntate inefficaci, sed tantum efficaci.
Although in Christ there ought to be distinguished a twofold will, one
effectual, another uneffectuall; yet notwithstanding, prayer ought not in the
like manner to be distinguished: for there are not two sorts or kinds of
Prayer, one proceeding from an effectual, the other from an uneffectuall will;
for prayer, if it be truly prayer, always proceeds from an absolute and
effectual, and never from an uneffectuall will of the party praying: For he
that petitioneth for the doing of any thing, does effectually desire it, and
therefore uses Prayer, as a means for the obtaining of that which he
requests: Hence it is wont to be said, that Prayer is in its own nature useful
or profitable for obtaining or procuring. Whence I conclude thus; He who
wills any thing with an uneffectuall will, applies or uses no means for
the procurement thereof; because if he should make use of any means to procure
it, he should will it with an effectual will: but he who prays, makes use of
a means for the obtaining of what he Praye's for, to wit, Prayer it self:
therefore he who Prays, wills that he prays for, only with an effectual,
and not with an uneffectuall will. He goes on in the confirmation of this
opinion. Haec sententia est probabilior: pro qua nota, aliud esse orare; aliud,
simplex seu inefficax desiderium proponere: quod facile in nobis ostendi and
explicari potest. Nam nostra oration debet esse conjuncta cum certa spe seu
fiducia consequendi id quod petimus. Iacobi 1. 6. postulet autem in fide, nihil
haesitans. Et Math. 21. 22. Omnia quaecunque petieritis in oratione credentes,
accipietis. Quando autem proponimus seu manifestamus alteri simplex seu
inefficax desiderium nostrum, non facimus id cum certa spe, seu fiducia
consequendi illud, sed potius cum contrario affectu: ut si dicam,

O mihi praeteritos referat si Jupiter annos. This opinion is the more
probable, for the opening of which we must mark, that it is one thing to pray,
another thing to propound a simple or uneffectuall desire; which may easily be
shown and explained in our selves; for our Prayer ought to be conjoined with a
certain hope or assurance of obtaining that which we pray for. Iam. 1. 6. Let
him ask in faith nothing wavering or doubting. Math. 21. 22. And all things
whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer believing, ye shall receive. But when we
propound or manifest a bare, simple, uneffectuall desire, we do not do it
with a certain confidence of obtaining what is so desired, but rather with
assurance of the contrary.

A seond testimony shall be taken out of Doctor Ames, an acute and learned
Protestant. Coron. art. 5. c. 5. Juxta sententiam Arminii etc. nulla propria
est oration, quae non sit absoluta: quae etiam sententia non est temere
damnanda, cum inniti videatur rationibus non contemnendis; praesertim illa,
quae deducitur ab orationis natura: Oration enim est submissa repraesentatio
voluntatis nostrae apud Deum ut ab ipso perficiatur. Explicatio velleitatis,
qua quid vellemus, si aliud non obsisteret, non est oration proprie dicta. jam
vero nihil volumus proprie, quod non absolute volumus; atque adeo nil petimus
quod non absolute petimus, Quamvis in dispositione precantium conditionis ratio
virtualiter saepe contineatur. Petimus quidem nonnunquam, ut unum fiat si
alterum contingat; cujus quidem consequentis rei futuritio ut conditionata sit
rogamus: Sed ipsa tamen petitio est absoluta, quoniam absolute petimus, ut
posito uno, ponatur and alterum.

According to the opinion of Arminius, there is no proper prayer, but what is
absolute; which opinion is not rashly to be condemned; seeing it seems to be
grounded upon considerable reasons, especially that which is drawn from the
nature of prayer: for prayer is a submisse and lowly representation of our
wills before God, to the end, it may be performed by him. The unfolding of a
velleity, whereby we would will a thing if something did not hinder, is not
prayer properly so called: But now we will nothing properly, which we do not
absolutely will; and therefore we pray for nothing properly, which we do not
absolutely petition for, although the nature of a condition be often virtually
contained in the disposition of the parties praying, who may be ready to submit
their wills unto Gods. Indeed we sometimes pray that one thing may be done, if
another thing come to pass; and here we pray, that the futurition of the
following thing be conditional, but the prayer it self is absolute, because
we pray absolutely that one thing do exist upon the positure or existence of
another. If this which these men say be true, then Christ prayed for the
justification of all his crucifiers, as a private man, only improperly, and not
in the proper and strict acception of Prayer; for which improper notion of the
word, we have warrant from Scripture, when Christ said, Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me, Non oravit (says Becanus) sed simplex
naturae desiderium proposuit: He did not pray but propound the simple, bare,
and naked desire of his nature: but though this his expression of his natural
desire and love of life, be not a prayer in regard of either a critical or
Phylosophicall use of the Word, yet you see, it is agreeable enough unto the
language of the holy Ghost in scripture, to enlarge the signification of the
Word so far, as to apply it thereunto: for Matthew says expressly that he
prayed. Math. 26. 39, 42.

But here for mine own part, I must freely profess that I better like Aquinas
his interpretation of the place; that Christ prayed not for all his Crucifyers,
but only for those of them, that were predestinate unto the obtaining of
eternal life, by and through him.

And of this prayer what a fruitful and plentiful Harvest he reaped, you may
read in the 2, 3, and 4. Chapters of the History of the Acts of the Apostles.
There you shall read, that the Lord daily added to the Church such as should be
saved; at one time three Thousand, and another time five thousand; of whom a
great and considerable number denied the Holy one and the just, and desired a
murderer to be granted to them, and crucified and killed the Prince of life.
Acts 2. 36. Acts 3. 14, 15. Rivet on Psalm. 2. quotes a testimony of Austin
favoring this gloss: videbat quosdam suos, inter multos alienos: illis jam
petebat veniam, a quibus accipiebat injuriam.

In making good this to be the sense and meaning of the place, I shall proceed
by degrees: proving first, that it cannot be gathered out of the Text, that
Christ prayed universally for all that crucified him.

Secondly, That the contrary may be cleared from the Text, both considered in
it self, and compared with other places of Scripture, as also by reason.

Thirdly, That those of his persecutors for whom he prayed were such as
belonged unto the election of grace.

First, All the Logic in the World, though racked never so much, cannot
infer out of the Text, that Christ prayed universally for the pardon of all
his Crucifyers: for out of an indefinite term, a universal cannot be
concluded, says our Author, in defense of Moulin his denial that Christ
prayed for all without exception. Vindic. l. 1. part. 2. Digres. 7. p. 136.

Secondly, That Christ prayed not for all his Crucifiers without exception, may
be cleared from the Text, both considered in it self, and compared with other
places of Scripture, as also by reason.

First, From the Text considered in it self; Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do: Here Moulin, from the reason adjoined to the Petition,
concludes, That he prayed not for all that had a hand in Crucifying him, but
only for those who did it out of ignorance; and in all probability some of
them, especially some of the rulers, did it out of pure malice. And whereas
Corvinus objecteth out of Acts 3. 17. against Moulin; That even the Rulers did
it through ignorance: Doctor Twisse upbraideth him with his unskilfullnesse in
framing consequences, and making an indefinite proposition equivalent unto an
universal. It does not follow, (says he) The Rulers did this through
ignorance, therefore all the Rulers did it through ignorance. That some did, is
certain from that place; and so it is, that some of them were converted, and
obedient to the Faith Act. 6. 7.

Besides he adds, that the Rulers, in all likelihood, did it out of affected
ignorance, resisting the evidence of the holy Ghost, speaking in, and by
Christ, and bearing witness to the divine Authority of his Doctrine by
miracles: Whereas it is possible that Christ might pray for the executioners,
that assisted and acted in his crucifying, perhaps not out of malice, but
merely in the simplicity of their hearts, in obedience to their Superiors,
not knowing any thing. Tum vero ad ignorantiam istam quod attinet, quam populo
Iudaico, and primoribus populi vitio vertit Apostolus; quid obstat, quo minus
affectata fuerit in multis, (resistendo scilicet evidentiae Spiritus sancti per
Christum loquentis, and per miracula doctrinae ipsius testimonium ferentis)
praesertim in primoribus. Qui vero ipsum in crucem egerunt, (pro quibus etiam
oravit) erant illi ministri, and superiorum mandatis ex officio inserviebant:
poterat ergo Christus orasse pro iis, qui non malitia pulsi, Sed cordis
simplicitate in Superiorum obsequium ducti Christum in crucem sustulerunt. He
also adds, that he prayed only for them that were present at his Death; and
it is probable that the Rulers, at least such of them as were not afterward
converted, were not present at his Death. Esto vero, non fuerint conversi, sed
and nihilo minus probabile est, primores istos non adstitisse presents
Christo, qui crucifixionem ipsius promoverent, pro quibus tamen and solis
oravit Christus in cruce.

Secondly, that Christ prayed not for all and every one of his crucifyers, D.
Ames confirms, from comparison of this text with other places of Scripture.
Coron. Art. 2. c. 9. Art. 5. c. 5. Amongst these his enemies there might be
some that had committed that great and unpardonable sin against the holy
Ghost Math. 12. 24, 31, 32. There were some, by the confession of Arminius
himself, that were finally impenitent; and final impenitency in general, and
the sin against the holy Ghost, which formally includes final impenitency,
are sins unto death, for the pardon of which, if known, prayer is not
lawful. 1 John 5. 16. And therefore (says Austin) if Gods Church knew, who
were predestined to be sent into eternal fire, with the Devil, and his
Angels, they would no more pray for such then they would pray for the Devil
himself. Now Christ knew who had committed the sin against the holy Ghost,
and who would be finally impenitent; for he himself knew full well what was in
man. Ioh. 2. 28. Yea he knew from the beginning who they were that believed not.
Ioh. 6. 64. See the Learned and reverend M. Owen in his Treatise of Universal
Redemption. p. 44. 45.

Thirdly, that Christ prayed not for all his crucifyers, may be confirmed by an
argument shaped in imitation of that, which Doctor Twisse urges against a
common and general intercession, which Corvinus ascribes unto Christ. If
Christ prayed, that all who crucified him should be forgiven, then it was
either that they should be forgiven absolutely or conditionally; not
absolutely, for then all of them were pardoned; if conditionally upon
condition, then this condition was either on Gods part, or else to be performed
on his crucifyers part: it could not be on Gods part, modo scilicet ipsi visum
fuerit, for then all of them should be pardoned according to your opinion; for
you hold, that God truly and unfainedly desires the salvation, and
justification of all and every one of the Sons of Men: If you say that it is a
condition on the part of his crucifyers, why this condition can be nothing else
but faith and repentance; and then I demand, whether he prayed for their faith
and repentance or no? If you answer, that he did not pray for the Faith and
Repentance of all and every one of them, then say I, neither did he pray for
their pardon; for he that truly and sincerely prays for any thing, prays
also by just and undeniable consequence for all the necessary antecedents and
consequents, causes and means, fruits and effects thereof: If you hold, that
he prayed for the faith and repentance of all and every one of his crucifyers,
then the argument may be renewed as in the beginning; for I ask you again,
whether he prayed for their faith and repentance absolutely or conditionally;
if absolutely, then all and every one of them did believe and repent, which the
Remonstrants themselves deny: if conditionally, then this condition is either
on Gods part, or else on the part of the crucifyers of Christ; if upon
condition on the part of God, it can be nothing but this, if he will or please,
and then all of them should believe and repent, for (as Arminians gloss that
text 1 Timothy 2. 4) God will have not only all sorts and kinds of men, but also
all and every individual man to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth: if it be a condition on the part of those who crucified him, then pray
do you assign that condition, and either I shall drive you upon the same rock
of absurdity, upon which Doctor Twisse forces Corvinus, to wit, that Christ
prayed for his Crucifiers, that they should believe and repent, upon condition
that they do believe and repent; or else I shall renew the argument, so as
that a progress from one condition to another, and that without end, shall be
unavoydable.

Lastly, that he prayed only for those of his crucifiers, who belonged to the
election of grace, is evident from what has been already said out of D. Twisse
upon Ioh. 17. 9. For thence I have inferred, that he prayed only for his elect
as Mediator, that Chapter being the platform of Christ's intercession, as
mediator for his Church: and you affirm it to be improbable, that Christ
prayed under the notion and capacity of a private man, for any for whom he did
not pray as Mediator.

But now in the last place, let us hear how you expound this prayer of Christ.

Mr GOODWIN.
BUT the intent of Christ's prayer for those that crucified him, was not that
all their sins should be forgiven them, much less, that simply and
absolutely, that is, without any intervening of faith and repentance, they
should be forgiven; (which had been to pray for that which is expressly contrary
to the revealed will of God) but that that particular sin of their crucifying
him should be forgiven them, i. e. should not be imputed unto them by way of
bar unto their repentance, either by any sudden or speedy destruction, or
by delivering them up to such a spirit of obstinacy or obduration, under which
men seldom or never repent.

IEANES
FIrst, I say of this your comment, as you did of D. Twisse his notion upon the
place, this is said but not proved, Nor indeed probable, because

First, Scripture is a stranger to this acception of remission.

Secondly, it is very irrational to take remission in this sense, which by your
Doctrine may be consistent with its contrary: to wit condemnation. Though this
particular sin of their crucifying him, were not imputed to them by way of
bar unto their repentance, either by any sudden or speedy destruction, or by
delivering them up to such a spirit of obstinacy or obduration, under which men
seldom or never repent. yet according unto what you teach of grace, and
ascribe unto the power of man's will, they might notwithstanding all this not
believe and repent, but resist the grace of God, and dye in final unbelief
and impenitency, even for this sin, and so consequently be condemned for it.
Christ's prayer might be granted, this particular sin of their crucifying
Christ might be forgiven unto them, and yet they might be everlastingly damned
for it, and their other sins. How you can reconcile these things passes my
understanding, but I shall not be unwilling to learn.

Lastly, you seem to intimate, that some sins are so foul, as that they are
of themselves a bar to repentance, for the desert of which God does sometimes
deny men either time for, or the grace of repentance.

And hereby you entrench upon the freeness of Gods grace in man's effectual
vocation, which is the free gift of God, and therefore dispensed, not according
to men's preceding carriages good or bad, but merely according to the good
pleasure of his will: but this argument I shall spare farther to prosecute, and
refer you to our Doctor, who has abundantly labored herein, as in other
places, so especially in his examination of Mr Cotton his Treatise of
Predestination, a page 190. usque ad 204. and again, p. 234, 235. etc. usque
ad 246.

As for that which follows, as also that which is in the beginning of this
Section, the examination of it is beside my present design, which is to
vindicate Doctor Twisse from what you object against him.

Yet if the Reader desire satisfaction thereabouts, he may meet with it in
Doctor Ames his Coronis ad Coll. Hag. Art. 5. c. 5. Whither I shall in this
have refer him.

And thus have I done with the defense of Doctor Twisse against your opposition
of him: when I consider your fluent Wit, and ready Pen, I may expect from you
a very speedy reply, Which may be, as sharp, so specious and Rhetorical
enough. I shall desire this favor of the judicious Reader, that he would
suspend his censure until he has my rejoinder, which I shall not defer
long, if God grant me his assistance.

FINIS.

