A TREATISE OF Mr. Cottons, Clearing certain DOUBTS Concerning PREDESTINATION.

Together with AN EXAMINATION Thereof; written by William Twisse, DD. Pastor of
Newbury.

Prove. 19. 21. There are many devices in man's heart; nevertheless the counsel
of the Lord that shall stand.

2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

The Authors Epistle unto the Reader.
IT was my purpose and resolution at the first, to let this piece, in answer to
Mr. Cotton, pass without a preface; for it was put into a Stationers hand ere
I was aware: Neither did I see the man's face until the whole book was printed.
And for certain years I knew not what was become of it, which I imputed to
the confusion of these times. But so it was, that a Knight of our County, sent
over unto me the Minister who lived in his house, to entreat me to
communicate unto him my answer to a book, entitled, Gods love to mankind:
which I condescended unto; willing to satisfy so noble a friend as Sir Francis
Pile. The Minister perceiving this answer of mine to Mr. Cotton lying with it,
desired that he might take that also along with him, that Sir Francis might
have a sight of that together with the other: whereunto I yielded, upon promise
made, that both pieces should be returned into my hands very shortly, within a
month or two.

But evil times followed not long after; and for a whole year we were full of
distractions in the Country. My chiefest care was, for the preservation of my
manuscripts, which I brought with me to London at the first: But this piece in
answer to Mr. Cotton was wanting; I had utterly forgotten what was become of
it. Sir Francis removed to Southhampton, and took care of my copies to have
them along with him. It was somewhat long ere they were brought to London; but
in good time they arrived here safe and sound. And Mr. Gilbert, who brought me
the first word of it, showed me withal that he was well acquainted with a
Stationer, who would undertake for the setting forth my Answer to Gods love to
mankind: Only his desire was, he might begin with the printing of my answer to
Mr. Cotton, because that was a small piece. And thus ere I was aware, I came to
understand, that my stray sheep, which I gave for lost, was found.

And since that, considering certain passages of divine providence, causing
some interruption in the proceedings of bringing forth this Treatise unto the
light of the press: I have been moved thereby to prefixe this preface, partly
on mine own behalf, and partly on the behalf of Mr. Cotton: For men may
perhaps conceive me to be well pleased with an adversative dispotion, and to
affect a course of opposition, as well to the friends of the Bridegroom, as to
his enemies: As if I were like Ismael in part, of whom it was said, that his
hand was against every ones; which is enough to make me like unto him in the
other part also, and provoke every one to have his hand against me. Truth it
is, all my writings, both printed and manuscript, that have an eye toward the
press, are of a responsorious nature; but the original motive cause unto me
was merely mine own satisfaction; and that in the points of grace and
predestination. In arguments of this nature, I promised to my self more
comfort then I could expect in studying Transubstantiation, or Purgatory. And
because truth is never sufficiently known in a scholasticall way, unless we
are able to master the strongest oppositions that are made against it;
therefore I gave my self to take notice of the greatest sticklers in their
oppositions against that doctrine, which is maintained by our Divines: and all
this merely for mine own better progression in the investigation of truth,
without the least thought at that time of publishing ought. And for the same
cause I set my self upon those passages, which seemed to contain the greatest
difficulty: And therefore in examining Arminius, I began in the midst of his
answer to Mr. Perkins, to ponder well his digression and discourse about divine
permission; for in that argument I had found no small difficulty; and I made
trial, whether by that discourse of his I could find satisfaction; but I found
no satisfaction at all from him; neither was I able to work out sufficient
satisfaction to my self: about that matter was the first digression I began
with, but it was one of the last that I finished.

Other discourses of mine, many of them, yea, most of them, were written by me
only at the instance of others. My answer to Mr. Hords discourse (which since
is printed with Mr. Simsons additions, and set forth under the specious title
of Gods love to mankind;) was performed by me at the request of Sir Nathaniell
Rich. My answer to the Synod of Dort, after reduced to practice, was penned by
me to satisfy friends, two copies thereof manuscript being sent unto me from
scholar friends in Oxford: but especially I was glad, that I had so good an
opportunity thereby to quiet the spirit of my lord Say; his honor being not a
little moved with the scoffing carriage of Tilenus, the Author of that piece
(who dyed shortly after as I was advertised) and by his lordships honorable
care it was brought forth to light. I could give the like account of many other
pieces written by me, and employed therein by others; many of them being as
mean in condition as my self. This very piece of Mr. Cottons, the answer
whereunto is now put forth, I undertook merely upon the motion of Mr. Bets, a
young Minister, who at that time lived at Broughton, in the house of my lord
Say: he entreated me to take it into consideration, and show my judgment
concerning it: And to gratify him I undertook it; and my lord Say himself
liked well of it, and communicated it unto Mr. Cotton, who carried it with him
into New England; whereby I was put to my shifts to get a copy of it as I could
for mine own use.

Now concerning Mr. Cotton, it may be his reputation will seem to be touched
in this; but let the indifferent Reader consider what I say in my observation.
Both Austin and other great Divines have written freely and largely of
Election, but very sparingly of Reprobation; the reason whereof I conceive to be
this, There appears more seeming offensive harshnesse in the doctrine of
Reprobation, then in the doctrine of Election. Secondly, I am persuaded, they
manifestly perceived, that by stating the doctrine aright in the point of
Election, the truth, by just analogy and proportion, did there-hence
necessarily follow in the point of Reprobation, to all judicious Divines. Now
Mr. Cotton, as I have heard, is very sound and orthodox in the point of
Election; and comes to this work with a gracious intent, to clear the doctrine
of Predestination (and that in the special of Reprobation) from such harsh
consequences as seem to be derived there-hence; which do very frequently
break forth, as I have observed, when the order of Gods decrees is not stated
aright: And by experience I have found the manifold odious imputations of
strange harshnesse laid upon Gods proceedings, and represented by the
Remonstrants in their Antisynodalia Dordracena, in number 10. as I remember;
but they all vanish and come to nothing upon the right ordering of Gods
decrees: wherein, if any Divine fail, it may be his failing is only in a point
of Logic, provided that he be orthodox in the point of grace; but if he be
corrupt in that, then the more corrupt his Logic is, the better it may serve
his turn for the countenancing of his erroneous ways in matter of divinity.

Lastly, I have been given to understand by Mr. Simson, one of the reverend
Divines of the Assembly, that Mr. Cotton upon the receiving and perusing this
treatise of mine, seemed to be moved therewith not a little; and that in such a
way, as not to be provoked thereby, but rather to incline to the receiving of
satisfaction! Mr. Cotton is a Divine whom I never saw; but so much I have heard
of his piety and parts of learning, that his name shall ever be of reverend
remembrance with me. Nevertheless, because this discourse of his, whereunto I
address my answer, is in the hands of many, and some of them may be
strengthened in their erroneous ways, by this writing of his; and I have heard,
that certain Arminians have taken advantage, to justify them in their ways,
from some passages in this very discourse of Mr. Cottons: Others, though
orthodox, may hereby be misled into error, in such sort, as to corrupt both
themselves and their brethren into such opinions (too pleasing unto flesh and
blood) as may shake the orthodox doctrine of Gods free grace, in the precious
points of Election, Predestination, and Regeneration. This danger I desire to
prevent; and upon my knowledge, my labor and pains herein have bin taken in
very good part, by those who are the very good friends of Mr. Cotton; and some
not his good friends only, but great and right well approved of by Mr. Cotton
himself; they have deserved no less at his hands. The God of all grace, bring
all his into an unity of faith, in the acknowledgement of his grace, which is
the only sure way unto glory.

Faults in Printing correct thus.
Page 6. line 15. if read of. p 10. l 1. thus, r. this. p. 12 l. 25.
contradictions, r. contradictious. p. 27. l. 28. Apostle, r. Epistle p. 33. l.
1. r. what was Gods. p. 38. l. 29. Question the 2. it should be Doubt the
third: the want whereof made us suspect that the whole and entire Answer to the
third Doubt was missing. p 39. l. last save one, hen, r. when. p. 40. l. last
save one, confesses, r. confess. p. 43 l. 21 bought, r. brought. p. 52. l.
15. decrees to save, r. decree was to save. p. 57. l. the last, distinct, r.
disjunct. p. 61. l. 33. distinct, r. disjunct. p. 76. l. 18. grants, r. grant.
p 87. l. 9. after the word feign there should be such a disjunction as this
[3]. p 98. l. 12. objects, r. objection. p 114. l. the fourth from the end,
controversies but; read it thus, controversies; but. p. 117. l. 16. manner, r.
nature. p. 131. l. 18. rash, r. harsh. l. 19. rash, r. harsh. p. 182. l. 9. in
his his purposes, r. in Gods purpose. p. 190 l. 27. r. obduration. p. 194. l.
17. like, r. life. p. 199. l. 26. objection, r. Objector. p 207. the fifth
Doubt, Question the fifth, line the sixth and seventh seems to be obscure; but
yet compared with the former, and well considered, the mist will break up, and
the sense of the Author appear. p. 209. l. 4. man's, r. man. p. 225. l. the
fourth from the end, serves, r. seems. p. 227. l. 30. leave out the word and.
p. 234. l 30. effectual, r. and effectual. p. 236. l. the last, r. inform
him. p. 137. l. 29. that without, leave out the word that. p. 239. l. 6. short
of, r. short of them. p. 250. l. 3. special, r. specials. l. 13. Genius, r.
genus. p. 254 l. 15. it, r. in. p. 255. Quest. 7. l. 10. of a grace, r. of
grace. p. 267. l. 17. naturalls should, r. naturalls right, should. p. 283. l.
20. agat, r. aget. p. 284. the last line save five, sounding, read soundness.

AN EXAMINATION of a Treatise written by Master Cotton, for the clearing of
certain doubts concerning Predestination.
QUESTION. 1.
HOw may it appear that there was any thought of the incarnation of the second
person, or advancement of the man Christ, before the presupposall of the fall
of man, and his own humiliation.

God does not propose one thing before another in time, all things are at once
present with him: But the things purposed by God, God Answ.
does order them one for another, and so is he rightly said to purpose one
thing in order before another. Now in order of things, God has first purposed
the glorifying of himself, yea, and the glorifying of himself in Christ too,
before he presupposed the fall of man, and humiliation of Christ; as may
appear, etc.

1. I will first take into consideration the doubt proposed. Here are four
things mentioned: and the Question is made touching Exam.
the priority of the two first in respect of the two latter, and that in the
thoughts (or intention) of God. And withal I conceive the incarnation of the
Son of God is considered in reference to the fall of man. And the advancement
of the man Christ in reference to his humiliation. Of the Priority of each in
respect of his correlative proceeds the doubt. I think good to consider them
apart. As touching the first couple, the incarnation of the Son of God, and the
fall of man: I should answer at the first dash, that there is no order between
them at all: My reason is this, All order in intention has course only
between the means and the end: But between these two there is no such
reference as between the means and the end. The proposition is without
question; the assumption I prove thus: It belongs to the same Author to be the
Author, as of the end, so of the means tending to the end. (All experience
justifies this.) But God (though he be the Author of the incarnation of his
Son, yet) could not be the Author of the fall of man, as he cannot be the
Author of sin. But it is not sit so weighty a question should be strangled
unius verbi praejudicio, with the prejudice of one word; therefore let the
question proceed (with a little alteration) in comparison of the incarnation of
the Son of God, and the permission of the fall of Adam, which undoubtedly was
Gods work as well as the former. Some think the decree of the incarnation of
the Son of God presupposes the fall of man; or rather (to speak more
accurately in a scholasticall discourse) the consideration of Adams fall, and
consequently (though this be not always considered) the decree of God to
permit Adams fall. This order, though very generally received; yet it is
contrary to manifest reason, according to the rule in this Treatise mentioned,
and which I take to be most sound. For, if the permission of Adams fall were
first in intention, then it should be last in execution, and consequently the
Son of God should be first incarnate, and after this Adam should be permitted
to fall. Others it seems (though very few that I have ever bin acquainted with)
take another course, and presuppose Gods purpose touching the incarnation of
his Son to precede his purpose touching the permission of Adams fall; yet not
so much for the former reason, as for the honor of Christ. But this will be
found upon true scanning, to be as contradictions to manifest reason as the
former, and that upon the same ground. For, if God did purpose the incarnation
of his Son before he purposed the permission of the fall of Adam, much more
did he purpose the incarnation of his Son, before he purposed to permit the
sins of all men, and particularly the sins of them that crucified the Son
of God, Act. 2. 36. I say much more; only to signify that this is much more
evident. But this is a thing impossible upon the former ground, and upon the
former rule. For, if the incarnation of the Son of God were first in
intention, then it should be last in execution; and consequently Christ should
first be permitted by God to be crucified, and after this he should be
incarnate. 2. Again. Did God decree that his Son should take humane flesh
upon him indefinitely in respect of place where, and time when? Or definitely
at such a time, and in the womb of the Virgin Mary? Indefinite decrees are
generally thought to be nothing becoming God. If definitely, how could this be
without the consideration of Adams fall? 3. If the decree of incarnation be
advanced before the decree of permitting Adam to fall, why not before the
decree of the creation also, and that not only of men, but of Angels?
Certainly it could not be before the decree of creating Angels: For priority in
intention is only of the end, in reference to the means; and certainly the
creation of Angels, was no means for the incarnation of the Son of God. Now if
the decree of incarnation were not before the decree of the creation of Angels,
surely it was not before the decree of the creation of mankind: For the decree
of the creation of Angels was in no moment before the decree of the creation of
man: which I prove thus: If the creation of Angels were first in intention, it
should be last in execution, and consequently man should be created before
Angels. Now if the incarnation of the Son, were not in intention before the
creation of mankind in Adam, I will here-hence manifestly deduce, that the same
incarnation of the Son of God was not any moment of nature in intention
before the permission of man's fall; for certainly creation of mankind in Adam
was not: as I prove thus; If Adams creation were in Gods intention before the
permission of his fall, then should it have bin last in execution; that is, man
should be permitted to fall into sin, before God created him.

Thus, look by what reason it may appear, that the permission of Adams fall
was not in Gods intention before the incarnation of the Son of God; by as
good reason does it appear, that the incarnation of the Son of God was not
in Gods intention before the permission of Adams fall: whence it follows,
that the incarnation of the Son of God, and the permission of Adams fall,
together with his creation are not subordinanda, to be subordinated in Gods
intention (as if any of these were the end which God intended, and the rest
means ordained to that end) but co-ordinanda, to be co-ordinated, as joint
means tending to a further end: and that is the manifestation of Gods glory in
a way of mercy mixed with justice: Which end does equally be speak all the
three former as means tending thereunto. For, no declaration of Gods glory can
be without creation, nor in the way of mercy without permission of sin and
misery: nor of such a mercy as is mixed with justice, without the incarnation
and passion of the Son of God.

2. As for the order of the other two, to wit the advancement of the man
Christ, and his humiliation, thereof we are now to speak. And first I confess
willingly, that his humiliation could not be intended before his exaltation,
lest, being first in intention, it should be last in execution. I will further
prove that his advancement or exaltation could not be intended before his
humiliation. And first, this may be made evident as touching his greatest
advancement, which was by incarnation; all advancement following was far
inferior unto this. Now this advancement was not intended before his
humiliation; for had it bin first in intention, it had bin last in execution,
and consequently Christ had been first humbled, and afterward his nature taken
into an hypostaticall union with the Son of God. Secondly I prove, that the
advancement of his humane nature after his passion, was not in Gods intention
before his humiliation. For I have already proved that the taking of the humane
nature into an hypostaticall union with the Son of God, was not before his
humiliation: and you will not say that the advancement of the man Christ you
speak of, was in Gods intention before his incarnation, therefore neither was
it in Gods intention before his humiliation.

What remains then, but that all these, to wit, the incarnation of the Son
of God, his humiliation in the flesh, together with his succeeding advancement,
are not sub-ordinanda, to be subordinated in Gods intention, (as if onewere
the end, and the other means tending to that end) but rather Co-ordinanda, to
be co-ordinated; if not as joint means tending to one and the same end
throughout, yet as different means tending to different ends; or partly the
one, partly the other: Still holding up this truth, that no order is to be
found in intention between any but such as have the reference of end and means
amongst themselves. As for example, The incarnation of the Son of God is a sole
and single means tending to the manifestation of the greatest free grace of God
that ever was or can be showed to the world; his humiliation respects both our
good and his own. As it respects ours; together with his incarnation, it is a
means to manifest the glory of God in saving us in despite of sin, and that
in the way of justice. In respect of his own good, together with his
advancement, it is a joint means for manifesting the remunerative justice of
God, in rewarding him according to his deserts: in conformity to that of the
Apostle, Therefore has God exalted him. But neither Phil. 2.
this advancement of his, is the end of his humiliation, nor either of these
the end of his assumption into an hypostaticall union with the Son of God:
Nor his hypostaticall union with the second person in Trinity the end of any of
these; and therefore they are to be accounted rather coordinate then
subordinate in the intention of God.

2. Now I come to examine how this doubt is cleared. Here we have first a rule,
then the accommodation of this rule. Touching the rule I acknowledge it, and I
add something to the clearing of it. Granting that there is no order in Gods
decrees, but such as is grounded upon this, that God purposes one thing for
another. This one thing and another are only the end and the means; between
which we say, in the intention of God there is only prioritas rationis,
priority of reason; which in my judgment is well expounded thus: when ratio
unius petitur a ratione alterius, the reason of the one is taken from the
reason of the other; as ratio mediorum petitur a ratione sinis, the reason of
the means is taken from the reason of the end. And therefore we say, The end is
first in intention, and then the means.

As for the accommodation of the rule, it seems to me to be nothing at all to
the purpose; for the doubt proposed was not how it might appear that there was
any thought of the glorifying of God, before the presupposall of Adams fall,
and of Christ's humiliation. We willingly acknowledge the glory of God was
thought on before them all, both before the incarnation, advancement of the man
Christ, man's fall, and Christ's humiliation: I say, before them all, prioritate
rationis, by priority of reason; for, undoubtedly, both the incarnation of the
Son of God, That is, the hypostaticall union of Christ's manhood to the second
person in the Trinity, and the advancement of the man Christ, was to the glory
of God as the end thereof, as well as ought else. And this glory of God has
been specified at least in part. And as for the glorifying of himself in
Christ, this still denotes the glory of God as the end, though it adds withal
the matter wherein it shines, to wit, the man Christ. And to prevent the error
of equivocation, that usually lurkes under generals. This glorifying of God in
Christ consists either in several, or in common, with the glorifying of
himself in man also; to wit, in the elect, considered in several. I confess
there is a double glory of God, manifested in Christ: The one is the glory of
his pure grace in conferring the greatest good and honor that the creature is
capable of, as namely in the hypostaticall union of the manhood of Christ to
the second person in the Trinity.

Secondly the glory of Gods remunerative justice in the highest degree
possible, both in respect of the reward, the greatest that possibly could be
deserved (for that hypostaticall union could not be deserved) and that is the
glorisication of the humane nature of Christ, both in respect of his glory
absolute, and of his glory relative, as by whom salvation is procured to
others: as also in respect of the desert, the greatest I think that possibly
could be, to wit, the humiliation of the Son of God to the death of the
cross in way of obedience to his Fathers will. There is also a glory of God
that appears in Christ, not in several, as a sole means thereof, but in
common with other means jointly concurring thereunto: and that is the glory of
God in the way of mercy mixed with justice, in saving sinners for the obedience
of Christ. The glory of God in all these several ways was in the first place
intended by God before ought else, prioritate rationis, in prioritie of reason;
and afterward the congruous means to these several ends, as the ends them
selves did bespeake, were intended by him: for ratio medioru^ petitur a ratione
sinis; the reason of the means is taken from the reason of the end. But all
this is nothing to show that the incarnation of the second person, or
advancement of the man Christ, should be before the consideration of man's fall,
or Christ's humiliation. Yet let us examine that which follows, delivered by
way of proof of that which no man, that I know, makes question of.

Because Christ was ordained before the world was, therefore before the
consideration either of Creation or Fall. For, in scripture Answ. 1.
phrase, when God is said to do one thing before another, he means before
the existence or being of it in his consideration, as an inducement leading him
unto it, as well as before the existence of it by nature: As when God is said
to have loved Jacob rather then Esau before they had done either good or evil.
Romans 9. 11. He means before they had done it in his consideration, as a cause
or condition leading him to love, or hatred, as well as in actual performance
in their own persons.

I pray consider, why was Christ ordained, and to what end, before the world
was? Was he not ordained to be incarnate in Exam.
the womb of the Virgin, and to be a Lamb for a burnt offering, to make
satisfaction for sins? And was it possible that this ordination could have
course without consideration of the creation and fall? And though this be
confessed, yet will it not here hence follow, that the decree of creation and
permission of man's fall, was before the decree of the incarnation of the Son
of God: which alone, as I conceive, casts some men's inventions upon the
platform of a new course. And consequently it will not follow, that, in this
case, the consideration of creation and fall should precede as motives to God
to send his Son: For first, I say, the considerations hereof are not all
precedent, but conjunct and concomitant, like as are the decrees. Secondly, if
they did precede, yet should they not precede as motives. Good or evil works
are fit motives, I confess, of election and reprobation, if it were possible
their considerations could precede the one or the other: But creation and fall
are no fit motives of ordaining Christ, (for they were found in Angels as well
as in men) though the consideration of them could precede this ordination. 2.
Election is as expressly said to be before the foundation of the world, as the
ordination of Christ. And was not reprobation in opposition to election in the
same moment of time and nature also? Does not election connotate reprobation?
But it will be said that this phrase, before the world, signifies not any
measure of duration when that work was done, but a negation of any
consideration had of the creation or fall. This seems a very strange
construction; therefore it deserves to be discussed.

3. Before Abraham was I am; would you interpret it thus: Before the
consideration of Abraham, I am? Before the Child shall have knowledge to eschew
the evil, and to choose the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be
forsaken of both her Kings, is the meaning hereof, before the consideration of
the Child's knowledge to eschew the evil and to choose the good?

4. Is not this a manifest course to overthrow our best evidence of the
eternity of election and Christ's ordination? For what evidence does the word
of God afford comparable to these? And we know that out of our selves some
have risen, denying the eternity of Gods decrees: and shall we do them such
acceptable service, as in blasting such evidences as these that make against
them? Then let us go and interpret accordingly the Apostle, where he speaks
of some thing promised (...), and say the meaning is, before the consideration
of those (...), times consisting of many ages, or some thing in them, I know
not what. 2 Timothy 1. 9.


5. I grant, before they had done good or evil, Rom 9. is as much as before
the consideration of any good or evil done by them. The text it self does
bespeake this meaning. But will it follow that, because before they had done
good or evil, Romans 9. is as much as before the consideration of their good or
evil works; the text bespeaking that sense, therefore, 1 Pet. 1. 20. where
Christ is said to be ordained before the world, it is as much as to say, Christ
was ordained before the consideration of the creation and fall; the text
bespeaking no such interpretation, but rather resisting it, by the comparison
made betwixt the ordination of Christ, and the declaration of Christ; the one
said to be made before the foundations of the world, the other said to be made
in these last times? as much as to say the one before all times, the other not
till these last times: Times with times compared, not consideration of the
creation and fall with these last times.

6. Again, the consideration of works, good or evil, are fit motives (as has
been said) unto election and reprobation if they could precede them; but the
consideration of the creation and fall, though preceding, yet is no fit motive
to the ordination of Christ; we well know they were found in Angels as well as
in men. By the way, where I pray is it said, that God loved Jacob rather then
Esau? I find it said Romans 9. that God loved Jacob and hated Esau. But if you
take liberty to interpret it thus, He loved Jacob rather then Esau; why may not
I as well take liberty to interpret it thus, God hated Esau rather then Jacob?
yet I confess the former interpretation is made by Cornelius de lapide the
Jesuit.

God chose us before the world in Christ our head, Ephesians. 1. 4. Therefore he
chose Christ also to be our head before the Answ. 2.
world was. For if we be chosen in him, it implies that he, as our head, was
chosen before us in order, and we in him, Now if we who were chosen in Christ,
and so after Christ in order; if we (I say) were chosen before the world, and
so before the consideration either of creation or fall, how much more Christ,
who was chosen before us?

In the allegation of Saint Paul's text, I find something left out that
pertaines to the completing of the sentence: for the sentence Exam.
is this, Who has chosen us in Christ, that we should be holy: Here the latter
part of one entire sentence is quite left out. And by your dismembring it, the
sentence is made causelessly obscure, and so the fitter to serve for advantages.
This is Arminius course, Exam. Page 31. Apostolus ait, nos in Christo electos
esse; The Apostle says, we are elected in Christ. And as something in the text
is left out: so something besides the text is put in, God chose us before the
world in Christ our head. This likewise Arminius insists on, Exam. Page 158.
And mark I pray you how he works upon each; To be elect in Christ, is with
him, to be elect being in Christ: for, nos in Christo, with him is, nos
existentes in Christo. And seeing we are not in Christ but by faith, hereupon
he makes the object of election to be fideles, the faithful; or in Christum
credentes, such as believe in Christ. We answer: first, We may take as great
liberty to interpret it, for explication sake, by supplying a participle of
the future tense, thus, elegit nos futuros in Christo, he chose us hereafter to
be in Christ: (like as it follows, who has predestined us to be adopted.
Now we are adopted by faith, Gal. 3. 26.) as he takes liberty to supply a
participle of the present tense, esspecially, considering that when we were
elect, to wit, before the foundation of the world, we were not at all, and
consequently were not fideles, believers. Secondly we answer, that the
complete sentence, considered at full, does manifest in what sense this phrase
[in Christ] is taken. He chose us in Christ, that we should be holy: This
shows to what we were chosen, to wit, to obtain holiness, and how; to wit,
in Christ, that is, for Christ's sake; Like as v. 3. it is said, God has blessed
us with all spiritual blessings in Heavenly things in Christ Jesus: that is,
for Christ his sake. And like as 1. These. 5. 9. it is said, God has ordained us
to obtain salvation thorough Jesus Christ: So here in a conformable
exposition, when it is said, God has chosen us in Christ, that we should be
holy; a fair meaning may be this, God has ordained us to obtain holiness
through Jesus Christ; especially considering that grace is called salvation 2.
Tim. 1. 9. as well as glory; And thus Arminius himself falls upon Exam. Page
31. Apostolus inquit, nos in Christo electos esse tanquam in mediatore, cujus
sanguine nobis salus parta est. And thus the danger is fairly avoided of
making Christ the cause of our election quoad actum eligentis, which not one of
our Divines, that I know, maintains, save Rolloc. But Arminius, I confess,
labors for it tooth and nail, to no other end, but that so he may somewhat
plausibly bring in faith also, if not as a cause, yet as a pre-requisite at
least of our election. And yet for all the noise he makes in this kind, calling
Christ the foundation of our election, nevertheless the issue is to confess
that all comes to this, that Christ is therefore the foundation of our election
because he is the meritorious cause bonorum electione praeparatorum, of good
things which are prepared by election; such as he specifies to be grace and
glory, as appears both in his public and private disputations. Now, if in
this sense we are said to be elect in Christ, that we should be holy, then it
is clear, we are not elect in Christ tanquam in capite; for, ratio capitis non
est ratio causae meritoriae, as Arminius himself acknowledges, Exam. Page 3.
Apostolus inquit nos electos esse in Christo tanquam in mediatore, cujus
sanguine nobis salus parta est and vita: there a way has causa meritoria, his
course. And then he adds, and ut in capite, ex quo ista bona ad nos
derivantur. So that ratio capitis with him is ratio causae efficientis; not
moraliter, but physice: and therein he says truth. Secondly, observe what he
marks out of this, that we are all elect in Christ, tanquam in capite, for
here-hence he will deduce, that we are elect in Christ tanquam mortuo and
resuscitato, because Christ was not made the head of his Church till after his
resurrection, building as it seems upon that we read Ephesians. 1. 20. Which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his
right hand in heavenly places. 21. Far above all principalities and powers,
and every name that is named, not in this world only, but also in that that is
to come: 22. And has made all things subject under his feet, and has given
him over all things to be the head of the Church. But these discourses, if I be
not deceived, have taken their original from a saying of Austin, namely that
Christus est praedestinatorum caput, Christ is the head of the predestinate.
Therefore I have taken paints to consider the doctrine of Arminius hereabouts,
consisting of three members. First, Christ is the head of the elect or
predestinate. Secondly, our election made in Christ, is made in him as in our
head. Thirdly, Christ is not our head but as he is dead, and raised; which,
because it is much pertinent to the present purpose, I will not spare to set
down, though in another dialect: Ratio illa altera de Christo considerato ut
capite his membris, niti videtur etc. See my vindicia gratiae Dei, lib. 2.
crim. 24. digress. 10. Page 74. col. 2. lin. 50. which was not set forth when I
wrote this, but since it is.

2. But be it granted that we are chosen in Christ as our head; it follows not
here-hence, that Christ Jesus was chosen in order before us. He was ordained to
be a Lamb for a burnt offering to save us, and we were ordained to obtain
salvation through him. What color is here, why the former ordination should be
conceived to go before the latter, and not rather the contrary; seeing our
salvation is plainly intimated to be rather the end of his mission, incarnation
and passion, then his mission, incarnation and passion to be the end of our
salvation? So Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten
Son; where the love of God to us men is designed as a motive with God for the
giving of his Son; yet I do not maintain any such order, I have other
reasons to overthrow that, and to bring both these ordinations to be
coordinate, and not subordinate in the intentions of God. And indeed, as I
have said, if the incarnation of the Son of God were in Gods intention, before
the permission of the sins of the world, it would follow, that the permission
of the sins of the world, even in crucifying Christ, should be first in
execution, that is, Christ should be crucified before he was incarnate.

Christ is said in all things to have a pre-eminence, and God is said to
dispose and carry his Counsels and ways toward the Church, Answ. 3.
that it might appear, Christ in all things to have the pre-eminence. God
deals with us according to the Image of his dealing with him. Col. 1. 18.
Romans 8. 29.
And therefore in the Counsel of God, Christ had the pre-eminence to be first
purposed, and the elect in him, and both them, and the other creatures for him,
that so he might be the first borne among many brethren. Its accounted
somewhat a monstrous and unnatural conception, the feet to be conceived in the
womb before the head: so were it alike unmeet and preposterous course, the
members of Christ to be first thought upon, and conceived in the womb of the
Counsel of Gods predestination, before the head Christ. If God should have had
no thought of the advancement of Christ man to the fellowship of the second
person to become man, till upon the presupposall of the fall of Adam; then were
we not created for Christ, but Christ for us, contrary to that of the Apostle;
And so Christ Col. 1. 16.
shall be brought into the world, as it were, ens per accidens, a thing by
accident, upon occasion of the fall.

When once we have conceived an opinion, we are very prone to take hold of
every thing that carries any show of favoring it, howsoever Exam.
it proves in the issue. Be it that he has a pre-eminence in all things and a
priority; but will you extend this to such things as are not capable of
priority? Is it not confessed that God does not purpose one thing before another
in time? Is not the predestination of Christ, and of the elect all one act in
God? only as God orders one thing for another, so God purposes one thing
for another. Now which has the pre-eminence in Gods predestination, whether
that which is purposed for another, or that for which another thing is
purposed? I presume you will say, that for which another thing is purposed.
why, then consider, whether the salvation of the elect be purposed for the
incarnation and passion of the Son of God, or the incarnation and passion of
the Son of God purposed for the salvation of Gods elect.

2. The pre-eminence the Apostle speaks of is the pre-eminence of Christ's
person, not of the priority of predestination. Now the pre-eminence of a person
always presupposes the being of a person; for, to say a thing had a
pre-eminence before it had any being, is a strange phrase, and contradictions.
Therefore pre-eminence of any person is not to be looked for in predestination,
which is rather in ordaining to pre-eminence, then containing pre-eminence: for
we commonly say, that Praedestinatio nihil ponit in praedestinato,
Predestination puts nothing in the person predestined.

3. But come we nearer to the Apostle, Col. 1. 18. that he might have the
pre-eminence (...) this (...) is indefinite, and may be applied two ways, as
Calvin observes; vel in, omnes creaturas, vel in omni re, either over all
creatures, or in every thing. You take it as in omni re, in every thing, and
indeed so the English translation renders it; but if we find in scripture it
self this indefinite (...), or that which is equivalent thereunto defined, and
that in speaking of the pre-eminence of Christ, why should we not comply with
scripture in the accommodation of it in this place? Now, in the other place
alleged, Romans 8. 29. its defined not to things but to persons, that Christ
might be the first begotten (...), that is, among many brethren; why may we not
then in like sort render it here, that he might have the pre-eminence among all
the children of God? So Luke 1. 28. Blessed art thou among women: So (...),
Inter omnes: So Piscator, Ex cujus sententiae collatione patescit, illud (...)
recte hic redditum esse, inter omnes. Phrasis graeca est, ne quis putet
vertendum esse, in omnibus, scilicet rebus; and Beza, Miminerimus de Christi in
ecclesia regno coepisse ab hoc versiculo disserere, quod nemo negabit qui verba
ipsa vel levissime considerarit, ac proinde universally particula non aliud
comprehendi quam omnes omnium temporum fideles. And so Anselme also, Christus
primus est resurgentium, ut in omnibus sanctis, tam prioribus quam sequentibus,
teneat primatum dignitatis, potentiae, sanctitatis. And Lyra, ut sic in omnibus
primatum tenens, non solum respectu hominum, sed etiam omnium Angelorum.

4. But let it run in the neuter gender, of all things, as Beza confesses it
may be so taken, potest quidem hoc accipi neutro genere, quum in proximo
versiculo scribat; yet what meaning does he make of it but this, vera est
(says he) haec universalis sententia, Christum inter omnia sine ulla
exceptione eminere? making it signify still pre-eminence above or amongst all
things, but not in all things.

5. Taking it as in all things, Ambrose interprets it thus, ut semper in omni
vita sit primus and Princeps: in gratia and gloria (says Aquinas:) In genesi
and resurrectione, (says Cajetan:) Tam in visibilibus quam in invisibilibus
creaturis, (says Hierome.) Some practical Divines extend it far,
interpreting it according to our English translation; as, first in time, first
in order, first in the dignity of the person, first in degree, first in
government, first in acceptance with God, first effectively as the cause of
all the respect, order, and excellency in others, none extending it to
predestination.

6. Nay, consider whether the text it self be not against it, He is the head
of the body of the Church, the beginning, the first begotten of the dead, that
in all things he might have the pre-eminence. Now consider, was Christ made the
head of the body of the Church; was he the first begotten of the dead, to this
end, that he might have the pre-eminence in predestination?

When it is said, that the other creatures were for him, that so he might be
the first borne among many brethren; I find want of convenient proportion: for
what did the being of other creatures for him further his primacie or eldership
amongst many brethren?

It is true, all things were for him: but take the rest along with this; all
things are created by him and for him: which clearly has reference to his
Godhead, one with the Father and holy Ghost, as Romans 11. From him, and by him,
and for him are all things: and Heb. 2. 10.

It is, I confess, Master Baynes his conceit, that it is as unmeete and
preposterous for the members of Christ to be first thought upon in the womb of
Gods counsel in predestination, as it is accounted monstrous and unnatural
for the feet to be conceived in the womb before the head. And is it not as
unnatural to have the feet brought forth before the head? Yet we know many
thousands of Christ's members were brought forth, both into the world of nature,
and into the world of grace, before the man Christ. Yet am not I of their
minds that think that any was elect before the predestination of Christ. I
say with Aquinas, si consideretur praedestinatio Christi and nostra, quantum ad
actum praedestinantis, sic una non est causa alterius, quia idem non est causa
sui ipsius; sed eodem actu divino praedestinatus est Christus and nos: ergo
praedestinatio Christi non est causa nostrae praedestinationis. Si vero
consideretur quoad effectum and terminum, cum effectus nostrae
praedestinationis sit gratia, and gloria, and adoptio siliorum; sic dicendum,
quod utraque praedestinatio Christi causa est praedestinationis nostrae and
efficiens and exemplaris. And I hope it is nothing unmeet that God should at
once think of Christ and his elect; as at once he thought of Angels and
worms; especially considering that Christ and his elect are correlatives; as
he the head and they his mystical body. Nay at once God did from everlasting
both know himself, and know all things in himself. Yet I am persuaded the
chiefest motive to devise a prioritie of Christ's predestination before others,
was only this conceit, that if it be not prior, it must needs be posterior.
But I have endeavored in brief to show here (as elsewhere more at large) that
the predestination of Christ is neither prior nor posterior to the
predestination of the elect. And indeed most are so pusled about devising a
right place for the predestination of Christ amongst the decrees of God, that
usually that is left quite out, because they know not where to find a fit
place for it: and all because they presume he must be predestinate either
before the decree of creation and premission of sin, or after; neither of
which can hold water, but they are both equally removed from the truth.

Where we are said to be created for Christ, it is jointly said, we were
created by Christ, which undoubtedly proceeds of Christ as God. And if Adam had
not fallen, but the world of mankind stood in integrity, what glory had
redounded to the man Christ more by our creation, then by the creation of
Angels?

Though God had decreed the advancement of the man Christ upon presupposall of
Adams fall (which yet I hold to be impossible) yet this had not hinderd but we
had been created for Christ, and that diverse ways: 1. To reap benefit by him
after our fall. 2. To be of the number of those over whom the man Christ should
one day rule, if not in grace (for thousands were out of that state before
Christ man had any being) yet in glory. 3. As also to glorify him both in this
world (though this is verified of those only who were brought forth after his
incarnation, for Christ man had no being before, and consequently could not be
glorified before) and in the world to come. Yet it cannot be denied, but that
Christ also was both incarnate, and lived, and died for us and for our
salvation, though that of the Apostle which you mention is nothing to this
purpose, as spoken of Christ God, and not of Christ man.

Undoubtedly, Christ came into the world upon the occasion of man's fall, for he
came into the world as a Physician, and to call sinners unto repentance; which
had been merely in vain, had not sin entered into the world by Adam.

It does not follow, that if we were not created for Christ, but Christ for us,
then Christ should be brought into the world as Ens per accidens; for the
heavens and the earth, together with the fights of the one, and herbs and
trees of the other, and bruit beasts, were created for man and not man for
them; yet neither of them all were brought forth as Ens per accidens: yet, had
they been brought forth per accidens, never-a-whit the more had they been
Entia per accidens; Entia per se may be brought forth per accidens: to be Ens
per accidens is one thing, and to be brought forth per accidens is another
thing.

It had been more tolerable to argue thus; If Christ had been brought forth
into the world only upon occasion of Adams fall, then he had been brought
forth per accidens; yet no truth had been found in it; for upon occasions
wisemen do work, and proceed deliberately and with counsel, not
temerariously; only man, not forseeing the events of things, does many times
(upon emergent occasions which himself could not foresee) alter his former
counsels, and cast himself upon new deliberations. It is otherwise with God,
as who infallibly foreseeth all things, and not only fore-seeth them, but
ordains they shall come to pass as well as he ordains causes and effects.
For, not the things themselves are ordained by God, but also the very order of
them; some to be effects, some causes, some occasions. And so the very fall of
Adam was both foreseen and foreordained by God to come to pass; but how? Not
as good things which he ordains to come to pass, ipso faciente, himself
working them; but as all evil things which are ordained also to come to pass,
but Deo tantummodo permittente qua mala sunt, God only permitting them as they
are evil; according to that of Austin, Non aliquid fit nisi Omnipotens fieri
velit, vel sinando ut fiat, vel ipse faciendo. Enchirid. 95. And according to
the 11. article of Ireland, God did from all eternity ordain whatsoever in
time should come to pass.

That which is first in the intention of every agent, is last in execution. Now
the glory of Christ is last in execution (save only the Answ. 4.
glory of the Father;) And therefore surely it was Gods first and chiefest
intendment, after the glorifying of himself, to glorify Christ, before the
consideration of glorifying us, either in the first or second Adam, Psalm. 2. 9,
10, 11. It is true, in fulness of time Christ was first humbled, that he might
be glorified; but yet in Gods counsel (wherein the end in order is first purpo
ed, before the means leading to that end) the glorious advancement of Christ
was first purposed, before the presupposall of his humiliation, which made way
for it. The Apostle describing the subordination of things one to another, in
the order wherein God has set them; the world to be for the Church, and the
Church for Christ, and Christ for God; he thereby gives us to understand, God
first intended his glory, for which are all things, and then Christ's, for whom
the Church is, and then the Church, for which the world is, and then the world
last of all.

Here we have an argument, and a place of scripture wherewith it is backed: I
will consider them severally. Exam. 1.


1. As for the argument; that is grounded upon such a rule as I desire no
better direction for the right ordering of Gods decrees, which is the matter
we have in hand; but in the prosecuting of the argument in hand, upon this
rule, I find no soundnes, no truth, neither in the matter nor in the method.
For first, though the rule be proposed only of two, the first and last; yet in
the exemplification there is mention made of three, as if the rule did not only
extend to first and last; but also to former and latter, how many ways soever
they are in subordination; that look what subordination they have in
execution, the contrary subordination they should have in intention; which will
be found contrary to all reason: As for example, the last of the good of man is
his glory, but how? Both of body and soul in the resurrection. But before this
there was a glory of the soul in departure from the body, or a blessed
condition of it, accordingly as they are called the spirits of just men
perfected, Heb. 12. and they enjoy Christ's presence, 2 Cor. 5. Now shall we
say, that in Gods intention was the glory of body and soul, jointly first, and
secondly the glory of the soul in departure from the body? Come we to the
state of grace, there we have in execution, first effectual calling unto
faith, and repentance, after this perseverance final in both; shall we
therefore say, God did first intend to give them perseverance in faith and
repentance, and then intend to give them faith and repentance? Or that God did
first intend to give them repentance, secondly intend to permit them to sin?
After this manner, I confess, Piscator had sometimes ordered Gods decrees,
wherein upon due examination I have scarce found one member sound: But see the
issue of it; upon latter thoughts he fell quite off from this order, and
embraced the contrary in every particular, and so recompensed his extreme
rashness with extreme loosnesse. And no marveile, for truth alone is stable;
as for error, it is a slippery thing, there is no stabilitie in it. Secondly
here is nothing but miserable confusion throughout: First in the word glory;
for the glory of the Father is delivered in one sense, our glory in another
sense. And as for the glory of Christ, in what sense that is delivered, is
utterly uncertain; as whether in conformity to the glory of the Father, or in
conformity to our glory, or in conformity to both, which will be so much the
more equivocall: by that which goes before, it may seem to be spoken in
conformity to the glory of God the Father; as when it is often inculcated,
that all things were made for him: by that which comes after, it may seem to
be spoken in conformity to our glory; as when it is said, the glorious
advancement of Christ was first purposed. Again, the glory of God the Father
is in very great variety; and therefore it behooved to be specified in what
kind the glory of God herein specified is to be understood: as I will show in
the first place, when I come to oppose it particularly.

Secondly the glory of Christ is very ambiguous, both in respect of his person,
as whether it be spoken of him in respect of his Godhead, or of his manhood;
and it is nothing sit these should be confounded: as also in respect of the
word glory it self; for it is to be doubted (as before I said) whether it be
spoken in conformity to the glory of the Father, or in conformity to our
glory. And out of such a mass of confusion what satisfaction can be expected
in any distinct and particular truth? 3. I see no reason why the glory of
Christ only should be considered as the means of advancing the glory of God
the Father. I conceive the glory of God is as much seen in the abasing of his
Son, as in his exaltation; and if this very abasing of himself be called his
glory, as indeed it may; for even on the cross he spoiled principalities and
powers, and made a show of them openly, and triumphed over them, Col. 2. then
this discourse shall labor with a new aequivocation. In like sort, Is nothing
but our glory a fit means to advance the glory of Christ, and of God? Is not
God glorified as well in the martyrdom of his Saints? This is my confidence
(says Paul) that God shall be glorified in my body, whether by life or by
death, Philip. 1. yea and Christ also; Even when we bear about us the dying of
the Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus might also be made manifest in our
bodies. 2 Cor. 4. 10 If our glory also be extended unto martyrdom, this is a
very sore aequivocation, especially considering how the scripture does
distinguish them: first to suffer, then to enter into glory, Luke 24. 26. and
if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. 12. 4. But as
it lies, let us discuss it as well as we can. Therefore I say, first, Gods
glory is not only last in execution, but first also; even from the very first
creation, even then when the stars of the morning praised him, and all the
Sons of God rejoiced, Job 38. 7. And I will deal plainly, and show what
glory of his was manifested herein, to wit, the glory of his power, Revel. 4.
11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou
have created all things, and for thy wills sake they have been and are
created. Yea and his wisdom also, Psalm. 130. 5. which by his wisdom made the
heavens. Jeremiah puts them both together, He has made the earth by his power,
and established the World by his wisdom, and has stretched out the heavens by
his discretion. And as in the creation, so the same glory of God does send
forth 'its beams in the preservation and governance of all things. In the
meanest creatures we behold the glory of God; neither are we able to comprehend
the wisdom of God therein; every thing therein, as in a Be or silke-worme,
coming to pass by course of nature; yet who is able to give a reason of it? I
think, if Solomon had continued to this day, and his wisdom with him, yet had
he not been able to find it out; for although the spirit of man be as the
lamp of God, Verse. 10, 27.
which searches all inwardnesse, and God has set the world in man's heart, yet
is he not able to find out the work that he has Eccles. 3. 11.
wrought from the beginning to the end. I behold the flowers of my garden, in
great variety of colors; yet wonder at their uniformitie; each single one
has five leaves, each most uniforme in the color, in the shape, rising, and
spreading, and indented alike in their edges; all together make a most comely
proportion of the whole round in form, only indented in the edges, which is as
bonelace to set it forth, some of one color throughout the pageant, speckled,
having strakes like lines, so direct and proportionable in all, that it
represents unto me some curious Mathematical circle cut thorough with lines,
the matter of many curious demonstrations. And what a curious speculation would
it appear to represent the causes of all this variety? In the mean time, our
contemplation is broken off, and loses it self, and turns into admiration at
the wisdom of God, which confounds us in the contemplation of a flower, which
is worn in the breast at morning, and trodden under foot at night. But to
return, you will say, Another kind of glory is seen in the advancement of
Christ; but then you should have specified it: which had you done, I doubt not
but it would have afforded good matter to have wrought upon in the
investigation of truth. 2. As the glorifying of God the Father was the very
first, even from the creation, before either Christ man was, or we; so I say,
it is not so last, as if it should be after Christ's glory, and our glory shall
cease to be; for certainly, the glory of Christ, and the glory of the elect
shall continue for ever; and the glory of God cannot continue any longer then
for ever.

3. Come we to the consideration of the glory of Christ: There is a glory of
Christ which he receives from man, and there is a glory of Christ which he
receives from God: That glory which he receives from man, he has received
in greatest part long before we were born; for it is the Fathers pleasure,
That all men should honor the Son, as they honor the Father, Joh. 5. 23.
There is the Rule: here follows the Example; Worthy is the Lamb that was
killed to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
glory, and praise. And all the creatures which are in heaven, and on earth, and
under the earth, and in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying,
Praise, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that sits upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore, Revel. 5. 12, 13.

As for the glory which he receives from his Father, that he has already
received above 1500. years ago. I have overcome, and am sat with my Father in
his Throne, Revel. 3. If God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him
in himself, and shall straightway glorify him, Joh. 13. 32. So that every
way the glory of Christ, is before ours, not after ours; for when the elect are
once glorified, their glory shall continue for the time to come as long as
Christ's glory: but for the time past, certainly, Christ's glory and his
advancement, you here speak of, (noting thereby what you mean by Christ's glory
in this place) was long before ours. Whereas you say, that Christ, as man, was
first humbled, before he was glorified; if we consider the greatest
advancement of Christ, it is untrue; for his greatest advancement was the
assuming of his nature into an hypostaticall union with the Son of God, and
this was before his humiliation in the sense you speak of, to wit, in humbling
himself to the death, even to the death of the Cross: though I willingly
confess, the humiliation of the Godhead went jointly along with the
advancement of the manhood, even to this hypostaticall union. You say, His
advancement was purposed before his humiliation. I deny it: You will say, that
was the means tending to his advancement, as the end (for so I take your
meaning to be, leaving the consideration of the phrase mentioned of making way;
which if it be delivered in any other sense then to signify the means of his
advancement, will make your cause worse, and nothing better.) For now I deny
that Christ's humiliation was the means of Christ's advancement; and I prove it:
Those only are to be accounted means to such an end, quorum ratio petitur a
ratione finis designati, that is, the means are only such as the nature of the
end, duly considered, does bespeake: But the advancement of Christ does not
bespeake any such means; for, undoubtedly, God could advance Christ without
any such humiliation: nay, having taken his manhood into an hypostaticall union
with his Son, even in this respect his advancement was far more requisite, than
in respect of his humiliation. You will say, God purposed to advance him no
other way then this. I grant it: and if you consider it well, you shall find
the reason of it, by considering the right ends hereof in the counsel of God:
And these are different; one was in respect of others, to wit, that he might be
a fit Savior of Gods elect: not that their salvation was the end of his
humiliation; but the glory of God, in a certain kind, the end of both, to wit,
both of his humiliation and our salvation; namely, the glory of his free grace,
in the way of mercy mixed with justice. This end required satisfaction, as
without which it could not be procured. But here, I confess, the advancement
of Christ has no place: but in another consideration it shall find place, and
that as a joint means together with his humiliation; for another kind of glory
would God the Father manifest in Christ: (And, indeed, the Nation of mankind is
as a glass, wherein a very complete body of Gods glory does appear, in very
great variety:) and that was, the manifestation of his glory in the way of
remunerative justice, in the highest degree remunerating obedience: I say, in
the highest degree, both in respect of the reward deserved, and also in respect
of the desert it self: the reward being the sitting in the Throne of his
Father, and to have all judgment committed unto the Son; the desert being the
obedience of the Son of God, one and the same God with his Father, humbling
himself to death, even to the death of the cross, for the salvation of Gods
elect. But perhaps you may further say, It is not necessary that the means
should be only such as the end does naturally require; For, God could have
brought man to salvation the same way he brought Angels, without faith and
repentance; yea, he could have made them, and immediately have translated them
into glory: yet we commonly say, Faith and Repentance are the means of
salvation. I answer, granting not only that we commonly say so, but that we
truly say so, in respect of our selves; namely, that as salvation is the scope
and end we aim at, so faith and repentance are the only means to bring us
thereunto; but in respect of God it is utterly untrue; for neither is our
salvation the end of Gods actions, but his own glory: He made all things for
himself, Prove. 16. 4. And if it were his end, he could have brought it about
diverse other ways besides this: but in that he brings it to pass this way,
there is good reason for it, as we shall well perceive, if we take the end of
God aright, namely, to manifest his glory in doing good to man in the highest
degree, and that in the way of mercy mixed with justice. This end does
necessarily require a permission of sin; again, it does require satisfaction,
as by the death of Christ; and thirdly, it does require faith and repentance,
that so he may do him good, by way of reward; and lastly, a glorious
salvation, which is the doing of him good in the highest degree. And as man's
salvation is not the end of Gods actions, so neither is the glory of Christ, as
he is man, the end of Gods actions; for such a glory inherent can but be a
created glory, and no created thing can be the end of Gods actions; but only
God himself: For, as he is the chief efficient of all, so must he be the
supreme end of all: and as he is most lovely, and most good; so must he
necessarily love that most which is most lovely, even himself, and aim at his
own glory in all.

2 Now I come to the Apostles Text, wherewith this Argument is backed, 1 Cor. 3.
22, 23. All are yours, and ye Christ's, and Christ Gods: that is, say you, The
world for the Church, and the Church for Christ, and Christ for God: thereby
giving us to understand, That God first intended his glory, for which are all
things; and then Christ, for whom the Church is; and then the Church, for which
the world is; and then the world last of all. But, I pray you, consider whether
this Interpretation, and Collection thereupon, be not more superficiary than
sound: First, when he says, All are yours, is the world only to be understood
by all? Is not the world expressly named but as a member of this universal? Are
not Paul, Apollos, and Cephas also joined with it; together with life, and
death, and things present, and things to come, and jointly comprehended under
the word all? Verse 21. Let no man rejoice in men, for all things are yours,
Verse 22. Whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
death; whether they be things present, or things to come, even all are yours,
23. And ye Christ's, and Christ Gods. As he was persuaded, Romans 8. 38. That
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, 39. Nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, should be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord; and therefore we need not fear them: So here he goes
further, and tells us, that all are put, as it were, in subjection unto us, to
work for our good; and therefore we should not rejoice in them, but rather in
Christ, and in God, who has wrought this, and ordered all this for our good,
through the merits of Christ: not only Apostles and Pastors, but even the very
Angels also, who pitch their tent about us, and have charge given them, to keep
us in all our ways; and all of them are sent forth for the good of them that
are heirs of salvation: Yet this subjection is only of a spiritual and
gracious nature, nothing prejudicing their advancement above them whom they
thus serve in love; and that for this their service performed for Gods sake, to
whom rather they are in subjection then unto us; yet so far in subjection to
work our good, that it becomes us not to rejoice in any of them, but rather in
God, who has thus ordered them for our good, and Christ for whose sake they
are thus ordered: An Argument, like to that the Lord uses, Deuteronomy. 4. 19. Take
heed lest thou lift up thine eyes to heaven, and when thou see the sun, and
the moon, and the stars, with all the host of heaven, should be driven to
worship them, and serve them. Now mark the reason whereupon the Lord dehorts
them from this, which the Lord thy God has distributed to all people under the
whole heaven: as much as to say, God has made them to do you service,
therefore do not you make them your gods: So Pastors, and Apostles, and
Angels, are made by God to do us service, therefore set not us make them our
gods. Thus we see plainly by All, in this place, not the world only, but the
Church of God is signified; every one of them being made to do service unto
the Church, that is, one unto another; For, are they not all members of one
body, though some perform more honorable service then others? like as in a
natural botly, some members are more honorable, and for more honorable uses
than others. Unless we thus understand it, we shall exclude the Apostles out
of the Church. And when it is said, We are Christ's, this seems not to admit
the same sense with the former; for, undoubtedly, Christ is as much for our
good as any, nay more then all the world, the Apostles, and Angels, and all;
for unto us he was born, unto us he was given, Esa. 9. 6. given by the
Father, Joh. 3. 16. given by himself, and that for us, Tit. 2. 14. Gal. 2. 20.
and that to dye for our sins, and rise again for our justification, Romans 4.
and, to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purge us a peculiar people unto
himself, zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. and that by his blood, 1 John 1.
7. Revel. 1. 5. We are therefore his, not so much in respect of any good we
bring to him, but in respect that he has bought us; And so we are Gods too,
as, Who sent his Son to redeem us unto God his Father, Revel. 5. 9. Ye are
bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your bodies, and in your
spirits, for ye are Gods, 1 Cor. 6. 20. And Christ is Gods in special manner;
as touching his Godhead, the natural Son of God; as touching his Manhood
assamed into an hypostaticall union with his natural Son: in both, the
Chief Servant of God, for the work of mediation and redemption, for Gods
elect, given by the Father unto him, that he might bestow eternal life upon
them, Joh. 17. 2. according to the good pleasure of his Father, Mar. 10. 40.
Thus I have been bold to deliver my judgment touching the Interpretation of
this place, without consulting any Interpreter; only the native genius of the
Text it self seemed to afford sufficient light, and evidence, to discern the
meaning thereof; which I willingly submit to the judgment of any.

It is no part of my meaning to dispute, much less to determine, whether
Christ should have been incarnate, if Adam had never Answ.
fallen: I conceive it a question no less frivolous, then curious. The purpose
of glorifying Christ, though it presuppose not the creation or fall of man, as
making way for such an intention in God, yet does it enforce the creation and
fall of Adam, as making way for this purpose.

Nothing, usually, does cause more perturbation and hinderance in the
inquisition of truth, than incommodious expressions: The Exam.
purpose of glorifying Christ (say you) presupposes not the creation and fall.
No marvel, for the creation and fall are things temporal; but Gods purposes
are eternal. Again, such a purpose (you say) does not make way to any such
intention: This phrase, such intention, is spoken in reference to the creation
and fall; as if they were intentions, which indeed they are not; but rather
executions of intentions: it should run thus, As making way for the intentions
of such things in God. Purpose and Intention signifying the same, it is good to
keep our selves in one sentence to the use of one of them, lest we expose our
Readers to distraction, possibly suspecting they may have different
significations. Your meaning, questionless, is this, Gods intention of
glorifying Christ does not presuppose the intention of creation or fall of
Adam: And I am of your mind in this. But your meaning contains two things
more, whereof the first is this, Gods intention of the creation and fall, does
presuppose his intention of glorifying Christ: The second is this, Gods
intention of glorifying Christ, does infer the intention of creation and fall
of Adam. As in both these I differ from you, so I will endeavor to disprove
your opinion in both. And first, I prove that the intention of glorifying
Christ, was not before the intention of creation, and permission of Adams fall.
For although this may seem plausible, for as much as thus the glorifying of
Christ, as it is first in intention, so also shall it be most congruously last
in execution; yet according to this very rule, the issue will fall more foul
then you are aware of; For, to begin with the Creation; if the glorifying of
Christ were before creation, then also was it much more before the generation
of all mankind: but this will appear to be most untrue, by the same rule; for,
if in comparison of the glorifying of Christ, with the generation of all
mankind, the glorifying of Christ was first in intention, then accordingly it
should be last in execution, which is most untrue; for that of the Apostle,
Heb. 9. 2. We see Jesus crowned with glory and honor, was delivered above
1500. years ago, and yet the generation of all mankind is not in execution.
Again, if the glorifying of Christ were first in intention, then was it the
end, and the generation of all mankind should be as the means tending to the
furthering of that end; but what, I pray, does the generation of a little child
of mine tend to the furtherance of the glory of Christ, wherewith he was
crowned above 1500. years ago? Come we to the permission of Adams fall: I say,
the glorifying of Christ was not in intention before this, though it seems
never so plausible in respect of congruity in execution; for, by reason of
incongruity, in the very same kind, I disprove it thus; If the glorifying of
Christ were in Gods intention before the permission of Adams fall, then much
more was it before the permission of other men's sins in Gods intention; but
this is most untrue, upon the very same ground: For, if in comparison between
the glorifying of Christ, and the permission of all men's sins to the end of
the world, the glorifying of Christ were first in Gods intention, then should
it be last in execution; which is most untrue: for the glorifying of Christ was
accomplished above 1500. years ago, as has been showed; but the permission of
all men's sins, to the end of the world, is not yet in execution. Again, if
the glorifying of Christ were first in intention, then should it have rationem
finis, and the permission of all men's sins, to the end of the world, should
be a congruous means to that end: but to aver this were most unreasonable;
for what furtherance does my sins this day and hour afford to the glorifying
of the Son of God, which was accomplished 1500. years ago? If it be replied,
that this glorifying of Christ is spoken in reference to a glory of Christ
which is yet to come, to wit, the kingdom of Christ which we look for, 2 Timothy
4. 1. I answer, there is no reason why it should have any particular reference
unto that; for as much as that glory shall have an end: For that kingdom shall
continue but for a while; He must reign till he has put all his enemies
under his feet, 1 Cor. 15. 25. And, When all things shall be subdued unto him,
then shall the Son himself be subject to him that did subdue all things
under him, that God may be all in all, Verse 28. Again, if the glorifying of
Christ were in Gods intention before the permission of Adams fall, then were it
before the permission of reprobates to fall in Adam, as well as of Gods elect,
and consequently before the permission of all sins of the reprobates, unto
the end of the world, and before their generations; and all these should be
first in execution, as means tending to the furthering and promotion of the
glory of Christ Secondly, I deny that the intention of glorifying Christ does
infer either the creation of Adam or his fall; yet, by the way, I am glad to
see you acknowledge, that the intention of the end does infer the intention
of congruous means: But seeing, by that I have already showed, it must infer
as well the generation of all mankind, to the end of the world; therefore, I
pray, what color of reason can be devised, why it should infer the
generation of such a number of men as shall be, precisely, rather then more or
less? So in respect of permission of Adams fall, I have already proved, that
the glorifying of Christ must be before the permission of men's sins, to the end
of the world, as well as of Adams fall, and consequently infer that as well
as the other: And what color of reason can be given, why it should precisely
infer the permission of just so many men's sins, and just so many sins of
such men as shall be to the end of the world, neither more nor less? Again,
if the intention of glorifying Christ does infer Adams fall, then seeing by
denying the Consequents the Antecedent must be as justly denied, it follows
manifestly, that if Adam had not sinned, Christ had not been glorified, and
consequently, had not been advanced to an hypostaticall union with the second
person in Trinity: And yet to make question thereof, you profess to be no
less frivolous than curious. I confess, it is rather frivolous than curious
to draw that into question, the negative whereof does evidently follow upon
that which is positively received. Again, others, of the same opinion with
you, are driven to take notice of this Question, for to derive this opinion of
yours from a more ancient original than Mr. Baynes upon the ^p^stle to the
Ephesians, Petrus Alphonsus Mendoza, a Spaniard, maintains the same; A Doctor
of the Chair in the University of Salamanca, not of Moses Chair, nor of Paul's
Chair, no nor Austins Chair, nor of Aquinas Chair, but of Scotus Chair;
whose opinion is to be seen in his first Theological Controversy, printed 42.
years ago; and what his opinion was, appears by these conclusions:

1. Omnium quae Deus ab aeterno in mente sua facere excogitavit, primum fuit,
unio hypostatica verbi divini: Secundum, praedestinatio omnium electorum:
Tertium, naturae rerum conditio. Ac proinde priora sunt supernaturalia quam
naturalia, and ordo naturae praesupponit ordinem gratiae.

2. Nullius futuri praescientia praesupponitur in mente Dei ad
praedestinationem, sed omnia ex ipsa sequuntur: atque adeo nihil prorsus ab
aeterno decrevit Deus facere, vel in tempore facit, nihil permittit, sive
intendit, sive natural, sive supernaturale, sive res sit magni ponderis, sive
minimi and fere nullius, quod non inde perveniat, sitque effectus and medium
praedestinationis electorum and Christi. Atque adeo omnia cadunt sub ordine
divinae praedestinationis, tanquam media ad Christi and sanctorum gloriam
ordinata.

3. Non est aliqua alia providentia in Deo antecedens praedestinationem, ex
qua, scil. providentia, proveniant res naturales and quidam alij effectus
supernaturales; sed unica est duntaxat providentia, ipsaque est praedestinatio,
ex qua omnia in universum nullo prorsus excepto, habent sequi. Atque adeo juxta
hanc conclusionem totum universum ut complectitur, naturalia and
supernaturalia, bora and mala, substantias and accidentia, and omnes in
universum modos essendi and operandi, non solum in general, sed in specie and
individuo, sunt consideranda, tanquam unicam objectum total divinae
praedestinationis, ita ut nihil omnino sit quod subterfugiat illius objecti
latitudinem, and quod non cadat sub actu illo praedestinationis.

4. Si electorum praedestinatio futura non esset, nihil esset omnino in rerum
natura. Itaque statuo tanquam certum, quod nisi Christus futurus esset in
mundo, nulla fuisset a Deo facta electorum praedestinatio, non existente autem
praedestinatione, ex cujus vi secuta sunt omnia, non esset coelum, non terra,
non reliqua elementa, non viventia, non homines, non Angeli, non peccata, non
daemones, non reprobi, and demum, ut uno totum verbo absolvam, solus Deus
esset, and nihil aliud esset a Deo, neque natural neque supernaturale, neque
bonum neque malum; loquimur secundum communem rerum legem and ordinem, and
juxta eos sines quos probabiliter suspicamur Deum habuisse in creaturarum
condition. Nam nequaquam intendimus divinae potentiae majestatem sic nostrae
imbecillitatis captui alligare, ut negemus potuisse Deum quae sua est absoluta
potentia, naturam rerum independenter a gratia and gloria, and gratiam
independenter a Christo Domino facere and ordinare.

Then he proceeds to show, how many, seeming to favor this opinion of his,
yet take quite contrary courses in the maintenance thereof, such as tend rather
to the destruction of it; and they are in number five.

Hence he proceeds to the justification of his own Tenet: and his first
confirmation is derived from that of Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 13. All are yours, and ye
are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Ecce ubi (says he) qua ratione Christus
dicitur esse Dei, and praedestinati dicuntur esse ipsius Christi; eadem ratione
omnia naturalia, sive praesentia, sive futura, sive vita, sive mors, dicuntur
esse praedestinatorum: Sed sic est, quod ideo dicitur Christus esse Dei, and
electi dicuntur esse Christi, quia Deus est finis Christi, and Christus
electorum, id est, quia Christus ordinatur in Deum tanquam in finem, and electi
in Christum tanquam in finem: and nisi esset ille primus finis, id est, Deus,
vel manifestatio gloriae Dei, non esset Christus; and nisi esset Christus, non
essent electi: ergo omnino eadem ratione creature ideo dicuntur esse electorum,
quia sunt propter electos, and electi sunt fines earum; and sic nisi essent
futuri electi, non essent naturae creaturarum, etc.

His second proof is taken from that Ephesians. 1. 4. Elegit nos in ipso ante
mundi constitutionem. Loquitur vero de Christo homine, viz. de Christo capite,
ut express ibi dicit Hieronymus, and ex contextu apertissime liquet. Certe,
aut ego fallor, aut D. Paulus non id tantum intendit, quod, viz. nos Deus in
Christo elegerit ante veram and realem mundi constitutionem, quae fuit abhinc
sex mill annis in tempore facta. Quod enim nos in Christo elegisset ante illam
temporariam rerum creationem, non erit quid magnum and tanto calamo dignum; Sic
enim etiam boves and lapides elegit: i. Decrevit and praevidit ante temporariam
rerum creationem, quand^quid^m priusquam in tempore quidquam faceret, jam illud
ante mundi constitutionem and ab aeterno excogitaverat ac decreverat ut
faceret; aliquid ergo altius and divinius Paulus intendit, nempe, quod in sua
Deus aeternitate cum excogitavit de constituendo mundo, jam prius ordine
rationis excogitaverat de electione electorum, jam (inquam) Christum intenderat
and praeviderat, and in ipso praedestinatos elegerat.

Other places he draws to the same purpose, and concludes with the Argument
of Scot, which in his judgment is ratio efficacissima; Omnis ordinate volens
prius vult finem, and ex mediis ea prius quae sunt fini propinquiora: Sed
Christus and praedestinati, ac proinde omnia supernaturalia sunt fini, id est,
manifestationi divinae bonitatis, propinquiora quam omnia naturalia, ergo prius
quam naturalia volita sunt a Deo supernaturalia, and his prius manifestatio
ipsa divinae bonitatis, quam confideramus ut horum omnium finem, etc.

And withal, he shows that himself is not alone in this opinion, but that
the same is maintained by Jacobus Naclantus, upon the 1. Chapter of Ephesians. in a
digression, Quo ordine and ratione de rebus definitum fuerit apud Deum.
Albertus Pigh. lib. 8. de lib. Arb. cap. 3. and lib. 1. in initio. Ambrosius
Catarinus lib. 1. de eximia Praedest. Christi. Petrus Galatinus lib. 7. de
Arcanis Cathol. veritatis, a cap. 3. ad 9.

But withal, he observes a doubt, the solution whereof must not be
pretermitted; that is, whether this opinion can be maintained according to the
doctrine of Aquinas; for, says he, page 16. S. Thomas existimat, minime
Christi praedestinationem futuram si homo non reccasset. Ex quo fieri videtur
consequens, prius visum a Deo fuisse peccatum, and volitam ejus permissionem,
quam volita fuisset incarnatio Verbi: atque adeo non apparet quomodo in via
Thomistarum stare possit, quod primum omnium decretorum Dei fuerit incarnatio
seu praedestinatio Verbi, si jam praecessit peccati visio atque permissio. Si
vero priusquam peccatum videretur fuit Christus praedestinatus, jam ergo etiam
non existente peccato, Christus, qui ante visum peccatum praedestinatus fuerat,
veniret: Quod direct pugnat cum doctrina S. Thomae.

By the way, I observe a vain supposition to be the ground of all this
perturbation, and conflictation of contrary opinions, in this Argument: And the
presupposition is this, That the decree of Christ's incarnation and of our
predestination, as also of creation, and of the permission of sin, cannot be
coordinate and simultanea, but must needs be subordinate and one before
another. And so he carries himself in the confirmation of the priority of
those decrees which he fancieth to be before the other, as chiefly to oppose
the priority of the others. And this I account a very vain supposition,
(though, I confess, for many years I was carried away with the common error,
and therewithal still found my self in a brake or labyrinth, without hope of
extricating my self) as I have here proved in part, but elsewhere more at
large. But as for the solution of the doubt proposed, his answer is this, Prius
Deum voluisse unionem hypostaticam and incarnationem Verbi, quam vellet
permittere peccatum, and quam vellet condere naturam hominis and totius
universi. But I have already demonstrated the falsity of this. But he
proceeds, Quia tamen non est volita incarnatio sine peccato, imo dependenter
est volita a permissione peccati, and a natura rerum tanquam a mediis; idcirco
non sequitur, futurum esse Christum si peccatum non esset, aut si universum non
esset. Two things he constitutes media tendentia ad incarnationem Christi; and
indeed, if the incarnation of Christ were first in intention, as the end, all
other things intended after, must be intended as means: But I have already
showed how absurdly the creation of mankind is constituted as a means of
Christ's incarnation: and is it not strange, that the making of every worm, or
a gnat, should be a means tending to the incarnation of Christ? In like sort,
I have showed the absurdity of conceiving the permission of sin to be a
means of Christ's glorification, much more of his incarnation.

He proceeds to remove some other rubs out of the way, but in such a vain
manner, that it were the wasting of time to make relation thereof; neither can
I well give account for proceeding so fatre as I have done, only I desired to
show the Authors of this opinion, which here I confute: And I have entertained
sometimes a thought of taking occasion to discuss this whole dissertation of
Alphonsus; but more necessary businesses have hitherunto taken up my
meditations.

And I hope that which I have here delivered may suffice to the cutting off of
the very sinews of that discourse: if not, I shall not be averse from taking
further pains, as I shall see cause, and opportunity, and God shall enable me.

Much less is it my meaning to disparage, or under-value the Answ.
love of God toward the elect, in that I set forth Christ as not first thought
upon by God for the elect sake; for though I do not prefer his love to us
before the love of Christ, yet is the love of God to us unspeakable and
glorious; not only in preferring us before the world of other men, and the rest
of the creatures, but also in thinking upon us in Christ, upon whom Christ
should show forth the riches of his gracious love and tender mercy. 1 Timothy 1.
16. Exam.


I confess, there is no color of disparaging Gods love to us by giving the
precedence of Gods love to Christ, especially when both are acknowledged to be
eternal, and to be toward both the man Christ and us, before we or the world
had a being; most of all, when in the issue the priority seems to be for us,
rather then for Christ: for it is confessed, that priority in Gods decrees
consists only in purposing one thing for another. And again, it is without
question, that all priority in this case is on the part of that for which
another thing is purposed. Now albeit we are Christ's servants, and he our
Lord; yet, undoubtedly, Christ was ordained rather for our good, then we for
his good: yet I do not hence collect, that our predestination was before
Christ's; much less, that Gods love was less toward him then toward us; but
I willingly acknowledge, that albeit thousands had tasted of Gods love, both in
the way of nature, and grace, and glory, before Christ-man had any being at
all; yet was the love of God to the manhood of Christ infinitely beyond his
love toward us, measuring the love of God by the effects thereof: and that in
two respects; first, for as much as the fruit of Gods love to him was the
taking of his humane nature into an hypostaticall union with the Son of God:
secondly, in making him the Captain of our salvation, Heb. 2. 10.

Least of all is it my meaning to extenuate the heinous nature of sin, by
setting forth the purpose of God, concerning the incarnation Answ.
of Christ, before the consideration of the fall of Adam: It is enough to make
sin out of measure sinful, that God in his wisdom saw no means so sit, as
by the sin and fall of Adam, to make way for the humiliation of Christ, and
thereby for the manifestation of his justice, and riches of his mercy, and both
in Christ; although we grant, so far as to conceive, that God had never thought
of humbling the Godhead, or advancing the manhood of Christ, but upon
consideration of sin foreseen.

Ex magnitudine remedii, magnitudinem cognosce periculi, says Bernard; this
has place, in what order soever Christ was ordained Exam.
a Sacrifice for sin; neither is there any color of remitting ought of the
heinousness of sin, by the priority or posteriority of Christ's predestination,
in comparison to Gods decree, concerning the permission of sin. Sin, and
the heinousness thereof is amplified according to the quality of the
transgression, in reference to Gods law, so honorable a rule of man's
perfection, and to Gods deserts at our hands, and plentiful motives from
consideration both of rewards and punishments, wherewith it is estadlished. It
is a common and just aggravation of sin, that it caused the Son of God to be
humbled; but to aggravate it in making way for Christ's humiliation, is a very
odd conceit, in my judgment. Neither do I comprehend, how the manifestation
of justice in punishing sin, or of mercy in pardoning it, does aggravate the
heinousness of sin: This, I say, I comprehend not.

The second DOUBT.
WHere have we, in Scripture, ground for this, That the Lords first and
primary intention, in his decree of Predestination, was to set forth Grace and
Justice? That the declaration of his justice was intended, is not doubted, but
by the Apostle it seems, his primary aim was the declaration of the
sovereignty, freedom, and dominion of God over the creature, in that he
purposes grace and power.

The Apostle throughout his whole discourse of Predestination, Answ.
does no where oppose grace and power; for God shows as much power, freedom,
and dominion over the creature, in his grace toward the elect, as in his
justice toward the world: The Apostle sets forth the like power and sovereign
will of God, as well in showing mercy on whom he will, as hardening whom he
pleases. Do not think he opposes Gods power and sovereignty over Pharaoh,
to his grace and love unto Jacob: for the power he there speaks of, is not
sovereignty, but ability, might, and power, showing it self forth in the
hardening and overthrow of Pharaoh; in Moses called the power of his wrath.
Power natural is one thing, power civil, which we call sovereignty, another:
the first is, ability to do a thing; the second is, liberty to do what
naturally he can do, without sin. Undoubtedly, the power of God showed in
Pharaoh, was in his overthrow, and answerable to the power of Gods wrath.

I like well that the power of God showed in Pharaoh, is extended also to the
hardening of his heart; only, this is not so congruously Examine.
applied to the power of Gods wrath, for as much as wrath has always
reference to something in man, as the cause of it; so has not hardening: in
that of Paul, Romans 9. 18. He hardens whom he will, like as, he has mercy
on whom he will. But withal, I confess, hardening in this place seems to
consist only in denying of mercy: But Pharaohs hardening was much more; for,
undoubtedly, mercy was no more showed him when his heart rele^ted to the
letting of Israel go, then when he detained them. So likewise, when God
hardened him to follow after them, to bring them back, this was more than a
bare denying of mercy, even a secret impulsion of him to take such courses as
should precipitate him unto destruction: and this may well be accounted a fruit
of the power of Gods wrath; and accordingly I am verily persuaded, that Gods
power or sovereignty over Pharaoh, are not opposed to his grace and love to
Jacob: Only, freedom, in my judgment, does not so well consent with the
execution of justice, whether justice be taken in rewarding or punishing.
Neither do we ever read of Gods rewarding or punishing whom he will;
freedom and sovereignty is seen only in giving or denying good, according to
common account: Albeit, there is a further freedom and sovereignty of God, over
his creatures, in doing evil unto them; as in annihilating the most righteous,
which Arminius acknowledges, and in exposing his holy Son to suffer strange
pains and sorrows, for other men's sins, when he had none of his own. Not
to speak of the sovereignty wherewith God has endued man over his fellows,
though inferior creatures.

That God in his decree of Predestination did show forth the declaration Answ.
of his sovereignty, freedom, and dominion over the creatures, I easily grant;
yet that it was his primary aim, rather then the declaration of his justice
and grace, I cannot believe, without better proof.

My opinion is, That all the variety of Gods glory, to be manifested in the
creature, was intended at once; and if they that are Examine.
otherwise minded come to a particular expression of what glory was intended
first, and what next, and so in order, I am persuaded the incongruity of that
order will soon appear.

It is granted on all hands, that God first aimed at the declaration of his
own glory: Now, wherein does God delight principally Answ.
for to manifest his glory? God himself declared it to Moses, who desired him
to show him his glory; The Lord, says he, merciful, and gracious, and that
will by no means clear the guilty, visiting iniquity: Exodus 34. 6, 7.
Where God declares, and proclaims his chief glory to stand partly of
attributes, and the work of grace in the one hand and of justice in the other;
for God in like sort declares wherein he delights chiefly to glorify
himself, viz. in the exercise of loving kindness, and righteousness, and
judgment, Jer. 9. 24.

I should think whatsoever is in God is equally glorious, even his strength as
well as his mercy, wherewith the Lord begins, in Examine.
the Exodus 34 6.
place alleged, though here pretermitted: Neither does it follow, that because
these only are here mentioned therefore the glory of God does principally
consist in these. And besides, there is the glory of his sovereignty expressed,
even then when the promise of this revelation (here mentioned) was made to
Moses; to wit, in showing mercy, and having compassion on whom he will. I
beseech thee, show me thy glory: And he answered, I will make Exodus 31. 28,
29.
all my good go before thee, and I will proclaim the Name of the Lord before
thee; for I will show mercy to whom I will show mercy, and I will have
compassion on whom I will have compassion. And this is it the Apostle does most
insist upon, Romans 9. yet I make no question but (...), the various wisdom of
God, is as glorious as any of the rest; and this appears in the incarnation
of the Son of God, and in the complete execution of his office, as in nothing
more. But, I conceive, that glory of God represented to Moses, Exodus 34. 6, 7.
was expressed to a special end unto his people, namely, to compose them to a
greater reverence of his Majesty; which reverence is a quality consisting of a
mixture of love and fear, a moral gesture. Not to speak how the execution of
mercy and justice are competent unto the creatue, nor to mention that wherein
Vasquez and Suarez concutre, otherwise much different, about their conceptions
of Gods justice, namely, that there is no justice in God toward the creature
which is not grounded upon the determination of his will; and so, undoubtedly,
is the execution of his mercy also; only with this difference, God has
revealed unto us rules, according to which he will proceed in the execution of
his justice; no such rules has he revealed to us, or prescribed to himself,
according to which he will proceed in the execution of his mercy.

It is well observed by others, that those virtues which grace the Will, are
more honorable than those which grace the Understanding, Answ.
or other parts: It is a greater honor to a Prince to be gracious and just,
then to be wise and powerful; power and wisdom may be found in a vicious
Prince, not grace and justice: If then grace and justice do more set forth the
glory of their sovereignty, surely God (who aims at his highest glory) in the
highest and first place, he aimed chiefly at the manifestation of his grace and
justice, above the manifestation of his power and dominion.

1. First concerning the instance it self, I answer 1. It is not to be
expected, I confess, that virtue should be found in a vicious Examine.
person; but yet Princes commonly make more account of their absoluteness,
then of their virtue. 2. And the most capital crime against them, consists
rather in the derogation to their power, then to their virtue. 3. And virtue is
common to all; and if all were as they ought to be, what glory were it to a
King to be virtuous? 2. But as for the accommodation of it, though all were
granted, yet it concludes nothing. To be virtuous is honorable to a man,
because he is indifferent to execute his power, in the way of vice, as well as
in the way of virtue: But there is no such indifferency found in God. Gods
gracious disposition ties him to do good to none, but to whom he will. Had he
never made the world, nor purposed to produce any creature, he had been
notwithstanding the same he now is; yea the very execution of justice in God,
does presuppose the determination of his own will: whereupon it is that
Bradwardine distinguishes between meritum aptitudinale, and meritum actuale.
Aptitudinale meritu^ is the merit of such good, as God can bestow in the way of
reward, if he will; or such evil as God can inflict in the way of punishment,
if he will. Actuale meritum is the merit of such good or evil, as God has
determined to bestow, or inflict; Answerable hereunto Gerson professes, that
when a sin is committed, it is merely at the pleasure of God to inflict what
punishment he will. And withal he professes, that God does actually
remunerate every good work ultra condignum, and punish every evil work citra
condignum; all which I hold to be Orthodox, and sound. And let me entreat and
prevail with you, in this, that you will not think any thing in the nature of
God to be less glorious then another, howsoever, to our apprehension, some
attributes, may seem more glorious then others.

Consider what you find last in the execution of Gods decree, and from thence
gather, what was first in his intention. Now at Answ.
the last judgment, as likewise in the course of his providence in this world,
God does chiefly manifest the glory of his grace to the elect, and the glory of
his justice upon the world. When God in his ways toward the elect, blesses
them with all spiritual blessings in Christ, what does he rather aim at, then
the praise of the glory of his grace? When God destroys the wicked in their
flourishing estate, and causes the righteous to flourish, in their weak and
decayed age; what does be rather aim at, then to show that the Lord is
upright, and there is noe unrighteousness with him? When Christ shall come to
judgment at the last day, what will he rather show forth, then the righteous
judgment of God upon the world of the ungodly, and the admirable glory of his
grace to the Saints? Since then, all the ways of God do finally work to this
issue, the setting forth of his grace, and justice; surely we are so to
conceive it, as his primary aim and intent to be, to glorify rather his grace
and justice, then his power and sovereignty.

1. That God does manifest the glory of his grace to the elect, and the glory
of his justice upon the world, both in this life, and Examine.
at the day of judgment, I grant; But that he does chiefly manifest this, is
not proved: save only there is a propension in the phrase, to signify as much,
as properly, and then it is true indeed. His grace properly on the one, his
justice properly on the other; whereas the glory of his power, and sovereignty,
and wisdom, is promiseuously showed on both, yet there is not taken so
distinct a consideration of justice, as seems fit: For whereas justice is as
well remunerative, as vindicative; as this has place only on the wicked, so
the other on the good; I mean those, that departed the world after they came
to years of discretion: yet consider, I pray you, what think you of them that
perish in no other sin but original, derived unto them by the fall of Adam,
which Adam we believe to be saved? In the condemnation of these what glory of
God does appear more, either of his justice, or of his sovereignty?

2. But be it granted, that these glories do appear chiefly at such times;
yet if other glories do appear also in the same last execution, how will you
deduce herehence, that only those glories you mention were first in intention?
Will it not rather follow, that seeing other glories, as well as these, did
appear in execution though not chiefly, therefore other glories, as well as
these, were first in intention, though not chiefly?

3. When God blesses his elect, with all spiritual blessings in Christ, we
need not say, he aims rather at somewhat else then the praise of the glory of
his grace: when out of mere grace he made his glorious self known unto us, he
made not only his grace known unto us, but all his attributes more or less,
which to our understanding are equally glorious in themselves, though we take
more comfort in the speculation of his grace; which yet is more wonderful,
when we consider his sovereignty over us his creatures, and that it was
indifferent to him to make us vessels of wrath, as well as vessels of mercy:
and in this very consideration, the very damnation of reprobates shall improve
our glorious joys in the apprehension of Gods free love to us at the day of
judgment, according to that of the Apostle, Romans 9. 22. You are to look to
it, how you make your Tenent good, who maintain that God does rather aim at
the one, then at the other.

4. As for the wicked, the righteousness of Gods judgment upon them, we can
in some measure conceive at this present: But as for the power of God in
executing such judgments, maintaining the creature, in the suffering of
eternal sorrows, we are not able to conceive, and therefore the glory hereof
is far more admirable then the other. So likewise, what shall be the fruits
of the grace of God toward us at that day and after, neither eye has seen,
nor ear has heard, etc. nor that glory contained in seeing the face of God.
If God should but reveal unto us the wisdom whereby he has managed his
providence toward us before he called us, and since the calling of us,
immediately by himself, mediatly by the ministry of good Angels, contending
with, and crossing the counsels and practices of wicked Angels; what a body of
glory would appear unto us, and how should we be ravished with the
contemplation of it? How much more with the contemplation of his providence
thoroughout, both in managing the whole course of nature, and the whole course
of grace?

QUESTION ^.
How and by what demonstrative reasons, may it appear that there is a
necessity of a departing from the doctrine delivered in our Church.

The reasons, which moved me a little, and but a little to depart Answ.
from the form of words usually received in delivering the doctrine of
Reprobation, are such as to me seem, if not demonstrative, yet convincing. And
though I have learned to suspect mine own judgment where I differ never so
little from my godly and reverend loarned Brethren; yet I consider, we are
taught to try all things likewise, and to hold fast that which is good; and as
we believe, so to speak, submitting our selves to the fear of God. But
before I come to the ground, whereupon I have been led to believe, and speak
somewhat otherwise of this point, then is commonly received; let me first show
you how far I consent with the received opinon, even in all useful truths;
and how little it is then wherein I dissent. In the doctrine of election, I
consent wholly with Augustine, Calvin, Beza, Martyr, Zanehy, Perkins, Paraeus,
and others, who have taught us, by plain evidence, and that from scripture:

1. That, before the world was, God out of his free will has chosen the elect
by name, by an unchangeable decree, unto grace and glory in Christ Jesus, to
the showing forth of the riches of the glory of his grace.

2. That to restore them, who were los^ in Adam, he sent forth the Lord Jesus,
to be obedient to the death for them, and by his death, to redeem them as
effectually, as if they themselves had suffered in their own persons.

3. That in the fullness of time, he calls each one of them, by an effectual
and invincible drawing, even by such an almighty work of his quickening spirit,
as he did put forth in raising Christ from the dead.

4. That those, whom he so calls, he preserves by some powerful work of
his spirit to himself in Christ, so as they never fall from him totally, or
finally: Only herein take it not amiss, if I place the subject of Election in
Persons considered in Christ, before the world, or themselves were, and not in
massa corrupta, with the late venerable Synod. For though herein they follow
Augustine, and Zanchy, and some others; yet have they dissented from the chief
instruments, of the reformation of our Religion. And, with reverence I speak
it, as I am led to conceive, that it need not trouble any, if, taking Christ to
be the head of the elect, I conceive him to be first thought upon, and chosen,
and we in him. Mr. Baynes, follows the school in so expressing it; and the
reasons delivered above in the first point, have carried me with them: and the
difference lies in opening the purpose of Reprobation. But see here how far
I go with the stream^, and, ^hen I go aside, how little, and upon what ground.

How convincing, or demonstrative, the reasons are, I address my self to
consider: It is good to make progress in the investigation Examine.
of truth. Austin professes himself to be of the number of those qui
proficiendo scribunt, and scribendo proficiunt: only our care must be, that we
go not backward, and make things worse then we found them; which comes to
pass (especially with good men) many times, not so much by falling into error,
as by confusion of method; for hereby it comes to pass, that the passages
opening the way to the investigation of truth, are stopped up, and we find our
selves in a brake, and see no way out. To prevent them, I am persuaded, it is a
profitable consideration, to think with our selves, that different opinions,
especially amongst godly Divines, may be no other then the dividing of the
truth between them.

About the object of predestination there has bin a triple difference in
opinion: some standing for massa nondum condita; others for massa pura, that is
condita but nondum corrupta; others for massa corrupta: yet both Junius did
endeavor: but very obscurely; and Piscator has endeavored very perspicuously
to reduce them into one. If he failed therein, especially in some one
particular, his failing, rightly observed and discerned, may open a way for the
discovery of the entire truth. But let the issue thereof commend it self. Your
phrase of useful truths I do not like; amongst Arminians, I often meet with
such a course of arguing truth, by the usefulness of it; which is like the
giving of the larger coat to him that is bigger, because it is fitter for him,
when in the mean time he had no right unto it.

And though we can judge aright of a coats fitness to a body; yet it is a
dangerous course for us, to presume so far of our judgments in the
usefulness of opinions, as thereupon to conclude what are true, and what are
false.

1. To choose before the world, is to choose before the creation, or Adams
fall, according to your own exposition, formerly mentioned: but in this sense,
your self confesses in the 4. place, that Austin and Zanchy do not concur
with others in this; was there no more in Gods intention, when he elected some,
then the manifestation of the riches of his glorious grace? Did not God purpose
to manifest also the glory of his remunerative justice? Is it not undeniable,
that God will bestow salvation upon all his elect (of ripe years, before their
departure out of this world) by way of reward, and crown of righteousness,
which God the righteous Judge shall give at that day to all that love his
Sons 2 Timothy 4.
appearing? It being a righteous thing with God, as to recompense tribulation
to them that trouble his Children; so to his Children that are troubled, rest
with his Apostles: when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from Heaven, with
his mighty Angels, in flaming 2 Thessa. 1.
fire, rendering vengance etc. When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints,
and be made mavelous, in all them that believe etc. It is great pity this is
not considered (as usually it is not) especially for the momentous consequence
thereof, in my judgment, sufficient (if I mistake not) to have stifled this
opinion following, touching Reprobation, in the first conception of it.

2. Touching the Second, I have nothing to say; for if you have any opinion
concerning some benefit that redounds to the Reprobate by the death of Christ,
it is more then hitherunto you do discover.

3. Touching the Third, it were to be desired you did express, whether no
less powerful motion, would serve to the drawing of them to faith and
repentance.

4. Likewise touching the Fourth, whether this powerful work being denied to
any, it is possible for such a one to believe, and repent unto salvation.
Concerning the order here mentioned, though my opinion be, that the object of
predestination is massa nondum condita, yet in no moment of nature, or reason,
was the decree of God concerning Christ's incarnation, and our salvation by him,
before the decree of creation, and of permission of Adams fall, and
consequently Election unto Salvation had the consideration of massa corrupta
concomitant with it, though not precedent; only the consideration of massa
nondum condita being antecedentall to all these decrees. Likewise, in my
opinion, they do mistake, who take the Synod of Dort to maintain the
consideration of massa corrupta, as precedent to Election, though they begin
with signifying what God purposed to bring to pass, upon the fall of mankind,
in Adam. And Galvin in his answer to Pighius confesses, that the safest
course is to treat of predestination, upon the consideration of the corrupt
mass in Adam. As touching what you have delivered, touching Election in Christ
our head, in the first place, that I have already examined.

Our Divines commonly conceive, a double act of Reprobation, Answ.
as Bellarmine, and others of the Papists do.

1. Negative, as they call it, a non-election, or Reprobation, unto which some
add a purpose of forsaking the creature, excluding it from glory, and from
sufficient means of grace in Christ.

2. Positive, ordaining it to condemnation.

The former, they conceive to be absolute, as being an act of Gods sovereign
Lordship over the creature, without all respect to sin.

The latter they conceive, as being an act of vindicative justice, to
presuppose original sin at the least, and some of them (as Bellarmine)
actual sin also, whom Paraus in this point seems to give way unto.

1. To the first of these acts I wholly assent so far as it rests in a
non-election, or preterition of the creature, according to the liberty of Gods
absolute soveraignety. That which is added to it, of a purpose of forsaking the
creature, and to exclude it, from glory, and from sufficient means of grace in
Christ, before all respect of sin, I want warrant from scripture to
condescend unto. But this Negative act, I would rather express in such words
as the holy Ghost has used before me, and so distinguish it into two branches.

That before all respect of good or evil in the creature:

1 God did not so love the world, (I mean the world of mankind distinguished
from the elect:) this is plain from the Apostles comparison, of Jacob and
Esau. Romans 9. 11. 12, 13.

2. God did not give the world to Christ, by him of grace to be brought to
salvation, as he did the elect, for they are not said to be written in the
Lambs book of life, from the beginning of the world. Revel. 13. 8, 17, 18. And
indeed all who were given to Christ, do, in fullness of time, come unto him.
Joh. 6. 37. Gods hatred of Esau, before he had done good or evil, reaches to
this act also. Romans 9. 13.

2. Touching the positive act, which they conceive, I wholly agree with them,
that God ordains none to condemnation, but upon sin presupposed. Annihilate
the creature God may without presupposall of sin; for annihilation is an act
of Soveraignetie, suitable to creation; but condemn it he may not, without
presupposall of sin. For condemnation is an act of justice, and presupposes
a rule of justice transgressed, and thereby wrath, or just revenge provoked:
only this positive act of Gods counsel about the world of mankind severed
from the elect, upon serious consideration of sundry passages of Scripture, I
would rather distinguish into a double act.

1. Whereby, without all respect of good or evil in the men of this world, God
ordained them unto judgment, according to their works. Ezech. 33. 20. to
judgment, I say, not of condemnation, which presupposes sin in the creature
to be condemned; but judgment (I mean) of just retribution, whereby God is
willing to deal with them, according to their works in justice; justice I say,
as well distributive, to reward them with life, if they continue in obedience;
as vindicative, to punish them to death, if they provoke him by careless and
wilful disobedience.

Hitherto, even to this act, the hatred of God to Esau reached.

2. Whereby, upon the presupposall of the careless or wilful disobedience of
the world, either in refusing the means of grace in Christ, or abusing other
talents and helps of the knowledge of God in nature, God rejects, or
reprobateth them from all hope of life, and purposes to condemn them for
their sins, to the glorifying of his power, justice and wrath.

Non-election, absolute is an act of soveraignitie, you grant; which also you
call preterition. Let us speak distinctly, that the Examine
fairer way may be opened, to the discovery of truth and error. Preterition
may be in time; as when, in giving grace to some, God passes by others: or it
may have place as well in not purposing to give grace to some, when he does
purpose to give grace to others, which purpose of his was from everlasting; and
preterition in this sense, is all one with non-election. Now this non-election
is either a negation of election unto grace, or a negation of election unto
glory; It is here proposed indefinitely, and I conceive it is understood of
both. Now it is true, that John Scot, and Francis Mayro after him, did
sometimes shape the order of Gods decrees in this manner: In the first instant
of nature, Peter and Judas being offered to the divine consideration, Deus
volebat Petro gloriam, nihil volebat Judae; in the second instant, Deus volebat
Petro gratiam, nihil volebat Judae; In the third instant, Deus volebat utru^que
existere in massa corrupta; wherehence it follows in the last place, (says
he) that the one shall infallibly be saved, the other damned. This sometimes
seemed plausible to me, and I did prefer it, and still do, before the
perverse orders of Gods decrees, devised by many: For, est quiddam prodire
tenus: we have the shorter way to our jorneys end. But in what instant shall
God velle Judae damnationem? not till after all this? If it be last in
intention, shall it not be first in execution, according to your own rules, so
much insisted on in the first place? The Dominicans and particularly Alvarez
professes in opposition to these negative decrees of Scotus, that the decree
of reprobation is positive; and one reason amongst others is this, because if
reprobation were merely negative, then all men and Angels possible, though
never existent, might be justly said to be reprobate as well as the reprobate
men and Angels that are or shall be existent. For it is most true, that they
are non electi, in as much as one of contradictions is verified de omni ente,
and non ente; therefore certainly there goes more to reprobation then a mere
negation of election. And, in my judgment, this reason of his is a weighty
reason. Therefore they profess plainly, that God did not only not purpose to
give Judas glory, but he did purpose to deny him glory, that is, ordain that
he should be without glory: Secondly, that he did not only not purpose to give
him grace, but also did purpose to deny him grace, or ordain, that he should
be without grace, at least without such grace as should bring him to salvation.
And indeed if God does purpose that Judas shall exist in the corrupt mass, and
withal does not purpose to give him grace and glory, does it not manifestly
follow, that he shall exist without grace and glory? for how shall he come by
glory or grace, if not from God? Or how shall God deny him one or other, but
according to the Counsel of his will, seeing he works all things according to
the counsel of his will? Therefore God did not only not purpose that he should
have grace and glory, but did positively purpose that he should be without
both: and it is Bradwardins opinion, that no pure negative act can be
attributed unto God, but such as is aequivalently resolved into an act
positive, thus, If Deus non volebat gloriam Judae, then Deus volebat illi non
glorium; that is, that he should not have glory, so of grace, so of existencie;
if God did not will the existency of more Angels then are, it follows that God
did will that more Angels then are should not exist; and that this positive act
does better become the nature of God, then the former negative, by reason of
his most perfect actuality. And as for the purpose of forsaking the creature,
and excluding it from glory; that is no other then Gods purpose not to give
certain creatures any such grace, as whereby they shall be brought to glory:
And seeing this is acknowledged by you, I see no cause why you should stick in
acknowledging a purpose of God to forsake some creatures, and exclude them from
glory. It is pity, that the prejudice of phrases, whereby it is expressed,
should strangle any doctrine, when there lies no just exception against it, as
untrue in the substance thereof. When you confess, that God did not so love
the world, as the elect (which is no more, then to acknowledge a non-election
of some) if you expound it in reference unto his purpose of not giving grace
and glory unto them, as to the elect; Aquinas himself acknowledges, that
odisse in Scripture phrase is no other then non velle alicui gratiam and
gloriam. And it is well known that Mr. Moulin does as eagerly oppose this
absolute reprobation negative, as absolute reprobation positive: For he
manifestly perceives, that damnation follows as infallibly, and unavoidably
upon that doctrine of reprobation negative, as upon this of reprobation
positive.

If you conceive, that God did give the world to Christ, by him of grace to be
bought to some kind of grace, though not to salvation, as he did the elect; I
doubt you are not able to bring any sufficient reason to justify this;
wherehence it will follow, that Christ's death was meritorius unto them, but not
satisfactorie; or if satisfactorie, yet only for some sins of theirs, but
not for all.

As touching the act positive of reprobation, I trust, when all things are
rightly stated, there will appear to be as little reason, why there should be
any difference between us in this act, as in the former. For what, I pray, is
the meaning of this, God ordaines none to condemnation, but upon sin
presupposed? Is there any other meaning of the words then this; God has
ordained that no man shall be condemned, but for sin? who ever denied this?
What one of our Divines, or Papists, or of any Sect, ever called this into
question? But herehence it only follows, that sin is the cause of
condemnation, and that by the ordination of God: it follows not, that sin is
the cause of Gods ordination; although I confess the confusion of these is
most frequent amongst our Divines, amongst Papists, though otherwise very
learned, and chiefly among the Arminians, for the advantage of their cause; yet
see not a far greater advantage to their cause then any yet has been taken
hold of by any one of them: And this confusion alone is that which sets our
Divines together by the ears, not considering the dangerous consequence
here-hence, utterly overthrowing the Orthodox doctrine of our Churches, in the
very point of Election, and bringing in Arminianisme entire and whole; not in
Reprobation only, as Master Moulin does, and you seem to do; but in Election
it self unavoidably, though hitherto, I confess, the Arminians have not been
so happy as to discern it. I doubt not but your meaning is, in that
Proposition, That sin is not only the cause of damnation, but of Gods decree
also of ordaining thereunto. But to affirm this, seemed so foul to Aquinas,
(namely, that there should be conceived a cause of Gods will, or Gods decree)
that he professes, never any man was so mad as to affirm it. But because
the saying of Aquinas moves you little; why should it, seeing it little
hindered not only Valentianus the Jesuit from saying as you do, but Alvarez
also the Thomist, and a great Thomist? therefore I will proceed further: What
should move you to affirm, That, to ordain to condemnation is an act of
vindicative justice? Condemnation, I grant, is an act of vindicative justice,
like as remuneration is an act of justice remunerative; but will it follow
here-hence, that to ordain to condemnation is an act of vindicative justice? I
will not press you with the authority of Master Baynes, who denies Reprobation
to be an act of justice; but thus I dispute: If Gods purpose to condemn to
death, be an act of justice vindicative; then also Gods purpose to remunerate
with eternal life, is an act of justice remunerative: And if Gods purpose of
condemnation presuppose sin, it follows, that Gods purpose of remunerating
with eternal life must also presuppose obedience; even obedience of faith,
repentance, and good works; for all these God does remunerate with eternal
life. Here appears the foul tail of Arminianisme, in the doctrine of
Election, which this plausible doctrine of yours and of Master Moulins, in the
point of Reprobation, draws after it. The consequence is manifest, though few
or none consider it, even of them that are both Orthodox in Election, and most
versed in the examining and discerning of just consequences. Now because this
consequence, I presume, is unexpected, I imagine men may be moved to cast
about, and consider how they may wind themselves out of this dangerous
inconvenience. And perhaps it may come to their minds to affirm, that they
do not conceive Election under this form; namely, to be the decree of God to
remunerate with everlasting life. And I verily believe they do not; for if
they did, it were not possible they should continue Orthodox in the point of
Election; but miserably betray their cause, by giving way to a doctrine
(plainly contradictory) in the point of Reprobation. But why then do they not
consider Election as they ought? Is it not generally confessed, that Election
and Reprobation are contrary? why then should they not be shapen under
contrarient forms? and what act, I pray you, is contrary to the act of justice
vindicative, but the act of justice remunerative? But perhaps you may say,
Though this be true, yet there is no place for such an opposition here; for as
much as though a man may merit damnation by sin, yet he cannot merit
salvation by obedience. I answer therefore, that this only shows there can be
no opposition between them in a special kind of retribution, to wit, in the
way of retribution according to desert on both sides; yet this hinders not, but
that there may be, and indeed is, an opposition in the general of retribution:
For it is well known, that God will reward every one according to his works;
and that he means to bestow salvation upon every one of ripe years by way of
reward, and, tanquam coronam justitiae, as the Arminians urge; and justly,
though with no just advantage to their cause, but according to their shallow
and unlearned conceits; as if therefore God should first foresee their
obedience, before he should ordain them to a reward: which yet will follow,
if on the other side we grant them, that God first fore-seeth man's final
impenitency, and thereupon ordaines them to condemnation. Perhaps you may say,
Is not the contrariety between Election and Reprobation sufficiently
maintained, by saying, the one is Gods purpose ordaining to salvation; the
other Gods purpose ordaining to condemnation? I confess, it seems so, and is
generally reputed to be so: and this I take to be the principal cause of this
error; one confusion drawing on more and more after it. But, I say, there is no
congruous opposition between salvation and damnation; for, to damn is either
finally to punish, or to adjudge to punishment. Now, as the Negative opposition
hereunto is only not to punish, or to adjudge to punishment; so the contrary
opposition hereunto is to reward, or to adjudge to a reward: So that Election,
as it is Gods purpose ordaining to salvation, by way of reward, is only
opposite contrarily to Reprobation, as it signifies Gods purpose ordaining to
condemnation. More fairly, and void of all equivocation, thus: Like as
Reprobation is Gods purpose to punish with everlasting death; so Election is
Gods purpose to remunerate with everlasting life. And thus the contrariety of
these acts being rightly stated, it follows as evidently, that Election must
presuppose, not obedience, but the foresight of obedience; as Reprobation
presupposes not sin, but the foresight of sin. And thus are we tumbled
into the very gulf of Arminianisme, over head and ears, before we are aware.
But it may be this discourse of mine may raise such a Spirit as will not
easily be laid; and hereupon some may the more profusely be carried to
embrace Arminianisme, in the very point of Election also; because, as
Reprobation seems to be an act of justice vindicative; so Election also, as
here it is stated, seems to be an act of justice remunerative. And I
willingly confess, I never found any Arminian that discernes the advantage
which our Divines do afford them, by shaping the doctrine of Reprobation as
they do: Therefore I will endeavor to quiet this Spirit that I have raised,
first, by discovering the Sophistry that bleares our eyes in this; and
secondly, by clear demonstration I will prove, that no foresight of sin and
obedience can precede the purpose of God ordaining to salvation and damnation.
As for the discovering of the Sophistry which has place herein, consider;
first, It is agreed between Vasquez and Suarez (though otherwise much at odds
about the nature of justice in God) that there is no justice in God toward his
creature, but upon the presupposition of his will: whence it follows
manifestly, that the purposes of God, being the very acts of his will, are no
acts of justice, but only the executions of these purposes may be acts of
justice; to wit, upon the presupposition of some act or purpose of his will.
And the reason hereof (not to insist wholly upon any humane authority) is
manifest, for as much as in remunerating it is clear, that God is not bound to
remunerate any creature, but upon presupposition of his will; for he may
convert him into nothing, if it please him: But if he has determined to
reward them according to their obedience, it must needs be so; for as much as
the Divine nature is without variableness or shadow of change. So likewise,
neither is God bound to punish any sinner; for he may pardon him, if it please
him; but upon supposition that he has determined not to leave a sinner
unpunished: in this case only is he bound to punish. Further, I will show,
that in such acts, the condition whereof does not depend upon the will of God,
the act may be of one condition, and yet nevertheless the purpose of God to
perform such an act is of another condition: As for example; the act of
creation is an act of Gods almighty power; but Gods purpose to create the world
is no act of power, but of will rather. So likewise, Gods act of ordering all
things unto their end, in wonderful manner, is an act of infinite wisdom;
but his purpose to order all things, in so admirable manner, is no act of his
wisdom, but of his free will. Now I will demonstrate, that the foresight of
sin cannot be the cause of Gods purpose to condemn: For if it be the cause
of Gods purpose; then either by necessity of nature, or by the free
constitution of God: not by necessity of nature; for he is naturally more
prone (as Piscator confesses upon Exodus 24. 6.) to remunerate obedience, than
to punish for sin: but no man will say, that he does remunerate by necessity
of nature; therefore neither does he punish sin by necessity of nature:
therefore it must be only through the voluntary constitution of God, that
sin is the cause of ordination unto condemnation. But mark, I pray, the
foul absurdity hereof; for here-hence it follows, that God did purpose that
upon the foresight of sin he would purpose that men should be damned. So
that the purpose of God is made the object of his purpose; and that upon a
certain condition: whereas nothing can be the object of Gods purpose, but some
temporal thing or other; and consequently, one purpose of God shall be in time
precedaneous to another purpose of God; which is impossible: first, because no
purpose of God begins in time: secondly, there is no priority between the
purposes of God, but priority of nature and reason; and that only in such a
case as when one is of the end, and the other of the means tending to that
end; which has no place in this matter we now treat of. By the way, when you
say, God cannot condemn the creature without sin, though he may annihilate
him; what do you mean by condemnation? do you take it for punishment? If so,
then the formality of it, expressed at full, is this; Affliction for sin. Now
consider, is it a sober speech to say, God cannot afflict for sin, without the
presupposall of sin? I doubt not but you deliver your mind, of what God cannot
do, in the way of justice: But it is utterly impossible that any man should be
afflicted for sin without the presupposall of sin: I presume your meaning is
only this, (though incommodiously expressed) God cannot excruciate or afflict a
creature without the presupposall of sin. But in whom? I doubt not but your
meaning is, in the person afflicted. But what think you then of the Son of
God, how was he afflicted, and without any presupposall of sin in him? And I
pray you tell me, has not God as much power over us as over him? Again,
consider I pray, what power does God give unto man over inferior creatures?
But let this pass: Can God annihilate us without any respect to sin, and can
he not afflict us? Alas! what affliction would most men be content to endure
rather then to dye, much more rather then to be turned to the gulf of
nothing, from whence we came? If it be said, that God may afflict in some
degree, but not in the highest; or for a time, but not for ever; such as we
conceive that torment to be which we signify by the word Condemnation: I
pray remember, we are made after the image of God, and endued with the light
of reason, and let us not cast our selves in a brutish manner upon conceits
without all evidence of reason. Now tell me, what reason can be devised why
God should be able, without all prejudice of his justice, to inflict pain in
one degree, in two degrees, in three or four degrees, in five, six, and seven
degrees, without all respect to sin only, if in the eight degree he should
inflict it in this manner, he should be unjust? Again, if without injustice
he may inflict pain on an innocent creature for a thousand years, or ten
thousand years, or ten times ten thousand, what reason why he cannot afflict
a creature for ever, without injustice? yet if no finite time can be set which
he cannot exceed, why not for ever? Nay, if a creature should be put to his
choice, whether he would choose to be annihilated, or to be in eternal
torment, yet preserved without sin, which of these two would an holy creature
make choice of? should he not prefer his being without sin (though in
eternal torment) before annihilation?

But let us consider the double act of God here devised about the world of
mankind severed from the elect: God, you say, did ordain to judge them
according to their works. I pray consider, who denies this? even they that
maintain Reprobation as absolute as Election, do notwithstanding maintain,
that God does judge them no otherwise then according to their works; for they
do not avouch that God does ordain to damn them for ought else then for
sin; yea and that for sin actual, as many as do dye in actual sin
unrepented of; and for original sin, as many as do dye only in original
sin. Again, will you deny the same form of decree to have his course
concerning the elect, as well as concerning the Reprobate? Does not God reward
them according to their works? I mean, as many as live unto ripeness of age;
for otherwise it cannot be verisied of the Reprobates. And if God does reward
the righteous according to their works, did he not also ordain from
everlasting so to reward them? Neither is Election, rightly stated and in
congruous opposition unto Reprobation, any other then Gods decree to reward men
with everlasting life for their obedience of faith, repentance, and good works;
like as Reprobation is Gods decree to punish them with everlasting death, for
their continuance in sin, without repentance, unto death; albeit, neither of
these is Gods complete decree, on either side: but the decree of Election, is,
Praeparatio gratiae and gloriae, as Austin says; that is, a decree to give
both the grace of obedience, both in the way of faith, repentance, and good
works, and to crown them with everlasting life for it. And so on the other
side, Reprobatio, as Aquinas speaks, includit voluntatem permittendi
peccatum, and damnationem inferendi pro peccato: It is the purpose of God both
to deny the grace of obedience, as aforesaid; or, which is all one, to permit
them to persevere in sin and final impenitency, and to inflict damnation for
their sin. And unless Election on the one side, and Reprobation on the
other, do include the parts before mentioned, we shall fall into the
Arminians definition of Election and Reprobation, who make them merely
conditionate, either in formal terms, or though they avoid the formality of
such expressions, yet merely in effect: as by saying, that, Election is Gods
purpose to save them that believe and repent; Reprobation Gods purpose to damn
them that do not believe and repent: as if there were no other purpose of God,
revealed in Gods word, then these; no decree of showing mercy to whom he will,
by giving faith and repentance; no decree of hardening whom he will, by
denying it. Again, when I say, God does purpose to reward every man according
to his works, let us understand it aright; for indeed there neither is, nor
can be any such formal decree of God, and of an indefinite nature: as if God
in priority of nature or reason did make such a decree, not knowing as yet what
would be the works of each man in particular: for of such a decree there can
be no correspondent execution, distinct from the execution of particular and
definite decrees, concerning all men in particular, as I have already showed in
ransacking the absurd order of Gods decrees devised by Arminians, to no other
end but to catch the simple; there being Vindiciae gratiae 'Dei. lib 3. dig. 2.
no common sense nor sobriety in them throughout. Besides this, if when God is
conceived to make such a decree God did know particularly the works of all,
then there is no reason to conceive that he made any such indefinite decree;
but rather that the decree to save or damn every one in particular according
to his works, well known to him in that very instant, not of duration only,
but of nature and reason. But God did in the same moment foreknow all the
particular works of every man, as already I have made manifest, in ransacking
the Arminian order of Gods decrees. But the denomination of such an indefinite
decree, as to reward every man according to his works, arises from the
consideration of other definite decrees in God: As for example, God did decree
to have mercy on Peter, in giving him faith and repentance, and accordingly to
save him; and so of every one of Gods Elect, of ripe years: On the contrary,
God did decree to deny to Judas the grace of faith and repentance; which is as
much as to say, that God decreed to permit him to continue finally in sin,
and accordingly to damn him; and so every one of the Reprobates: Whence it
follows, that it is true to affirm, that God decreed to reward every one of
ripe years according to their works; not that there ever was any such
particular decree conceived by God, distinct from the former, as the Arminians
feign; but that from the former particular decrees resulteth the denomination
of such a decree as this; as if you should say, If God did decree to save Peter
and Paul, it follows, that God did decree to save some: not that God did
first indefinitely decree to save some, and then decree that Peter and Paul
should be two of them. And to reward men according to their works, is no more
a work of hatred then of love; but as it is indefinite, so it is indifferent
to prove in the issue either a work of hatred or of love; as that God, Who
works in us every thing that is pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ,
Heb. 13. 21. shall work in some that which is pleasing in his sight through
Jesus Christ, and not in others.

Neither will it follow here-hence, that God rejects and reprobateth some
upon presupposall of disobedience, more then that he electeth and
predestinateth others upon presupposall of their obedience; for undoubtedly God
purposed as well to reward the godly according to their works, as the ungodly
according to theirs; though, I confess, there is a great difference between
the condition of evil works and good works; evil works being meritorious
of punishment, good works no way meritorious of reward: but this nothing
hinders the course of remuneration in general: And again, what is wanting of
merit on the part of Gods Elect, is abundantly supplied by the merit and
satisfaction of Christ. It follows, I confess, that upon disobedience on the
one side (provided it be final, not otherwise; for, undoubtedly, abuse both of
means of grace in Christ, and other talents and helps of the knowledge of God
in nature, is found also in the Elect, though not final; for, Novimus, says
Austin, that God has converted non modo aversas a vera fide, sed and adversas
verae fidei voluntates) God damneth some for disobedience; and it is no less
true, that upon obedience on the other side, God saves the others. But this
opinion, I confess, was heretofore shaped by Doctor Overall, and perhaps taken
from Caterinus, but with a little variation, and, if I be not deceived, first
devised by the Author of the two books, De vocatione Gentium; all which
notwithstanding are orthodox in the point of Election throughout, excepting
Caterinus, whose orthodoxy therein is only in part. But, in few words, I will
disprove this latter position of yours, by your own rules: For thus I dispute,
If God did first foresee man's disobedience, and then ordain them to
condemnation, then God did first decree to permit this disobedience, before he
did decree to damn them for it. Whence it follows, that the permission of
this sin was first in intention, and consequently, last in execution: that
is, God must first damn them, and afterward permit their disobedience,
whereby they deserve damnation. Yet, I pray, conceive not hereupon that I
maintain, that God does first purpose to damn men, and secondly purpose to
permit their disobedience; both orders, in my opinion, are very dissolute;
though I confess it is commonly so received, that by denying the one we must
necessarily fall upon the other.

Herein two things are granted by common consent of our Divines: Answ.


1. That the end of Gods purpose in his positive Reprobation of the world, is
to glorify his justice, power, and wrath in their just overthrow and
condemnation.

2. That he does not purpose to condemn them but for sin.

But two other things you see there be, wherein, I confess, I dissent from
them; but with submission of my spirit to the guidance of the word, and the
spirit of my brethren.

1. In the first act of positive Reprobation, that I do not acknowledge any
unwillingnesse at all in God to reward the men of this world with life, upon
any condition whatsoever.

2. In the second act of positive Reprobation, that I do conceive the decree
of Reprobation to be conversant about the world, not as considered in massa
primitus corrupta, as in the first fall of Adam; but as afterward voluntarily
falling from the means, either of grace in the second Adam, or of the
knowledge of God in nature, by some acts of careless or wilful disobedience.

These two things above mentioned are granted not only by Examine.
the common consent of our Divines, but by the common consent also of all
Christians, as I conceive, whether Papists or Arminians: yet observe, I pray,
as touching the second, that sin is apparently made the cause only of
condemnation, but not of Gods purpose; whereas hitherto you have carried the
matter so, as if sin were the cause not only of condemnation, but also of
Reprobation; as much as to say, of Gods purpose to condemn. But to say, that
God for sin did purpose to condemn for sin, is so harsh an expression, that
in all my reading I never found any adventure thereupon. Come we to your
proper opinion: You do not acknowledge any unwillingnesse in God to reward the
men of this world with life, upon any condition whatsoever. I know no reason
why you should conceive any of our Divines to differ from you in this, although
you had spoken out your meaning never so plainly and fully: not only denying
unwillingnesse, but acknowledging a willingness, as afterward you do; not a
willingness only which may have place though joined with a will to the
contrary, as in all mixed actions, which yet are not incident to God, though
they are to a creature, as who sometimes does some thing volens nolens: for
certainly, God will save any man upon condition he believes and repents: And
on the other side, neither is there any unwillingnesse in God, but a
willingness rather, yea and that a resolute will to damn any man in case he
dies in infidelity and impenitency. For we have the clear word of God to
justify us herein, professing most evidently, that, Whosoever believes shall
be saved; whosoever believes not shall be damned. So that I wonder not a
little whereto these expressions tend, save that commonly, such is the issue of
imperfect conceptions, all preparations to the justifying of them fall
miserably short of that whereunto they aim.

2. As touching the second act, either you must profess that no Infants perish
in original sin; or you must, according to your Tenet, consider them only
in massa primitus corrupta; for as much as they, dying before they came to the
use of reason, were never guilty of any voluntary falling off from the means,
either of grace in the second Adam, or of the knowledge of God in nature, by
some acts of careless or wilful disobedience. As for their opinion, who
think the consideration of all men in massa Adae sufficient to justify God in
decreeing the condemnation of all, I take it to be a very rude and undigested
conceit; for undoubtedly, if the consideration of sin be at all prerequired
to the decree of condemnation, it must be the consideration rather of that
sin for which they are chiefly damned: For, shall the consideration of that
sin only, which deserves the least degree of damnation, justify God in the
decreeing the greatest degree of condemnation? what color of justice is found
in this? Shall the consideration of telling an officious lie, justify a
Magistrate in decreeing to inflict such a punishment as is due only to high
treason? I say rather, that God considers none in massa Adae, before they are
in massa Adae; for thus to consider, is not considerare, but errare, or
fingere; which we cannot decently attribute to God: but God considered all men
tanquam in massa Adae futuros; and as many as should dye in infancy, God
considered them in no other state of sin, tanquam futuros, but in that. As
for as many as should survive to the use of reason, God considered them,
tanquam futuros, not only in massa Adae, but guilty of their own personal
transgressions; and whom he so considered, and withal as finally persevering
therein, all them he decreed to damn. So likewise whom he considered tanquam
fideles futuros, and resipiscentiam acturos, and in fide and resipiscentia
perseveraturos, he decreed to save. But take heed that herehence you infer
not, Therefore foresight of perseverance in sin was the cause or prerequisite
of Reprobation; lest you be driven by just proportion to confess, that
foresight of faith also and perseverance therein was the cause, or
prerequisite at least, of Election. Yet do not hereupon fall into the contrary
extreme, as to think that then the decree of Salvation and Damnation precedes
the foresight of faith on the one side, or of final impenitency on the other;
though such delusions have had their course, and passed in the world a long
time; and all for want of a little Logic, in discerning the right order in
intention of the means tending to a certain end: For, both creation and
permission of sin in Adam, and final perseverance in sin, and damnation
for sin, are but joint means tending to one end; to wit, the glory of God,
in the way of justice vindicative: and consequently the intention of all those
means is at once, neither before nor after other, howsoever they are not at
once in execution, (which perhaps is the rock of offense whereat many stumble
ere they are aware:) As for example, To the curing of a disease a Physician
discerns that many operations are necessarily requisite, these are at once
intended, the nature of the disease bespeaking them all; but they are not, nor
cannot be executed at once: The like may be said of all other proceedings,
according to the order of media and finis. So on the other side, creation,
permission of sin, deliverance from sin by the grace of faith and repentance,
and finally salvation, are all but joint means tending to one and the same
end; to wit, the glory of God in the way of mercy mixed with justice; and
consequently, all at once in intention, though not all at once in execution.
But to disprove that which here you affirm, as if some wilful disobedience,
in Gods foresight, was before the decree of condemnation, I dispute thus,
according to your own rules; If the foresight of disobedience did precede the
decree of condemnation, then God did first decree to permit this disobedience,
before he did decree to damn any man for it: which is as much as to say, Man's
disobedience was first in Gods intention; and consequently, it must be last in
execution: that is, men must first be damned for their disobedience, before God
permits them to become disobedient. But let us consider your grounds, in the
next place.

That God has some willingness to glorify his distributive Answ.
justice, as well as vindicative, in rewarding the world with life upon
condition of obedience and repentance, as well as with death upon condition of
disobedience and impenitency, appears from Gods Oath; As I live (says the
Lord) I have no pleasure in the wicked man's death; but rather that he should
turn from his wickedness and live. The usual answer made to this place seems
to once to strain the word beyond his native simplicity.

1. Some say that God speaks not of all the wicked, but of some of the elect
only, who in time are brought on to repentance: but the truth is, he speaks
of such wicked men, whereof some dye in their sins, as is evident by the
parallel place.

2. Others say, that God speaks of his antecedent will, going before all
causes in the creature, not of his consequent will, following the creature in
sin: but plain it is, he speaks of men now wicked, defiled with original
and actual sin.

3. Others say again, God speaks not of the secret will of his good pleasure,
but of his revealed will: but though I know there be sundry parts of Gods
secret will which are not revealed, yet I know no part of his will by oath,
doctrine, or historical narration, that is discrepant from his secret will as
all.

Object. If you say, Yes: Gods revealed will is that all should repent.

Resp. 1. I answer: It is not a part of Gods will revealed by has, doctrine,
or historical narration; but by a word of command.

2. I say, it is a part of his secret will too; I mean, of his good pleasure,
that all men should repent: and it is his displeasure if they repent not.

3. But there is another part of his good will also, that if they repent they
shall not perish; and this also revealed in his word: And thus the will of God
revealed in a dist^^^^ axiom is always consonant to his secret will, and
never frustrated.

4. Finally, others say, that God delights not in the death of a sinner, as it
is the destruction of the creature, but as it is a means of the manifestation
of his justice. I answer, It is true; but the manifestation of his justice
stands, as he expresses himself, in the removal of the cause of their
destruction from his own will to their will: As I live (says the Lord) I
desire not the death of a sinner: Turn ye, turn ye; why will ye dye, O
house of Israel?

First, here is some Philosophical error in distinguishing between Examine.
justice distributive and justice vindicative; which are no more to be
distinguished than a genus is to be distinguished from his species: Justice
commutative is only opposite to justice distributive; but justice distributive
comprehends under it as well justice vindicative as justice remunerative.

2. Here we have an anxious discourse to prove that which no man denies, as
before has been showed: And on the other side, it is equally as true, that God
has a willingness to glorify his vindicative justice, as well as
remunerative; to punish with death any one of his Elect, upon condition of
final disobedience and impenitency, as well as to reward with life, upon
condition of obedience and repentance.

3. But it appears by the Proof, that some further Point is intended then is
yet manifested; and such a one as you seem rather to insinuate then express.
For whereas hitherto you have proposed a will of God only conditionate, the
place of Scripture alleged mentions no such conditionate will, which is
indifferent to pass either upon the life or death of a man accordingly as he
shall be found to repent or not to repent; but rather intimates a will of God
inclining to affect rather the life of man then his death: as it is manifested
in these words, I have no pleasure in the wicked man's death, but rather that
he repent and live. Now this is nothing congruous to a conditionate will; as
before premised; First, because a conditionate will, at the best, is but
indifferent, to pass either upon life or death according to the condition
proposed. Secondly, if the condition of life be such as whereunto man is not so
well disposed, and the condition of death such as whereunto man is most prone;
it will follow here-hence, that such a conditionate will is more propense to
affect a man's death than life. Thirdly, most of all, in case it be such as that
the condition of life is never performed, and the condition of death always
performed; and the event hereof well known to God when he made this
conditionate decree.

4. But whereas you would (I guess) insinuate, that God does will the life of
the wicked (distinguished from Gods Elect) rather then their death, the place
alleged is nothing to this purpose; as not signifying what God does rather
will to come to pass, but what God does take most pleasure in, when it does
come to pass, whether it does come to pass or no; for certainly, the life and
repentance of the world does never come to pass, according to your opinion.

5. Junius renders the place so, as that Gods delight is signified to be placed
in the repentance of a sinner; Ne vivam fi delector morte improbi; sed delector
cum revertitur improbus ut vivat. And indeed God is glorified by our obedience,
as whereby he is acknowledged to be our supreme Lord; not so by our
disobedience. And indeed, did God take pleasure in the death of a sinner, what
should move him to wait for his repentance, and use all persuasive means to
bring him to repentance? And it is proposed to take them off from a desperate
condition, proposed in these words, Quia defectiones nostrae and peccata nostra
incumbunt nobis, ideo ipsis nos tabescimus ecqui viveremus. To take them off
from this, the Lord sends his Prophet, charging him and saying, Dic eis, ne
vivam ego, dictum Domini, si delector morte improbi, sed cum revertitur
improbus a via sua ut vivat. Revertimini, revertimini a viis vestris pessimis;
cur enim moreremini, domus Israelis?

6. Be it spoken in general, both of Elect and Reprobate, (yet only is it
directed to them to whom the Prophets of God are sent;) it follows not, that
God does will or desire the repentance of any Reprobate; (though to the
confirmation hereof you chiefly tend:) certainly, whosoever repents, God takes
pleasure in his repentance; and the Scripture says no more: But that he does
not will it or desire it, out of your own mouth may be convinced, seeing that
God affords not any Reprobate such an effectual grace as he fore-sees will
bring them to repentance; but reserving that for the Elect alone, unto all
others he vouchsafes only such a grace as he knows full well will never
bring any of them unto repentance. And if God would bring any man unto
repentance, who should hinder him? shall the will of man? how does it hinder
him in working the repentance of his Elect? cannot he omnipotenti facilitate
convertere, (as Austin speaks) whom he will, and ex nolentibus volentes
facere? Again, does God continue to will their repentance after they are
damned, or no? If no: then is he changed if ever he willed their repentance.

7. Certainly, he speaks of men defiled with original and actual sin; for
he speaks of such whom he exhorts to repentance: yet this hinders not but
that it may proceed of his antecedent will; for nothing but final impenitency
makes way for Gods consequent will concerning damnation.

8. Saint Paul, of all his labors, tendered to the good of all sorts,
professes, that he suffered them for Gods Elect: How (...), 10.
much more in Gods intention was the Ministry of his Prophets for the Elect
sake? The question is not so much about Gods delight in the death of the
wicked, as about his delight concerning their repentance and life; and this
has no parallel, Ezech. 18. applying it to other then Gods Elect.

9. The third Answer, though it seems to me not congruous enough in respect
of life; because revealed will, in this distinction, is usually taken only for
Gods commandment; and life is no precept: yet is it congruous enough in
respect of repentance; for it is generally commanded; and consequently, Gods
will of life, if it be called his will revealed, may be reduced to congruity,
as consequent to repentance, which God commands to all; and consequently, he
may be said, by his revealed will, to will the salvation of all. The Answer to
this is nothing to purpose, as sticking upon the terms, secret and revealed,
and not applied to the usual acceptions of this distinction, which is only to
signify Gods will of commandment, which we all know to be revealed; and Gods
will of purpose, which mostly is not revealed.

10. It is untrue, that it is Gods good pleasure that all should repent; for
the will of Gods good pleasure, in the acception of all that ever I read, is
only of that which God will have come to pass; and consequently, of what
shall come to pass; not of what should come to pass, to wit, of man's duty;
that is generally accounted voluntas signi, in distinction from voluntas
beneplaciti; and in special, we may call it voluntas praecepti, and
distinguish it from voluntas propositi; this is, What God will have to be
done; that is, what God will have to be our duty to do: And thus far it may
be accounted the will of Gods good pleasure (as you call it.) But then, Gods
displeasure following has no congruous opposition hereunto; as when you say,
It is his displeasure if they repent not: the contrary whereunto is not as you
shape it, It is his good pleasure that all men should repent; but rather thus,
It is his good pleasure if they do repent. That distinction tends to mere
confusion. Neither yet do I like this expression, shaped never so congruously:
rather it should run thus, God is well pleased when men do repent, and most
displeased when they do not repent; which is most true, but least to the
present purpose, as touching the distinction ventilated between us, concerning
voluntas signi, and voluntas beneplaciti.

Your second instance, of voluntas beneplaciti, is no less extravagant; as
when you make the object thereof thus; If they repent, they shall not perish:
If they repent not, they shall perish: for promises and rewards are but
adjuncts to voluntas signi, and nothing secret, but plainly revealed. But to
whom God will make his commandments, backed with promises and threats,
effectual to the working of repentance, this is a secret; and this we
commonly account voluntas beneplaciti. When you add, saying, Thus the will of
God revealed in a distinct axiom, is always consonant to his revealed will,
and never frustrated; You continue still in a miserable confusion, worse rather
then better: as when you talk of a disjunct axiom, in reference to that which
went before, when no disjunct axiom at all went before, but certain
conditionate axioms; as these, If they repent, they shall not perish: If they
repent not, they shall perish: whereas disjunct oppositions are such as these;
They shall repent or no: They shall perish or no: And to say such axioms are
consonant to Gods secret will, is a wild expression; whereas indeed they are
neither consonant nor dissonant, save only in enuntiating that in an
indeterminate manner, which Gods will has made determinate; and in that
respect it is dissonant enough.

Of the cause of the death of a sinner there needs not to be any question;
for undoubtedly, the sin of man is the cause thereof, in the way of a cause
meritorious; but not in the way of a cause naturally efficient. And as
undoubted it is, that Gods will is the cause thereof, as a Judge, in the way of
a cause naturally efficient; but not in the way of a cause meritorious. And as
clear it is, that only the meritorious cause is the chief cause in this
kind; for as much as by the rendering thereof alone, satisfaction is made to him
that demands the reason, why such a one suffers death. But I wonder what you
mean to change the former Translation of the Text, thus, I have no pleasure in
the wicked man's death, into another, thus, I will not the death of a sinner;
For, is it not God that inflicteth death? and does he not do all things
according to the counsel of his will? Ephesians. 1. 11. Yet if it were so to be
rendered, it will nothing advantage you. And in no other sense can it be said,
that he does not will it; then in that in which he is said, not to punish
willingly, Lam. 3. according to the Latin phrase, when he does not punish,
Animi causa, but by reason of some provocation, the sin of man urging and
moving him thereunto; as is fairly intimated in that, Hos. 11. 8. How shall I
give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? And, Esaias 3. They
provoke the eyes of his glory.

For a second ground: In the Covenant of Works you may see, as in a glass,
what the purpose of God is, in the manifesting his Answ.
Justice upon the world of mankind; as in the Covenant of Grace you may see, as
in a mirror, what the purpose of God is, in manifesting his mercy upon the
Elect: For as it is in men renewed after the Image of God; so likewise it is in
God himself: Such as his Covenant or Promise is, such is his Purpose. God does
covenant and promise in the Covenant of Grace to give life to the Elect, out of
his grace in Christ: So here does God covenant and promise, in the Covenant of
Works, to give life to Adam and all his posterity, if they continue in
obedience of his Law; or if, breaking this Law, they return again to him by
repentance; as it is described at large, Genesis 4. 7. Levit. 18. 5. Ezekiel. 18. 5.
and 20. 11. and 40. 21. Gal. 3. 12. Surely then, the purpose of Gods just
retribution is to give life to the world of mankind, upon condition of their
obedience, or of their repentance after disobedience. Say not, Surely God
purposed nothing but death to the world of mankind (whom he elected not,)
because he offered them life upon such condition which he knew was impossible
for them to keep: for, first, in Adam they were enabled to keep it; neither
impotency in Adam, nor efficacy of Gods decree did put upon Adam any necessity
of breaking it. Again, in Christ they have so much knowledge and grace
revealed to them, and offered, as is sufficient to bring them on to see their
impotency in themselves, and to stir them up to seek for help, and strength,
and life, in him where it is to be found: which if they neglect or despise, as
the Pharisees did, and all the rest of impenitent sinners do, God and his
Covenant are blameless, in offering them life, and the means of it; their
destruction is of themselves.

That Proposition of yours, As it is in men renewed after the Image of God, so
likewise it is in God himself; had need of much Examine.
limitation and qualification, lest it prove as often false as true, or rather
more. That which follows; Such as is his Covenant or Promise, such is his
Purpose: is likewise as often false as true. If the Promises of God are
absolute, such are his Purposes; but if his Promises be conditional, such are
not his Purposes. Both Piscator of late, by evidence of Scripture, and
Bradwardine long before, by demonstration of Reason, have proved, that no will
in God is conditionate, quoad actum volentis; all the conditions are found,
quoad res volitas. And indeed, though the Purposes of God are absolute, yet his
Promises are therefore conditionate, because they are conformed to the manner
of Gods operation with man: For, as God works in all things agreeable to their
natures; so in man he uses to work agreeable to his nature. And therefore,
albeit his Purpose be absolute to bring them to grace and glory, to faith,
repentance, and salvation; yet he allures them to faith and repentance by
promises and threatenings. When you say, that, God does covenant and promise to
give life to the Elect, out of his grace in Christ: You might as well have
said, that, God promises to give life to them that believe and repent; and
more congruously a great deal; seeing the conscience of our faith and
repentance brings us to the assurance of our Election; the conscience of our
Election, or of the assurance thereof, brings us not unto faith and repentance.
But it seems you desire to shape the Promises of God in the Covenant of Grace,
and in the Covenant of Works, in so different a manner, that the one may seem
to be absolute, the other conditional; whereas they are of the same nature in
both: And as God does withal intend to give the grace of obedience to the
Elect; so does he as absolutely intend to deny it to the other. And I wonder
you make not mention of the Reprobate in the latter, as of the Elect in the
former: Undoubtedly, the Covenant of Works concerns all to whom it is
preached; as well the Elect as the Reprobate. And the Covenant of Grace
likewise concerns all to whom it is preached; as well the Reprobate as the
Elect. To all it is preached, Whosoever believes shall be saved; as well to
the Reprobate as to the Elect: To all it is preached indifferently, Whosoever
believes not shall be damned; as well to the Elect as to the Reprobate:
only, God shows mercy on whom he will, in giving the grace of faith; and
hardens whom he will, in denying it. God does covenant (you say) to give life
to Adam and all his posterity, if they continue in obedience to his Law. This
then, undoubtedly, concerns the Elect as well as the Reprobate; For they are a
part of Adams posterity. But I wonder not a little at this language, speaking
in the Present Tense, that God does covenant to give Adam life; whereas Adam
many thousand years ago has ceased to have any thing to do with any such
Covenant. Therefore this is for some special purpose, in joining Adam and his
posterity together, as persons covenanted with by God. And I imagine the reason
of it to be this: Lest otherwise there could be no place for continuance in
obedience required of all Adams posterity; for that presupposes them to be in
the estate of obedience: which was never verified of them all, but as they were
in Adam, and that in his state of Innocence. But why should we please our
selves with such confusion? Let us consider them apart; and say, that, God did
covenant with Adam that if he continued in obedience to his Law; or if
breaking his Law he did return again to him by repentance, he should have
life. But what evidence, I pray, have you for this? namely, that God made any
such Covenant with Adam in the state of Innocence? who ever was found to
entertain any such conceit before you? why might not you as well devise the
like Covenant to be made by God with the Angels? Nay, is not the contrary
manifest? In the day thou sinnest thou shall dye the death. How could this be
verified, if God Genesis ^.
made any such Covenant with Adam? For, if he were under such a Covenant, he
could not be said to violate it by sinning, but only by refusing to repent
after he had sinned. And I verily believe you have no such meaning, as if you
conceived any such Covenant to be made with Adam before his fall; and
therefore you clapped Adam and his posterity together; to the end, that if that
which you delivered might not hold of the one, it might of the other. And
though it hold of Adams posterity, as touching this part, of turning unto God
by repentance after sin committed; yet of them it holds not, as touching the
other part of the condition, to wit, of continuance in obedience; for the
posterity of Adam, through his fall, are quite out of the estate of obedience,
till God restores them. Nay, God in this life never restores any to the estate
of obedience, which was found in Adam before his fall. Out of this confusion
you infer, that, Surely the purpose of Gods just retribution is to give life
to the world of mankind, upon condition of their obedience, or of their
repentance. As before we were troubled with confusion, so here we are again
troubled with an unhappy distinction: For, what do you mean to distinguish
Obedience from Repentance, as if Repentance were not Obedience? Does not God
say as well unto us, Repent, and believe the Gospel; as, If you consent and
obey, you shall eat the Esa. 1.
good things of the land? Is it fit to distinguish the Genus from the Species,
so as to set one in opposition to the other? Though the contentions of Brethren
are as the bars of a Palace; yet, as Brethren, they are all the Children of
the same Father, or Mother, or both. But take we your meaning; and that by
Obedience is to be understood, such a state or condition of obedience as is
without all sin; then let your Position run plainly thus, Surely, the
purpose of Gods just retribution is to give life to the world of mankind, upon
condition of their being without sin, or of their repentance after obedience.
To this I answer, That, there never was any such Covenant of God with man; I
mean, in such sort conditionate: and consequently, there never was any purpose
in God to make any such Covenant with man; at least for the time past: As for
the times to come, let them speak for themselves, by their own experience,
when they come. But that never any such Covenant had place hitherto, between
God and man, it is manifest: For, since the Fall of Adam all being borne in
sin, there is no place for such a Covenant, as touching the first part of the
condition, which is, of being without sin. And before the Fall of Adam there
was no place for this Covenant, as touching the latter part of the condition;
as I presume you will not deny: only the confusion of these two states, before
the Fall and after the Fall, has brought forth this wild conceit of such a
Covenant. By that which follows, it seems that all these conceptions tend to
no worse end, then to justify Gods disposition toward the Reprobate. And it
is great pity that so good an end, as the justifying of God, should be brought
about by no more congruous courses then these. But I would feign know, what
blemish should redound to the nature of God, if he should intend nothing but
death to the world of mankind? yet your self will acknowledge, that he might
have intended nothing but annihilation: And is not annihilation as bad as
death? But your meaning is, by death to understand sorrow. And is there not
just cause to prefer sorrow before death? Yea, but your meaning is, of sorrow
in the highest degree, and that everlasting. Why, but if it be no blemish to
God to intend nothing but sorrow in seven degrees to the world of mankind, why
should it be any blemish to him to intend nothing but sorrow in a degree more?
And if it be no blemish to God to intend nothing but sorrow to the world of
mankind for millions of years, why should it be any blemish to his reputation,
to intend to the world of mankind nothing but everlasting sorrow? Yet whom do
you oppose in this? Who ever said, that God did intend nothing but death to the
world of mankind? those on whom you obtrude this conceit, do not affirm this
of the world of mankind, but only of the Reprobates; if they do affirm any
such thing. And why, I pray, should the Reprobates be taken for the world of
mankind, rather than the Elect? Neither does any man say, that God did intend
nothing but death to the Reprobates: He did intend to them all life as well as
death; but withal, that all the posterity of Adam should be borne, or at least
conceived, in sin; and also that many thousands should perish in that sin
wherein they were conceived and borne. And I presume you dare not deny this:
which yet is the harshest proceeding of God, above all others, except his
dealing with his own Son. As for others, he intended to expose them to
actual sins of infidelity and impenitency, by denying to them that grace
which alone would preserve them from such sins; as your self spare not to
profess: and yet for all this you would obtrude upon us a strange conceit, and
that as very reasonable; namely, That God did not intend their death only, but
their life also: whereas God is nothing at all advantaged hereby in his
reputation, but only in words, which is no real relief to his honor, but
the adding of another injury (if that be an injury unto him, as you conceive;)
namely, to mock him also. And if we shall nothing pleasure him by a lie, lying
for God, as man does for man, to gratify him; surely we shall do him no
pleasure by thus mocking him. I would you had tried your strength in oppugning
their opinion to the uttermost, who maintain God to carry himself as
absolutely in the way of Reprobation, as in the way of Election: I would gladly
have considered it. But let us consider your present discourse: First, you say,
They were in Adam enabled to keep the condition; therefore say not, God
intended nothing but death to them. I pray transfer the case to the Angels;
were not they also enabled to keep the condition of life, as well as their
fellows? yet, did not God grant his Elect Angels such a grace as whereby he
knew they would stand; denying such a grace unto the others; and that as
absolutely as he granted it unto the other? And could he not as absolutely
have granted this grace unto them (...) and denied it to them that stood? And
what would have (...) the issue, but quite contrary? and versis luxisset curia
fatis.

Now let any man, that is not possessed with a prejudicate conceit, consider,
whether God did not as absolutely will the damnation of the one, as the
salvation of the other; making the one amplius adjutos (as Austin speaks) then
the other? For the absoluteness of Gods Election of Angels, is seen by the
absoluteness of his giving them such a grace as to keep them from sin. And
if he does as absolutely deny others the same grace, as he must needs; (for
before the first sin of Angels there could be no cause moving God to deny
them grace;) it will follow, that their Reprobation was as absolute as the
others Election. Yet what a poor relieving of Gods reputation is this, to say,
that Judas had power in Adam to keep the condition of life proposed to him;
though since his Fall he has not: yet we believe that Adam is saved, who
bereaved Judas of his ability; and Judas damned, for not keeping that whereunto
he had no ability; and that through the Fall of Adam. Further, observe I pray
you the miserable consequents of this your Argument, as it runs thus, in few
words; In Adam we were enabled to keep the Condition; Therefore say not, that
God intended nothing but death to the Reprobate. By the same reason I may
dispute thus: In Adam they were enabled to break the condition of life;
therefore, Say not that God intended nothing but life to his Elect. But as he
intended salvation, and not damnation only, to the Reprobates; In like sort
he intended damnation, and not salvation only, to the Elect: Especially
considering, that not in Adam only, but in themselves also, they are able
enough to break it; and the best of them have that in them that deserves
damnation, nothing that deserves salvation. As for the Reprobates, there
neither was nor is any thing in them that sits them for salvation. It is
strange that these incongruities should not be discerned; or being discerned,
men should be so little moved with them. But these are days of vengeance; and
when a good man erres, and that in weighty matters, I consider not any
judgment of God upon him, but upon the world rather; that hereby are so much
the more countenanced in their erroneous ways, which are advantageous to flesh
and blood; and therefore they delight in them, and thereby become the more
worthy to be given over to illusions, to believe lies. Let me touch upon that
also, as where you say, It was not the efficacy of Gods decree that did put
upon Adam any necessity of breaking it. This, I confess, is a plausible speech
now adays, and apt to be taken up; especially coming from good men's mouths,
to choke others withal, who fear not to give God the glory of his power,
with as much truth, and with a greater distinction and plainness; we say with
Aquinas, that, Gods will is so efficacious, as to cause all things to come to
pass after such a manner as they do come to pass; to wit, necessary things
necessarily, and contingent things contingently, or freely, whether in good or
evil. And if you spare to speak with the Holy Ghost, yet we will not; but
profess, that, Both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of
Israel, were gathered together to do that which Gods hand and Gods counsel
determined before to be done. And with Austin, Non aliquid fit, nisi Omnipotens
fieri velit, vel sinendo ut fiat, vel ipse faciendo.

So that even those things which God sinit sieri, vult sieri: Enchirid. cap. 95.
Good things he will have come to pass, by his working of them; evil things
he will have come to pass, by his suffering of them. Nay, otherwise it were
impossible he should foreknow them; for unless they are future, they are not
knowable to be future. But how can it be, that things contingent, and in their
own nature indifferent, as well to be not future as future; how, I say, is it
possible that they should pass out of this indifferent condition into a
condition determinate; and things merely possible in their own nature, become
future without a cause? And what cause can be devised of this transition, but
the will of God? For, from everlasting, nothing was extant to cause them of
things possible to become future, but God himself: and in God himself,
nothing can be imagined to be the cause hereof, but the will of God. This is
the insoluble demonstration that cuts the throat of Scientia media, whereupon
the Jesuits and Arminians, and all that oppose the absoluteness of Gods
proceedings, do, and must rely; either wittingly or unwittingly, and whether
they will or no; unless they will directly turn Atheists, and with Cicero
deny that God fore-knowes things that are to come. So that upon supposition of
Gods will to permit Adam to fall, it was necessary that Adam should fall;
necessary, I say, that he should fall: But how? Not necessarily, but
contingently, and freely: and no other necessity is at this day found in man
for the performing of any particular sinful act, but such as is joined with
liberty; and that in such sort, as that the necessity is only Secundum quid;
the liberty is Simpliciter: so called, I say, in respect of any particular act.
But, I confess, there is an absolute necessity of sinning, in general, laid
upon man by the Fall of Adam; whereby it comes to pass, that whether a man
commits a sinful act, then questionless he sins; or whether he omit a
sinful act, yet therein he sins also; in as much as he does not abstain
from it in a gracious manner. I come to the second Reason: Again, you say, In
Christ they have so much knowledge and grace revealed to them, and offered, as
is sufficient to bring them on to see their impotency in themselves, and to
stir them up to seek for help and strength, and life in him, where it is to
be found; which if they neglect and despise, as the Pharisees did, and all
impenitent sinners do, God and his Covenant are blameless, in offering them
life, and the means of it; their destruction is of themselves. I have read
such manner of discourse as this often in Carvinus, that busy Arminian; I am
sorry to read it in the writings of good men; especially when I find it not one
jot mended in them. Yet all this I see still tends to a gracious end, even to
the justifying of God; as when you say, Their destruction is of themselves. But
so do Arminians also pretend; to wit, the justifying of God in the way of
Reprobation: but the issue is, to justify themselves, and glorify themselves
in the way of Election. But, I pray you, what think you of Infants that perish
in Original sin; how is their destruction of themselves? Is it of themselves
that they are borne in sin? Yet I presume you will not say, with Arminians,
that all Infants that dye in their infancy, whether they be the Children of
Turks and Saracens, yet are saved, as well as the children of believing
Parents. Again, was not Pharaohs destruction of himself also, for not letting
Israel go? yet, will you deny that God hardened his heart, that he should not
let Israel go? Sihon King of Heshbon, was not his destruction of himself, in
that he would not suffer Israel to pass by him, though they promised to go
by the highway, and to turn neither to the right hand nor to the left, and to
pay for all that they received of them, both meat and drink? nevertheless it
is said, that, The Lord hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate,
because he would deliver him into the hands of the Israelites. The destruction
of Abimelech and of the Shechemites, was it not of themselves? yet surely, God
it was that sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem,
that the cruelty against the seventy sons of Jerubbaal, and their blood,
might Judge. 9.
come and be laid upon Abimelech their brother, which had slain them; and upon
the men of Shechem which had aided him to kill his brethren. But to proceed:
The face of your discourse seems to tend to the maintenance of a sufficient
grace in the Reprobates themselves; whereof there is much question: but yet you
express only a sufficient grace without them, whereof there is no question.
For, undoubtedly, in Gods word (whereof even Reprobates are partakers as well
as the Elect) there is grace sufficient in the way of instruction and
revelation; no man makes question of this. Undoubtedly, therein is contained
all things necessary both for faith and manners, and so to bring them to
salvation, if they will obey it. But all the question is, whether they have any
sufficiency of grace to enable them to obey it? I presume your self will not
avouch this. And the Pelagians of old acknowledged a sufficiency of grace in
the way of doctrine and instruction. Only you say, There is sufficient grace
given them to bring them to see their impotency. But how do you prove this?
The natural man commonly is too preiant of his ability; Dicere solet humana
superbia (says Austin) si scissem, fecissem. What was Paul's meaning when he
said of himself, Romans 7. 9. I once was alive without the Law? I should think
this impotency cannot be discerned without the life of grace. For, like as a
dead man naturally is not sensible of his death; so he that is dead in sin,
is nothing sensible of this his sinful condition. But howsoever, surely grace
revealed only has no congruity to such a work, as to bring a man to see his
impotency; for what greater grace in the kind of revelation then the word of
God? let this word testify, that a man is shaped in wickedness, and in sin
conceived; and that he is dead in sin. Is this sufficient to make him see
his impotency? Is the hearing of Gods word sufficient to make him believe it?
why then is it not sufficient to take away men's blindness? and why then does
not every one that hears it, cease to be blind; and consequently, cease to be
lame, and deaf; yea, and cease to be dead also? Nay, which is more, suppose a
Physician discovers a man to be in a dangerous estate, when he dreams of
nothing less, and suppose the party believes it upon his word; yet here-hence
it follows not, that he sees the dangerous estate wherein he is, until
he has some feeling of it. So likewise, if he should believe the word,
telling him that he is unable to do any thing that is good; yet he shall not
be said to see it, till he has some feeling of it: and whence can this
feeling proceed, but from some principle of life that must be shed into his
soul, that he may have a feeling of that miserable estate wherein he is by
nature; otherwise though upon supposition he should believe it in Gods word,
yet he should not see it in himself. Further, you say, It is sufficient to
stir him up to seek for help, and strength, and life, in him where it is to
be found. A strange conceit, that a man should seek for life, whereas if he
has not life he is dead; and was it ever known that a dead man sought for
life? well Martha might seek for the restoring of life to her dead brother
Lazarus, but surely Lazarus himself, being dead, neither did, nor could seek
for life. A man that has life, may be said to labor for life; that is, to
hold it, when he is in danger of losing life: but for a dead man to seek for
life is more then miraculous; for it is utterly impossible. When the Angel
came down into the Poole of Bethesda, the poor Creple had never a whit the
more sufficiency to enter in, had his heart been as lame to desire as his body
to go, notwithstanding that he saw so good an opportunity, he should make no
more haste to desire the benefit, then his body could to enjoy it. Again, no
man seeks for that he desires not; neither can he desire ought, unless he
know it, and loves it. And is it possible that a man should know the precious
nature of the life of grace, and be in love with it, and yet without the life
of grace? Is the knowledge of the precious nature of the state of grace, and
the love thereof, a fruit of the flesh think you? But, by that which follows,
it seems this is not your meaning; but you suppose, that notwithstanding all
the operation of grace mentioned, they may despise it: In which case, they
neither love it, nor understand the precious nature of it; for no man despises
that which he loves, and accounts precious: Therefore this stirring up seems
to be nothing but persuasion and exhortation. Now this, as Austin long ago
delivered, Doctrinae generalitate comprehenditur; and we willingly grant, that
the word preached does equally exhort all that hear it, to faith, to
repentance, to prayer, in some of which, or in all which, consists the seeking
of life. And no man makes question, but the word of God sufficiently performs
its part, in exhortation to faith, to repentance, to prayer: but the Pharisees
despised this, and so do most; and God is blameless. But of any power that
they have to believe, repent, and pray, upon the doing whereof they should
obtain life, your self are content to say nothing at all; but keep your self
unto general phrases, which are very apt to deceive us; and this is the course
not only of them that are in love with their own errors; but with good men
also, when out of a desire to justify God, and not content with that
simplicity of satisfaction which is laid forth unto us in holy Scripture, and
seems harsh to flesh and blood, making them cry out, Durus est hic sermo, they
shape unto themselves other courses, more convenient (as they think) to give
satisfaction; yet not so much unto themselves, as unto others: but all in
vain; for flesh and blood will receive no satisfaction in the plain truth of
God.

A third Reason then to prove that God purposed life to the Answ.
world, upon condition of their obedience and repentance, is taken from the end
God aimed at: As he declares himself, to offer means of salvation unto the
world: which is not in the first place to harden, and to leave without excuse;
but to bring them to the knowledge of God and of themselves, to repentance, to
the seeking after God, to the purging of themselves from sin, and to peace.
To the Gentiles God gave the works of Creation and Providence, and his Law
written in their hearts; to reveal the knowledge of God to them, to teach them
to do the things of the Law, to judge of them that do amiss, and thereby be
brought to condemn themselves doing the same things; to lead them to
repentance, to move them to seek after the Lord. And thus much light Christ
enlighteneth every man withal that comes into this world. From whence also it
was, that God vouchsafed heavenly dreams and visions even to the Gentiles,
That he might withdraw them from their sins, and hide their pride, and save
their souls from the pit. But because this light alone did not prevail with
the Gentiles, as to bring them to the knowledge of God in Christ, therefore it
pleased God in the fullness of time to send the preaching of the Gospel amongst
them; and in the mean time, not to judge them nor condemn them for their not
believing in Christ, of whom they had not heard; nor for transgressing the Law
of works, which they had not received; but only for sinning against the law
of nature, which was written in their hearts, and expounded to them daily by
the works of Creation and Providence, and sealed up to them by particular
amplification, partly by their Consciences accusing or excusing, Romans 2. 15.
partly by dreams and visions, Job 33. 15, 16.

To the Jews God revealed his Covenant clearly and fully; sent his Prophets
among them early and late; gave them deliverances; chastened them with many
wholesome afflictions; yea, sent his holy Spirit among them: And all this, in
the first place, not to harden, no not carnal Israel; nor to leave them
without excuse; but to purge them, to humble them, and to prove them, and to
do them good in the latter end. And when these ends were not attained, he
complains he had used these means in vain: which plainly argues his first
and chiefest intent was to heal, and not to harden. In fullness of time God
sent his Son into the world, not to condemn it, or any thing in it; but that
the world might be saved through him: implying, that even that part of the
world which is condemned for refusing of Christ, it was not Gods chiese intent
to send Christ to procure their condemnation, but their salvation rather. If
they should plead their condemnation to be unjust, for unbeleese; because they
were not able to believe, Ver. 18. our Savior answers, by a reasonable
prevention, Ver. 19. This is their condemnation, viz. the just cause of their
condemnation, that when light came into the world, men loved darkness rather
then light: men chose rather to cleave to their sinful estates and ways of
darkness, than to follow the light of the means of grace, which might have
brought them on forward to believe in Christ. Again, when Christ lived here in
the world, and was the Minister of Circumcision, and so might speak and do
some thing as man; yet as man he went not to do his own will, but the will of
his Father who sent him: and yet, how willing and earnest was he to gather
Jerusalem under his wings; even his wings in which lay healing and salvation? A
sign it was the will of God to have healed and saved that part of Jerusalem
which would not. And when our Savior with tears tells Jerusalem, Oh that thou
had known, at least in this thy day, the things that do belong unto thy
peace! does he not intimate, that God had even to that day carried thoughts of
peace unto them; and accordingly to send them means of peace, even those that
should never from that day forward enjoy the like means of peace?

Finally, God sent his Spirit into the world, to convince it of sin; because
they believed not in Christ: Which argues, that the Spirit did not only
persuade them to believe in Christ; but did convince them also that it was
their sin, that they did not attain to believe on him. Now, the Spirit of God
moves to nothing, but what he knows to be according to the will of God:
And therefore the Spirit bears witness, the will of God is, the world of
unbeleevers shall not be shut out from Christ, if they shut not out themselves
through unbeleefe.

Still you proceed to prove that which no man denies: namely, Examine.
that God purposed life to the world, upon condition of obedience and
repentance: provided, that you understand it aright: namely, that obedience and
repentance is ordained of God, as a condition of life; not of Gods purpose.
Otherwise it were a very wild expression to say, that, God ordained that
obedience and repentance should be the condition of Gods ordination: Or, that
God purposed that obedience and repentance should be the condition of Gods
purpose. Yet, by the way, I desire to know whether you exclude faith? If you
do, what ground have you to prove that God ever purposed that any of Adams
posterity, coming to ripeness of age, should be saved upon the condition of
obedience and repentance without faith? Last of all, on the other side, it is
as undoubtedly true, that God ordained, that whosoever, coming to ripe years,
should not believe and repent, should be damned; the very elect not excepted:
Not that any such conditionate decrees are agreeable unto God; but upon such
decrees as were absolute in God, such Propositions as these are naturally
inferred; Whosoever believes and repents, shall be saved; Whosoever
believes not and repents not, shall be damned. One thing I had almost
forgotten: In the former Section you spoke of a Purpose of God to save the
world upon condition of obedience or repentance, in a disjunctive manner: now
you are come off from that, and turn your former disjunctive into a
copulative, saying, that God purposed to save the world upon condition of their
obedience and repentance: This argues that you are not well grounded in your
own opinion. Howsoever, your third reason is drawn from the end which God
aimed at in offering means of salvation to the world, which is not (say you)
in the first place to harden, or leave them without excuse; but to bring them
to the knowledge of God and of themselves, to repentance, to the seeking after
God, to the purging of themselves from sin, and to peace. I am content,
first, to consider what you say; secondly, how you prove, who ever said, that
God offered means of salvation to any to this end, that he might harden them?
Means of grace were never (that I know of) called means of obduration.
Hardening follows hereupon by accident; but means of grace harden not. But
when means of grace are offered, the corruption of man's heart, uncorrected by
the spirit of regeneration, is apt to suggest carnal considerations, such as
are apt to make a man obstinately stand out against them. The motion that
Israel made to Sihon, to pass through his Country, hardened him not; but the
fear of inconveniences and dangers, more than enough, upon the passage of so
great an Army through his Country, in all likelihood, was it that hardened him;
and God is said to harden him, in not correcting that fear, but moving him
according to that projecting disposition wherein he found him. And mark how
Cajetan commenteth upon these words, Utramque hominis partem (spiritum and cor,
hoc est, superiorem and inferiorem) male dispositum a Deo, intellige negative
penes dona gratuita, positive autem quoad judicum inclinationem and
prosecutionem boni sensibilis. It a quod Deus spiritum regis durum (hoc est,
non cedentem petitionibus) reddidit, and non dando ci gratiam acquiescends, and
cooperanda cidem ad affectum securitatis and boni proprii. When Moses came to
Pharaoh, to require him, in the name of the Lord, to let Israel go; this was
not that that hardened him; but his own pride, superstition, and
covetousness: Neither did Gods judgments harden him; for it is diverse times
signified, that when he found himself eased, then he hardened his heart: and
in other places, in the way of an adversative, when it is said, that yet Pharaoh
hardened his heart; and the like. This also does remove the cause of hardening
his heart from Gods judgments; yet, notwithstanding, it cannot be denied, but
that when God offers the means of grace to many, he does it with a purpose to
harden their hearts; if so be he entertaines any such purpose at all, as your
self grants he does; for Gods purposes are eternal and immutable. As for
your qualification of it, by saying, He does not offer means of grace, in the
first place, to harden; It is a strange expression, whereof, I am persuaded,
you are not able to give any account; but, hand over head, cast out such a
phrase as seems agreeable to your Tenet. For, consider I pray, this first
place you speak of, is it in intention, or in execution? It cannot be in
intention; for, in intention there is no order in things, but in respect of end
and means: but, neither obduration is a sit means to salvation, nor salvation
a sit means to obduration. Neither can it be in execution; for, in execution
salvation is not found at all, but only obduration, in the men of the world
you speak of. Therefore, your meaning must not be of primacy in place or
order, but in principality; as much as to say, Not chiefly to harden, but
chiefly to bring to repentance. But none of your Proofs come near the making
of this good, as we shall see in due place. In the mean time, I disprove it
thus; No wise man does chiefly intend that which he means not to bring to
pass at all: Now, God does purpose to harden them, as your self confess,
though not chiefly: but God does not purpose to save them; for, if he did, who
could hinder him? This is the foul blemish of your opinion; plainly denying
Gods omnipotency, as Austin long ago discoursed: and yet you swallow this with
facility, though a bit as great as a Camel. I know full well Arminius his
shifts to ease himself of this imputation; I would gladly be acquainted with
any other man's inventions also. As for the other end, impugned by you, to wit,
to leave them without excuse; that, indeed, we grant may more commodiously be
accounted an end intended by God than the former: neither do you deny it to be
intended by God, only you say, it is not chiefly intended by him; yet this is
such a thing as God brings to pass, to wit, their unexcusablenesse; but their
repentance he never brings to pass: and is it fit to say, that God chiefly
intends that which shall never come to pass, as he well knows, rather than
that which infallibly shall come to pass, and that by his procurement, as
himself well knows? Thus I have considered what you say: Now I come to
consider how well you prove what you have said. To the Gentiles (you say) God
gave the works of Creation and Providence, and his Law written in their
hearts, to reveal the knowledge of God to them, to teach them to do the
things of the Law, to judge them that do amiss, and thereby to be brought to
condemn themselves doing the same things; to lead them to repentance, to move
them to seek after the Lord. Like as it were not fit to say, that God gives
us his word to this end, that he might reveal himself unto us, (for so I had
rather say, than to say he reveals the knowledge of himself unto us;
because, the very giving of his word is the revealing of himself unto us:) In
like sort, it is not fit to say, that, To the Gentiles God gave the works of
Creation and Providence, and his Law written in their hearts, to reveal
himself unto them; for, like as the word in its kind, so the works of God in
their kind, and the Law written in our hearts, are the revelation of God unto
the world: God, in ancient times, teaching the world, (...), as afterward he
did, (...), as Chrysostom has observed long ago. But suppose all this were
granted you, yet is it nothing to purpose; for here is not the least intimation
of any comparison between the objects of Gods intention, to signify what God
did intend in the first place, or chiefly; and what in the next, or not
chiefly. Again, all this, as touching his not revealing himself unto the
world, is rather subservient to the end, impugned by you, to wit, the leaving
them without excuse, then opposite thereunto; for, had not God in some sort
revealed himself unto them, they had not been left without excuse; neither had
there been any place for hardening them to resist Gods truth, if the truth of
God had not been some way or other manifested to them. That of aiming to bring
them to repentance, and the rest of the same nature, is most for your purpose,
if you were able to make it good: But when we are not wel-grounded in the way
that we take, no marvel if we multiply expressions, that when some fail us,
we may take hold of other. Sure I am, it is apt to confound the judgment of
him that, in the search of truth, shall address himself to examine it. Now,
that God did not at all intend their repentance, I have already proved; for had
he intended it, it should come to pass, he would have given it them, seeing
it cannot be had without Gods gift, as the Scripture testifies, 2 Timothy 2. 25,
26. Acts 5. 31. and 11. 18. and as Austin long ago has expressed it, contra
Julian. lib. 3. cap. 4. Quantam libet praebuerit pationtiam, nisi Deus dederit,
quis aget poenitentiam? But we are apt to be deceived by phrases of speech,
which, carrying many times an ambiguous signification, and being plausible to
procure credence one way, is, hand over head, so carried, as if it were nothing
less true the other way also: As for example, To intend repentance, is a
plausible attribute to be given unto God; but it has a double signification,
the one that he intends it shall be man's duty to repent; and in this sense it
is not more plausible than true: the other is, that God does intend they shall
repent; and this is no more true than plausible; for as much as God intends to
give repentance to none but to his Elect: like as, de facto, he brings none to
repentance but his Elect, according to that of Austin, contra Jul. Pelag. lib.
5. cap. 4. Istorum neminem (says he, speaking of the Reprobate) adducit ad
salubrem spiritualemque poenitentiam, qua homo reconciliatur Deo in Christo,
sive illis ampliorem patientiam, sive non imparem praebeat. As for that of Gods
leading to repentance, Romans 2. 4. I answer, first, I had thought that had been
delivered rather of the Jews than of the Gentiles; and Acts 17. 20. the
Apostle does clearly signify, that the admonition of Gentiles to come to
repentance, was reserved for the time of the Gospel; The time of this ignorance
God regarded not, but now he admonishes all men every where to repent. And in
reason, faith and repentance are inseparable; and therefore, where there was no
admonition unto faith, how could there be admonition unto repentance? And who
would not rather incline to think, that the Gentiles (taking them in separation
from the Church of God) had the knowledge or God and of his Law given them, not
to bring them to repentance that they might be saved, (for I acknowledge no
sufficiency of instruction granted them hereunto) but rather for the ordering
of their lives in moral conversation, and for the politic government of the
world, lest otherwise all things should run to disorder and confusion? And, as
Austin says, that the means of grace are granted to some, ut proficiant
thereby, ad exteriorem vitae emendationem, quo mitius puniantur.

Secondly, Gods leading to repentance, in that place, is attributed to the
goodness of God, which is showed in his patience and long-suffering; as if it
signified no more than giving way unto repentance.

Thirdly, take it as rigorously as you will, it cannot signify more than God
performs by his word, and preaching of the Gospel: For, can you imagine that
God performs more by his works in leading men unto repentance, than by his
word? Now, Gods leading to repentance by his word, is but his admonishing them
to repent; Acts 17. 30. Now he admonishes all men every where to repent. And
here-hence it follows not, that God does will their repentance any otherwise
then voluntate praecepti, not voluntate propositi, or bene-placiti; for if he
did, then must he needs give them the grace of repentance. Yet, I confess, in
this voluntas praecepti is included voluntas propositi, in some sense; which
yet nothing serves your turn, though some equivocation makes it seem
plausible, taking it hand over head in the general; for it signifies withal,
that it is the will of Gods good pleasure that they ought to repent, and it is
their duty to repent: But there is much difference between these two
Propositions, Its my good pleasure that it shall be your duty to repent; and,
It is my good pleasure that you shall repent, and therefore I will give you the
grace of repentance. As for the second place of importance, drawn out of Job
33. verse. 15, 16, 17. of Gods providence in vouchsafing heavenly dreams and
visions unto the Gentiles, that he might withdraw them from their sins, and
hide their pride, and save their souls from the pit: This likewise, in two
respects, is nothing for the purpose: For, first, this is spoken of such a time
as wherein there was no partition wall, as afterward was erected, between the
Jews and Gentiles; and therefore you do not well to apply this unto the
Gentiles, in distinction from the Church of God: for, was not Job, and such
like, in those days, of the Church of God? does not God send his friends unto
him, that he might sacrifice for them, God himself promising to accept it?
Secondly, you are to prove, that God does intend the repentance of those in
whom he does not effect repentance: But Elihu, in Job, speaks of God intending
the repentance in those in whom he does effect repentance; as it appears,
Verse. 16, and 23, 24, 25. and yet I deny not but God may intend a kind of
repentance even in the wicked; to wit, exteriorem vitae emendationem, as Austin
speaks; and so deliver them from judgment temporal, and make also their
damnation more tolerable. Here you pass over from Gods natural providence to
a more gracious providence, but not with a right foot; as when you say, that
because this light alone did not so far prevail with the Gentiles, as to
bring them to the knowledge of God in Christ; Therefore it pleased God, in the
fullness of time, to send the preaching of the Gospel amongst them: You should
have said rather, Because this light alone could not prevail: but so, perhaps,
you had much prejudiced your own Tenet. I say, you should have rather said so;
seeing you undertake to give the cause of this enterchange of the providence of
God: For, to say only, It did not prevail; is not to allege any tolerable
cause thereof; especially, considering that you make the blame hereof wholly to
lie upon man's wilfulness: for by the same reason you might introduce a further
course of Gods more gracious providence to bring men unto repentance, than any
he has undertaken yet; for even the preaching of the Gospel, thereby
admonishing men to repent, does not prevail with most. There is another
incongruity, as when you say, This light of nature alone did not prevail; as
if you would imply, that the light of grace alone does prevail: which, I
presume, you will confess, is notoriously untrue; and that not only
illumination of the mind, but the affection of the heart by the finger of God
is necessarily required to bring men unto repentance. As for that which
follows therein, I do most willingly and freely concur with you,
acknowledging that God condemns none for not believing in Christ, of whom they
had not heard; nor for transgressing the Law of Moses, which they had not
received; but only for sinning against the Law of nature, which was written in
their hearts: For I verily believe, that where there is no Law, there is no
transgression. But, I presume, you deliver this only in reference to men of
ripe years, and do not concur with Arminians, in maintaining that all
infants dying in their infancy are saved. Thus, from Gods providence concerning
the Gentiles, I come unto his providence concerning the Jews.

2. Of the sufficiency of outward means of grace granted unto the Jews, to
bring them unto repentance, no man makes question: yet seeing that among them,
all were not precious, but many were found vile enough, and reprobate silver,
according to that, Romans 9. 6. All are not Israel which are of Israel; and that
of the Prophet, Esaias 10. 22. Though the number of the children of Israel were
as the sand of the sea, yet but a remnant shall be saved: and how few were
those represented by the basket of good figs, Jer. 24. 2. in comparison to
those other naughty figs, which could not be eaten they were so evil? That God
did intend the salvation and repentance of those to whom he never gave
repentance and salvation, I hold it as impossible for you or any man to prove,
as to pull God down from the throne of his omnipotency, or disrobe him of his
immutable perfection: For, unless God continues to intend their repentance and
salvation, even when they are damned, he must be mutable; and if he did will
and desire their salvation, the reason why they failed of salvation must needs
be, because God was not able to procure it. I never met yet with any other then
vile shifts, to avoid these consequences, both in Arminius, and others that
follow him. But consider we your proofs: nay, what proof do you bring to
prove the point you undertake, namely, that God does not only intend their
repentance, but that in the first place; and yet you cannot deny but that this,
which you say God intends in the first place, never comes to pass: whereas the
other, which God intends (you confess) though in a latter place, does come to
pass. But because I think it were absurd to conceive, that God intends their
repentance whom he purposes to harden, lest they should convert, and God
should heal them; therefore I am willing to consider what you bring to the
contrary. Your first place is out of Deuteronomy. 8. 16. Who fed thee in the
wilderness with manna, which thy fathers knew not, to humble thee, and to
prove thee, and that he might do thee good in thy latter end. That of
humbling thee, Junius and Piscator reads thus, ut affligeret te; belike, partly
in reference to that which follows, and to prove thee; (for as much as
temporal humiltation has more congruity to the proving of them, than
spiritual; as whereby they humble themselves, and which follows the proving
of them, rather than goes before it;) partly in reference to the third Verse,
going before, where it is said more at full, Therefore he humbled thee, and
made thee hungry, and fed thee with manna, which thou knew not, neither did
thy fathers know it; that he might teach thee, that man lives not by bread
only. By which words we may gather a fair interpretation of that you
allege: If it be spoken of humiliation spiritual, thus, He fed thee with
manna to humble thee; that is, to teach thee to humble thy self: and so indeed
his providence, providing alike to them all, did equally teach them all to
humble themselves. But did God intend that every one should, de facto, humble
himself? why then did he not give them eyes to see, and ears to hear, and
an heart to perceive, as Deuteronomy. 29. 4. Moses tells them plainly, saying, Yet the
Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to
hear, unto this day. I deny not but God did manifest, by the course of his
providence toward them, what he did require and deserve at their hands,
namely, that they should humble themselves to walk with the Lord their God;
and the phrase, to humble thee, applied even to the most carnal, may have a
fair construction, that thou should be humbled, or, humble thy self,
understanding it ex officio; for hereby he did manifest that this was their
duty, answerable to Gods proceedings with them: and yet futher, considering
that he represents his own gracious proceedings with them, by the
proceedings of an earthly father with his children, Verse 5. Know therefore in
thine heart, that as a man nurtureth his son, so the Lord thy God nurtureth
thee; no marvel if he expresses his affections and desires toward them,
suitable to the desires and affections of an earthly father, who being not able
effectually to procure their amendment, yet desires it. And this is Gods usual
course, to express himself in such language, per (...). But, shall we
hereupon take liberty to build doctrines, as touching the nature of God, as if
that which is figuratively uttered were properly delivered? He proved them
all, I confess, and upon the probation some proved good silver, and others no
better than dross; and thereupon he did good to the one in their latter end,
and not unto the other: Neither did he ever purpose, that good in their latter
end should redound unto any, but as they should be humbled: wherein,
humiliation is made the condition of doing them good, not of Gods purpose or
intention: And withal, God gave unto those that were truly mortified, that is,
truly humbled, hearts to perceive, eyes to see, and ears to hear; but he
gave not the like grace unto all. And look what is said of Gods intention to
humble them, the same may be said of Gods intention to purge them, according to
that Ezekiel. 24. 13. Because I would have purged thee, and thou wast not purged,
thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness, till I have caused my wrath to
light upon thee: I would have purged thee, voluntate praecepti, represented by
the means used in his word; which failing, he resolves to take another
course, even by judgments in his works, meaning to go on in avenging the
quarrel of his Covenant, Levit. 26. 25. until their uncircumcised hearts were
humbled, Levit. 26. 41. purposing so at length to effect it; as he professes,
Ezekiel. 22. 15. saying, I will scatter thee among the heathen, and disperse thee
in the countries, and will cause thy filthiness to cease from thee. Yet this
is not so much by the power of afflictions, as by the power of his Spirit, Esaias
57. 17. For his wicked covetousness I was angry with him, and have smitten
him: I hid me, and was angry; yet he went away and turned after the way of his
heart: I have seen his ways, and I will heal them. But, when these ends are
not attained, God complains (you say) He had used these means in vain.
Indeed, Jer. 2. 20. he says, Of old have I broken thy yoke, and burst thy
bonds, and thou said, I will no more transgress; but, like an harlot, thou
runnest on all high hills, and under every green tree. But this is rather a
conviction of their unfaithfulness, in not keeping Covenant with him, than a
complaint: But be it a complaint, as such complaints are attributed unto God,
like as men complain when they cannot help; but take heed we do not
here-hence infer, that God is like man, not able to prevent cross events
contrary to his expectation. Neither does he there say, He had used these
means in vain; for, before he used them, he knew at least (you will not deny
it) what would be the issue; and no wise man, I think, will set himself to do
that which he knows will prove vain, in respect of the end intended by him.
But Jer. 10. 30. the Lord says thus, I have smitten your children in vain,
they have received no correction; and this plainly argues (as you say) his
first and chiefest intent was to heal, and not to harden. It is true, upon a
superficial scanning of the place, it seems that God intended to heal them;
but of any comparison made between two ends intended, the one chiefly, the
other secondarily, not the least glympse of evidence. But I deny that he
intended healing at all in this case; for, if he did, that being his own
work, why did he not heal them? Will you say, Because they would not receive
instruction, but went after the way of their own hearts still? This is a vain
answer; for this is no impediment unto God; as I prove first by clear evidence
of Scripture, Esaias 57. 17. I have smitten him, and yet he went after the way
of his heart; nevertheless mark what follows, I have seen his ways, and I
will heal them. Secondly, by clear demonstration of reason; to heal them, is
to bring them to repentance: Now, will you say that God is ready to perform
this, provided that they do repent? If they repent already, what need is there
of Gods grace to bring them to repentance? and what is it to prerequire
repentance on man's part, to this end that God may give them repentance? as if
man must first repent, and then God will give him repentance. But some will
say, What then is the meaning of the Lord, saying, I have smitten your children
in vain, they have received no correction? I answer, we are to conceive Gods
corrections to tend to this, according to that of Peter, knowing that the
long-suffering of the Lord is salvation: or, God speaks this, (...), after the
manner of earthly parents, seeking their childrens amendment by correction, but
not obtaining it. And this being an end of correction in Gods children; in the
wicked this end is not obtained. And what difference is there between means
natural and means moral, but this, means natural have power to effect
their ends, means moral are to admonish moral agents of their duty to do
this or that? and so the ends of Gods punishment is, that by them we should
learn to amend our lives; as is signified in the Collects of our Church. In a
word, natural means tend to ends that shall be thereupon; moral means tend to
ends that should be; and each are usually said to be in vain, when the end,
according to each kind, is not obtained. God sent his Son into the world, not
that he should condemn the world, but that the world should be saved by him.
Most true; for he sent his Son into the world, to dye for the world; and to
dye for them is to save them, and not to condemn them. But, for whom did he
send his Son into the world, to dye? Surely, for the world of Elect; even for
those whom God the Father had given him: Thou have given him power over all
flesh, that he should give eternal life to all them that thou have given him,
Joh. 17. 2. And if we consider the world, in distinction from those whom God
has given him, he plainly professes, that as he did not pray for them, Joh.
17. 9. so he did not sanctify himself for them, Verse 19. that is, offer
himself up upon the Cross; as Maldonate acknowledges to be the joint
interpretation of all the Fathers whom he had read: And your self have but
erst confessed, that God did not (Joh. 3. 17.) give the world unto Christ, by
him of grace to be bought (or brought) unto salvation. Undoubtedly, he sent
not Christ into the world at all to procure any man's condemnation: neither does
Christ procure any man's condemnation; although infidelity and disobedience to
the word of Christ procures the condemnation of many. And I wonder what moved
you so to speak, as to imply it was Gods intent (though not chief intent) to
send Christ into the world to procure the condemnation of any. At length we
are come to the (...) of the point controverted between us, in the words
following; If they should plead their condemnation to be unjust, for unbeleefe,
because they were not able to believe, Ver. 18. our Savior answers by a
reasonable prevention, ver. 19. This is their condemnation, viz. the just cause
of their condemnation, that when light came into the world, men loved darkness
rather than light; men chose rather to cleave to their sinful estates, and
ways of darkness, than to follow the light of the means of grace, which might
have brought them on to believe in Christ. First, let us consider the Text it
self, then your interpretation and accommodation thereof. Our Savior does
plainly derive the cause of their unbeleefe, or disapprobation of the Gospel,
signified in these words, They loved darkness rather than light; I say, the
cause of this our Savior referres to their works of darkness, expressed in
these words, Because their deeds were evil. The full meaning whereof, I take
to be this; The works wherein they delight are evil; that is, works of
darkness; and therefore no marvel if they hate the light, and prefer
darkness before it: -- Pulchra Lavernae, Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque
videri.
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus objice nubem.


But give me leave to make an honest motion: As it becomes us to take notice
of this cause mentioned here, so it becomes us nothing less to take notice of
other causes mentioned in other places. Now, another cause of unbeleefe is
mentioned Joh. 5. 44. and that of the same general nature with this, but
expressed in more special manner by our Savior, thus, How can ye believe,
which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes from
God only? Yet this is not all the cause of unbeleefe which the Scripture
commends unto us; for the Apostle also takes notice of Satan's illusions, in
this work of unbeleefe, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that are lost: Whose eyes the God of this world has blinded, etc. And
because it is in the power of God to correct this delight we take in evil
works, and to deliver us from the illusions of Satan, if it please him to
show such mercy toward us; and when he does not, he is said to harden us; The
hand of God in this our Savior takes, notice of, as the cause of unbeleefe in
man, Joh. 12. 39, 40. Therefore they could not believe, because Esaias says
again, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they should
not see with their eyes, and understand with their heart, and be converted, and
I should heal them. Like as Moses of old told the Jews, saying, Deuteronomy. 29. 2,
3. Ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in the land of Egypt
unto Pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto all his land: The great
temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those great miracles:
Ver. 4. Yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see,
and ears to hear, unto this day. And this he does even then when his purpose
was to reprove them for their natural incorrigiblenesse; for men sin never
the less obstinately, because God denies them grace, but rather so much the
more obstinately; because (as Austin well says) Libertas sine gratia non est
libertas, sed contumacia: and, consequently, they are never a whit the less
faulty, though it be not in their power to correct that corruption of their
hearts, whence this faultiness proceeds. And hereupon the Apostle gives way to
the same objection, in effect, which you propose; for, having concluded that
God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens, he gives
place to such an objection; Thou will say then, Why does he yet complain? for
who has resisted his will? and answers it not as our Savior does; for our
Savior proposed no such objection to be answered, as you feign, the Apostle
does plainly, and in express terms. Our Savior discovers the immediate cause
of unbeleefe, to wit, because their hearts were set on evil; as it was
sometimes with the Colossians, Col. 1. 21. yet because it was not in their
power to change their hearts, but God alone; who will change them, through
mercy, in whom he will; and will not change them in others, but harden them.
Hereupon the Apostle gives way to an objection, in a matter more sublime than
yours, as before mentioned, and answers it in this manner, O man, who art thou
that disputest with God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why
have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power, etc. which is an answer to
such a question as this, Why does God complain of us for that which proceeds
from the hardness of our hearts, which God alone can cure, but will not; but
rather, by denying us mercy, continues to harden us?

But now, let us consider the interpretation and accommodation of this place,
to the plea devised by you: The reason, you say, why men loved darkness rather
than light, is, because men chose rather to cleave to their sinful estates,
and ways of darkness, than to follow the light of the means of grace, which
might have brought them on to believe in Christ. It is great pity that by our
own phrasiologies we should raise unto our selves a mist, whereby we should
be the more unable to discern the truth of God. Suppose the Paraphrase were
both sound in it self, and congruous to the Text; yet give way, I pray, to
such a question in the second place, What was the reason that they chose rather
to cleave to their sinful estates, and ways of darkness, than to follow the
light of the means of grace? If you answer any thing but that of our Savior,
Joh. 12. 39. Therefore they could not believe, because Esaias says again, He
has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they should not see with
their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I
should heal them; I will not cease to pursue you, until you come to this; and
withal, put you to give a reason, why you should not take hold of this answer
of our Savior Joh. 12. 39. as of that Joh. 3. 19. especially, considering that
if a question were moved, Why some chose rather to follow the light of the
means of grace, than to cleave to their sinful estates, and ways of
darkness? I doubt not but you would forth with answer, Because God had mercy
on them, and gave them hearts to know Christ, and to believe in him, 1 John 5.
20. Phil. 1. 29. And seeing God does not show the like favor to others, to
show them the like mercy, which is, in Scripture phrase, to harden, Romans 9. 18.
and Romans 11. 7. or, not to give hearts to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears
to hear, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. why should we not say plainly, that whereas the one
takes a right way, it is because God shows mercy toward them, to give them so
much grace; and whereas the other takes not the right, but the wrong way, it is
because God hardens them, in denying the like mercy and grace to them? like as
our Savior expressly signifies also, Joh. 8. 47. He that is of God hears
Gods words; ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. But if
any man shall inquire, What then moved our Savior to give this reason why men
loved darkness rather than light, to wit, this, because their deeds were
evil? I answer, he gives the immediate cause why they loved not the light;
that is, they had no mind to hear the doctrine of our Savior: and that was,
in respect of the convincing nature of it, and therein, like unto light, which
makes every thing to appear and be manifest, according to its proper hiew;
whereas in darkness all things are confounded; according to that Ephesians. 5. 13.

Now they who brought ill consciences along with them, no marvel if they were
quickly weary of our Saviors company: A pregnant example whereof we have Joh.
8. 7. For when our Savior said unto them who brought unto him a woman taken in
adultery, Let him that is among you without sin cast the first stone at her.
Ver. 9. When they heard this, being accused by their own conscience, they went
out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even to the last. So that, indeed, the
reason given by our Savior Joh. 3. 19. is not so much a reason why they
believed not, as why they liked not to hear him. Many did endure the hearing
of him, yet were not brought to believe in him. Austin sometimes proposed such
a question as this; Why do not men do this or that? As for example, Why do
they not facere quod justum est? and he answers, Quia nolunt. But if you ask
me, Quare nolunt? Imus in longum, says Austin. Yet, sine prejudicio
diligentioris inquisitionis, he takes upon him to answer it thus, Vel quia
latet, vel quia non delectat. But mark what he brings in upon the back of
this; Sed ut innotescat quod latebat, and suave fiat quod minime delectabat,
gratia Dei est quae hominum adjuvat voluntates. But the face of your discourse
tends to this, as if you were of opinion, that every natural man has so
sufficient grace, as to choose to follow the light of the means of grace,
rather than to cleave to his sinful estate, and ways of darkness: and that
not only if he will, for if he will, the greatest part of the work is done
already; but that his will is indifferently of it self inclinable to the one as
well as to the other: which is so dangerous an opinion, and so opposite to the
doctrine of Gods word, representing the miserable corruption of man's heart, and
the peculiar power of Gods regenerating grace, that you are loath to break out
in plain terms to profess as much. Lastly, whereas you say, The light of the
means of grace, had it been followed, might have brought them to believe in
Christ; You will not say, upon the following hereof they had been brought, but
they might have been brought to believe. By following the light of the means
of grace, I understand a continuing to hear the word of God: Now, it is well
known that many, nay most, in all probability, though they continue all their
days to be hearers; yet, as the Apostle speaks of some, so may we say of
them, They are ever learning, and never come to the knowledge, at least to any
saving knowledge, of the truth. On the contrary, Saul persecuting the Church of
God, even in the way, marching furiously, Jehu like, against the Professors of
the Gospel, it pleased God to call him, and convert him. We know, says
Austin, that God has converted the wills of men, not only aversas a verae
side, sed and adversas verae sidei. So that even opposition to grace God can
cure, if it please him; and regenerate a man to bring him to faith and
repentance, if it please him; and if he does not, certainly the reasons can be
no other, then because he will not; and that to his own glorious ends, which
is reason enough for the Creator to do what he will; his wisdom in
referring all to congruous ends, being his justice; as Aquinas acknowledges.
Christ was willing and earnest to gather Jerusalem under his wings; and no
marvel, he was bound to do all he could, as the Minister of Circumcision,
to save his brethren; for he was made under the Law, and was bound to love not
only his brethren, but his enemies also, as well as we are bound to show the
like love to all: But to infer here-hence, that therefore it was the will of
God to have healed and saved that part of Jerusalem that would not, is a
liberty which affection to a cause may take, but no reason does justify it.
Like as our Savior in his ministry, so the Prophets in theirs, desired to do
as much good as they could to all: but here-hence it follows not, that it was
the will of God to convert all whom the Prophets desired to convert. And as our
Savior by his tears, so the Prophets by their tears, did manifest their
desire to bring them to repentance, Jer. 13. 17.
to do the uttermost of their power to bring them hereunto: but will you
infer here-hence, that God also did desire to bring them to repentance? As
for the phrase of carrying thoughts of peace toward them, that is general,
and therefore ambiguous; and to what specialty you do refer it, I know not:
Yet, according to the Scripture sense thereof, it is nothing correspondent to
your opinion. For Gods thoughts of peace, in Scripture phrase, toward his
people, consist not only in affording means, but in making them effectual
also to the procuring of such a gracious disposition in his people, as to make
them fit for the mercies which God has resolved to confer upon them; as Jer.
29. 10. But thus says the Lord, That after seventy years be accomplished at
Babel, I will visit you, and perform my good promise toward you, and cause
you to return to this place. Verse 11. For I know the thoughts that I have
thought toward you, says the Lord, even the thoughts of peace, and not of
trouble, to give you an end, and your hope. Verse 12. Then shall ye cry unto
me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hear you. Ver. 13. And ye
shall seek me, and find me, because ye shall seek me with all your heart. Ver.
14. And I will be found of you, says the Lord, and I will turn your
captivity. And as for the former phrase, in saying, It was the will of God to
have healed them: In proportion to the place now alleged out of Jeremy, it may
be granted, that God would have healed them; to wit, in case they would have
converted unto God with all their heart, and with all their soul; as our
Savior signifies, Joh. 12. 40. and that out of Esaias 6. and like as God
himself expressly professes, Deuteronomy. 4. 29. If from thence thou shall seek the
Lord thy God, thou shall find him, if thou seek him with all thine heart, and
with all thy soul. But is it, think you, in any unregenerate man's power to
seek God with all their heart, and with all their soul? I think this is no
more in the power of a man unregenerate, than it is in his power to love the
Lord his God with all his heart, and with all his soul: Now this is expressly
attributed to the circumcision of the heart wrought by God, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. When
you add, that the will of God is, the world of unbeleevers shall not be shut
out from Christ, if they shut not out themselves through unbeleefe: This
assertion of yours is such as no man, that I know, denies: And it is as true of
the Elect as of the Reprobate; namely, that they should be utterly shut out of
Christ, if they should shut out themselves by small unbeleefe; for,
undoubtedly, the word of God is true, that says, Whosoever believes, shall be
saved; whosoever believes not, shall be damned. But lest we should seem to be
pleased with our own errors, let us speak distinctly, and keep our selves
from confusion: To be shut out of Christ, is, to be shut off from some benefit
that is to be obtained by Christ. Now, if we speak of the benefit of
forgiveness of sins, and of salvation; the truth is plain and distinct,
that no man is bereaved of salvation and forgiveness of sins by Christ, but
through unbeleefe; and whosoever believes not, is excluded from pardon and
salvation by Christ. But is there no other benefit we obtain by Christ,
besides forgiveness of sins and salvation? What think you of the gift of
faith and repentance? are not those spiritual blessings which we obtain in
Christ, and for Christ's sake? Ephesians. 1. 3. If it be so, I pray consider, Is it
handsome to say, that none is shut off from the gift of faith, but through
unbeleefe? Certainly, unbeleefe is no tolerable cause why God should deny them
the gift of faith, seeing all are in anbeleefe till God bestows upon them the
gift of faith; neither can it be expected a man should believe, till God gives
him the gift of faith, if so be faith be indeed the gift of God, and not the
work of man's free will without any gift of God. As for your discourse, though
it tends to a conclusion, which, rightly understood, no man denies in one
sense; nor will any wise man affirm in another sense: I think fit to consider
that also. The Spirit, you say, convinces the world of sin, because they
believed not in Christ; but the Spirit of God moves to nothing, but what he
knows to be according to the will of God. Let all this be granted; yet
nothing follows here-hence but that it was the will of God that the world
should be convinced of sin, in not believing in Christ; which no intelligent
man will deny. But yet, by your leave, it is no good consequence to infer
here-hence, that, therefore it is the will of God that the world of unbeleevers
shall not be shut out from Christ, if they shut not out themselves by
unbeleefe. Therefore, we grant both the antecedent and the consequent: yet, by
the way, as touching that which you affirm, that God sent his Spirit to
convince the world of sin, because they believe not in Christ; this is a
truth, we confess; but, perhaps, we may be to seek of the right
accommodation hereof: for, where is the world convinced of sin, in not
believing in Christ? or, to whom? I grant, to all believers the world of
unbeleevers is by the Spirit of God convinced of sin, in not believing in
Christ; but are they convinced hereof to themselves, and in their own
consciences? I grant this also, as often as it pleases God to convert them by
the power of his Spirit; then they are convicted of the sinful nature of their
own unbeleefe: Yet be it granted, that an unbeleever continuing in unbeleefe
may be, and is, sometimes convicted of the sinful nature of his unbeleefe;
because the Apostle says of an heretic, that he is (...)* yet, that is not
till after one and another admonition: nevertheless, this makes nothing for
you, unless you maintain that Gods Spirit convicts them also of this, that it
is in their power to believe; which power of believing you seem to attribute
to a man unregenerate, though you are loath to speak plainly, in expressing so
much. And you seem to intimate such an Argument as this; They sin in not
believing; therefore it is in their power to believe: But you may as well
infer, that we sin in not keeping Gods Law; therefore it is in our power
to keep it. Or, if you dispute thus, The world is convicted of sin in not
believing; therefore they have power to believe: You may as well dispute thus;
The regenerate are convicted that they sin, in that their flesh lusts
against the Spirit; therefore it is in their power to keep the flesh from
lusting against the Spirit.

Besides, when men quench the motions of the Spirit, and persecute Answ.
the Ministers of the word, how can they be said, in so doing, to resist the
Holy Ghost, if the Holy Ghost went not about such a work, as to bring them to
Christ, and to life by him? Could they be said to resist the Holy Ghost, if the
works of the Holy Ghost had never striven with them to work this work in
them? Thus then you see, those three that bear witness in heaven, the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, they all from heaven bear witness of this
point in hand, concerning the truth hereof: The Father, by the end of the
creation of his works and providence; the Son, by his end of enlightening
the world, and of his coming into it to dye for it; the Holy Ghost, by his
inward wrestling in the hearts of men, do all of them really proclaim, that
it is the will and good pleasure of God, as to save the Elect, not according to
their own works, but his grace; so likewise to save the world of mankind, if
their works hinder not his good will toward them. Thus you see also a sweet
harmony between the Purpose, and the Covenant or Promise, and the Providence of
God: This Purpose wills life unto the world, upon the condition of their
obedience and repentance: the Promise, in the Covenant of Works, offers life
unto them likewise upon the same condition: the Providence of God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, provideth and applies several means of life unto the
world, upon the same terms. And there is in every godly man, renewed after
the Image of God, a just concord betwixt his Purpose, his Covenant or Promise,
and his Performance: So is there here the like in God. You may read what Gods
purpose is toward the world, by his Covenant made with the world; and you may
see both what his Covenant with them, and purpose of them is, by his
performance and axecution of them both, in his actual providence, in the
fullness of time. If you ask how God may be said to purpose any thing that is
not effectually accomplished? I answer, the act of Gods will, which he is
pleased to put forth, is always accomplished: There is no good thing possible
to be, though it never come to pass, (as that all men should in all things
obey the word of God) but God passes upon it some act of his will; he at
least approves it to be good, and good it is, though it never come to pass:
This act is not disappointed; for as he will prove it, so likewise does he
approve it. Does God command this or that good duty to be done, which is not
done? Yet that act of his will which he puts forth is done: as he willed to
command it, so he did command it. Does God purpose to give life to the world
upon condition of obedience, and accordingly give means to help them to the
performance of this obedience, so far as it is meet for them to do? Surely
God performs it on his part, although men perform it not on their part:
their salvation is indeed disappointed, but not Gods will; who never willed to
give salvation to them, but upon that condition.

The motions of the Spirit which are quenched, are godly motions, in the way of
admonition, persuasion, exhortation; and they Examine.
are quenched not only in the men of the world, but too often in the children
of God; the flesh too often prevailing in their lustings against the spirit,
whereby are quenched for a time the motions of the Spirit; that is, the
regenerate part lusting against the flesh; and consequently, the motions also
of the Spirit of God admonishing and inviting unto good, either by the hearing
of the word, or by the observation of Gods works. This work of moral motion
and invitation is wrought sometimes with a purpose to work obedience
conformable thereunto; sometimes with no such purpose; as often as God does not
make them effectual to the working of obedience, whether in the unregenerate
or regenerate, for even these sometimes (yea, too often) err from Gods ways,
and have their hearts hardened against his fear: for, if God had a purpose to
make them effectual, who should hinder him? Who has resisted his will? cui
nullum humanum resist it arbitrium (says Austin;) for, ex nolentibus volentes
facit. Undoubtedly, moral invitations, if they be not yielded unto, are justly
said to be resisted, to what end soever they be made, whether to convert them,
or to leave them without excuse; even such an excuse as Austin speaks of, when
he says, Dicere solet humana suporbia, Si scissem, fecissem. I see no reason
why you should deny the Elect to be saved according to their works; our
Savior does manifest, Mat. 25. that they are so: Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, etc. For I was an hungered, and
you fed me, etc. and can it be denied, but that God rewards every man
according to his works? I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course,
I have kept the 2 Timothy 4.
faith, says Paul; Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness. God is not unrighteous, to forget the labor of 1 These. 1.
your love, etc. Look to your selves, says John, that we may not lose the
things that we have done, but we may receive a full reward. Piscator, a
precise Divine, spares not to profess, that fides is causa salutis: They are
not, I confess, causa meritoria, as sin is causa damnationis; but they are
causae dispositivae, according to the Apostles phrase, God has made us meet
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. Neither do I see any
reason why you should oppose grace and good works, in the point of salvation,
howsoever they are opposed in the point of justification: The place you point
unto for proof, treats not of the salvation of glory, but of the salvation of
grace, consisting in effectual 2 Timothy 1 9.
calling; as the Text it self manifests. Had you spoken plainly, as you
might, and as sometimes you do, even in this Section, more than once; as when
you say, Gods Purpose wills life to the world, upon the condition of their
obedience and repentance, it would manifestly appear, that there was no reason
to distinguish the Elect from the Reprobate, in this Purpose of God, seeing it
equally passes upon them both. For, undoubtedly, Gods Purpose is not to give
the Elect life, but upon condition of their obedience and repentance. And
likewise, his Purpose was to condemn all, one as well as another, upon the
condition of their disobedience and unrepentance. But, had you dealt thus
plainly, then you would be driven to acknowledge another decree, which alone
puts the difference between the Elect and the Reprobate; and that is, the
decree of God to show mercy, in giving the grace of obedience and repentance
unto the one; and of hardening, in denying the grace of obedience and
repentance unto the other. But this plaine-dealing had utterly marred the state
of your present discourse, in this particular. Yet, to touch something by the
way; How, I pray, does God the Father, by the end of the Creation of his works
and Providence, bear witness to this Point, that it is the will and good
pleasure of God to save the Elect, not according to their own works, but his
grace? Secondly, if God the Son died for the whole world, Reprobate and
Elect, how does this testify that only a few, called the Elect, should be
saved by Gods grace? Is there any greater grace than the grace of Redemption by
the blood of Christ, which is both of a satisfactory nature for all sin, and
of a meritorious nature to purchase all grace and all glory? And shall not God
deal with Christ according to the exigence of his merits and satisfactions?
whether they were meritorious and satisfactory so far of their own nature,
or by the constitution of God, all is one. Last of all, as touching the motions
of the Spirit, if they are no other then moral invitations, they tend to no
other end then to bring all men alike unto salvation, in case they are obeyed;
and to expose all alike unto condemnation, in case they are disobeyed. If we
speak of other motions making the former effectual unto obedience and
repentance, these being found only in the Elect, are documents of Gods will
and purpose to save them to whom they are granted; and as manifest a document,
that Gods will and purpose is not to save them to whom they are denied.

As for the harmony you speak of, between Gods Purpose and Covenant, herein is
your error twofold: First, in that you apply this wholly to the world, to
Reprobates; whereas it concerns, as I have showed, the Elect as well as the
Reprobate; the reason whereof is, because it respects only the collating of
salvation, and inflicting of condemnation, which have their course upon
condition. But there is another work of Gods Providence, concerning the giving
or denying of grace for performing the condition of life: And this work is not
performed upon any condition, but merely according to the good pleasure of God,
in showing mercy to whom he will, and hardening whom he will. And, the Purpose
of God for the execution of these is clearly absolute, without all color of
condition. And whereas you conceive this Purpose of God, thus absolute,
concerns only the Elect, that is your second error: For, God does not more
absolutely grant the gift of obedience and repentance unto his Elect, than he
does deny it unto Reprobates; as I doubt not but will be made clearly to
appear, if you should come to a Collation hereabout. But I do not think you
have any purpose to deal upon this, but carry your self in a way of your
own, not exactly considered, wherein confusion, of things that are to be
distinguished, does afford you the best service. As for the third, which this
harmony you speak of comprehends, to wit, the Providence of God, I left that
out, because you shape to your self such a Providence of God, as whereby God
did provide for all men, in all ages, sufficient means of grace, to bring them
to obedience and repentance: which seems to be the opinion of the Author who
wrote the two books De vocatione Gentium. For the justification of which
conceit, though Arminians now-adayes rely much upon that Author, in this
particular, I freely confess, I know no reason, nor color of reason. As for
the comparison you make between a godly regenerate man and God, you might as
well have shaped it between many an honest heathen man and God. But you
consider not a most momentous difference; man purposes to do things upon
conditions, the performance or not performance whereof he is not able to
foresee, much less able to dispose of efficacy to perform the condition to
whom he will, and to deny it to whom he will; all which is incident unto God,
and casts us necessarily upon the acknowledgement of an absolute Purpose in God
to perform this, as he thinks good; which is not to be found in man. Again,
you conceive this Purpose and Covenant of God to be made only with the world,
who will never perform it: Man enters upon no such Purposes and Covenants; but
rather such, the conditions whereof are as soon performed as not performed. And
I wonder you should swallow this comparison, as exact, not considering the
foul disproportion that is found therein between God and man: But affection to
our own opinion, I confess, is apt to abuse us, and make us take notice only
of that which makes for us, not of that which makes much more against us.

As for the Objection here inserted, in the Answer whereunto, you trouble your
self not a little, you might well have spared your pains, and answered in
brief, that though it were very strange that any thing should not be
accomplished which God does will absolutely; yet, surely, it is nothing
strange, that that should not be accomplished which God does will to come to
pass only upon a condition; for, the condition failing, there is no reason
why we should expect the accomplishment thereof. And such is the will of God
which here you propose concerning the world, namely, in willing that they shall
be saved, on condition of their obedience and repentance; damned, in case of
their disobedience and impenitency. Yet, it is not amiss to consider what you
let fall in your Answer, to an Objection very needless, and which no wise man,
amongst them who are adverse to you in this opinion, would frame; That act of
Gods will (you say) which it pleases God to put forth, is always
accomplished: I demand then, as touching this will of God whereby he wills
life to the world upon their obedience and repentance, whether it be
accomplished or no? If it be, then it is accomplished in their condemnation;
for, certainly, it is not accomplished in their salvation. And to this effect,
I presume, tends your answer in the next Section. That which follows, when you
say, There is no good thing possible to be, though it never come to pass, (as
that all men in all things should obey the word of God) but that God passes
upon it some act of his will; This, I say, is nothing to the purpose; and that
for two reasons: First, because it proceeds of moral good; whereas the object
(...) rising from the consideration of God willing salvation to the world, upon
their obedience and repentance, had not its course of good moral, which is
man's duty; but of some good natural, which he should receive by way of reward.
Secondly, accomplishment of a thing willed, consists not in the approving of
it, but in bringing of it to pass; as all men know, by common notion. When as
you say, as touching Bonum, that God as he will prove it, so he does approve
it; as if approving of it were for the present, and proving of it were for the
time to come, is so wild an expression, that I cannot comprehend it. We use
by proving a thing, to approve it as good; and not first approve it, and then
prove it. As little to the purpose is that which follows, as when you say,
When God commands a duty, his will of command is accomplished: But, whereas God
is said to will the thing that he commands, here arises a question, how that
can be said to be willed by God, which most commonly is not accomplished? For,
albeit the will of command is accomplished, by the commanding of this or that,
yet Gods will of the thing commanded seems not to be accomplished, unless the
thing willed by God be sometimes brought to pass. The truth is, your opinion
seems to be, That God not only wills the salvation of the world, upon the
condition of their repentance, (for that is no more to will their salvation,
than their damnation) but that God wills and desires their salvation
absolutely, in as much as he wills and desires their repentance. I confess
you do not in express terms profess as much; namely, that God wills and
desires the repentance of Reprobates; yet hitherto you seem to tend, in this
discourse of yours, though concerning this you say no more than this, That God
gives means to help them to the performance of this obedience, so far as is
meet for him: which while you profess, I doubt you understand not your own
meaning; and therefore no marvel if others do not understand it: For, how
far he does help them, you express in a very uncertain manner; which is
rather to conceal, than to discover and express your meaning. But I will
endeavor to bolt it out. These means you speak of are either moral only,
consisting in instructing them wherein this obedience does consist, and urging
them by persuasion thereunto; or, in affording, besides this, some efficacious
operation of Gods Spirit, to work them to this obedience. Now, this latter
cannot be your meaning; for if this were afforded them, their obedience,
certainly, would be wrought: but the world, of whom you speak, do never
perform this obedience. Now, in granting the other, there is not so much
evidence of Gods will that they shall perform this obedience, as by the
denying of this we have evidence, that his will is not that they shall
perform this obedience. Again, in respect of means moral, can any be saved
without the means of true faith and true repentance? I think you will not say
they can: Then consider, have all men sufficient instruction unto the
performance of true faith and true repentance? How will you be able to make
this good? Hand over head, you say, God gives means to help them to the
performance of this obedience, so far as is meet for him to do: yet, I am
persuaded, you are not able to make this good, taking it according to the
confuse generality wherein you express it. For, is it not meet for God to
afford any Nation or particular persons his word and Gospel, as well as it is
meet for him to afford it us? Nay, is it not as meet for God to afford any
other person both the outward means, and the inward efficacious operation of
his holy Spirit, to work them unto faith and true repentance, as well as by
these means he has been pleased to work us hereunto? This meetnesse, what
is it but that which Schoolmen call, Justitia condecentiae, and which they
profess does accompany every action of God? So that had God afforded the same
grace to others which he has afforded unto us, he had carried himself
therein meetly, that is, justly, justitia condecentiae. Again, had he denied
the same grace to us which he has denied unto others, he had herein also
carried himself meetly, or decently, that is, justly, justitia condecentiae. I
am sorry to observe from such good men's pens such illusions to have their
course, to the obscuring of the grace of God, and his sovereignty of dispensing
it to whom he will. This very air I find breathed forth in the writings of
others, and it seems to me very probable, that they have derived it from
hence.

Besides, to clear this point more fully, the will of God toward Answ.
the world is put forth in a disjunct axiom; viz. either to give life unto the
world, upon the condition of their obedience; or to inflict death, upon the
condition of their disobedience. Now, as in a disjunct axiom the whole
proportion is true, if either part be true; so the will put forth in a disjunct
axiom is always accomplished, if either act be accomplished.

But if it be objected, how may it appear this will of God to give life to the
world, upon condition of their obedience, is serious and not pretended; since
if he would he is able to give them such hearts as would cause them to obey
him?

I answer; That God wills it seriously, appears manifestly by the
declaration of his will already mentioned; viz. his Oath, his Covenant, yea,
and the works of each Person in the Trinity, tending to this end, to give life
to the world: all which it were blasphemy to think they were not done
seriously. Does the living God swear, and not swear in earnest? God forbid.
Does God enter into Covenant with his creature, and intend no performance of
promise according to his Covenant? far be it from the just and holy God to
do it, and from us to imagine it. Shall we think each Person in the Trinity
slighteth the work of the salvation of mankind, because mankind slighteth to
work out their salvation with the Trinity?

But, besides the declaration of Gods will, thus seriously expressed, I produce
the tears of our Savior over Jerusalem, lamenting their careless neglect of
the day of their peace: which argued, not only in Christ as man, a serious
compassion of their affected ignorance and misery; but also, as God, a tender
consideration of their peace, and of providing the means for it. Moreover,
what shall we think of those passionate exclamations? Oh, that there were in
this people an heart to fear me, and to keep my commandments always, that
it may go well with them, and with their children for ever! Oh, that they were
wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end! Oh,
that my people had hearkened unto me, and that Israel had walked in my ways!
I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their
adversaries. Do not all these speeches express an earnest and serious
affection in God, as concerning the conversion and salvation of this people,
whereof sundry died in their sins? It is true, God might have given them such
hearts as to have feared and obeyed him; which though he did not, yet his will
that they had such hearts was serious still. To clear it by a comparison: The
father of the family has both his son and servant dangerously sick of the
stone; to heal them both, the father uses sundry medicines, even all that art
prescribes, except cutting: when he sees no other remedy, he persuades them
both to suffer cutting, to save their lives: they both refuse it; yet his son
he takes, and binds him hand and foot, and causes him to endure it, and so
saves his life. His servant also he urges with many vehement inducements, to
submit himself to the same remedy; but if a servant obstinately refuse, he
will not always strive with him, nor enforce him to such breaking and renting
of his body. But yet, did not his Master seriously desire his healing and life,
though he did not proceed to the cutting asunder of his flesh, which he saw
his servant would not abide to hear of? So in this case, both the elect and
men of this world are dangerously sick of a stony heart; to heal both sorts
the Lord uses sundry means; promises, judgments, threatenings, and mercies:
when all fail, he persuades them to break their hearts and the stone
thereof, with cutting and wounding of their consciences: when they refuse, he
draws them both; the one with his almighty power, the other with the cords of
man, (viz. such as are resistible) to this cutting and wounding, that their
souls might live: and the elect are brought to yield; and the men of this
world break all cords asunder, and cast away such bonds from them. Shall we now
say, God did not seriously desire the healing of such men's hearts, because he
procured not to bind them with strong cords, to break them with such woundings
as they will not abide to hear of? Thus having laid down the grounds of my
judgment touching the first Point, That there is a will and purpose in God for
to reward the world as well with life, upon condition of obedience; as with
death, upon condition of disobedience; I come now to the grounds of the second
Point.

You proceed in clearing a difficulty devised and shaped without Examine.
all ground; as if any sober man would find it strange, that a conditionate
will of God should not be accomplished as often as the condition fails. And to
this purpose you make use of the nature of a disjunct axiom. All-along I
savor others that have grased here, yet have not rested themselves contented
with this, but proceeded further to more erroneous opinions.

A second objection you propose, in the second place, the solution whereof you
seem to travel with, much more than of the former: and yet the objection is
altogether as causeless, and without all just ground, as the former. I have
now been something more than ordinarily conversant in these Controversies, for
the space of seventeen years; I never yet met with any of our Divines, or any
other, that made any question whether Gods will, being granted to pass on any
object, were serious yea or no: I should think, there is no intelligent man
living that makes any doubt of this; but puts it rather out of all question,
that whatsoever God wills, he wills it seriously. I confess, the Arminians
do usually obtrude some such things on our Divines, yet not altogether such;
for they do not obtrude upon us, as if we said, God does not will seriously
that which he wills; but rather, that he does not seriously exhort and
admonish all those whom he does admonish to believe and repent: as if he made
show only of desiring their obedience and salvation, when indeed he does not.
Yet, you seem to sweat not a little in debellating this man of straw. Upon
these terms I might easily dispatch my self of all further trouble, in
examining your elaborate Answer to so causeless an Objection: but I will not;
for it may be you insperse something by the way of opposition to that which you
do profess; which is this, That God does not at all will the obedience and
repentance of any but those who are his Elect. And I would not pretermit any
evidence you bring to countenance your cause, in opposition to our Tenent,
unanswered. That Gods Oath, or Covenant, or the works of any Person in the
Trinity tends to the end by you mentioned, namely, to give life to the world;
is utterly untrue. Likewise, it is utterly untrue, that you have hitherunto
proved any such thing; For, that which you here deliver as Gods end in giving
life, is proposed simply and absolutely; but that which hitherunto you have
endeavored to prove, is only this, that Gods will was to give the world life
conditionally: to wit, upon their obedience and repentance: and that, as, in
the last place coming to the point, you have expressed it in a disjunct axiom,
thus, To give life to the creature, upon his obedieace; or to inflict death
upon his disobedience: Now let any sober man judge, whether in this case the
will of God be more to give life, than to inflict death; more passing upon the
salvation of the creature, than upon his eternal condemnation? Could you
prove, that God does will at all the salvation of any other save his Elect, I
would forthwith grant he wills it seriously: I should think it no less than
blasphemy to think, that God does either will, or swear, or covenant, or do
that which he does, not seriously; as blasphemy consists in attributing that
to God which does not become him. I nothing doubt but that if all and every one
should believe and repent, all and every one should be saved: and none other
thing hitherto have you so much as adventured to prove, in this particular
whereupon now we are. But then, it behooves you to look unto it, on the other
side, how you clear your self from blasphemy in the same kind, while you
maintain that God does will the salvation of those which shall never be saved:
which not in my judgment only, but in the judgment of Austin, of old, does
mainly trench upon Gods omnipotency; for, if he would save them, but does not,
he is hindered and resisted by somewhat; and, consequently, his will is not
omnipotent, nor irresistible. And more than this, here-hence it will follow,
that either God continues still to will their salvation, even after they are
damned, or else God is changed. And if these be not blasphemies, and foul ones
too, I know not what is blasphemy. I know not what you mean by, slighting the
salvation of mankind; but, sure I am, it is your own opinion, that in case man
slights the working out of his salvation, God is so far from willing his
salvation, that he has unretractably decreed his everlasting condemnation. As
for the salvation of mankind, this being an indefinite speech, we are ready
with your self to maintain, that God has peremptorily decreed (to wit) the
salvation of his Elect; and it is not fair to make use of indefinite speeches,
the truth whereof is confessed on all hands, by prejudice of an indefinite
truth to draw your Readers to the embracing of your definite Tenet, which is
void of truth. And can it be denied by you, that God from everlasting has
decreed the condemnation of them, whose salvation you would not have us think
he slighteth?

Our Saviors tears not only argued in him a serious compassion, as man, but
a serious desire also of their salvation; and whom he wept over, out of that
love he owed unto them (being made under the Law) he was bound to desire
their salvation, as we are bound to desire the salvation of all those to whom
we are sent; though this desire on all hands ought to have course (and that by
the very Law of God) with submission to his will: But, that it argued in him,
as God, a will or desire to save them, your modesty would not permit you to
express; although the face of your Tenet is as manifestly set toward this
mark, as ever our Saviors face was set toward Jerusalem. As for the
consideration of their peace, which you attribute unto him, were it extant, it
were impossible but as God he should consider it; were it to come to pass, it
were no less impossible but he should purpose it and effect it: but seeing it
was never to come to pass, he could no otherwise consider it then as a thing
possible, but such as should never come to pass; and it was equally
impossible, as the former, that he should not so consider it. But I do easily
imagine what you mean, though you are very loath to speak it out; (which, to
deal plainly with you, is nothing fair) save that I am verily persuaded it
proceeds not out of any ill mind in you, but partly out of fear (by speaking
plainly) to give offense to good men; and partly out of some conscientiousnesse
of your inability to justify it: namely, that Christ, as God, did consider it
as a thing possible, with a tender affection desiring it. And indeed, otherwise
the word tender added to consideration, attributed to God, comes in very
incongruously; for, in proper speech, to consider a thing tenderly, is to
consider a thing passionately; which is incident to man, but not to God. As for
the other object which you make of Gods consideration, namely, the providing of
means for their peace; this is brought in too too unseasonably; for the time
thereof was at this time out of season, as our Savior himself signifies when
he says, But now they are hid from thine eyes: And were it never so
seasonable, yet were it little or nothing to the purpose; for what outward
means soever he affords them, yet if he afford them not the efficacious
operation of his holy spirit, it is a manifest document, that his purpose is to
glorify himself in their everlasting condemnation, rather than in their
salvation. But whereas hitherto you have but prevaricuted, pleading for that
which no man denies, namely, that Gods purpose toward them is but in a
disjunct manner, either for salvation if they obey, or for condemnation in case
they disobey; or, only in a conditionate manner willing life unto them, and
that, upon such a condition as he well knows will never be performed by them;
all-along concealing your opinion, and sparing to deal plainly, in an open
profession thereof: Now, at length, you are come to broach it; and that is, not
only that God wills either their salvation or condemnation, according as they
shall be found to repent or not repent; or, that he wills life unto them, upon
condition of their obedience and repentance; giving hitherto not the least
inckling of your meaning to be this, that he wills also and desires their
obedience and repentance. Now you take heart to open this mystery of your
meaning also, namely, that there is in God an earnest and serious affection, as
concerning the conversion and salvation of the world, which never are, nor
shall be saved: Yet here also you give cause to complain, that you walk not
with a right foot, sparing to express your meaning home; for you apply it
only to the people of Israel, which is an indefinite term, and may be applied
to the Elect; concerning whom, there is no question of Gods earnest and serious
affection concerning their salvation: All are not Israel, that are of Israel
(says the Apostle;) So that Israel are Gods chosen, in the Apostles phrase:
And there is an universitas electorum, yea, and mundus electorum too; as the
Author of the books De vocatione Gentium observes. Again, that which, in the
places alleged by you, is applied to Israel only, you, by your Tenet, do,
and must extend to all that are not elect, to the very Turks and Saracens of
these days, though you have no such exclamations to serve your turn withal,
to prove Gods earnest and serious affection concerning their salvation, though
this be the most colorable Argument which you have to stand you in stead, in
this particular. But, why should a slight and colorable interpretation of holy
Scripture cast you, or any sober man, upon such an opinion, the absurdity
whereof is evident by the light of nature? For, does not God know full well
that, notwithstanding all the means which he uses to bring them to
obedience, they will still continue in the hardness of their heart? Does he
not also know full well, that he could give them such a grace as should break
the hardness of their heart, and make them humble and obedient, with upright
hearts? And withal, has he not resolved to deny them this grace, which he
knew full well would prove effectual to their conversion, and to grant them
only such a grace as he knew would prove ineffectuall? Now, in this case, let
every sober Reader judge, whether God has any affection to all (much less
earnest) unto their salvation; and whether he means not rather to glorisie
himself in their utter condemnation? To pretermit here my former Arguments, as
namely, That this serious and earnest affection, concerning their salvation,
must still continue, even after they are damned, or else God is mutable. And,
that if God does earnestly desire their obedience and repentance, that they
might be saved; in case they do not obey and repent, it follows, that God is
not able to effect it. But nevertheless I am willing to consider the strength
of your Argument: it is grounded upon a certain Scripture phrase, Oh that
there were in this people an heart to fear me! Oh that they were wise! Oh that
my people had hearkened unto me! etc. Is it not great pity that good men, and
good Divines, should be carried away into odd opinions, upon the slight
consideration of a phrase? The Hebrew phrase runs thus, Quis dubis ut cor
eorum sit hujusmodi (i. e. ita dispositum) illis, ut timeant me omnibus diebus
vitae suae? This is, Quis praestabit? Who shall give, or effect, that such an
heart were in them, that they might fear me all their days? Now, I pray,
consider; if this were spoken properly, might we not answer God according to
his own language, and say, O Lord, do thou ask who shall give or make good
unto them such an heart? why who should do such a work as this but thy self?
for thou have made the heart, and thou alone can change it; we cannot change
an hair of our head, much less our heart: and thou in thy Covenant of grace
have undertaken this, even to be our Lord and God, to sanctify us; and to this
purpose thou have given us thy Sabbath, as a figne that thou the Lord do
sanctify us: to this and thou have given us thy word, which is that truth of
thine, according unto godliness, which alone can sanctify us: and thou have
promised to circumcise our hearts, and the hearts of our children, that they
shall love the Lord our God with all our hearts; and as to love thee, so to
fear thee also; and that, all our days: and to this purpose, to put thy fear
in our hearts, that we shall never depart from thee; yea, and to put thy
spirit within us, and to cause us to walk in thy statutes, and in thy
judgments, and to do them. And, surely, if God desires such an heart to be in
us, he will not false to give us such an heart; seeing he alone is able to
work such an heart in us. Therefore I conclude, this is not to be understood
properly, but figuratively: And you may as well infer out of that of the
Psalmist, The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open
unto their prayers, that God has eyes and ears, in proper speech; as out of
such places as these to conclude, that humane ineffectuall desires and wishes
and velleities are found in God. If God transfer upon himself the members of
our bodies, in a figure of speech called (...), why may he not as well
transfer upon himself, by the same figure of speech, the desires and
affections of our minds? especially, considering that God has made us apt to
be moved and wrought upon by such passionate expressions; and it is Gods usual
course to work in all things agreeably to their natures. And I make no
question but such expressions are usually prevalent with true Israelites, with
Gods own people; not so much by the force of a passionate expression, which is
accommodated to the condition of man's nature, as chiefly by the operation of
Gods Spirit, whose sword the Word of God is.

I doubt not but Gods will is serious, what way or course soever it takes; but
you are very adventurous upon your Readers credulity, in endeavoring to
persuade him, that God wills such a gracious heart in them, in whom he means
not to work; considering, as I presume your self believe (although this
discourse of yours makes me not a little to stagger in this mine apprehension)
that God alone is able to work such an heart in any: yet you labor to
expedite a facile way unto our faith, or credulity rather, to take hold of your
Proposition by a familiar comparison; A father (you say) persuades both his
son and his servant to be cut, both being dangerously sick of the stone; but
when persuasions will not serve with his son, he takes him and binds him
hand and foot, and causes him to endure it: The servant he continues to
persuade to endure the like course of cure, but proceeds no further. In this
case, you say, the Master does seriously desire the healing and life of his
servant, though he did not proceed to the cutting asunder of his flesh: I grant
all this; but I wonder not a little that your self do not observe the
incongruity in this comparison, which on no side is suitable; for the son, in
this case, is made to be cut against his will, that he may be healed; but God
forces no man to conversion and repentance against his will, that he may be
healed; for, indeed, voluntas non potest cogi, at least in respect of actus
eliciti, wherein consists repentance and conversion. On the other side, the
servant is no more willing to be cut than the son, for it is not in the power
of man to change the will either of servant or of son; but this is in Gods
power, and with an omnipotent facility, as Austin speaks, Omnipotenti
facilitate convertit, and ex nolentibus volentes facit: Now, put the case that
the Master should know, that of all the means he could use to make his
servant willing to endure the cutting, none but one would prevail with him,
and that one would prevail with him to make him willing; should the Master use
all other means, which he well knew would prove ineffectuall, and purposely
forbear the other, which he well knew would prove prevalent? In this case,
speak freely, I pray, whether this man did seriously and earnestly desire the
cutting and healing of his servant, and not rather the contrary? To put the
case home unto you; you know what admonition David upon his deathbed gave to
Solomon concerning Shimei, Thou shall not count him innocent, for thou art a
wise man, and know what thou ought to do unto him; and thou shall cause
his hoare head to go down to the grave with blood: yet withal, Solomon must
have a care of David his fathers oath; for when Shimei came to meet David at
Jordan, David swear unto him by the Lord, saying, I will not slay thee with the
sword: Now while Solomon meditated on some course to take with Shimei, suppose
God should reveal unto him, saying, If thou proposest such a condition unto
him, to wit, of building him an house in Jerusalem, and to stay there, and not
pass over the brook Kidron, he will transgress; but if thou proposest any
other like condition, he will observe it: and hereupon Solomon should be moved
to propose this conditon, which he knew Shimei would transgress; judge, I
pray, whether this course proposed to Shimei were an evidence of Solomon's
earnest and serious affection, concerning the saving of Shimei's life; and not
rather concerning his destruction? In like sort, when God persuades many by his
Ministers to make them new hearts and new spirits, and himself alone, by the
power of his Spirit, is able to take the stony heart out of their bowels, and
give them an heart of flesh; when he resolves to afford this grace unto some,
but not unto others; let every one judge hereby, whether God can be said
earnestly to desire the changing of their hearts, when he resolves to forbear
that course which alone can change them? No, no, this discourse favors
strongly of a conceit, that it is in the power of an unregenerate man to change
his own heart, and of an heart of stone to change it into an heart of flesh:
And in this case, I confess, it were very probable that God should earnestly
desire it; provided that any ineffectuall and changeable desires were incident
unto God.

That when God puts forth the second act of positive retribution, Answ.
viz. the rejection of the world, or decree of their condemnation, God does
behold and consider the world, especially men of riper years, not in massa
primitus corrupta, nor as newly fallen in Adam; but as voluntarily falling off,
by some act of careless and wilful disobedience. To prove this, I need not
produce other reasons then what I have formerly alleged in the fone-going
Point; for when God did express, by his oath, his will and good pleasure to
be, not for the death, but life and conversion of sinners, was it not after the
fall of Adam, and all his posterity in him? then, notwithstanding the
presupposall of the fall, God had not yet rejected the creature; but, as he
there declares himself, still retains and reserveth thoughts of peace
toward them, even a desire of their conversion unto life.

Again, with whom did the Lord enter into a Covenant of life and death, upon
condition of obedience and disobedience? was it not with Adam only, and his
posterity in his loins, in the state of innocence, by the law written in their
heart? Was it not also after Adams fall renewed to all his posterity, both
Jews and Gentiles? Then, yet God had not cast them away in the fall, though
the fall had justly deserved it; but expects yet further to see how they will
yet keep this renewed Covenant with him, before he cast them off as
Reprobates: Even Cain himself, the eldest son of Reprobation, is after the
fall offered acceptance of Gods hand if he do well. Moreover, is it not after
the fall that the Father, by his works of creation and providence, judgments
and mercies, etc. the Son by his enlightening the world, by his death and
ministry of his servants; and the Holy Ghost by his calling and knocking at
the hearts of the wicked, do all strive with men, even to this very end, to
turn them to the Lord, that iniquity may not be their destruction? If
therefore all the Persons in the Trinity do provide several helpful means
for the conversion and salvation of the world; of the world, I say, now after
the fall lying in wickedness, surely God did not then upon the fall reprobate
the world unto eternal condemnation and perdition. If you say, God might well
reprobate the world unto condemnation upon the fall, and yet still after the
fall us^ means for their conversion and salvation; because those means do
but further aggravate their condemnation: I answer, these do indeed further
aggravate their condemnation, but it is but by accident only, by their neglect
and abuse of them; but the proper end which God himself, of himself, aims at
in the use of these means, himself plainly expresses it to be, not the
aggravation or procurement of their condemnation, but the restoring of them to
salvation and life; as has been before declared. So then, to draw all to an
head, the sum of this first reason is, If God after the fall do retain a
will and purpose to restore life to the world upon an equal condition, then
he did not upon the fall, or upon the only consideration of the fall, reject
the world of the ungodly unto their utter perdition. But, you see, God
retains after the fall an holy will and purpose of restoring life unto the
world upon an equal condition, as appears by his Oath, by his Covenant, and
by his Works; therefore the conclusion, which is the point in hand, is evident.

I marvel what you mean to call Gods decree of condemnation his act of
retribution; retribution being an act temporal and Examine.
transient, the decree of God is an act immanent and eternal: And therefore it
is not so handsomely said to be the putting forth of an act, for so much as it
is immanent and not transient. It Is manifest, I confess, that sin is always
precedent to the retribution of punishment; as it is without controversy, that
sin neither is nor can be antecedent to Gods decree, sin being temporal,
but all Gods decrees eternal. And I have found it by experience to be an
usual course with our Adversaries, to confound condemnation with the decree of
condemnation. And Junius himself, very incongruously, in my judgment, calls
this decree, Praedamnatio; to make the fairer place, as I guess, for sins
praecedencie thereunto, at least in consideration: But no necessity urges us
to any such course; and we may well maintain, that God in this decree of
condemnation has always the consideration of that sin for which he
purposes to damn them; for, undoubtedly, he decrees to condemn no man but
for sin. It is impossible it should be otherwise; condemnation, in the notion
thereof, formally including sin. But I like not your expressions in the
distinction you make, saying, God considers men in this sin, not as newly
fallen in Adam, but as voluntarily falling off (you mean long after) by some
act of careless and wilful disobedience. When God made this decree, they were
not newly (that is, a little before) fallen in Adam; for that fall in Adam was
temporal, but the decrees of God are eternal: And to consider as newly
fallen, when as yet they were not, much less were they fallen, is not so much
to consider, as to err or feign. But like as God decreed to suffer all to
fall in Adam, and many also to continue both therein, and in bringing forth the
bitter fruits thereof even until death; so he purposed to condemn them for
those sins: but take heed you do not make an order of prius and posterius
between these decrees; lest either you make the decree of condemnation
precedent to the decree of permission of those sins for which they shall be
condemned, which will be directly contradictory to your Tenet here; or, making
Gods decree of permitting such sins for which they shall be condemned
precedent to his decree of condemnation, (whereunto you do incline unawares)
which will cast you upon miserable inconveniences, and that by your own rule
already delivered; for if the decree of permitting sin be first in intention,
then, by the rules received by you, it should be last in execution; that is,
men should be condemned for sin, before they be permitted to sin: But the
conjunction of these decrees into one, as in the same moment of nature and
reason, will both prevent this inconvenience, and also justify Gods decree of
condemnation, to proceed upon the consideration of those sins for which he
purposes to condemn them. But then there is another point of great moment,
which in like manner must be accorded unto, though you seem to be little aware
of it, (though, I willingly confess, this oversight is very general) namely,
that God decrees the salvation of none of ripe years, but upon, or with a
joint consideration of their faith, repentance, and good works. For, let us
first make the decrees of salvation and condemnation matches: As for example,
Reprobation, as it is accounted the decree of condemnation, is a decree of
punishing with everlasting death. Now, if you will match Election unto this, as
it is the decree of salvation, it must be conceived as a decree of rewarding
with everlasting life. Now let any man judge, whether this decree must not as
necessarily be conjoined with the consideration of faith, repentance, and good
works, in men of ripe years; as the decree of condemnation, or of punishing
with everlasting death, must be conjoined with the consideration of those
sins for which God purposes to punish them. And I will further demonstrate
it thus: Like as the decree of permitting some men to sin, and to continue
therein to the end, and Gods decree of condemning for sin, are joint decrees,
neither before nor after other; and consequently, the decree of condemning for
sin must necessarily be conjoined with the consideration of sin: In like
sort, Gods decree of giving some faith, repentance, and good works, and his
decree of rewarding them with everlasting life, are joint decrees, neither of
them before or after other; and consequently, Gods decree of saving them, and
rewarding them with everlasting life, is joined with the consideration of their
faith, repentance, and good works. Now that these are joint decrees I prove
thus: First, the decree of salvation cannot precede the decree of giving faith
and repentance; for if it should, then salvation were the end of faith and
repentance; but salvation is not the end, as I prove thus: The end is such as
does necessarily bespeake the means tending thereunto; but salvation does not
necessarily bespeake faith and repentance tending thereunto: for, God intending
the salvation of Angels, brought it to pass without faith and repentance; as
likewise, the salvation of many an infant he brings to pass without faith and
repentance. Secondly, the end of Gods actions can be nothing but himself, and
his own glory; and therefore salvation it self must have for end the glory of
God. Now, examine what glory of God is manifested in man's salvation, and it
will forth with appear upon due examination, that the glory of God manifested
in man's salvation, is such as whereunto not salvation only does tend, but
diverse other things jointly concurring with salvation thereunto. As for
example, Gods glory manifested on the elect, is in the highest degree of grace,
but in the way of mercy mixed with justice: This requires permission of sin,
the sending of Christ to make satisfaction for sin, faith and repentance,
(for Gods justice is seen partly in conferring salvation by way of reward) and
last of all salvation. Out of all these results the glory of God in doing good
to his creature in the highest degree of grace, proceeding in the way of mercy
mixed with justice. Thirdly, if God gave faith and repentance to this end, to
bring his elect unto salvation, as to the end thereof, then, by just proportion
of reason, God should deny the gift of faith and repentance unto others; that
is, to permit them finally to persevere in their sinners, thereby to procure
their condemnation as the end thereof: which you will not affirm, neither can
it with any sobriety be affirmed. In the next place I will show, that neither
can the decree of giving faith and repentance, precede the decree of salvation;
for if it should, then should faith and repentance be the last in execution; to
wit, if it were first in intention, and consequently men should first be saved,
and afterward have faith and repentance granted unto them. Thus I have showed
my readiness to concur with you in opinion in this particular; and that upon
other grounds than yours: and whose grounds are more sound, yours or mine, I am
content to remit it to the judgment of any indifferent Reader. As for your
reason here mentioned, repeating only what you have formerly delivered, as
touching the will and good pleasure of God, not for the death, but for the
life, not only of the elect, but of all others also; the vanity of this
assertion of yours, I think I have sufficiently discovered. And I wonder you
should carry it thus, not of the death, but of the life; when most an end you
have carried it only thus hitherunto; that Gods willing their life, is only
upon condition of their obedience and repentance, not otherwise: Or, in a
disjunct axiom, thus, Either of life in case they repent, or of death in case
they did not repent; and what should move you to call this a willing to give
them life, and not to inflict death? Why should you not rather call it a will
to inflict death, and not to give life; considering that God was resolved to
deny them such grace, as would effectually bring them to obedience and
repentance; and to grant them only such a grace, as he fore-knew full well,
would never bring them to obedience and repentance? 1. Cain was of the family
of Adam, to whom the promise was made concerning the seed of the woman, that he
should break the serpents head; and although Cain was offered acceptance upon
his repentance, yet it follows not that all were offered the same acceptance,
even those that never received any tidings or promise concerning the Messiah.
And the Apostle plainly signifies, that the Gentiles were not admonished to
repent until Christ was preached unto them, Act. 17. 30. But suppose it were
so, yet this hinders nothing at all the precedencie of the decree of
condemnation, unto the decree of giving such a Covenant and permitting them to
despise it. For, because God purposed to damn them for such a sin, therefore
he might decree to give them such a Covenant, and permit them, or expose them,
(by leaving them destitute of his grace) to the despising of it: Not that I do
approve of any such conceit, as before I have manifested; but to show how short
your discourse falls of making good that which you undertake to prove. And I am
much deceived, if you mistake not their tenet, who make reprobation to proceed
upon the consideration of the corrupt masle in Adam: For, undoubtedly, their
meaning hereupon is not to maintain that God did purpose to condemn all
reprobates only for the sin of Adam, or for original sin drawn from him:
this were a very mad conceit. But supposing that by Adams fall an impotency of
doing that which is good is come upon all; as it is free for God to give grace
to whom he will, and so to bring them to salvation, the purpose whereof is
called Gods election; so is it enough for God to deny grace to whom he will,
and thereby to expose them to condemnation: the purpose whereof in God, is that
which we call Reprobation; which, as Aquinas says, Includit voluntatem
permittendi peccatum, and damnationem inferendi pro peccato. Now of this
general impotency of doing good, which cleaves unto all since the fall of
Adam, you take no notice at all, though herein consists the very (...) of these
controversies but carry your self throughout in such manner, as if,
notwithstanding that shipwreck of grace, which all humane souls made in Adam,
it were still as much in man's power to obey God, as it was before; or as much
in man's power to rise by repentance now after he is fallen, as it was in his
power to stand in his integrity, and in obedience unto God before he was
fallen. Put the case all were true that you deliver in the next place, namely,
that God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost proceed in the way of admonition and
exhortation to turn themselves to the Lord, that iniquity might not be their
ruin; yet this hinders not but that the decree of condemnation might be
precedent to Gods decree of taking such a course, and permitting them to resist
it. For, upon a purpose to condemn them for such a sin, he might thereupon
resolve to expose them to such a sin: And if God should first decree to
permit such a sin, and then decree to condemn them for it, the permission of
this sin being first in intention, should by your own rule be last in
execution; that is, first men should be condemned for such a sin, and
afterward they should be suffered to commit it: Not that I maintain any such
order, but only to represent the weakness of your discourse, approaching
shrewdly to such a disorderly constitution of Gods decrees, and nothing at all
preventing the most harsh tenet that can be devised. Again, this that here you
deliver, were it granted you, yet does it nothing hinder the corrupt mass in
Adam, to be the object of Gods decree of condemnation. For, albeit God the
Father, and God the Son fail not of performing all this you speak of, yet if
by reason of the general impotency which is come on all, they are nothing able
to obey these motions of Gods spirit, and withal God purposes to deny them a
further grace to make them to obey; shall not this be sufficient to expose them
to condemnation, even for this sin of resisting the motions of Gods spirit?
But now let us consider your discourse it self, and what weight it carries,
which only makes a show of much, but comes to nothing in the end. First you
please your self in devising distinct works, applied to the distinct persons
in the Trinity, without all ground in my judgment: We commonly say, Opera
Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisibilia. Were not the Son and the Holy Ghost
as active in the creation, and are still in the works of providence, as the
Father? How Christ enlightened the world by his death is a mystery to me; his
doctrine I confess did, and much more the doctrine of his Apostles: But in
this ministry of Christ's servants, were not the Father and the Holy Ghost as
operative as the Son? As for the knocking of the spirit at men's hearts, you
nothing distinguish it, for ought I found hitherto, from the ministry of
Christ's servants in admonishing and exhorting; which work is yet the Fathers
and the Sons as well as the Spirits. But whereas you say, all this is done for
this very end, To turn them to the Lord, that iniquity might not be their
destruction; I pray you observe your own words well: all the operations you
specify are drawn from these two heads, Instruction and Admonition to turn to
the Lord; and the end of all this, you say, is to turn to the Lord. Put these
together, that you may behold the sobriety of this discourse. God exhorts them
to turn to the Lord, to this end, to turn them to the Lord: As much as to
say, God exhorts them to turn to the Lord, to this end, that in case they obey
his voice, and turn to the Lord which is their part, then God will perform
his part also, and turn them to the Lord. But what need, I pray, of Gods work
in turning them to the Lord, after they have performed their part so well as to
turn themselves to the Lord? Again, if God has a purpose to turn them to
the Lord, why does he not? Is it because they refuse to perform some act, upon
the performance whereof God would turn them to himself? Now I would gladly
know what act that is, which God expects to be performed, that so he might
turn them to the Lord. I am verily persuaded your self are not willing to be
put to design this: Is it the very act of turning to the Lord, or less, or
more? If the very act of turning to the Lord, you fall upon a manifest
absurdity before specified: if less then turning to the Lord, then it is less
than a good act; and shall God reward that which is less then a good act with
conversion unto him? What is it to confer grace according to the works of
nature, if this be not? Yet I would feign know what this act is? Least of all
will you say, it is more than turning to the Lord, for that should suppose
conversion unto the Lord already wrought; and consequently, no need that God
should turn them to the Lord, which supposes that they were not before turned
to the Lord at all. The providing of several helpful means for the salvation
of the world after the fall, does nothing hinder Gods reprobating of the world
upon the fall unto eternal condemnation and perdition. For if he purpose to
deny them grace to obey these means, this shall be sufficient to expose them
to condemnation, even for the despising of those means of grace which God
purposes to provide for them; and accordingly the objection here proposed is
sound. And whereas you answer, that these means do aggravate their
condemnation by accident only; to wit, through their neglect and abuse of
them: I answer, that this their neglect and abuse does by necessary
consequence follow upon Gods purpose to deny them effectual grace for the
using of those means aright: like as upon Gods purpose to harden Pharaohs
heart, that he should not let Israel go, it followed by necessary
consequence, that Pharaoh, through the hardness of his heart, would not let
Israel go. But that Gods end is (as you say) the restoring of men to salvation
and life; as if God did will and purpose any such thing, is utterly untrue, and
nothing proved by you hitherto, but rather flatly contradictorie to that you
have most an end delivered; partly in making Gods will of their salvation to be
only in a disjunct (...), and partly of a conditionate (...), which is no more
to will their salvation, than their damnation, in case they were indifferent to
perform either condition. But in case they be found unable to perform the
condition of life, and most prone to perform the condition of death, God
meaning not to give them such a grace as alone can relieve them, it is
(manifestly) an evidence, that God wills their condemnation, and nothing at all
their salvation. Not to mention any other arguments against this conceit; the
one drawn from Gods omnipotency, the other from his immutab litie.

In the recapitulation of this reason, you help your self with a phrase, and
only with a phrase: God retains a will and purpose to restore life to the
world upon an equal condition. Obedience is due to God, though man be not able
to perform it. And therefore God, in requiring that which is due unto him,
carries himself in an equal (I had rather say, in a just) course, though man
becoming banckrupt, be not able to perform it. But in this case, namely, if
God will not restore life, but upon performance of such a condition which he is
utterly unable to perform, and withal purposes to deny him that grace, which
should enable him to perform it; is not this a manifest document, that God
has no purpose to restore life unto him? Yet I confess, the phrase used is
advantageous unto you; for, at the hearing of an equal condition, most are apt
to conceive the condition to be such as lies in a man's power to perform. But
you have not hitherunto manifested any such opinion of man's ability: If you
have entertained any such (as whereunto pastoral Divines, dealing much upon
exhortation, are sometimes over-prone, though I see small cause why the opinion
of man's impotency unto good should any whit rebate the edge of their
exhortation) you should do well to convince your adversaries by argument, and
not circumvent them.

From the condition of those men, upon whom the scriptures pronounce
reprobation, or rejection; I no where read of reprobation, Answ. 2.
but of such men to whom the means of grace, or at least, of the knowledge of
God in some measure or other have been offered in vain. In the Old Testament
God pronounces the house of Judah reprobate silver, rejected by him: But when?
Not till they were all become revolters, and corrupters, and till the means
he had used to purge and cleanse them had been attempted in vain. The bellows
(says he) are burnt, the lead is consumed in the fire, the founder melts in
vain, and reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord has rejected
them. When did God reject all further care of purging the people from their
filthiness any more? Not till after he had used means to purge them, and
they were not purged. When does the Son of God, under the name of wisdom,
reject the wicked? Not till after he had called upon them earnestly to return,
and stretched out his hands unto them, and offered to pour out his spirit upon
them; and they after all this, had set at naught his counsel, and despised the
means of their own reformation. Prove. 1.

In the New Testament, the Apostle speaks of reprobates, in case so powerful a
ministry as his was, so long a time dispensed unto them, and had
notwithstanding been vainly received by them, and that as yet they knew not
themselves to be in Christ. Yea, the Gentiles themselves, when did God give
them up to a reprobate mind? Was it not after they had disregarded the
acknowledging and glorifying of God, according to the means they had received?
In a word, when does God shut up the Sons of Adam, either Jews or Gentiles,
under enmity against Christ, and set forth Christ in enmity against them,
thereby excluding them from atonement with him, or by him with God? Is it not
after they are become the seed of the Serpent? Now, by the seed of the Serpent
cannot be meant, all men fallen and corrupted in Adam by original sin (though
that fall was wrought by the suggestion and practice of the Serpent) for then
all the seed of Adam had been shut up in enmity against Christ, and cut off
from all fellowship with him their head. But by the seed of the Serpent I
understand, all such men of the world, as have the image of the old Serpent
stamped upon them, which is a will set to do the lusts of the devil. Says
our Savior to the Jews, Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of
your John. 8. John. 3.
father ye will do: or, which is all one, an hatred of the light when it
comes amongst them; and which is a character of the devil, a lover of
darkness rather then light. Upon which point it is our Savior shuts up the
men of this world under condemnation. viz. When by the hatred of the light they
have drunk in the venom, and received the image of the old Serpent; till
which time, men are counted the seed of Adam: Or, if they be borne in the
Church the seed of Abraham, rather then the seed of the Serpent. For our
Divines do wisely and justly maintain against the Anabaptists, that the seed
of Abraham, as pertaining to the Covenant, are not only his spiritual seed,
partakers of his faith, but also his children after the flesh, till by their
careless and wilful disobedience they have excluded themselves from the
Covenant of Abraham: From whence it is, that all the seed of Abraham, even the
carnal seed, are scaled up by Circumcision or Baptism under the Covenant of
Abraham. Neither are they excluded from hope of benefit by the Covenant and the
seals and ordinances of it, till that, with profane Esau, they despise this
their birthright, and sell the pledges of their inheritance for some base and
sensual lust. Now if all such are to be accounted the seed of Abraham, till,
by despising the Covenant, they have broken off themselves from partaking with
him in the satnesse of the olive; then surely, even the carnal seed of Abraham
are not the seed of the Serpent from their original pollution, but do become
afterward by their actual voluntary rebellion.

As there is an election eternal, and election temporal, so Examine.
in both senses the word is taken in holy scripture. Of election eternal we
read, Ephesians. 1. 4. where God is said to have chosen us in Christ, that we
should be holy, before the foundation of the world. Of election temporal we
read, 1 Cor. 1. 26. Brothren, you see your calling, how that not many wisemen
after the flesh, etc. But God has chosen the foolish things, etc. Where
Election is taken as all one with vocation, in proportion whereunto we must
distinguish of reprobation. And like as Election temporal is all one with
effectual vocation, as when men find mercy at the hands of God to obey their
callings: So reprobation temporal is all one with obduration, as when men are
not, through the mercy of God and power of his grace, brought about to obey
their calling, but through the hardness of their hearts, uncorrected by the
spirit of God, they stand out, and refuse to obey when they are called. Now
like as it follows not, that because men are not elect, in respect of
Election temporal, until they obey their calling, therefore God did consider
them as obedient to their calling before he elected them unto life: In like
sort it follows not, that because men are not reprobate in respect of
reprobation temporal, until they are found to disobey their calling; Ergo,
God did consider them as disobedient to their calling before he reprobated them
unto death: albeit there is a vast difference between Election and Reprobation.
For if once men be found truly to obey their calling, hereby as they are
effectually called, so they may be assured of their eternal Election unto
grace, and consequently unto glory also. But although men for a while are found
to disobey their calling, though hereby they are obdurated, yet no evidence
arises here-hence of their non-election unto grace, and consequently of their
reprobation from grace, and as from grace so from glory also. The reason is,
because nothing but small obduration and continuance in sin is an evidence of
Preprobation eternal; though in this case they may be accounted reprobate two
ways: First in a negative opposition to Election temporal; for certainly in
this case they are not as yet effectually called, that is, converted unto God.
Secondly, they may be called reprobate as it has the signification of an
adjective, and not of a participle; like as (...) is sometimes used in holy
scripture, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Revel. 17. 14. 2 John 1. 14. And the word Reprobate in
those places you take advantage of, is rather an adjective then a participle.
As for Reprobation in opposition to Election eternal, that is expressed in
holy Scripture by the not writing men's names in the book of life: which
signifies Gods purpose to deny them both grace and glory; and they are commonly
styled (...) rendered, such as perish; 1 Cor. 1. 18. and 2 Cor. 4. 3. And on the
contrary, the Elect are called (...), 1 Cor. 1. 18. But unto us which are
saved, it is the power of God. And Act. 2. last v. God added daily to the
Church, (...). But then, whereas by consequent follows their continuance in
sin and condemnation, there is also in scripture a decree of God called
Ordination unto wrath, 1 These. 5. 9. And as there is a preparing [(...)] unto
destruction, and a creating unto an evil day; so there must consequently be
acknowledged in God a purpose to prepare to destruction, and to create against
the day of evil. But let us come to the particular scanning of your discourse.

I willingly acknowledge that (as you say) we no where read in scripture of
Reprobation, but of such men to whom the means of grace, or at least of the
knowledge of God in some measure or other has been offered in vain. This
qualification is brought in to prevent an exception out of Romans 1. Where the
Gentiles are said to be given over into a reprobate mind; who yet had not the
means of grace: But they had (you will say) the knowledge of God in some
measure; you mean, the means of the knowledge of God, and these means are
the world, wherein they are brought forth; for the world contains the works
of God, and by them are manifested the invisible things of God, even his
eternal power and Godhead. And indeed these means of the knowledge of God,
all enjoy in equal measure, according to the proportion of the time of their
lives. But, to discover unto you the loosnesse of this your discourse, I pray
you consider, the sin of the Gentiles here taxed, is the transforming of the
glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of corruptible things;
contrary unto that knowledge which they did or might attain unto by Gods
works. Their judgment was their giving over into a reprobate mind, to do
things inconvenient, as there it follows. And do you think indeed, that all
such Idolaters were given over into a reprobate mind to do such abominable
things, as after are mentioned? Were there not found many moral men among the
Heathens, which yet were reprobates as well as the most profane amongst them?
Nay, what think you of them, amongst whom this sin of transforming the glory
of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of corruptible things, was not
found; as Varro writes of the Romans, that for, above an hundred years they
had no Images, and that in those days the Gods were worshipped more chastely;
and that they who brought in Images were to blame in two respects: First,
because errorem auxerunt. The Second, because timorem ademerunt: and were not
they, think you, given over into a reprobate mind? Lastly, be it so they were
given over, are you indeed persuaded that none of these were the elect of God?
Does not the contrary apeare manifestly in the Corinthians? For, were not they,
as well as others, in former time carried away after dumb Idols, as they were
led? 1 Cor. 12. 2. Were not they also given over into a reprobate mind? Were
not they fornicatours, idolaters, adulterers, wantons, buggerers, etc? 1 Cor.
6. 9, 11. Yet they were sanctified in due time; notwithstanding all this, they
were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.
Therefore I conclude, it is one thing to be a reprobate in that sense we here
speak of reprobates; for we speak of reprobates in opposition to Gods elect.
But undoubtedly the very elect of God may be for a time, and that for a long
time, given over into a reprobate mind. Again, is Reprobation only of those
to whom the means of grace have been offered in vain? and is Reprobation
pronounced on none but such? Then, belike, Reprobation is not eternal, but
temporal; and consequently, nothing pertinent to our present purpose: And I
could wish you had expressed wherein this Reprobation temporal, which is
pronounced upon men after the means of grace have been offered unto them in
vain, does consist. For, to use words signifying we know not what, makes all
our disputation as much in vain, as to draw water with a bucket that has no
bottom. Sure I am, noe receiving of the means of grace in vain is an
evidence of that Reprobation we speak of, unless it be final, though well it
may be of giving over into a reprobate mind for the present. But devise what
you will to be the act of Reprobation temporal you speak of, will it therefore
follow that the consideration of this contumacie in standing out against the
means of grace, was with God before his purpose thus to reprobate? As for
example, because final impenitency and infidelity go before condemnation, will
you herence infer, that the consideration of final impenitencie and
infidelity did precede Gods purpose of condemnation? By the same course you
may conclude, that because faith, and repentance, and good works, and
perseverance in all this, goes before a man's salvation, therefore the
consideration of all these was precedent to Gods purpose of salvation. And
indeed it cannot be avoided, but that this doctrine of yours in the point of
Reprobation, must necessarily overthrow your own doctrine concerning Gods
election; though this is little considered usually. And how can God know man's
final impenitency, unless he purpose to permit it? And if the permission of
final impenitency be in Gods intention before condemnation, then, by your own
rules, it must be after it in execution; and so men shall be condemned for
their impenitency before they have committed it. It is true, the Jews are
pronounced reprobate silver, Jerem. 6. 30. after the Prophets labor was found
in vain; but you do not well to extend this unto Reprobation in that sense we
speak of it: For, in your own opinion, nothing but final obstinacy does
make men reprobate; but such was not as yet the obstinacy of those Jews, who
are there called reprobate silver. And how uncharitable a thing were it for
you, or any man, to think that none of those obstinate Jews were afterward
converted unto God by the ministry of the Prophet Jeremiah. Yet, admit it
were final, such I confess precedes condemnation which is temporal: But will
you herence infer it precedes also Reprobation, or the decree of
condemnation, which is eternal? But there is no tolerable good consequence in
this; and you might as well infer, that good works are precedent to
election, as I have already showed. And withal, hereby you should constitute a
very wild order of things in execution: Yet, I grant, every obstinacy, so long
as men continue in it, making a show of godliness, is sufficient to constitute
them reprobate silver, and such as are given over into a reprobate mind. Were
it so, that after God has used means to purge the people, and they would not
be purged, then he rejects all further care of purging them from their
filthiness any more: will you infer therence, that the consideration of this
contempt of the means of grace goes before Reprobation, as it signifies the
decree of condemnation? And consider you not, that thus the permission of this
obstinacy in Gods intention, must go before condemnation, and consequently
must follow after it in execution? That is, men shall first be condemned, and
afterward suffered to despise the means of grace. Again, does not faith, and
repentance, and good works, in like manner precede salvation? And must not the
consideration of all these by like reason go before Election? Besides all
this, it is an untruth which you deliver; that after men have refused to be
purged when God would have purged them, forthwith he gives off all further
care of purging them from their silthinesse. How many thousands are there in
this Kingdom, who are guilty, and for many years have been guilty, of
refusing to be purged when God would have purged them: yet does not God give
over all further care of purging them from their silthinesse? and who dares
say, that none of them shall be converted unto God ere they die? Does not Paul
warn Timothy to carry himself gently toward them that are without, waiting
(...), if at length God will give them repentance, etc? And why should we
despair of any, so long as God suffers them to live, and enjoy the means of
grace? Neither does the Prophet Ezech. 24. 13. express or signify, that God
in this case gives over all further care of purging their silthinesse, only
professes that he will not spare them any longer: They should not be purged,
till he had caused his wrath to light upon them. But might not the lighting of
Gods wrath upon them be a means of this? Nay, is not this Gods ordinary
course, when his word is received in vain, to exercise his people with
affliction, and that to this end, even to purge away their dross till it be
pure, and take away all their tin? Isai, 1. And did not the Lord promise as
much by the mouth of Ezechiel also, and that in reference to the very same
wrath of God, as a means of their reformation? What else means that, I will
scatter thee among the heathen, and disperse thee in the Countries, and will
consume thy filthiness out of thee? Ezekiel. 22. 15. Your second question is of
the very same nature, and admits in every particular the very same answer.

From the old Testament you come unto the new: That of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.
5. you strain miserably to make it serve your turn. For first you serve your
turn at pleasure in the word (...), which is merely the privation of (...).
yet you enforce it to signify a desperate condition, which is utterly
repugnant to the genius of the Apostles text: who admonishes them to prove
themselves, whether they were in the faith, to humble them if they found
themselves otherwise; not to preach desperation unto them. Another does the
Apostle infer the condition of reprobates (such as there he speaks of) from
the receiving of the grace of God by a powerful ministry (such as Paul's was)
offered unto them in vain; but from the not having Christ in them. In this
case, whatsoever their minister was, and how little time soever, as well as how
long they had enjoyed the Gospel, he pronounced them reprobates: As, indeed,
till men are effectually called, there is noe necessity that there should be
any difference between the Elect and Reprobates considered in themselves:
Albeit in respect of the different purposes of God toward them, there is a
very great difference. That out of the 1. to the Romans as concerning the
Gentiles given up to a reprobate mind, I have already spoken sufficient. I
like Piscators interpretation of (...) better then yours: He renders it thus,
in mentem omnis judicii expertem. And I pray tell me, do you not think they
were given over (...); (...), before their transforming of the glory of the
incorruptible God, into the similitude of corruptible things? Were it not so,
how could they have been guilty of so foul a transformation? It is true, he
gave them up also to a reprobate mind, to do things uncomely, and to corrupt
their lives also with horrible uncleanness. Yet, I have showed out of 1 Cor.
6. that some of those were afterward sanctified, and consequently ab origin
the elect of God, and not reprobates in such a sense as we entreat of it in
this controversy.

Be it so, that men are not shut up in enmity against Christ till they have
the light: For, how could it be otherwise, seeing to be an enemy to the light,
and to hate the light, are but one thing, though expressed under different
phrases. What is this to the purpose? Say they are not condemned till then; I
say nor then neither; 1. Unless they continue finally therein: for were not
the very Elect sometimes strangers and enemies? Romans 5-10. Col. 1. 12. Be it
so, hatred of the light goes before condemnation, therefore the consideration
of this hatred goes before Gods purpose to condemn them. If this Logic likes
you, like this also: Faith, repentance, and good works, go before salvation;
therefore they are before Gods purpose to save them whom he saves. But, whereas
you seem to denote, that after a certain continuance in hatred of the light,
a man's case is desperate, which you seem to signify by a phrase of shutting
up; besides that it is nothing at all to the present purpose, but matter of
another question, I shall believe it, when I find your self, or any man else,
to prove it: In the mean time I continue as I am, and rest contented with the
reasons formerly mentioned for the disproving of it. Undoubtedly, by the seed
of the serpent, cannot be meant all men fallen and corrupted in Adam by
original sin, for they are expressly proposed in opposition to the seed of
the woman: Genesis 3. 15. Herein I concur with you, but I concur not with you
in the description of the seed of the serpent; for that agrees to all, even to
the Elect, as well as to the Reprobate: before the time comes, that God has
appointed for their effectual calling; for till then, they have the Image of
the old serpent (as you call it) stamped upon them: for they are in blindness
of mind and hardness of heart, which undoubtedly are the chief works of the
devil, which Christ came into the world to loose. Their will is to do the
lusts of the devil, for the devil works in them, and being taken in his
snare, they are led captive by him to do his will; yea Paul himself had an
hatred of the light, and loved darkness above it. But assure your self, no
hatred of the light, except it be final, is the cause why our Savior shuts
any man under condemnation. I verily thought with my self (says St. Paul)
that I ought to do Act. 26. 9.
many contrary things against the name of Jesus of Nazareth. 10. Which things I
also did in Jerusalem; for many of the Saints did I shut up in prison, having
received authority from the chief Priests, and when they were put to death, I
gave my voice against them. 11. And I punished them often in every synagogue, and
compelled them to blaspheme; and being excedingly mad against them, I
persecuted them even unto strange Cities. I see no reason why the profaneness
of Esau should stand in greater opposition unto grace, then the zeal of Paul
while he was a persecuter. Esau entreated Jacob kindly in his return from
Mesopotamia, but Esau continued finally in his profaneness. Paul continued
not in the course of his blind persecuting zeal; and this puts the true
difference between them. Though with God there was a difference put between
them from everlasting in his counsels, to make the one a vessel of mercy, the
other a vessel of wrath. And I see no reason why the reprobates should not be
accounted the seed of the serpent from their first conception; not because of
their original pollution (for that is common to them with Gods Elect) but
because God does not purpose to cure it in them, as he will cure it in the
Elect; though this natural corruption cannot break forth into actual hatred
of the truth, till they were brought, acquainted with it: and the like actual
hatred breaks forth also in Gods Elect, as it did in Paul, until the time
comes which God has appointed for the curing of it: But he will never cure it
in the Reprobate.

Against the point I know nothing of worth, besides that in the Answ.
Romans interpreted and opened in the answer to the fourth Doubt following; save
only that place in Jude, where it is said of the false teachers (as it is
commonly translated) that they were ordained of old to condemnation. The words
in the original are; (...). The sense whereof is given to be, that these false
teachers were of old ordained to judgment. viz. As they take it from
eternity, and so before themselves were, or had given any former cause of such
condemnation: and according to this sense, the subject whereabouts the decree
of reprobation is conversant, is not the world as fallen in Adam, much less as
fallen from Christ: but as considered in massa pura, before they had done good
or evil, yea, before they were. To clear this objection I am to crave leave to
depart from the usual translation and interpretation of this place. For first,
(...) does not in the first place signify condemnation, but, as you well know,
judgment rather. And so if I should give the sense, they were of old ordained
to judgment, viz. according to their works; this would not at all touch the
second act of positive Reprobation, the point now in hand; but only confirm
the first point touching the former act of positive Retribution, spoken of
before; viz. before the world was, God then ordained the men of this world to
judgment according to their works. And surely I should have rested in this
sense, but that I see the Apostle Jude interposing the Pronounc^ (...), does
thereby point at some spiritual kind of (...), or judgment spoken of by him
in the words before. v. 3. He thought it needful to exhort them to contend
earnestly for the faith once given to the Saints. In the v. 4. He renders a
just reason hereof from the antagonists which were crept in amongst them; and
whom God himself, as the chief (...), had designed and sent amongst them, to
put them to this contention and trial. For so the coherence requires this word
(...) to be here translated; for (...) coming of (...), which signifies
decerno, dimico, to contend in law or war; and then judico, and last of all
condemno; does first signify lis or certamen, contention or trial; and then
judgment, and at the last hand condemnation. Thus, Paul takes this word in the
first sense with Jude here, (...) for suits or trials, or contentions. There
is utterly (says he) a fault amongst you, (...), in that you have
contentions, or suits, or trials, one with another. If you take the primitive
sense of the word (...), and also consider the coherence of the Apostles words
in this place, this will appear to be his native and true meaning; (...), who
were of old designed to this contention: Yet for a little further clearing of
the text, let me add a word touching the sense of the other two words; (...).
In the word (...) the Apostle alludeth to the common course of Judges, and
suites in the law; or of wrestlings in the Olympian, or of captains in the
war, who were wont conscribere, to design aforehand, or set down in writing
the names of such adversaries as were to have their causes or trials tried
before them. And as for (...), which signifies of old, I dare not stretch it so
far, as to reach it to eternity; neither does the place require it, nor any
other in scripture to my remembrance. Yea, God himself, in Jeremy, plainly
distinguishes time of old, from eternity; as the lesser from the greater. If
you then ask what is that old time Jude here speaks of, wherein God wrought
aforehand, and as it were designed; viz. these false teachers to the trial of
his Church, and contention with him: I answer, About 4040. years before Jude
wrote this Epistle, when God pronounced in 'Paradise that ancient curse upon
the serpent and his seed, I will put enmity (says he) between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed and her seed, then was that of old, when God did
assign and appoint these false teachers under these general words, the seed
of the serpent, to this enmity, and contention with the Church, concerning the
faith once given to the Saints. And indeed the description which Jude gives of
these false teachers, thus set out by God unto this contention, does plainly
decipher them as the seed of the serpent; (...), ungodly men, turning the grace
of God into wantonness, denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

Thus have I declared how far, or rather how little I have departed, and upon
what grounds, not so much from the received doctrine of our Church, as the
received manner of the explication of it. In all which I humbly submit my
spirit, not only to the judgment of the reformed Churches, whether of England,
or of foreigne countries (if ever they come to take notice hereof) but also of
every learned godly brother, into whose hands this discourse may fall.

As for that place of Jude, (...), Examine.
the sense hereof (you say) is given to be, that these false teachers were of
old ordained to judgment: viz. As they take it from eternity, and so before
themselves were, and had given any former cause of such condemnation. This you
make the interpretation of the place given by others, and their doctrine
accordingly: And the consequent thereof you make to be this; namely, That
according to this sense the subject whereabout the decree of Reprobation is
conversant, is not the world as fallen in Adam, much less as fallen from
Christ, but as considered in massa pura, before they had done good or evil,
yea, before they were. Now I have diverse things to object against you in this.
First, were I of your opinion in the point of Reprobation, I should utterly
deny that there is any such consequent, that may be lawfully inferred from the
former interpretation and doctrine: For, albeit men are from eternity ordained
to condemnation, and consequently before themselves were, or had given any
former cause of such condemnation: yet, if when God did ordain them hereunto,
he did foresee, not only their fall in Adam, but their final infidelity and
impenitency also, and thereupon did proceed to ordain them to condemnation, as
it is acknowledged on all hands at this day; both Papists, Arminians, and
orthodox Protestants, your self only (that I know) excepted: then surely
herehence it will not follow, that massapura should be the object of
Reprobation, but massa corrupta; and that not in Adam only, but with actual
sins, and that throughout the whole course of their lives all along, even
until death. And I persuade my self, you also will be of the same opinion, if
you give your self to a due and serious consideration of it; which might have
saved you all this pains in straining a poor text to serve your turn in a
miserable manner, and that most causelessly: For, certainly you fear in this
place, where there is no cause of fear at all on your part. Secondly, why
should you strain courtesy to acknowledge Gods ordination (which is no other
then Gods decree) of men unto condemnation, to have been from all eternity?
For, what Papist, Arminian, Lutheran, or orthodox Protestant (provided that he
be learned withal) is found to deny this? Was it not one of the prodigious
doctrines of Vorstius, to maintain that Gods decrees are not eternal? Whence
it should manifestly follow, that God is changeable. For, if God should now
begin to will that, which formerly he willed not; this would introduce a
change in God, as well as if he should cease to will that which formerly he
willed. Can it be denied, but that God did everlastingly foresee whatsoever
should come to pass? If he did, then he did from everlasting foresee the
final infidelity and impenitency of every one that in such a condition
departs out of the world. And why then should it not become God from
everlasting to ordain all such unto condemnation? Thirdly, who are they that
interpret St. Jude in such a manner as you obtrude upon them? I cannot believe
any is found so absurd. What? that (...) should signify no more then ordain
to judgment! What shall become of (...) then? a word in this place most
significant? I persuade my self you cannot name one, the Author of so loose an
interpretation. But let us consider how you carry your self in the clearing of
it as you speak, which indeed is to raise a mist rather in the clear. (...) you
say, in the first place signifies judgment; and, I say, neither do they
render it otherwise whom you undertake to confute. Yet, holding the translation
here (as it were at bay without specification) it cannot stand with your
interpretation; to wit, of Gods ordaining men to judgment (in general)
according to their works: a judgment of mercy, in case their works prove
good; or of wrath, in case they prove evil, whatsoever you pretend to the
contrary, but most improvidently. For, albeit the word judgment be general,
and indifferently appliable to either kind, yet, the Apostles phrase here, this
judgment, (...), cannot be understood, and maintained in any such generality
and indifferency. And therefore you could not rest in this sense without much
oversight as your self observe, and forthwith confess. Therefore you proceed
further to observe, that the Apostle v. 3. thought it needful to exhort them,
to contend earnestly for the faith once given to the Saints. That is true, In
the v. 4. he adds the reason hereof; that also is true in these words: For
there are certain men crept in, of old ordained (...). And these men you call
Antagonists, hawking thereby after some congruitie to your interpretation
following. And thirdly, you observe, that God designed them to somewhat: and
the better to hold up the congruitie of your interpretation, you call God the
chief (...). And the thing whereunto God designed them, was (you say) to put
the Christians, to whom the Apostle writes, to this contention and trial:
Where you leave the Greek, as no longer able to serve your turn; for it is not
(...), but (...), whereunto God ordained them. But yet (which is enough) you
positively avouch that the coherence requires this word (...) to be so
translated. This, I say, were enough if you could as substantially prove it, as
you do confidently avouch it. And yet I presume, you well know your self to
have been the first that has discovered any such pregnancie of the text; to
go as it were with child with any such sense and meaning. And therefore it
behooves you to bring good cards for the proof of this your interpretation,
Now before I come to examine your proof, I say, that this interpretation of
yours is far more (...) than that is which you impugn, by how much it is
far more (...) (as Arminius urges against Mr. 'Perkins according unto truth)
to say, that God from eternity ordaines a man unto sin, then, that from
eternity he ordaines men unto condemnation: And Piscator concurreth with you
in the issue, though he takes a different way. Ad hoc judicium, (...), i. e.
(says he) ad hanc impietatem, qua impietate commerentur, sibique accersunt
judicium Dei, i. e. eternam condemnationem: As much as to say, to this
impiety, which is their condemnation; according to that of our Savior, Joh.
3. 16. This is the condemnation of the world, that light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were
evil; still holding the word (...) to his usual signification of judgment or
condemnation. Now we come to the consideration of your proof: (...) we know,
comes from (...), which signifies, you say, first decerno, then judico, and
last of all condemno. Be it so, hence you infer, that (...) does first
signify lis or certamen, and then judgment, and at the last, condemnation;
and thus Jude takes it here. If this were granted you, then Judes meaning must
be this, who were of old ordained to this contention: But you render it in much
different manner, thus; Who were of old ordained to put them (good Christians)
to this contention. Something you plead for the liberty you take in tempering
the word, but you do not so much as endeavor to justify the liberty you
take in interpreting Paul's phrase, when you say, that to ordain men to this
contention, is, to ordain them to put Christians to this contention. If you
should diswade men from impatience, and, giving a reason hereof, should say,
For many wicked men there are of old ordained to this impatience; would any of
your Auditors understand you? But give we you leave to enjoy your
interpretation of the phrase, let us see how you can justify your
interpretation of the word. The first reason is, ab origin nominis; as if the
verb (...), did first signify to contend, and thence you infer that (...)
signifies contention in the first place. But you bring no Greek Grammarian or
Dictionarie to justify either the one or the other; neither do I think any
world of words (as Dictionaries are sometimes called) does justify any such
interpretation of (...) or (...). A matter may be determined by deeds (as by
dint of sword) as well as by words, and legal debatings; so that judicare and
decernere, as comprehended under (...), shall be still of the same moment, and
nothing different in the effect, though res prove to be judicata different
ways. Secondly you say, that St. Paul takes the word (...), for contentions: I
find by my Concordance that the word (...) is found 28 times in the new
Testament. Out of all these you have picked out one to serve your turn, if that
does serve your turn; 1 Cor. 6. 7. There is utterly (says he) a fault among
you, (...), that is, say you, in that you have contentions and suits or trials
one with another. Calvin renders it thus, I am quidem omnino delictum in vobis
est, quod judicia habetis inter vos; keeping the word to his usual
signification: you will have it to signify contention, as if by special
providence it were here so used. For the better clearing of St. Jude, our
English, both the last, and Geneva, thus: Now there is verily a fault among
you, that you go to law one with another. Now to go to law, what is it but to
seek to civil courts for judgment or justice. Yet I am content to take your
own translation, whereby it is apparent, that by this word, is not so much
signified contentions in general, as suites and trials in special; like as
Piscator renders (...) in this place, controversias forenses, to wit, by a
Metonymie of the effect for the cause; for, where there are judgments
forensecall, there must needs proceed controversies forinsecall. And as for
contentions in general, I doubt not but you well know, that in the new
Testament they are usually denoted under the words (...) or (...). Now compare
we this with that of Jude, when the Apostle exhorts them, v. 3. to contend
(under the word (...)) for the faith once given to the Saints, and that against
those seducers and corrupters, the devils factors no doubt, who goes about
like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: he does nothing at all exhort
them to such contentions as you call suits or trials, but rather unto a
contention of resistance unto the practice of such who would corrupt them; of
the same nature with the exhortation of Peter, 1 Pet. 8. 5. Having told them of
the devils going about like a roaring lion, etc. Whom resist (says he)
steadfast in the faith: And answerable to that of Paul, Ephesians. 6. 12. We
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, and against
powers, and against worldly governors, etc. For this cause take unto you the
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to resist in the evil day; and
having finished all things, to stand. So that throughout, there is nothing at
all that serves your turn for the countenancing of so strained an exposition,
which yet (as before I showed) is most causelessly undertaken. You proceed to a
little further clearing of the text, or rather to the raising of more mists,
especially in the interpretation of the word (...). As for the allusion you
find in the word (...) to the common course of Judges and suits in the law, or
of wrestling in the Olympians, or of Captains in the war, who (as you say,
but without any proof) were wont conscribere, to design aforehand, or set
down in writing the names of such adversaries as were to have their causes or
trials tried before them. I have no great edge to oppose it. But Calvin goes
no further then scripture, to discover unto us this allusion: Porro (says he)
haec metaphora inde sumpta est quod aeternum Dei consilium, quo ordinati sunt
fideles ad salutem liber vocatur. And Revel. 20. we read of another book
besides the book of life, wherein the deeds of wicked men are written, and is
not there written (think we) their condemnation also? As for the word (...)
of old, I confess there is no native force therein to extend it to the
signification of eternity: Nay, Mar. 15. 44. it is applied to a very little
time before; for Pilate demands of Joseph of Airmathea, that came unto him
boldly to ask the body of Jesus, whether he were dead (...) already; yet it is
applyable even to eternity, neither does it signify any desinite time rising
upwards. And, although this phrase of old be distinguished from eternity, Jer.
31. 3. yet it is not Habac. 1. 12. And as the words are different in the
hebrew, so neither of them is rendered by (...) in the greek: but we extend
not the signification of it to eternity by any force of the word, but from the
matter whereof he treates, which is the ordination and decree of God, which
every intelligent and orthodox Divine acknowledges to be eternal; and I find
it wondrous strange so worthy a Divine as your self should be of any other
opinion. And, I pray, why might not this designation be from eternity, as well
as 4040. years before, such ungodly men were crept in amongst the people of
God? Belike not till then was the devil assigned to be an enemy to the woman;
for it is expressly said, God would put enmity between the woman and the
serpent, between the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent. Surely,
that place only signifies what Gods eternal purpose was in this particular,
then breaking out and manifesting it self; not that then the Lord did begin to
ordain it: For, nothing in the nature of God is temporal. And, certainly the
enmity of the serpent against mankind had broken out before this.

Amongst others, I am one into whose hand this discourse of yours is fallen at
length, having heard some inckling of it in the general before; and truly by
accident I lighted upon it, without any enquiring of mine, without any others
offering it unto me; and I am sorry to see the scandal and offense that is
given thereby unto Gods people in the way of truth: and that as I seem to have
just cause to suspect, some have been hardened and confirmed in their error;
and some, I hear, do boast of this discourse of yours, as no small credit and
reputation to their cause: yet, I am persuaded, this is no judgment of God
upon you, who are far from any heretical animositie: only we all know but in
part, and the best are obnoxious unto error; but the judgments of God that
have their course in these days do astonish me, in giving men over to
illusions to believe lies, by what means, and after what manner he thinks
good; and all because we do not embrace the truth, the precious truth of God
with love, thereby making our selves most unworthy of it. For, when in
vouchsafing unto us his holy truth, he does as it were cramme us against our
appetite, is it not high time for him to make us fast?

And amongst them of our selves, only this let me add; because, Answ.
verum and bonum convertuntur, every divine truth is rich in profitable use: I
have been confirmed in this truth, by the holy usefulness thereof to all sorts.

1 To the Elect it maintains and cherishes the freeness and Use 1.
largeness of the riches of the grace of God to them, whose salvation he
carries along in all the ways of it, not according to their works, but
according to his purpose and grace given them in Christ before the world was;
under whom also are spread the everlasting arms of Gods almighty power and
eternal love to guide and preserve them to his heavenly kingdom; which grace
to us is so much the more magnified, when we behold the severitie, and yet
equity, of his justice toward the world of mankind; who though he love them
as his creatures, yet he deals with them according to their works, which in
the end windeth up in their woeful and just destruction.

2 To the carnal Christian, that sins of ignorance or humane 2.
frailitie, and not of profane and wilful contempt of the means and ways of
grace, this doctrine offers a serious exhortation to them to seek after
Christ whilst he may be found, and earnestly presses on him those lively and
quickening expostulations of the Prophets, Why will you die, O house of Israel?
What could I have done more for my vineyard, that I have not done? Turn ye,
turn ye, that iniquity may not be your destruction.

3 To the prophance and malignant dog and swine, that walloweth 3.
in sensual and worldly lusts, and snarleth against the means and ways of
his own peace, and trampleth the precious ordinances of God under foot; to
such this doctrine testisieth to their faoes, that God is just in all that
comes on them, and his way equal: They loved the cursed ways of sin, and
are fallen into them; they loved not the ways of blessing, and therefore are
they far from them.

4 To the Lutheran and Arminian, who refuse the excellent and 4.
heavenly benefit of the sound and comfortable doctrine of Election, by reason
of some hard saying which they observed in the usual manner of handling the
opposite decree of Reprobation; to them this doctrine removes such stumbling
blocks out of the way, as have hitherto turned them out of the way of truth and
peace.

5 To the cavilling froward spirit, this doctrine cutteth off all 5.
occasions of reviling and slandering the orthodox truth of God, and against
them clears the equity of the ways of God.

6 To all sorts of men, yea, to men and Angels, it ministers 6.
much matter of admiring and adoring the wonderful riches of Gods grace to
Christ the head of the Church, and in him to all the elect his members, the
absolute power of his soveraigntie in dealing far otherwise with the world,
the unsearchable depth of his wisdom in the order and end of all his ways,
the unsearchable depth of his patience, bounty and long-suffering toward all
men, and manifest equity of his justice, even to those who abuse his patience
and bounty to their own perdition.

I confess this course of justifying, a tenet, by the usefulness of Examine.
it, is usually much made of by the Arminians; but I could never brook it in
any. This is a fair way to make a rule of faith unto our selves, and under
color of usefulness, to shape the doctrine of the Gospel after our own
fancies: yet, I am willing to examine what here you deliver also in every
particular. 1. As touching the first Use, I find, you serve your turn with a
manifest confusion of the grace of vocation, with the grace of salvation; Thus:
God of free grace saves in the one, in justice damnes in the other. But the
comparison you make is nothing congruous; For, it is so carried by you, as if
in this dealing of God, the case were alike with man's dealing; as when a Judge
amongst many malefactors, equally guilty of death, saves some, and damnes
others. These are nothing equal; for the one die in faith and repentance, the
other die void of faith, and in the state of impenitency. Therefore to help
this incongruitie, you will be driven to fly to effectual vocation: And
indeed, before God does effectually call some by such a grace as he denies
others, they whom he calls were no better then others. But, let us make way for
the truth to appear in her proper colors, by distinguishing those things
which ought to be distinguished, lest we be found to be in love with our own
errors.

As touching Vocation; 1. we acknowledge with you, and you with us, the
freeness of Gods efficacious grace bestowed on some, and denied to others, and
herein magnified; that whereas God might have bestowed it on others, and not on
them, he has bestowed it on them, and not on others; yea, on them who are but
few in comparison, permitting a far greater multitude of others, and which is
especially to be considered, though you are not willing to take notice of it:
Like as God has mercy on some in giving them this efficacious grace we speak
of, merely according to the good pleasure of his own will; so he hardens
others, denying them the same grace, and that merely according to the good
pleasure of his own will. And thus the freeness of his grace is magnified
toward the elect, by his severitie and freeness of his will in denying it
unto others: whereas you so carry it, as if the freeness of his grace to the
one, were magnified in respect of his justice toward the world of mankind, in
dealing with them according to their works; which is a plausible speech, and
of common course usually admitted, but utterly void of truth. The truth being
this: That like as God, in inflicting damnation on men, does not proceed
according to the mere pleasure of his own will, but according to the works of
men; so, in denying grace efficacious, he does not proceed according to the
works of men, but merely according to the good pleasure of his own will.
For, the Apostle plainly professes in this case, that look how he has
mercy on whom he will; so likewise he hardens whom he will. And to clear
the truth in this point (because as many as vary from the truth of God in this
point, are not very prone to hear on this ear) let us consider, that justice
has different acceptions. In a common notion it is no otherwise taken then for
justitia condecentiae, as the Schoolmen call it. Thus, whatsoever God does is
an act of Gods justice, whether it be an act of power, as in making the world
out of nothing, or an act of liberality, in doing good to the creature without
cause, or an act of mercy in pardoning sin; all these are acts of justice in
this sense. The meaning whereof is no more but this: In all these actions God
does no other thing then what himself has lawful power to do. In this sense
it is just with God, as well to have mercy on whom he will, as to harden whom
he will. And so your comparison here made, should have no life at all to that
purpose whereunto you accommodate it. For, in this sense the justice of God
shall equally appear on both sides: Whereas you make the freeness of Gods
grace only on the one side to be magnified the more, by the consideration of
his justice, which has course on the other. So that to hold up your own
comparison as decently proposed, you must be driven to forgo this common
notion of justice, and stick to a more strict and peculiar notion thereof; and
that is, when God rewards or punishes men according to their works. Now, I
say, that God does not deny efficacious grace to any man according to his
works; which I demonstrate thus: The execution of justice in this kind, does
always proceed according to some law, which law is made to man by some
superior power; but unto God not by any superior power (for he acknowledges
no superior power), but by his own will: As for example, Wherefore does God
crown all them with glory who die in faith, and in repentance? To wit, because
he has ordained and made a law, that, whosoever continues to the end (in the
state of faith and repentance) shall be saved. Again, why does God damn them
to everlasting fire who die in sin, void of faith, void of repentance? To
wit, because God has ordained and made a law, that, whosoever believes not
(provided that he continues in unbelief unto the end) shall be damned. For,
undoubtedly, God could have turned men into nothing, had it so pleased him, and
had he not decreed the contrary; like as he brought men out of nothing. Now
show me that God has ordained or made a law, that men found in such or such a
condition shall be denied efficacious grace: if you cannot show any such
ordinance or law of God, then do not say that God, in denying grace, proceeds
according to men's works in justice. And, indeed, if any such law could be
assigned, it would follow, that in the communicating of grace also God should
proceed not according to the good pleasure of his will, but in justice,
according to men's works. Consider a second argument, What is sin original,
but the spiritual death of the soul? By Regeneration man formerly dead in
sin is revived. Now is it congruous to say, that because man is dead in
sin, therefore it is just with God not to revive him? Because a man is blind,
therefore it is just with God not to open his eyes? Or, because he is deaf,
therefore it is just with God not to open his ears? Suppose sin were but the
sickness of the soul, is it congruous to say, that because a man is sick,
therefore it is just with God not to cure him? Whereas it is manifest, that
unless a man were first sick, it were impossible to cure him; unless first
blind or deaf, it were impossible to restore sight or hearing unto him;
unless first dead, it were utterly impossible to revive him.

Come we now to salvation and damnation; you seem to say that God of his free
grace does save a man. In my judgment it is an improvident speech. For,
consider, whom does God save of ripe years? Does he save any other but those
that die in the Lord? That is, such as die in the state of grace, in the state
of faith and repentance? Now judge, I pray, Is it fit to say, It is free and
indifferent with God, either to save or damn them who die in the Lord, in the
state of grace, in the state of repentance? For, has not God made as well such
a law, that, whosoever believes and repents, he shall be saved? As such a law,
Whosoever believes not, nor repents, shall be damned? And, in respect of the
former law, is not God as much obliged to save them that believe and repent, as
in respect of the latter law, he is obliged to damn them that believe not,
that repent not? So that the comparison is miserably to blame, made between the
freeness of Gods grace in saving the one, and his severitie and justice in
condemning others: And the confounding of effectual vocation and salvation on
the one side, and obduration with damnation on the other, has exposed you to
this incongruitie ere you are aware. So that, whereas I thought to have least
to do about this use, a greater business is made unto me in clearing the
truth of God herein then I could imagine: and yet I am not come to an end. This
may suffice to discover the unsoundnesse of the maine body of your comparison.
But there are some other things to be considered on the by: First, by way of
amplifying the largeness of the riches of the grace of God. You tell us how
the Lord carries the salvation of his Elect in all the ways of it, etc. And
forthwith by way of addition you say, that under them also are spread the
everlastig arms of Gods power and eternal love, to guide them to his eternal
kingdom: Which is no different thing, but merely the same with the former, of
carrying their salvation along in all the ways of it. These expressions, I
confess, are momentuous, to stir up gracious affections in the apprehension of
the freeness and power of Gods grace. But, if hereby our judgment (in the
mean time) is not a little disturbed in discerning Gods truth, so that we
embrace error in stead thereof, we shall buy good affections at too dear a
rate, as is the loss of truth. And hereby as I have showed, the freeness of
Gods grace is miserably weakened: For, if God be not acknowledged freely and of
the mere pleasure of his will to deny grace unto some, I cannot see how well
it can be maintained that he does freely and according to the mere pleasure
of his own will bestow it upon others. Again, that phrase of yours, the
equitic of Gods justice toward them that are damned, seems somewhat
incongruous. For, equity signifies the moderation of justice in such sort,
that the strictness thereof may not hinder man's good: But what good the damned
reap by this equity you speak of, you have not declared. Lastly, you say, God
loves the damned as they are his creatures. And it is a phrase, I confess,
that has 'its course with many hand over head. In the very state of damnation
in hell fire, they are and still continue to be his creatures; what, I pray, is
that love of God that passes upon them in that state? Undoubtedly, whatsoever
it be, it must consist with hatred in the highest degree. I would willingly
know whether it be Amor complacentiae, or Amor beneficentiae. If it be
complacentiae, what is it that God likes in them, unless it be his own work,
the nature of men? Or what good is it that God does unto them in the state of
damnation? Can it be any other then the continuance of their being? Yet, most
think that is nothing good to them in the state of damnation. Whatsoever your
meaning be, if you did express it, it may be you would fly from your own
caution in this place, as Moses did from his rod when it was turned into a
Serpent. I am persuaded, the apparent incongruitie thereof would little please
you. I come to the Consideration of the second Use.

2 That the doctrine of our Church, from which you swerve, does not offer, as
well as yours, to carnal Christians a serious exhortation to seek after
Christ whilst he may be found: Or that it does not, as earnestly as yours,
press upon them those hearty and quickening expostulations of the Prophets:
Why will ye die, O house of Israel? Or, What could I have done more for my
vineyard that I have not done? Turn ye, turn ye, that iniquity may not be
your destruction, you do not so much as go about to prove. But I have
something more to except against this use of yours. The description here given
by you of a carnal Christian; to wit, That he sins of ignorance and humane
frailty, and not of profane and wilful contempt of the means of grace; I
had thought it had been proper to the regenerate, and not at all belonging to
the carnal Christians, whom, I think, you make no better than natural men,
to whom the things of God are foolishness; and in whom (...) is enmity unto
God, in such sort, that they are not subject unto the law of God, nor can be.
But, I presume, you speak this of civil and moral Christians, conforming to
the means of grace, and not giving any outward evidence of contemning them.
But, herehence it follows not, that God who sees their hearts, finds not
profaneness in them, or vile estimation of the means of grace. But
howsoever, whether they are profane or formal, we exhort all, we press the
same expostulations upon all: and dare you say, that never any profane or
wilful contemner of the means of grace is converted? Though that these
expostulations do quicken any, it is merely of the spirit of God, who blows
where he lists. But, whereas you seem to imply (though you are not willing
to deal plainly, and express so much) that a carnal Christian, such as here
you have shaped him, has power to yield to these exhortations, and quickening
expostulations; a point that we dare not take hold of, without much
explication: For, to yield unto them in a gracious manner, I conceive, to be
utterly out of the sphere of a natural man, or a carnal Christians activitie:
And, I presume, you will affirm as much; but to yield unto them, either
hypocritically, either according to the course of gross hypocrisy, or of that
hypocrisy which is secret to him that is possessed with it, or, ad exteriorem
vitae emendationem; we deny not such a power unto a carnal Christian as you
describe him, nor unto any profane person whatsoever. And, I am persuaded, it
is only a consideration of things in general, and in a confusaneous manner,
holds you on to imply such a power in carnal Christians: Whereas if things
were distinguished aright, it would more easily appear what is within the
region of nature, and what beyond it, as merely imputable to the special
grace of God, and operation of his spirit.

3 As for dogs and swine, we are forbidden to give our holy things, or to cast
our pearls before them at all. And therefore are we not to trouble our
selves, in considering to what end this doctrine is to be preached unto them.
And yet, as for the testifications proposed as proper unto them, it is nothing
so; for not to them only, but to carnal Christians also do such belong, yea,
to the very Children of God also; to wit, That God is just in all that comes
on them, and his ways equal. As when after David's foul sins in the matter
of Uriah, the sword pursued his house, and Absolon defiled his fathers
concubines, and he was driven to fly from Jerusalem, and Shimei meeting him
on the way cursed him, etc. And, I pray you, what unregenerate man throughout
the world does not love the cursed ways of sin, in some kind or other, though
not in all kinds? And no marvel, for vice is like a pike in a pond, it
devoures both virtue and lesser vices: One vice is opposite to another, and not
only unto virtue: And therefore, no mervaile if no man be found vicious in all
kinds.

4 As for the Lutheran and Arminian, you profess, that this Tenet of yours
removes such stumbling blocks out of their way, as have hitherto turned them
out of the way of truth and peace. But what these stumbling blocks are, which
you have removed, I know not. It seems this has been a chief inducement unto
you, to decline from that which you confess to be the most received opinion of
our Church, and to shape unto your self a new form of opinion different from
that which is received, (if not to remove some stumbling blocks out of your
own way.) Now, if it be so, the fairest course had been to have expressed what
these offenses are; Secondly, how our most received Tenet does either cast them
in tho way of others, or at least does not remove them; and thirdly, to show
how by this opinion of yours they are removed: But none of these have been
performed by you. Again, Mr. Moulin, being very orthodox in the point of
Election, as you are, varieth from us, as you do, in the point of Reprobation;
maintaining, Reprobation to be instituted upon the foresight of man's final
impenitency, in his Anatome Arminianismi. Corvinus an Arminan, has taken him
to task in a work of his, and is never a whit the more forward to concur
with us in the point of Election, because Moulin concurres with them in the
point of Reprobation. Nay, what do Papists say about Durham, by occasion of
our complying with them, but this, They need not comply with us, for we come
fast enough forwards to comply with them. And more then this, I have already
showed, that this tempering (or corrupting rather) of the doctrine of
Reprobation, makes a fair way for the utter overthrowing of that which you
call the sound and comfortable doctrine of Election. Forasmuch, as look by
what reason you maintain the foresight of small impenitencie and infidelity
to go before Reprobation, as it signifies the punishing with everlasting
death; by the same reason it will appear, that the foresight of final
perseverance in faith, repentance, and good works, must necessarily go before
Election, as it signifies Gods decree of rewarding with everlasting life. In
which notion alone, election or the decree of salvation, is contrarily opposite
to reprobation, or the decree of condemnation. For, in maintaining that
Reprobation, as a purpose of God to condemn for sin, does presuppose the
foresight of sin, you do thereby imply that Election, as a purpose of God to
reward for righteousness of faith and repentance, does presuppose the
foresight of faith and repentance. But, if your meaning be no other than this,
that God has ordained no man unto damnation but for sin, what offense or
scandal do you remove hereby, which we do not remove also, who concur
with you herein. And, which is more, we are ready not only to affirm, but to
make good also, that in no moment of nature does the purpose of Condemnation
go before the foresight of sin, even of that sin for which men shall be
damned: Whereas you, in maintaining that the foresight of sin is precedent to
the purpose of condemnation, are not able to make it good; but must necessarily
fall foul upon a manifest contradiction to your own rules: For, if the
foresight of sin be precedent to the decree of condemnation, then God did
first decree to permit sin, before he did decree to damn for it: And
herehence it follows that permission of sin in Gods intention, was before
condemnation: and if it were first in intention, then, by your own rules, it
must be last in execution; that is, men shall be condemned for sin, before
ever they be permitted to sin. Nay, I appeal to your own conscience,
whether we do not open a fairer way for composition in the point of election,
then you do in the point of Reprobation. Considering that like as in
Reprobation, Gods decree to condemn, is in no moment of nature precedent to
Gods foresight of sin; so in Election, I am bold to affirm, that Gods
purpose to save is in no moment of nature before his foresight of faith,
repentance, and good works, and final perseverance in them all. Will not you
think, that you have cause to fear hereupon, that I am more dissolute in the
point of Election, than rigid in the point of Reprobation? Yet if you will
confess, that herein is a fair way opened for composition in the point of
Election; I dare undertake to persuade you, that this shall be maintained
without any prejudice either to the freeness of Gods grace, or to the
absolutnesse of his power. The truth is, our Divines have a long time erred in
making different decrees of those which are but one (I mean formal) decree, to
wit, of the means, though materially different, which is nothing strange: For,
why should it seem strange that many means should be required to the same
end? We commonly say, that Gods decree to give salvation is the decree of the
end; and his decree to give faith and repentance is the decree of the means:
yet they dare not say commonly, that Gods decree to inflict damnation is the
decree of the end; and Gods decree to deny grace is the decree of the means:
And so they are driven to overthrow all Analogy between Election and
Reprobation. I say that Gods decree of giving faith and salvation unto sinners,
are but one formal decree of God concerning the means; the end whereof is,
the manifestation of Gods glory in the way of mercy mixed with justice. And,
indeed, nothing can be the end of Gods actions but his own glory; for he made
all things for himself, and as all things are from him, so all things must be
for him; for the supreme efficient must be the supreme end. Now if God at
once, and in one moment of nature, decrees to give salvation by way of reward
of faith, judge you, or let any indifferent Reader judge, whether this decree
of salvation be not necessarily conjunct with the foresight of says.

5 As for the occasions of slandering and reviling the orthodox truth of God,
which as you conceive, this doctrine of yours cutteth of to the cavilling and
froward spirit; you have not so much as expressed what they are, much less
justified them, to be such occasions as you speak of, or showed how they are
removed by your doctrine, and not by ours. In like sort, what is that equity
of the ways of God, the credit of the clearing whereof, you attribute to your
own doctrine, and derogate from ours, you take no pains to explicate. If your
meaning be, that you maintain, that God condemns no man but for sin
voluntarily and freely committed by him, and withal do obtrude upon us the
contrary, you do us the greater wrong, provided you speak of men of ripe
years. As for the damnation of infants, I doubt you fear so much to offend
men, that you come too near the Pelagian and Arminian tenet hereabouts. And if
you think there is any active power in a natural man to believe and repent,
we will not fear offense to resist you, or any man in this, the scripture
having so plainly expressed the contradictorie to this; 1 Cor. 2. 14. and Romans
8. 8. Or, if your opinion be, that God does not harden whom he will, as well as
he shows mercy on whom he will; (where the good pleasure of God is as
evidently signified to be the cause of the one, as of the other) we shall not
forbear by Gods grace, through fear of offense, to resist you in this also.
And if Pharaoh shall hereupon object and say, Why does God complain of my not
letting Israel go, when he himself hardens, my heart, that I may not let
Israel go; we think it fit to take the Apostles course to stop such a ones
mouth; and say, O man who art thou that disputest with God, shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the
potter power, etc. And let men take heed, they do not take upon them to be
wiser then the Holy Ghost, and think to satisfy men by devises of their own,
when the word of God does not satisfy them. Yet, in all this, the Apostle does
not impeach the liberty of their wills, nor Austin neither, but rather
justifies it throughout; yet is he bold to pronounce, that libertas sine
gratia, non est libertas sed contumacia. As much as to say, a man without grace
has will too much to that which is evil, and averse from that which is good,
as being wilfully bent to the one, and opposite to the other. And, the
providence of God in the efficacy of working all things to his own ends,
compared with the liberty of the creature, has ever been accounted of a
secret nature; whereas now a days, nothing will satisfy the Patrons of free
will, unless this secret and misterious providence of God, as it was wont to
be accounted, come to be utterly overthrowen, and liberty of the creature (if
not chance) be brought to domineere in the place thereof. When you speak of the
orthodox truth of God, I presume, you do not distinguish of the truth of God
as if some were orthodox, and some not. Yet, I confess, Epithites have another
use besides the use of distinction; yet, in this case also, the Epithet is not
congruous, for orthodox is as much in effect as true.

6 As touching the last, I presume, you will not deny, but that the riches of
Gods grace to Christ, and in him to all the Elect, are by our Tenet
acknowledged to be as wonderful as by yours. As for the absolute power of his
soveraigntie in dealing far otherwise with the world, I presume, your opinion
is, that we do exceed rather then come short of you in the acknowledging
thereof: For, we maintain God to be as absolute and free, in the denying of
grace to some, as in giving it to others. And by denying of grace, we
understand the hardening of men, at least as touching the chief part wherein it
consists. Yet, this you will have to proceed not so much according to Gods
absolutnesse, as according to his justice in punishing men with obduration:
yet, I grant, there is an obduration which is properly enough a punishment of
sin, and when men are thereby prostituted unto danger, and exposed unto
destruction. Yet, I dare appeal to the judgment of any intelligent Arminian,
whether, in case you do maintain as you speak, the absolute power of Gods
soveraigntie in dealing far otherwise with the world, then with the elect,
any scandal is removed out of their way by your tenet which is cast in their
way by ours. As for the unsearchable depth of his wisdom in the order and end
of all his ways, as also of his patience toward all men; I presume, you will
not say it is more maintained by your tenet then by ours. But by the way, I
hope, you will not except against that of Austin; Quantam libet praebuerit
patientiam nisi Deus dederit, quis aget poenitentiam, cont. Jul. liber 5. Cap.
4. And again in the same place, Istorum neminem (to wit, non praedestinatorum)
adduoit Deus ad salubrem spiritualemque poenitentiam, qua homo reconoiliatur
Deo in Christo, sive ampliorem illis patientiam, sive non imparem praebeat. And
again, adducit ad poenitentiam, sed praedestinatum adducit, and none other in
his opinion. As for the justice of God to obstinate sinners, I hope you will
not say, the common tenet of our Divines does any way infringe it; we
generally maintain him to be righteous in all his works, and holy in all his
ways: For, he punishes none but for sin; none of ripe years, but for sin
voluntarily and freely committed by them, and that in such sort as they might
avoid it; speaking of any outward transgresion; Only it is not in their power
to change their hearts, and to love God with all their hearts, and fear him,
and depend upon him: Whence it comes to pass, that albeit there is no
particular, material, transgresion, which they could not avoid, yet it is not
in the power of a natural man to avoid it in a gracious manner; and all for
want of that love of God, before spoken of, which cannot be wrought in a man,
but by the spirit of regeneration. If any man should further object (as I wish
you had objected, to the uttermost, against our Tenet) supposing a natural man
to perform what good lies in his power to perform, but not in a gracious
manner; and likewise to omit what lies in his power to omit, but not in a
gracious manner, which alone is not in his power to perform; and say, what
justice is there in the damnation of such a man? I answer, as much as in the
damnation of an infant for original sin, considering that by reason of
original sin it is, that a natural man cannot perform any thing in a
gracious manner, to wit, for want of the love of God: Original sin being an
habitual aversion from God, and conversion unto the creature, or more briefly
an inordinate conversing with the creature, either in enjoying it, whereas he
should only use it, God alone being to be enjoyed; or in using it, but not in
a gracious manner, that is, not for Gods sake; to wit, through want of the love
of God, which is brought upon us by the sin of Adam; as whereby our natures
were bereaved of the spirit of God. Thus in prosecuting mine answer unto a
devised argument, I have made bold to open my mind concerning original sin:
A point that has seemed unto me of such difficulty, that I have been wont to
range it amongst those three, whereabouts I could not expect to be satisfied
whilst I lived. Another was the very point we have in hand.

To the fourth Doubt.
HOw may it appear that Gods hatred of Esau, is of a less 4 Doubt. Quest. 4.
degree of love, since the making of him who by birth is superior, to be a
servant to his underling, argues no good will at all, but:

First, rather a purpose to pass him by, in respect of communicating grace and
glory.

Secondly, since the raising of Pharaoh, which was to this intent, to show his
power in his overthrow argues the like.

Thirdly, since hardening is an effect of hatred, and depends on the will of
God, as the first cause thereof, even as Mercy does.

Fourthly, since there is no cause of that objection, why complains he? Who
has resisted his will? or at least of that answer, Romans 9. 20, 21, 22.

I Answer, as Jacob preferring Ephraim the younger brother to greater estate
then his elder brother Manasses did not thereby Answer.
declare a positive hatred of Manasses, but a less degree of love to him in
comparison of his brother:

So Gods preferring Jacob to be a superior and Lord to his elder brother
Esau, does not argue that in him there is no good will at all to Esau, but a
less degree of love.

To subject Esau, as a servant to Jacob, does not reprobate Esau, but puts him
into the condition of the world of mankind: who together with the rest of the
Creatures are made to be servants to the Church of the elect, and to the
members of it.

But grant Gods hatred of Esau, and making him a servant to his underling,
argues no less then a purpose to pass him by, in respect of communicating
glory unto him out of grace. And for my part thus far I yield, that it may
well argue a purpose of God to pass by him, in respect of communicating glory
to him out of grace, that grace I mean, whereby he has made us accepted in
his beloved: for this grace or free love, is made Jacobs pre-eminence, and is
denied to Esau, and though it put him into the estate of a servant to his elect
brother, and so into the condition of the world of mankind, yet it does not
reprobate him, or argue a purpose to pass him by in respect of communicating
life or glory at all unto him, but implies only a purpose to deal with him in
justice, viz. to give him life or death according to his works, as I have
already showed in the answer to the former doubt, and shall have occasion more
fully to declare it, in the end of this.

Surely Jacob in doing that which he did to Manasses and Exam.
Ephraim, did neither prefer one to a greater estate then the other, or love
one less then the other. But in the spirit of prophecy fore-signifyed, what
would be the condition of each in their race and posterity. But suppose a
father in that which lies in his power, preferres one son before another, and
accordingly in that way of Amor beneficentiae, be said to love one less then
another, will any sober man say, that he loves the one, and hates the other?
is this a decent expression of less love? We know full well, that a less
love in the way of beneficence, may be joined with a greater love in the way
of complacency: As for example, an earthly Father, though he suffer his eldest
son to go away with the Land, yet he may bear greater affection to a younger
son, though he assign unto him a far less portion then to his elder
brother. And if it were decent to say, he hates him, whom he loves less in
respect of beneficence; then he should be said to hate him whom he loves
best.

Lastly, if the hating of Esau be interpreted less loving, why may not the
loving of Jacob, by the same liberty be interpreted the less hating of him.

Amongst Gods elect some are more beloved of God, and some less, according as
he ordaines one to greater grace and glory then another, and is it fit to
attribute that to Esau, which we attribute to Gods elect?

I grant that to subject Esau to Jacob as a servant, is not to reprobate him,
for this subjection is made in time; But reprobation, as we take it in
opposition to election Ephesians. 1. 4. was made before all times. It is your own
phrase, to distinguish the world of mankind from the elect, as if the elect
were none of the world of mankind. For the very elect themselves are subjected
as servants to the elect, every one unto others: though as great as Paul and
Apollo, as appears by the very place, your self have now in a contrary sense
alleged more then once. And who doubts that we must all serve one another
through love, since Christ himself was content to wash his Disciples feet?
Lastly, the yoke of Esau unto Jacob was at length shaken off, as appears by
Isaacs prophecy it should be; but the yoke of subjection of all things unto
the Church, shall never be shaken off.

But you perceive well enough that the discourse which you answer, considered
this temporal preferment (which yet had course only in their seed) only in a
typical manner, as that which under temporal things prefigured spiritual,
and accordingly you proceed to shape your answer thereunto in that respect
also. The same is this, Though God had no purpose to deal with Esau, as he
dealt with Jacob: that is, to communicate glory unto him out of grace, yet he
had a purpose of communicating glory unto him some other way, and what can that
be, but of communicating glory unto him, not out of grace? A very strange
assertion, and therefore no marvel, you spared to set it down in so many
words. Only you say, that the putting him into the state of a servant, did not
reprobate him, or argue a purpose to pass him by in respect of communicating
life and glory unto him. Which to my judgment does manifestly intimate that
you acknowledge in God a purpose to communicate life and glory to Esau, some
way or other.

And if you did acknowledge a purpose in God not to communicate life and glory
at all unto him, this Aquinas confesses, and we jointly with Aquinas,
confess that it is nothing less then to hate him. For if God will have a man
to be, and will not have him to be saved, surely he will have him in the end
to be damned. For in the end there will be found no middle state, equally
remote from salvation and damnation. But you do in plain terms acknowledge a
purpose in God to deal in justice with Esau, and to give him life or death
according to his works. I presume you will not avouch this of all them that you
account the world of mankind. For I doubt not but you will except Infants. As
for men of ripe years, is it not as true of the elect, as of those you call the
men of the world, that they shall be dealt withal according to their works?
I do not say according to their deserts, but according to their works, keeping
my self to your own phrase. Has not the Apostle professed, 2 Cor. 5. 10. That
we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which are done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or evil? But these works I confess are different, for
either they consist in obedience or disobedience; either to the Covenant of the
Law, or to the Covenant of Grace; either to the Law of works, or to a Law of
Faith. Now as for those whom you call the world of mankind, and concerning
whom you profess, God has a purpose to judge them according to their works. I
demand whether your meaning is, God will judge them according to their works, in
reference to the Covenant of the Law, or in reference to the Covenant of Grace.
If in reference to the Covenant of the Law, then the meaning must be this, God
has a purpose to save them, in case they perform exact obedience to his Law:
But in case they continue not in every thing that is written in the book of the
Law to do it, Gods purpose is to condemn them to everlasting death. Now I
appeal to every sober Christians judgment, whether if God has no purpose to
save them, but upon condition of such obedience, and withal has a purpose to
damn them upon condition of such disobedience, whether, all things considered,
it may not be more truly avouched, that God has a purpose to damn them, but
no purpose at all to save them. If it be spoken in reference to the Covenant
of Grace, I dispute against it, first in the same manner. The conditions of the
Covenant of Grace on man's part being Faith and Repentance, if God will not save
them, but upon condition of faith and repentance, and will damn them in case
of infidelity and impenitency; then surely if it shall be found, that the men
of this world are far more prone to infidelity and impenitency then unto faith
and repentance, it follows that God purposes rather to damn them then to
save them; But in case they are naturally carried to infidelity and
impenitency, and have no power to believe in Christ, and to break off their
sins by true repentance; then it follows as well in respect of this
Covenant of grace (according whereunto God will deal with them) as in respect
of the former Covenant of the Law, that God has no purpose to save them, but
has a purpose to damn them unto everlasting fire. But so it is of all those
whom you call the world of mankind, namely, that they have no power to believe
in Christ, or to break off their sins by repentance, but are naturally
carried on unto infidelity and impenitency, as I prove thus. They that cannot
discern the things of God, but account them foolishness, they cannot believe
in Christ: But such are all they whom you call the world of mankind, for 1 Cor.
2. 14.
they are not regenerate, and consequently they are mere naturals. Now the
natural man, as the Apostle speaks, perceives Romans 8.
not the things of God, for they are foolishness unto him. Again, all such
persons are still in the flesh. Now the affection of the flesh is enmity
against God, is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.
Secondly, I prove that God cannot deal with them whom you call the world of
mankind, according to the Covenant of Grace: For if he should, he should
save them all; as I prove thus. If whatsoever God requires by this covenant on
man's part, God undertakes to perform on his part, then it is impossible but
that all must be saved with whom he means to deal according to this
covenant. But whatsoever by this covenant God requires on man's part, God
himself undertakes to perform on his part, as I prove thus. First, in general,
God undertakes in this covenant, to be our Lord and our God, to sanctify us.
Therefore, he undertakes to give us faith and repentance. Secondly, in
special, and first, does God require at our hands, that we should love him
with all our hearts, and with all our souls? God undertakes to perform this.
Dent. 30. 6.


I will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy children, that thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul. Does God
require at our hands that we fear him? And God also undertakes on his part to
work us unto this. Jer. 32. 40. And I will put my fear into their hearts, that
they shall never depart away from me. Does God require Faith? this also on his
part he performs, Act. 2. ult. God added to the Church daily such as should
be saved: And Philip. 1. 29. To you it is given to believe in him, and to
suffer for him. Does God require Repentance? Even to this end God sent his
Son, to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins. In a word, it
is God that makes us perfect unto every good work to do his will, working in us
that which is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, Heb. 13. 21.

Answ. But in the second place it may be argued, that Gods raising up of
Pharaoh, to this intent to show his power in his hardening and overthrow,
argues the like hatred of Esau as of Pharaoh: viz. a purpose of passing both
by, without communicating grace, or glory unto them.

To which I answer, a difference there is between Esau and Pharaoh; though not
in their final condition, nor in (...) purpose concerning them: Yet in the
degree of their present estate, whereunto they were severally come, when God
gave out his several Oracles concerning them both: for he says not of
Pharaoh, God raised him up to show his power in his hardening and overthrow,
before he had done good or evil, as he said of Esau, that he should serve
Jacob, before he had done good or evil. The Hebrew and Greek word signify
neither to create, nor bring into the world, but to preserve, or to cause to
stand, to stir up, or to advance; which presupposes Pharaoh already born,
yea, and of such a Spirit; that if God preserve him and stir him up, he was
become a fit subject upon whom God might show his power in his hardening and
overthrow. Otherwise God might as well be said to condemn Pharaoh out of his
absolute will, without all respect to sin, as to show his power in hardening of
him without all respect to sin.

Hardening, when it falls upon the creature, is both the height of his sin, and
depth of his misery, and therefore is it as prejudicial to Gods justice to
inflict it without respect of sin going before, and to the creature as
dangerous to undergo it, as condemnation to hell it self. Hell has no greater
torment then an heart desperately hardened under the wrath, curse, and judgment
of God, which was Pharaohs case.

But consider Pharaoh, not in the estate of Esau, as having done neither good
nor evil; but in the state wherein he stood, when God gave out his Oracle
concerning him, that for this cause he stirred him up, to show his power in
his hardening and overthrow; and then may I easily grant more then is required.
viz. When God purposed to pass by him, not only in communicating grace and
glory unto him, but also to fall upon him in his utmost wrath, as well in
outward strange calamity, as especially in spiritual judgments, hardness of
heart, and blindness of mind to his utter perdition.

In the former part you declined a direct answer to the question proposed; for
whereas the question proposed was touching Exam.
the communicating of grace and glory, you not adventuring to maintain a
purpose of God to communicate grace and glory to them whom you call the world
of mankind, only maintain a purpose in God (at least you seem so to do) of
communicating life and glory some other way then out of grace. But with what
advantage to your cause that has been carried, I have already considered. Now
you seem to answer the question, looking it directly in the face. For though
you acknowledge such a purpose in God concerning Pharaoh, to wit, of passing
him by in communicating grace and glory, yet the cause (you say) is not alike
of Esau, when Gods Oracle was given out concerning him, (he being not then
born) as of Pharaoh, when the Oracle, here spoken of, was given out concerning
him, he being then a fit subject, upon whom God might show his power in his
hardening and overthrow. Yet here again you decline the question: For the
question was not, whether Pharaoh at that time when God said, For this cause I
have raised thee up, etc. were a fitter subject for God to show his power in
his hardening and overthrow; then Esau was, while yet he was in his mothers
womb. But whether God had not a purpose to pass by Esau as touching the
communicating of grace and glory, even before he was born, which he had
concerning Pharaoh at that time before spoken of; which that he had, I prove
thus. It was said of Esau before he was born, that God hated him. What more
could be said of Pharaoh, to express his alienation from him?

Secondly, look how you qualify the hatred of God to Esau, in the same manner
may it be qualifyed toward Pharaoh, even at this time you speak of. For Gods
hatred toward Esau, you qualify thus. God had a purpose to deal with him
according to his works: But say I, even then when God professed of Pharaoh
saying, For this cause have I raised thee up, etc. God had a purpose to deal
with him according to his works.

Thirdly, if therefore God had no such purpose toward Esau, (namely, to show
his power in his hardening and overthrow) because Esau was not yet born; then
belike God had no such purpose toward Pharaoh himself, while Pharaoh was not
yet born. But this is utterly untrue, for as much as Gods purposes are
eternal, and not temporal.

And in like manner, it may be proved, that if ever God had the like purpose
toward Esau, to wit, after his preferring a mess of pottage before his
birthright, or at any other time, it follows that God had the same purpose
toward Esau, even before he was born, for Gods purposes are not temporal,
but eternal.

Lastly, as for the difference you put between them, (besides the question) one
being a more fit subject for God to show his power in his hardening and
overthrow then the other, I grant it to be true in part, as touching the
hardening of them. For obduration presupposes a man of such ripeness of years,
as to have the use of reason: But this hinders not, but that God might at the
same time have a purpose to harden him in his time, as Pharaoh in his time; And
yet, why I pray was not Pharaoh as fit a subject for God to show his power in
changing his heart, as well as Saul was in the midst of his bloody
persecutions of the Church of God? And what natural man (such as I presume are
all those whom you call the world of mankind) is not a fit subject for God to
show his power in his hardening and overthrow, though he be never so moral,
yea as moral as Trajan, who raised one persecution, or Marcus Antoninus
Philosophus, who raised another, or as Aurelianus, who raised a third. It is
true, if God will move any man unto courses contrary to his corrupt
inclination, and not give him grace to master that corrupt inclination; that
man whatsoever he be, shall be a fit subject for God to show his power in
his hardening, yea, and overthrow also, if it please him. But if God move any
man never so contrariously to his corrupt inclination, and withal give him
grace to master that corrupt inclination of his, he shall be a fit subject
for God to show the power of his grace in his conversion and salvation.

You speak much of hardening, even according unto pleasure, without giving your
Reader any explication of the words, whereby he might understand your meaning,
wherein obduration consists. Surely, obduration is either the denial of grace,
or whatsoever it be, it is always joined with the denial of grace, as I take
it. But in very different manner I confess, which you distinguish not. As for
the denial of grace, that was found to have course in the first sin that was
committed both in Angels and men. For I am of Austins mind concerning the
Angels that stood, that they were Amplius adjuti then the other that fell, De
Civit. Dei. lib. 12. cap. 9. As also concerning Adams fall; that in that case,
Though God gave him posse si voluit, yet he gave him not velle quod potuit,
and these he makes several adjutoria. The like may be said of every sin that
was committed, whereas God could undoubtedly restrain from the committing of
it, and that either in a gracious manner, or in a mere natural manner. When
it is committed, his gracious restraint is not afforded, but denied rather.
What that other action is, wherein this obduration consists, and which is
joined with the denial of grace, you expound not. Suppose it be Gods moving a
man to some course contrary to his corrupt nature, either by his word, as he
moved Pharaoh to let Israel go, or by his works, or by the suggestions of
conscience; according to that Law which is written in men's hearts, is not this
usually found also as often as sin is committed contrary to light of Nature,
or light of Grace? And has not obduration consequently its course in all this?
And why you should pronounce of obduration indefinitely, That it is both the
height of man's sin, and depth of man's misery, I see no reason. Do not the
children of God sometimes feel it, and in patheticall manner complain of it,
Lord why have thou caused us to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts
against thy fear? Esaias 63. 17. What says our Savior to his Disciples? Mark
8. 17. Perceive ye not, neither understand, have ye your hearts yet hardened?
As for your phrase of inflicting obduration, that does much require
explication, which you do no where perform that I know. There is I confess
another operation of God besides those I mentioned formerly; whereby men are
given over by God, whence it follows, that they will grow harder and harder,
and that is the suspension of his admonitions, either by taking away his word,
or forbearing inward motives by his spirit, or removing his judgments and
giving outward prosperity, whereby God is said to give men over to their own
hearts lusts. But how this or any of these can be called the inflicting of
abduration, I understand not. And whereas you say it is prejudicial to Gods
Justice, to show his power in hardening Pharaoh without respect to sin, like as
to condemn him; I have already showed the great difference between condemnation
and obduration. It being never said, that God damnes whom he will, but the
Apostle plainly professing that God hardens whom he will, even as expressly
as it is said, He has mercy on whom he will; and no marvel. For God has
revealed a Law, according to which he proceeds in damning men, but you are not
able to show us a Law according to which God proceeds in the hardening of them.
For if the elect before their callings, be no better then reprobates, it is
impossible to assign a Law, according to which God proceeds in the hardening of
men, but that by the same Law, the Elect of God must be hardened also. And
hardening in the Scripture phrase is usually opposed to Gods showing mercy. It
is one thing to speak of an heart hardened, another to speak of a heart
desperately hardened. Yet if you were put to explicate your self, and show what
it is to be desperately hardened, and that of God, and there withal to prove
how Pharaoh was at the time you speak of, desperately hardened, I am persuaded
this phrase would cost you more pains then you are aware of, for the satisfying
of your self, and perhaps somewhat more for the satisfying of others. If then
God purposed to fall upon Pharaoh in his utmost wrath, etc. Surely, from
everlasting he purposed so to fall upon him: for all Gods purposes are
everlasting.

If your meaning be only to denote the precedence of such a condition of
Pharaoh in sin, to Gods falling upon him, in bringing such judgments upon his
back; but not a precedence to Gods purpose; I willingly concur with you
herein. But then the like may be said of God concerning Esau, before he was
born, to wit, that God purposed to bring such a measure of obduration and
confusion upon him after such a condition of sin. But if your meaning be (as
indeed hitherunto the genius of your opinion drives you,) namely, that upon the
foresight of some sinful condition, God did decree to bring obduration and
condemnation both upon Esau and Pharaoh, as this may be said as well of one as
of the other; here you will give us leave to dissent from you, considering how
manifestly you are found herein to dissent from your self. For if such a
foresight of sin go before Gods decree of obduration and condemnation, then
God did first decree to permit that sin, before he did. decree to harden and
condemn man for it, so that the permission of that sin in Gods intention, must
be before obduration and condemnation, and consequently last in execution:
that is, men shall first be hardened and condemned, and then suffered to commit
that sin, for which they are hardened and condemned.

Again, if Gods purpose to punish with condemnation, must necessarily
presuppose foresight of sin in God; by the same reason Gods purpose to reward
with salvation must necessarily presuppose a foresight in God of obedience, and
in this case, what shall become of the freeness of Gods grace in election? not
to trouble you with the profession of Aquinas, that never any man was so mad as
to introduce a cause of predestination, quoad actum praedestinantis. The case
is the same with introducing a cause of reprobation, quoad actum reprobantis.
For the ground of this is, only because there can be no cause of the will of
God, quoad actum volentis. Now reprobation is well known to be an act of Gods
will, as well as predestination.

Answer, But say further, that this hardening of Pharaoh, be an effect of the
like hatred of Pharaoh as of Esau; neither is it said to depend on the sin of
Pharaoh, but on the will of God, as mercy does, as the first cause thereof.

I answer, this hardening of Pharaoh, though an effect of Gods hatred of
Pharaoh, yet it is not an immediate effect of the like hatred he bare to Esau,
before he had done good or evil, but presupposes the sin of Pharaoh, viz.
his malicious hatred of Gods Church coming between. God hates no man so far
as to harden him, till he has fallen into some sin, in which, and for which
he may be hardened. Hardening being always (as far as I can perceive by
Scripture) not only a sin, and cause of sin, but a punishment of sin.

How can God be said to punish sin with sin, in hardening the creature, if sin
in Pharaoh be not presupposed to go before the hardening? It is true indeed,
this hardening of Pharaoh is referred by the Apostle to the will of God as the
first cause thereof: For otherwise the answer of the Apostle had not been
sufficient to the objection propounded, ver. 14. for there it was objected that
unrighteousness might seem to be found in God, even respect of persons to
deal so unequally with persons equal, such as Jacob and Esau were; for if
Jacob and Esau had done neither good, nor evil, when God had exalted the
younger to the participation of his free love, and to sovereignty over his
Brother, and depressed the elder to the condition of a servant, and as a
servant reserved for him just dealing, but not fatherly love; might not this
seem an unequal partiality with God, to deal so unequally with persons
equal? To resolve this doubt, the Apostle could not have cleared God from
unrighteousness by pleading the sin of Esau, which deserved that he should
be so dealt withal, for neither did Jacobs sin deserve better; and besides
the Apostle had said before, God gave out these Oracles which pronounced his
different respect of them without all consideration of good or evil in either
of them; viz. before they had done either good or evil. Therefore to satisfy
the objection, and clear Gods righteousness, the Apostle wisely alleges
testimony of Scripture, to prove Gods absolute power and ability, to show
mercy on whom he will, and whom he will to harden.

When you say this hardening of Pharaoh, though an effect Exam.
of Gods hatred of Pharaoh, yet was not an immediate effect of the like hatred
which he bare to Esau, before he had done good or evil, but presupposes the
sin of Pharaoh, your meaning seems to be this, that it is not at all an effect
of the like hatred which he bare to Esau, before he had done good or evil,
yet it is no less then the not writing of his name in the book of life, as
touching the communicating of saving grace and glory, neither do we
acknowledge it to be any more; (like as Aquinas does not) now the consequent
of this kind or measure of hatred in holy Scripture is no less, then the
worshipping of the beast, Rev. 13. 8. nothing less then the obduration of
Pharaoh. The obduration of the children of Israel, was no greater then such as
was consequent unto this, that God did not give them an heart to perceive, and
eyes to see, and ears to hear, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. And this of not giving hearts to
perceive, etc. undoubtedly, is a consequent even to that hatred which you are
content to attribute unto God, concerning Esau. But you help your self with a
complicate proposition, and fly to an immediate effect, which alone you deny
in this case, for as much as the hardening of Pharaoh (as you say) presupposed
sin committed by him, but very improvidently: For if it be not an immediate
effect of the like hatred that God bare unto Esau, then in accurate
consideration it is to be acknowledged an effect thereof. Only there is some
effect thereof more immediate then this, and what I pray was that? was it
Pharaohs sin? for of no other do you make the least intimation; the more
improvident is your expression, intimating thereby that Pharaohs sin was a more
immediate effect in Pharaoh of the like hatred God bare to Esau then this
obduration.

But how do you prove that Pharaohs hardening was not an immediate effect of
the like hatred which God bare to Esau? to wit, because it presupposed sin. But
I deny this Argument, neither do you (discoursing at large) give your self to
the proving of it; but only suppose it. By the same reason you might say, that
salvation is not the immediate effect of election unto salvation; because
salvation in men of ripe years presupposes faith, repentance and good works.

Nay, you may as well say, that Gods giving of grace, is not an immediate
effect of Gods love to any man; because in most men of ripe years it
presupposes many good works. In Saul it presupposed his zeal and his
righteousness according to the Law, which was unblameable. If you say that
Saul's righteousness, whatsoever it was before his calling was no fruit of his
love: I may with more probability affirm, that Pharaohs sin which preceded his
obduration, was no effect of Gods hatred. If you say, that though such
righteousness in Saul was no moving cause to God to give him saving grace: In
like manner I say, that no sin in Pharaoh was a moving cause in God to deny him
saving grace: For if it were, then either by necessity of nature, or by the
constitution of God. Not by necessity of nature; for undoubtedly God could have
pardoned this sin of his, and changed his heart, as well as he pardoned the
sins of Manasses, the sins of the Jews in crucifying the son of God, Act. 2.
the sins of Saul in persecuting Gods Saints; and changed all their hearts. Nor
by any constitution of God; for show me if you can any such constitution of
God. And if you would but explicate wherein the hardening of Pharaoh did
consist, I presume it would clearly appear, that the mere pleasure of Gods
will is the cause of it; like as it is the mere pleasure of God that he does
not harden others in like manner: But when we carry our selves in the clouds of
generallties, we are very apt to deceive not others only, (if they will be
deceived) but our selves also. Again, you seem to speak of Pharaohs hardening
mentioned Exodus 9. 16. And indeed for this cause have I appointed thee, to show
my power in thee, etc. Whereas from the first time that Moses was sent unto him
he was hardened, and that by God, according as God had told Moses beforehand,
that he would harden him. As for his sin, before ever Moses was sent unto him,
you do not take any special notice thereof at all; but whatsoever it were, as
suppose the cruel edict of his in commanding the male children of the Hebrews
to be cast into the River; like as God answered him most congruously in his
works; first causing the waters of Egypt to be turned into blood; and in the
last place making the waters of the red Sea, the grave of Pharaoh and of his
Host: was this horrible sin any less then a consequent to more then ordinary
obduration^ for even heathen men are seldom exposed to such unnatural courses.
So that if this obduration were an effect of Gods hatred, but not immediate;
supposing sin according to the manner of your Discourse; then you must be put
to devise some other sin as precedent to this obduration. And whereas that sin
also cannot be denied to be a consequent to Gods denial of effectual grace to
abstain from sin, we shall never come to an end, till the cause of all these
obdurations be at length resolved into original sin; And what share I pray you
has the world of mankind therein, which Gods elect have not? When you tell us
the hardening is a punishment of sin, it were very fit you should deal plainly,
and tell us in what operation of God this work of hardening does consist, which
I make no doubt, would clear all. All confess that God is not the cause of
hardness of heart in any man, but man being borne in hardness of heart, Ezekiel.
36. 3. 1. God is said to harden, not infundendo malitiam, sed non infundendo
gratiam: By leaving him thereunto, whereby it comes to pass that naturally it
is increased, especially in case a man be moved to courses contrary to his
corrupt humors, whether by Gods word, or by his works, and God does not by
grace correct those corrupt humors, which are so contrariant to good motions;
good motions, I mean such as have their course only in the way of instruction
and persuasion; In this case thus to move and to deny grace is to harden. But
when God does forbear thus to move, and gives men over to follow the swing of
their own lusts, this I confess is to harden in greater measure, and properly
a punishment. But this was not the manner of Pharaohs hardening. For long after
the ninth Chapter of Exodus we read how God continued to admonish Pharaoh by
his servant Moses to let his people go; neither ceased he this Discipline
till the ten plagues or nine of them at the least were fulfilled. And like as
to show mercy is not to move only to obedience, but effectually to work men to
obedience, so the hardening of man in opposition thereunto, consists not in not
moving unto obedience, but rather in not working unto obedience, although they
be moved thereunto both in the way of instruction and exhortation. As for the
punishing of sin with sin, in the hardening of the creature, let us understand
our selves aright, and not confound our selves when we need not. Is it a sober
speech to say that God punishes his denial of grace, with denial of Grace?
or that God punishes the sins of the heathen with the denial of that grace,
which they never enjoyed?

But as for the punishing of sin with sin, this is a large field of Gods
providence consisting in diverse kinds, and it is no way fit to consider them
without distinction. God made the unnaturalness of Senacheribs Sons, a scourge
to chastise Senacheribs unnaturalness toward God; one man's sinful act to be
the punishment of another. Here is one kind utterly distinct from that you
treat of.

Again, some say, (and I think justly) and Austin acknowledges it, that every
man's sin may be a just punishment unto him in respect of a former, as Romans 1.
25. When men for their Idolatry were given over to vile affections, to defile
themselves in abominable manner, it is said that herein they received in
themselves, such recompense of their error, as was meet. So 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10,
11. Because men received not the truth of God with love, God is said to send
them strong delusions, that they should believe lies. Now seeing this
concerns the providence of God in evil, which is very secret, it were very
fit that you should declare your opinion hereabout, and show what operation of
God it is, wherein consists the administration of this providence. When first,
the one committed Idolatry contrary to the light of Nature, and the other
received not the truth with love contrary to the light of grace: neither the
one nor the other had any saving grace; and therefore, it is not decent to say
that God exposed the one to do things inconvenient, the other to believes
lies, and herein punished them for their former misdemenour, by denying unto
them that which they never enjoyed. For to punish is either to inflict evil,
which formerly they suffered not, or to withdraw some good which formerly they
enjoyed. Now how God does expose unconscionable Christians unto errors of
Faith, is easily comprehended. For whereas unconscionable Christians apprehend
the truth which they do enjoy, but in a natural and carnal manner, they may
easily be withdrawn from it, either by persecution or by seduction: Now it is
in Gods power to send persecutors or seducers amongst them, and thereby expose
them to the embracing of lies, for not embracing his truth with love; or by
withdrawing good Pastors and conscionable teachers from them: and then men
being naturally more prone to error then to truth, especially in matter of
Salvation; we see hereby apparently how God can punish sin with sin in this
kind, not by denial of grace which they never enjoyed, but by denying some
outward means of grace which formerly they enjoyed. And withal it appears that
this is nothing to our present purpose, who treat of obduration, as it
consists in, or is joined with the denial of saving Grace, in proper
opposition to the showing of mercy; or affording saving grace. As touching the
other examples wherein the administration of Gods providence is more obscure,
while he punishes sin with sin; I say also that Gods punishing consists in
denying, or not maintaining some kind of grace, or rather not so much to be
called grace as a natural restraint, not from sin in general, (for that
cannot be but by saving grace) but from some sins in special, which are foul
in the judgment of a natural man's conscience; such as are those unnatural
defilements the Apostle speaks of Romans 1. Now God in a natural manner
restraines men from such excess, either for fear of shame of the world, or by
reason of some natural detriment that may arise thereby, or by the ministry
of his Angels restraining the temptations of Satan in this kind; And it is
found by experience that Nemo repent fit turpissimus, but they grow to
extremes by degrees, and the longer a man lives, the worse he grows, if grace
correct not the course of corrupt nature, according to that saying, Nemo senex
metuit Jovem. Now if God shall forbear this restraint, and give them over to
the power of Satan, they shall be exposed to the commission of such abominable
things, and therein they shall receive in themselves a just recompense of their
former errors. And therewithal we see how this case is as extravagant from
our present purpose in discoursing of obduration as the former. And you
confess that the hardening of Pharaoh is referred by the Apostle to the will of
God; but withal you add, that it is referred thereto, by him, as to the first
cause thereof, whereas no such distinction or limitation suitable is expressed
or employed by the Apostle; but only for the advantage of your own opinion, you
are pleased thus to shape it. And it is very strange that the Apostle should
utterly omit such a cause as is of a most satisfying nature, and give himself
to the pleading of that, which affords so little satisfaction in the judgment
of flesh and blood, such as it seems they relish most of, with whom the Apostle
enters upon this his Dialogue; neither does the Apostle refer this to Jacob
and Esau only, as you fashion it (to hold up the difference you put between
Gods hatred of Esau before he was born, and his hatred of Pharaoh;) but to the
obduration of Pharaoh also, nay, more properly to that, his obduration alone
being expressed, and the Apostle being upon an answer to an objection arising
from the Apostles Doctrine concerning Gods sovereignty and liberty to harden
whom he will.

Besides this, you do not well to qualify the difference God puts between
Jacob and Esau, as if it consisted only in making Esau Jacobs servant, and
Jacob Esaus Lord; according to your opinion it extends further then this, even
to the granting of such grace to Jacob as should be accompanied with
salvation, and denying of the same to Esau, whereupon infallibly followed
condemnation. It is true, God is just in dealing with Esau, and God is as just
every whit, in dealing with Jacob; for he deals with each according to the
Law himself made. But God showed mercy also unto Jacob in providing a Savior
to die for him, and in circumcising his heart, and making him to perform the
condition of life, he showed no such mercy unto Esau.

You see well how incongruous it were to plead the sin of Esau, why he should
be so dealt withal, seeing Jacob at that time deserved no better. But why do
you not observe, that this Discourse of the Apostle, has every way as pregnant
a reference to the obduration of Pharaoh, or of any one that is hardened, as to
Gods dealing with Esau?

Again, suppose some are not so bad as Pharaoh was, when God hardens Pharaoh,
and does not harden others, but rather shows them mercy, will you say the
reason hereof is because these deserved better at the hands of God then
Pharaoh? Do you not perceive how this Doctrine carries you ere you are aware,
to trench upon the freeness of Gods grace in man's effectual vocation? Suppose
Nicodemus who sought to our Savior by night were converted, and Saul had not
been at all converted, but still hardened; would you have said that Paul was
hardened because of his sin in persecuting the Church of God, but Nicodemus
deserved better at the hands of God then Saul? Yet we are sure that Saul in
spite of all his persecution was converted, when in all probability many a
moral Jew, and nothing factious in opposing the Gospel of Christ, yea and many
a Gentile too were not converted, but perished in their sins, and in the
blindness of their mind.

If it be urged thereupon that God does harden the creature Answer.
and also hates him with a positive hatred, without all respect of sin in the
creature out of his absolute will.

I answer, in these deep counsels and unsearchable ways of God, it is safe for
us to wade no farther then we may see the light of the Scriptures clearing our
paths, and the grounds thereof paving our ways, and as it were chalking it out
before us. The Scripture tells us, That God hardens whom he Romans 11. 1. 8. 9
10. compared with Psalm. 69. 21, to 28. See also Rom 1. 26 27, 28 Psalm. 81. 11,
12.
will.

And again, sin is the cause in which, and for which God does harden any: both
which will stand together.

That as God shows mercy on whom he pleases; so he hardneth whom he
pleases, out of his absolute will. Yet hardneth none but with respect of sin
going before. For,

First, when we speak of the reprobate with comparison of the elect, they are
both alike sinners: And therefore if the question be, why God hardneth the
reprobate, and does not harden, but show mercy on the Elect? Here no cause can
be rendered of this different dealing, but only the will and good pleasure of
God; sin is alike common to both, and cannot be alleged as the cause of this
diversity. Idem qua idem semper facit idem. But when we speak of the
Reprobates alone considered in themselves: If the question be, why God is
pleased to harden them; The answer is always truly, and safely given; It
pleased God to harden them for their sins. And which is yet more, when God is
said to harden a wicked man for his sin, it is not sin that moved God primarily
to harden him; but his absolute will it was to harden him for his sin; for what
sin could God see in the creature to provoke him to harden it, but what he
might have prevented by his providence, or healed by the blood of Christ, if it
had so seemed good to his good pleasure? When therefore God does harden a
creature for his sin, it is because it is his good pleasure, even his absolute
will so to harden him. To will a thing absolutely, and yet to will it on this
or that condition, may well stand together in many a voluntary agent, when the
condition is such, as that the will might easily help, if it so pleased. As if
a man should cast off a servant for some disease he has, which he might
easily heal if it pleased him: or break his vessel for some such uncleanness
which he could easily rinse out; Both these may well be said of him at once,
that he cast off his servant for his disease, and brake his vessel for its
uncleanenesse, and yet might he cast out his servant and break his vessel,
and both out of his good pleasure, and out of his absolute, and his free will.

It is true; the Word of God is a Lantborn unto our feet, and a Light to our
paths, and it is fit we should rest contented herewith Exam.
for discovering unto us the whole counsel of God. Now this Word of God
plainly teaches us, that God bardneth whom he will. Now I presume you do not
doubt, but that Romans 9. 18.
God out of his absolute will, shows mercy on whom he will. Nay, I can hardly
believe but that your opinion is, that like as God out of his absolute will
granted saving grace to Jacob: so out of his absolute will he denied saving
grace to Esau. And still does to those whom you account the world of mankind.

And I have already showed that the denial of this grace can be no
punishment; For as much as punishment consists, either in inflicting evil,
or in denying some good which formerly was granted them. But in denying saving
grace to the world of mankind, he does not deny them any thing which they
formerly enjoyed.

I have already showed, what that hardening is which is for sin, and wherein it
does consist, not in denying saving grace, which they never enjoyed, but in
denying that natural restraint from some foul sin, which formerly they
enjoyed, as I exemplifyed it in that, Romans 1. 27. That in Romans 11. 7, 8, 9, 10,
11. is nothing for you, where there is no mention of sin as the cause of their
obduration. As for that in Psalm. 69. 21. Their blinding is referred to their
giving unto Christ Gall in his meat, and in his thirst vinegar to drink. I
pray consider: Were they not even then blinded, when they persecuted Christ
unto death? And yet notwithstanding some of these were converted, Act. 2.

But upon this their opposition unto Christ, God did proceed to blind them
more and more, but how? Not by denying saving illumination, for this they never
enjoyed, it was denied them, from the first to the last.

But by withdrawing from them the means of illumination more and more, as
namely the preaching of Gospel, and the working of miracles, and the giving
them over unto the power of Satan. This also is to give them over to their own
hearts lust, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. by ceasing to admonish them of the error of
their ways, either by his word, or by his judgments and chastisements in his
works. That God does harden out of his absolute will, and yet hardens none but
for sin, cannot be avouched in my judgment without manifest contradiction. If
they are not contradictions; Then those also are not, God has mercy on whom
he will, yet God has mercy on none, but in respect of their good works going
before.

Secondly, by the same reason it may be said, that God condemns men out of
his absolute will, and yet he condemns none but for sin, yet you shall never
read that God condemns whom he will.

Thirdly, if God does harden out of his absolute will, then also he did
purpose to harden of his absolute will. Whence I infer that then God did not
purpose to harden for sin. For Gods purpose to harden only in respect of sin,
is commonly accounted (and that by your self) a will conditionate, and a will
conditionate is opposite to a will absolute.

Lastly, I deny that God does harden for their sins, as hardening denotes a
denial of saving grace; For to harden for sin is to punish, but to deny saving
grace to them that never had saving grace, is not to punish them; to leave a
man in the state wherein he finds him, is not to punish him. And therefore
when Epaminondas ran his Javelin through a Sentinel whom he found in sleep,
saying, I did but leave him as I found him, because sleep is usually said to
be Mortis Imago, the Image of death, had he no better Apology for his fact
then this, he had no way freed himself from injustice. If God may harden man
for sin, and yet sin shall not be a primary cause moving God to harden him, by
the same reason, though God condemns man for sin, it is not necessary, that
sin should be a primary cause moving God to condemn him, which is directly
contrary to your tenet in the point of reprobation. And this consideration of
your own, if you hold your self unto it attentively, may bring you into the
right way, from which you have erred, and the want of it has been a means I
fear to confirm many in their errors. We acknowledge it to be Gods absolute
will to condemn for sin, but withal we say it is his absolute will to permit
whom he will to sin, and continue in sin by denying saving grace to raise them
out of sin. And this denial of grace cannot be for sin, as I have already
proved. To harden a man, in opposition to Gods showing mercy on him: we take
to be nothing else then his refusal to cure him. Now let any man judge
whether it be a decent speech to say, that because a man is sick, therefore
God will not cure him.

In the cases proposed by you, of casting a servant off for a disease which he
can cure if he list, or breaking a vessel for some filthiness which one may
cleanse if he will; whether this be not to be resolved into the absolute
will of the Master, I am content to appeal to every sober man's judgment:
although the comparisons are not congruous to the case we have in hand; for as
much as the casting of a servant off, is distinct from the not curing of him;
the breaking of a vessel is distinct from the cleansing of it. But the
hardening of a man, in opposition to Gods showing mercy on him is nothing
distinct from Gods refusing to cure him. If the question were proposed thus;
Why will not a man cleanse his vessel when he is able to cleanse it? why will
he not heal his servant when he has power to heal him? Is it a good reason
to say, therefore he heales him not, because he is sick? therefore he
cleanses not his vessel, because it is unclean? Neither is it a more sober
speech to say, therefore God hardens a man because he is a sinner; For it is
as much as to say, therefore he refuses to cleanse him from his sin, because
he finds him unclean by reason of his sin.

Answ. The want of considering this point, has as I conceive it, entangled the
Doctrine of predestination with needless difficulties, and exposed it to rash
and hard censures in the minds of gainsayers. Then it may be said there was
no cause of that objection, Why complains he, and who can resist his will?
or at least of that answer to, why does he yet complain? Romans 9. 20, 21, 22.

I answer, that objection propounded by the Apostle, Why does he yet complain?
for who has resisted his will? does not arise upon occasion of Gods preferring
Jacob before Esau, but upon the latter part of the Corollary going immediately
before, v. 18. Whom he will he hardneth; for if it be God that hardneth the
creature, and that according to his absolute will, then might the hardened
creature say, what fault is there in me to be so hardened? Why does God
complain of me for my hardness and impenitency? Who has resisted his will?

To make this objection colorable, we need not say as you seem to imply, that
the Apostle gave occasion of it, by ascribing the hardening of Pharaoh and other
reprobates to Gods absolute will, and without all respect to sin; yet the
creature hardened, is wont to plead with God about it, Esa. 63. 17. you shall
there see Gods own people to err, and upon their error, to have their hearts
hardened from Gods fear, and both done by God, and yet the people expostulate
with God about it, which if Gods own people may do reverently, is it any
wonder if the reprobates do the same upon the same occasion petulantly and
profanely?

But the answer of the Apostle to the objection propounded, clears the whole
matter; For, as a man would justify the severe proceedings of a Master of a
College, in refusing to elect an unworthy person, and in stead thereof
expelling him the College by pleading, first, the liberty or authority of his
negative voice: Secondly, the desert of the person refused and expelled. So the
Apostle beats down the insolency of the objection, and pleads the justice
of Gods proceedings against Reprobates hated and hardened, from, first, the
Sovereignty of God over his creature, ver. 20, 21. secondly, the due deserts of
persons being vessels of wrath, and fitted for destruction, ver. 22.

What these needless difficulties are, wherewith the Doctrine Exam.
of predestination is entangled, by the Doctrine of them whom you impugn, you
do not express, nor the hard and harsh censures which are passed upon it,
that by due comparing of the one to the other, we might examine how justly
such censures are pronounced.

But of what nature your opinion is, how inconsistent in it self; on how little
reason it is grounded; what consequences it draws after it, as also what
causeless fears you raise unto yourself; and above all, and which is worst of
all, how you deal with Scripture in this argument, to serve your turn, I leave
it to your conscience to judge, not to mention how this Discourse of yours is
found to harden many in the way of error, and to offend others in the way of
truth.

Indeed there were no cause of any such objection as that, Romans 9. 29. if so
be God hardens no man but for sin, and withal it is just with God to harden
men in their sine, and less cause of such an answer, Romans 9. 20, 21, 22. No
man, I think, makes any doubt but that the objection, Why does he complain?
for who has resisted his will? arises from the 18 ver. where it is said, that
God as he has mercy on whom he will, so he hardneth whom he will, even as
he hardened Pharaoh; but yet you do not shape the objection right, when you
shape it thus; What fault is there in me to be hardened? which is in effect as
if you would shape it thus; Wherein then have I deserved to be hardened? For
the negative to this, namely, that God does not harden upon desert, is that
which the Apostle avoucheth; Like as neither does he show mercy upon desert.
But like as upon the mere pleasure of his will, he shows mercy on some: So,
according to the good pleasure of his will, he hardneth others. But well might
he say, why then does he complain of the hardness of my heart, and my
impenitency; or rather the Apostle proposes it, in reference to the fruits of
man's hardness of heart and impenitency, such as God complains of, Esa. 1. I
have nourished and brought up a people, and they have rebelled against me. And
Esa. 56. All the day long have I stretched out mine hands to a rebellious
people, that walk in a way which is not good, even after their own
imaginations. Or as if Pharaoh, hearing of this ministry of Gods providence,
should say, Why does he complain of the hardness of my heart in not letting
Israel go, when he has hardened my beart that I should not let Israel go,
and who has resisted his will?

I have already showed that this hardening of Pharaoh, and so likewise of all
reprobates, as it consists in denying of saving grace, in congruous opposition
to Gods mercy, proceeds merely according to the good pleasure of Gods will:
And the Apostle plainly signifies as much, when he says, That like as God
has mercy on whom be will, so he hardneth whom be will; Neither does he
take into consideration any sin of theirs as the cause of hardening, either in
the proposition delivered by him, or in answer to the objection arising
there-hence. Why then should we be moved with your bare word in saying, we
need not say that the Apostle gave occasion of this objection, by ascribing the
hardening of Pharaoh and other reprobates to Gods absolute will, and without all
respect to sin, as the deserving cause thereof. Neither do you give any reason
of that you avouch, in saying, that albeit God does not harden but in respect
of sin; yet the creature will plead or expostulate; as indeed it is most
unreasonable to ask why God does complain of hardness of heart, and the fruits
thereof; when it has been showed that this hardness of heart has been
brought upon man for his own sin, and no exception taken against it. But when
out of Gods absoluteness men are hardened, then, and not till then may it
justly seem strange that God should complain of the hardness of men's hearts,
and the fruits thereof. As for the place of Esa. 63. 17. Wherein you suppose
Gods people to expostulate with God for hardening them, notwithstanding they
suppose that God hardens them for their sin, this is to beg the question, and
not to prove ought, there being no evidence of any such acknowledgment as you
suppose, namely, that God does harden them for their sins. Yet if there were
any such acknowledgment, it would not forthwith make for your purpose unless
they should acknowledge as much of that obduration, the Apostle speaks of,
where he sets it in opposition to Gods showing mercy. To serve your turn, you
take liberty to interpret the coherence of these parts, to err from thy ways,
and to be hardened against thy fear: as if the former were the cause of the
other, upon no other ground that I know, but that thus it shall stand in more
congruity with your opinion. Whereas, indeed there is a far greater
probability, that hardening against the fear of God should be the cause of the
error of our ways, then that error of our ways should be the cause of our
hardening against the fear of God; especially taking hardening, not confusedly
hand over head, but distinctly in opposition to Gods showing mercy in man's
conversion; I take them only as several expressions of the same things
consisting of an inward corrupt disposition as the root, and that I conceive
to be the want of the fear of God; and the fruit hereof, which is aberration
from the good ways of the Lord.

And they expostulate with God, for not correcting all this by his grace, as by
his Covenant of grace, which he has made with them, he has engaged himself
hereunto, even to keep them from going astray, like a good Shepherd, and to put
his fear into their hearts, that they shall never depart away from him; Jer.
32. 40.
Which kind of expostulation is nothing answerable to that which the Apostle
proposes to answer, Romans 9. 16. And I may well wonder what you meant to yoke
them together: Non been inaequales veniunt ad aratra juvencae. The children of
God do not expostulate with God for his complaining of their disobedience,
unthankfulness, and rebellions against him, though they heartily wish they had
never provoked him, and expostulate with him for not preserving them by his
grace, from such courses of provocation of him, even of the eyes of his glory.
The wicked have no such desire to be preserved from sin and sinful courses,
which are unto them as sweet bits, which they roll under their tongues;
Although when they hear of the Doctrine of obduration and his power to harden
them, and in hardening they may take advantage thereby to blaspheme God, and to
plead Apology for themselves; Belike then you acknowledge that God has power
to harden without respect to sin, for to this purpose tends your comparative
illustration.

But then you must be driven to deny that obduration is a punishment; seeing
it is impossible that just punishments can have course but with respect to sin,
as a meritorious cause thereof. That God beats down the objectour, and
pleads the justice of Gods proceedings against Reprobates, from the sovereign
authority of God over his creatures is most true, ver. 20, 21. But that he
pleads the due desert of the persons, ver. 22. thereby to justify God in
hardening whom he will, as positively avouched, but so far from truth, as
that it involves plain contradiction; no less then if the Apostle after he
had said that God has mercy on whom he will, should afterward take a course
to justify God herein, by saying that God has mercy on none, but in respect
to their former good works. Nay, much more contradictions, for as much as no
good works in the state of nature or grace, can be meritorious of reward. But
sins may be and are truly meritorious of punishment. In the 22 verse. there is
not the least mention of obduration, much less any mention of the cause
thereof, least of all, any reversing of the former cause (expressed ver. 18.
and justified ver. 20. from the authority of God the Creator, having power to
make his creatures of what fashion he will,) and substituting a new in the
place thereof. And although all that are vessels of wrath are sinners, and
consequently deserve punishment, yet obduration, in opposition to showing
mercy, consisting in the denial of saving grace, is no punishment, for as much
as God does not thereby withdraw any saving grace from them, which formerly
they enjoyed; and as for inflicting evil, that has no place in obduration,
for as much as all confess that God does not obdurate any man, infundendo
malitiam, but non infundendo gratiam. Neither is it sin either original, or
actual, that which constitutes a man a vessel of wrath, as a vessel of wrath
is opposite to a vessel of mercy. For sin both original and actual is
incident to the Elect as well as to the Reprobate: but like as Gods showing
mercy makes a man a vessel of mercy: so Gods denial of mercy, finally
constitutes a vessel of wrath, exposing him to final infidelity or
impenitency, which sin alone is not found in any of the elect. It seems you
think they are fitted to destruction by themselves, as if vasa the vessels did
separate, and not Herus the Master rather. Sin alone makes a man obnoxious to
condemnation as deserving it, and so there is sin in the best of Gods children,
to drive them to confess, that if the Lord should be extreme to mark what is
done amiss, none were able to abide it: Yet the sin of the Reprobates you
confess God could prevent, and not preventing it, yet could cure it by the
blood of Christ, so that though sin be granted to be a cause hereof, yet a
more original cause (though nothing culpable) must be acknowledged to be the
denial of Grace; as our Savior budgeth not to profess to the faces of some;
Ye therefore hear not my words, because ye are not of God, and Joh. 12. 40.
Therefore they could not believe, because Esaias says, He has blinded their
eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, and
understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and I should heal them.

All this while have I maintained, the safenesse of that exposition Answer.
which interprets Gods hatred of Esau, of a less degree of love, and the
same word is also used in the same sense; But yet so understand me, I conceive
this less degree of Love, to have somewhat in it of the true nature of Hatred.
For as the nature of Love stands in affecting communion with one, and
communicating good unto him: So likewise the nature of hatred stands in the
contrary to this, either in affecting separation from one, or inflicting evil
on him, or at least in not vouchsafing communion, or communicating good unto
him. So is a man said to hate his brother, that will not vouchsafe him such an
office of brotherly communion, as that he will communicate a kindly reproof
to him for his sin.

Now I would easily grant, that before Esau had done good or evil, God so
hated him, as that he did not communicate to him that fellowship with Christ,
which by Gods election and donation the members of the body have with him their
head in Gods account, even before the world was. Neither did God vouchsafe that
plentiful communication of his free grace unto him, as might in time by a
real actual power draw him to Christ and to live by him: Yea God was pleased
to set him in a state further remote, and separate from him then his elect
brother: Even in the estate of a servant to the elect: and in stead of
communicating free grace, he purposed to deal with him rather according to
his works, by a covenant of Justice; For both these are employed in Gods putting
of Esau into the state of a servant.

First, the denial of such grace and fatherly love to him as is reserved for
children.

Secondly, the (not) refusing of him to just dealing, such as is due to
servants according to their works.

I look to receive from you some proof that the word Hatred Exam.
is used in the same sense, to wit, to signify a less degree of Love, for to
my judgment, it is a wild interpretation; for in this sense God might be
said to hate every one of Gods elect excepting Christ, for he loves them all
in a less degree then he loved Christ, and one in a less degree then
another, according as degrees of Love attributed to God are to be estimated,
that is, not quoad affectum, (for undoubtedly there are no degrees to be found
in the nature of God) but quoad affectum, and undoubtedly God alots one degree
of grace to one, and another degree to another, and as he deals with them in
communicating of grace, so in the communicating of Glory also. Love and hatred,
undoubtedly are opposite contrarily, and not only contradictorily. And because
quot modis dicitur unum oppositorum, tot modis dicitur and alterum; as love of
complacency consists in delectation, so hatred opposite is of displicency or
aversation. And as love of beneficence consists in wishing or doing good: So
hatred opposite consists in wishing or doing evil to another.

Here at length I observe the place you stand upon to prove that hatred in holy
Scripture, does sometimes signify a less degree of love, and that seems to
be Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, thou shall
plainly rebuke thy brother, and suffer him not to sin. And to serve your turn
in this interpretation, you shape a correspondent practice of Love consisting
in vouchsafing communion; which unless it be a communion of reproof, is
nothing to your purpose, who desire to shape hatred in contradiction thereunto.
And yet hatred, all conceive to be much more then not to love. But were all
this yielded unto you, yet does it fall short of your purpose; for albeit he
that forbears to reprove his brother, does him harm, yet if he do not intend
him harm, he cannot be said to hate him. For in Scripture phrase hatred
denotes an intention to harm, as Deuteronomy. 4. 42. Where we read that certain
Cities were appointed, That the slayer might fly unto, which had killed his
Neighbor at unawares, and hated him not in times past. But if you measure
hatred by the harm done, why should the sparing of reproof to preserve a
brother from sin, and consequently from incurring the wrath of God, be so
qualifyed as to be accounted a less degree of love, and not a fruit of
hatred: for consider I beseech you, is not this far worse then to mischief a
man by cutting off an arm or limb? So that albeit Scripture did plainly
profess that not to reprove a neighbor, but suffer him to sin, were an act of
hatred, yet it follows not hence, that hatred in this case signifies only a
less degree of love. For certainly, such an act (to wit, in sparing reproof)
is worse by far then to give a man a box on the ear; yet I presume you will
not interpret that to be hatred only in such a sense, as signifying a less
degree of Love. For certainly the fruits of love are the communications of
good, and not any contumelious inflicting of evil. But by your leave I do not
find that this is the Scriptures meaning in the place you aim at; but rather
in my judgment it seems to meet with a corrupt course of the world, prone to
conceive none to be their greater enemies, then such as reprove them. To
prevent this, the Lord forbids the one, to wit, the hating of our brother, and
as expressly commands the other, to wit, to reprove our Neighbor, manifesting
thereby that reproof may be performed, without any just suspicion of hatred
in him that reproves. In fine, this interpretation of hatred which here you
make, is embraced by Vossius in his Pelagion Story; but he does not betray
that he is beholding to Cornelius de Lapide the Jesuit for it, in his
Commentaries on the ninth to the Romans. And he brings other manner of
instances to prove it then you do. And so does Junius also in Genesis 29. 31.
though he were far enough off from applying it in the same sense to Esau, as
his son in law Vossius does, and the Jesuit does before Vossius.

In few words your meaning is, God did so far hate Esau, even before he had
done good or evil, that he did not destinate unto him any saving grace as he
did unto Jacob. May you not as well say that he did not destinate unto him
glory, as he did to Jacob? And even this in Aquinas his language is to hate,
where he interprets Gods hatred of Esau before he was born. Yet you might
be pleased to go a little further, and to affirm that God did not only not
destinate unto him any saving grace, but also that God was purposed to deny him
such saving grace as he granted unto Jacob, and consequently he purposed to
deny him glory also; if you be pleased to gratify your self in yielding to
this truth, we will willingly gratify you in acknowledging that
notwithstanding all this, God purposed to deal with Esau according to his
works.

As for that phrase of yours of putting him into the estate of a servant;
though it be of little material consideration in this place, yet I have
sufficiently discussed it, in examining your Answer to the first Doubt.

The Fifth Doubt.
Question, 5.
HOw may it appear that all have a sufficiency of coming to Christ, since no
man can come without drawing? Joh. 6. 44. 65. and he who is drawn shall be
raised to life; or since no man can come except it be given him of the Father.
Which speech is a reason why we ought not to murmr or be offended if some
believe not, Romans 11. 7. and since none but the Elect by the means of help
and power, Revelat. 2. 15.

I no where say, nor ever thought that all men had a sufficiency Answ.
of power to believe or to come to Christ. Far be it from me to avouch such
ungracious Pelagianisme; But this I say, God gives to the men of this world,
this world, I say, as opposed to the elect, such means and helps of seeking
after the Lord, and finding mercy from him, that they are sufficiently enabled
by him to do much more then they do, that way, they are deprived of those
drawing and effectual means without which none can come, and with which none
ever failed to come to Faith and Repentance: Else how shall we understand
these and sundry such like places of Scripture, Act. 17. 25, 26, 27. Romans 1.
19. to 25. Romans 2. 4, 5. 14, 15. Luke 16. 11, 12. Act. 1. 51, 52. Act. 13. 46.
Matthew. 22. 37, 38. Luke 19. 41, 42. Ezekiel. 24. 13. Prove. 1. 20. to 30. 2 Chronicles.
36. 15, 16. Hose. 11. 4. Esa. 5. 3, 4, 5. Job 33. 14. to 18. Joh. 16. 69? From
all which places I gather four Conclusions, pertinent to the point in hand.

First, That God offers to the men of this world, helps and means, either of
the knowledge of God in Nature, or of grace in Christ: and that to this end, to
lead them to Repentance and Salvation. Thus is God said to manifest to the
Gentiles, that which may be known of him by his works, and by his Law written
in their hearts, and that to this end, to make them to seek after the Lord; to
lead them to Repentance, to withdraw them from their courses, to heal their
pride and to save their souls from the pit. Thus God offered to the carnal
Israelites means of grace to purge them, to turn them, Prove. 1. 13. to gather
them, Mat. 23. 37. to convince them, Joh. 16. 8, 9. To draw them with cords of
man and bands of love, Hos. 11. 4. To dress them to bring forth good fruit,
Esa. 5. 4.

Secondly, That the means God uses for these good ends, are in some measure
sufficient (if they be not hindered by men) to bring them to the attainment of
these ends: for when God says himself, he uses these means for these ends;
for us to say, these means are not sufficient for these ends, seems to me
to derogate from the wisdom and sufficiency of God, whose works are all of them
perfect, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. and so sufficient for the ends for which he wrought
them. Yet God forbid I should doubt of that which our Savior tells the Jews,
No man can come to Christ, except the Father draw him, Joh. 6. 44. by the same
Almighty power and authority, whereby he sent Christ into the world.

The whole tenor of your Answer in clearing the Fifth Exam.
Doubt looks this way, as if you maintained a sufficiency of power in those
whom we account Reprobates to perform such things, upon the performance
whereof they should be saved. I confess you do not make any express mention
of Faith, but of obedience in general, and of repentance; which I presume you
will acknowledge, will be inseparable from Faith. And that you do acknowledge
a sufficiency in them to perform Obedience and Repentance requifite to
Salvation, I prove thus:

You maintain a true desire in God, of their Salvation; and how can this stand
with, the denial of such sufficiency as is in his power to grant?

Again, You expressly maintain, that there is in God, a serious and fervent
affection, not concerning their Salvation only, but their Conversion also.
Which how it can stand with a denial of sufficient power to turn unto God, I
comprehend not.

Thirdly, You plainly affirm, that mankind slights to work out with the
Trinity, their salvation. Now no man can be said to slight the doing thereof,
for the doing whereof he has no power. You maintain there is in a reprobate
man's power to work out his salvation with the Trinity.

Fourthly, the comparison you make to represent Gods different dealing with his
Elect, and with the reprobate, does intimate as much. The servant you say is
only persuaded to yield himself to be cut, that he may be cured of the
stone, yet earnestly and forcibly persuaded: The son over and above is taken by
the Father and bound and cut, that he may be cured. Now as it is in the power
of the servant to yield to be cut, that he may be cured, so do you hereby
intimate that it is in the power of a Reprobate to yield to be converted, that
God may heal him.

Fifthly, you do acknowledge that Gods purpose to give life unto the world
upon condition of obedience, does imply that God should accordingly give means
to help them to the performance of this obedience; for you plainly signify
that God purposing to give life unto the world upon condition of obedience,
does accordingly give means to help them to the performance of this obedience.
Now I say, Gods purpose to give life unto the world, upon condition of
obedience, does no more imply that God must accordingly give means to help them
to the performance of this obedience, then that God must accordingly give
ability by the help of such means to perform obedience. And indeed, to what end
tends the giving of means to help them to the performance of obedience, if they
have not ability by the help of those means to perform obedience? In this very
Section you profess the means which God affords are sufficient to bring them
to those gracious ends, which God (you say) intends, if they be not hindered by
men. Which does imply that in your opinion, the men of the world have power to
give way unto them, and not hinder them. Yet I confess you are very sparing to
confess so much. But the more you are to blame by the face of your discourse
to bespeak such opinions in your Readers, and to draw unto them, the
maintenance whereof you dare not undertake your self. But let us consider what
you deliver hereupon. And First, though you do not attribute unto a natural
man sufficiency, and power to believe: yet if you do attribute unto him
sufficiency of power to perform ought, upon performance whereof grace shall be
given him, whereby he shall be enabled to believe and to come to Christ, you
shall even in this be guilty of that, which you call ungracious Pelagianisme.
Now as for your opinion of the power of a naturall-man, you here express it
partly negatively, partly affirmatively. You conf^^^, they are deprived of
those drawing and effectual means, without which none can come, and with
which, none ever failed to come to Faith and Repentance. Touching which I have
something to oppose concerning the phrase, and something concerning the
assertion it self.

The word means used by you, and which you call effectual, we commonly
understand as things outward; such as either the Word of God, and the Ministry
thereof, or the Works of God and the manifestation of his providence therein.
But you seem to go further, and comprehend thereby the effectual operation of
Gods Spirit, which is very ambiguous, and being delivered in the general, is
the fitter to serve a man's turn, sometimes in the one, sometimes in the other
signification. As touching the assertion it self, it utterly overthrowes all
that you have delivered in clearing the fifth Doubt. For with what sobriety can
God be said to entertain an earnest and serious affection, concerning their
conversion, (which is as much as to say concerning their repentance) being
resolved to deprive them of those drawing and effectual means, without which
none can come to repentance?

Again, how can God be said to entertain an earnest and serious affection
concerning their Salvation, being resolved to deprive them of those drawing and
effectual means, without which none can come to Repentance, and consequently
without which none can be saved? As for the affirmative part, you say the
Reprobates are sufficiently enabled by God, to do much more then they do, in
seeking after the Lord, and finding mercy from him, and that by certain means
and helps. Now in this place I conceive by means and helps you understand only
outward things, as either the administration of Gods providence in his Works,
or the ministry of his Word, and not the effectual operation of Gods Spirit,
bestowing any power upon them, which naturally they had not, though this must
needs be your meaning in the negative part of the assertion. But as touching
the assertion it self, there is no question but every natural man, has power
to do more then he does, in the way of actions natural, but in the way of
doing ought that is good, and pleasing in the sight of God, I know no power
incident to a natural man: for as much as the Apostle says, They that are in
the flesh cannot please God. Yet I confess according as the world accounts
morality, every natural man has power to do more good then he does, and to
abstain more from evil then he does, that is, he may give more Alms then
he does, he may be more temperate then he is: but whether he does that,
which for the substance of the action is accounted good; or abstaines from some
particular evil actions; yet neither the one nor the other is or can be
performed by him in a gracious, but rather in an ungracious manner; and whether
this be accounted, a seeking after the Lord, and that to find mercy from him,
I dare appeal to your own judgment; yet this is not all you maintain. For
whereas the Lord may be sought after, as the God and governor of nature only;
you further say in the next page, that there is a sufficiency of power in the
means, to lead the men of this world, to come to the knowledge of God, and to
grace in Christ.

But let us examine the places of Scripture, which you muster up in great
abundance. The first is out of Act. 17. 25, 26, 27. There we read that God is
not worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing be
gives to all, life and breath and all things. 26. And has made of one blood
all mankind, to dwell upon all the face of the earth, and has assigned the
seasons which were ordained before, and the bounds of their habitation. 27.
(...), That they should seek the Lord, if so he they might have groped after
him and found him, though doubtless he be not far from every one of us.
28. For in him we live and move, etc. This seems to be the most principal
place whereon you insist, not only by setting it in the first place, but in as
much as you deliver your opinion, in the phrase of seeking the Lord, here alone
expressed. But this does nothing serve your turn.

For first, here is no mention at all of any sufficiency and power, that
natural men either by this providence of God, or otherwise have attained unto
for seeking of the Lord. For consider I pray; the manifestation of Gods grace
in his word, is far more able to enable us to seek the Lord, then the
manifestation of his providence in his works; yet by the manifestation of his
grace in his word, it follows not that as many as are partakers thereof, are
endued with power of seeking the Lord in such sort as to find mercy from him.
I confess that to seek the Lord is a phrase of a very general signification,
not denoting any material action, but containing only a certain denomination,
which may pass upon many material actions; and this Discourse of yours is
throughout carried in such generalities, which are very apt to deceive. For in
genere latent multae aequivocationes. And for a man to rest on such, is to be
in love with his own errors. But I am confident it is only your zeal of
justifying God in his ways against the imputation cast upon him by flesh and
blood, that makes you take hold of, and content your self with such general
notions, I should think that (...) to seek the Lord, in this place, in
reference to Gods works, is of the same signification in the general with
(...), to seek the Lord, in reference to his word; that is the thing, not
whereunto we are hereby enabled, but the thing whereof we are thereby
admonished. As Verse 30. it is said, Now he admonishes every man, every where
to repent; to wit, by the preaching of his Word: He does not say, He does
enable every man, Psalm. 191. 1.
every where to repent. So; The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his handy-worke: And that which Romans 1. 20.
may be known of God, is made manifest by his works. Romans 1. And he leaves
not himself without witness, giving rain and Act. 14. 17.
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. And so here,
He has assigned the seasons which he ordained before, and the bounds of
their habitations (...), to seek the Lord, that is, as I conceive, to admonish
them to seek the Lord: forasmuch, as though the invisible things of God, are
said to be manifested by his works: yet it is in such a manner, as it requires
study and deep contemplation, to attain to these invisible things of God, in
the most indifferent measure: But say, we have power, and all men have power
to seek the Lord, that is, to search out those invisible things of God, which
are made manifest by his Works, as many Naturalists have done; and to give
instance: As Aristotle has searched after an Ens primum, a first being; and
has found out immateriall substances, and amongst them a first mover, in the
contemplation of whom the felicity of all the rest consists; and has delivered
strange conclusions concerning his Nature: Yet I deny that any man has power
natural, so to seek after the Lord, as to find mercy from him. To this
purpose it is not enough to know him as the Author of Nature, but we must
take forth, and know him as a Redeemer, and author of Grace. For I presume you
will not say that Aristotle after his most studious inquisitions after the Lord,
did find mercy from him.

Nay, this great searcher into the secrets of Nature, denied his Omnipotency,
for they could not be drawn to believe that he was able to produce any thing
out of nothing, this was the general opinion of them all in a manner. Thence
he proceeded to deny that the world had a beginning: and to maintain that God
wrought all that he wrought by necessity of nature, and not by freedom of
will. Yet this eternal power and Godhead they did acknowledge, and that he
was to be worshipped for the dignity of his nature. But not either out of
fear of punishment, or hope of reward. Such notions were rather popular then
Scholasticall, a manifest evidence that the world was brought to conceive more
soberly of the nature of God, by instinct of Nature, then by discourse of
reason. For such as followed discourse of reason most, became most Atheistical
as touching the providence of God; yet all agreed in this, that he was
incorruptible, which was sufficient to convict them of impiety, in changing the
glory of the uncorruptible God unto the similitude of the Image of a
corruptible man, and of birds, and of foure-footed beasts, and creeping things.
And did not they profit best in the School of Nature, who by the observation
of providence in the way of mercies and judgments, were driven to acknowledge
an unknown God, and to erect Altars for his worship? And as for seeking of the
Lord, so as to find him in any comfortable manner, does not the Apostle as
good as confess despair of such power in natural men, when forthwith he
adds, If so be they might have groaped after him, and found him, though
doubtless he be not far from every one of us, for in him we live, move,
Act 17. 26, 27.
and have our being. And yet as for the Apostles finding of him in this place,
I should rather think that it is in reference to the apprehension of his
nature (as the Creator of all) rather then of his goodness (as a Redeemer) so
to find mercy from him though you seem to aim at this interpretation.

Your second place is out of Romans 1. 19. to 25. That which may be known of God
is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them. Where? In his works, as
it follows. For the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and
Godhead, are seen (not by, but) from the creation of the world, being
considered in his works. If the Apostle had here added (...), to seek the Lord,
and to find mercy from him, it had been more fair for your purpose. But the
Apostle adds (...) to the intent that they should be without excuse, viz. in
a particular case, to wit, because they did not glorify God as God, but turned
the glory of the incorruptible God into the similitude of the Image of a
corruptible man, and of birds, and of fourfooted beasts, and of creeping
things. Neither do we deny but men have power to discern the nature of God, to
be incorruptible, and consequently they are inexcusable in the way of
Idolatry. But whereas Idolatry is but the third kind of blasphemy, in
attributing to the creature, that which belongs to God himself. And there are
two sorts of blasphemy besides this: One in attributing to God that which does
not become him. Another in denying unto God that which does become him; will
you say that every natural man has power to discern the nature of God in such
sort as to preserve himself from blasphemy every way?

The third place is out of Romans 2. 4, 5. Despisest thou the riches of his
bountifulness, and patience, and long sufferance, not knowing that the
bountifulness of God leads thee to repentance? 5. But thou after thine
hardness, and heart that cannot repent, heapest up unto thy self, as a
treasure, wrath against the day of wrath. Now if this does imply any ability in
man of seeking the Lord, and finding mercy from him, it must needs be in the
way of repentance. And this I confess is a clear way, both of seeking the
Lord, and of finding mercy from him. But dare you say that a natural man has
power to repent? I presume you will not, unless you frame repentance after
such a notion, as will be found to be neither seeking of the Lord, nor
finding mercy from him. And you your self here profess, that God deprives them
of those drawing and effectual means, without which none can come to
repentance. And in the very place alleged, it is expressly said of them whom
God is said to lead to repentance, that the hardness of their heart is such,
that they cannot repent.

The fourth is taken out of Romans 2. 14, 15. When the Gentiles which have not
the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law, they having not the
Law, are a law unto themselves, which show the effect of the Law written in
their heart, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts
accusing one another, or excusing. I wish things were carried with less
ostentation, and with more judgment, then to allege Scriptures, and put the
Reader upon making Arguments for them thence. For my part I see no color in
all this, to justify any power and sufficiency in a Reprobate to seek the
Lord, and to find mercy from him: though I make no question, but they have
power to abstain from many things prohibited in the Law of God, and to do
things commanded, as touching the substance of the duty commanded, or the
action forbidden: though they are far enough off from doing it for Gods sake,
and out of the love of God, with all their heart, and with all their soul, as
whom they knew not even the very best of them, 1 Cor. 1. 21. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5.

The fifth is drawn out of Luke 16. 11, 12. If ye have not been faithful in
the wicked riches, who will trust you in the true treasures? And if you have
not been faithful in another man's goods, who shall give you that which is your
own? Hence you seem to infer, that carnal men, natural men, have power and
ability to perform faithfulness in the administration of temporal riches: and
you might proceed further to infer, that by performing such fidelity, which
is in their power to perform, they should have true riches, and such as should
never be taken from them. And what is to maintain that God does dispense grace
according to works, if this be not? And yet this latter is with more
probability inferred then the former. For certainly God does reward
faithfulness in little, with the bestowing of greater gifts, as Matthew. 25. 21.
23. But albeit they that are unfaithful in little, are unworthy to have
greater gifts bestowed upon them; yet herehence it does not follow, that mere
natural men have so much power of goodness in them, as to be faithful unto
God in the use of those natural gifts which God has bestowed upon them, (yet
in spite of this unworthiness, which God finds in his Elect, before their
calling, he does nevertheless trust them with true riches. And if they were
faithful therein, they would be found faithful also in greater things. For
ver. 10. our Savior professes, That he who is faithful in the least, is
also faithful in much.

The sixth place is, Act. 7. 51, 52. Ye stiff-necked, and of uncircumcised
hearts and ears, ye have always resisted the Holy Ghost. 52. Which of the
Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? That which you stick upon (I doubt
not) is this, that they are said always to have resisted the Holy Ghost, both
they and their Fathers. We deny it not: but will you herehence infer that they
had power and ability to yield to the Holy Ghost? If this inference like you,
then you may be bold to infer in like manner, That because many resist the
Holy Ghost moving them to faith and repentance; therefore they have power and
ability to yield to the Holy Ghost in this also, that is, to believe and
repent. Yet your self profess in this very Section, that God deprives them of
those drawing and effectual means, without which none can come, to wit, to the
Lord, and find mercy from him; which yet undoubtedly they should do, did they
believe and repent. Yet I deny not, but they might have abstained from
persecuting the Prophets; but I deny that it was in the power of any of them
(being but natural men) to abstain from it in a gracious manner, and
acceptable in the sight of God. And so long as they did not abstain so, is it
fit to call it a seeking after the Lord, or finding of mercy from him? I
presume you will not deny but that many a Jew in the Apostles days were free
from faction, contenting himself to enjoy his own course quietly and peaceably,
was yet further off from grace then Paul that persecuted the Church; God
calling him in the midst of his furious pursuit, and not calling others though
far more peaceably disposed toward the Church of God then Saul.

The seventh place alleged is Act. 13. 46. Then Paul and Barnabas spoke
boldly, and said, It was necessary that the Word should first have been spoken
unto you, but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of
everlasting life, we turn unto the Gentiles. Hence you infer that these
Jews were enabled to do more then they did in seeking the Lord, and finding
mercy from him. But I would gladly know wherein that seeking of the Lord
consists? Had they not railed against Paul, (as I confess they had power to
spare that) had they not contraryed him, nor spoken against those things which
were spoken by him, as I confess they might have held their tongue; had this
been to seek the Lord more then they did? or in better manner then they did? I
think not: for they might have contained themselves from all this, nay, they
might have pretended some propensions to embrace the Gospel, which yet had it
been performed in hypocrisy, it had nothing commended them in the sight of
God. As Diasius, when he could not prevail with his brother to draw him back
to Popery, pretended some propension in himself to hearken unto him; but we
know what the issue was, even to slit his head, as the issue of Judas his
following Christ was to betray him. I think they that deal so, and through
zeal persecute the Church, as Soul did, are nothing further off from seeking
the Lord and finding mercy from him then the other. These did manifest
themselves unworthy of eternal life; do not all so, who stumble at the Word
of God, and refuse to hearken to it? For this is the condemnation of the world,
Light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather then light,
because their deeds were evil, Joh. 3. 16. Will you therehence infer, that
all such are enabled to obey it, which is as much to say, as that they are
enabled to believe and repent?

The eighth is out of Mat. 23. 37, 38. How often would I have gathered thy
children together, as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye
would not? Behold your habitation is left unto you desolate, etc. What I pray
you, is to be gathered under his wings? can it be less then to come unto
him? nay, is it not to be healed by him? since as your self observe, healing
was under his wings: and if so, to come to Christ, is to be healed by him: can
it be any thing less, then to believe and repent? And will you herehence
infer that they had power thus to come under his wings, and consequently to
believe and repent?

And yet in this very place you profess that as touching all others except the
Elect, God deprives them of those drawing and effectual means, without which
none can come to Faith and Repentance. Nay, whatsoever it be, that lies in
their power to perform besides, by the performing of it, do they come any whit
nearer to the participation of Grace? I do not find you adventure to profess
so much, for fear of falling into that which you call ungracious Pelagianisme.

The ninth is Luke 19. 41, 42. Which is of the same nature, and of no greater
force then the former, Oh that thou had even known at the least in this thy
day those things which belong unto thy peace; but now are they hid from thine
eyes. For the days shall come upon thee when thy enemies shall cast a trench
about thee, and make thee even with the ground, because thou knew not the
season of thy visitation. To know, in Scripture phrase is of a complicate
notion and signifies knowledge joined with congruous affections: and thus to
know the things that belong unto our peace, is so to know, as therewithal to
embrace them; and to know the time of our visitation, is so to know, as to
accommodate our selves thereto in agreeable conversation, as Jer. 8. 7. The
Stork in the air is said to know her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the
Crane, and the Swallow (are said) to observe the time of their coming. That
is, so to know it, as accordingly to come: so to know the time of our
visitation, is so to know it, as accordingly to come unto God when he visites
us, and according as his Visitation requires of us. Now will you herehence
infer, that they were enabled to perform all this, and so to seek the Lord? I
appeal to your own conscience, whether it might not be as justly said of
them, as Moses said of the children of Israel in the wilderness, Deuteronomy. 29. 4.
The Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to
hear, unto this day. Nay, does not our Savior himself say as much of these
Jews, Joh. 12. 39. Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias says
again. 40. He has blinded their eyes and hardened their hearts, that they
should not see with their eyes, and understand with their hearts, and should
be converted, and I should heal them. Neither will it follow hereupon that
they are excusable so much the more, although this is a very plausible
inference, for our Savior professes (notwithstanding this) that they had no
cloak for their sins, Joh. 15. 22. And indeed only such an inability does
excuse, as hereby a man is unable to do that which he fain would do^^ As for
the doing of that they did in resisting the Gospel, they had rather too much
will therein then too little, and that through the want of grace.

For as Austin wisely observes: Libertas sine gratia non est libertas, sed
contumacia. Liberty without grace, is not liberty, but wilfulness.

The tenth is, Ezekiel. 24. 13. Because I would have purged thee, and thou wast
not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness, till I have caused
my wrath to light upon thee. I should think this were spoken of Gods Elect, not
so much by observing that phrase, till I have caused my wrath to light upon
thee, but chiefly by comparing it with Ezekiel. 22. 10. I will scatter thee among
the heathen, and disperse thee in the Countries, and will cause thy filthiness
to depart from thee. It may have place, not only of the Elect, but of the
regenerate also, for even them sometimes God does cause to err from his ways,
and harden their hearts Esa. 63. 17.
against his fear. Which though they have power to repent, yet upon
supposition of obduration, and so long as that continues, it may be said that
they cannot repent. How much more may it be verifyed of natural men, in the
state of unregeneracy, that they cannot repent? And shall this any way hinder
the course of Gods judgments against them for their sins unrepented of,
because without grace it is not in their power to purge themselves from their
sins by repentance? I deny not but they have power to perform feigned
repentance, as Jer. 3. 10. And shall feigned repentance (think you) be of
force to keep off the judgments of God? or if Gods judgments shall have their
course, except they be prevented by unfeigned repentance, will it herehence
follow that natural men are enabled to perform unfeigned repentance?

The eleventh is Prove. 1. 20. to 30. Wisdom cries, etc. 20 How long will ye
love foolishness? ver. 22. Turn you at my correction, ver. 23. Because I have
called and ye have refused, etc. ver. 24. I will also laugh at your
destruction, ver. 28. Will you herehence infer that they were enabled to turn,
to hearken to wisdoms voice, and think to put a difference betwixt your
opinion, and that of the Pelagians of old, by saying that though natural men
have not power to believe and repent, yet they are enabled to do more good
then they do, in the way of seeking the Lord and finding mercy from him? and
pin upon every place you allege, such a distinction as this, which you no
where manifest sufficiently to understand your self, as touching the latter
part of it; So loath you are to show what are the particulars of seeking the
Lord, they do attain to, and to what particulars further they might attain,
and of what particulars they must necessarily fall short, for want of certain
helps.

Might you not as well infer, that it is in the power of man to make him a new
heart, because God calls upon him to make him a new heart? Austin was wont to
say and advise rather in this manner. In praecepto cognosce quid debe as
habere, in correptione cognosce tuo te vitio non habere, in oratione cognosce
unde possis habere. In Gods precept know what you ought to have, in his rebuke
take notice that through your fault you have it not, in prayer know whence you
may have it.

The twelfth is out of 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. And the Lord God of their fathers
sent unto them by his Messengers, rising early and sending, for he had
compassion on his people, and on his habitation. 16. But they mocked the
messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the
wrath of God rose against his people, and till there was no remedy. I do not
deny but that it was in their power not to misuse the Prophets, not to mock his
Messengers, but do you not think, that amongst these naughty figs, some were
nothing so bad, and yet did not the wrath of God come upon them as well as upon
others.

Again, consider, what of all this; yet if they had repented, had not their
foulest sins hereupon been done away? so that for want of repentance, the wrath
of God brake forth against them. Now why do you not as well infer herehence,
that they had power to repent, and so to seek after the Lord, and find mercy
from him?

Thirdly, was it not enough to bring the wrath of God upon them, to be found
guilty of despising his words, and has any natural man power to keep himself
from this sin? Is there any greater despising of them, then to esteem so basely
of them, as to account them no better then foolishness? Now is any natural
man free from this? Does not the Holy Ghost tell us, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural
man perceives not the things of God, for they are foolishness unto him? But by
the way I observe, we little agree in the notion of free will; which (if I be
not deceived) was never accounted by the Learned, to consist in ought other
then in election of means. As for the end, according to the habitual
disposition of the heart and will, a man is necessarily carried to the
affection of an agreeable end, agreeable, I say, to his own disposition. Whence
it follows, that albeit it be in the power of grace alone, to change the
heart and renew the will, yet whatsoever the unregenerate either do or refuse
to do, they carry themselves herein freely, in as much as they proceed herein
with choice in respect of their own ends.

I come to the thirteenth out of Hos. 11. 4. I led them with cords of a man,
and with bands of love, and I was to them as he that takes away the yoke from
their jaws, and I laid their meat unto them. Was not such like the Lords
dealing with the children of Israel, when he took them by the hand to bring
them out of the Land of Egypt? Did he not lead them with the cords of Love?
did he not take off the yoke from their jaws? did he not lay Manna before
them? yet of them does Moses profess, that notwithstanding all this; God gave
them not an Deuteronomy. 29 4.
heart to perceive, nor eyes to see, nor ears to bear unto that day. And in
this Text alleged, what color is there to justify this your distinction;
namely, that albeit God deprives Reprobates of those drawing and effectual
means, without which none can come to faith and repentance, yet they are
enabled by him to do much more then they do, in seeking after the Lord, and
finding mercy from him.

The fourteenth is out of Esa. 5. 3, 4, 5. Judge I pray you between me and my
vineyard. 4. What could I have done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done
unto it? why have I looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought
forth wild grapes? 5. And now I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard.
I conceive herein you may devise a treble ground to build upon. I could wish
your self had dealt plainly, and argued herehence, the justification of your
premised distinction. It might have saved your Reader a great deal of pains,
whereas now by the manner of your Discourse, he is driven as well to argue for
you, as to answer for himself, that he may keep himself from being overtaken
with error upon a general consideration ere he is aware.

The first ground may be, that God seems to profess, that he had done what
he could do; now undoubtedly he could give them power to do more good then
they did, in the way of seeking the Lord, which is the thing that you affirm,
and therefore he did give this power: but say I, God could give means also to
draw effectually unto repentance; and consequently he did draw them hereunto,
which is the thing that your self deny, and the Text it self also, for instead
of sweet grapes, they brought forth wild grapes.

Secondly, you may ground upon this, that God expected they should bring forth
sweet grapes, and upon such grounds you usually make Collections, and herehence
you may infer, that therefore they had power to bring forth sweet grapes. But
this consequent is untrue by your opinion; for sweet grapes must needs be
grateful unto God, and no less then Faith and Repentance. But you confess
that God deprives them of such drawing and effectual means without which none
can come, and with which none ever failed to come to faith and repentance.

The third ground may be Gods resolution to lay his vineyard waste. And thence
you may infer that they had power to avoid such sins as were the causes
thereof. But consider, I pray you, is it not just with God to damn the world
for infidelity and impenitency, and will you herehence infer that it was in
their power to believe and repent? I presume you will not.

The fifteenth is Job 33. 14. to the 18. there we read that God speaks once
and twice, and one sees it not, even in dreams and visions of the night. 15.
When this will not serve the turn, he opens the ears of man, even by the
corrections which he has sealed, ver. 16. and that which God aims at in this
is, That he might cause man to turn away from his enterprise, and that he
might hide the pride of man, ver. 17. and keep back his soul from the pit,
and that his life should not pass by the Sword, ver. 18. All this represents
the power of Gods grace in overcomming the hardness of man's heart, together
with the wisdom of God, proceeding various ways to the same end, an instance
whereof we have in Manasses. But as for any power in man to do any more good
then he does in seeking after the Lord, here is not the least indication, much
less to justify the distinction here devised by you.

I come to the last, taken out of Joh. 16. 8, 9. And when he is come he will
reprove the world of sin, because they believed not in me. It seems you insist
only upon the latter, in as much as the allegation reaches no further. The
other parts being explicated in the Verses following. Cannot Christ reprove the
world of infidelity, for not believing in him, unless thereby be acknowledged
a power in a carnal man to do more good then he does, in the way of seeking
the Lord? Surely, if any power in man hereto is to be acknowledged, it must
be a power to believe in Christ; seeing infidelity is the sin whereof the
world shall be reproved by Christ; and not the sin of not doing the good they
could in the way of seeking the Lord.

But your self acknowledge in this section that God deprives them of those
drawing and effectual means without which none can come to Faith and
Repentance. Much less does it prove your present distinction, namely, that
albeit God deprives them of such means, without which none can come to Faith
and Repentance; yet they are enabled to do more good then they do, in the way
of seeking the Lord.

Means of the knowledge of God, we confess to be partly the administration
of his providence in his works, which is the book of his creatures; and there
was a time when God did teach the world (...), by his Works, as Chrysostom
observes, and not (...), by his Writings, and partly by the revelation of his
word in the Scriptures. And one of these means ever was and is afforded unto
all. But whereas you say God affords them to this end to lead them to salvation
and repentance. Here is first an incongruity, which you are content to swallow,
to hold up your opinion. For in truth the administration of Gods Providence in
his works, and the revelation of himself in his word, is the very leading of
them to that whereunto he leads them, to wit, by admonition. And as it is
absurd to say that God does admonish men to the end he may admonish them: so
is it no less absurd to say, that he does lead them, to the end he may lead
them. As for the things whereof he does admonish them repentance and salvation
are ill matched. And even such an incongruity does serve your turn, to blear
both your own eyes and others also. If these were the things God leads men to
by his works, and word, it were but in this manner, he leads them to
repentance that they may be saved.

As for repentance it self, admonition hereof the Apostle does so manifestly
attribute in such sort unto the ministry of his word as withal he derogates
it from the bare administration of his providence in his works, Act. 17. 30.
And the time of this ignorance God regarded not, but now he admonishes all
men every where to repent; manifestly giving to understand that the Gentiles
were not admonished till now. In the time of extraordinary affliction, brought
upon them by the administration of Gods providence in his works, men may be
stricken with fears that they have provoked a divine providence, and hereupon
they may be stirred up to take a course to pacify the wrath of God according
to that counsel. Non te nullius exercent numinis irae, etc. therefore faciles
venerare Napaeas: namque dabunt veniam votis irasque remittent.

But when they neither know God whom they have offended; nor the sidne whereby
they have provoked him, nor the right way to pacify him; (as a Jew sometimes
being taken in a foul fact of collusion, with the place where he had been
kindly entreated, and desiring to make remonstrance of his repentance, out of
his familiarity with me, came to me privately, and inquired of me what it was
to repent, for says he, I do fast and macerate my body.)

This manner of admonition deserves not to be called an admonition to
repentance. In such a case the Athenians were sometimes brought about to erect
an Altar to an unknown God; as much as to say, to pacify they knew not whom,
nor how, nor for what.

It is true, God is said Romans 1. 19. to manifest to the Gentiles that which may
be known of him, by his works. Yet not all that may be known of him; for even
the wisdom of the world, after all their pains and studious courses, are said
not to have known God, no not in the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 21. But his
eternal power and Godhead is generally made known to the world, sufficiently
to convict them of Idolatry: and the Apostle delivers no more in that place.

I hope we Christians by the help of Gods Word, are now adays brought to such
a measure of understanding of God by his works, that we are able even by
discourse of reason to prove many a fair attribute of God, which the greatest
Philosophers were ignorant of, though some things are found in them concerning
the nature of God, which we cannot read without admiration.

You add also that God has made manifest that which may be known of him by
his Law (also) written in their hearts. These you couple together, though little
or nothing Homogeneall. The Law of God written in our hearts, is concerning man's
duty, no part whereof is contained in his Works.

His eternal power and Godhead the Apostle tells us is made manifest by his
works, no such content does he make of the Law written in our hearts, Romans 2.
14. but when you say this is done to this end to move them to seek after the
Lord, you fall upon the incongruity formerly spoken of. For the very
administration of Gods providence, is the moving of them to seek after the Lord.

I say the administration of Gods providence in his works, moves men, as the
Apostle signifies, to seek after the Lord. The Apostle no where refers this to
the Law written in men's hearts; but you put all together, and that for a
special purpose as it seems.
serves. For the phrase of seeking after the Lord, Act. 17. seems only to
import the seeking after his nature, manifested by his works; but you desire
(as it seems) to bend it to denote such a seeking after the Lord, as whereby
to pacify him, and to find mercy from him. In which sense you say it was
far more accommodable to the Law of God written in man's heart, then to the
Administration of his providence in his works; and therefore you couple both
these courses together, and then assign the end of them both, to seek after the
Lord; which through the ambiguous signification thereof, is applicable to both;
though the Apostle utters it in such a sense only, as whereby it is applied to
one course only, namely to the administration of his providence in his works.
Which yet I do not conceive to proceed from any ill mind in you, but out of a
desire to hold our tenets up in that course of opinion which pleases us, which
is a common fault of all.

But with this difference; some affect those opinions, which are most fit to
humor flesh and blood: but your aim (I am persuaded) is only to take a fit
course to justify God in his proceedings. Only you may be pleased to
remember, that it is nothing fit, we should lie for God, as man does for man,
to gratify him.

As for the other end here specified, of Leading to Repentance; this is neither
appliable to that course of Gods providence, mentioned Act. 17. which is
admonishing to seek the Lord, nor to that, Romans 2. 14, 15. but to a course
different from both, namely, the consideration of Gods patience and
long-suffering, which yet without Gods word to inform us better, is far more
fit to harden men's hearts in their sinful courses, then to bring them to
repentance. Which is a good reason to persuade, that in this second Chapter to
the Romans, the Apostle makes a transition from the Gentiles to the Jews, from
them which were nurtured and disciplined only by Gods works, to them which
were nurtured also by the Ministry of his word. That in Job 33. 17. 29. of
withdrawing men from their courses, healing their pride, and saving their
souls from the pit; You do not well to confound the courses taken for this
there mentioned, with the bare administration of Gods providence in his works,
or the writing of his Law in men's hearts, after a natural manner. For the
courses there mentioned by dreams and visions, and by an interpreter, were in
those days the only means of grace. And then Elihu speaks of Gods effectual
working of these gracious operations: to wit, In withdrawing men from their
sinful courses, to heal their pride, and save their souls from the pit. And
we can willingly grant, that God did intend that which he would effectually
bring to pass. But to say that God does intend and will, that such a thing
should come to pass, which never comes to pass, this we take to be a most
indecent assertion, and spoils God of his omnipotency, and plainly
contradictious to that which your self here profess, in saying that God
deprives the men of this world, of those drawing and effectual means, without
which none can come to Faith and Repentance. And with what sobriety can it be
affirmed, that God wills their repentance and salvation, whom he deprives of
those means, without which none can repent, that he may be saved? Yet for the
making good of your assertion, I have often devised a commodious interpretation
of your words, which you do not, as namely thus; God uses such or such means
to withdraw men from their course, to heal their pride, to save them from the
pit. That is, to admonish them of their duty in turning from their wicked
ways, and humbling themselves, that they may be saved. And accordingly God
may be said to will it, with will of precept, not of purpose, Voluntate
praecepti, non propositi; until withal he does effect it, by giving those
drawing and effectual means, without which none can repent.

Or lastly, God may be said, by using such courses to intend, that they should
repent, and so be saved, that is, that they should (Ex officio, not de facto)
repent, that they might be saved. Thus to the Israelites he did, and to his
Church Ezekiel. 24. 13.
he does even to reprobates amongst them; offer means of grace to purge them.
Now by the operations of outward means, (which I think you signify) and if you
thereby comprehend the inward operation of Gods Spirit also, you do not well
to confound things so different under the same terms, (such ambiguitie is so
apt to deceive us) consists only in instruction, and admonition, and
exhortation or correption. Now these whether made to turn us, Prove. 1. 23. or
to gather us, Mat. 23 27. or to convince us, Joh. 16. 8, 9. are not of
themselves (as you know) effectual to the conversion of any; though they are
called in Scripture phrase, the drawing of us with the cords of a man, and with
the bonds of love, Hose. 11. 4. And the dressing of us, Esa. 5. 4. And your
self profess, that unless God use those drawing and effectual means, no man
can convert, no man can believe and repent.

Secondly, when you say, that the means which God uses for these ends, are in
some measure sufficient (if they be not hindered by men) to bring them to the
attainment of these things. This is worse then ought you have delivered
hitherto; yet you are to be commended for dealing so plainly as you do in
this place, and no where else for ought I have found. But the more plainly you
deal, the more foul does your opinion appear. I should with a distinction,
willingly confess that the means God uses are sufficient, to wit, in the way
of instruction and admonition, so far forth as God will have them (toward
whom they are used) to be instructed and admonished: But this kind of
sufficiency does not depend on man, as if he could hinder it.

Whether they will receive any instruction or no, the means are never a whit
less or more sufficient in the way of instruction.

And indeed outward means tend no further, then to such like operations as
thus, (to wit) instruction, admonition, correption.

But when you make the sufficiency of the means to depend on man's will, so as
to be hindered thereby, this must needs be delivered of sufficiency in respect
of conversion, of bringing men unto faith and repentance.

And withal this is further to imply, that it is in the power of man by these
means to be converted unto God to believe and repent: which is a more foul
tenet, then any you have delivered yet, though little truth hitherto have I
found in this Discourse throughout, saving in things merely delivered to no
purpose. And withal it is plainly contradictious to that which here you
expressly profess, namely, that no man can believe and repent without some
drawing and effectual means, which are far different from the means here
spoken of. For the means here spoken of, are such as he affords to
Reprobates: but those drawing and effectual means, which he affords only to
his Elect, as your self do acknowledge; we are so far from denying them to
be sufficient to the ends whereto he intends them, as that we willingly
profess, they are all effectual (in their kind) unto the ends, whereto he
intends them.

As for example, if God intends them for the converting of some unto God, all
such shall certainly be converted; if only to the taking away of excuse from
others, they shall be effectual to the removing of excuse; if to the bringing
of some ad exteriorem vitae emendationem, to an outward amendment of life and
no further, they shall be effectual to that also and no further. And
therefore we do nothing derogate from the wisdom of God, but look you well
unto it, that you do not derogate from Gods omnipotency whilst you maintain
that some things are intended by God, which are never brought to pass, and
that because the will of man forsooth stands in resistance unto Gods intention.
Directly contrary to the Discourse of Austin, Enchir. cap. 96. whose words are
these, Deo proculdubio, quam facile est quod vult facere, tam facile est, quod
non vult esse, non sinere. Hoc nisi credamus, periclitatur ipsum nostrae fidei
consessionis initium, qua nos in Deum Patrem omnipocentem credere confitemur.
Neque enim ob aliud veraciter vocatur omnipotens, nisi quia quicquid vult
potest, nec voluntate cujusquam creaturae voluntatis omnipotentis impeditur
effectus. And if it be so as you profess; That no man can come to Christ,
except the Father draw him; by the same Almighty authority and power, whereby
he sent Christ into the world; and withal if you add thereunto, as
elsewhere you do, that this power (I leave out authority as of an alien
signification) is showed only in drawing his Elect, what need all these pains
that you have taken, since it is clear, that so long as you hold to this, you
shall never satisfy any Pelagian or Arminian? and all the absurdities they
charge our Doctrine with, are directed against this.

But well you may puzzle the wits, and trouble the mind of many an Orthodox
and well-affected Christian, with so intricate a discourse, laboring to devise
a new way to justify our Doctrine of Election by so tempering the Doctrine of
reprobation, as utterly to overthrow your own Orthodox opinion, in the very
point of election, as I have already showed, as occasion has been given.

Object. How then (will you say) can these two stand together? there is a
sufficiency and power in the means, to lead the men of this world to the
knowledge of God, and to grace in Christ, and yet there is an impotency, yea an
impossibility in the men of the world to come to Christ, without greater and
stronger means then these be?

Answ. For answer whereto I will not content my self to say, that these means
are sufficient, because they suffice to leave men without excuse; only in the
second place, and by accident, after, when men have neglected to make so good
use of them as they might have done: but you see that God aims at other ends
in the first and principal place. viz. to lead them to repentance to save
their souls from the pit, as the places alleged give evident witness: and
for these ends it is that these means must be acknowledged and conceived as
sufficient. For else the Word of God argued an imperfection or insufficiency of
such means to their proper ends. I think it safe to say, these means are
sufficient, ex part Dei, on Gods behalf, to manifest the will of God, rather
to desire repentance and life, then the hardening and destruction of the
Creature. And ex part hominum, in regard of men, sufficient to enable them to
the performance of such duties, in which their natural consciences would
excuse them, and in which way they might the sooner find mercy, mercy
vouchsafing more powerful and more effectual helps, whilst they walk
according to the knowledge and helps, which they have received, and sin not
against conscience, but only out of ignorance in the state of unbeleef.

It is Arminius his superficiary conceit, that Hortatio non facta Exam.
sed spr^ta, makes a man inexcusable, not considering that admonition and
instruction it self, takes away excuse, although none have need of excuse, but
they that do evil. For the excuse is this, si scissem fecissem, or, si
audivissem credidissem; now this excuse is manifestly removed by the preaching
of the Gospel. And the word inexcusable, though it formally signify without
excuse, yet withal it con-notates a condition delinquent, and such as had need
of excuse, though bereaved thereof, and such a condition arises from the
contempt of the means of grace.

Neither is this condition by accident, like as the neglecting to make good use
of them is not by accident.

For God intending to deprive them of those drawing and effectual helps,
without which none can make good use of them, did never intend they should make
good use of them, but rather the contrary, in as much as he purposed not to
show that mercy toward them which he shows toward his Elect, but rather to
harden them. As the Lord tells Ezekiel. Chap. 2. 4. They are impudent children,
and stiffe-hearted. I do send thee unto them, and thou shall say unto them;
Thus says the Lord God. But surely they will not hear, neither indeed will
they cease; for they are a rebellious house, yet shall they know, that there
has been a Prophet among them.

So that albeit the Lord knew full well what sorry entertainment his Prophets
should find, yet would he not give way to any such excuse as this; If the
Lord had sent his Prophet to admonish us of our wanderings from him we would
soon have turned unto the good way of the Lord.

No, they shall know there has been a Prophet among them.

And as for the ground of this his foreknowledge, Esaias manifests this to be
Gods purpose to harden them, Esa. 6. 9. Go and say unto this people, ye shall
hear indeed, but shall not understand, ye shall plainly see and not perceive;
make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their
eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their hearts, and convert, and I shall heal them. What place is here for
such conceits of leaving men without excuse in a second place, and that by
accident?

Yet if you can prove that God did intend any better thing unto them in a first
place, we shall be willing to confess that this comes in, in a second place.

You say, God leads them to repentance to save them from the pit.

I answer this leading to repentance, Romans 2. is only his sparing them in
their sins, and admonishing them to repent; and this we say is done to the
Reprobates, not with any purpose to bring them to repentance: for if God had
any such purpose, he would not deprive them of those helps without which none
can come to repentance as your self profess he does: and if he had any such
purpose to bring them to repentance and yet does not, it follows that he
cannot.

And if he has any such purpose, either this purpose must continue still in
God, even after their damnation, or otherwise God must be charged with
mutability, all which you consider not, much less accommodate any tolerable
answer thereto.

For the same reason I deny that God has any intention or purpose to save
them: how can he? considering that from everlasting he has ordained them to
condemnation.

And of this also you take no notice, much less go about to shape any
convenient answer thereunto; carrying the matter all along in such manner, as
if Gods decree of their condemnation were not conceived, until the means of
Grace offered are found to be finally despised.

Neither do the places alleged by you, give any testimony to these your
uncouth assertions, much less evident testimony. Indeed I blame you not for
desiring your Reader would take them so, to save your pains of proving it. For
you take no pains at all to enforce any place, by Logical argumentation to
give evidence to such a sense you put upon them, though it stand in manifest
opposition to the nature of God even to the bereaving him both of his
omnipotency and immutability, to make him to contradict himself, and strangely
to go about to persuade the world that God intends the repentance of those men,
to whom he denies those helps, without which none can repent, as your self
also acknowledge.

So that we need not to be put to deny the sufficiency of Gods word to those
ends whereunto God has given it, which is to instruct in all points of Faith
and duties of life; and to admonish us to give obedience unto it, and reprove
them that do not; and consequently to take away all excuse for want of any of
these gracious operations. And thus it is sufficient ex part, Dei, and ex
part hominum too, as for God to admonish thereby, and men to be admonished
and instructed.

But otherwise to require any thing on man's part to add sufficiency to God, is
too too absurd.

For whether man does yield obedience, the word is never a whit the more
sufficient, or whether he yields not obedience, the word is never the less
sufficient.

As for the desire of the Repentance and life of Reprobates which you attribute
unto God, you keep your course I consesse in strange expressions, manifestly
contradictious to the nature of God, and to your self.

Can you persuade your self that ever the world will be brought about to
believe, or any intelligent or sober man amongst them, that God desires the
repentance and life of them, whom he has determined from everlasting to
deprive of those helps without which no man can repent and be saved? yet that
he does deprive them hereof, it is your own most express profession in the
former Section.

As for hardening them; does he not harden whom he will? and has he not from
everlasting ordained all Reprobates unto destruction? As for any desire hereof
in God, I account it a very absurd thing, to treat of any will in God under the
notion of desire in proper speech; Speak we of the desires of weak men, who
cannot effect what they will; but be advised to spare to attribute any desires
to God in proper speech, as you would spare to attribute to him, eyes and ears,
and hands, and heart, in proper speech, and though God be pleased in
condescension to our capacities to take upon him our infirmities, let us not
recompense his goodness so ill, as to conceive of his nature as obnoxious to
the same imperfections whereto our natures are: When you say that the Word
inables not only the Elect, but others to perform such duties, and having but
erst spoken of the duty of repentance, and this being delivered in the same
breath, whereto does this tend, but to work in your Reader an opinion, that
even Reprobates are enabled by the Word to perform the duty of Repentance?
which you know full well cannot be affirmed by you without palpable
contradiction to your self, as well as to the truth of God, and therefore I
wonder not a little what you mean to carry your self in this your Discourse in
such sort as to draw so near to such foul assertions. Therefore you forbear
to name particularly the duty of Repentance, but flee to generals and say that
even Reprobates are enabled by the Word, to perform such duties in which their
natural conscience would excuse them.

And I confess that, as Paul has taught me, even without the word natural
men are enabled to do some duties wherein their natural conscience does
excuse them, as namely, in doing the things contained in the Law, and that by
nature, mark that well, I beseech you, that you may see the uncouthnesse of
that which follows, as when you say; And in that way they sooner find mercy.
For what? is a man by nature able to perform some things whereby he may the
sooner find mercy? Was ever mercy found at the hand of God by performing some
duty by power of nature? What revelation of God has taught you this? that a
work of nature should further us to obtaining the mercy of God? I speak of
moral works of nature, not of natural, such as are to go to Church and to
hear a Sermon; to go, and to hear, are actions natural, not moral, unless
they be considered as joined with affections and intentions moral. And to go
to Church and hear a Sermon, with ill affections and intentions, as namely
either to mock, or to take a nap, is a natural way I confess, whereby a man
may and does find mercy far sooner, then by keeping at home, though never so
civilly employed. And therefore Father Latimer reprehending some for coming to
Church to take a nap, yet says he, let them come, for they may be taken
napping; which is as much as to say, they may find mercy at the hands of God
whilst they are napping.

Yet I presume you will not say, that so to come to Church, is the performing
of a duty whereby they may find mercy sooner.

In the next place you indirectly embrace the sower leaven of Arminianisme,
plainly professing that God does vouchsafe more powerful effectual helps to
them that walk according to the knowledge and helps they have received. As if
that of our Savior Habenti dabitur, to him that has shall be given, you did
interpret especially after the same manner, as Arminius does, to wit, that if
men use their naturals right, God will give them means of grace; But here is
the difference, they speak their minds plainly, you carry your Discourse so,
that we are driven to groape (as in the dark) after your meaning. For you
deliver this of Reprobates, who do already enjoy the Word, the means of grace;
And therefore the more powerful helps you speak of, are not outward means,
(for that they enjoy already) but inward grace. As if God had ordained that
grace should be given according unto works, which is direct Pelagianisme. And
withal you imply a power in Reprobates to walk according to knowledge, and
helps already received, to wit, under the means of grace; And what can this
be less, then a power to believe and repent. How many a godly man's heart
would bleed to understand so foul assertions to drop from the pen of such a
man as your self?

In fine, you add a new qualification of the way to find mercy the sooner,
and that is, not to sin against conscience, but only of ignorance, and withal
by the coherence imply, that even reprobates and unregenerate persons have
power to keep themselves from sinning against their conscience, and so to keep
themselves as to sin only through ignorance. Whence it manifestly follows,
that in such a case of performance which you esteem possible, either the
conscience of a natural man shall not convict him of nay sin, or convicting
him of sin, shall not convict him, that he ought to repent of it.

Or lastly, it follows, that he has power to repent. The two first are
unreasonable; to affirm the last, is to contradict your self, having lately
professed, that God deprives all save his Elect of those helps and means,
without which none can repent. And truly it seems, in denying the power of
repenting unto the world, you did not well consider what you delivered; for the
face of your Discourse seems to lead to the contrary, namely, to the
maintaining that it is in the power of a natural man to repent though he be
in the state of unbeleefe.

Where again, in signifying that you speak of a man in the state of unbeleef,
you confound, if not your self (yet) I am sure your Reader. For but erst you
discoursed how men of the world are enabled by Gods Word to the performance of
such duties in which their natural conscience would excuse them. Now I should
think, they that enjoy the Word of God, and are thereby so enabled as you
speak, are not to be accounted in the state of unbeleefe, which I should think
is a state peculiar unto heathens, who have not so much as an outward
profession of Christianity. In like sort it is your course to confound the
inward operation of Gods Spirit with the outward means, and comprehend them
both under the terms of means and helps, which have no univocall notion common
unto them. It is bad enough to hold ones self to generals; considering, that
may be verifyed of one species which cannot be verifyed of another, but it is
too too bad to confound those under general terms, that have no more
univocation between them then creation, and exhortation.

Another confusion I find abuses your fancy in this very Section, and that is
spread all over it like a Leprosy. For whereas the objection arising naturally
from the former discourse, is grounded upon a seeming contradiction, in
professing a natural man to be impotent to perform faith and repentance; and
yet giving power to a man to attain those ends, whereunto the means given
tend, namely, to his conversion and salvation: instead of comparing the
sufficiency you give to man with the sufficiency you deny to man, and there
with all showing how the one does not contradict the other; I say instead of
comparing these, you compare the sufficiency of the means with the impotency of
man, to convert and be saved; which you express by coming to Christ. Varying
your phrases at every turn, which is good for nothing but to trouble
disputation. Whereas indeed there is no question to be made of the sufficiency
of the means, (if by means you understand the word of the Gospel) in that
kind, wherein means are capable of sufficiency, to wit, in the way of
instruction, exhortation, reprehension, beyond which kind of operations their
sufficiency does not extend.

The question is only of the sufficiency of man to perform what the means do
move us unto.

I confess under means you comprehend, not only the book of grace, which is
Gods word, but the book of Nature also, which is Gods works, the sufficiency
whereof to inform either, as touching the nature of God or duty of man, we
utterly deny, neither are you able to prove. And therefore you do not so well
to carry it in the general, seeing as touching the specials, it is true of the
one, not of the other. And in such cases the issue of generals, is rather to
circumvent a simple Reader then to inform him.

And yet as touching that undue comparison by you made, and formerly mentioned;
you do not carry it so cleanly, but that by the way you supplant your self; as
when you speak of the sufficiency of the means, to the ends formerly mentioned,
except they be hindered by men. For it cannot be understood of bringing a man
passively to those ends, to wit, unto repentance. For man neither is nor can
be merely passive in repentance, but must be active also. Nay, for ought I
see, you make him passive therein, only in respect of instruction, and
exhortation, which nothing hinders, but that he may be altogether active in
performing repentance, if he will. Since then repentance is the end whereto
these means tend, and the means are sufficient to bring any to repentance (as
you avouch) except they be hindered by men, it must necessarily follow, that
man has power by these means to attain to these ends whereto these means lead
him, if he will; and consequently has power to repent, and to obtain grace in
Christ, if he will; for the means lead hereunto, namely, to the knowledge of
God and grace in Christ, as your self have professed in express terms.

And consequently when you say to the contrary, that there is an impotency,
yea, an impossibility in the men of this world to come to Christ, without
greater and stronger means then these be: you do directly contradict your
self, neither will all the labor following, expressing your self in various
phrasiologies, serve turn to free you from this contradiction, but leave men
suspicious that you affirm this contradiction only in words, but the contrary
potency, you maintain in deed. And because that without all tergiversation you
profess, that such men have power to perform something, upon the performance
whereof they might the sooner find mercy; I beseech you in the fear of God no
longer to abuse your self and others in speaking thus indefinitely, but tell us
plainly and particularly, what that is which (you say) Reprobates have power to
perform, and upon the performance whereof they should find mercy. To confess
my bold weakness, ingenuously I am persuaded you are not able to define any
such particular; if you should, it will not satisfy to the full, unless
withal you explicate your self, and show whether that work you speak of be a
work of nature, or a work of grace; If a work of grace, then an unregenerate
man is not so farredead in sin, but he is able to perform a work of grace, and
if he be able to perform one work of grace, why not two, why not twenty? If a
work of nature only, then seeing hereupon you say he shall find mercy; you
fall foul upon that which was censured in the Synod of Palestine, one thousand
two hundred years ago, namely, that grace is given according unto works. If
some may say on your behalf, that you do not say they shall find mercy in
this case, but only that they shall the sooner find mercy: or if this like
not, if any shall otherwise plead in this manner: namely, that you do not say
that he shall find mercy in this case, but he might find mercy: I will bid
him content himself, and expect while you warrant such Apologies, and then I
doubt not, but he shall wait long enough, for I am confident you are far
off from maintaining such foul collusions.

By the way give me leave to wonder that you express your self in such a
manner. But alas, what should we look for when the cause is no better? and yet
a gracious respect unto a gracious end, namely, the justifying of Gods
proceedings, has cast a good man upon such a course. So dangerous a thing it
is when a man is to seek in some particulars, not to content himself with
acknowledgment thereof, and to wait upon God for a time of revelation, but to
cut out his own way in seeking satisfaction.

Thirdly, the men of this world do not walk answerably to Answ.
the means they have received, neither do they employ or use these talents to
such advantage as they might. The Gentiles though they knew God, yet they
glorified him not as God, but Romans 1. 21. 28.
became unthankful and vain in their imaginations, they did not like to
retain God in their knowledge: but to detain the truth in unrighteousness.

The Jews resisted the Holy Ghost, despised the messengers and word of God,
acknowledged not the day and means of Act. 7, 51. Luke 19. 24. Mat. 27. 21, 22
Joh. 3. 43.
their own peace; refusing him and all his benefits, preferring a murderer and
false prophet before him, brought forth wild grapes of injustice and
oppression instead of the sweet grapes of righteousness and judgment. In this
they abused the talents and means of Grace in a worse manner then could be
excused, by any necessity or impotency of corrupt nature. Corrupt nature
resisting not, but by these helps they might have avoided these sins which
they fell into, and might have reached to the performance of these duties; for
the neglect of which they are here reproved for coming short of (...) Yea,
Pilate himself would have brought forth better fruit, then some of these which
the Jews yielded, but that the Jews themselves prevailed with him for worse.

To speak plainly, that phrases do not deceive us, it is Exam.
true, that the men of the world do not live according to their knowledge, nor
abstain from foul sins, from which they might abstain. But what if they
did? should they find mercy the sooner? for unless you make this good, you
say nothing to the purpose. Therefore to the maintenance of this you tended in
the former Section, but all in vain. For consider; why then did not the
Philosophers find mercy, Plato, Socrates, Phocion, the most moral men of the
world? Again, did any of these abstain from any foul finne in a gracious
manner, or out of their love to God? Look to Isocrates his incitements to
morality, what are they other then the reward of praise and applause of the
world? and why, I pray you, should God regard them any whit the more for this?
nay, did they not look for justification by this? all their goodness did they
not attribute to their own Free will? and why should not God hate them the more
for this? Do not Publicans and Harlots (and did not our Savior tell us as
much?) enter into the kingdom of Heaven before Scribes and Pharisees? Be it
so, that the men of the world were Fornicators when they might have forborne it:
were Idolaters, but might have abstained from that: were Adulterers, Wantons,
Buggerers, and might have kept themselves pure from such abominations: were
thieves, when they might have abstained from laying hands on their neighbors
goods; were covetous, yet might have contemned the world as many did: were
Drunkards, yet might have tempered themselves from such excess: were Railers,
yet might have ordered their tongnes: were Extortioners, yet might have been
more merciful then so. Now I pray you tell me, were not the elect of God such
also? See what the Apostle says in reference to every one of these
particulars, 1 Cor. 6. 11. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but
ye are justified, but ye are sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the spirit of our God. Nay, how many a natural man was more moral then to be
guilty of so foul pollutions, as many of Gods elect have been conscious of,
yet never found mercy at the hands of God. If otherwise, God should call men
not so much according to his purpose and grace, as according to works;
directly coutrary to Paul's text, 1 Timothy 1. 9. And what then should become of
that, He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth? Rom, 9
18.

As for the fault you mention of the Gentiles, was it not common to the Elect
as well as to the Reprobates? What says Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 12. 2.
Ye know ye were Gentiles, and were carried away unto dumb Idols, even as ye
were led. Yet the Romans for above a hundred years had no Images, as Varro
testifies, saying, That then the Gods were worshipped castius, more chastely,
and that they who brought in Images, timorem ademerunt, errorem auxerunt, took
away the fear of God, and increased the error concerning the nature of God:
Yet in these days of Image Worship, thousands were from Idols turned to serve
the living God, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 8. in those former days not one that we read of.

We come to the Jews; be it so, that they were worse then Pilate, yet many of
them in despite of their sins were converted unto Christ; I say, of them
that crucified him, and preferred a murderer before him; Pilate was not: at
least we have a record of the conversion of the one, Acts 2. none of the
other. Yea Saul breathing nothing but wrath and fury against the Church of God,
as Ferox scelerum -- Quia prima provenerant; being heartned with the blood of
Stephen, as with a cup of sweet Wine, was converted unto Christ, when many a
moral, quiet, peaceable, and nothing factious Jew, had not the mercy showed
him that Saul had. They abused (you say) their talents and means of grace, in
a worse manner then could be excused (yet who worse then Saul or Manasses) by
any necessity or impotency of corrupt nature. But who I pray, goes about to
excuse them this way? we certainly excuse them not, no, nor they themselves
neither; for it were most incongruous they should, even as if Epicures should
complain of the sweet morsels which they roll under their tongues, that they
are so sweet, that they cannot forbear to be in love with them. But will you
deny God to have a hand in hardening them, to the committing of so foul
excess? what is the meaning of giving over to vile affections? to do things
inconvenient, and that in an abominable kind? and that to what end but this,
that so they might receive the just recompense of their error? yet that error
is well known to have been incident, as well to the very elect of God, as unto
Reprobates. By the way you signify, that by the neglect of the helps and
means afforded them, they fell short of these duties, to the performance
whereof they might have reached. Their sin was in doing contrary to their
knowledge and conscience upon due information out of Gods Word; this is to
neglect the means; And consequently to use the means aright, was to do
accordingly as they were informed. And indeed, if they had done otherwise then
they did, they had not done so bad as they did. I find such giddiness of
discourse usually amongst the Arminians; while they satisfy themselves with
phrases, never examining particularly, the matter and substance of their own
expressions.

Because of the abuse of these talents and means of grace, Answ.
God therefore does deny to the men of this world such powerful and gracious
helps, as he vouchsafes freely to the Elect, to draw them on effectually to
repentance and salvation.

The Gentiles abusing the light of nature, God gave them Romans 1. 29.
up to vile affections, yea, even to a reprobate mind.

The Pharisees because they employed the talent of their Luke 16. 11, 12.
wealth unfaithfully, God would not trust them with the true riches.

The Jews because they rejected Christ, and his Word, and Acts 16. 46. Lukc 19.
42.
his Messengers, with scornful and bitter malignity, and brought forth grapes
of gall and wormwood; therefore God took his Word from them, and hid from them
the things that did belong Mat. 21 41, 42.
unto their peace; he took the kingdom of God from them, and gave them as a
prey to sin, and misery, and derision, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. What if none of the
world (as opposed to the Elect) ever came to Christ, or made such use of the
means and helps offered in him unto them, as to obtain salvation and
regenerating grace by him; yet might they have made better use of the means
then they did, which because they did not, it was just with God to deny them
greater means, who thus abused the lesser.

In all this we have as pure Arminianisme tendered unto us, as could drop from
the pen of Arminius himself, or Corvinus. Exam.
Yet God forbid we should co nomine, for that cause dislike it. It truth, we
must embrace it, though it come out of the mouth of the Devil. If falsehood,
we shall by Gods grace disclaim it, though it proceed out of the mouth of
Angels of light, and not disclaim it only, but disprove it also. You may as
well say that God does not draw the men of this world effectually to
Repentance, because they do abuse the talents and means of grace, but this I
disprove thus.

First, if this be the cause why God does not draw them to repentance, then
this is the cause why he shows not to them that mercy which he does to the
Elect; but this is not the cause thereof, which I prove thus. The mere pleasure
of God is the cause; therefore that is not. The antecedent thus; God shows
mercy on whom he will, and hardens, (that is, denies mercy) to whom he will.
If to harden were not to deny mercy, it could not stand in opposition to
showing mercy. The consequence I demonstrate thus. If to deny mercy to whom he
will, does not infer that mercy is not denied according unto works: then to
show mercy to whom he will, does not infer, that mercy is not showed
according unto works.

Secondly, if men's evil works were the cause why God denies them mercy, then it
could not be said, that God denies mercy, because it is the pleasure of his
will to deny it. For if a reason be demanded why a malefactor is hanged, it
were very absurd to answer, that the reason is, because it was the pleasure of
the Magistrate to have him hanged.

Thirdly, if evil works be the deserving cause, why Gods mercy is denied unto
men, then either by necessity of nature, or by constitution of God. Not by
necessity of nature, in opposition to the constitution of God; for then by
necessity of nature God must be compelled to deny mercy unto such, what then
shall become of Gods Elect? unless you will say, that their works before
mercy showed them, were not so bad as others, which were equally to contradict
both experience and the Word of God; For in this case men should have mercy
showed on them, according to their works, to wit, as they were found less
evil then the works of others. Nor by constitution of God.

For first, show me any such constitution, that men in such a condition of
evil works shall be denied mercy.

Secondly, by the same constitution, mercy should be denied to the Elect also.
When you speak of the Gentiles (in this case) abusing the light of Nature, and
given over to vile affections, you take your aim miserably amiss: For the
Gentiles are not the men of the world in opposition to the Elect. But God
forbid, that the Gentiles, and the men of the world, should be terms
convertible in this kind, for then what should become of us?

Certainly the number of Gods Elect is greater amongst the Gentiles, then among
the Jews; and even of those that were given over to vile affections, some were
Elect, as appears 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. And to say that the cause why God denies
them mercy, was, because they abused the light of nature; I have freshly
disproved this, and that evidently, as I presume the intelligent Reader will
observe, though the contrary (I confess) be very plausible at the first
sight, and before we come to the discussing of it.

Thirdly, you take your aim amiss also (though not in so great measure as in
the former) in the phrases: For even of the Pharisees some were Elect, witness
holy Paul; Who abused his zeal of the Law more foully then he? even to the
persecuring of Gods Church? yet was not the true treasure denied to him, and
that in the highest measure. And as for Reprobates, if you think their
unfaithfulness in the use of their wealth, was the cause why mercy was denied
them: for the disproofe hereof, I refer me to my former arguments.

Fourthly, the very Elect of God, not only rejected Christ for a time, but
also crucified him. That which you urge of Gods taking his word and Kingdom (in
plain terms the means of grace) from such a Nation as contemns them, is nothing
to the purpose. For we treat of Gods showing and denying mercy, not in the
means, but as touching the grace it self of Repentance. But this benefit you
have confounded, by comprehending both under the name of means and helps, for
your advantage, to pass from the one to the other, as you see good. Here
indeed it is as true, that because men do make precious account of the means
of grace, therefore God continues these means unto them: like as because of
men's perseverance in Faith, and Repentance, and good works, God rewards them
with everlasting life; like as because men die in their sins, therefore God
inflicts on them everlasting death. Only with this difference; Sin on the one
side is the meritorious cause both of withdrawing the means of grace, and of
damnation: but conscionable walking before God in the use of the means, is only
the disposing cause both to the continuance of the means, and to eternal
salvation. For God by grace makes us meet partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints Col. ^.
in Light. Forthwith you return to the right state of the question, to wit, in
the concession or denegation of regenerating grace, but carry your self in show
very prejudicially to the freeness of Gods grace; as when you say, What if no
Reprobate made such use of the means and helps offered as to obtain
regenerating grace? Dangerously implying that there is a certain use of the
means, quo posito, which being put, regenerating grace should be obtained. As
if grace regenerating were to be dispensed according to an unregenerate
persons works. Of the same leaven savor your words following, when you say,
That because they did not make better use of the means, it was just with God to
deny them greater means, saving that here you may be relieved by the ambiguity
of the word means, by shifting from one sense of it to another. For if means
be taken in the same kind, to wit, of outward means, like ^^ it is just with
God to reward the right use of smaller means, with the bestowing of greater,
so it is just with God, for the abuse of the smaller, not only to deny
greater, but to take away those smaller.

But as touching the granting, or denying grace regenerative, herein God
carries himself merely according to the good pleasure of his own will,
according to that of the Apostle, He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he
will he hardneth. Neither can it be otherwise; For as much as mercy in
regenerating any man, cannot be showed according unto good works, and
consequently the denying of mercy cannot proceed according to evil works, as I
have already demonstrated in the first place.

The Sixth Doubt.
Question, 6.
HOw may it appear, that the declaration of the equity and sufficiency of Gods
justice is real, and not pretended; since all things are carried and come to
pass, by an absolute and unconditionall decree, and providence: exempli
gratia, that fact, Act. 4. 28. and 2. 23.

Answer. To say that God carries all things by an absolute and unconditionall
decree of providence, viz. opposing absolute to all conditions presupposed in
the creature, in my judgment is neither agreeing to the Doctrine of Scripture,
nor of our Divines; who do both teach that as God in the fullness of time does
administer and dispense the way of his providence, so he decreed to dispense
them in the same manner from eternity. Now in dispensing the performance of the
Covenant of works, the Lord punishes and rewards the creature according to
the condition of obedience or disobedience performed by it, as it is at large
described, Levit. 26; Deuteronomy. 28. and therefore surely he decreed to carry such
works of his providence upon the same conditions.

The places that may be alleged to the contrary, do speak of Gods Decree in
delivering Christ to death for us, which as it was a work of mere grace, you
may safely conceive it was decreed by an absolute and unconditionall decree of
providence, as generally the works of free grace are. For either they depend on
no condition in the creature, or at least on none but such as God is pleased to
work in us, and for us. And yet I believe that in your own judgment you think
not that God did decree the death of Christ, much less deliver him to death,
but upon condition of Adams fall. If you say, God did as well decree a sinful
manner of the death of Christ by the hands of the wicked, as the death it self,
and that by an absolute, an unconditionall decree.

I answer, if you mean an unconditionall decree, presupposing no condition in
those creatures, which were the wicked instruments of his death, it is spoken
without warrant either from those places, or from any other. That God gave up
Judas to betray him, it was the punishment of his covetousness and hypocrisy.
That God gave up the high Priests and Pharisees to conspire against him, to
deliver him to Pilate, it was the punishment of their ambition and envy, and in
some of them their sin against the Holy Ghost. That Pilate against his
conscience gave judgment against him, it was the judgment of his carnal
popularity and his worldly fear of Caesar. That the common people and
Soldiers cried out against him, and laid violent hands on him, it was the
punishment of their ignorance and infidelity. Now it is out of all controversy
that God does not punish sin with sin, nor decree to punish, but upon condition
of sin presupposed. It is true indeed, God works all things after the
counsel of his will; but that proves not that God carries all things with an
absolute and unconditionall decree of providence. For it is the counsel of his
will, as to work the salvation of his Elect according to the Covenant of Grace,
freely and absolutely: so to dispense rewards and punishments to the men of
this world according to the condition of their obedience or disobedience.

There is therefore no place left for such a question, viz. How it may appear,
that the declaration of the equity of Gods Justice was not pretended, but
real, since all things are carried and come to pass by an absolute and
unconditionall decree of providence. For neither are all things (as it is
evident) so carried, and if they were, I had rather such a question should come
out of the mouth of an Arminian, then of any godly and judicious Brother.

The Arminians you know upon a seeming fair pretense, are wont to object
against our Divines, that God calls the Reprobates rather simulate then
sorio, in semblance rather then in truth, if he has before determined of
them, by an absolute and unconditionall decree. But the same answer your self
would return to their objection, the same I return to your question, with more
probability, (yea, I may truly say) with more safety.

That no will of God is conditional, we have the concurrent Exam.
consent both of our, and Popish Divines. For both Piscator maintains it
against Uorstius, and Bradwardine demonstrates it: And this condition which you
speak of, can be no less then some motive cause: and Aquinos has professed
that never any was so made, as to affirm that there was any cause of
Predestination, quoad actum praedestinantis, as touching the act of God
predestinating; and that for no other reason then because there can be no cause
of the will of God, quoad actum volentis, as touching the act of God willing.
Whence it follows manifestly, that in like sort there can be no cause of
reprobation neither quoad actum reprobantis, as touching the act of God
reprobating: and consequently no condition. As for the contrary allegations out
of Scripture, and out of Divines, I shall be content to consider them,
whenever you shall produce them; but I am persuaded you will not be forwards
to trouble your self there-about, after I shall present unto you how
incongruous a course you take to the justifying of that which here you affirm.
And not incongruous only, but most dangerous, tending manifestly to the utter
overthrow of the Freeness of Gods grace in Predestination; which indeed very
frequently you shake in this unhappy discourse of yours. As God in fullness of
time does administer and dispense the ways of his providence, so (you say) be
decreed to dispense them in the same manner from all eternity. We grant it
willingly; but what of all this? you add, that in dispencing the performance
of the Covenant of works, the Lord punishes and rewards the creature
according to the condition of obedience or disobedience performed by it, or
rather by the persons under it: This also we willingly grant. But what do you
infer herehence? only this; Therefore surely he decreed to carry such
works of his providence upon the same conditions. Now this conclusion we
embrace as readily as your self; but this is far from justifying the decree
of God to be conditional. Nay, your self do plainly express, that the
carriage of such works of his providence is upon such conditions: Not that
Gods decree is upon such conditions: which is as much as to say in plain
terms, that the execution of his decree proceeds upon condition, not the
decree it self. Yet I confess, in the same manner Arminius himself and his
followers discourse; as if they would explicate themselves in this manner of
argumentation. Sin always goes before damnation; therefore a respect to
sin goes before Gods decree of damnation: As if we should argue thus. Faith
in men of ripe years always goes before salvation: therefore a respect unto
faith always goes before Gods decree of salvation. Do you not perceive by
this the dangerous issue of your argumentation? yet this is the very thing they
aim at: this is the Helena they are enamoured with. But I am confident you are
far from this, and would not a little grieve to understand, that the Orthodox
faith of some in the very point of predestination, is not a little shaken by
such argumentations as these. And the rather, because they have found such an
eminent man as your self, not only to swallow them, but in a confidentiary
manner to propose them as most sound to give satisfaction unto others.
Therefore Aquinas fairly distinguishes of the cause or condition of Gods
will, either quoad actum volentis, as touching the act of God willing, or quoad
res volitas, as touching the things willed; no cause or condition thereof,
quoad actum volentis; there may be quoad res volitas. As for example, to give
instance in predestination, no cause thereof at all, quod actum
praedestinantis, as touching the act of God predestinating; there may be a
cause thereof quoad res praedestinatione praeparatas, as touching the things
prepared by predestination. As for example: Grace may be, and is the cause of
glory, and Christ's merits may be, and are the cause of grace. So of Reprobation
no cause thereof at all, quoad actum reprobantis, as touching the act of God
reprobating, no more then of the will of God, quoad actum volentis, as touching
the act of God willing: But there is a came thereof, quoad res reprobatione
praeparatas, as touching the things prepared by Reprobation, as sin is the
cause of condemnation. And indeed many confound these, and thereupon profess
the will of God in some cases to be conditional; the issue whereof is no more
then this, That some things which God will have to come to pass, shall not
come to pass but upon on condition. Thus Vossius understands voluntas
conditionata, a conditionate will, which he attributes unto God, not
considering how handsomely he contradicts himself. And Doctor Jackson of
Providence, discoursing of voluntas antecedens and consequens, will antecedent
and consequent, premiseth that the distinction is to be understood non quoad
actum vokntis, not touching the act of God willing, but quoad ves volitas, as
touching the things willed; though his discourse hereupon be nothing suitable.
A manifest evidence that he understood not the distinction any more then
Uossius did.

You are willing to acknowledge that Gods decree of delivering Christ to death,
was absolute, as a work of mere grace. As for the condition of Adams fall to
be premised to this decree, sure I am, that is not your Opinion: neither does
it become any to maintain any decree of God to be both unconditionall and
conditional. And why that sin more then any other for which Christ satisfied
should be imagined to be premised as a condition of this decree; I see no
reason: and if every sin must be presupposed, why not the sin of crucifying
Christ? This sin started Arminius; and this is it, and this alone, which he
thinkee good to except in this case. I do nothing wonder that his learning and
his honesty were so well met both of a very temperate nature. But albeit the
fall of Adam was not preconceived to this decree of delivering of Christ to
death; yet I am not of your Opinion, who think hereupon, that the decree of
sending Christ into the world, was before the decree of permitting Adams fall:
concerning which I have discoursed enough, while I examined how well you
cleared the first doubt. But when you distinguish of Gods decree to deliver
Christ to death, and to deliver him to a sinful death; you take a course to
make mad work amongst Gods decrees. As if God did first intend the generality
of a thing, and not till after the foresight of somewhat else intend the
specialty thereof. I will not tell you how undecent a course Schoolmen
conceive it to be, to attribute decrees to God of things indefinite; I never
found any Arminian take such a course, Philosophy has taught us, duplicem
ordinem naturae, a double order of nature; as namely, nature generantis, and
naturae intendentis, in generation and intention. And albeit, secundum naturam
generantem, communia and generalia, are priora specialibus, in generation,
things common and general are before their specialls: According as a man in
generation, prius vivit vitam plantae, first lives the life of a plant, then
vitam animalis, the life of an Animal. Lastly, vitam hominis, the life of a
man; yet quoad naturam intendentem, as touching the intention the order is
quite contrary, and that the more specialls (as more perfect) are first in
intention. And whereas intentio rerum gerendarum, the intention of things to be
done, is for the production of things in existence; and it is well known that
generals can not exist but in specials, nor specials exist but in particulars;
it is very strange that God should first intend to produce a Genius, and after
intend the specialty: seeing nothing can be produced but in particular. You
may as well say that God did first intend that Christ should die, but whether a
natural or violent death that was at first undetermined. Secondly, that God
determined he should die a violent death, but whether by a judicial
proceeding, or extrajudiciall, that as yet was left undetermined. And see
whether this might not be extended further also. But let us examine it by your
own rules, the best course to present before your eyes the strangeness of
these conceptions. Three things are to be considered as ordered by you one
after another. First, Gods absolute decree to deliver Christ to death.
Secondly, the foresight of men's corrupt dispositions. Thirdly, Gods decree to
deliver Christ to death by the sins of men.

Now men's sinful dispositions depending partly upon original sin derived unto
all from the sin of Adam; partly upon men's former actual conversations; as
also upon Gods permission of it to continue uncured and uncorrected; it
follows herehence, that the foresight of these sinful dispositions did
presupose both that God purposed to permit Adams fall, as also to bring these
men forth into the world in original sin, as also to permit their former
actual sins, whereby they arrive to these vicious habits; together with his
purpose to deny grace whereby these vicious habits should be corrected.

Before all these decrees, was the decree of delivering Christ to death by
certain sins of certain men, according to your Opinion in this place. Whence it
follows, that the delivering of Christ to death by the sins of men, being
last in intention, must be first in execution, to wit, before Adam was
suffered to fall, or they suffered by an evil conversation to arise to so
corrupt dispositions, or God denied them grace to correct such corrupt
dispositions. And though Christ's suffering death in a special manner, to wit,
by the sins of men, were to be first in execution, yet Christ's suffering death
in general and in an indefinite manner, was to be last in execution. And this
argumentation of mine throughout depends merely upon your own rules delivered
in clearing the first doubt. But pass we over these scrupulosities.

The course you take to explicate Gods providence in punishing sin with sin, is
nothing congruous to the examples thereof set down in holy Scripture. For
whereas Judas his betraying of Christ was a fruit of his covetousness, you
make Gods giving him over to the committing of this sin to be the punishment
of his covetousness. Likewise whereas the High Priests and Pharisees
conspiracy against Christ was a fruit of their envy; (for Pilate knew that for
envy they had delivered him) and of their ambition, as appears Joh. 11. 48.
you make Gods giving them over to the committing of this sin, to be the
punishment of their ambition and envy. In like sort that Pilate gave judgment
against Christ being a fruit of his popularity and worldly fear of Caesar, the
giving of him over to the committing of this sin, you make to be the
punishment of his popularity and worldly fear of Caesar. So the Jews crying
out against him being a fruit of their ignorance and infidelity, the giving
them over unto this sin, you make it to be the punishment of their ignorance
and infidelity.

Now show me any example throughout the book of God in punishing sin with sin,
answerable unto this. As if God did punish men's sinful dispositions by giving
them over to bring forth the proper and congruous fruits of those sinful
dispositions, Romans 1. We read God gave the Gentiles over into a reprobate
mind, to do things inconvenient, to commit horrible uncleanenesse. But God
hereby punished not the unclean disposition, the fruits whereof were brought
forth by Gods giving them over into a reprobate mind, but hereby God punished
their Idolatry, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 20. We read of Gods giving men over to illusions
to believe lies, hereby he did not punish their infidelity, the fruit whereof
was, the believing lies, but hereby he punished their want of love to Gods
truth. So when God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of
Sechem, to set them together by the ears, he did not hereby punish their
mutual hatred one against another, but rather their joint conspiracy against
the sons of Jerubbaal. I do not deny but it may be said, as Austin says,
that God has ordained, Ut omnis inordinatus animus paena sit sibi, That every
inordinate mind should be a punishment to it self; but in my judgment it is
a strange liberty of speech, to say, that God does punish a man for his
covetousness, by not restraining it, but suffering it to have his course.

What you mean by giving Judas over to betray Christ, I know not. Gods
providence operative in evil, is of an obscure nature. You speak of obduration
and of giving over unto sin, but wherein it consists you explicate not. Yet by
declining these phrases, you forsake the point in question: Which is not at
this present, whether God gave Judas over to the betraying of Christ, but
whether he decreed he should betray him, and the Priests conspire against
him, and the people prefer Barabbas before him, and Pilate condemn him. Which
because you not directly deny, the Question is transferred to the manner of
this decree: as namely, whether it be absolute or conditional. You will have
it to be conditional, to wit, upon the presupposall of Judas his
covetousness. Yet this you do not in plain terms express, as indeed you
seldom set down your meaning plainly, giving your self too much liberty in
speaking at large, which is no way conducing to the investigation of truth, but
a sore impediment rather. Having said that it is without warrant to say, that
the sinful manner of Christ's death was decreed by God by an unconditionall
decree, presupposing no condition in the creatures, which were the wicked
instruments of his death. Whereas hereupon you should show upon presupposall of
what condition in Judas, in the Priests, in Pilate, God decreed that Judas
should betray him, the Priests deliver him to Pilate, and Pilate condemn him:
you decline this, and in a new phrase tell us, that it was the punishment of
Judas his covetousness and hypocrisy, that God gave him up to betray Christ;
and in like manner you speak of the rest. Leaving to your Reader to expiscate
your direct meaning, and to explicate that which you involve. It seems your
meaning is, that upon the foresight of Judas his covetousness and hypocrisy,
God decreed he should betray him.

Now let us discuss this; If God did in this manner decree it, then certainly
upon the covetousness of Judas he brought this to pass. Now I demand by what
course of providence God brought it to pass, that Judas betrayed him? you say
it was by giving him over to betray him. Now what you mean by this I know not,
neither do you express: but I will endeavor to explain it.

First, I presume your meaning is God did not restrain his covetousness, for
this seems to be the meaning of this phrase, Psalm. 81. where it is said, God
gave them over to their own hearts lusts, and by way of explication it is
added, And let them follow their own inventions. Now this course of providence
was not sufficient to bring it to pass, that Judas should betray him. For this
is only to let him do what he will in the course of his covetousness. Now
though Judas was left to do what he would in the way of satisfying his
covetous course, yet it does not follow hereupon that Judas should betray
Christ. Therefore Arminius to this decree of God, presupposes not Judas his
covetousness only, but his will to betray Christ, as much as to say, God
foreseeing he would betray him, decreed he should betray him. To this
construction of Gods decree you come too near, though you do not deliver your
self thereof so plainly as he does, nor so plausibly. But the mischief is, it
is now confessed on all hands; that the very act of willing is wrought by God,
and consequently was decreed by God. Now upon what condition presupposed did
God decree that Judas should will the betraying of Christ? was it upon the
foresight of his will? If so, then also upon the presupposition of Judas his
will to do this, God did work his will to do this; which is flat
contradiction, in making Judas his will to do this, to go before his will to
do this. Besides, what need was there for God to work his will to do this,
when his will to do this is already presupposed? Bellarmine goes another way
to work, and confessing that God decreed that Christ should be betrayed and
crucified, yet denies that he decreed that any should betray and crucify him.
Christ's suffering was decreed and his patience therein, but not their sin in
putting him upon suffering. Your interpretation is less plain then theirs, but
equally with theirs removed from the truth. Punishment of sin always
presupposes (I confess) sin; but I deny that the decree of punishing sin
presupposes sin. If this argument were right; then it would follow, that
because to reward with everlasting life, presupposes good works, Gods decree
to reward with everlasting life, presupposes good works; which is as much to
say that election presupposes good works. For election is the decree of
bestowing everlasting life by way of reward; yet here you bring in Gods
punishing sin with sin, whereof there is no question here, and forbear to
speak of Gods decree, whereof alone is the present question. I pray you what
rewards does God dispense unto Reprobates in regard of their obedience? will
you deny plain Text of Scripture expressly professing, That we must all
appear asore the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive the
things which are done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or evil? Only here is the difference, Christ made satisfaction for
Gods Elect, and not of Reprobates. And also merited that God should enable his
Elect, and not Reprobates to perform obedience acceptable to God, according to
the Covenant of Grace, and that Salvation accordingly shall be bestowed upon
them by way of reward.

Yet I confess Gods equity and justice in dispensing rewards and punishments
is no way prejudiced by the absoluteness of his decree. For he has
absolutely decreed to deal with men according to that, which they have done in
their bodies whether it be good or evil; though the good which is done is
merely of Gods grace, and his rewarding men accordingly, is no impediment to
the course of his Covenant of Grace.

Gods calling of Reprobates we conceive consists in causing the Gospel to be
Preached unto them, which in effect is this, Whosoever believes shall be
saved, whosoever believes not shall be damned; judge you whether there be not
as much truth in Preaching this to Reprobates, as in Preaching it to the very
Elect of God.

The Seventh Doubt.
Question, 7.
THat if all be translated into Christ's Dominion, then the Infants of Turks.

First, how then says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 14.

Secondly, on all children dying before the guilt of actual sin, he will show
the riches of his grace, because their damnation cannot stand, with such an
equity of his justice as here is mentioned and made show of.

To this I answer, that when I say, that all the creatures are Answer. Col. 1.
3.
translated into the Dominion of Christ, I mean not into his Kingdom of a
grace, but into the dominion of his power; viz. to be disposed of by him, the
wicked to the praise of his justice, and both them and other creatures to the
service and exercise of his elect. Hence I conceive it to be that it is said,
that Christ has bought the dominion of such as deny him. Hence Romans 14. 9.
John 3. 35. Mar. 28. 18. Phil 1. 8, 9, 10, 11.
by his dying and rising again he is said to be the Lord both of the quick and
dead. Hence God is said to have given all things into his hand, with all power
both in heaven and earth. Neither am Lable to conceive how the whole body of
the Creature, I mean all the world beside Reprobates, can be said to wait for
the redemption, and restoring into the glorious liberty of the sons of God,
unless as they lost their liberty -- by the first Adam, so they had recovered
the same again by the redemption of the second Adam. If then all the creatures
be translated into the dominion of Christ, think it not absurd that the
Infants of Turks themselves be translated into the same dominion. The place
that may be alleged to the contrary, does prove the Infants of Infidels not to
be translated into the Kingdom of grace, or fellowship of his Church, but what
is that to this point touching children that die in their infancy before the
guilt of their actual sin? I would not hastily determine any thing. Praestat
dubitare de occultis, quam ligitare de incertis. It is better to doubt of
secret things, then wrangle about things uncertain. They stand or fall to him,
who has said of the Infants of such parents, as commend them to the blessing
of Christ, Of such is the kingdom of God. But to my understanding Mark 10. 14.
it is most agreeable to the analogy of faith to range little children under
the convenant of Parents, it being Gods usual manner of dealing, to visit the
sins of the Fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of
them that hate him, and to show mercy unto thousands of them that love him, and
keep his commandments.

That all creatures are under the dominion of Christ no ^^am.
Christian doubts, for as God, he made all things, Col. 1. John 1. and as
the son of God, he is the heir of all things, Heb. 1. When God brings in his
first begotten son into the world, he says of him, Let all the Angels of God
worship him, Heb. 1. 6. and Joh. 5. God has committed all judgment unto his
Son, and Joh. 17. 2. Thou have given him power over all flesh. But that he
has bought this dominion, well it may pass for an Oracle of flesh and blood,
but I have not hitherto found it to be an Oracle of God. Whatsoever is bought,
is bought with a price. And so whatsoever Christ has bought, he has bought
with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 20. and 7. 23. And this price wherewith Christ has
bought that which he has bought, is his blood, Rev. 5. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 18. But
blood is no sit price wherewith to buy Dominion. His blood is propitiatory and
satisfactory, and so fit only to buy poor souls, and to save them from
condemnation. And accordingly, the life that he gave for many, was given by
the way of ransom, Matthew. 20. 24. So that persons thereby are ransomed, rather
then any general dominion procured. And is it sit to say, that Christ by his
blood obtained dominion over the wicked to damn them for their sins? Rather the
power which he obtained was to give eternal life to them, whom his Father had
given him, Job. 17. 2. and that in despite of sin.

Again, is it fit to say that Christ by his blood bought dominion over brute
and senseless creatures? Or, that by his blood he obtained dominion over
Angels and Devils? Whom Christ bought, he bought unto God, Rev. 5. 9. And
shall we say that by his death he bought unto God the dominion over
Reprobates, whether Men or Angels, and over all other creatures?

Again, whom he bought, he bought from the earth, Rev. 14. 8. And from men,
ver. 4. Can this be verifyed of Angels of light, and of angels of darkness,
and of reprobate men, and of all Gods creatures?

Lastly, whom he bought by his blood, he redeemed from their vain
conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18. So he did not redeem either reprobate men, or
reprobate angels: and as for the Elect Angels they stood not in need of any
such Redemption, much less the brute creatures of God. Yet even of some that
were no better then Reprobates, it is said that he redeemed them, 2 Pet. 2. 1.
And hence Arminius inserres that the most wicked are redeemed by Christ, and
that in the same sense that Gods Elect are redeemed by Christ. You say he
redeemed, even the Reprobates, but not in the same manner as he redeemed the
Elect, but only that he bought the dominion of them. But this seems a forced
interpretation: For whom he has bought, they are his in special manner. But
to he Christ's, is peculiar to Gods Elect, 2 Cor. 3. ult. And hence the Apostle
infers, Glorify God in your bodies, 1 Cor. 6. ult. You will say, In what
sense does the Apostle say of wicked men, that the Lord redeemed them?

I answer, it may be said in the same sense wherein it is said of the gods of
Damascus that they plagued Ahaz: not that indeed they plagued him, or had any
power to plague him, for An Idol is nothing, says Paul, that is, has no power
to do good or evil, but it was Ahaz his opinion that they plagued him, and so
he sacrificed unto them.

Again, their former profession was such, that they were the redeemed of the
Lord as well as any other. So Piscator interpretech that place in Peter, as
spoken, not (...), but (...), not as it were so indeed, but in their opinion
only, or in the common opinion of others. The creature likewise shall be
restored by him, Act. 3. For the Heavens must contain him, till the time come
that God has appointed, for the restoring of all things. But that redemption
is not yet, neither has he purchased that redemption with his blood.

We deny not that all creatures are under the dominion of Christ, but that
they should be translated into his dominion by way of purchase by his blood,
that seems to me a strange conceit. Yet it suffices us that you confess,
that Turks, together with their Infants, are not translated into the kingdom
of Grace. By Infants of Turks we understand none other then such as dye in
their Infancy, and I wonder, you should distinguish betwixt them; Why you
should reckon the condition of Infants deceasing out of the Church, amongst the
number of the secret things of the Lord, I see no reason. Are they not born
children of wrath? And if they continue so from the time of their conception
unto their birth, why not as well from the time of their birth, to the time of
their death dying in their Infancy? And can we doubt what is the condition of
those who dye children of wrath? does not God say of the Sodomites, that they
suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, and were there (think you) no Infants at
all amongst them? As for those who are commended to the blessing of Christ, I
make no question but that of such is the Kingdom of God. For the Apostle
teaches us, that if but one parent be a believer, the children are holy, but
if neither are, they are unclean.

But if they die in their uncleanenesse, unwashed, unsanctifyed, what shall
become of them?

You do well in mine opinion, to range little children under the covenant of
their Parents: that I like well: but I like not so well the reason whereby you
enforce it. For the sins of the Father who is under one Covenant may be
visited upon their children unto the third and fourth generation who are under
another covenant. For the sins committed in the days of Manasses, were in the
captivity of Babylon, visited upon the children in a fourth generation after,
and that upon as gracious children as were those that were represented by the
basket of good figs, Jer. 24. And the Covenant between Jonathan and David,
was only the preservative for keeping gracious Mephibosheth, from having
visited upon him the sins of his Grandfather Saul, in slaying the Gibeonites.
Neither yet have we cause to complain as the heathen does Delicta majorum
immeritus lues Roman. For if I mistake not, there is a great deal of
difference between punishing the Son for the sin of the Father, (which has no
place at all in Gods providence, excepting the case of punishing original sin,
if so it has place in that) and visiting the sin of the Father upon the Son.
This being the punishment of the Father rather then of the Son; And God being
able to sanctify any temporal affliction that falls upon the son for the
sin of his Father, either while the Father lives or after, and to make it fall
amongst the number of those things which work together for his good.

The Eighth and lost Doubt.
Question 8.
HOw may it appear, that this makes not three Covenants? The first of works,
requiring perfect obedience.

The second of grace, promising Christ and all his graces, even faith in him.

The third, partly of grace, providing a redemption, and promising sufficient
help; partly as requiring both what we can do of our selves, and Gods help
proceeding with us accordingly.

Answer. This frame of Doctrine is so far from making three Covenants, that
the serious meditation of two Covenants The Examination must proceed according
to this correction.
was one of the principal reasons that first turned the stream of my thoughts
into this covenant. For when I saw that the Covenant of works did in justice
reward according to works, as well with life upon condition of obedience, as
with death in case of disobedience; I began to conceive, that as the purpose of
election was suitable to the Covenant of grace; so suitable unto a Covenant of
works, must be a purpose of retribution. For how shall God covenant to
retribute or recompense with life or death according to works, if he have no
purpose at all of such retribution? How shall the Covenant of works promise
life upon condition of obedience, if the purpose of reprobation have absolutely
determined death upon all them within that Covenant, without all respect of
good or evil, obedience or disobedience in any of them? the grace of
redemption offering the death of Christ, and reaching forth some fruits
thereof unto all, as the promising and offering sufficient help to bring them
to the knowledge of God and means of grace: yea, and sometime bestowing on them
the participation of some excellent and common graces, does not make a third
covenant, partly of grace, partly of works, but binds such so much the more
to keep the Covenants of works, by how much the more helps and means God
vouchsafes them to keep it. It is not the helps of grace offered or given,
that includes men with in any part of the Covenant of grace, but the condition
whereupon it is offered or given.

Secondly, if God offer grace and give, though never so small, even as a grain
of Mustard Seed, and promise to uphold it freely for Christ his sake, and not
according to our works, it is a Covenant of Grace. But if he offer and give
never so many gracious helps, and means, and gifts, and uphold them according
to the works of the creature; it is still a Covenant of works, as it was to the
Angels that fell, and to Adam, though he gave to both of them the whole Image
of God, and besides, heaven it self to the one, a Paradise to the other, it is
but the same covenant of works which God made with the world of mankind after
the fall, and with Adam before the fall: though Adam received greater means and
helps to keep it, then his posterity had after the fall.

Because still the condition of the Covenant was the same in both, to reward
them both according to their works. So is it still but the same Covenant of
works which God makes with mankind, when he offers them in Christ, greater
grace and helps to keep it, then after the fall they could have attained unto
without Christ, because still the condition of the Covenant runs in the same
tenor, to deal with them according to their works.

Neither do I conceive any danger in the point, though by this means obedience
to Christ, and walking worthy of him, should be commanded in the Law, which is
a covenant of works. For if the infidelity and disobedience of the men of this
world to the Gospel of Christ be sin, then are they also transgressors of the
Law, and then the contrary virtues are commanded in the Law.

Thirdly, the Ceremonies of the Old Testament, which were figures of Christ,
were commanded in the second precept of the Law, was not Christ himself under
those figures commanded also? were they commanded to lay their hands on the
sacrifices, and not withal to lay their Faith on Christ? were they commanded
to look on the Brazen Serpent, and not withal to behold Christ? were they
commanded to obey Moses, and not withal the Prophet like unto Moses? What
then? do we confound the Law and the Gospel? God forbid; The Law indeed
commands to obey God in whatsoever he had of old, or in fullness of time,
should afterward reveal to be his will: but it is one thing to command
Christ to be obeyed and revealed, (which after Christ is revealed, even the
Law also does to all that hear it) another thing it is to give Christ freely,
and faith to receive him, and the spirit likewise to obey him, yea and
perseverance also notwithstanding our unworthiness to continue in him, all
which the Gospel promises to the Elect of God.

Glory be to God in Christ, and peace upon Israel.

If the serious consideration of two convenants did turn the Exam.
stream of your thoughts into this Indeed it should be not Covenant, as my
Copy had it, but current, as a friend showed me how to correct it.
covenant, it should seem you do acknowledge a third covenant, distinct from
the former two. Therefore I conceive there is an error in the writing, and
that whereunto the stream of your thoughts was turned, is not a different
covenant from the former two, but rather an opinion concerning reprobation,
different from that which is most generally received amongst our Divines. And
albeit hereupon you fell on this; yet herehence it follows not, but that you
might hereby fall upon laying a ground for three covenants ere you are aware.
Yet do I not charge you with this. As in some respect you may seem to make
three; so in another respect you may seem to make but one; if the covenant of
retribution according unto works be but one; For I see no reason but Gods
purpose of election, may well pass for a purpose of retribution; and
consequently, if the purpose of election and reprobation be reduced unto one,
why may not the covenant of works and the covenant of grace, by your rules be
reduced into one? As election is Gods purpose to bestow everlasting life,
seeing God does not purpose to bestow it, but by way of reward of obedience, of
faith and repentance, and good works; it necessarily follows that Gods
election is his purpose of retribution. But there is besides in election, a
purpose to work a certain number of men unto faith, obedience, and good works,
and unto a final perseverance in them all. So likewise between the covenant of
the Law and the covenant of Grace, there is this principal difference: that
God inables his elect to the performance of the one, not of the other; but as
touching the reprobate, he inableth them to the performance of neither
condition. Subservient to Gods election of some is each covenant. The covenant
of works to humble them, not only upon the consideration of their sins,
whereby they have merited eternal death; but especially upon consideration how
their natural corruption is so far from being mastered and corrected by the
Law, as that on the contrary it is irritated and exasperated so much the more.
Then the covenant of grace to comfort them, considering how the condition of
life is adulced and tempered, being from exact and strict obedience changed
into faith and repentance; but chiefly upon consideration that the word of
this covenant is a word of power mastering their corruption, and inabling to
perform faith, repentance, and Evangelicall obedience in an acceptuble manner
unto the Lord. Subservient to the purpose of reprobation may be the Law, only
written in men's hearts, which very obscurely, intimates (if at all) any
covenant made of everlasting life between God and man. Where the word is
revealed, that in general comprehending both Law and Gospel, is subservient
thereunto in the way of instruction and exhortation, and the like, thereby
taking away all excuse.

Of any other end intended toward them I know not, except sometimes, as Austin
observes, Ut proficiant ad exteriorem vitae emendationem quo mitius puniantur.
And why I pray may not the covenant of works promise life upon condition of
obedience, notwithstanding the purpose of reprobation has absolutely
determined death, upon all them within the Covenant: as well as the Covenant of
grace threatens death upon condition of disobedience of faith and repentance:
notwithstanding that the purpose of election has absolutely determined life
upon all them within that Covenant. And yet like as in election we acknowledge
a respect to obedience, consequent thereunto, in as much as it includes a
purpose to give grace to work them to obedience, though not any respect thereto,
as antecedent to the decree it self; how much more may you easily conceive,
that in reprobation we deny not a respect to disobedience consequent, for as
much as it includes a purpose to deny grace, which alone can prevent
disobedience, though not any respect to disobedience as antecedent to the
decree of reprobation? And to repeat by the way, that which formerly has been
delivered.

Respect to disobedience as antecedent to the decree of damnation cannot be
imagined, unless withal you imagine God did first decree to permit it, and
thereupon for the foresight thereof decree to damn for it: Whence it follows
that permission of disobedience must be first in intention, in comparison with
condemnation, and consequently it must be last in execution by your own rules,
formerly laid down as unquestionable foundations. Yet do not I maintain that
God in any moment of nature, does first decree damnation, and then decree the
permission of sin, for which he damnes them; I make these decrees not
subordinate as most do, but coordinate and joint decrees, being only
concerning means tending to the same end. And with Aquinas, I say that
reprobation includes Voluntatem permittendi culpam, and condemnationem
inferendi proculpa. The end whereof is the demonstration of his glory in the
way of justice. But withal I desire that culpa in this description of
reprobation may be understood aright, and not as Arminius does, whose
superficial consideration of things is usually for his advantage, making him
thereby the more to abound in arguments for the impugning of his adversaries
opinions, according to his own shaping of them quite beside their meaning. For
culpa is not fin in general in this definition, but only such a sin, propter
quod quis damnatur, for which a man is damned; that is, final perseverance in
insidelity or impenitency. When you say the grace of redemption offers the
death of Christ, and reaches forth some fruit thereof unto all, you walk
according to your course in the clouds of your own mysteries.

What you mean by these fruits you speak of, and by the reaching of them
forth, I am utterly to seek; neither does ought you have formerly delivered
help me in this. But in these particulars it seems you love to speak darkly;
and keep your self to general terms. I know no condition proposed in the
Gospel, for receiving of any benefit from Christ, but faith and repentance. But
you seem to bring in gracious helps for the obtaining of faith and repentance,
to be tendered unto us for Christ's sake upon other conditions, I know not what;
neither have. I hitherto received any ground of assurance from this your
discourse, that your self know what. In the next place you seem to specify
what these fruits are, as when you say, that it promises and offers
sufficient help to bring them to the knowledge of God, and means of grace,
still keeping your self in the general, as if you feared to be understood.
And I wonder not a little that your self being a man of such reputation, and
much exercised in giving satisfaction, addressing your self to give
satisfactivn in so tender and precious points of Divinity as these, should
deliver your self in so strange a language. But let us take the more pains in
discussing the clouds of your Phrasiologies. When you say the grace of
redemption promises and offers sufficient helps; your meaning must be that
the Gospel of Christ does promise and offer this, for as much as we are
acquainted with no promises of Grace but in the Gospel. Yet this phrase of
expressing, used by you, is enough to trouble a Reader, who when the matter we
treat of is difficult enough, might justly desire that he might not be put to
other trouble, as to interpret men's expressions. Yet it may be you may think
to have a ground for this out of Saint Paul, where he says, The grace of God
which brings salvation has appeared unto all, teaching us to deny
ungodliness; and by which grace he seems to mean the Gospel. Be it so, yet
Saint Paul does not call it the grace of redemption, as you do. Redemption in
Scripture phrase signifies forgiveness of sins, Ephesians. 1. 7. and Col. 1. 14.
If this be your meaning, I find no congruity in this your affirmation. For
what? will you say the Gospel preached, does promise and offer to bring men to
the knowledge of God, and means of grace? I had thought rather it had brought
the knowledge of God and means of grace to them. Or rather is the very
bringing of it, or to speak more properly is the very means of grace it self.
All which considered, I am yet to seek of your meaning, I find it so miserably
involved, and that in the very close of all, enough to make any intelligent
Reader despair to receive satisfaction from you, when in the very last act he
shall find himself so far from making any tolerable construction of your
words, thereby to pick out any sober meaning.

Then again, by offering helps, you seem to imply some terms or condition
whereupon it is offered them, but no such condition is expressed by you. If it
had, perhaps thereby we might have taken the altitude. I mean the depth of
your meaning throughout. The same grace of redemption bestows also (you say)
sometimes some excellent though common graces. I have heard (I confess) you
stand much upon common graces. But what they are, and to what end they tend,
and whether absolutely or conditionally imparted according to your opinion:
when I shall be sufficiently informed, I will do my best endeavor to weigh
them in the balance of Christian and Scholasticall examination, and
accordingly to give them that due respect which belongs unto them. It may be
about a third covenant, which they might seem to make, partly of grace and
partly of works: I should not be much contentious. Yet it follows not, that
because they do bind the more to the keeping of the Covenant of works, as
having more means and helps vouchsafed unto them; therefore it does not make a
third Covenant: You say it is not the helps of grace offered or given, that
include men within any part of the covenant of grace, but the condition
whereupon it is offered or given: that is, whereupon they are offered or given,
to wit, the helps of grace.

Here new mysteries offer themselves again, I must be driven Balaam-like to
cast about for divinations: and whether in the issue I shall find that I seek
for, I cannot assure my self. You came but now from speaking of common graces,
and by the coherence, these helps of grace which here you speak of, should be
those common graces, considered as helps of grace special. Now had you given
instance, and showed what these common graces are, they might of themselves
have discovered the reference wherein they stand unto grace special, which I
guess to be faith and repentance. This you might easily have done, and saved
us a great deal of irresolution and pains also, partly in seeking after that
which we cannot easily find, and partly in laboring to disprove we know not
what. This confused course proceed in some from an ill mind, fearing lest
their opposites should have too much liberty by their plain dealing to impugn
them, but in good men it proceeds from the weakness of their cause, and from
the uncertainty and ambiguity of their thoughts, for the justifying of that
which they do maintain. But let us proceed. These helps of grace by which I
hope you mean, helps unto faith and repentance, you plainly signify are
offered upon a condition, and by the quality of this condition we may judge
whether they to whom they are offered are included within the covenant of grace
or no.

Now let us endeavor to sound your meaning; These helps of grace must needs
be, either outward means, or inward qualities and habits.

By helps I should understand outward means, after mine own phrase of speech,
and by yours also I have good cause; for as much as in the words immediately
going before, you join helps and means together, and confound common graces
with them both. As for means of grace, they are not given upon condition; for
what condition can be imagined whereupon the Gospel should be given to a
Nation? shall it be the using of their naturalls right? how will you be able
to make it good, that heathen men before they enjoyed the Gospel, did use their
naturalls right? Did the Corinthians who were carried away with dumb Idols even
as they were led? 1 Cor. 12. 2. And for not honoring God as God, did not God
give them up into a reprobate mind, to do things inconvenient as well as
others, thereby to receive the recompense of their errors? Judge of this by
that which the Apostle minds them of, 1 Cor. 6. For after he had told them
that neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Wantons, nor
Buggerers, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Raylers, nor
Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, ver. 9. 10. forthwith he
adds (...), these things were some of you, as much as to say, some of you
were fornicators, some adulterers, some Idolaters, some wantons, some
buggerers, some thieves, some covetous, some drunkards, some raylers, some
extortioners; or some of them in diverse kinds, if not in all these kinds
liable to condemnation, and utter exclusion out of the Kingdom of God: But (yet
for all this) ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in
the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God, ver. 11. And is it
not manifest that when the Gospel is first preached to any Nation, it is
preached as well to the uncivil as to those that are civil: as well to the
debauched as to the moral?

Again, In this case, the Gospel should be bestowed by way of reward of
obedience: but obedience is no obedience, unless it be performed upon
knowledge, in obedience unto some Law given. Now how could the Gentiles know of
any such Law, that whosoever used their naturalls should be rewarded with the
benefit of the Gospel; seeing this is no where pretended to be revealed but in
the Gospel? So that as soon as any man hears of such a Law, he already enjoys
the Gospel. The two first of these arguments may as well be applied against
this doctrine of yours, if by helps of Grace you mean some habits or qualities
besides that which may be further alleged upon your specification, what these
habits and qualities are.

And here is a fair way opened for a third Covenant; for as for the two
covenants commonly acknowledged, they are only for the obtaining of Salvation
different ways: besides which here is brought in another Covenant for the
obtaining the means of grace, and that different ways also, to wit, either by
works or by Grace. But when I look unto your former words and consider them
well, as when you say it is not the helps of grace offered or given, that
include men within any part of the Covenant of grace, but the condition
whereupon it is offered or given, these words, It is offered or given, perhaps
are not referred to the helps of grace, but rather to the grace it self, yet I
interpret them of the helps of grace, with no other mind then to salve this
rule of yours from manifest contradiction.

For by your rule you profess, that the inclusion of some within the covenant
of grace, and the exclusion of others, depends not upon any indifference in the
things offered or given, but only on the condition whereupon they are offered
or given; manifestly implying thereby, that the same things are given to them
that are without the covenant, and to them that are within; but the difference
is only in the condition whereupon they are given.

But if your rule run thus, it is not the helps offered or given, that include
a man within the Covenant of grace, but the condition whereupon the grace it
self is given. Hereby you manifest that they within the Covenant of grace, and
they without are distinguished, not only by the condition, whereupon that
which they have is given, but also by the things themselves which are given
them: for as much as only the helps of grace are given to the one, to wit, to
them that are without the covenant, but not only helps of grace, but grace it
self is given to the other, which serves directly contrary to your rule here
given: not to speak of the miserable confusion that like a Leprosy seizes
upon your manner of expression, and which you hold up in the beginning of your
next section. But before I come to the scanning thereof, let me tell you of
your dis-junctive phrase, as when you said, offered or given; this is very
ill-accommodated to the helps of grace, if you mean helps outward, such as
the Gospel; for the Gospel where it is preached, there it is not only offered,
but hoc ipso given.

The phrase offered, is as ill accommodated to grace it self in respect of the
condition, whereupon depends admission into the convenant of grace. For to
offer to a man admission into the covenant of grace upon condition, is to offer
it upon a condition to be performed by him to whom it is offered. But such an
offering your self confess does savor of a covenant of works, but when the
condition is merely for Christ's sake, that you say makes the covenant of grace.
Now to that which follows.

If God offer (say you) and give it, to wit, [grace] though never so small,
even as a grain of mustard seed, and promises to uphold it freely for Christ's
sake, and not according to our works, it is a covenant of grace. But if he
offer and give never so many helps, and means, and gifts, and uphold them
according to the works of the creature, it is still a covenant of works, as it
was to the Angels that fell, and to Adam. Here you continue your former
confusion; for pretending to maintain the difference between them within, and
them without the covenant of grace, as depending merely upon the condition,
whereupon things are given; you notwithstanding this, make a difference also in
the things given. For the one thing, given to them within the covenant of
grace, you seem to make grace it self, though perhaps as small as a grain of
mustard seed, and not only helps of grace; but the things given to them
without the Covenant, are only gracious helps and means. And withal you deal
not fairly in the expression of that which you intend; for you do not make it
plainly appear, that you put a difference between the things given (lest you
should contradict your self, for you place the difference only in the
condition whereupon the thing given, is given) but that which is given to them
within the covenant of grace you formerly expressed by the relative [it], which
made me in doubt whether I should refer it to grace it self; or to the helps
of grace; yet forthwith on the other side running again to helps, you do not
style them helps of grace, as before you did, which does manifestly distinguish
helps of grace, from grace it self, but you call them gracious helps and means,
and not contented with that, you add gifts also, as if your purpose were not
to distinguish them from grace in the other member of the comparison mentioned,
but rather to confound them therewith. Which I confess sorts best with your
rule, which places the difference only in the condition of the things given,
and not in the things given themselves. And this is further confirmed by the
instance given in Angels and Adam, where you plainly give us to understand,
that by gracious helps and means, and gifts given them, you understand the
Image of God; which clearly signifies not any outward help and means, (after
which manner I was prone to interpret this phrase of yours) but the very inward
sanctification of their natures, which in my judgment is very untowardly
called means of grace, or helps of grace.

Whereas it is rather, that holy power wherewith God had endued them to perform
that which he had commanded them. For of Adam, that is undoubtedly true which
Austin says, namely, that God gave Adam, posse si voluit; non dedit velle quod
potuit, power to obey if he would, but not a will to do that which he could;
and questionless it is as true of the Angels as of Adam.

And this power I confess had continued in them, had they performed actual
obedience according to that power, whereof by their disobedience they were
deprived. Whereby you give me good ground to guess, what that opinion of
yours is, (which you carry wondrous closely, (and I verily believe because of
the offensive nature thereof to good men, such as your self) namely, That power
to believe and repent is given to them as well without the covenant, as to them
within; like as both Angels and Adam before their fall, had power to perform
obedience to Gods Commands: But to them within the covenant of grace, it is
given and upheld only for Christ's sake; to others it is to be given and
upheld only according to the covenant of work, that is, upon condition of
some performance of theirs. But yet of the full pourtraiture of your opinion, I
am to seek in some particulars: As

First, what the condition is upon the performance whereof they shall have
power given them to believe and repent. Whatsoever you say, or give instance
in, if it be a work of nature, it will necessarily follow that grace shall be
possibly, at least resolved into a work of nature; then we are where we are,
and still to seek how they came by power to perform that work of grace.

Secondly, I am to seek by what means God does work this power, whether only
by persuasion, which is only a moral action, or by an immediate change of
their natures by the inspiration of Gods Spirit.

Now the first of these cannot be; for persuasion has no power to change the
nature of ought, and work new powers in it, which are not wrought without
giving a new life. And indeed persuasion tends rather to move men to do that
which they have power to do, then from thence to receive a power of doing. We
do not persuade men, ut possint aliquid facere, sed ut velint, and ut faciant,
to be able to do ought, but to move them to be willing to do it.

If by immediate inspiration giving a new life, then it follows that
regeneration is a common grace, possible at least, given to them as well
without the Covenant of grace, as to them within: to the Reprobates as well as
to the Elect, and that upon performance of a work of nature. And because it
were in vain to speak of upholding it after it is given, unless it were given
indeed, you imply hereby that even this power is given to Reprobates. But
whereas it is to be upholden but upon condition, yet you do not express what
this condition is. But I guess the condition hereof is the exercising of this
power; like as upon the exercising of the power which God gave Angels and Adam,
before the fall, they had been confirmed in their integrity. But what if they
do not believe or repent for a year or two together; yet I presume you will not
say they are thereupon deprived of this power, but that it continues for ought
we know to the contrary to their lives end; though it fell out quite
contrarily with Angels and Adam, who immediately upon their disobedience were
deprived of this power. What is your meaning when you say, God offers mankind
in Christ, greater grace and helps to keep the Covenant of works, then after
the fall they could have attained to without Christ, I cannot easily
comprehend, and throughout find you very close and reserved hereupon, which to
speak like a free man, is no good dealing.

First, I know not what that grace and help is, which here you speak of. If
your meaning be no more but this, that they have more power to perform the
Covenant of works through Christ, then otherwise; (as I guess it will come to
no more in the end) I pray you what think you of mankind before Christ came
into the world, had they this power you speak of through Christ? If you think
they had, I pray you how came they by it? If only it hold of mankind since
the preaching of the Gospel; I demand whether of all, or some? if of all, then
you must acknowledge the Gospel to be preached to all. If only of them to whom
it is preached; yet the question still is, whether it be wrought by persuasion
or inspiration.

Secondly, in saying that in Christ they have greater grace to help to keep it,
your phrase does imply, that even without Christ men have grace and helps and
power to keep the Covenant of works. In a word, dare you say that any natural
man has any power to be subject to the Law of God, or to do that which is
pleasing in Gods sight? If you say they have any such power, I demand whether
ever any were found subject to the Law of God, or did that which was pleasing
in Gods sight? It is very strange that never any such act should proceed from a
power so general. If they were, or did that which was pleasing in Gods sight,
then they were not in the flesh, for they that are in the flesh cannot please
God. Romans 8.


Lastly, when you say, these helps or this power is offered them in Christ, it
implies that upon some condition performable on their parts it is offered unto
them. Now it were very requisite you should deal plainly, and express this
condition, which you do not. I confess I see no danger in acknowledging that
God purposes to deal with mankind according to their works; nay I wonder you
should exclude the elect from the number of those with whom God deals in this
manner, when the Apostle professes so directly, we must all appear before
the judgment seat of God, that every man may receive the things which are done
in his body, according to that he has done, whether good or evil, 2 Cor. 5.
10. Only for Christ's sake God gives faith and repentance to some, working in
them that which is pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ; and does not
deal in the like mercy with others.

The rest of this Section I dislike not.

Glory be to God in Christ, and peace upon Israel, In submission unto his
Truth.

For why should we lie for God, as man does for man, to gratify him?

For an Auctarium, here is laid down a short Survey of the ninth Chapter to the
Romans, so far as it treats of the Doctrine of Predestination: the better
to clear some passages of the former Discourse.
THe whole Chapter from the first verse to the 23. is taken Analysis.
up in the answering of objections, each latter arising from the answer to the
former: for the Apostle having taught in the last verse of the former Chapter,
that nothing can separate us from the love of God in Christ gives occasion of
this doubt that may arise.

Quest. What think you of the Jews, are not they the Elect people of God, and
yet are not they separate from Christ?

Answ. The Apostle does not plainly affirm it, that they are separate from
Christ, but with much compassion bewailes it, yea, and protests, that he
would wish himself rather separate from Christ for their sakes: The grounds of
which he renders to be for his kindreds sake, ver. 3. for their privileges
sake, ver. 4, 5.

This coherence I could brook well enough, only I say it is devised at
pleasure: and I find it is a general course to feign Exam.
coherences, and sometimes only to shape thereby some conformation of the
Apostles meaning to their interpretation of him. The Apostle I am sure makes
none, and accordingly Ludovious Leoburgensis professes, saying, Prorsus nova
disputatio instituitur, in qua tametsi doctrinam de Justificatione alicubi
repetit and intertexit, tamen duas alias materias principales tractat:
videlicet, quis sit vere populus Dei, seu quae sit vera Ecclesia, and de
vocatione Gentium. Judaei contendebant, se esse Ecclesiam, se esse populum; ad
se solos pertinere promissiones. Paulus respondet Elector esse populos Dei. The
disputation here instituted by the Apostle, is altogether new, wherein although
he does sometimes repeal and insert the Doctrine of Justification; yet he
handles two other principal matters, to wit, who are the people of God in
truth, and which is the true Church; and of the calling of the Gentiles. The
Jews contended that they were the Church, they were Gods people, and that to
them alone pertained the promises. Paul answers that the Elect alone are Gods
people.

Analysis. What is then the word (the word of promise of inseparable
conjunction with Christ) to them of none effect?

Answ. No, all are not Israel which are of Israel: nor are all the children of
Abraham, that are of the seed of Abraham, but in Isaac are his seed called,
viz. Not the children of Abraham's flesh are the children of God, but the
children of promise, ver. 6, 7, 8. which he proves by a twofold instance, or
example.

First, of Isaac the seed of Abraham by Sarah, who was given unto him as his
seed by the word of promise, ver. 9.

Secondly, of Jacob the seed of Isaac by Rebekah, of whom another promise was
given, that the elder brother should be to him a servant, ver, 11.

Which promise touching Jacob is amplifyed by,

First, the freeness of it, all cause of different acceptance being removed
from the two brethren, and in regard, first, of parentage, ver. 10. secondly,
of personal condition and indowments, ver. 11. which freeness is also further
set forth by the end of it, that the purpose of God might stand firm, as not
depending on any condition in the Creature, ver. 11.

Secondly, A parallel promise suiting to it, preferring Jacob before Esau in
Gods affection, when they were both considered only as brethren, ver. 13.

These words of the Apostle are I confess the key of the whole Exam.
Chapter, for opening the meaning, or at least making way to a fair
understanding of all that follows. If the Jews are rejected as the Apostle
presupposes (to wit, as touching the most of them) in the former words, then
it may seem that Gods word is of none effect, which consequence, (the Apostle
supposing such a consequence likely to be made) by his denying of it does
imply, that there was some Word of God that seemed to be made of none effect
by this Doctrine concerning the rejection of the Jews. This word therefore is
to be inquired into, the investigation whereof will give light to all the
rest. Now this word can be no other then the word of some promise made by God
for the taking of the seed of Abraham to be his people, to be his Church. For
such a promise alone seems to stand in contradiction unto our Christian
Doctrine, concerning the rejection of the Jews. And indeed such a promise God
made to Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee,
and thy seed after thee, for an everlasting Covenant, To be a God to thee and
to thy seed after thee. This I conceive to be the Word of God, which the
Apostle had before his eyes when he delivered this, and denied that this word
and promise of God can be of none effect; although it be granted, that most
part of the Jews be rejected, provided that all are not. And he gives this
reason, to wit, because this word and promise of God concerning Abraham's seed
to be taken into his Covenant of Grace, did not comprehend all his seed: for
all are not Israel, that are of Israel, etc. seeing then we do not maintain
that all Israel are rejected (for as it follows, Romans 11. 1. I demand then;
Has God cast away his people? God forbid, For I am also an Israelite. God has
not cast away his people whom he knew before, ver. 5. Even so then at this
present there is a remnant according to the Election of grace. Withal the
Apostle signifies that not one of Gods people is rejected: to wit, not one of
them whom he did foreknow, which Romans 9. 8. are called children of promise, in
opposition to the children of the flesh: alluding to Isaac, who was begotten
beyond the power of nature, and by virtue of Gods promise made to Abraham for a
Son, when both he and Sarah were dead as touching any natural power to beget,
or conceive a Child. But God to make his promise good, enabled them with power
hereunto above nature. And conformably hereunto alluding also to the condition
of Gods children begotten unto him, not by power of nature, but above nature,
by virtue of a promise likewise, even that which he made unto Abraham, that in
his seed (that is, in Christ) all the Nations of the earth should be blessed.
That is, the Elect of God amongst all Nations. And to make this good by the
power of his grace and his holy Spirit, he begets them unto himself, each in
his appointed time according to their generations.

Quest. Is there not then unrighteousness with God to deal so unequally with
persons equal? ver. 14.

Answ. God forbid, which denial the Apostle proves by a double testimony of
Moses, both of them declaring the absolute Sovereignty of God over the
creatures, and thereby his liberty to deal diversely or unequally with persons
equal.

First, the one by showing the independency of his mercy, ver. 15. wherein he
infers a Corollary denying the obtaining of mercy to the means which the
creature uses who finds mercy, ver. 16.

Secondly, by declaring and setting forth the right God challenges to himself,
to stir up a sinful Creature to this purpose, to show his power on him,
though it be in his just hardening and overthrow, ver. 17. Where he infers
another Corollary arising from both these places, ascribing as well the
hardening of the creature that is hardened, as the showing mercy to him that
obtains mercy, both to the absolute Sovereignty of Gods will, ver. 18.

This objection arises from the consideration of the equality Exam.
of Esau and Jacob, before they were born, and whilst they were in their
mothers womb.

The Answer is rightly conceived, as freeing God from injustice, by reason of
the sovereignty he has over his creatures and liberty thereupon to deal, not
only as here it is expressed in general, diversely, or unequally with persons
equal (for so he deals even with his Elect) giving a greater measure of
grace to one, as even to Saul a persecutor and less to another though never so
moral, and free from such as the world accounts foul sins before their
callings, but so unequally as to show mercy unto one, and to deny mercy unto
the other. For the more full explication whereof we are to consider, that
righteousness or Justice is taken in a double notion. The one is, when things
are carried toward men according to their works: The other is, when a man does
no other thing then he has power to do; as in executing the power that God
has given them over inferior Creatures, we are just though we do kill
Sheep, or Oxen, etc. Not in reference to any works of theirs, but only in
reference to our own necessary use, and unto that lawful power which God has
given us to serve our own turns of them. And thus God is not unjust or
unrighteous, but righteous and just, in showing mercy on some, and not on
others, when there is no difference between them.

But whereas it is said, ver. 16. that the Apostle infers a Corollary,
denying the obtaining of mercy to the means, which the Creature uses to find
mercy; implying that when the Apostle says, it is not of him that wills, and
of him that runs, this of willing and running are the means to obtain
mercy.

I no way like this, for if it be understood of willing and running in a
natural manner, such willing and running are no means to obtain mercy: Or if
it be to be understood of willing and running in a gracious manner; whosoever
thus wills and runs has obtained mercy: as the Apostle signifies when
he says, I found mercy that I should be faithful. And to obtain mercy in
the Apostles phrase, Romans 11. 30. 1 Cor 7*
and 31. is clearly to obtain faith and repentance; So that according to this
exposition, the meaning of the Apostle is this; though man is he who believes
and repents, yet the glory of all is to be given unto God, as who shows
mercy to whom he will, when as freely he denies it to others, and so
hardneth them. And that this is the Apostles meaning in this place, it
appears by the Antithesis which the Apostle makes, between showing mercy on
the one side, and hardening on the other.

Again, whereas the right of God in stirring up a creature to this purpose to
show his power on him, though it be in his hardening, and overthrow; this right
I say, or rather the exercise of this right in God, is confined to a sinful
creature, this is quite besides the Apostles Text; For albeit the creatures he
speaks of (as Pharaoh and the rebellious Israelites) were sinful creatures,
yet it does not follow that the Apostle in the Doctrine which here he
delivers, takes any notice of their sinfulness; As indeed it is apparent
that he does not justify Gods courses here mentioned upon the consideration
of their sinfulness, but only upon the consideration of Gods Sovereignty over
his creatures. And indeed it is plain, that of two sinners God can give the
grace of raising from sin to whom he will, and deny it unto the other: so it
is manifest that of two creatures standing in the estate of grace; God can
maintain the one in that estate by his corroborating grace, and by denying the
same grace, permit the other to fall from that estate of innocence wherein he
stood; As it is clear in the difference that God put betwixt the Angels that
stood, to wit, his elect Angels,) and those that fell; they that stood being
amplius adjuti, more succored then the other, as Austin professes, De Civ.
Dei, lib. 12. cap. 9. And Coquaeus at large upon him. So that in this respect
the denying of corroborating grace to those Angels that fell, while before they
were without sin, was just with God; not in any reference unto their works, as
if they had deserved that God should permit them to fall into sin, it being
impossible that any creature should deserve this. For in this case there should
be acknowledged a sin to precede the first sin, which cannot be avouched,
without manifest contradiction. But it is just in respect of Gods Sovereignty
to keep from sin whom heo will, and to permit whom he will to fall into sin.

Quest. Thou will further say unto me, Why does he yet find fault, for who
has resisted his will?

Answ. To this the Apostle returns answer in four material points.

First, He checketh the petulancy of the creature, by showing that though God
should harden the creature by his irresistible will, yet it is not for the
creature to reply thus to God; this he does by a comparison, arguing Gods
Sovereignty over the creature, suitable to the power which the potter has over
the clay, ver. 20.

Secondly, he admits a deny all or at least a mitigation of the rigor of
that word objected in the manner of Gods hardening by his irresistible will,
instead whereof the Apostle implies, he does rather harden by his suffering
and long patience. What if God suffer in long patience, etc. ver. 22.

Thirdly, He clears the justice of God in hardening the creature, by showing
the conditions of those persons, whom he thus hardneth, not creatures that
have done neither good nor evil; but, 1. vessels of wrath, which men are not,
till first considered as sinners: 2. fitted, or as it were perfected and
ripened unto destruction, which Ephesians. 2. 23. men are not till after the
refusal of the means of grace, Ephesians. 2. 4. 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. or else after
gross and unnatural iniquity, Genesis 15. 16. compared with Levit. 28. 27, 28,
29.

Fourthly, he declares the holy ends which God aims at in all this his
dealing with vessels of wrath after this manner; which ends are the
manifestation, first, of his power and wrath toward the wicked, ver. 22.
secondly, of the riches of his glorious grace toward the elect, in dealing far
otherwise with them, v. 23. Romans 11. 33. Oh the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom, and of the power of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out! To him be glory for ever, Amen.

By this objection arising out of the former Doctrine, namely, Exam.
that God has mercy on whom he will, and hardneth others: he does evince
that by showing mercy, is signified Gods giving the grace of obedience; by
hardening, his denying the same grace of obedience; And withal that by denying
this grace it comes to pass, that men cannot obey the will of God, seeing
hereby is manifested, that Gods will is not, they should obey, but rather
continue in their hardness of heart uncured, and consequently in their
disobedience, whereupon it seems unreasonable that God should complain of men's
disobedience, as oftentimes he does, as Esa. 1. Hear, O Heavens, and hearken O
Earth, I have nourished and brought up a people, and they have rebelled against
me. Again, Esa. 65. All the day long have I stretched out my hands unto a
people that walk in a way that is not good, even after their own imaginations,
And Jer. 8. 7. Even the Stork in the air, knows her appointed times, and the
Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observes the time of their coming, but
my people knows not the judgments of the Lord, and ver. 6. I hearkened and
heard, but none spoke aright, no man repented of his wickedness, saying, what
have I done? Every one turns into their race, as the horse rusheth into the
battle. And Hose. 7. 14. Though I have bound and strengthened their arm, yet
they have rebelled against me. And Exodus 10. 2. Thus says the Lord God of the
Hebrews, How long will thou refuse to humble thy self before me? Let my people
go that they may serve me, ver. 4. But if thou refuse to let my people go,
behold, to morrow I will bring Grasshoppers into thine house, etc. ver. 20. But
the Lord hardened Pharaohs heart, and he did not let the children of Israel
go. Now this I say seems most unreasonable in the judgment of flesh and
blood. Namely, both to harden a man's heart, and yet to complain of, and find
fault with the hardness of his heart, with his rebellion and disobedience,
considering that no man can resist his will.

To this the Apostle answers in certain notable particulars.

First, showing that when the Scripture does manifest this to be Gods course,
namely to harden, and yet to complain of a man's hardness and disobedience, it
becomes not the creature to quarrel with God, or dispute with God hereabout,
because his weak capacity is not able to comprehend the reasonableness
thereof. As for hardening by a will irresistible, implying that there may be a
kind of hardening by a will resistible, as Arminius interprets the Apostle,
it is to put upon the Apostle the conceits of man, for he makes no such
distinction.

Secondly, He proceeds to show how that God as the Creator, has power over
the creature to dispose of him as he thinks good, in two notable particulars.
First, in making him, of what fashion he will, ver. 20. Secondly, in making
him to what end he will, and that without control from the creature (the one
being answerable to the other) in these words: Shall the thing formed say unto
him that formed it, why haste thou made me thus? Now these different
conditions, as different fashions of a vessel, are to be conceived in
congruous reference to the double act of God formerly mentioned. First, the one
was in showing mercy on whom he will, whereby a man is made a vessel of grace
fit for honor. Secondly, the other was in hardening whom he will, whereby a
man left destitute of grace, is exposed to rebellion and disobedience and
consequently made a vessel fit for dishonor.

Secondly, to what end he will, to wit, either to honor or dishonor, that
is, either to become finally a vessel of mercy, or a vessel of wrath, like as
the potter disposes of clay in making vessels thereof; answerable hereunto in
each particular, according to the mere pleasure of his will.

Thirdly, he shows that the end of all this is threefold.

1. The manifestation of his wrath or justice on the one. 2. The riches of his
glory, that is, of his glorious grace on the vessels of mercy. 3. His power and
sovereignty in making whom he will vessels of wrath, or mercy.
Fourthly, he shows withal, that before the execution of his wrath comes, he
suffers these vessels of wrath with long patience; implying both by this, and
by this wrath, that the liberty of the creature in sinning, is nothing
prejudiced in all this, and in the course of his patience, way is opened for
his complaints and admonitions, and that in patheticall manner, unto these
vessels of wrath to move them to repentance. For that God does complain, and
expostulate, and reprove for these their sinful courses is most evident. And
it is no less evident that when they go on in their obstinate courses, not
profiting by Gods Word and Works unto Repentance, the cause is (though no
culpable cause) that God has not given them a heart to perceive, and eyes to
see, and ears to hear, from the first unto the last, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. That is,
that both man runs on wilfully in his sinful courses, and that most
culpably, and also that without grace it cannot be otherwise. Though the
reconciling of both these be very obscure and difficult as indeed the
providence of God especially in evil, and generally in working what he will,
by the free wills of the creature, is of a most mysterious nature. This
patience of God comprehends not Gods bare suffering the wicked only, but his
prospering of them also, Jer. 12. 1. Why are all they in wealth that
rebelliously transgress? 1. As for the first material point of the Apostles
answer, I agree with you, in the explication thereof. 2. But as concerning the
second, in my judgment there is nothing sound.

For first, you feign the rigor of that which was objected to consist in a
certain manner of Gods hardening: to wit, by his irresistible will; As if the
Apostle did give us to understand, that there is a double kind of hardening,
that is imputed unto God. The one by his irresistible will; the other is not
expressed by you, but intimated to consist in hardening by his will resistible,
whereas no such distinction is either expressed or insinuated by the Apostle,
neither do you once go about to prove it. And the distinction it self is very
absurd; both in bringing in a will of God resistible, whereas the Apostle
supposes the will of God in hardening to be irresistible, without all
distinction; neither does he give any the least intimation of a twofold
hardening used by God, or imputable to him. He plainly professes, that as God
has mercy on whom he will, so he hardneth whom he will, without all
distinction. And you may as well distinguish Gods showing of mercy, as if that
were twofold; one by his will resistible, another by his will irresistible; For
showing mercy and hardening are made opposite by the Apostle. And it is a well
known rule in Schools, that Quot modis dicitur unum oppositorum, tot modis
dicetur and alterum, of two opposites, look how many ways the one is taken, so
many ways may the other be taken. And upon this Doctrine of the Apostle,
arises the objection to this effect. That seeing Gods will is irresistible in
hardening a man; it seems unreasonable that God should complain of such a man's
rebellion and disobedience whom himself has hardened, supposing that they
cannot obey God who are hardened. And throughout this objection also, there is
no color of any such distinction as you introduce at pleasure, concerning Gods
will, as either resistible or irresistible, and accordingly as concerning the
different manner of Gods obduration, to wit, either by his resistible will, or
by his irresistible will.

Secondly, you feign at pleasure in like manner, a denial, or at least a
mitigation of the rigor of St. Paul's former Doctrine, whence rose this
objection (for so I had rather express it, then as you do, when in very
obscure manner you call it the rigor of the word objected) And I wonder you
would adventure to devise a denial, or any color of denial made by the
Apostle of that, which formerly he delivered in saying, He has mercy on whom
he will, and whom he will he hardneth; when your self have not hitherto
manifested any mind to deny ought delivered by him, as it is not fit you
should. But it may be the rigor mentioned by you, is not conceived to consist
in Paul's former Doctrine of Gods hardening whom he will, but rather in
complaining of their disobedience whom God himself has hardened, his will being
irresistible. Now this, though amplified as a rigorous thing, the Apostle may
seem to deny, or at least mitigate. But first it seems to me, that the
objection charge God not so much with a rigorous course, (for who shall
hinder God to deal with any, as rigorously as pleases him, there being no
injustice in rigor?) as with an unreasonable course. But whether rigorous or
unreasonable in show, the Apostle by saying God suffers them with long
patience, does neither deny, nor any way mitigate the condition of this course
of his, for complaining of their disobedience, whom himself has hardened. For
albeit God all the day long, yea, and all the year long, yea, and many years
long, stretches out his hands to a people that walk in a way that is not good,
even after their own imaginations, such being the hardness of their hearts, as
even in despite of Gods sufferance of them, and gracious proceedings with
them, in the ministry of his word, and sparing them in his works also, yet if
God himself continues to harden them, his will being irresistible, Gods
complaining of their rebellion and disobedience, seems never a whit the less
rigorous or unreasonable, according to the objection proposed. For as Austin
says, Contra Julianum Pelag. lib. 5. cap. 4. Quantamlibet praebuerit
patientiam, nisi Deus dederit, quis agat paenitentiam? though God afford never
so great patience, yet unless God give [grace] who shall perform repentance?
And to say that God does harden by his long patience, is a strange liberty that
you take in interpreting Paul. If to harden, be to suffer with long patience,
then to show mercy, being opposite to hardening must be not to suffer with long
patience. And if to suffer with long patience be to harden, then as often as
he suffers his own elect with long patience, he hardneth them. And when St.
Peter says, God is patient toward us, the meaning in proportion must be, he
hardens us. Let me tell you, that Julian the Pelagian of old, took the like
advantage as you do of the word Patience in this place to corrupt the Doctrine
of St. Paul, lib. 5. contr. Jul. Pelag. cap. 3. Quid est (says Austin) quod
dicis, [cum desideriis suis traditi dicuntur, relicti per divinam patientiam
intelligendi sunt, non per potentiam in peccata compu si.] quasi non simul
posuer is haec duo idem Apostolus, and patientiam and potentiam, ubi ait. Si
autem ostendere volens iram and demonstrare potentiam suam, attulit in mult a
patientia, vasa irae, quae perfecta sunt in perditionem: Quid horum tamen dicis
esse quod scriptum est. Et propheta si erraverit and locutus suerit, ego
dominus seduxi prophetam illum: and extendam manum meam, super eum and
exterminabo eum de medio populi mei Israel, patientia est, an potentia? Quod
libet eligas vel utrumque fatearis, vides tamen falsa prophetantis peccatum
esse paenamque peccati, An and hic dicturus es, quod ait, Ego dominus seduxi
prophetam illum, intelligendum esse deserui, ut pro ejus meritis seductus
^rraret? Age ut vis, tamen eo modo punitus est pro peccato: ut falsum
prophetando peccaret, sed illud intuere quod vidit Micheas propheta, Dominum
sedentem super thronum suum, and omnis exercitus caeli stabat circa eum, a
dextris ejus, and a sinistris ejus. Et dixit dominus, Quis seducet Achab Regem
Israelis, and ascendet and cadet in Ramoth Gilead? and dixit iste sic, and iste
sic. Et exiit spiritus and stetit in conspectu Domini; and dixit. Ego seducam
eum. Et dixit Dominus ad cum, in quo? Et dixit, exibo, and ero spiritus mendax
in ore omnium prophetarum ejus. Et dixit, Seduces and praevalebis, exi and fac
sic. Quid ad ista dicturus es? Nempe Rex ipse peccavit falsis eredendo
prophetis. At haec ipsa erat and paena peccati, Deo judicante, Deo mittente,
angelum malum. Ut apertius intelligeremus, quomodo in psalmo dictum sit,
Misisse iram indignationis suae, per angelos malos. Sed numquid errando,
numquid injuste quicquam aut temere judicando, sive faciendo? Absit. Sed non
frustra illi dictum est, Judicia tua sicut abyssus multa. Non frustra exclamat
Apostolus, O altitudo divitiarum sapientiae and scientiae Dei! quam
inscrutabilia sunt judicia ejus, and investigabiles viae ejus! Quis enim
cognovit sensum Domini, aut quis consiliarius ejus suit, aut quis prior dedit
illi, ut retribuatur ei? And again in the same Chapter; Sequitur propter hoc,
Tradidit illos Deus in passiones ignominiae. Audis propter hoc, and quaeris
inaniter quomodo intelligendus sit tradere Deus, multum laborans, ut ostendas
cum tradere deserendo: sed quomodo libet tradat, propter hoc tradidit. Propter
hoc des^ruit, and vides ejus traditionem, qualem libet, and quomodo libet
intelligas, quae consecuta sunt. Curavit enim Apostolus dicere, quanta paena
sit a Deo tradi passionibus ignominiae, sive deserende, sive alio quocunque,
vel explicabili, vel inexplicabili modo quo facit hoc sum bonus, and
ineffabiliter justus.

Thirdly, as touching the third, there is as little sounding in that also, for
already you have confessed, that the Apostle in answering this objection, to
justify God, has recourse to Gods sovereignty over his creatures, as great as
the potter has over the clay, who makes vessels of what fashion he will, and
to what end he will. But in the last place you feign most unreasonably, a
justification of Gods course in hardening whom he will, from the consideration
of the persons hardened, as being sinners. I say this is most unreasonable.

First, because when the creature is dealt withal according to his deserts,
this alone is most sufficient and satisfactory to every one that acknowledges
it, for the justification of any course taken with such. And it is merely in
vain to fly to any other course of justification, especially when it is less
satisfactory then this. And how strange were it, that the Apostle should insist
so fully and directly upon that other course of satisfaction, upon the
consideration of Gods sovereignty, and should only intimate this, and that
obscurely, when this does afford far better satisfaction then the former.

Secondly, in this case, there were no ground for any such objection, nor any
color of unreasonablenesse; if God did but deal with them according to their
deserts, as often as he hardneth them.

Thirdly, the objection arises not upon Gods hardening a man simply, but upon
the hardening of whom he will, and that in a conjunct consideration, with his
showing mercy therewithal on whom he will. In which case if God be justified
from the consideration of their conditions with whom he deals, like as he
deals differently with them, in showing mercy on some, and hardening others,
so there should be acknowledged a different condition, in the persons with
whom God deals in so different a manner. But it is confessed by you, that the
persons here in St. Paul's consideration are equal, with whom nevertheless God
deals very unequally.

Fourthly, though this be a plausible course in the judgment of man,
especially of the Arminians, for the smothering of the light of Gods truth in
this place, yet when it is well considered, in the proper nature of it, I
presume it will be very dissonant unto common reason. For what I pray you is
hardening in this place, standing in opposition to the showing of mercy, but
only the denying of the grace of Faith and Repentance to them that hear the
Gospel; like as to show mercy is to give the grace of Faith and Repentance, as
appears manifestly, both by the same phrase used, Romans 11. 30, 31. and also
by this very place clearing it self? For it is such an operation whereupon it
will follow, that God shall have cause or occasion to complain, as appears by
the objection moved hereupon. Now I say, to deny Faith and Repentance is not of
the nature of a punishment, neither can it be said with sobriety, that man by
sin does deserve that God should deny him faith and repentance, like as it
cannot be with sobriety affirmed, that man by being sick, has deserved that
the Physician should not cure him: or that man being dead, has deserved
thereby that God should not raise him from death; whereas indeed a man could
not be raised from death, unless he were first dead, nor cured unless first
sick, neither were there any need of Faith in Christ crucified, and of
repentance, unless man were a sinner.

Lastly, consider, as there is a grace of raising from out of sin, so there is
a grace of pieserving from sin. This grace God granted to the elect Angels, he
denied to the rest, merely out of his own free pleasure, according to the
Sovereignty he has over his creatures, and not with any reference unto sin
preceding. For how was that possible? namely, that there could be any sin
found in Angels before their first sin? yet were the one, (to wit) the elect
Angels amplius adjuti, more succored then the other, as Austin exprestely
profesteth, lib. 12. De Civ. Dei. cap. 9. Indeed I find Ephesians. 2. 3. That we
are born children of wrath, in respect of sin, but that sin makes a man a
vessel of wrath, or that he is not a vessel of wrath till sin comes, the
Apostle says not; nay, the Apostle intimates the contrary, when he represents
the power of God over his creatures, by the power of the Potter over the Clay,
in making therehence one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor. It is
true, since the fall of Adam; man in his generation has no being without sin;
(for we are even conceived in sin) yet it is not that sin, that makes a man a
vessel of wrath, for if it did, then all should be made by God vessels of
wrath. But albeit the Apostle signifies that we are all born children of
wrath, which is verifyed in respect of the desert, even of sin original, yet
neither Apostle nor Prophet does any where give us to understand, that all men
are made vessels of wrath. This phrase includes, first, the intention of God
like a Potter, to make such use of them, as to make his just wrath appear upon
them, and this purpose of God was everlasting, not only as old as every man's
generation, but as old as the creation of all, yea, and from everlasting before
the Creation. Secondly, it includes also a fitness in the vessel for such an
use, not fitness in the way of desert only; (such fitness being found in all
the natural sons of Adam) but fitness in respect of Gods purpose to show
wrath. Now like as in proportion hereunto, the making of a man fit for mercy,
is the giving of him grace; so the denying of grace finally makes him fit for
wrath in this sense, for as much as God will damn none but such as die in their
sins. Here I speak of wrath and mercy, as they consist in giving salvation, or
inflicting damnation.

Lastly, if none are ripened for destruction, till the refusal of means of
grace, or the committing of gross and unnatural iniquity, then it follows,
that no Infants of Turks and Sarecens are vessels of wrath; No, nor men of ripe
years amongst the heathen, many of whom never having either refused the means
of grace (for as much as they never enjoyed them) and having lived civilly and
morally all their days, Philosopherlike, free from gross and unnatural
iniquity. And though all this be granted you; yet if God to that end refuse to
show mercy on them, in giving them Faith and Repentance, and continues to
harden them by denying such grace, look how rigorous or unreasonable soever the
objection pretended Gods course to be, in complaining of them for their
disobedience, when God himself has hardened them, in the same degree of rigor
and unreasonablenesse, it continues still without all mitigation,
notwithstanding all that you have said hitherto to the contrary.

Fourthly, as for the fourth, I have no desire to quarrel with you thereabout;
Gods judgments indeed, Romans 11. 33. that is, his agendirationes (as Piscator
interprets it) are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out. But you take
a course quite contrary, to make them nothing unsearchable, but easy to be
found out. For if obduration be in respect of sin, surely there is no
unsearchable depth in this. And in my opinion, the chief ways of God, which
the Apostle aims it in the place alleged, consists in having mercy on whom
he will, and hardening whom he will, and in general thus in proportion to that
which goes before; There was a time when God had a Church without distinction
of Jews and Gentiles, as before the Flood, and after, till the bringing of the
children of Israel out of Egypt: Again, there was a time after this, for about
1600. years, that God had a Church of the Jews in distinction from the
Gentiles. And since that for the space of about 1600. years, God has had a
Church among the Gentiles in distinction from the Jews. And we look for a time
to come when God shall have a Church, and that here on earth, consisting both
of the Nation of the Jews, and of the Nations of the Gentiles. Three of these
states are signified by the Apostle immediately before, Romans 11. 30. For even
as ye in (...) past, have not believed God, yet have now obtained mercy,
through their unbeleef, there have we two of them; one past, another then
present: Then follows the third, ver. 31. Even so now have they not believed by
the mercy showed unto you; (this is part of the second) that they also may
obtain mercy. This is the third, which we look for, ver. 32. For God has shut
up all in unbeleefe, that he might have mercy upon all. Then follows the
exclamation, ver. 33. O the deepnesse of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God (for he knows all courses possible to be taken, both wise
and unwise, and out of the depth of his wisdom makes choice of what he thinks
fit) O how unsearchable are his judgments, (for out of all these different
courses, results such a splendour of the glory of God, as no creature (till it
be revealed) can project, nor devise any courses countervailable thereunto,
when it is revealed) and his ways past finding out!

FINIS.
The English of the Latin passages in this Treatise, in the several Pages
thereof, that are not formerly englished.
PAge 10. lin. 2, 3, 4. The Apostle says that we are chosen in Christ, as in a
Mediator, by whose blood salvation is procured for us. lin. 5. As touching the
act of God choosing. lin. 17, 18. as in the head. -- The nature of an head, is
not the nature of a cause meritorious. lin. 19, 20, 21. The Apostle says that
we are elect in Christ, as in a Mediator, by whose blood life is precured for
us. l. 21. a meritorious cause. lin. 22, 23, 24. and as in an head, from whence
these good things are derived to us. So that the reason of an head, is the
reason of a meritorious cause, not morally, but naturally. l. 26. as in the
head. l. 27. as dead and raised again. l. 37. Christ is the head of the
predestinate.

Page 11. lin. 5, 6. The other reason concerning Christ considered as the head,
seems to depend on these parts.

Page 12. l. 5. a thing being by accident. l. 28. Predestination puts nothing
in the thing predestined. l. 31. in all things.

Page 13. lin. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. By the comparing of which
sentense it appears, that the Greek (...) is here rightly rendered, among all.
It is a Greek phrase, lest some one might conceive it ought to be translated,
in all; to wit, in all things. We are to remember, that the Apostle from this
verse began to discourse of Christ's kingdom in his Church, which no man will
deny, if he does but lightly consider the very words themselves: and therefore
under the universal particle, no other thing is comprehended, but all
believers of all times. Christ is the first of them that rise again, that among
all the Saints, both of them that went before and of them that came after, he
might have the primacy of dignity, power, and holiness. that so among all he
might have the pre-eminence; not only in respect of men, but also of all
angels. lin. 23, 24, 25, 26. that always in every life he may be chief and
principal: in grace and glory: in generation and resurrection: as well in
visible as in invisible creatures.

Page 14. lin. 17, 18, 19 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. If Christ's predestination and
ours be considered, as touching the act of God predestinating, so the one is
not the cause of the other; for the same thing cannot be the cause of it self:
but by the same divine act both Christ and we are predestined; therefore the
predestination of Christ is not the cause of our predestination. But if it be
considered as touching the effect, seeing the effect of our predestination is
grace and glory, and the adoption of sons; so it is to be said, that the
predestination of Christ is the cause of our predestination, both the cause
efficient and the cause exemplary. l. 32. first. l. 33. latter.

Page 15. lin. 28, 29, etc. a being by accident.

Page 16. l. 14. God only permitting them as they are evil. lin. 16, 17. not
any thing comes to pass unless God will have it come to pass, either by
suffering it to come to pass, or himself working it.

Page 21. l. 3. the reason whereof is derived from the reason of the end
designed.

Page 26. l. 10. the reason of the end.

Page 27. lin. last thirteen. 1. Of all things which God from everlasting did
in his mind devise to do, the first was the hypostaticall union of the divine
Word. The second was the predestination of all the elect. The third was the
condition of the nature of things. And therefore supernaturals are before
naturals; and the order of nature presupposes the order of grace.

2 The foreknowledge of no future thing is in the mind of God supposed to go
before predestination, but all things follow from it: and so farforth, that God
decreed nothing at all from eternity to do, nor in time does, he permits
nothing, or intends, whether natural or supernatural, whether it be of great
weight, or of least weight, or of no weight, which proceeds not there-hence,
and is the effect and means of the predestination of the elect and of Christ.
So that all things fall under the order of the divine predestination, as means
ordained to the glory of Christ and of his Saints.

Page 28. 3. There is no other providence in God preceding predestination, to
wit, from which providence proceed things natural, and some other effects
supernatural; but there is one only providence, and that is predestination,
from which all things throughout proceed, without all exception. So that
according to this conclusion, the whole universe, as it comprehends things
natural and supernatural, things good and evil, substances and accidents,
and all ways throughout of being and working, not only in general, but in
special and individual, are to be considered as the only total object of
divine predestination; so that not any one thing is without the breadth of its
object, and which falls not under that act of predestination.

4. If there had not been a predestination of Gods elect, nothing at all had
been in the nature of things. Therefore I hold this as certain, that unless
Christ had been to come into the world, there had been no predestination of the
elect made by God; and if no predestination had been, by virtue whereof all
things follow, there should have been neither heaven, nor earth, nor other
elements, nor living things, nor men, nor angels, nor sins, nor devils, nor
reprobates; and last of all, that I may conclude in one word, God alone had
been, and nothing else had been besides God, neither natural nor
supernatural, neither good nor evil; we speak according to the common law and
order of things, and according to those ends which probably we conceive God to
have had in the making of creatures. For our purpose is not at all so to tie
the majesty of the divine power to the weakness of our apprehensions, to deny
that God could (such is his absolute power) make and ordain the nature of
things without dependence upon grace and glory, and grace without dependence
upon Christ our Lord.

Page ibid. five last lines. Behold where, look by what reason Christ is said
to be Gods, and the predestinate are said to be Christ's; by the same reason all
natural things, whether present or to come, whether life or death, are said to
be the predestinates own things: But so it is, that Christ is therefore said
to be Gods, and the elect are said to be Christ's, because

Page 29. God is the end of Christ, and Christ is the end of the elect; that
is, because Christ is ordained unto God as unto the end, and the elect unto
Christ, as unto the end: and unless he, that is, God, were the first end, or
the manifestation of his glory, there should be no Christ; and if there were no
Christ, there should be no elect: therefore altogether by the same reason, the
creatures are therefore said to be theirs who are elect, because they are for
the elect, and the elect are the ends of them; and so if the elect should not
have been, no natures of the creatures should have been.

Page ibid. l. 9, 10, etc. He has chosen us in him before the constitution of
the world. Now he speaks of Christ man, to wit, of Christ the head, as Hierome
expresses upon that place, and it appears most plainly by the text.
Certainly, either I am deceived, or Saint Paul intends not that only, to wit,
that God has chosen us in Christ, before the true and real constitution of
the world, which was made in time now six thousand years ago. For that God
had chosen us in Christ before the temporal creation of all things, was no
great thing, nor worthy of so great a pen; for so he chose oxen and stones: For
he decreed them, and foresaw them, before the creation of things in time, or
before he made any thing in time; now before the constitution of the world, and
from everlasting he devised them, and determined to make them. Therefore Paul
intends some higher and more divine matter; to wit, that God in his eternity,
when he devised with himself the creation of the world, even before that in
order of reason he devised with himself concerning the election of his elect;
and even then (I say) he had intended and foreseen Christ, and in him he had
chosen the predestinate. -- lin. 27, 28, etc. a most efficacious reason; Every
one willing things ordinately, first wills the end; and of means those means
which are nearer to the end: But Christ and the predestinate, and therefore all
supernaturals are nearer to the end, that is, to the manifestation of the
divine goodness, than all natural things; therefore supernaturals are willed
by God before naturals; and the manifestation of the goodness of God before
them all; because we consider it as the end of all. -- lin. 37. 38. After what
order and manner things are determined with God.

Page 30. lin. 6. to 15. Thomas is of opinion, that Christ should never have
been predestined if man had not sinned. Whence it seems to follow by
consequence, that sin was first seen by God, and the permission thereof
willed, before the incarnation of the Word was willed: So that in the way of
the Thomists, it appears not how it can stand, that the first decree of God
was the incarnation or predestination of the Word, if so be the permission and
foresight of sin was before it: but if Christ were predestinate before sin was
foreseen, then though sin had not been yet Christ should have come into the
world, who was predestinate before the foresight of sin. lin. 30, 31, 32, 33,
34, 35, 36, 37, 38. That God did first will the hypostaticall union and
incarnation of the Word, before he willed the permission of sin, and before he
determined to make the nature of man, and of the whole universe -- Yet because
the incarnation was not willed without the consideration of sin, but was willed
dependently upon the permission of sin, and of the nature of things, as upon
the means; therefore it follows not, that Christ should come into the world
if sin had not entered, or if the world had not at all been. -- means tending
to the incarnation of Christ.

Page 32. l. 20. From the greatness of the remedy, take notice of the
greatness of the danger.

Page 36 l 26. beyond the worthiness of it. l. 27. less then it deserves.

Page 40. l. 4. who by profiting write, and by writing profit. l. 16. the mass
not made. l. 17. made not yet corrupted. l. 18. the mass corrupt.

Page 41. lin. 23. the mass not yet created. l. 28. the mass corrupt.

Page 43. lin. 34, 35. God willed glory unto Peter, he willed nothing unto
Judas. l. 36. God willed grace unto Peter, he willed nothing unto Judas.

-- l. 37. God would have each of them to exist in the corrupt mass.

Page 44. l. 2. It is something to come thus far. l. 4. will damnation unto
Judas. l. 14. of every thing that is, and of every thing that is not. l. 33,
34. If God did not will glory to Judas, then God did will that he should have
no glory.

Page 45. l. 13. to hate. l. 14. not to will grace and glory to some one.

Page 47. l. 23. as a crown of justice.

Page 51. l. 25, 26. Reprobation includes the will of suffering sin, and
inflicting damnation for sin.

Page 53. l. 22. We know. l. 23. not only wills averse from faith, but wills
adverse to faith. l. 29. Of the vocation of the Gentiles.

Page 54. l. 20. in the mass from the beginning corrupt.

Page 55. l. 34. in the mass of Adam. lin. 36, 37. to consider, -- to err or
feign. lin. 27, 28. as to come in the mass of Adam.

Page 56. lin. 5, 6. as should be faithful, and repent, and persevere in faith
and repentance.

Page 59. lin. 13, 14. Let me not live if I delight in the death of a wicked
man; but I delight when a wicked man returns, that he may live. lin. 21, 22.
Because our defections and our sins lie upon us, therefore we pine away in
them, and should we live. lin. 24, 25, 26. Say unto them, Let me not live,
says the Lord, if I delight in the death of the wicked, but when the wicked
returns from his way, that he may live. Return ye, return ye from your
most evil ways; for why should ye die, O house of Isreal?

Page 60. lin. 3, 4. by almighty facility convert, and of unwilling make them
willing? lin. 38. the will of sign, -- the will of good pleasure; l. 39. the
will of precept.

Page 61. l. 1. the will of purpose. l. 14. the will of sign, and the will of
good pleasure.

Page 63. l. 18. as touching the act of God willing. l. 19. as touching the
things willed.

Page 67. l. 20. the decrees being changed the Court of heaven had mourned.
lin. 24. in a greater measure succored.

Page 68. lin. 23, 24. Not any thing comes unless God will have it come to
pass, either by suffering it to come to pass, or himself working it. l. 25.
suffers to come to pass, he will have it come to pass.

Page 69. l. 11. middle knowledge. l. 21. in part. lin. 22. simply, or
thoroughly.

Page 71. l. 2, 3. the pride of man is wont to say, If I had known it, I would
have done it.

Page 72. l. 32. This is an hard saying.

Page 76. l. 1, 2, etc. Each part of man (the spirit and the heart, that is the
superior and inferior) ill disposed by God, understand it negatively, as
touching the giving of free grace, but positively, as touching the judgment,
inclination to, and prosecution of a sensible good. So that God made the Kings
spirit hard (that is, not yielding to the requests made) and not giving him
grace to yield, and working with him to the affection of security, and his own
good.

Page 77. lin. 31, 32. by works, by writing.

Page 78. lin. 16, 17. How great patience soever God affords, who will repent
unless God give repentance?

Page 79. l. 11, 12. that they may profit so far, as to perform outward
repentance, that so their punishment may be the less. l. 24, 25. by will of
precept, by will of purpose or good pleasure.

Page 82. l 4. that he might afflict thee. l. 28. of duty. -- by conformity to
the affections of men.

Page 86. l. 6, 7. Fair Laverna, teach me to deceive, teach me to seem just and
holy: Cast darkness over my sins, and a cloud over my deceits.

lin. 38, 39. Liberty without grace is not liberty, but wilfulness.

Page 89. l. 3. do that which is just. l. 4. because they will not. -- why
will they not? l. 5. we go far, -- without prejudice of a more diligent
search, l. 6, 7. Either because the goodness of it lies hid, or because it is
such as delights not. l. 8. but that, what lay hid is made known, and that is
made sweet which formerly did not delight, this is from the grace of God which
succoureth men's wills. l. 34, 35. averse from true faith, but adverse to true
faith.

Page 94. l. 27, 28. whom no man's will resists; -- for of unwilling he makes
them willing. l. 32, 33. the pride of man is wont to say, Had I known it, I
would have done it.

Page 95. l. 5, 6. faith is the cause of salvation. -- cause meritorious. l. 7.
cause of damnation. -- causes disposing.

Page 97. l. 3. Of the vocation of Gentiles.

Page 99. l. 34. Justice of condecency.

Page 105. l. 29. university of elect. -- a world of elect. l. 30. Of the
vocation of Gentiles.

Page 108. l. 10. the will cannot be constrained. lin. 15, 16. God by almighty
ease converts men, and of unwilling makes them willing.

Page 109. l. 21. in the mass at the first corrupt.

Page 111. l. 24. of former and latter.

Page 114. lin. 31, 32. includes the will of suffering sin, and inflicting
damnation for sin. l. 36. the critical point.

Page 115. l. 33. the outward works of the Trinity are indivisible.

Page 121. l. 2. such as should be saved.

Page 122. l 1, 2. they increased the error concerning God. -- they took away
the fear of God.

Page 125. l. 11, 12. into a mind void of all judgment. l 20. from the
beginning.

Page 127. l. 10. of old fore-written to this judgment.

Page 129. l. 28. the pure mass. l. 29. the corrupt mass.

Page 132. l. 38. suits at law.

Page 133. lin. 31, 32, 33. moreover this metaphor is taken from hence, that
Gods eternal, whereby the believers are ordained to salvation, is called a
book.

Page 137. l. 24. righteousness of condecency.

Page 140. l. 20, 21. The love of good liking. -- the love of well-doing.

Page 141. l. 10. the will of the flesh. l. 25. to an outward amendment of life.

Page 146. l. 11. is not liberty, but contumacy.

Page 147. l. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. what patience soever God shows, yet
who shall repent unless God gives repentance. -- None of these whom God has
not predestined, does God bring unto true and wholesome repentance, whereby
man is reconciled unto God in Christ, whether he affords them greater
patience, or as great. -- God brings to repentance; but whom? whom he has
predestined

Page 185. lin. 9, 10. more helped. l. 11, 12. to be able if he would. -- to
will what he could. l. 13. helps or succors.

Page 187. l. 22. as touching the act of God predestinating. l. 23. as touching
the act of God reprobating. l. 25. as touching the act of God willing.

Page 191. l. 4. not by infusing malice or naughtiness, but by not infusing
grace.

Page 193. l. 15. no man becomes most foul at first. l. 18. No old man fears
God.

Page 195. lin. 21, 22. The same, as the same, always works the same.

Page 202. l. 12. unequal heifers are not fit to plough under the same yoke.

Page 203. l. 17. by infusing malice, but by not infusing grace.

Page 205. l. 3. not as touching the affection, l. 4. but as touching the
effect.

Page 212. l. 15. In the general lurk many equivocations.

Page 224. lin. 27, 28, 29. Thou art under the wrath of God, -- therefore
worship God who is easy to be entreated. For upon thy prayers he will pardon
thee, and his anger will be appeased.

Page 227. l. 27. of duty, not of fact.

Page 229. lin. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. To God, without doubt, look how
easy it is to do what he will, as easy it is not to suffer that to be which
he will not have to be. Unless we believe this, we must renounce the first
article of our Creed, whereby we profess to believe in God the Father, who is
almighty. For he is not called omnipotent, but to show, that whatsoever he
will do, that he can do; neither can the effect of an almighty power be
hindered, by the will of any creature.

Page 230. lin. 28, 29. Exhortation not made, but despised. l. 32. if I had
known it, I would have done it; -- if I had heard, I would have believed.

Page 232. l. 33. on Gods part, -- on man's part.

Page 258. lin. 7, 8. O Roman, thou do undeservedly suffer for the sins of
thine Ancestors.

Page 262. lin. 31, 32. that they may profit to the outward amendment of their
life, to the end that their punishment may be the milder.

Page 263. l. 24. the will of suffering sin, and inflicting damnation for their
sin.

Page 283. lin. 31, etc. what is this that you say, [when they are said to be
given over to their lusts, they are to be understood, as men left by divine
patience, not compelled into sins by Gods power] as if the Apostle had not put
both these together, both patience and power, when he says, But if God
willing to show wrath, and demonstrate his power, suffered in much patience the
vessels of Gods wrath, fitted, or prepared, for destruction. Yet which of these
two do you say is that which is written? And the Prophet if he shall err,
and speak, I the Lord have deceived that Prophet: and I will stretch out mine
arm upon him, and cut him off out of the midst of my people Israel. Is this
patience, or power? choose which you will, or confess both. Yet you see, that
the sin of him who prophecyeth falsely, is also a punishment of sin. And when it
is said, I the Lord have deceived that Prophet: will you say here also, that
this is to be understood as if it were said, I have deserted him, that by
reason of his merits he is seduced that he might err? Be it so, if you will;
yet after this manner he was punished for his sins, that by prophesying that
which was false he might sin. But look unto that which the Prophet Micheas
saw; to wit, The Lord sitting upon his throne, and the whole army of heaven
stood about him, on his right hand, and on his left: And the Lord said, Who
shall persuade Ahab the King of Israel, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth
Gilead? and one spoke on this manner, and another on that. And there came forth
a Spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I will persuade him. And the
Lord aid unto him, Wherewith? And he said, I will go forth, and will be a
lying Spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets. But this very thing was also a
punishment of sin; God judging, God sending an evil Angel: That we may more
clearly understand, how it is said in the Psalm, that he sent the wrath of
his indignation by evil Angels. But did God err in this? did he judge or do
ought unjustly or rashly in this? Far be it from us so to think. But the
Prophet spoke not in vain, when he said, Thy judgments are a great depth.
The Apost be does not cry out in vain, when he says, O the depth of the
riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out! For who has known the mind of the
Lord? or who has been his Counselor? or who first gave unto him, that he
might be recompensed? And again, in the same Chapter it follows; For this
cause God gave them over to the lusts of uncleanness. You hear, that for this
God gave them over; and you vainly inquire, How it is to be understood, that
God gave them over? taking much pains to show, that God gives men over in such
manner, by deserting them: But after what manner soever God gives them over,
for this cause God gave them over: For this he deserted them. And you see Gods
giving of them over, what kind of desertion soever it be, and after what manner
soever you understand the things which followed hereupon. For the Apostles care
was to show, how great a punishment it is, to be given over of God to the lusts
of uncleanness, whether by forsaking them, or after what other manner soever;
whether explicable or inexplicable, whereby God does this, who is both good and
just in an unspeakable manner.

FINIS.

