TWO PETITIONS of the Counties of BVCKINGHAM and HERTFORD, Presented to his
Excellency S. THOMAS FAIRFAX at S. ALBANS.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie. 1647.

TO His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, General of the Forces raised for
the defense of the Kingdom, etc. The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the
County of Buckingham-shire.
May it please your Excellency,
WE bless God for you, as the Instrument whom he has raised up, and made
eminent in putting an end to the sad and dreadful war, wherein this Kingdom
was involved not many months since; our eyes are still upon you, and our
prayers for you, that God would crown your labors with an happy period of our
miseries, ending in the enjoyment of our due and native liberties, which are
the things we have chosen our fellow Subjects serving in Parliament to obtain
for us. They are the things for which we have adventured our lives and estates
freely, being the first county that appeared for them. They are the things we
have so often petitioned for, and could not have so much as expected a delay of
answer to these our just desires.

But to our grief we speak it, we have been rejected, and are become hopeless
of satisfaction, by some men who have not only prevailed in discountenancing
our just petitions (the proper way of the subjects addresses) but have almost
made it a fault for the Subjects to petition even for things that are due to
them both by common birthright and the law of the Kingdom, and which
frequently have been confirmed unto us by several ordinances and Declarations
of Parliament; we are not ignorant that even some men amongst them, whom in due
time we shall not stick to name, are such as by their subtle thoughts have
endeavored to render your Army odious to the Parliament and Kingdom, which
rather then they shall not obtain, they will not stick to inflame the Kingdom
in a second unnecessary and unjust war. That being the only help under God
left us, of having a firm peace settled in this Kingdom.

These things being come to this pass, we take upon us the boldness to
beseech your excellency, being a person whom your justice, courage, fidelity
and zeal for the common good, have made eminent, and given so great an interest
in the hearts and affections of all men who have any sense of their common good
and just liberties, That you will be pleased to mediate in our behalf to the
honorable Court of Parliament, for the obtaining of our so dear and near
concernment: without the enjoyment whereof even our lives will be uncomfortable
to us.

And although this our address may seem strange or hazardous unto you, yet we
doubt not but the justice of our desires will preserve you. As for our own
parts, we are resolved in the mediation hereof, to assist you to the uttermost
of our power, etc.

FINIS.
To the Right Noble His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Captain General of the
Forces raised for the preservation of the Kingdom: THE HUMBLE PETITION Of
diverse Knights, Gentlemen, Freeholders, and other Inhabitants of the County of
HERTFORD.
May it please your Excellency,
WE do with much thankfulness acknowledge the great care and pains that have
been undergone by those our faithful and well betrusted Worthies of
Parliament, who even in the saddest of times, when deserted by many of their
own Members, have not spared the hazard of their lives, estates, and fortunes,
for the preservation of the just Liberties, Immunities, and Franchises of the
freeborn Subjects of this Kingdom, being desperately and strongly invaded, by
a powerful and malignant party: And have also made many solemn protestations
and declarations of their aims, intents and purposes, whereby we have been
greatly encouraged to yield all cheerful and due assistance in so necessary a
work; yet now, to our great grief observing, by reason (as we conceive) of the
machinations and contrivances of some desperately affected to the weal, and
quiet of the public in general, and to the honor of your ever honored Army
in particular, many obstructions daily to intervene and f^ll in, whereby both
they and we, notwithstanding the still real intentions of our forenamed
worthies, are as yet clea^ly debarred the fruition of these our often promised,
much wished for, prayed for, fought f^^, rights and privileges, whereof we had
^^ll hope long since to have been partakers:

Wherefore we your said Petitioners do most humbly entreat and beseech your
Excellency, whom God has eminently and highly honored, and we well know to
have a tender and compassionate care over the distresses of this miserable
afflicted Kingdom, to use your utmost endeavors withal expedition, before the
disbanding of the Army now under your Excellencies command, that those
Firebrands and Incendiaries, who have endeavored new divisions in the Kingdom
or by their slanderous tongues to fix undeserved reproaches upon the Army, may
be brought to condign punishment, and that we your Petitioners, with the rest
of our faithful brethren in the Kingdom may have a certain relief in our
grievances hereunto annexed.

And as in duty bound, we shall not fail to yield our best assistance with our
persons, purses, and prayers. I. That diverse Counties and Corporations in this
Kingdom viz. Devonshire, Cornwall, Wales, formerly in open hostility and for
the present wholly disaff^cted to the proceedings of Parliament, have
notwithstanding retained eq^ally with the most cordial to the State, their
privileges of electing members, a thing very destructive to the safety of the
Commonwealth, which is the chief end of Parliaments, and one main cause of
many present grievances; Wherefore we desire that such Elections may be
revoked, and the place declared incapable of any such privilege, during the
sessions of this Parliament, or until such time as it shall appear that their
former enmity and rancor against the Parliament be laid aside.

II. That whereas the honorable houses have raised up the expectations of the
well affected, by promising the improvement of their time and care to apply
remedies against their pressing evils, as appears more fully in their
declaration, the 17. of April, 1646. yet the said Commons have to their great
grief been frustrated of their hopes, and instead of being relieved, have to
their great grief been vexed, imprisoned, and otherwise molested.

III. Our Petitions to the Parliament are not as in former times either
received or answered, whereby no redress can be had to our pressing
grievances, as in particular those against tithes, that for the enlargement of
our fellow Commoners, long, and, as we humbly conceive, unduely detained in
prison.

IV. The putting in of M^lignants, Neuters, and persons who have not shown any
affection or done any service for the Parliament during these troubles that
have layen upon the Kingdom, into places of honor trust and profit, as
governors of Towns, Castles, Forts, Justices of peace, Commissioners of
Excise, Committees of Accounts, etc. whereby the most cordial friends of the
Parliament are slighted, disregarded, and upon very slender causes indicted,
committed, imprisoned.

V. That the body of the Kingdom consisting much of Copyholders, who for the
most part have been very cordial and faithful to the Parliament, may not now
be left finable at the will of the lord, in regard the generality of them have
been very malignant, and much disaffected to a Parliamentary or through
reform^tion; and from whom they cannot but expect very severe dealing.

VI. That all men who have received any State-moneys, as well Parliament men as
others, may be called to an account for such moneys. And that Committees (not
as now for the most part Neuters or Malignants but) of approved fidelity may be
elected for that purpose.

VII. That one Cordwell a man of a most notorious lewd life and conversation,
and withal a most desperate Malignant, did procure a Warrant for the
apprehending three Soldiers under the command of Col. Albom Cox, brought them
before one King of S. Albanes a Justice of Peace, where their said Colonel did
appear with them, and made it very clear and apparent to the said Justice that
what they did was by command from their Captain, and no more then what was
expressly contained within their Ordinance, which the said Justice did
acknowledge, and was fully satisfied in their Ordinances, authorizing them
thereunto, yet notwithstanding the said King would have committed them to
Hertford Goal, had not their said Colonel and Captain become bound for their
appearing at the next Sessions. And the said Cordwell did prefer a bill of
Indictment against them, and had it not been for two or three honest men that
served of the Grand Jury, the said bill had been found to the great peril of
the lives of the said Soldiers, there being but little favor or mercy to be
had for Parliament Soldiers by the Justices of our County.

FINIS.

