THE TWO PETITIONS OF THE BUCKINGHAM-SHIRE MEN DELIVERED THE XIth OF January,
one to the PEERS, the other to the House of Commons, in the behalf of Mr.
Hampden, Burgess for their Shire, etc. They being 4000. that came on Horseback
to deliver them.

And also a Relation of the free and voluntary offers of the Trained Bands of
the City of London; of the Masters of Ships, Mariners and Seamen; of the
Aprentices of London; of the Trained Bands of Southwarke, and of the Watermen
upon the Thames to defend the King and Parliament against malignant Counsels
and Plots of Papists.

LONDON, Printed January 12. An. Dom. 1641.

A TRUE RELATION Of sundry passages in and about the most honorable House of
PARLIAMENT.
ON Monday the third of this instant month of January, his Majesty by Warrant
under his own hand, Authorized Sergeant Frances, Sergeant at Arms, to come to
the House of Commons, and there to demand Mr. Denzill Hollis, Sir Arthur
Haslerigg, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hampden, and Mr. Strowd, whom in his Majesty's name, he
accused of High Treason.

The House of Commons returned this answer, that not only those five
Gentlemen, but also every one of them would lay down their lives and fortunes
at his Majesty's feet, so he would be but pleased to accuse them in a legal
way, and make known the cause of their Accusation.

The next day being Tuesday, his Majesty (unexpectedly) came to the House of
Commons attended with a multitude of persons Armed as aforesaid, and there in
the SPEAKERS Chair, demanded these five Persons, saying he expected yesterday
obedience, and not an Answer: When his Majesty a long time together had cast
his eyes round about the House, and could not discern any of these five
Members there, he was pleased to command Mr. Speaker to tell him if they were
there, the Speaker falling upon his knees humbly beseeching his Majesty to
excuse him, for he was servant to the House of Commons, and could neither see
nor speak without their leave.

His Majesty discerning they were not in the House, graciously departed; but
the bloody minded soldiers, some of whom stood near the door of the House of
Commons, with their Pistols ready cockt, and their Swords erected in their
hands, expecting when the word should have been given with fearful Oaths
expressed themselves, that they lost that they came for, the persons were not
there, they mist the opportunity of cutting their throats, and the throats of
all those Parliament men of the House of Commons that would not have suffered
these five persons to have been taken out of the House, his Majesty's own
servants carrying themselves civilly, and indeed ignorant of the Traiterous
design.

As soon as these damme blades about the number of 400. were gone, the House
of Commons, full of grief of heart to see the privileges of Parliament thus
broken, adjourned in great discontent til Wednesday, the 5. of Januarie, at two
of the clock, at which time they met, and concluded of an Order to adjourne the
House till Tuseday, the 11. of January, 1641. And in the mean time, appointed
a Comittee of the House of Commons to sit in London, to consider of the safety
of the King, Kingdom and Parliament, and of repairing of the privileges of
Parliament so highly broken.

Which meeting has produced several Orders and Declarations for maintaining
the privileges of Parliament, which are to be reported to the House, and there
to have it is force.

But for the safety of the Kingdom and City, which they conceived to be in
emminent danger; the Committee for Irish affairs of the House of Commons
propounded the consideration thereof to the Committee of the Lords House for
Irish affairs, who sat likewise in London, who in regard the King had denied
both houses a Guard to protect them; and in regard such an hostill plot was
intended, as was apparently proved declared their opinion, that whereas the
King and Parliament was in so great danger; that in that case the Sheriffs of
London and Midlesex, ought to come with the Posse Commitatus, to the Parliament
to defend the King and Parliament, to which opinion the Comittee of the House
of Commons assented, which was communicated to the Lord Major, Aldermen and
Common Counsel of London, and they delivered their opinions herein, and
expressed their forwardness hereunto.

This breach of privilege of Parliament begot much discontent in the
Parliament and people, and the more in regard by special command, the Articles
against Master Pym, and the rest was printed, and the same published by Sir
William Killegrue and Sir William Flemyn, and delivered in his Majesty's Name
(as they fasely pretended) to the four Innes of Court, to the end to make
these persons the more odious to them and the Kingdom: And in regard the
consequence of admitting this Accusation in this manner against these five
persons, is a president to take away the whole House of Commons at a breath,
under pretense of high Treason, if (as God forbid) an Accunsation of this
nature should be hereafter; and considering that to this very day, (11. Januar.
1641.) no Articles of Impeachment is come into the House of Commons by the
Kings Attorney or otherwise, or from the Lords House (if any be there against
them) till which time that it come from thence by messengers of their own (if
their first depending) the House cannot legally take notice thereof: This, and
many other reasons, made the House of Commons to insist upon it, besides the
great merit of these persons, whom (as the house has declared) though as dear
as their lives unto them, they will deliver over unto a trial, so as his
Majesty will proceed against them in a legal way, either at the Kings Bench,
or in Parliament, and produce any Subject in England that will stand to make
good the Accusation, and in case they fail to make it good, that his Majectie
will let them be forth-comming, and also to discover those wicked Counsels
that have advised him to this course, that they may be brought to condign
punishment.

The City and people in the adjacent parts are so much moved in this business,
and fearing some sudden execution may be done upon the Parliament (both the
House of Peers, and House of Commons, and the Lords of the Privy Counsel,
having declared that this Act of his Majesty's without their advice, and
against the privilledges of Parliament) That they yesterday declared, that
eight Companies of the Trained Bands, with 8. pieces of Ordnance, and diverse
Horsemen mounted, shall Guard the Commitees of the House of Peers, and
Commons, from Grocers-hall in London to Westminster, And the Sea Captains,
Masters of Ships, and Mariners, with small Barges, and long Boats
sufficiently manned and Armed with Murderers, Rablets, Faulchion and Minion,
with Muskets and halfe-Pikes, to the number of 2000 persons have engaged
themselves to Guard the Parliament by water. The Trained Bands in Southwark
have offered themselves to secure all the other side of the water, and the
Aprentices tendered their services to attend the Parliament to the number of ten
thousand with Warlike weapons, but those the Parliament enjoined to stay at
home. And lastly, the Watermen tendered their Barges for more safety to carry
the Parliament men by Water: All which to the great admiration of all the
Beholders, put in execution this day: And that which is most considerable, 4000
Horsemen are come to the house of Commons this day, except some of them which
lay at Vxbridg and places thereabouts, with a Petition in the name of the whole
County of Buckingham, that Mr. Hampden their Knight of the Shire may receive
his Trial, and not lie under the name of high Treason, and cannot obtain a
legal way of Trial, and that if he acquit himself (as no good men make doubt
of) Justice in a high measure may be done upon the false informers of his
Majesty, how near or how a great soever; They being confident that it is but
design of the Popish party, to put an interruption in the proceedings of
Parliament, that no relief may be sent to Ireland, but that more Protestant
blood may be shed there, and that all Acts made this Parliament, may be avoided
under pretense of no free Parliament: And lastly to force a breach of this
Parliament, by an untimely adjournment, or fail of meeting through fear of
danger.

To the Right Honorable the House of PEEERS now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The Humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the County of Buckingham.
Shows,
THAT whereas we hoped upon the happy assembly of this present Parliament, we
should have had a speedy redress of those great pressures, we had for many
years been under, but have hitherto been in great measure frustrate of our
hopes by the strange Counter-working of a malignant faction, whereby the
perfecting of Reformation is hindered, the endeavors of the House of Commons,
in great part successelesse, our dangers grown upon us by iterated plots,
Priests and other Delinquents unpunished, to the encouragement of others,
Ireland near lost by protracted Counsels, while Thousands are there Butchered
by inhume cruelties; and to cut off all hopes of future Reformation, the very
being of our Parliaments endangered by desperate and unexampled breach of
privilledges; which by our Protestation lately taken we are bound with our
lives and estates to maintain. And in respect of that late attempt upon the
Honorable House of Commons, we are now come to offer our service to that end;
as resolved in their just defense to live and die.

ANd do therefore humbly pray that this most Honorable House will cooperate
with the House of Commons in most speedy perfecting the most necessary work of
Reformation, bringing to condidge and exemplary punishment both wicked
Counselors and other plotters and delinquents. That Ireland may be speedily
relieved, the Privileges of Parliament fortified against all future attempts.
And the whole Kingdom put into such o present posture of defense, that we may
be safe both from all pra and ices of the malignant party at home, and the
endeovours of any ill affected States abroad.

And they shall pray, etc.
To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, of the House of
Commons, now assembled in Parliament
Shows,
THat whereas for many years past we have been under very great pressures
(which are clearly set forth in the late Remonstrance of the House of Commons:
The redersse thereof which has for a long time been by you endeavored with
unwearied pains though not with answerable success, having still your
endeavor, frustrated or retarded, and we deprived of the fruit thereof by a
malignant faction of Popish Lords, Bishops, and others and now of late, to take
from us all that little hope was left of a future reformation: the very being
of the Parliament shaken, and by the mischievous practices of most wicked
Counselors the Privileges thereof broken in an unexampled manner and the
members thereof unassured of their lives, in whose safety the safety of us and
our Posterity is involved. We held it our duty according to our late
Protestation to defend and maintain the same Persons and Privileges, to the
utmost expense of our Lives and Estates. To which purpose we are now come to
make the humble tender of our service, and remain in exepctation of your
Command and Order; to the execution whereof, we shall with all alacrity
address our selves, ready to live by you, or to die at your feet, against
whomsoever shall in any sort illegally attempt upon you.

MAy it therefore please this Honorable Assembly to assist the ardent Prayer
of your poor Petitioners, that Popish Lords and Bishops may be forthwith outed
the House of Peers, that all Privileges of Parliament (Yours and our
Posterities Inheritance) may be confirmed to you, and that evil Counselors,
the Achans of this Commonwealth, may be given up to the hand of Justice;
without all which your Petitioners have not the least hope of Isreal's peace, or
to reap those glorious advantages, which the 14. Months seed-time of your
unparalleld endeavors has given to their unsatisfied expectations.

So your Petitioners will be bound (...)

