Two New NOVELS. I. The ART of making LOVE Without Speaking, Writing or
Enterview of the LOVERS. II. The FATAL BEAUTY OF AGNES de CASTRO; Taken out of
the HISTORY OF PORTUGAL.

Translated out of the French by P.B.G.

Licensed,

May 19th. 1688.
LONDON, Printed for R. Bently in Russel Street, in Common-Garden. 1688.

TO THE Virtuously Accomplished LADY; My LADY CHARDIN.
Madam,
THough Virtue, Honor, and all the other Accomplishments of the Mind, are not
to be reflected on with the least grain of Ostentation, by those, that the
Heavens have endowed with such eminent Quallities: Yet certainly, Madam, those
three Illustrious Persons, represented in this small piece, which I Humbly
offer you, would have thought themselves particularly obliged to kind Heaven,
if it had produced in their time, so exact a Pattern o^ their own Perfections,
as you are Madam; in which without the least scruple or offense to Modesty,
they might have admired, with as much Justice as Delight those Accomplishments,
which did so visibly mark in their own Persons so great a difference from the
rest of the World. Yes Madam, in you they might have loved the rare Qualities
which were so consonant to those which adorned themselves, and which modesty
would not permit them to applaude in their own Persons.

Is it not therefore, with great Justice, Madam, that I have sheltered this
little, but true piece of History, under your safe protection. You who has so
great a share in it; you Madam, in whom all the glittering Caracters of
Persons, as great in their Perfections of Minds, as they were in their Births,
do so greatly abound, you, Madam, who has so just a discernment in all that is
excellently good, who has so nice a Judgment in the Criticism's of your own
Dialect, and who is so great a Judge of our's. Finally, you, Madam, who can
best Judge of the equity with which I have proceeded, in presenting to our
English World, the true and lively Caracters of three Persons so remarkable.

But, Madam, that you may not be enticed in your turn into some agreeable
rapture, by too long a contemplation these Excellent Persons Merits, give me
leave to draw the Curtain over it, and to divert you with a pretty piece of
Turkish gallantry, in which you way behold a certain way of Courtship, as
pleasant, as new to us Europeans; I am sensible, Madam, it were but reasonable,
I should give you some more particular accounts of these two Novels, but that
having been done already, sufficiently by the French Author, I shall desist
therefore from giving you any further diversion, from your more serious
reflections, and shall only take the Liberty of subscribing my self,

Madam, Your most humble Servant P. Bellon.

THE ART Of making LOVE WITHOUT Speaking, Writing, or Enterview of the LOVERS.
A Pleasant NOVEL.

Translated from the French.

LONDON, LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley in Russel Street, in Common-Garden.
1688.

THE ART Of making LOVE WITHOUT Speaking, Writing, or Enterveiw of the LOVERS.
SInce I had the Honor, Sir, of entertaining you with a Dumb Language, that
the Turks use to Express without Speaking, without Writing, and without Seeing
one another, the strongest of all the Passions. You have been exceedingly
pressing in obliging me to put in Writing that which I had Communicated to you
in a familiar Conversation. You extremely pusle me in it, and I assure you that
I had begged your excuse, had I but known the difference betwixt a particular
Discourse of two Persons in which all freedom is admitted, and from whence all
Affectation is banished, and a studdied Discourse, which peradventure you will
publish, and so cause it to be Criticis'd, in its Phrase, Method, Words, and in
all Things else which those that Write are obliged to observe

I am not Ignorant of the hazard I run, I prepare my self against all the
troublesome consequences, that my temerity will draw on me. You are obliged to
maintain my Reputation, seeing you have first engaged me to satisfy your
Curiosity, without giving me the leisure of reflecting on the difficulty of my
enterprise. And if Love is counted the Shipwreck of Liberties and Hearts, he
may well be that of my Pen also. Be it what it will, spare me, I pray you, and
expose not this small Piece to the public, who will not prove so kind as you
are, and that will not consider, that my design is but to Divert you in a
manner of making Love, which is wholly new.

There are diverse ways of expressing that Passion. The first School in that, is
that of Nature, and all those Lessons which the Poets have given us on that
Subject, would remain very useless without the Aid and Assistance of this
Universal School Mistress.

Though the Love of the Brutes is necessary to the Conservation of their
Species, Nature has added to it the seasoning of some preparatory Agreements,
to quicken the Senses and to stir up the Natural Heat.

Man, the most rational and sensual of Animals, finds the pleasure too short,
and endeavors to prolong it, by new Inventions, he sets to work all sorts of
Means, to express unto the beloved object, what he makes us to feel, and these
Troubles which he causes in a Lovers Heart; who sometimes expresses himself
with the Voice, who employs Writing to set forth in the most moving Manner that
Ardor which consumes him, and who in defect of Voice and Writing endeavors to
express by the different Motions of his Face the Sentiments of his Heart.

These are the usual ways of making Love in a Country of Freedom, where
Communication is easily obtained, and where Persons can See, Speak, and Write
to one another.

There are Nation that enjoy not those advantages. The greatest part of the
Turks can neither Write, nor Read, neither have they the freedom of Conversing
with Women; yet are they not insensible. On the contrary it appears that the
Eastern People are more apt to Love then any other Nation; They wholly Abandon
themselves to it, there they fix their sovereign good, they raise their Passion
even to a Fury, and I have seen some in their Rage to Stab their Limbs with
D^ggers, and then to drop burning Brimstone in the Wounds.

There is no wonder therefore that People of so Hot Tempers, when they want the
ordinary means of making known their Passion, endeavor to invent extraordinary
ones. Flowers, Leaves, Fruits, Aromatic Woods, Gold, Silver, all Colors,
Stuffs, and in fine, almost all things that are useful in the Commerce of Life,
enter in that of Love.

All those things which the Turks call Selam's, Salutes, have their
signification, and their Natural or Allegorical Valor, much like the Old way
of Poetry, so that a little packet about the bigness of a Thumb does form by
the several things which it contains, a very expressive Discourse.

This way of Expressing a Passion, will appear to you as extravagant as new.
Yet it wants not its Agreements also, and though it proceeds but from a great
want of Liberty, and a defect in the most Common of Arts, which is that of
Writing and Reading, yet it is so Gallant and Ingenious, that those that can
both Write and Read, make use of it also, and believe that those Selams, have
more force and make a greater impression on the mind, then the Characters of a
Letter.

To Initiate you with delight into the Commerce of that Dumb Love, and to give
you a perfect Knowledge of it. You must be introduced by the Knowledge of those
things, which Compose that Language.

I have reduced them in an Alphabetical Order, to ease the finding out of those
Names. I have Composed diverse Letters with them, to show you the way of their
Order, and I have Inserted them in a Gallant and true Hystory, to give them
more Agreement, and the more to engage you to the reading of them.

The Alphabetical Dictionary of the Dumb Language, containing the Name,
Signification, Worth, and Interpretation of the Selams.
A
AIna, Looking-Glass. Kourban, olaim, boyunga, I shall become your Slave.
Yeuzum sureim paingna... I shall rub my Face with your Feet. Al. Red. Chimglumj
aldung, dgianumj al, you have taken my Liberty, take also my Soul. Asma, a
great stock of a Vine. Yerdekj Yuzu basma, tread not on a Face that is on the
ground, despise not those that are submitted to you. Atlas. Satin. Kimse
yuzume bakmas. No body cast their Eyes on me. Arpa. Barley. Tchekme bizj sarpa,
produce no difficulties. Alma, Apple. Benden Alma, take me not. Kustaglighe
kalina, excuse my Freedom. Aktche Asper, Halfpenny. Ghetehenelum bir hoktche,
lets divert our selves together. Altum, sequin, Piece of Gold. Albenj satun,
take me, and fell me, dispose of me as you please. Amberboj, Ambretta, Flower.
Ikimus birboj, we are the same height. Astar, course Cloth. Evignuzj ghieuster,
show me where is your House. Ak, White, living. Aklum aldung, you have seized my
mind, I am no longer mine. Amber, Amber. Amver, satisfy my Passion. Asma
yagraghj, Vine Leaf. Yuzum yagung topaghj, my Journey is the Earth under your
Feet, where I lay my self under your Feet. Armouth, Pair. Albenden bir mout,
take a bushel from me, that is, satisfy you fully.
B.
Badian hindj, Indian Anis. Senden gairj dostum yok Chimdj, I have no other
Friend but you. Bakla, Bean Benj goinunga sakla; hide me in your Bosom.
Balmounj, Wax. Echkund Artudj dgenounumj your Love has increased my folly, or,
I love you even to folly. Bolgour, beaten Wheat. E^den Eve Kalghir, you run
from House to House, from Fair to Fair. Bogdaj, Wheat. Tchekilmez echkung yaj,
let not the bow of your Love be drawn, or, exercise not over me the power of
Love. B^iruldge, small white Bean. Bize ghel bou ghedge come and see us this
night. Koulun olaim ulundge, I shall be your slave till Death. Badem. Almond.
Bozwktur Madem, my inwards are tainted, I am peirs'd with Sorrow. Neguzel adieu,
ah! the Beautiful Man. Biber, Pepper. Bize birbellj L^herber, we know
assuredly. Buberie, Rosmary. Ghel berie: Approach near me. Beyaz, White. Bir
tefter bize yaz, Write to us a Note. Bez, Cloth. Bez dum, I have wearyed,
tired, my self.
C.
Cheker Kamichj, Sugar Cane. Vm rum gunechj, Son of my life. Cheftalj, Peach.
Yetter etting bize alj, you have deceived us sufficiently. Cheker, Sugar. Senj
Madem techeker, my own Nature draws you, or we both Sympathize. Chemame,
Pomander, or sweet Apple. Sabghideris hamame, we shall go to morrow to the Bath.
Chiche, Glass. Kail olman bou iche, I consent not to this business. Chab, Alum.
Bize bir chafj dgeuab, give us a sincere answer.
D.
Dgeuiz, Nut. Nedurbize dgeirigniz, you give us much trouble. Dug me, Button.
Bone mungnu kimseye Ame, submit your self to no Body. Darj, Millet. Benj yaktj
echkum narj, the fire of Love has Burnt me. Deriaj, Sea green. Tchekilurmj
demjr yaj, Canan Iron bow be drawn? That is to express a strong resolution.
Dartchin, Cinnamon. Biz Tchekeris hardgin, we will be at the expense. De mir,
Iron. Beneridum sen semir, I parch, and you fatten. Dginghiarj, grass green.
Dgenghimus var, we are in quarrel.
E.
Ekmek, Bread. Erik, Plumb. Eridik, we are Melted. Eudagadgj, Aloes Wood.
Bachimumd il adgj, Remedy of my head. Essirgan, Nettle. Birj biriniz essirghen,
take compassion of one another. Lazum oldu senj eupmek, it is necessary that I
should kiss you.
F.
Furfelek. Yacume ej ledum dilek, I have made an humble petition to my Mistress.
Fistik, Pistache. Size Kustuk, I am angry with you. Frag Fourj, Porcelain.
Yolun duchtukche guel berj, visit us if occasion serves. Feslighen, the Herb
Bafil. Senj siriemde besleyen, I shall raise you in my breast. Fonduk, Haisel
Nut. Felattuk, we are broke off.
G.
Ghemik, Bone. Nedurgher danuna omik, who has made this Succon at your neck
Gul, Rose. Guldurdum bejn you made me laugh, otherwise. Benaglarum sen gul, I
weep and you laugh. Gulgulj, Rose Color. Sinem bulbulj, Nightingal of my
bosom. Gulpemhe, Peach Blosom Color. Serdam bil send, learn my passion, what
Torments me. Ghionluk, Incense. Bize Ograrsen bir Ghionluk, If you should come
to see us one day.
H.
Hilal, Earpick. Benj bile al, Take me along with you. Assir, mat. Sangna olaim
essir, I shall be your slave. Havaj gall Color. Tenha aldun mj odaj, have you
chosen a secret Chamber out of the way? Hindistan dgeuizi, Indian Nut. Atchun
gnuz, tenugnuzj, Open your breast. Hindj, Nutmeg. Benaglarum guler kendj, I
weep, and she laughs. Halj, Carpet. Nerd hhalungj, how do you?
I.
Indgir, Figg. Benj chimler adgj, does no Body pity me? Iplik, new thread. Gair
dostumlensick, divert your self with your other Mistress otherwise. Sangna Lazum
mj biblick, stand you in need of being more cleared. Jessemin, Jessmine. Sangna
ettum jemin, I have Sworn to you, otherwise Ahumden eridj Zemin, my sighs cause
the Earth to open. Ibrichim, twisted Silk. Allaha kaldj ichim, I have laid my
business on God. Judgj, Pearl. Guzellerum, sensen ghendgj, you are a treasure
of Youth and Beauty. Ikj kardak kanj, a kind of Coral. Hageba, ne ichler
numidgia dgiani; By your leave, what does the Soul of my Soul. Ilimon, Lemon.
Ilumumus var, we are informed, Igne, Point. Ghieuz sunde olaim dugme, I will
cleave to your bosom, as a button to your Vest.
K.
Kachek, Spoon. Ayak Larumus dolachek, let us twist our Legs together. Kiretch,
Lime. Dostum ichj isse, birinden var ghetch. If you have two Mistrisses, you
must abandon one. Kabouksis fonduk, a nut kernel. Biz size omduk, you are all
my hope. Klaboudon, Gold-twisted on Silk. Iki yuzlu, Traitor, double-fac'd Man.
Krmizj, Crimson Red. Bangna miej serzen nazj, It is not with me that you must
act the Proud one. Kestane, Chestnut. Kesselidik, we have separated our selves.
Echkunden oldum mestane, I am drunk and troubled with love. Kalem, writing Pen.
Benum itchun, tchekme elem, suffer nothing for love of me. Khare, Taby.
Yureghim yare, my Heart is to what I love. Kieten, Flax. Vmrume yeten,
sufficient during life. Kouroum, sout. Nege guler yarum, what makes my Mistress
to laugh? Kilim, Woolen Carpet. Yeter ettim bize Zouloum, you have sufficiently
used me cruelly. Kibritj, Brimstone Color. Yanum den kon oitj, drive that Dog
from near you. Khiar, Cow-comber. Korkarum unglar doyar, I fear it might be
perceived. Kau, a Match. Hhalkj bachingden saw, separate your self from so much
People. Khourma, Date. Muradigna irma, execute not your design. Katife, Velvet.
Yeter ettin latiffe, you have jested long enough. Kiomour, Coal. Ben ulurem,
size eumur, I am willing to dye, so you live. Kacoule, Indian Anis. Ouyarmisen
ma koule, do you consent to what is just? Kiaghit, Paper. Hholkj bachinden
daghit, send the People from you. Kalaj, Pewter. Senj aldatmak kolaj, you
permit your self to be easily deceived. Kenevis, Canvas. Yaren gherge bile iz.
To morrow we will pass the night together. Korenfil, Clove. Karorum yok, you
have no Constancy. Kaissj. Apricock. Boulamadum senden eissj, I find nothing
better then you. Kiraz, Cherry. Bize ver bir raz, give your self a little.
Kebe, thick covering of Horse hair. Sout Chume teube, I repent me of my Fault.
L.
Laden, Ladanum. Boulasen Merladen, God return it you. Lale, Tulip. Kaddumj
dunderdum halile, You have winded my Body as an Ear-pick. That is to say, I
have done all you pleased. Lahana, Cabage. Neme bouldum behane, what pretense
is that? Sule, Pipe Nut. Tchatladum gule gule, I have burst my self with
Laughing.
M.
Makas, Cisers. Benj kapigne as, hang me at your door. Missir bogdaj, Buck
Wheat. Sen ulursen birdahj, If you dye, there are others. Menevich, Crimson
Violet. Yazuktur bize bou itch, there is conscience in using us thus. Merdgmek,
lentile, Haua oldu bou dge emek, all my services are lost. Menekche, Violet.
Albenj okche. Take me, and caress me. Madanos. Parsley. Tenhamj Euignuz, is
your House, out of the Way? Merdgian, Coral. Malum senum durhardgin; dispose of
my means. Mechin, Turkey Leather. Yoktur echim, you have not your like. Mercin,
Myrtle. Allag seni bangna versin, God give you to me. Mavj, Blew. Mail oldum, I
am fallen in love. Mazj. Gall-nut. Nedur bize nazj. whence comes this
hautiness? Muskuroumj, Wall-flower. Tchek owtch kourumj, I am yours. Mor,
Violet Color. Senj sevelu oldum khior, your Soul has made me become blind,
N.
Nar. Pomgranate. Yureghim yamar. My heart burns. Nohoud. Pitch. Derdumden
oldum bejhhod. My pain takes away my senses. Nane, Mint. Sevichelum dgiane,
let us love with all our hearts. Nerkez. Marry-gold-flower. Koum olaim herkez.
I Will be your slave on all occasions. Nebat cheker, Sugar Candy. Neubet ignize
kail oldum, I yield, that you have your turn.
O.
Orondghek, Spider. Gurmedum yuzunt doing, I cannot be satiated with seeing
you. Ouvez. Yanuma ghel birez* draw near me.
P.
Pirindge. Rice. Eteme bize ele gulindge, expose me not to laughtuer. Pambouk.
Cotton. Ghel bize Konouk. Come, and lie at our House. Para, a small piece of
Silver. Ghel Ardun Ara, come and feel me out.
R.
Rezene: Fenel. Rutek gherek ghezene, Inconstancy must be punished Ratfic
tachj, Antimony Mineral. Akar, ghieuzumum yachj, my Eyes melt into Tears.
S.
Sarj. Yellow. Sarilatum, let us embrace. Satche. Hairs. Batchimetadge. Crown
of my head. Santan. Straw. Allakton boulaman, God forgive thee. Boulachalum bir
Zaman, let us meet some where. Sunghier. Sponge. Etme seusum inkiar, keep your
word. Sarrmuffak, Garlic. Birghedge sarilsak, we must pass the night together
Saboun, Soap. Ettinbene saboun. You make me Sick. Supurgbe, a Broom. Benj bir
yol essirghe. Once take pity of me. Sidgim. Packthread. Nedur soutchum, what is
my fault? Si^ma, Gold-wyer. Yuzungnu bend najrma. Turn not your face away from
me, abandon me not. Sandal, Tafety. Yeter oldu bize bousal; That cheat is
sufficient. Sursam, Grain of -- Sangna bir seus dessem, If I told you a word.
Sumboul, a jacinth. Khoudadan boul, God reward you. Servj, Cyprus-tree. Zeter
ettin dge^rj. You have caused us trouble enough. Sarmachik, Joy. Yum hej
boulachik. Retire, draggletail. Sakiz. Mastick. Ghel bize kiz. Draw near me;
you fair Maid.
T.
Toprak. Earth. Eskj seudugungj brak, leave your ancient Love. Kiaadge bize
bak, behold us sometimes. Tire, twisted thread. Kalbime ghire. Enter into my
Heart. Tchira, Oyly-wood. Echking i will oldum khira. Your love has made me as
lean as a rake, or, as a Skeelton. Timin A piece of five Pence. Seudugungna
aile yemim: Oath of fidelity to his Mistress. Boulamodum siz den yemin: You
have no word. Frnak, a Finger-nail. Kazak. Rustic, clownish, inhuman. Tulbend.
Cambresine. Echkum getchtj bize bend. Love has bound us together. Troup,
Radish. Evigniz yolt sarp, It is difficult to get into your House. Ychola,
Cloth. Khalumuze birbacha, consider the condition I am in. Tach, Stone.
Koialum bir yastiga bach, let us rest our head on the same pillow. Tell.
Golden-thread. Bizeghel, come to us. Touroddte. Orange. Toutzun senj koulendge,
may all evils fall on thee. Taxta, Board, or Plank. Dourmaf-son akta, you are
not true to your word. Tchimchir, Box-wood. Aklum bachina devjchir, recollect
your mind. Tougla, Confederacy. Yarem bize Ogra. Come to see us to morrow.
Tuhin Tobaco. Kalbimus bitum, my heart is whole.
V.
Vnnap, a Jujube. Bangno yap, do of me what you please. Vzum, a Reason* Ichj
ghieulum. Both my Eyes. Vstupj, Toe, or Flax. Yarum bangna kustumj, my Mistress
is angry with me. Ouve. -- Yanuma ghel bir ez. Come a little on my side.
Vskulen ustupj, Toe and Flax mixed together. Yanun lakaj ben kestjmj. Has my
Mistress broke off with me?
Z.
Zambak. Lily. Ben upein, senbak, I'lkiss, while you will be looking. Zengebil,
Ginger. Senj severem sendebil. Know that I love you. Zoitun, an Olive. Vgnum
dengheth sun mejtun. May thy Corpse pass before me.
A Gallant and True HISTORY.
IT is the Custom amongst the Turks, to pass the three Festival Days of the
Bayram, in public rejoycings. Those Sultanesses that have their particular
Palaces in the City of Constantinople and near unto it, go to the Seraglio to
Visit the Sultanesses, which at other times are not seen. There they pass these
three days, in Sports, Feasts and Dances.

Those amongst the Slaves, that are not Employed in Singing or Dancing, which
makes the Chief Divertisement of the Princes, retire themselves in some
Appartment, where they Sport amongst themselves.

One day that Bournaz Atidge, the Sultaness, Sister to Sultan Morat, was at the
Seraglio with Tarhain Sultaness Valide, Mother to the Grand Segnior now
Reigning. Those two Sultanesses who were very good Friends, being desirous to
entertain themselves in Private, dismissed their Slaves.

Some of them very good friends, separated themselves from the rest, that they
might with more freedom entertain one another. They turned their Conversation
on the Love of Gulbeas white rose. She was the principal Slave of the Sultaness
Valide; That Maid, at first made some resistance, either through Modesty, or to
spare her self the Sorrow of the remembrance of a Beloved Lover. Yet she
yielded at last to her Companions Importunities.

She told them that she had passed diverse years without knowing what was Love,
though she daily heard her Companions Discourse of that Passion; which produced
such strange Effects in those Maids mind, that she could perceive them to pass
in an instant, from joy to sadness, and from Love to their Jealousy, and
Desire, and that Faces would change as frequently as their Hearts were agitated
with different Passions: That so Woeful a Condition had caused her to fear such
like Engagements, and that she had shunned them as much as she could: But at
last, said she, Love angered at my resistance, forced me to yield to his Power,
and inspired in me some Feelings of Tenderness for a Young Turk, Neighbor to a
Jew, with whom I Boarded, to Learn the Exercises of Reading, Writing, Singing,
Playing on Diverse Instruments, and Dancing, in Order to be Admitted into the
Seraglio.

This Turk named Issouf, Son to Mahomet Bassa, was both Neighbor and good
Friend to the Jew, and he did frequently come to his House, to hear me Sing. He
conceived so strong a Passion for me, that he passed both Days and Nights at
his Window, or in his Garden to see me: And one day, he ventured to spoke to me
of his Love, but his Discourses made so small Impression on my mind, that I had
not at that time the least Sentiment of Tenderness for him.

Sometime after that Person who had put me to the Jew, finding me sufficiently
Instructed, Presented me to the Sultaness my Mistress. Absence, which is a
great Remedy against Love, instead of alaying Issoufs Passion, served but to
increase it, while I lived, without the least disturbance in the Seraglio,
where Love had not yet disturbed my Rest.

He did endeavor by all sorts of means to learn some News of the Person he
loved; all his endeavors were fruitless, The Gates of the Women's Apartment are
inaccessible places. Those Cerberuses that keep them, enraged and desperate to
find themselves deprived of that which might render them agreeable to so many
Beauties which they have under their Conduct, become Jealous, and have more
Eyes then Argus to examine all their Actions.

So many difficulties had a most repulsed Issouf, who had consumated three
years in fruitless Attempts. He did Abandon himself to Grief and complaining,
when one of his Friends who shared in his Sorrow, informed him that a Jewish
Woman Merchant, named Boullaster, had free Access in the Seraglio, where she
sold a great many J^wels to the Sultanesses.

Issouf who had Wit, and Means, made good use of his Friends Advice, and built
great Hopes on it, being persuaded that Money overcomes all difficulties, and
that Liberality moves the most obdurate Hearts. He resolved to confide his Love
to this Jewish Woman, and to engage her in his Concerns.

The Enterprise was not very difficult, considerable Presents, and Promises of
Reiterating them upon a favorable Success, did engage the Jewish Woman to
serve Issouf in his Amors.

He put into her hands a Pair of Pendants of Emeralds cut in the shape of
Pairs, a pair of Diamond Bracelets, and the Buckles of a Girdle set with
Rubies, in Enameled Gold. He Accompanied this Present with a Billet, and a
Seliman, put up in a Watch Case of Enameled Gold, set with Diamonds. He
Conjured his Messenger to use all her Industry to persuade and convince me of
the excess of his Love, and to represent to me the Disorders which that Passion
had made in his Heart, the deplorable Condition in which it had reduced him,
that I had been almost three years in the Seraglio, and could not all that
while learn any News of me, that he was ready to Dye if all that he had
suffered for me was not capable to molifie me, and to inspire some kindness for
him in my Breast.

The Jewish Woman, who was very Dextrous and Prudent, coming to the Seraglio as
she used to do, took her time when the Sultaness was not visible, and seeking
of an opportunity of speaking to me conveniently, requested that I should give
her leave to rest her self a while in my Apartment, which I could not in
Civility refuse her, I being she which this Jewish Merchant best knew, by
reason of my Place of Treasurer to the Sultaness, to which I had been advanced,
in a short time, through the Sultanesses singular Bounty.

Women are naturally Curious, I informed my self of the quality of her Jewels.
She heightened their Beauties and Perfections, pulling out of her Bosom a box in
which those things were put up, she showed them me.

The fires and sparklings of those precious Stones, on which I most earnestly
gazed, with an envious Eye, invited me to put them on me for a while.

The Jewish Woman, who perceived that I was coming to the Lure, and that this
dress pleased me, did invite me with her praises to frequently Consult a small
Looking-glass which I had found by chance, which made me observe an
extraordinary redness on my Face, caused by a Vexation, that Fortune had not
favored me, with such a like Treasure.

Boulluster who easily perceived what passed in my Heart, knowing that every
moment was precious, thought it high time to Play her Part, and to discover to
me Issoufs Passion in giving me his Letter and Present.

Charming Gulbeas, said she, I must confess to you how much I am surprised that
the Sultan is not yet taken with your Beauty, and with so many Graces which I
observe in your Face; there is nothing in you but what is capable to Produce
Love, and if that Emperor had once seen you in this Dress, the Sultaness would
conceive some Jealousy thereon, and I easily believe what has been told me of
the Passion of a Young Turk whose Name is Issouf.

Though I had not heard him mentioned since I had been Admitted into the
Seraglio, no more then of the Jew with whom I had lived, that Name made me
change Color, for that young Man's Passion was not unknown to me, seeing he
had entertained me with it before. I did all I could to disguise my Surprisal,
and to Conceal the Motions of my Soul, but that Poison that had thrown it self
there and so long fomented, without perceiving it, discovered it self against
my will by a Sigh drawn from the bottom of my Heart, which I could not for my
Life retain.

Boullaster made so good use of the disorder in which she perceived me to be,
and made me so lively a draft of Issoufs Passion, and Merit, that laying aside
her indifferency in that business, she made an end of engaging me, in
presenting me with the Box of Diamonds. I thought at first that it had been a
Watch: My Curiosity invited me to open it, but in lieu of a Watch Movement I
found in it a Billet. Honor made me immediately shut it up again, and return
it to the Woman. I Counterfeited the Angry Body, yet would I gladly have been
informed of the Contents of that Billet, not doubting but that it was Issouf's,
Declaration of Love, who began to please me. The Jewish Woman who had too much
of Experience not to discern my feigning, did Press me to take the Box, I did
it protesting it was merely in Complaisance, and to free me from her
Importunities.

I pulling out the Billet found under it a little Packet which enclosed a
Selam, but because I can Read well, I instantly opened the Billet, which was
expressed in these Terms.

To See and to Love you Divine Gulbeas have been to me the same thing. The Gods
who have made you so Fair, ought to have made you more sensible also, or not
have possessed we with so much Love, and so little of hopes. My Passion is as
Ancient as the knowledge which I have had of your Merit, and Time which
Consumes all things has served but to increase it. There are passed diverse
years since I am no more my self, and that I live but for you. I pass both days
and nights in that part of the Garden, where I did hear you Sing, and Play on
your Instruments, and from whence I did sometimes spoke to you. That place once
the Confident of my Delights, is now the same of my Sorrow, and will soon be
that of my Death, if you cause not my Destiny to alter, not being any longer
capable of Life without seeing you. I am not Ignorant of the difficulty of the
Attempt; but most Incomparable Beauty, if you will afford me but a little
pity, who Languishes for you, and the happiness of casting my self down at
your Feet, leave all the rest to Prudent Boullasters Cares, she will know how
to manage my Bliss and your Reputation.

The Reading of this Billet gave me the Curiosity of unfolding the Selam. It
was Composed of a grain of Grape, a little Race of Ginger, a small piece of
Cole, and Alum, lapp'd up in white and yellow Silk, which signified as follows.

I wish, My Eyes, that you were perfectly informed of that Love which I feel
for you. It deprives me of my self, and if you take not pity of the Condition
I am in, I shall Dye while you will enjoy an happy Life: Honor me with an
Answer, and put an end to my sufferings.

Though I feigned not to be well pleased at this Declaration which I thought
something too free, my Heart was very well satisfied with Issoufs Constancy. It
spoke to me in his hehalf, and there needed not any great effects to persuade
me of his Love, and to inspire in me some tenderness toward him.

The Jewish Woman, who studied my Countenance, perceiving the Effects of the
Letter, and of the Selam, did presently offer me the Jewels with which I was
already adorned. My reason, which was not yet wholly prepossessed, made me to
refuse them, and to Represent to her the wrong which it might do to my
Reputation, should the Sultaness discover it, and that I could not accept of a
present that would be the cause of my Ruin. At the same time I undid those
Jewels which I returned her with the Box, retaining nothing but the Letter and
the Selam.

Boullaster who a long Practice had rendered expert, was of Opinion that
sometimes a too great earnestness, does impede the success which is most
desired, did endeavor to convince me by a means to which I could make no
resistance.

She told me that my Beauty being Assisted with so powerful an Addition, I
might please the Grand Segnior, and peradventure be made Sultaness. The
Ambition of Reigning, at least in an Emperors Heart, carried it above my
Reason, and made me consent to receive the Present.

She would gladly have had me as ready to have received Issouf in my
Appartment: My Heart did not reject the proposition, had not my reason rendered
me inexorable. Finally after long instances and reiterated entreaties, I
consented to see him in the Garden.

Boullaster could have wished (to acquit her self handsomely of her Commission)
that I had given her an Answer; Honor and Reason opposed it, but Love did
engage me to let him know by a Selam, that his Passion was not unpleasing to
me, it was lapp'd up in an Handkercheif of Silk Embroidered with Gold, wrought
with my own Hand, after which the Woman retired, pretending before my
Companions, who had surprised us in the Conversation, that she left those
Jewels with me, that I might show them to the Sultaness.

Issouf impatient to learn the success of his enterprise expected his Agents
return, who made him an exact Relation of all that had passed, and gave him
that Handkercheif which I had sent him.

The Joy which he resented at the receipt of this assurance of the acceptance of
his Passion, did Transport him in such manner, that without examining what it
contained, he kissed it a thousand times, and watered it with his Tears, with
the most tender Expressions, that Love could inspire.

Boullaster who would not interrupt him during the height of his Transport,
when he was come to himself again a little, made him to take Notice of the
Selam. It was Isabella Silk, a Sprig of Jessemy, a little bit of Sponge, some
Time, and some Myrtle.

I cannot express to you the excess of the Joy which Issouf conceived at it, it
was so great that he was struck Speechless, and that Rapture had lasted longer,
if Boullaster, as Curious, as he was Contented, had not pressed him to give her
the Exposition of it. I accept your Vows, said the Selam, be persuaded of my
Constancy, provided you be so I pray Heaven to bestow you on me, and that our
Souls may be inseparably joined together.

Is it possible most Amiable Gulbeas, said Issouf, that my Passion, is
agreeable to, you is it not to deecive me, and to Laugh at my Grief, that thus
you seek to engage me further, and kissing the Handkercheif, he said, dear
Pledge of the fidelity of she who I adore, will you be it also of the sincerity
of her Heart. Then Addressing himself to the Selam, and you Dumb Mouth, will
you assure me the duration of her new Born Love?

He had said more; but all Moments were Precious to prepare himself for this
Enterview.

The difficulty of this enterprise did cast him in a new Sorrow, and plunged
him in a Melancholy more profound then the former. He was in a despair of
finding in the Seraglio, a Friend so faithful as to be trusted with his Amors,
and his Impatiency did increase, still as he grew nearer the so desired time.

After he had much Tormented himself on the means of bringing about his design,
he remembered that there was a Master Gardner named, Ousta Mehemet, who was
greatly obliged to his Father, and that that consideration, might engage him to
do him Service, he resolved to find him out.

Ousta Mehemet, who had preserved for Issouf a natural Inclination, received
him with Demonstrations of a perfect Friendship, and great protestations of
acknowledgments of the good Offices which he had received from the Bassa, his
Father.

Though Issouf was satisfied of Mehemets fidelity, and that he doubted not but
that though he should not grant him the favor which he was about to ask of
him, that he would however keep his secret, he however exacted from him an
Oath, on the Head of the Prophet, never to reveal that which he would entrust
him with, which he easily obtained from Mehemet.

Issouf discovered his Passion to his Friend in such sensible Terms, and so
pressing, that though he had not had any mind to serve him, it was no longer in
his power to refuse him. I Love, most faithful Mehemet, but what serves my
Love, when that I cannot spoke to the Object of my Vows. I Love a Fair One,
Prisoner in this Place, the inward part of the Seraglio which is Guardian of
this Treasure, is almost Penetrable, or at least the Access is so difficult,
that it cannot be attempted without a great hazard; Yet that is not the thing
which detains Me, my Passion which is beyond all limits would make me to
undertake all things, if that she whom I Love would consent to it. I have only
obtained to see her from a little Garden of Flowers which is just under the
Sultanesse's Appartment. You, My Dear Mehemet, must facilitate the entry of it
to me, on you depends the success of this Enterprise; I have Built on your
Friendship; and if ever you have loved, you will judge of the Importancy of the
Service, and the greatness of the Obligation, that I shall be indebted to you
for it.

That Declaration had made too great an Impression on this Old Man's Mind, the
remembrance of those Disorders which a like Passion had formerly Caused in his
Breast, did make him condescend with ease to Issoufs request, without
considering the danger unto which he exposed himself, should the intreague be
discovered. He promised to introduce him under a Gardiners habit, and that he
had no more to do, but to observe my appointed time.

Issouf did presently dispatch Boullaster to the Seraglio, he gave her no
Letter, his Joy was too great to permit him to write. He only gave her a small
Selam, composed of a grain of Pomegranate a little piece of Unctious Wood,
lapp'd in white Silk, a Gray-pea, a little piece of Suggar Cane, and the kernel
of an Hazel Nut, all which did spoke thus.

The fire which your love has kindled in my Hearty, has reduced me to such a
Condition, that if you take not pity of me and that if like the Sun, you
enlighten not my mind, I shall soon loose that with my life.

Though I was highly possessed with Love, I had still some reason left me, I
wa^ kept in with fear, I dreaded least the intreague should be discovered, and
that the Sultaness should cause me to be severely Punished: Thus I would, yet
would not, yet at last I was forced to yield to the Syrenes Enchantments. I
promiss'd her that the next day at nine I would render my self in allow room
which answered on the Garden, and which was parted from it but by a Lattice
Window, of which I should open a small wicket, which would be the sign of my
coming, that that was the most favorable time, that the Sultaness did usually
rest, and her Women also, after breakfasts; and that all the Eunuchs were on
the outside of the Gate, to prevent all noise.

Issouf had like to have dyed, at the receipt of this news, which did cause him
some restlessness, through the apprehensions that his ill Fortune might make
him miscarry in this attempt. He passed the whole night with terrible
apprehensions, mixed of fear and hope.

He rendered himself at the Seraglio, at the appointed hour. Mehemet caused him
to change his rich habit for a Gardiners dress, made of a course red Serge,
with a cap a Foot long, of the same Stuff. He put a Spade in his hand, and
conducted him to the Garden ordering him to dig a border just under the Windows
of that Appartment; at every stroke the new Gardner would lift up his Eyes, to
observe whither the wicket did open; but unluckily, the Sultaness being fallen
asleep a little latter then usually, the Gardner had leisure to dig almost all
the border, before I could come to the Rendevouz.

He was very impatient, as I was informed, he would some time hear your great
flies, which seeking for passage would strike against the Lattice, which made
him fancy that I was looking and laughing at his slavery.

When I came near the Window, and that through the Lattice, I perceived Issouf
with the Spade in his hand, I no longer doubted of the strength of his love,
and though it was a little uneasy to me to see a Person of his Quality digging
of the ground, to enjoy one moment the satisfaction of seeing me, it gave me a
secret joy, and without reflecting on what my absence might make him to suffer,
I took a great delight in considering of him without showing my self. But he
having worked a considerable time, and that so harsh an exercise to so tender a
Body, did oblige him, to rest often on his Spade, and to cast up his Eyes from
time to time on the place where I was to appear, I opened the wicket, and saw
Issoufs Pain to redouble, the Spade fell out of his hands, he remained without
motion, like a statue, but by good Fortune he was not perceived, Mehemet who
had forseen the consequences of this first sight, had set the Gardners at some
distance, who were to have worked in the same place.

There is no greater trouble, then to be in presence of that one loves, and not
in power to declare ones grief. That which Issouf did suffer by being deprived
of speaking to me because of the nearness of the Sultaness's appartment, was as
troublesome to me as to himself, and notwithstanding all the reservedness which
I pretended to, I suffered no less then he did. By good Fortune the Dumb
Language, which is very much used in this Court, and that we perfectly
understood, did so well supply the defects of our Voices, that we separated
well satisfied with one another. The Eyes, the motions of the face, the signs
of the Fingers, and the gestures of the Body, did all speak more then the most
fluent tongue could have uttered, which is frequently Dumb in such occasions,
and says nothing at all for having too much to say. We did so please our selves
in this conversation, that it had continued longer, if I had not heard some
treading in the Sultaness's appartment, which obliged me to make signs to
Issouf to retire; and so I shut the wicket.

During all our intreagues, Boullaster, who was now the confident of our mutual
amors, made diverse Journeys to the Seraglio. I took no less delight at the
news of my lovely Issouf, then he did of his dear Gulbeas. He was very rich,
and did promise me to use all his Endeavors, and to employ all his Friends, to
get me out of the Seraglio, and to marry me. This had not doubtless deceived my
hopes, if a precipitated Death caused by the Plague had not deprived me of my
only Joy.

Sobbs and sighs, mixed with Tears, interrupted Gulbea's relation, and the
strength of her grief having disenabled her from finishing, she entreated one
of her Companions, to whom she had discovered her secret, to go on with the
recital of a Death, which had cost her so many Tears. Patma, so was that good
Friend called, continued G^lbea's discourse. The Jewish Woman, did come twice
or thrice a week to the Seraglio, though she sold but few things there; but
she was sufficiently recompensed by those lovers, whose presents did in a short
time make her very rich.

Their Passions grew beyond all limits, Issouf, who was impatient at his
Incomparable Mistriss's absence, would attempt a second enterview, in which he
might freely, with a loud Voice and not by Dumb signs express the excess of his
love. He communicated his design to his confident, reiterating large promises
if she had good success. She being won by the gains, did engage to omit nothing
that might tend to his satisfaction.

She came to the Seraglio, gave Gulbeas a Selam put up in an Agath vessel. It
is to be confessed said Patmas, that if love sharpens Wit, it borders on folly
also, Issouf would engage his Mistress with a rich present. This Vessel was
Garnished with circles of Gold studded with Diamonds, and he endeavored to
convince her of her passion, by a Selam, composed of his Hairs, of Rose color
Silk, of Aloes Wood, of Antimony, of Nutmeg, a Sprig of Broom, a grain of
Grape, a small piece of Cloth, and of Cole, all which put together did say.

Precious Crown of all my wishes, Nightingal whose Voice is only capable to
Charm the sorrow of my Soul, true remedy of the Evils which I endure, consider
the Tears which proceed from my Eyes, while that perhaps you are Laughing at my
grief take pity on me, and behold the condition in which you have brought me. I
am ready to dye, if you honor me not with your writing, and if you give me not
a positive Answer.

This Selam, and the relation which Boullaster made to Gulbeas, of the
miserable condition that Issouf was in, whom she represented to her,
languishing, and dying, did so move her, being put on with passion and love,
that she consented to a second enterview, the p^^ce and manner, only, did
trouble her, and she caused him some by a little Selam, of a Gold Wire, of a
grain of Grape, of a grain of Millet, of a bit of white thread, and of a grain
of Wheat, all which said. Come my Eyes I am sensible of your griefs, my Heart
is yours, be persuaded of my Constancy. Gulbeas would not consent to Issouf's
disguise for his admittance into an appartment which was joining that of the
Sultaness; It was a slippery step, no less then honor and life were at stake.
All those considerations were powerful enough to brake off that design, if love
who was the strongest had not overpois'd them. Gulbeas let her self be won by
Boullaster's persuasion, and gave her leave to bring Issouf disguised like a
Maiden.

Three days were employed in getting things ready, the rather because that too
frequent visits might have been suspected. They were so many Ages to the
Amorous Issouf, for whom neat and proper Cloths were getting ready that his
dress answering to the Beauty of his Face, where no Hair had yet appeared the
Guards might be with more ease imposed upon.

The 4 th. day Boullaster, and her pretended Daughter whom we will call
Gevaher, which in the Turkish Language signifies, Precious-Stone, came to the
Seraglio. This She-Merchant who was well known, having told that who
accompanied her was her Daughter, deceived the Black Eunuchs, who let them both
enter.

Here Patma made a pause, and beginning again with a languishing accent, she
said, Issouf, what do thou do? you come to see Gulbeas* you seek in her Eyes
for a remedy to your Evils, you are going to find the end of them but after a
very extraordinary manner, your presence shall cure her of the Plague which
overcomes her, and by a strange counter-blow, you will take in, in approaching
her, a Poison, that shall kill you.

Of truth, continued she, The Jewish Woman did introduce the fair Gevaher, into
the dying Gulbea's Chamber. Judge of the trouble that Issouf found himself in,
and if the surprisal of such an unexpected accident were not capable of
breaking all the measures of this disguise.

There little wanted but that he discovered himself, but Gulbeas who still
preserved a sound Judgment with the rigor of her disease, which was at the
third day, did entreat her companions, to leave her one moment alone with this
Jewish Woman, to settle some accounts which they had together.

When that Issouf found himself alone near Gulbeas, he gave full scope to his
grief, and forgeting the place he was in, he tore of his vail, and cleav'd to
the Beds Head of the sick Person, who he bathed with his Tears not being able
to speak one word. Gulbeas on her side did receive such pressing strokes of
love, with the anguish of her disease, that it causing a great revolution in
her Body, a Chrisis was produced, which saved her life, and gave Issouf his
death who could not be persuaded to quit the Boulster, where he took in the
steam of a Malignant sweat, which pierced him to the very Heart, and caused him
to fall in a fainting Fit.

Boullaster strangly confused at the swooning of her pretended Daughter, and
much more at the consequences that the unraveling of this intreague might
produce in case that the illness increasing, she had been obliged to be put
into a bed, called me to assist her.

When I came in, the feigned Gevaher began to breath and to sigh, turning her
Eyes toward Gulbeas, whose name she spoke with such a tender and amourous
accent, that I wonder how I perceived it not, I reflected not on it, and did
attribute it to an ancient acquaintance, that which was a pure effect of love.

It passed not so with Boullaster, she was so surprised that all her senses
fled from her, and her face growing pale she fell in a swoon, so that I was
left alone very busy, and concerned. I brought the Daughter near to Gulbeas's
Bed, and run to the Mother who was not long fainted, when both were recovered
of their swoon, I went to prepare something for them to take.

The Amorous Issouf made use of that moment to say some few things to his
Mistress, which he pronounced with a Languishing Voice. Death, which persues
me, said he, is a less trouble to me, adorable Gulbeas, then the pain which I
feel for what you endure. I should run to it with Pleasure, if I thought it
would ease you, be persuaded of it, and that I had rather dye, then abandon
you, If I did not expose you, by my stay here to a danger greater then your
Disease. I retire, but I retire to dye, not being able to resist so much
sorrow. Gulbeas overcome with the strength of her disease, pierced to the quick
at Issoufs illness, and weakened with the violence of her Crisis, could not
answer those tender assurances but with Tears, which made her faint away. Here
it was that Poor Issouf had need of his whole stock of reason, to resist so
much Grief, and yet Act nothing that might betray the secret, he was forced to
rest contented with sighs, which were attributed to his late fainting.

Gulbeas was long in that condition, and beginning to Breath again, Boullaster
who feared some new accident, endeavored all she could to bring back Issouf,
from his afflicted Mistress.

He could not resolve on such a sad separation, which he foresaw would be
eternal; He would fain have expired near what he loved, yet he was forced to
obey his Mistriss's orders, who made signs to him, not being able to spoke, and
gave him her hand, which he kissed, protesting that he would not out live her.

All those accidents which had accompanied so sad an enterview, was not
sufficient to overcome our unfortunate Lovers. It happened that passing by one
of the doors of the Seraglio where there stands Baltadges, which are certain
varlets from without, that one of them distrusting the feigned Gevahers going,
which was become careless through her grief and pain; fancied it a disguise,
and stopped Issouf by the arm; Boullaster, whose Wit was always at hand, without
speaking to the Baltadgj, for fear of bringing more to them, drawing near,
dropped into his hand a ring which she pulled of her own Finger, and pressing his
hand she thereby obliged him to give liberty to this poor Lover to get out, who
thought much less on the present accident then on Gulbea's troubles.

So soon as Issouf was returned to his Palace, he went to his Bed, his Fever
increased, and finding himself pressed with that disease which killed him, he
would employ that little time he had to live, in taking leave of his dear
Mistress, and to give her his last farewell.

I dye for you, Incomparable Gulbeas, and Death is the more pleasing to me,
because I hope that its Cause which was your Crisis, will be that of the
prolongation of your days. I should dye without trouble, had I the certain news
of it. The disease presses upon me, and I employ that little time which is left
me, in giving you testimonies of a love which I shall carry to my grave: happy
if that last moment can better convince you then diverse Years of Sighs and
Tears have done. Adieu, all lovely, live and remember that the same love which
restores you to Life is the Cause of my Death.

No sooner had he ended his Letter, but he immediately sent it with the Ring on
his Finger, in which his Mistriss's name and his were Engraven on a very clear
Ruby, to Boullaster, and was presently seized with a disturbance in his head,
and a redoubling of his Fever, which deprived him of his Senses and Speech,
which never returned again but with the last sigh, which he vented, in
pronouncing the lovely name of his Mistress.

Gulbeas, whose Crisis had put out of all Danger, the sweat having Dissipated
the Tumors of the Plague, was more Distempered in the Mind then the Body,
Issouf's silence, and Boullaster's stay from giving her an Account of all that
had passed, since their parting, did strangly Perplex her, and giving her sad
Warnings of what was coming, she felt most mortal disquiets, she would Weep all
Day, and the Night was passed in Watchings, or in Terrible Visions, which
foretold her nothing but those Dangers which she feared. The same night that
Issouf expired, she thought that a Woman of a Prodigious height, as Lean as a
Skelleton, and of a frightful Deformity, her Hairs spread abroad approaching
her with the Face of a Fury, a great Knif in her Hand, was opening of her side,
and pulling out her Heart. All those Nocturnal Visions, Augmented her Sorrows.
She had made Choice of me for her Confident ever since Issouf's adventure, I
did endeavor to Divert her, and turn her off of all those Melancholy Thoughts,
nothing could Administer Comfort to her; But it was much worss, when Boullaster
came to the Seraglio, some days after Issoufs Death, to acquit her self of the
last Commission, which he had given her.

So soon as she did see her, she earnestly Informed her self of Issouf's
welfare; but the Jewish Woman's silence, who could not dissemble, nor keep in
her Tears, gave her easily to understand that truth which she feared to learn,
Ah! Cried she, Issouf is no longer in being! and presently fell in my Arms in a
Swoon.

When she was come to her self again, Issouf's Letter and Ring which Boullaster
put into her Hands, not being able to speak one word, did Confirm that
Sorrowful News, She Diverse times kissed those dear Pledges of Issouf's eternal
Constancy, Watered them with her Tears, and did hang the Ring at her Neck, as a
Mark that she Devouted her self to her Lover's Ghost; and having remained
sometime without Speech, her Face from Pale as it was, became Red, and as if
she were become Furious. Fatal Destiny, cried she, thou Renders me my Life in
killing what I Love, and thou sellest me very dear, that which I can no longer
Love, seeing that he, with whom I designed to share it, is no more. Why did
thou not kill me, or why did thou Conduct him here, that I might be further
obliged to him of my Life? after so many Services so ill rewarded, I will no
longer Live after such an Accident; Alas! what will Life signify to me, after
that he, who Animated me is Dead. No Issouf, I designed not to Live but for
you, and I should be unworthy of your Love should I have any other thoughts.
That Death which was to have taken me off, has not spared me, in taking of you.
It has doubly slain me in depriving me of what I Love, and permitting me to
Linger out a Miserable Life, which shall be but a Continual Death. You Live
Issouf, and your most happy shade, enjoys at present the Pleasures of the
Elisicumfields, and I shall never cease Dying till I am reunited to you. Then
Addressing her self to the Ring. This Ring, continued she, shall be henceforth
the Faithful witness of my Love, and seeing it could not Unite our Bodies
during our Lives, it shall be the indisso lubbiletye of our Wills, and the Mark
with which I will appear before you, I will continually wear it in my Bosom,
and it shall Accompany me in my Grave, seeing you could not have any other
thought, when you sent it me at your Death, than that of uniting me more
strictly to you in the other World.

She had continued, and gone on further with her Complaints, if the presence of
our Companions, had not interrupted their Course and obliged Boullaster to
retreat. The Grief for his Death brought her into a Lingering Fever, which has
caused that Languishing Condition you see her in, and of which there is no
likelihood she will ever be Cured, the cause of her illness being too dear to
her.

FINIS.
THE Fatal Beauty OF AGNES de CASTRO; Taken out of the HISTORY OF Portugal.

Made English out of French By P.B. G.

Licensed,

May 19th. 1688.
LONDON, ^rinted for R. Bentley in Russel Street, in Common-Garden. 1688.

TO THE READER.
TO give an advantageous Character of this Novel, there needed but to name the
Person that Composed it. The great Success which all the Ingenious Works which,
She has produced, have had, would be sufficient to put an Esteem on this, and
none can doubt of its worth after the great Approbations that have been given
to all the rest. But in this Particular I am not Permitted to Satisfy the
Curiosity of the Public. Her Will opposes it self unto that Glory that She
might justly pretend from it, and She does rest satisfied with the bare Secret
Delight which She receives, in that which She Pro^ares to the Ingenious. Yet I
believe not that all Her Cautiousness can Conceal Her from the knowing. The
Nicety of the Sentiments, the Towr of the Conceptions, the clear and easy
Style, all does here Conspire to Her Discovery. The Virtue of three as
Illustrious as Unfortunate Persons, which Vye with one another who shall most
overcome themselves in Greatness of Souls, Produces in the Heart such Motions
of Tenderness and of Pity as do extremely Delight. The Character of that
Nation, which makes the Subject of this Novel, appears so Natural that it will
not be Difficult to Believe the Truth of the Principal Events. Those that have
Read the Portugal Hystory, will agree to it, and I need not make any stay here
to Prove it. I shall only say, that if an Ingenious Fiction, has Power to exite
and stir up our Passions, a Truth so well Penned, as this is, will not fail of
moving the least sensible Persons, and to draw such Tears from them, as they
would gladly let fall.

THE Fatal Beauty OF AGNES de CASTRO.
THough Love promises nothing but Pleasures, the Effects of it are sometimes
sad. A Tender heartedness is not sufficient to attain to a Perfect Happiness;
and that Capricious Fortune which crosses all things, has but very little
regard to Passionate Hearts, when She is in the Humor of producing strange
Adventures.

Diverse Examples of the passed Ages prove the Certainty of this Maxim; But the
Reign of Don, Alfonse, the 4 th. of that Name King of Portugal does furnish us
with one the most Extraordinary.

He was the Son of that Don Denis, whose Enterprises did so well succeed, that
it was said of him, he did all that he would, and of Isabella of Aragon a
Princess of an Eminent Virtue. After he had inherited a Flourishing and quiet
Estate he Endeavored to Maintain in it both Plenty and Peace, by all means
imaginable.

To that end he fixed the Marriage of his Son Don Pedre, who was but eight
years old, with Blanch Daughter to Don Pedre, King of Castile, who the Young
Prince did Marry at sixteeen. She brought along with her at Coimbria diverse
Infirmities, and but a few Agreements. Don Pedre who had a stock of Mildness
and of Bounty, notwithstanding all those inconveniences, did live in good
intelligence with her; But at last those inconveniences being degenerated into
a Paralitic Distemper, and Blanch herself being desirous of a retreat the Pope
did annul the Marriage. The Princess did confine in Solitude all her
Languishments and the Prince for whom other Nuptials had been prepared, did
marry Constantia Manuel, Daughter to Don John Manuel, Prince of the Blood of
Castile, and famous for that resistance, which he made to hi^ King.

Constantia had been promised to the King of Castile; but he breaking his Word,
she was given to a young Prince, who was once to reign over a considerable
number of fair Provinces. He was but in his twenty fifth year, and the
hansomest Man of all Spain: with the most advantageous Qualities of the Body,
he possessed those of the Soul, and in all things, he did prove himself worthy of
that Crown, which was appointed for him.

The Princess Constantia was Beautiful, Spirituous, and generous as much as any
Woman in the World, her Merit ought to have Captivated Don Pedre, and certainly
he had for her an Esteem mixed with respect; which might have passed for Love
with the less Penetrating Persons. Mean time his more real Flames were reserved
for another Beauty.

Constantia, brought forth a Son in the first Year of her Marriage; who was
Named Don Louis, and who scarce had the time to discern the light; The loss of
him did cause her to feel many Sorrows; but that cold indifferency which she
observed in those Cares which her Husband did bestow on her, was much more
sensible to her. It had not been difficult for her to give herself wholly to
her Duty, and to singularly cleave to his tender Affections, but that powerful
Interest which bound her so strictly unto the Prince of Portugal, did open her
Eyes on his actions, where she could not find any thing that was Natural, and
that could satisfiy her Nicety.

At first she thought she had deceived herself; but time having confirmed what
she feared, she did secretly sigh for it, and had so much Consideration for the
Prince as to give him but some obliging marks of her Sorrow, which she could
not Conceal from Agnes de Castro, who lived with her, and the Princess
Affection did distinguish her from all the other Women.

This Maiden so dear to the Princess, did well deserve that preference which
she gave her. She was excessively Beautiful, wise, discreet, Spirituous, and
more Affectionate for Constantia then she was for her own Interest, having left
her Family, whose name was Illustrious, and that did hold a very Considerable
rank, to give herself wholly to the Princess, and to follow her into Portugal.
It was in her bosom that she poured forth her first Sorrow, and the Charming
Agnes omitted nothing that could Administer Comfort to her.

Constantia was not the only Person which Complained of Don Pedre, before the
Divorce of Blanch, he had expres'd some Tenderness toward Elvira Goncales,
Sister to Don Alvar Goncales, Favorite to the King of Portugal; and that
Amusement of the Princes youngest Years, having made a real Impression on
Elvira, whose Ambition had been flattered by Blanche's Infirmities, she had
seen Constantia possess her place, with a secret Rage, and to be Mistress of
Sufficiency of Charms to take from her all to the last hopes.

Her Jealousy left her not long idle; she examined all the Prince's Actions,
and without difficulty did unravel the Cause of that indifferency, which he had
for his Spouse: But that did not bring him back to her, and it was with great
presumption, that she mistrusted some new Passion in him, which she promised to
her self to thwart so soon a^ she should find it out. She had a mind that was
very fit for bold Enterprises, and her Brothers Credit did raise such a pride
in her, that all the Princes indifferency was not capable to humble.

He did languish, and none could guess at the Cause, he had no longer any
relish for public Sports, ordinary conversations were uneasy, and solitude only
had some power over him; this change surprised every body, Don Alfonso, who
loved his Son, designed to discourse him about it; but the Prince gave no other
Answer, than, that it was an effect of his Temper.

All this while, time did pass, and the Princess was delivered of a second Son,
who lived and was named Ferdinando. Don Pedre did force himself a little to
ta^^ a share in the public Joy. It was believed that the humor was going to
alter; but that glimpse of a Calm lasted not long, and he soon did relapse into
his deep Melancholy.

The plotting Elvira was incessantly agitated, in seeking after the Knowledge of
his Secret. Chance labored for her in it. One day, that she was walking of her
fury in the Palace's Gardens, she found the Prince of Portugal asleep in an
obscure Grotto. Her Fury could not hold against that Object. She cast her Eyes
on him, and perceived that in spite of sleep some Tears did steal from his
Eyes. That share which he still had in her heart, had no hard task to soften
it; but she heard him sigh, and afterward to express these ill articulated
Words: Yes, divine Agnes, I will dye before I discover it, and Constantia shall
have no Cause to reproach you any thing. Elvira was seized with horror at that
discourse, which presently represented to her Imagination Agnes de Castro with
all her charms, and not doubting but that it was she who possessed Don Pedre's
heart, she felt more hatred against that Rival, than she had of Tenderness for
him. The Grotto was no sit place to make Reflections in, and to form designs.
Perhaps that her first transport had caused her to have awakned the Prince, had
she not perceived under his hand a Paper, which she seized, and that she might
not be surprised reading of it, she went forth with as much diligence as
emotion.

When she was got to her Apartment, she opened the Paper trembling, and in it
found these Verses writ with Don Pedre's own hand, which it is likely he had
newly composed.

Desist, Torment no more my Heart,
Honor, and Sacred Rights, chief conserns of my Glory
Love whispers me another story.
And I yield to his Conquering Art.
Ye seeming over lasting ties,
Conspell'd engagements, Oaths Love never made,
You must all, at his feet be laid
As a Most humble Sacrifice.
Dear Princess, you, to whom my Faith is due,
Pardon my overruling Fate,
It Is confessed, I deserve your hate.
'Lass! it is my Star renders me false to you.
Elvira knew well Don Pedre's Writing, and was not Ignorant that he made
Verses, and observing the sad part that Hymen Acted in those which was fallen
into her hands, She Scrupled not to produce them to the Princess: That she
might not be suspected, She appeared not in the least; but it being not
sufficient to cause Constantia to observe how little her Husband Loved her, and
that it was necessary also, to inform her, that he was become Agnes de Castros,
Slave, Elvira caused these few Words, in an Unknown Hand, to be Writ under the
Princes Verses, where there was a sufficient space.

Sleep betrayed this unlucky Lover
Compelled his own Lips to discover,
The very Dictates of his Heart,
Declaring, Agnes, makes it Smart.
Elvira did not much stick on the Nicety of Poetry in the last Verses, and
provided, they had but the Effect which she wished for, she required no more.

Her Impatiency would not permit her to stay till the next day to Publish them.
She went to the Princess Apartment, who was gone forth to walk, and passing to
her very Closet without being perceived, she conveyed the Paper in a Book which
the Princess did usually read, and Retired very well satisfied with her good
Success.

So soon as Constantia was returned, she went into her Closet, where she found
the Book open and in it those Verses that should cost her so dear. The Prince's
Character was well known to her; but besides the cruel Confirmation of all that
she had feared, she learned that it was Agnes of Castro, whose sole Friendship
could consolate her Affliction, who was the cause of it. She did Read an
hundred times over the same thing, seeking to belie her own Eyes and Reason;
but perceiving too well that she was not deceived, and consulting her Thoughts
on this Adventure, she found her self much more possessed with Sorrow then with
Anger, when she considered that Don Pedre as Amorous as he was, had still
preserved his Love in Secrecy. After having pittyed him without Condemning, her
natural tenderness did cause her to shed a deluge of Tears, and did inspire her
with the design of concealing all her Grief.

She had certainly done it by the Power of an Extraordinary Virtue, had not the
Prince entered with extreme have, he missing his Verses at his awaking, and
fearing they should light into Indiscreet Hands, he came into the Palace
disturbed with this Loss, came to Constantia, observed her Humid Eyes, and
stayed his own on those unlucky Verses, which had newly escaped from his
Passion.

He presently grew Pale, and appeared so Concerned that the Generous Princes
was more sensible of his then of her own Misfortune: Madam, said he, with
Amazement, whence have you that Paper? It cannot come but from some Enemy of
your quiet and mine, replied Constantia, it is the Work of your own Hand, My
Lord, and doubtless of the Motion of your Heart also; but fear nothing, if my
Tenderness would make it pass for a Crime, that same Tenderness which nothing
can alter, would prevent it in me.

Constantia's Moderation did serve but to render the Prince more Confounded.
How Generous you are Madam continued he, and how Unfortunate am I! Some Tears
did Accompany those Words, and the Princess who Passionately Loved him, was so
sensibly moved with them that for along space they both remained Mute. At last
Constantia broke silence, and showing him, what Elvira had caused to be added;
You have betrayed your self, My Lord, continued she, you have been overheard,
and your Secret is known. It was in that very Moment that the Princes whole
Strength did Abandon him, and that his present Condition became worthy of
Compassion. He could not forgive himself that Unvoluntary Crime which he had
committed against the Amiable Innocent Agnes; and though he was convinced of
Constantia's Bounty, the Vexation which this Prudent, and Modest Maid might
receive from his Conduct, did carry it above all other Considerations.

The Princess who was examining of him with her Eyes, perceived so many marks
of despair on his Face, that she feared the effects of it, and obligingly
holding forth her hand to him; I promise you, my Lord, said she, that I will
never complain of you, and that Agnes shall ever be dear to me. You shall not
find me inclined to make you reproaches; and not being capable of possessing
your heart, I Will rest satisfied in endeavoring to render my self worthy of it.
Don Pedre more concerned than before, bowed a Knee before Constantia, kissed
with respect that hand which she had given him, and, perhaps did forget Agnes
for a moment.

But Love did soon put a stop to these small Progresses of Hymen, That fatal
Planet which did predominate over Don Pedre's Fate, had not yet spent all it is
malignity; and one moment of Agnes his sight, soon added new Forces to his
Passion.

That fair Maids consent had had no share in her victory, her eyes were exact
and discerning, but they sought not in the Princess eyes, for that which they
would have discovered to her.

She never did use to be long distant from Constantia, wherefore Don Pedre was
no sooner gone out of the Closet but she came into it, and finding the Princess
moved and melting, she doubted not but that she had some just Cause of Sorrow;
she put her self in the same posture, that the Prince had been but a moment
before, and expressing her disturbance with concerned Looks, Madam, said she,
in the name of your Bounties, conceal not from me the Cause of that Trouble I
find in you. Alas! Agnes, replied the beautiful Princess, what is it you would
know, and what am I to tell you? The Prince is in Love. That hand which he once
gave me, was no present of his heart, and all the advantage of this Alliance,
will but make me the Sacrifice. The Prince in Love! replied Agnes, with an
Amazement mixed with Indignation: And what Fatal Beauty can dispute with yours
the Empire of an heart so justly due to you? Ah! Madam, all my respect cannot
hinder me from murmuring against him. Do not accuse him of any thing, replied
Constantia, he strives all that he can, and I am more obliged to his
endeavoring to remain faithful to me, than if I really did enjoy his
affections. It is not sufficient to fight for to overcome, and the Prince does
more in that disposition he finds himself in, than I ought to have hoped for.
In fine, he is my Husband, an amiable Husband, to which there is nothing
wanting, but that which I have not been able to inspire in him, that is, a
Passion which had rendered me too happy. Ah! Madam, cried out Agnes de Castro,
transported with her affection for Constantia: He is a blind Prince, who knows
not the precious advantage which he possesses. It must needs be that he knows
more, replied the Princess, modestly: But Madam, continued Agnes, is there any
thing either in Portugal, or in all Spain, that can be compared to you? And not
to reckon on the Qualities of your Person, can those of your mind be
sufficiently praised? -- My Dear Agnes, replied the Princess sighing, she that
takes my Husbands heart from me, has but too much wherewith to plead his
Excuse, seeing it is of thee that Fortune has made use to give me that woeful
blow: Yes, Agnes the Prince loves thee, and that Merit which I know to be in
thee, puts a stop to my Complaints, not admitting of the least resentment.

The Beauteous Agnes little expected what the Princess had said to her. Thunder
and Lightning, had less surprised and abass'd her, she remained long
Speechless; but at last fixing her looks on Constantia; What say you Madam,
replied she, and what thoughts have you had of me? What should I be capable of
betraying you? And in coming here filled with Zeal for the quiet of your Life I
should bring with me but a direful Poison, that should disturb it? How should I
detest that little of Beauty which is found in me, (though without any design
in me of making of it known) and that unfortunate day in which I first beheld
the Prince! But Madam it cannot be me certainly that the Heavens have chosen to
travers you. They are not so much my Enemy to put me to so severe a Trial, and
if I was that Odious Person, there would be no Exiles nor Torments to which I
would not condemn my self. It Is Elvira, Madam, whom the Prince has formerly
Loved, before your Marriage, and even before Blanch's Divorce; some indiscreet
reports have been made you concerning that intregue of his Younger days; but
that which has happened in the time of Blanch, has no relation to you. It is
most certain that Don Pedre Loves, you answered the Princess, and I have vanity
enough to believe that of truth, there is none but you in all Spain that can
dispute it with me, but his secret is discovered, and he has not denied it.
What, replied the Beauteous Agnes, with a greater surprise it is from himself,
that you have received the Intelligence of his weakness? Then did Constantia
show her the Verses, and there never was any despair like hers.

While they were in that sad conversation, Impatient Elvira, who was desirous
to learn the effects of her Practices came again to the Princess, where she had
a free access, she was not hindered from going to her very Closet, and her
Presence drew a redness on the cheeks of two restless and afflicted Persons
which desired not her Company, she had the satisfaction of observing Constantia
to lay aside those Verses, which the Princess had not seen without her Malice,
and of an imoderate Sorrow in her Eyes, and in Agnese's also. She remained
there just so long as needed to inform her that she had succeeded well, but the
Princess who desired not such an obstinate Witness of the troubles she was in
at that present, ordered to be left alone, Elvira went out, and Agnes de Castro
retired at the same time also.

It was in her own Chamber, that examining more at large her Adventure, she
found it as cruel as Death it self. She Loved Constantia with a true Affection,
and till then, had not had for the Prince of Portugal but an esteem mixed with
that admiration which could not be denied to his Excellent Qualities, and
considering herself with extremity of Grief, as the cause of the Sorrows of
such a Princess to whose Bountys she was so Indebted, she Employed all the Night
in Tears and Complaints, which sufficiently revenged Constantia of these Evils
which she caused her to feel.

The Prince was no less disturbed, his Wives generosity increased his remorses,
without diminishing his love. He did fear, not without great likeliness, that
they who had possessed Constantia with those Verses, would also acquaint the King
of his passion, from whom he could not expect so great an Indulgency, and he
would freely part with his Life to free himself from that extremity.

The afflicted Constantia did Languish in a deplorable condition, she could not
see any thing in those Persons that caused her Misfortune, but what was apt to
move her tender affections. At last Jealousy designed, (but vainly) to combat
that tendency which she had, to Love them. The Prince was not less dear unto
her, and she could not be sensible either of hatred or indifferency toward her
rival.

While that these three uneasy Persons did abandon themselves unto their
Melancholy, Elvira who was resolved not to let her vengeance remain imperfect
was contriving by what means she might accomplish it. Her Brother on whom she
did depend, did show her a great affection, and guessing that the Loves of Don
Pedre and Agnes of Castro would not be approved of by the King, she discovered
it to Don Alvares, who was not Ignorant of the former that the Prince had had
with his Sister. He found himself most powerfully concerned in the news she had
told him, through a secret passion which he had for Agnes, which he had
concealed in his own Breast least it should in any sort thwart the smooth
course of his good Fortune, and he was in expectation of a continuation of Don
Alfonses Favors, whereby to render his Heart, a more considerable present.

He concealed not from his Sister a Mystery which he had found very difficult
to keep secret, and it proved a duplication of vexation to her, to find Agnes
the Sovereign of all those Hearts over which she had any pretentions.

Don Alvares was one of those Ambitious men that are so without Moderation,
Proud without Generosity, of cruel inclination, and who to attain his ends,
could not see any thing, that was either difficult or Illigitimate. He Naturaly
loved not the Prince who in all reason was to possess the first place in Don
Alfonse's Heart, and who set limits unto Don Alvare's good Fortune. But he
understood that he was his Rival, Jealousy increased his hatred, and he
entreated Elvira to employ all her cares to cross an engagement which could not
but be opposite to his designs. She promised him all aid and assistance, though
she was not satisfied, as to her own concerns, and he relied on her promise and
dexterity.

Don Alvares, who had sensibly felt the Prince of Portugal's concurrence in his
amors, had no other thoughts but of thwarting and opposing his Merits. He had
no handsome presence, neither was he of an agreeable temper, and Don Pedre had
those advantages, and possessed diverse others also, but being Husband to
Constantia, and that he wholly depended on a Father who was absolute, and that
Don Alvares was under no restraint, and Master of a considerable Fortune, he
trusted his good Fortune on that score.

He knew well that Don Pedre's Love could not but inspire Don Alfonse with a
violent anger; and being over diligent in doing evil, his first Care was to
inform him of it. After he had given sufficient Leisure to his anger to rouse
unto that Pitch he would have it, he spoke for himself, and soon did render the
King Protector of his Passion.

Though Don Alvares had no other Merits with the King of Portugal, than a
continual blind Complacency, he had poured all hi^ Favors upon him, and in
that State in which the Kings Liberality had placed him; few Women could well
refuse his Allegiance, Don Alfonse did assure him the connuation of his
Friendship and Favor, and did assure him that he himself should loose his
authority, or that he would make him Master of Agnes.

Don Alvares, perfectly learned in the Art of managing his Master did answer
his last bounties with a profound submission, and very fit to continue them. He
had never spoken to Agnes what he did feel for her, but he then thought it time
to break forth, and immediately sought after the means to perform it.

The galantry of Coimbria which lay in oblivion did then rouse it self up
again. The King to pleasure Don Alvares under a pretense of diverting of
Constantia, did order some public sports, and it was his Pleasure that all
things should appear very magnificently.

Ever since the adventure of the Verses Don Pedre had endeavored all means to
constrain himself and of appearing less concerned; but in the bottom he still
equally suffered, and it was not without great uneasiness that he fitted
himself for the Justing. And seeing that he could not appear so Publicly with
Agnes's Colors, he took those of the Princess, without any Motto or Agreements.

Don Alvares set himself off with Agnes de Castro's Liveries, and that
beautiful Maid, who found no comfort in what the Princess had said, had this
further addition of Sorrow.

Don Pedre did appear in the List extreme graceful, and Don Alvares who looked
upon this day as his own, did appear all Glittering with Gold and Jewels mixed
with blew, which was Agnes's Color, and his Equipage was all over sprinkled
with inflamed Hearts, and Love Knots, with abundance of double As; his Motto
was a Cupid breaking out of a Cloud with these four Verses under it.

My Bashful Love, Banish all fear,
From your concealing Cloud appear.
For nows the time, most Charming Eyes
To know that heart, you made your Prise.
Don Alvares's Pride was laid humble at Don Pedre's Feet, who bore him down
with twenty more, and he alone carried the honor of the day. At Night there
was a gallant appearance at Constantia's appartment, where Agnes had not been
without an express and absolute order from the Princess. She did appear very
negligently dressed, though still charming with Vexation, she had seen her Name
and Colors used by Don Alvares, in a public Solemnity, and if her Heart was
capable of any tenderness it was not for such a Person as he, that her Nicety
designed them. She looked on him with a Contempt, which hindered him not from
pressing much upon her, and she was forced to give Ear to what he had a mind to
say.

She was not rude, but her Coldness would have repulsed all other but Alvares:
Madam, said he to her, so soon as he could not be heard but by her self, I had
till this present concealed that Passion which you had Inspired me with; in
fear of your displeasure; but it has forced my respect, and I can no longer
conceal it from you. I have made no reflections on your Actions, replied Agnes,
with all the indifferency imaginable, and if you offend me, you wrong me the
more in desiring my taking Notice of it. This Coldness is of evil Omen to me,
replied Don Alvares, and if you have not this day taken notice of my love, it
is to be feared, that you will never approve of it. Alas! what time have you
chosen to show i^ me, contin'd Agnes, does it so much Honor me, that you show
it with so mu(...) care, and do you believe me so greedy of Glory, as to Aspire
at that which derives from you? You have ill maintained it in the Justs, and if
it is that vanity which prompts you on, you will make no great Progress in a
Soul which loves not shame. Though you were in Possession of all the Advantages
which the Prince has merited, yet you ought to reflect on what you are doing,
and it is not a Person like me that can be moved by such respectless
enterprises.

Don Alfonse's Favorite was too Proud, to hear Agnes thus spoke without
Color; but his design being to render her flexible, and not to anger her; he
concealed his Resentment; and taking Notice of the Observation which she had
made on Don Pedre's Triumph with an Addition of Jealousy. If, I have not
overcome at the Just, ^eply'd he, I am not less Amorous, (...) less capable of
Success in other ^^^^sions.

They were interrupted; but from that day, Don Alvares, who had gone over the
first difficulties, no longer observed any Measures, and Persecuted Agnes, to
whom the Kings Protection Inspired not the least considerations for him.

Don Pedre was still Ignorant of the means by which those Verses which he had
lost in the Garden had fallen into Constantia's hands. The Princess appearing
very Indulgent to him, he had no other trouble but for Agne's Interest. Don
Alvare's Love, that was now so known did perplex him, and if he had followed
his own Dictates, he had not left her exposed to the Persecutions of that
unworthy Rival. On the other hand he feared that the King should be informed of
his Passion; but he did not then reflect enough on Elvira, to fear her
Resentments.

She Burnt with a desire to ruin Agnes, against whom all her Poison was
stirred up, and she was not tired with making daily new reports to her Brother,
assuring him though she had no proofs for it, that Agnes did answer to the
Prince's tenderness, that it was the true cause of Constantia's Grief, and that
if that Princess should dye of it, Don Pedre might Marry Agnes, infine she did
so irritate her Brothers Jealousy, that he run, to show it wholly to Don
Alfonse, who Trembled with Anger at it; My dear Alvares, said he, to him, Marry
her, that Beauty that is so dangerous, and let your Possession secure both
yours and my quiet. If I have protected you in other occasions, Judge what a
business of such Importance to me can make me undertake. Act without any
reserve. The Powers of the Kingdom are in your Power, and all that I possess
shall be certainly at your disposal, provided you but render your self. Master
of Agne's Destiny.

Don Alvares well pleased with his Master, took hold of all the Authority that
he gave him. He really Loved Agnes, and was loath to come at first to any
violence; but he promised himself to be beyond all Management if she still
continued insensible.

Mean time Agnes de Castro highly importuned with his Assiduities, desperate at
Constantia's Griefs, and peradventure molified by those which she cau^'d the
Prince to suffer, did take a Resolution worthy of her Virtue. As Amiable as was
Don Pedre, she could not see in him but the Husband of a Princess that was most
dear to her, and far from seeking to improve that Power which she had over his
Heart, she thought of nothing but absenting her self from Coimbria. Don
Alvare's Passion, which she would not favor did furnish her with a pretense,
and pressed on with the fears of causing at last a Divorce, most Cruel betwixt
the Prince and his Spouse, she found out Constantia in a perplexity that all
her cares could not conceal.

The Princess easily observed it, and their common misfortune having not
altered her Friendship. What Is the matter with you Agnes, said she, with her
wonted sweetness, and what new misfortune does your sorrow come to inform me
of; That Attachment which I have for you, Madam, replied Agnes, does put me to
a Cruel Trial, and pouring forth a Flood of Tears, I had limited the happiness
of my Life in the hopes of spending of it near your Person, yet I find that I
must Transport somewhere else an Uunfortunate Face, that renders me but ill
Offices, and it is to obtain from you that Permission, that I come to Embrace
your Knees, looking on you as on my Sovereign.

Constantia was so surprised and so moved at Agne's proposition, that she
remained Speechless; for some Moments, some sincere Tears expressed her first
grief, and after she had sufficiently shed them to give Agnes a sufficient Mark
of her Tenderness, she fixed her Sorrowful Eyes upon her, and obligingly
holding forth her hand to her, then you will go, my dear Agnes, continued she,
and further expose me unto the sorrow of seeing you no more. Alas, Madam
replied that amyable Maid, Conceal from the Miserable Agnes a Bounty which
increases her Sorrows. It is not I that would depart, it is my Duty and my
Reason that will have it so, and those days that I shall pass absent from you,
cannot promise me any thing so agreeable as to inspire me such a design if I
found not my self absolutely compelled to it. I cannot be Ignorant of what
passes at Coimbria, and I should be an Accomplice to those Unjustices which are
there committed should I reside there any longer -- Ah! I know your Virtue,
cried out Constantia, and you may remain here in all security, if I stay you
here, and whatever does happen I shall never accuse you of any thing. We must
not promise our selves any thing of future, Madam, replied Agnes sorrowfully,
and I shall still remain sufficiently Guilty, so long as my presence shall
entertain such thoughts as cannot be accounted Innocent. Moreover Madam, Don
Alvare's importunities are unsufferable, and finding in my self nothing but
Aversion against him, that the King protects his Insolency, and that he is in a
Condition of undertaking much, my flight is absolutely necessary; But Madam,
though he possesses nothing but what is odious to me, I call Heaven to Witness,
that if I could Cure the Prince by Marrying of him, I should not defer it one
moment, and finding in my mind, the Consolation of having Sacrificed my self
for my Princess, I should bear it without any Murmur; But in fine though I
should be Don Alvare's Wife, Don Pedre would still have the same Eyes, and I
find nothing better then to go hide my self in some Corner of the World, where
I shall certainly Live without Comfort; but where I should preserve my
innocence. All that Justice which you can find in this design, answered the
Princess, shall not oblige me to approve of it. Would your Absence restore me
Don Pedre's Heart, and would he not fly with you? His Cares, are mine, my Life
is linked with his, reduce him not then to a despair, if you, love me. I know
you, I once again declare it to you, and what power soever you have over the
Prince 's heart, I shall not permit that you should leave us.

Though Agnes believed she had a perfect Knowledge of Constantia, she did not
expect such a fund of Virtue, she found her self the more Unfortunate by it,
and the Prince more Guilty. Oh! Wisdom, Oh! Bounty! beyond Example cried she
out; why do not the Cruel Fates afford you all that you deserve. You are the
Arbiter of all my Actions, continued she, kissing one of Constantia's hands, I
will not do but what you please; but I beseech you to think on what reason
ought to prompt you to prescribe to me.

Don Pedre, who had not yet seen the Princess that day, came in just then, and
finding them both disturbed he inquired after the reason with some earnestness.
My Lord replied Constantia, the too Wise and too scrupulous Agnes fears the
Effects of her Beauty, and will no longer live at Coimbria and it is on that
Account, which cannot be pleasing to me, that she is asking my Advice. At this
discourse the Prince grew pale, and with more disturbance then either of them
had. Agnes cannot err, said he, in following your Counsels; Madam, and I leave
you with free Liberty of given them to her. He presently went out, and the
Princess whose heart he did so absolutely possess, not being able to conceal
her discontent. My dear Agnes, continued she, though my satisfaction was not
chained to the sight of you, I should still desire it on Don Pedre's account.
It is, the only Advantage that his Unfortunate Love can hope for, and should I
not be with Justice reputed barbarous, if I should contribute toward his being
deprived of it? But that object is but a Poison to him, replied Agnes, and what
should I do my Dear Princess, if after so much restraint, his Mouth should add
to those Evils which I have already felt, that of hearing him spoke of his
flame? You should hear him without running him into despair, added Constantia,
and I should charge that new Obligation on my Account. You would have me to
wait for events that I fear, Madam, answered Agnes, I shall obey you. But ye
just Heavens! If they are Fatal, punish not for them an Innocent Heart. Thus
ended that Conversation. Agnes retired into her Chamber; but it was without
hopes of being more at ease.

That which Don Pedre had learned of her design, produced a strange Disturbance
in his mind, he wished he did not Love her, and desired Death with great
earnestness, but it was too late for him to wish against what the Fates had
decreed, and whatever he endeavored to resolve himself to bear as to the
Absence of Agnes, his Love never had the Power to consent to it.

After he had long strove, he firmly resolved to do that which he would not
have Agnes to do. His Courage did reproach to him that idle Life which he lead
during his happiest years, and representing to the King that their Allies, and
even the Prince Don John Manuel his Father-in-Law, had business in hand which
required his presence upon the Frontiers, he easily obtained the Liberty of
making that Voyage, unto which the Princess could make no opposition.

Agnes did see him depart without any sorrow: but that did not proceed from any
Aversion. Then did Don Alvares convert his first importunity into an open
Persecution. He omitted nothing to touch Agne's Heart, and for some
considerable time employed none but the. Arms of Love, but finding that his
respect and submission were fruitless, he took another Course, and framed most
strange Designs.

The King deferring all things to his Advices, he did easily inspire in him
what he pleased; he complained of Agne's Ingratitude, and failed not to let him
know that it was but through her too great sensibility for the Prince that she
was so insensible to him, so that Don Alfonse apt to be irritated, reiterated
all those Promises, which he had already made him.

The King of Portugal, had not yet discoursed Agnes in Favor of Don Alvares,
and not doubting but that his Will would overcome all sorts of Obstacles, he
sought after an opportunity of Entertaining her, and putting her at some
distance from those that might over-hear them, I did think Don Alvares to be of
a sufficient Merit, he said, to obtain some small share in your Esteem, and I
did not think it necessary that I should require it of you for him, I know you
are all charming, but he has nothing unworthy of you, and on the least
Reflection you might make of the Choice that my Friendship has made of him,
amongst all the rest of my Courtiers, you would doubtless readily do him more
Justice. His Fortune is not to be disputed, since I am the Protector of it. He
is of a Noble Birth, his Courage does him Honor, he adores you, and in my
opinion so many reasons ought to overcome your Scorns.

Agnes's Heart was so little disposed to give it self to Don Alvares, that all
the King of Portugal's Exagerations prevail^d nothing in his behalf. Though Don
Alvares were without Merits, Sir, She replied, he possesses sufficiently of
Advantages in those Bounties with which your Majesty does Honor him, to supply
all other defects. It is not to find any defects in him that I answer not his
wishes; But, Sir, through what Obligation would he have me to Love him, if the
Heavens have not furnished me with a tender Soul? and why does he pretend that
I should submit my self to him, when that nothing ought to be more dear to me
then Liberty? You are neither so free nor so insensible as you speak, replied
Don Alfonse, blushing with Anger, and if your Heart was free from all sorts of
Affections it might receive a more reasonable one then that which possesses it.
But Imprudent Maid, that you are guided by an ill fate, added he with Fury,
what can you pretend from Don Pedre? Hither to I have concealed the sorrow that
his and your weakness have caused me; but it has not been the less violent for
that; and since you oblige me to let it break forth, I ought to tell you that
though my Son were not tied to Constantia, his Marriage should never consern
you. Renounce those vain Ideas, and take a course that may cure him and
justify your self.

The Courageous Agnes, was scarce Mistress of her first Transport, at a
Discourse so full of Scorn, but calling her Virtue to second her Anger, she
overcame her self by her own reason, considering the wrong which she sustained
not as proceeding from a great King, but from a Man blinded and wholly
possessed by Don Alvares. She thought him not worthy of her resentment. Her
fair Eyes were animated with a sparkling brightness, which witnessed the purity
of her intentions, and fixing them on Don Alfonse; if the Prince Don Pedre has
failings said she, with an Air that inclined something to disdain, he has never
informed me of them, and I do not believe that I have contributed to them. To
cure your distrust, and set my Honor safe, I shall live at a distance from
him, and all that belongs to you. Yes, Sir, I shall contentedly leave the abode
of Coimbria, and as to that Man so dear to you, added she, with a Noble
boldness, of which the King of Portugal was very sensible, that Favorite, who
is so worthy to possess the most tender affections of a great Prince, I do
assure you that in what part of the World soever my Fortune leads me, I shall
not carry the least thought of him with me. At these words, she made a profound
Bow, and did so suddenly distance herself from Don Alfonse, that he could not
oppose himself against her retirement.

He believed more then ever that she did Favor Don Pedres passion, and passed
into Constantias appartment, to inspire her with the same thought; but she was
not capable of receiving such impressions, and following her Natural
inclination, she generously defended Agnes's Virtue, Don Alfonse, vexed to find
her so well disposed on her rivals account, whom he would have her to hate, did
murmur against her goodness, and went to join his anger to Don Alvare's rage
who no longer wa^ Master of himself after he had seen that his Master's
Negotiation wa^ of no effect. That Proud one braves me, Sir, said he, and
contemns the Honor that your bounties have made her, that I might renounce so
fatal a passion; but I must love her against my will, and though that Flame
should cost me my Life, I plainly feel that I can not put it out. What is it
that I can do for you? replied Don Alfonse? Alas! Sir, replied, Don Alvares,
that which I can never hope for from Proud Agne's consent. Well, added the King
seeing that I must not Publicly authorize any Violence in the Center of my
Kingdom, choose from amongst all my Subjects such as thou shall Judge most
capable of serving thee; carry off that Beauty which charms thee, and if she
yields not to thy Love, make use of all that force can do for thee, to force
her to Marry thee.

Don Alvares ravished with such a proposition, which at once did Flatter his
resentments and his love cast himself at Don Alfonse's Feet, did express his
acknowlegments to him, set forward his Zeal, with new protestations, and
thought no longer but to employ his unjust authority against Agnes.

Don Pedre had been absent above three Months, when Don Alvares did undertake
that which the King had advised him to do. Though the Princess moderation was
well known to him, he feared his presence, and was loath to expect the return
of a rival with whom nothing had yet been disputed.

One night that the sorrowful Agnes, full of her daily Disturbances, was in
vain expecting sleep, some unknown men, whose steps were well ordered did take
her out of the Palace, and after carried her out of Coimbria, without being
hindered by any Obstacle, she could not well tell on whom to fix her Suspicions.
Don Alvares seemed too powerful to seek for his Satisfaction after such a
manner, and she did not tax with this attempt a Prince of whom she had too
good an Opinion. All that she could say, did not hinder her ill adventure; she
was carried away with diligence, and before day, she was already considerably
distant from the City.

At the first Glimps of day, she looked on all those that surrounded her, not
knowing so much as one; and perceiving well, that both outcries, and tears,
were in vain to such cruel minds, she rested contented in imploring the
protection of Heaven, and so abandoned her self to her Conductors.

While she was overwhelmed with Sorrow, and uncertain of her doom, she
perceived a Body of Horse to advance toward the Troops that conducted her; The
ravishers did not avoid it, beleiving it to be Don Alvares; but coming near,
they perceived that it was the Prince of Portugal, who without any knowledge of
this opportunity of serving Agnes, was returning to Coimbria full of her Idea,
after he had performed all that he was to do in his expedition.

Agnes, who did not expect him altered her mind, and thought that it was by his
orders that she was forced away. Ah! my Lord, said she, in that thought, was it
you that was thus to tare me from the Princess? and must so cruel a blow fall
on me from a hand so dear to her? What will you do with a miserable wretch who
seeks but for Death? and why will you Tarnish the Glory of your life, by a
design so unworthy of you?

That Language did no less surprise the Prince, then the sight of Agnes had
done. He Apprehended that she had been forced away, and instantly resenting the
most peircing strokes of Anger, he gave her to understand with one single look,
that he was not the base author of her grief. I, tare you from Constantia who
are all her joy, said he, what thoughts have you of Don Pedre? If you see me
here, I am wholly Innocent of that violence which is offered you, and which I
shall prevent. Then did he turn himself toward the Ravishers; but his presence
had already dispersed them. He ordered his Men to pursue them, and at least to
seize some from whom he might learn the authority by which they did Act.

During this, Agnes was not less confused then before, she admired the conduct
of her Fortune, who brought the Prince at the very moment that he was so useful
to her. Her equity did soon redress the wrong which her distrusts had caused
her to do him. She felt some joy to have escaped a Misfortune which appeared so
certain to her, but it was no quiet joy, when she considered that her deliverer
was her lover too, and such a lover as deserved her entire acknowledgments, but
that also owed his Heart to the most amiable Princess in the World.

Don Alvares, who feared being seen near to Coimbria, and who delayed
Prosecuting of Agnes till she was at a distance from it, had confided his
design to some Friends, which he jug'd capable to execute it, and that had done
it had not the Prince interposed.

During the time that his Men were persuing of the Ravishers of Agnes, he
remained almost alone with her, and though he had resolved always to avoid her
presence, his Fortitude could not withstand so fair an occasion. Madam said he,
is it possible that Men born amongst those that obey us, should be capable of
offending you? It was not to the care of Punishing such a Crime that I thought
my self reserved; but since the Heavens have permitted that you should receive
it, I must perish or cause you to forget it. My Lord, replied Agnes, more moved
at this discourse, then at Don Alvares's enterprise, those that want respect
for the Princess and for you, may be dispensed from having any for me. I no
longer doubt but that Don Alvares is the Author of this attempt, and I judge
what I may expect from him, by that which his importunity has made me suffer.
He is certain of the Kings protection, and he designs to make him partner in
his crimes; But my Lord the Heavens have conducted you most happily here for
me, and to you do I owe the Liberty of again serving the Princess. You would do
for Constantia, that which is impossible not to perform for you, replied Don
Pedre, your goodness binds you to her, and others Fortunes does for ever engage
them to you.

The modest Agnes, who dreaded this discourse, as much as the danger which had
been prevented, made no other answer then to cast down her looks, and the
Prince who understood her disorder, left her to spoke to two of his Men, who
brought him back one of those that Don Alvares had employed. He pardoned him,
and did not think that he should punish him, for having obeyed a man, who was
made Almighty through his Fathers weakness.

After this, Agnes was brought back to Coimbria where her being forced away,
began to be highly censured. The Princess, was infinitely Afflicted, and at
first believed it was a consequence of that design which that Fair Maid had
expressed to her of her retirement; but some Women that waited on her, having
declared that violence had been offered to her, Constantia went and made her
complaints to the King, who gave no great attention to the relation.

Madam, said he, let that Fatal Plague that deprives you of your Husbands
Heart, be removed from you, and be not Afflicted at her absence, rather thank
Heaven with me for it.

The generous Princess took Agne's part, with a great deal of courage, and she
was still disputing with the King, when Don Pedre, came to Coimbria.

The first object which struck his Eyes was Don Alvares, who was crossing one
of the Courts of the Palace, in the midst of a Cloud of Courtiers, which his
Favor did fasten to him. The sight of him caused Don Pedre to be disturbed,
but the sight of Don Pedre and Agnes gave him much greater troubles, he easily
guest that it was Don Pedre who had rescued her from his Men, and if his fury
could have Acted all that it would have done, it had produced very sad Effects,
at that very Moment.

Don Alvares, said the Prince to him, is it thus that you employ that authority
which the King my Father gives you? have you received Employs, and Power from
his bounty, but to employ them in perfidiousness and in abusing of Women? Were
you ignorant of that interest which the Princess has in this Maid, and did you
not know what a tender affectionate esteem she has for her? No, replied Don
Alvares, with such insolency as did quite anger the Prince, I was not Ignorant
of it, nor of that share your Heart has in it. Base wretch, replied the Prince,
neither that favor which thou abuses, nor that insolence which makes thee
p^ate, shall hinder me from Punishing of thee, were thou worthy of my blows;
but there are other ways to humble thy Pride, and it is not such an arm as mine
that must take on it the vile employ of Chastising so mean a thing as thou art.

Don Pedre went forwards at these words, and left Don Alvares in such a rage as
cannot be expressed mad to see an enterprise fail, which he believed so sure,
and at the Princess scorn of him, and promiss'd to himself to Sacrifice all to
his revenge.

Though Don Alfonse loved his Son, he was too much preposses'd with his
passion, to Pardon him what he had newly done, and he did condemn an action of
great Justice, as if it had been an heinous Crime.

Elvira who the sweetness of hope had flattered for some moments, beheld Agne's
return with a most sensible Sorrow, which left her no other thoughts then of
stirring up her Brother to revenge.

In fine the Prince did see Don Alfonse, but instead of being received by him
with that joy which he owed to the good success of his expedition, he showed
him nothing but a close Anger. After he had rendered, him his first respects,
and and exact account of his proceedings he spoke to him of that violence which
had been offered Agnes de Castro, and complained of it in the Princess 's Name
as well as his own. You ought to be silent in that respect, replied the King,
and that motive which causes you to spoke, is so shameful that I blush and sigh
for you. What concerns it you whether that maid, whose presence troubles me, be
removed from hence or not? so long as I would have it so. But Sir, replied Don
Pedre, was open force, craft and the night Season, to be employed, where the
least of your orders was sufficient? Agnes had obeyed you, and if she remains
here still, peradventure it is against her will. However, Sir, Constantia is
offended at it, and without the fear of displeasing you, which, retains me,
that action had not remained unpunished. How happy are you, replied Don
Alfonse, with a scornful smile, to make use of Constantia's name in this, to
maintain the interests of your Heart. Do you think I know them not, and that
that unfortunate Princess, looks on the wrong you do her with indifferency?
never more mention Agnes to me continued he, in a severe Tone, be satisfied
that I Pardon you for what is passed, and think well on the kindness which I
have for Don Alvares, when ere you design any thing against him. No, Sir,
answered the angered Prince, I shall not spoke any more of Agnes; but neither
Constantia, nor I will any longer suffer her to be any more exposed unto the
insolency of your Favorite.

The King of Portugal had like to have broke forth at this Discourse; but some
Relics of Prudence prevented it. Retire, said he to Don Pedre, and go make
Reflections on what I can do, and what you owe me.

During this Conversation, Agnes was receiving from the Princess, and from all
the Ladies of the Court, great Expressions of Joy and Friendship, Constantia
saw again her Husband, with a great deal of satisfaction and far from being
sorry at what he had lately done for Agnes, she privately returned him thanks
for it, and still was the same toward him, nothwithstanding all the Jealousy
which was endeavored to be inspired in her.

Don Alvares who found in his Sister, a Maliciousness worthy of his trust, did
not conceal his fury from her. After she had made vain attempts to moderate it,
in blotting Agnes out of his Heart, seeing that his Disease was incurable, she
made him understand, that so long as Constantia should not be Jealous, there
was no hopes. That if Agnes should once be suspected by her, she would not fail
of Abandoning her, and that then it would be easy to get Satisfaction, the
Prince being now so Proud of Constantia's indulgency. In giving this Advice to
her Brother, she promised to serve him effectually, and having no need of any
body but her self, to perform ill things, she recommended Don Alvares to manage
well the King.

Four Years were passed in that Melancholy station, and the Princess besides
her first dead Child, and Ferdinand who was still Living, had brought two
Daughters into the World.

Some Days after Don Pedre's return, Elvira, who was most Dextrous in the Art
of well Governing any Wicked Design, did gain one of the Servants which
belonged to Constantia's Chamber; she first spoke her fair, than overwhelmed
her with Presents and Gifts, and finding in her as ill a Disposition as in her
self, she readily resolved to employ her.

After she was sure of her, she composed a Letter, which was after Writ over
again in an unknown Hand, which she deposited in that Maids Hands, that she
might deliver it to Constantia with the first opportunity, telling her that
Agnes had dropped it; This was the Substance of it.

I employ not my own Hand to Write to you, for Reasons that I shall acquaint
you with. How happy am I to have overcome all your Scruples! And what Happiness
shall I find in the Progress of our Intreague! The whole Course of my Life,
shall continually represent to you the sincerity of my Affections; pray think
on the secret Conversation that I require of you. I fancy still, that all
Persons that approach you, deprive me of something of my due. I dare not spoke
to you in public; Therefore come this Night where you know, I conjure you to it
by all that I have suffered; Mention no more Constantia to me; she must be
satisfied with my Esteem, since that my Heart could be none but Yours.

The false Portuguise Servant, obeyed Elvira exactly, the very next day
perceiving Agnes coming from the Princess she brought the Letter to Constantia,
who received it, and found in it, that which she was far from thinking on.
Never did tenderness produce so sorrowful an Effect as then. Alas! they are
both Guilty, said she sighing, and notwithstanding that Tendency which I find
in my Heart to justify them, my reason must needs Condemn them. Unfortunate
Princess, Sorrowful Subject of Fortunes Capricios, why can thou not Dye,
seeing thou art not of a Humor to Revenge thy self! Don Pedre, ought you to
give me your Hand, when you knew you could not give me your Heart? And thou
fair and ungreateful Agnes, were thou born to produce the Evil of my Days, and
to be the cause of my Death? After she had given some Moments unto the violence
of her Sorrow, she called to her that Person who had brought her the Letter,
charged her not to spoke of it to any body, and then ordered that no body
whatsoever should be Admitted into her Chamber.

Then did she with more Liberty think on him whom she could not inspire with
Love, and on her that betrayed her. The trouble of her Soul did not hinder her
from seeking some means to excuse them. And desirous to do all that she could
for Don Pedre, she took a firm Resolution of not complaining of him.

Elvira was not long, without being Informed of what passed, and of the
Princess 's Sorrow, whence she hoped for all that she could wish.

Agnes far from imagining any such Storm, returned to Constantia, and learning
her indisposition, she passed the rest of the day at her Chamber door, to learn
some News of her; but she was not permitted to enter. That Novelty did surprise
and disturbed her. The Prince had the same fate, and was startled at an order
that was not to concern him.

Finally the next day Constantia appeared; but with so much Dejection, that it
was difficult to believe that she had suffered much. Agnes was the most
pressing to approach her. The Princess could not contain her Tears. They both
kept silence along time, Constantia did attribute that of Agnes, to some
remorse, and that Unfortunate Maid not being able to contain any longer; is it
possible, Madam, said she, that two days can have deprived me of all that
Bounty which you had for me? What have I done? And for what Crime are you thus
to punish me? The Princess looked languishingly upon her, and did not answer
her, but with a sigh, and Agnes offended at such a reservedness, went out after
an hasty manner, which contributed much to make her be thought Guilty.

After this the Prince came, who found Constantia more disturbed then usually,
and he most obligingly did Conjure her, not to neglect her Indisposition. My
greatest good, is not the Preservation of my Life, My Lord, answered she, I
should take more care of it, did I love you less; But -- she could not go on,
and the Prince being put into a Consternation through her disturbance, did most
sorrowfully sighed without answering, which caused her an increase of Sorrow.
To this some grains of anger being added, and all things tending to persuade
the Princess that she was Sacrificed amongst them, she did not enter on any
discourse that might produce a right understanding, so left her Husband retire
without speaking to him.

Nothing is more capable of disturbing our Reason, and of altering our Health,
then the secret Motions of Jealousy and Solitude. Constantia who was
accustomed, to spoke freely to Agnes, and who believed she was deceived by her,
did Abandon her self to such Perplexity as quite did overcome her. She fell
violently Sick. The whole Court was concerned at this Misfortune; and Don Pedre
was really Afflicted at it: But Agnes appeared more Concerned then all the Rest.

Constantia's Coldness toward her, her continual sighs, and her obstinate
Distemper, caused that after she had sought after the occasion of it, in all
that she could recall into her Memory, she began to fear her self, and to
reproach her self for all that the Princess did suffer.

Mean time the Distemper did so increase that Constantia's Life was extremely
feared, and that she her self began to find that it was time to think no longer
of it; that though caused her no disturbance, She looked on Death as a great
good, and perceived the despair those Persons approached her were in without
the least Concern.

Don Alfonse who loved her and knew her Virtue, was moved at the Extremity she
was in, and Don Alvare's who had not lost the least occasion, of making him
conceive that it was Jealousy which caused Constantia's Death, did but too much
Exasperate him against such Criminals as were most worthy of Compassion.

The King of Portugal was not of a Temper long to Conceal his Anger. You give
Examples, said he to the Prince, that will render your Memory very Illustrious,
and Constantia's Death, of which none but you can be accused, is the
Unfortunate Effects of a Guilty Passion. Dread Heaven after this, and look on
your self as a Monster that deserves not to Live. If my Blood did not still
Plead in your behalf, what might you not fear from my just Resentments? But
what may not the Imprudent Agnes, to whom nothing Binds me, expect, if
Constantia Perishes? She that in my Court Foments your foolish Passion with
vain hopes, and causes us to loose so Amiable a Princess, that you were not
worthy to possess.

Don Pedre knew, that Constantia was not Ignorant of his concerns for Agnes;
but he also knew with what Moderation she had always expressed her self on that
point. The Kings reproach was very sensible; but his fault not being voluntary,
and that an Imperious Accident did force him to Love in despite of all his
resistance, he appeared more Afflicted, then Confounded. Without well examining
of me, you have accused me, Sir, answered he, and if my intentions were well
known to you, you would not, may be, find me so guilty, I should take the
Princess whom you say I Sacrifice for Judge of my Actions, were she in a
Condition to be Consulted. If I am Guilty of any Weakness, her Equity has never
reproached me of it, and my Mouth has never informed Agnes of it. But Sir,
though I had Committed some Fault wherefore would you Punish an Innocent Maid
for it? Who would perhaps Condemn them as much as you do? Ah! Wretch replied
the King, she has but too much favored you, and thy flames had not been so
constant had they not been well rewarded. Sir, replied the Prince, pierced with
Sorrow for the wrong which was offered to Agnes, you offend a Virtue most pure,
and those expressions which proceed from your Anger, do not become you. Agnes
has afforded me no Favors, I did never ask her any, and I protest that I have
not had so much as a thought against what I owe to Constantia.

While they were in this Discourse one of the Princesses Women came all in
Tears to Advertise Don Pedre, that she was at the last Gasp. Go look on your
Work, said the King, and expect no longer, from a Father, who has but too much
spared you, but that Severity which you deserve.

The Prince did run to Constantia, who he found Dying, and Agnes in a Swound in
the Arms of some Women. That which had caused that redoubling of illness, was
that Agnes, who could no longer bear the Princes indifferency, had Conjured her
to tell her what her Crime was, and either to deprive her of life or restore
her Friendship to her.

Constantia who felt that she must suddenly Dye, would not retain a secred
Anger against Agnes, and after some words that prepared her to a sorrowful
clearing of the business she showed her that Pernicious Note, which Elvira had
Composed. Ah! Madam, cried out the Beautiful Agnes, after she had Read it, Ah!
Madam, how many sorrowful disquiets had you spared me, if your Heart had
expressed it self with its accustomed Bounty. It is not hard to see that this
Letter is Artificial, and that I have most Merciless Enemies. Can you believe
the Prince so Imprudent as to employ another Hand, then his own in such an
occasion as this? And do you think me so simple as to keep that testimony of my
shame with so little Cautiousness? you are not betrayed, neither by your
Husband, nor by me I call Heaven to Witness, and those Attempts which I made to
get out of Coimbria. Alas! My Dear Princess, how little have you known she that
you have so Honored. Believe not that if I have justified my self, I shall
ever suffer the Worlds Conversation. No, no, there is no retreat distant enough
for me to fly to, and I shall so well conceal my face, that it shall never
give offense.

The Princess moved at Agnes discourse and Tears, did press her hand, which she
held, and fixing her looks on her, capable to move compassion in the most
insensible Souls; If I have done you any wrong, my dear Agnes, answered she,
Death which I expect every moment will avenge you of it. I ought also to
protest to you, that I have not ceased loving you, and that I believe all that
you say, in giving you again my most tender affection.

It was then that that sorrow, which acted on them both did reduce them to that
extremity, which caused the Prince to be called in. He was incapable of doing
any thing at the fight of them, and notwithstanding those tender motions that
inclined him toward Agnes, he run directly to Constantia.

The Princess, unto whom a cold clammy sweat did denounce her last moment, felt
that she had no time to loose and causing all Persons to withdraw that she
suspected, my Lord, said she to Don Pedre. Though I quit my life without
repining, I leave not you without regret and trouble. But dear Prince I must
overcome even dying, and I will wholly forget my self, to turn my thoughts only
on you. I reproach you not, well knowing that it is inclination alone that
disposes of Hearts, and not reason. Agnes is sufficiently Beautiful, to inspire
most ardent passions, and sufficiently virtuous to deserve the best Fortune in
the World. I also ask her Pardon for some small wrong which I have done her,
and recommend her to you, as a Person most dear to me. Promise me, before I
expire, to give her my Place in your dominions. It cannot be better filled. You
cannot make choice of a more perfect Princess for your People, nor a better
Mother for your Children. And you my dear and faithful Agnes, continued she,
lend not an ear to a too scrulous virtue, which might oppose it self to the
Prince of Portugals happiness. Refuse him not, an Heart that he is worthy of,
and give him that Friendship which you had for me, with that which you owe to
his Merit. Take care of young Ferdinando, and of the two little Princesses that
will retrieve me in you, spoke of me sometimes to them. Farewell live both
happy, and receive my last embraces.

The afflicted Agnes, who had recovered a little of strength, lost once more
all her senses. Her faintness was followed with such violent Convulsions that
her life was in very great danger. But Don Pedre kept close to Constantia,
what, Madam, would you depart; and with a belief that it were an advantage to
me. Ah! Constantia if my Heart has in any wise wronged you, your own virtue
punishes it, against your will for it. Think you me so barbarous -- as he was
going to continue he perceived that Death was closing for ever the generous
Princess 's Eyes, and it little wanted that he did not follow her.

But what an abyss of Sorrow was this to Agnes? so soon as she learned, during
a respite, that her reason received that Constantia was newly expired, she
would have destroyed her self, and gave a full scope to her despair.

At the Noise of this Death both the City and Fields were in an uproar, Elvira
who then saw Don Pedre free to dispose of himself, repented for having
contributed to the Death of the Princess. Don Pedre who accused himself of it,
did condole his Misfortune; And Agnes who thought herself the true cause of it,
did promise to her grief that she would never forgive herself for it.

There was reason to watch her for diverse days, in which she dried not her
Tears The Prince employed them in a deep Mourning; But when the first Notions
of grief were over, those of his love made him sensible that he was still the
same.

Don Alvares, who feared now the Prince's disengagement, made new attempts to
gain Agnes de Castro, who was become insensible of all things but of her own
discontent. Elvira desirous to reap advantage from her own dexterity, employed
all the Art, and Craft in her brains, to rekindle those fires wherewith the
Prince had formerly courted her; but his inconstancy was already limited, and
Agnes alone was to reign over his Heart.

She had taken a firm resolution since the Death of Constantia to give her self
wholly up to retiredness for the rest of her Life. Maugre all the Cautiousness
which she used to conceal her design, the Prince was informed of it,
endeavored all he could to dispose his constancy to submit to it. He believed
himself stronger then he was in that point; but after he had well Consulted
himself, he knew but too well, how much Agnes's presence was necessary to his
welfare. Madam, said he to her one day, his Heart ready to break, and his Eyes
full of Tears, which of the Actions of my Life, may have caused you to resolve
on my Death! Though I have never told you how much I Love you, I am Persuaded
that you are not Ignorant of it. I have been forced to silence during many
years, for yours, Constantia's, and my own sake; But it is no longer in my
power so to constrain my self, and I ought to express my self at least once
with you. Receive therefore the assurance of a passion, full of respect and of
heat with the offer of my Fortune, which I should not wish better, but to share
it with you.

Agnes answered not at first to these words but with abundance of Tears; at
last having dried them up, and looking on Don Pedre with an Air, which gave him
to understand that she was not well agreed with her wishes; If I were capable
of that Weakness which you would inspire me with, My Lord, replied she, you
were obliged to Punish me for it. What, Constantia is scarce in her Tomb, and
you would have me to offend her thus? No my Dear Princess, added she, with more
vehemence, No, she who you have so much weighed down with favors, shall not
deserve the curse of Heavens and the scorn of Men by so perfidious an action.
Do not therefore, my Lord, ^bstinate your self in a design which I shall never
approve of. You owe Constantia ever after her Death, such a fidelity as may
justify you; and I, to repair those Afflictions which I have caused her, I
ought to avoid all Conversation with you. Go Madam, replied the Prince,
changing Color, go and expect the News of my Death, in those places where your
Cruelty shall Conduct you. They shall follow you close, and that War, that now
employs our Neighbors will soon procure it me.

Those words made the Beauteous Agnes of Castro to feel that her innocence was
not altogether such as she had taken it to be, and that her Heart did concern
it self for the Prince. You owe the Preservation of your Life unto the Prince
and Princess, that Constantia has left you, she tenderly replied. Would you
abandon their Youth to Don Alvares? Live, my Lord, live, and Permit the most
unhappy Agnes to fall a single Sacrifice? Ah! thou Cruel Maid, replied the
Prince, why do you order me to Live, if I cannot live without you? Is it an
effect of your hatred? No, My Lord, replied Agnes, with some concern, I hate
you not; and would to Heaven that a little of indifferency would come and
assist my Weakness, cause me not to say more. You perceive my Blushes, expound
them as you please; but still consider, that the less Aversion I find in me
toward you, the more guilty I render my self, and that I ought not to see or
spoke to you. In fine, My Lord, if you oppose my retirement, I declare that Don
Alvares, as odious to me as he is, shall serve me as a fence against you, and
that I shall rather resolve to marry a Man which I abhore, than to favor a
passion which has caused Constantia's Life. Well, Agnes, replied the Prince
with looks full of sorrow, follow those Motions that your Barbarous Virtue
inspires you with. Take those cautious Measures which you judge most necessary,
against an Unfortunate Love, and enjoy the Glory of having refused all to my
desires.

He retired at these words, and all troubled, as was Agnes, she would not
retain him; Her Courage overcame her Grief and she thought more then ever on
her depart.

It had been difficult for her to leave Coimbria, without the Kings consent,
and not to defer that which appeared so necessary to her, she was at Don
Alfonses Apartment. Maugre Don Alvares interests, he showed her a severe brow,
and yet not being able to give his consent to her request, you shall not stir
from hence, said he, and if you are wise, you will here share and enjoy any
Friendship with Don Alvares. I have designed another way, Sir, answered Agnes,
and the World has no share in it. You might except Don Pedre, replied the King
of Portugal, his condition may satisfy an ambitious Person; but you would not
succeed Constantia, who so tenderly loved you; and Spain has more Princesses
wherewith to fill, a part of that Throne, which I am to leave to my Son, Sir,
replied Agnes, touched to the quick with that discourse. If I had any
dispositions for Love, and designs of marriage, the Prince should be perhaps the
only Person, on whom I could fix them, and you, Sir, know that if my ancestors
wore no crowns yet they were not unworthy of them. However I will be gone, and
I believe not my self a Slave in a place in which I came free.

This bold Answer, which discovered truly Agne's Character, did startle Don
Alfonse, and at the same time did vex him also. You shall go, when we shall
think it convenient, replied he, and without being a Slave at Coimbria you
shall however expect our orders there.

Agnes well saw that there was no shrinking from thence and she was so troubled
at it, that she kept her Chamber for many days, without daring to inquire after
the Prince; and that solitude saved her the labor of seeing Don Alvares.

During this Don Pedre fell sick, with so much violence and danger, that the
fear of his Death was general. Agnes could not doubt but that it was an effect
of his troubles she at first believed her self sufficiently strong to see him
dye, rather then prove favorable; but some small reflections did soon convince
her of the contrary. She found not in the bottom of her Heart that cruel
constancy, which she thought to be so firmly established there. She felt some
trouble and disorder, shed Tears, made wishes, and finally discovered all her
Weakness.

None could behold the Heir to the Crown, and a Prince that so well deserved it
in that extremity, without a general affliction. The People who loved him, did
pass whole days at the Palace Gates, to learn news of his health, and the
Courtiers were sorrowful.

Don Alvares alone could conceal a Malicious Joy before the King, under
sorrowful appearances. Elvira full of tenderness, and perhaps of remorse
suffered on her part also. The King who though he condemned his Sons love, did
however love him, could not resolve to loose him, and Agnes de Castro, who knew
the excess of his grief expected the end with strange agitations.

Finally after more then a Month of fears, some little hopes did appear. The
Prince himself, with Don Alvares, were the only two, that had no joy at it, but
Agnes did feel enough for all the rest.

Don Pedre perceiving that he must resolve to live, against his own will,
thought no longer then how to pass sorrowful days, so soon as he was able to
go, he sought after solitariness, and even gained so much over his weakness, as
to go in all Places where Agnes did not appear but her Idea followed him still
every where, and his memory very faithful in representing her to him with so
many Charms, did still render her dangerous.

One day, that he had been conducted in the Garden, he sought after a Labyrinth
which was at the farthest end, there to conceal his Melancholy during some
hours, he found the sorrowful Agnes, who had been brought thither by thoughts
little differing from his, and her sight which he expected not, caused him to
stagger, she perceived in his Paleness, and weakness, some relics of his
disease. His Eyes full of Languishments, disturbed her; and notwithstanding the
desire she had to fly, an unknown Power retained her, and it was impossible for
her to retreat.

After some moments of silence which was interrupted with many sighs, Don Pedre
did rise from a place where his weakness had caused him to rest, he showed to
Agnes coming toward her, sorrowful marks of his sufferings, and not contented
to conserne her pity by her Eyes; you had resolved my Death, cruel Agnes, said
he, to her, my will was agreed to it; but the Heavens would reserve me for
greater evils, and I again behold you, as unfortunate, but more in amour'd then
I was before;

Agnes wanted not those words to molify her, the Prince's languidness did
spoke, and that fair Maids Heart was but too well disposed to render up it
self. She then believed that Constantia ought to rest satisfied. Love who
Combated for Don Pedre, did triumph over Friendship, and found out that happy
moment, after which the Prince of Portugal had so long sighed.

Reproach me not of that which has cost me more then you, my Lord, said she,
and accuse not an Heart that is neither ungrateful nor barbarous. I must say
that I love you; but when that is confessed what do you require more?

Don Pedre who expected not so favorable a revolution, did feel a double
satisfaction, and falling at Agnes's Feet; he told her more, with a silence
which his Passion had caused then all the most Eloquent words could have
expressed.

After he had been sensible of all his happiness, he conferred with Agnes on
what they had to fear from Don Alfonse. They concluded that the unfortunate
Paper which had disturbed Constantia's last days, could not proceed but from
Elvira, and Don Alvares. The Prince who knew that the King was seeking already
after new alliances for him, and that would have his Favorite to Marry Agnes,
did so tenderly conjure her, to prevent her persecutions, to consent to a
secret Marriage; that she agreed to it after a long debate, I shall do all that
you please my Lord, said she, though I have but very sorrowful foresights. All
my Blood freezes when I think on that Marriage, and Constantia's Image seems as
if it would prevent it.

The amorous Prince did overcome those scruples, and parted from Agnes with a
satisfaction, which soon recovered all his strength. He after that did see her,
with the Pleasure of mystery in love, and at last the day of their union was
come. Don Gill, Bishop of Guarda, performed the ceremonies of their Marriage,
in presence of diverse witnesses that were Faithful to Don Pedre who became
possessed of all Agnes's Charms.

She lived not quiet for being now the Prince of Portugals wife. Her Enemies
who still Prosecuted her did not leave her without disturbance; and the King
who was offended at her resistance, did absolutely command her to Marry Don
Alvares, with threats to force her will if she continued refractory.

The Prince did highly take her part, and that joined to the refusal which he
made of Marrying a Princess of Arragon, gave suspicions of the truth to the
King his Father.

He had a second, but too much interested in the business, not to unravel it.
Don Alvares, and his Sister did act in it with such cares, gave such largness,
and made so many promises, that at last they did discover the secret engagement
betwixt Agnes and Don Pedre.

There little wanted but that the King at first so highly transported, had not
broke forth in a cruel manner against the fair Princess. Don Alvares, whose
love did change into a violent hatred, did stop his first fury in making him
conceive that though the Marriage could be made void he should not be
sufficiently revenged, and he so well did Poison Alfonses mind, that he made
him consent to Agnes's Death.

The Barbarous Don Alvares offered his arm for that horrid execution, and his
rage did sufficiently answer for the certainty of the sacrifice.

Don Alfonse, who thought the honor of his Family to be concerned by this
alliance, and particularly his in his Son's proceedings, did give a full power
unto that executioner who animated him.

It was not very easy to execute that design though the Prince did not see
Agnes but in secret, all his cares were still watching for her good, and he had
been above a Year her husband, when Don Alvares found the occasion which he had
so long sought after.

The Prince did not take much Pleasure, nor but rarely did distance himself
from Coimbria. One unfortunate day, and set a part by the Heavens, for so
horrid an act, he made a match at Hunting, toward a stately House that the
Kings of Portugal have near to the City.

Agnes loved all that could please him, but a secret trouble did make her to
fear that unfortunate journey. My Lord said she to him, being alarmed without
knowing for what, I tremble seeing you to day, as if it was the last time in my
life. Preserve your self my dear Prince, and though the exercise you are going
about is not always dangerous, consider the least of dangers and bring me back
all that I confide in you.

Don Pedre who had never seen her so Fair and so Charming, did diverse times
embrace her, and went out of the Palace with his retinue not to return thither
again till the next day.

While he was going, the cruel Don Alvares was preparing himself for that
Bloody execution which he had resolved. He thought it of that importance as not
to engage himself singly, and made choice, to accompany him in it of Don Diego
Lopes Pacheo, and Pedro Cuello, two such monsters as himself, whose cruelties
had been assured him by his presents.

They stayed till night, and the Bautiful Agnes was in her first slumber, which
was the last of her life, when those murderers came to her bed side. Nothing
had opposed Don Alvares, who was all powerful, and who was introduced near
Agnes, by the blackest of furies. She did awake and perceived, drawing the
Curtain, by the light of a Taper, left lighted, the dagger with which Don
Alvare's hand was armed. He having not covered his face she easily knew him,
and forgetting her own danger to think of the Princes. Just Heavens! said she
lifting up her Eyes, if you will avenge Constantia, rest contented with all my
Blood, and spare Don Pedre's. The barbarous Villain who heard her, gave her not
time to say more, and having not had the Fortune to move Agnes's Heart, he
received the horrid satisfaction of stabbling it through with a Dagger, His
partners did give her some blows also, and there needed not so many to put an
end to her innocent life.

What a Spectacle, for those that approached her Bed the next Morning, and what
news for the most unfortunate Prince of Portugal. He presently returned to
Coimbria at the first rumor of this adventure, and did behold that which had
certainly cost him his life, if one could dye of grief. After he had a thousand
times embraced the bloody Corpse of Agnes, and said all that a just despair
could prompt him to speak, he run up and down the Palace like a distracted Man,
requiring the Murderers of his wife from things that understood him not. He at
last saw the King, and without observing any respect, he gave a full scope to
all his resentments, after he had long spoken, he fell oppressed with grief
into a faintness which lasted all the rest of the day. He was carried into his
appartment, and Don Alfonse believing that this evil would prove his cure, did
not repent him of what he had done.

Don Alvares with the two others went out of Coimbria, and that absence
discovered their guilt, of which the most afflicted Prince did promise a
sudden revenge unto fair Agnes's Ashes, being resolved to pursue them to the
very end of the World. He made a considerable party of those that were
affectionate to him, and after he had made havok of those Territories which are
watered by the Duero, he pursued that War unto the Death of Alfonse,
inceessantly mixing of Tears with the blood which he spilt in revenge of his
dear Agnes's Murder.

Thus was the end of the unfortunate Amors of Don Pedre of Portugal, and of
the beautiful Agnes de Castro, whose memory the Prince did faithfully preserve
on his Throne, on which he set by Birthright after the Death of Don Alfonse.

FINIS.

