A LETTER FROM Monsieur Tyrconnel FROM LIMERICK in IRELAND TO The Late QUEEN,
AT St. Germans in France.
Licensed Sept. 2. 1690.
Most Transcendent Madam,
WHen, with a Veneration due to your Greatness, I presume to consider the
Happiness of those Blessed Climates that are under the Benignity of your Aspect
and Influence; when I contemplate the smiling Posture of all Things and
Persons, under the Cherishing and Reviving Rays of your All- Enlivening Eyes:
Pardon me Madam, if I say, it in some measure fills me with Emulation in the
midst of all my Triumphs, that the Acquests of my Sword must be vanquished, and
Outshone by the Conquests of your more powerful Beauty.

It was this, Mighty Princess, that first set the Courts of Italy agogg, when
the Attraction of your Early Charms made them pay Homage to the Growing Glory
of the House of Modena: This made the most Wise Monarch of France recommend
your Highness, as the fittest Person in the World to take the upper Hand of the
Duchess of Portsmouth, and fill the Envied Throne of that Kingdom, with such
an Awful and Viraginous Majesty, as no Female besides could pretend to: And the
Power of the same Magnetic has compelled him to court your Royal Presence,
which alone brings with it an Excellence and Perfection, surmounting all the
other Glories of his Palace. Nor can it be thought, that your Majesty is one
Ace behind that great Monarch in point of Complement, when it shall be
considered, you have preferred the felicity of an Entertainment at St. Germans
above the Throne of England, and three Kingdoms to pay you Homage.

The Romancers of your Italy make their Knights and Champions in the heat of
their Encounters, Catching a Glance, a Smile, or Innuendo from the fair Eyes of
their Saints or Mistresses, which has Elevated their Courage to such a degree,
that Woe be to him that is the Assailant! for presently you hear of Armor chopped
to pieces, a Combatant Chined at one Blow, or a Horse beheaded, or some very
dead-doing Exploit. Who then can doubt of that happy Reverse of Fortune that
must attend my great Master, when he shall return with fresh Vigor to pursue
his Conquests here? When he shall come with a Zeal Enflamed, Valor Exalted,
Indignation Whetted, Courage Pointed, and so All-over-influenced with your
Powerful Aspect; That if all the Heretics had but one Head, and that were
entering the Gates of Limerick, his derived Force would be sufficient to
dispatch him at one Blow. You see, Madam, how the Hearts of your humble
Votaries are supported, to what a pitch of Expectation they are lifted, and
their Hopes raised with the assurance of your Virtue: For if you do not
condescend to Pity, and Redress our Woes, all our Hopes must give up and
Expire. It Is therefore to your Shrine, who are our living Saint, that we bring
our humble Devotions; for, as for our dead Guardians, and Tutelar Friends, nay,
even St. Patrick himself, we have called upon them till our Throats are sore,
and our Hearts ache again, and cannot make them hear a word; whether the Enemies
Cannon have deafned them, or whether they are afraid it is the same Army that
was last before these Walls, I know not; but they are all as mute as Fishes: So
that we are not only obliged to supplicate your Personal Assistance, but that
your Majesty will use your powerful Intercession with the Saints of your
Country; and endeavor to prevail with your old Friend and Patroness Our Lady
of L^re^to, and your great Benefactress St. Winefryd to put their helping
Hands, for be Shaint Patrick, Madam, there will be a great deal of very much
need of every bodies help indeed.

All the last Winter, the Duke of Schomberg, and those never-to be-forgiven
Furies of Ineskillin kept us, out of the N^^^^, and as soon as their King came,
we ^ntly Retreated over the Boyne, not without leaving of Harrows, and Crows
Feet in the River, to have tamed their Horfe-heets that they might not pursue
us too fast; but notwithstanding the Depth of the Water, the Opposition on our
side, the Difficulty of Landing, and the Danger of the Bottom, their Troops
came over as sound as Roaches, or as if they had participated of the Nature of
those Amphibious Creatures to whom the Land and Water are alike.

Dublin we Abandoned, because it was not Tenable if we had not wanted Bravery,
but our Valor is so near kin to that of Louis the Great, that it thinks it
self not safe unless it be Walled in: But no sooner had we quitted Dublin, but
the Heretics took Heart, seized upon all their own Arms which they found in
the hands of our Friends, took the Castle and declared for their King William,
and Queen Mary. Waterford, and other places did the like: (...) that it was
high time for my Sacred ^aster to think of taking Sanctuary under ^he same
propitious Roof with your Royal ^elf, and the Illustrious Offspring of
Lo^tto's Favor. It was time, to betake himself to Your Majesty for new
Courage, and the Potent Louis for fresh Forces.

What incessant, and indefatigable ^ains were afterward taken by Monsieur
^auzun, Monsieur Sarfield, and my self to ^^e^ Our Tattered Troops together,
and to make those last Efforts of despair, which were put in most Catholic
Execution when We fell upon the Gunners Wives and Children, and a small party
that Guarded the Train, with a detacht Body of Our Army? These, Madam, Phope,
without ^anity, I may presume to call Undenia^le proof of Our Fidelity to your
Royal Cause, and inestimable Persons; and I must further take leave to add,
that in ^hese Enterpri^es the Young Duke of Ber^^ick has behaved himself with
a Gallan^ry becoming the Son of his Father, and the half Brother of the
Excellent Prince of Wales.

But what does the most accomplished Resolution, and the greatest
French-Assurance imaginable signify; when they shall meet with a Magnanimity
that Triumphs over Difficulties, and Glories in attacking the Greatest
Opposition? When Heaven it self shall, like St. Peter's Successor, take ^^art
with Heretics, and the Flood of Shunnon, which is rarely known to be fordable,
shall, like the Red Sea, make way for the People to pass through; There needs no
less than an Obduracy like that of Pharaoh, to be Impenitrable unden such
severe Dispensations.

That you have heard of Our Inimitable Valor, and that from the Fireworks,
Statues, and Medals of the Mighty Louis all Europe has been Advertised of Our
Celebrated Prowess, is apparent, Mighty Princess, from the Invidious Remarks
the English, and Dutch Gazettes, and Pamphlets have made thereon. But, whatever
impertinent Reflections they have made, There is no doubt but Posterity will
pay a just Acknowledgment to our Courage in Ireland, as well as to the
Vnpresidented Conduct of Our Great and August Patron of Versailes, Since it is
impossible that the Glory of his Undertakings can be mentioned, without
Reflections on the Affairs of Ireland: Nor is it reasonable to despair of a
proportionable Success of that Unbounded Monarchs Enterprises in England, and
the other parts of Europe, Since His Majesty's Unaccountable Undertakings are
founded not only on the Direction of his Absolute Power, but on Ancient, and
Undeniable Prediction; It having been long since entered in the Book of Fate,
That

He that will Old-England win
Must first with Ireland begin.
So that it is plain, howsoever Providence may be inclined, Fate is plain and
directly for Us: And there is no fear of Our coming off with Victory in Our
other Attempts since We have so Prosperously begun Our Acquirements here.

Madam, I have not only sent you what Treasure it was possible for me to Rap
from this Country to support the Grandeur of your Figure at the Court of
France, but have also sent the most Inestimable of my Own Treasures, my
Countess, to bear up Your Majesty's Train, and to pay her best Devoires to your
Growing Prince. But I earnestly implore Your Majesty, that to prevent heats
betwixt her and the Marchioness of Powess, Your Majesty will command them to
Cast a^ce for Precedence.

Whilst I am writing this the Enemies Cannon are Thundering down the Walls of
this City, and their Bombs have almost Ruined all the Streets; and yet such is
the intrepid Heedlesness of your poor Vassal and my Irish Troops, that I esteem
Limerick too mean a Sacrifice to Your Majesty's Interest, to whom Three
Kingdoms are but a small Oblation. It was but in the Year, 1641. 200000
Heretics fell Victims to the Holy Cause, in this Island; and were I Master of
as many Islands, They should all be Offered up a Tribute to Your Majesty's
Shrine; such is the profound Zeal and Veneration I have for Your Majesty's
Interest, and Resolutions.

I have read, amongst the Legends of Our Saints, That when the Famous Patron of
Our Nation St. Patrick had reaped Immortal Glory by the Exploits of his Sword,
and rendered himself the most accomplished Champion of his Age; Big with Fame,
and laden with the Renown of his past Actions, He walled himself in between
Four Walls, from the Society and Disturbance of the rest of Mankind; and
because nothing should Interrupt his Devotions, he left access for neither
Visitants, nor Victuals; and so after the Fatigue of a Life full of Turmoils,
he separated himself from Men first, and soon after from Life, Expiring in a
lonely Calmness, and Privacy, which he chose rather than to be knocked on the
head, or burnt alive. I must confess that Our being Immured here within the
Walls of Limerick looks very (...) after the manner of a Sepulcher, and as if
we were to make Our Exits like that Champion, and Confessor: Only in this (...)
differ? that Our Immurement is not so ^luntary, and Our Enclosure is every
(...) battering, and burning down about (...) Ears. However if Your Majesty
please Consult the Archbishop of Paris whether be not the same thing in the
Origin^ and as useful to the Purposes of H^^ Church, If we are burnt or starved
to Dea^^ and whether We may not have the h^nour to be Matriculated amongst the
Sai^^ of this dear Country; this will be of gre^^ Confirmation and Satisfastion
in these E^tremities.

I am only to Crave Your Majesty's Pa^don for the Presumption of this lo^^
Letter, though a Volume would not conta^^ what I have to say, on this Dismal
Occ^sion: And to pray your Clemency, Th^^ what Succors can be spared be
immediat^^ dispatched to Us, otherwise not only n^^ Great Masters must lose all
footing in th^^ Kingdom, but that Unhappy Rhyme whi^^ was at the Compiling a
Thanksgiving f^^ the Conception of a Prince of Wales; say that Unhappy Ballad
is in danger (...) become a Prophecy. (Viz.)

When her comes out a double Clout
May cover his whole Dominion.
This, as it would be the Dread, a^^ Confusion of all good Catholics, and the
Faithful Adherents, shall be Zealous^ Constantly, and Bigot-like opposed wi^^
the last drop of Blood of Your Majesty's

Limerick, September. the 1st. 1690.
Devoted Talbot, TYRCONNEL

London, Printed for A. Turner, 1690.


