THE ART OF SALVATION, Preached First at Saint MARY'S in OXFORD, and now
Published.

By THOMAS TVVITTEE B. D of Oriell Coll. and Vicar of Northlye.

What is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own
soul? Matt. 16.26.

Si animam negligamus, nec corpus salvare poterimus non enim anima pro corpore
sed corpus pro anima factum est: qui ergo quod primum est negligit, and quod
inferius est extollit, utrumqne corrumpit. Cyprian de reparatione lapsi.

Printed Anno Dom. 1643.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS Earl of DOWN etc. his singular good Lord and
Patron.
Right Honorable,
THe Heath^n by the purblind light of nature were so grateful, that they did
Deifie their Patrons, as the Historian tells us: a shame it were for
Christians, nay for Divines in the meridian sunshine of the Gospel, not to
acknowledge their Benefactors: to vindicate my self from such aspersion, I
presume humbly to dedicate this paper present, to your Lordship in all
thankful acknowledgment of your bounteous favors:

Thou art troubled much and careful for many things, but one thing is
necessary, says our blessed. Savior to Martha in the Gospel.

For though at your return from foreign parts, Your Lordship finds Your
native Country miserably embroyled in a civil war, which is a sea of all
infaelicity, and therefore the authors thereof deserve to be banished out of
the borders of humane nature as that learned Frenchman observes. Charron of
wisdom, lib. ^ cap. 11.^.
Yet my good Lord in the midst of all these distractions, I hope you will
never forget that unum necessarium; You have a God to serve, a soul to save
That this may be Your Lordships prime care and intention^, and that in these
tottering times, wherein the very foundations of the earth are out of course,
you may be preserved by the power of God, through faith unto salvation, in his
appointed time, exchanging your Coronet of temporary honor for that Crown of
immortal, immaculate, and immarcessible glory, is the continued prayer of

Your Lordships most humbly devoted Chaplain and servant, THOM. TVVITTEE.

THE ART OF SALVATION.
ACTS 16.30, 31. Sirs, What must I do to be saved, etc.

And they said, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved, etc.


MY Text does thus derive his pedigree, A vision sends Paul into Macedonia, at
Philippi the Metropolis, there he makes his abode, religious Lidia, whose heart
God had opened to receive the Gospel, sets open her house to harbor his
Apostles: But Paul must not preach here long, unless he will to prison, the
ejecting of a Devil proves many times cause enough to persecute an Apostle,
especially where gain or superstition may be pretended, there want not Masters
to raise such complaints, and there are Magistrates enough to prosecute this
quarrel, who side it with a Diviner rather then a Divine, and countenance a
Jugler more then a Preacher: to prison then must our harmless Apostles, who
here might have demanded as some time did their innocent Master, For what good
work do you this? the charge for safe custody being strict, the Dungeon is
their Chamber, the stocks their bed, a hard lodging for their late tortured
bodies: but ill were it with the Saints, Si tantas Malitia vires, quantos
Conatus; If malice had as much power as it has will to do mischeife; and if
the Saints extremity were not the Saviors opportunity, and his help nearest
when they seem most forlorn and destitute, noe rocks, no rivers, noe walls,
noe doors, noe bars, not the Center of the earth nor channel of the sea can
hinder the Almighty from extending his hand of compassion to his distressed
ones: In the dead of the night and depth of the Dungeon Paul and Sylas sing
Psalms unto God who demonstrateshis omnipotent presence by a miracle not more
strange for the time then for the effect, a midnight and a pick-locke
earthquake, in breife, a vision sends Paul into Macedonia thus to be distressed
in body, and a Vision sends this Jailer thus perplexed in mind unto Saint
Paul, who being roused from his Midnight sleep, with the shaking of the prison,
and the noise of the doors, chains, and bolts that were undone, not as yet
acquainted with the power or mercy of God, plots only to escape the Tyranny of
man by an Act of desperation, but is seasonably prevented by the pious charity
of holy Paul, who saves his life, restraines his fury by informing him of the
certain abode of his charge, whereas being amazed, convinced, confounded, he
calls for lights, comes trembling in, prostrates himself at those feet which
but whilom he set in the stocks, and with all proposes this so necessary a
Quaere Sirs, What must I do to be saved?

And they said, etc.

In which words are these two general parts.

1. A Question proposed.

2. An answer thereunto.

The question in these, (...), Sirs, What must I do that I may be saved?

The answer in these: (...): Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be
saved and thy house.

In the Question are these particulars to be considered.

1, The person demanding, the distressed Jailer, I, what must I do?

2. The parties demanded, the blessed Apostles Paul and Syla^ in this word,
(...), Sirs, Sirs, what must I do.

3. The matter in question, and that is the eternal welfare of the soul,
(...) that I may be saved.

In the answer these 3 particulars offer themselves.

1. The object proposed (...), the Lord Josus.

2. The means how to apprehend or lay hold on that object, which is faith
(...), believe.

3. The happy consequent of this faith (...), and thou shall be saved and thy
house, Sirs, What must I do, etc. of these in their order, first of the first,
the person demanding, I, the distressed Iailor, What must I, etc.

Although the word of God be now the ordinary means of man's conversion as in
the 1. to the Corinth, 1, 21. Since the world by it is wisdom knew not God, it
pleased him by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe
foolishness, not that it it so in it self, but in regard of that more
excellent and supernatural means God might have used, and not have made man
his agent in the conversion of man: or else foolishness, because the world
does so commonly account of it; Yet is not here a rule of necessity, but an
indulgent dispensation, not that the grace of God is here limited, or his
spirit restrained, but has allwaies free operation if not in the means, yet
in the directing of us to the knowledge and use of the means, Our Apostle
himself but in the 9. Chapter going before being on his Journey about another
errand, is by a great light and voice from heaven directed unto Ananias that
old Disciple of Damasco, who not only restores the sight of the body, but also
imparts unto him that true inward illumination of the spirit, and of a
persecuting Rabbi does baptize him into a professing Christian: Saint Austen
reports of himself in the 8. of his confessions and the 12. that by a voice
from heaven, Toll lege, Toll lege, Take up and read, Take up and read, he was
directed to that place in the 13. to the Romans and the last. Not in chambering
and wantonness, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in strife and envying,
but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make noe provision for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts thereof: and so he became a most illuminate Doctor of a most
effeminate Youngster. Justin Martyr witnesses in his Apology to Antoninus,
that when he saw the patient suffering of the innocent Christians, how they
rejoiced to bleed, nay to dye for the Testimony of the Gospel, it occasioned
in him a change of Religion, whence we had the opproved truth of that seeming
Paradox. Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae, the blood of the Martyrs was the
seminary of the Church. Euschins in the 4 of his Ecclesiastical story at the
8. makes mention of a certain Courtier called Eustatius in the time of
Trajane the Emperor, who as he was hunting saw a Heart with a Red Cross in his
forehead, and this engraven in Letters of Gold: Quid me persequeris? why do
thou persecute me? and so refusing to accompany the Emperor in his Idolatrous
sacrifice to Jupiter, immediately received the blessed Crown of Martyrdom: So
that I say, though the Word be now the ordinary means of man's conversion, yet
has the Lord had diverse and sundry ways in reclaiming men from Atheism,
Idolatry, and Superstition, and directing them into the knowledge and use of
the means, some by dreams, some by apparitions, some by miracles, some one
way, and some another, some do snatch the Kingdom of heaven as those whom our
Savior mentions Math, 8. Regnum Coelorum, etc. The Kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, etc. and some again are compelled by external violence,
as those extravagant Loyterers, Cogite intrare: Compel them to come in, Luke.
14. some do willingly embrace the word of faith, and some again are brought
even to despair before they relish the doctrine of happiness, and by the
gates of hell come to the knowledge of the ways to heaven, as this perplexed
Jaylour, who but now with drawn sword was spilling his body, but here with
bended knees enquires how to save his soul, Sirs, What must I do? etc.

Observe we hence our first position which is this, that perplexity of
Conscience, inward terrors yea almost dispairing fears are great and forcible
means to drive men to God, and make them solicitous of Salvation, (...), Ye
have not received the spirit of bondage to fear any more, but ye have received
the spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba, Father Romans 8.16. Where I note
three acts, or rather indeed three degres of operation of the spirit of God,
First it is a spirit of Bondage, Secondly a spirit of adoption, Thirdly a
spirit of intercession teaching us to make request to God, and to cry in the
true language of Canaan Abba Father. But first it is a spirit of fear and
bondage working in us perplexed doubtings, terrors of conscience, yea almost
dispairing fears before it give any comfort or assurance. St. Chrysostom upon
the 114 Psalm. expresses this truth by this familiar comparison, as Mothers do
use to fright their unruly children with Vizzards and Bugbears, to make them
fly to their lapp, not willing to hurt the Infants; but to make them sit the
closer to them, so God being a true lover of us, desiring to join us fast to
himself, does often times permit us to be brought to such necessity, and finding
us playing so near the pits brinke, so near the hole of the serpent, he takes
us as it were by the heels, shows us the very mouth of Hell makes us believe
that he will plunge us therein, that so we may take heed how we wander, and
endeavor not only to approach and draw near, but constantly to adhere unto
him, as the Psalmist has it; hereupon the Fathers compare this servile fear
to the ^eedle, and true filial fear to the thread; as the needle makes way
and passage for the thread, so is this terrifying and perplexing fear the way
to a filial affiance; and therefore what the Psalmist concludes of outward
disgrace is true of inward distress Imple facies little ignominia, and quaerent
nomen tuum, Psalm. 83. Make their faces ashamed and they will seek thy name,
so say I. Fill their minds with piercing, and almost despairing perplexities,
open the mouth of the sleepie Conscience, and awake the soul from her sinful
lethargy with one touch of this thy terrifying needle, and then the effect
will be Quaerent nomen tuum, They will seek thy name. That distress should
open a door to devotion, is a conclusion both harsh and strange to repyning
flesh and blood, which ever desires to be at ease and in jollitie, and to trace
vias dealbatiores saeculi the milkie paths of pleasures and preferments, as
St. Austin says; but unto the Christian it is a principle of sound truth, who
can acknowledge with Kingly David, Bonum mihi quod humiliatus sum, It is good
for me that I have been afflicted, and before I was troubled I went astray but
now I kept thy words, Psalm, 119. It were easy to expatiate in a point so
pregnant, but I affect not prolixitie, only, an instance or two, and then the
arguments that serve for further confirmation; And if you reflect but on the
Text, you shall se it apparent in this particular, he that before was obdurate
and settled upon the Lees of the Roman superstition, whose heart or ears the
Doctrine of the Gospel could not pierce, but rejected it as a thing altogether
unlawful, he being thus amazed and perplexed, becomes truly compassionate unto
the persecuted Apostles, pious and solicitous of his own Salvation; hence
judicious Calvin notes, hic apparet quam vtile sit hominibus dejici, ut se Deo
subjicere discant, hence it appears how profitable it is for men sometimes to
be dejected and distressed that they may learn how to seek unto God, and also
to be subject unto him, and in the 7 to the Rom: verse. 24. We have an instance
hereof in this our Apostle, who being terrifyed with the sense and guilt of
inseparable corruptions and amazed at the apparent impossibility of fulfilling
the Law or doing the least good, breaks out into this doleful exclamation,
(...), etc. Wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of
death? but hereby he comes to lay hold on Christ, for so it follows in the
next words, I thank God, by Jesus Christ our Lord: and we our selves have
known many by daily experience who in their strength and ability have scorned
the ministry, and made noe conscience of theft, fornication, heaven-daring
provocations, who when they came to be truly humbled and amazed, have with much
contrition of heart and compunction of spirit washed away the blackenesse of
their sins and turned unto the Lord, and this must needs be so, for many
reasons.

First we argue a contrario, from the contrary, as the Logicians say,
Prosperity ease and quietness do most commonly dull men's devotion and draw
them from God, and therefore affliction and distress must drive them to him,
and make them sollicitous for heaven: Was it not so with Israel Gods own
peculiar people, noe sooner delivered and at quiet, but they forgot God? nay
they made have to forget him as the word in the original imports, Psalm. 106.
But Lord in their trouble they have visited thee, they have poured forth their
prayer when thy chastening was upon them, Isai. 26.16. The Prodigals full
pursue puts him into an itch of travailing, and he no sooner receives his
portion, but he runs from his indulgent father, Luke. 15. Even so it is with
many, the filling of their barnes, their garners, their purses emptieth their
hearts of piety and devotion; Wise Agur therefore Prove: 30.8. Prays against
this, Give me neither poverty nor riches, the first clause of his petition
every one will say Amen to Poverty? We run from it as from a Lion, but for
riches they are prima vota and cunctis notissima templis, as the Poet says,
the first petition in our Pater Noster is for riches, yea but says the wise
man, Give me not riches, and he adds the reason in the next verse, Least I be
full, and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? Plutarch in his Pelopidas
reports that King Antigonus, had once in his army a very sick lie soldier, who
being weary of life, and desirous to dye was always for most in the hottest
services, the General casting an eye of affection upon the incomparable valor
of the man by his great care and cost, caused him to be cured, and expecting he
should have beeue as forward as before, finds the contrary, for now he kept a
loofe, and never approached any apparent Danger; whereupon being demanded the
reason, he thus replied, O King thou art the cause, before I had nothing but
sickness, diseases, and pain to part with, but now I have a sound body,
something to loose: You may apply it, It is true of every one of us, so long as
we are diseased in body or mind, we distaste the world, we desire heaven, we
would be dissolved and be with Christ presently, but when once we come to be
cured and eased, then we presently draw back, we have something to loose. It
is good sleeping in a whole skin; and approved discretion not to be too
forward. Oh the dangerous effects of worldly ease and prosperity, if not
attended and moderated always by a religious discretion; these are those
Circes and Sirens Homer mentions, which have such effacinating power as to
alienate men's minds, and transform them into very swine; these are always
(...), as the Greek Orator calls them the occasions of evil, giving men
ability to be idle, and a will to drench themselves in all kind of luxury:
These are those thorns mentioned by our Savior in the Gospel, Math. 13. and
Luke, 8. Whereby the good seed of admonition is continually choked: these draw
men from God, as we see in that young man, who though he seemed desirous of
heaven, yet could not keep company with Christ, because of his possessions,
Math, 19, 16, 23,

Secondly distress and Perplexity drive us to God, because thereby we truly
come to know our own weakness and infirmity: when we that before vaunted of
our strength in enduring any thing, shall be dejected by those inward
distractions; when those that before seemed as desperate as that flagitious
Judge. Luke 18 who did neither fear God, nor reverence man; and are as bold,
as if they durst grapple with lightning, and confront the Majesty of Heaven,
shall come to sink and almost expire under the horror and weight of a
distressed Conscience, for a wounded Spirit who can bear? Prover: 18.14. it is
a burden beyond the support of nature.

Thirdly as we hence see our own weakness and infirmity, so are we also
taught the vanity of all outward and sublunary things, when we can say of them
as Job of his friends in his greatest extremity, Miserable comforters are you
all, for riches avail not in the day of wrath, Prove. 11.4. when honors, and
profits, and pleasures, and preferments, and all things the world affords do
us no more good in these soul Agonies, in these spiritual convulsions, then a
silken sleeve does an arm out of joint; then seeing the wretched vanity of
these things we now do delight and and trust in, we are glad to run out of
the world, yea out of our selves, to fly unto the Sanctuary of Gods mercy, and
lay hold on the horns of that Altar.

This consideration affords. First matter of reproof for all those which
either through violence of passion, or violence of affection, go clean
contray to this truth, whereas in all distress either of body or mind they
should have recourse unto God, they run from him, or else adhere only unto the
subordinate help of outward things; thus Cain thought to pacify the fury of a
despairing Conscience by outward employment, by building a City: Asa in his
disease trusts in his Physician: Saul in his distress seeks to the sound of
the Harp; and lastly to the Witch of Endor: thus many lay wine on their cares,
hoping so to sink them, and to cure these qualmes, as they call them, by
music and merry company, but haeret lateri laethalis arundo, this for a time
may give some seeming ease, but the wound festers the more afterward; or else
as the Lord himself complains in the 8 of Esaias. 19. They seek unto Wizards,
and those that have familiar spirits, that peep and mutter whereas a People
should seek unto their God, and therefore when they are hard bestead they
shall fret themselves, and curse their King, and their God: that is, that which
they made such account of, and relied on, and they shall look upwards, as it
follows in the 17 of that Prophecy and the 7, In that day shall a man look
to his maker, and his eyes shall have respect unto the holy one of Israel.

Secondly, here is matter of confutation for all those who (as holy Job long
ago complained) cry unto Riches, you are our hope; and to the wedge of Gold,
thou art our confidence, which place their only happiness in outward rest and
worldly prosperity, which having once attained, they then think they are
arrived at the only haven of comfort, and that they are highly in the favor of
God, whereas the contrary is evident in that he most commonly has given a more
liberal portion of these outward things to his greatest enemies, then to his
dearest Saints, and a prosperons estate is so far from being a safe estate,
that it is rather most dangerous, riches having such an attractive and
effascinating power over the minds of men, as that I cannot define whether they
are more to be desired in respect of the benefit of nature, or to be declined
in regard of the hazard of grace; mistake me not, as if I debarred the Saints
from abundance of earthly things, I know they may have them, as Abraham, Job,
etc. but yet grace is above gold, Religion above riches, and a wise and
understanding heart above the wealth of a million of worlds: but if these had
been arguments of the divine approbation, God would never have dealt so
penuriously with his own Son, as not to allow him so much privilege, as the
Foxes of the earth, and the Fowls of the air, for the Foxes have holes and
the fowls have nests, but the Son of Man has not where to rest his head,
says our Savior of himself; he was pauper in nativitate, pauperior in vita,
pauperrimus in morte, poor in his birth and incarnation, for he came not in
the Power and Omnipotency of a God, as he might have done, nor in the pomp and
magnificence of an earthly Monarch, as the Jews thought he would have done,
but the Lord of glory and heir of the universe takes upon him (...) the form
of a servant, Phill: 2.7. Nay if Histories lie not, at that very time the
Emperor Augustus lodged his hunting Dogs upon Bedds of gold: the Son of
God, Christ Jesus blessed forever, was borne in a Stable, and lodged in a
Manger: poorer he was in his life and conversation, for when he was to pay
tribute, he had not a doyt, but sends Saint Peter a fishing for money, he never
did ride but once, and then was he constrained to borrow an Ass Colt, Matthew.
21. And poorest of all in his death and passion, for then does he humble
himself to the death of the Cross, a cruel and most ignominious kind of
death, and that in Calvary, nasty stinking Calvary, and that in medio latronum
tanquam imanissimus latronum, in the midst of thieves, as if he had been the
chief of thieves, as Luther notes.

Again if this were so? the Devil never should have been (...), the Prince
of this world, as our Savior styleth him. Ioh. 14, 30. Nor have been able to
make so large a proffer to him, as to give all the Kingdoms of the world,
though I take this but as a cast of Satan's office, who was a Liar from the
beginning, John. 8. for terra Domini and plenitudo, the earth is the Lords, and
the fulness thereof: the compass of the world and they that dwell therein,
Psalm. 24. and if ease and fulness did not draw men from God, whereas
distress does drive them to him, the Lord himself would never so seriously
have exhorted his own people, and given them such strict caveats in the 8.
Dent: 12, 13, 14. verses. When thou have eaten and art full, then beware least
thou forget the Lord thy God, least when thou have eaten and art full, and when
thou have built goodly houses, and dwelt in them, and when thy herds and thy
flock multiply, and when thy silver and gold is multiplied, and all that thou
have is multiplied, then thy heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy
God: But thou shall remember the Lord thy God. Where the Lord himself
intimates the danger of wealth and prosperity, that thereby men are apt to
become irreligious, forgetful, proud, and profane.

And lastly, if this were not so, that heavenly Orator and laborious Apostle
Saint Paul should never have been so buffetted with the messenger of Satan,
nor received so short an answer to his trebled petition: sufficit tibi gratia
mea, my grace is sufficient for thee, 2. Cor: 12, 9.

Let us not then be dejected too much in our distresses, how harsh soever they
seem to flesh and blood, we may be happy, especially if we have grace to make
this sanctified use as thereby to be drawn to God and made solicitous of
Salvation. Happy soul that have been thus humbled, almost confounded with
these terrifying and dispairing fears? and unhappy he whosoever, that has not
been sensible hereof, for there is no failing to heaven but by the very gates
of hell, no casting anchor in the heaven of hope, before thou have almost
been split upon the very rocks of despair, no regeneration wrought without
the panges of the soul, no new birth without these inward throws and
spiritual convulsions, they are the very Harbingers of grace and mercy, and
always the fore runners of joy and comfort, few there are that ever perished
hereby, none I dare affirm, that trusted in the Lord, were his troubles never
so many, his trialls never so sharp, and for those few that ever have been
cast away by the roaring billows of cruel despair, millions of souls are
daily wafted to hell, by those smooth streams of smiling presumption, Blessed
therefore is he that fears always, whereas he that hardens his heart shall
fall into mischief, Prove, 28.14.

If then we have case and prosperity let us bless God for it, and always
moderate it with a religious fear and careful discretion, that it do not
eaffscinate our souls and make us forgetful: and in our adversity and
distresle let us not be too much dejected but in our patience possess our
souls, for it is the safest though not the smoothest way to heaven; It is
recorded of the Caspian sea that neither the rivers running into it, nor the
Sun nor Moon nor any other supposed cause can make it ebb or flow, but that
it still keeps one constant course: even so must every good Christian not be
proud, though God shoure on him rivers of prosperity, nor too much disanimated
though he be scorched with the Solstice of misery but still keep a constant
kind of tranquillity.

Nec tamen his mutata quies probitasve secundis. Stat in Theba^^

Intumuit, tenor idem animo, moresque modesti.
Fortuna crescente manent.
What then though our fears be great? our terrors many? the thicker our
throws, the stronger our pangs are, the nearer is the time of our delivery:
the more violently corruption does seem to struggle the nearer it is to its
last gasp and expiration; Let us not refuse to go to the promised Canaan,
though through a wilderness of woe, and red sea of affliction, let it content
us, that God will in the end bring us to his heavenly joy, though sometimes
through the very Jaws of hellish despair, And in the fainting of our souls
let us remember the Lord as it is, Jonah. 2.7. Let us pray unto him and ask
Council of his messengers, as he does here of Paul and Sylas in this word
(...) Sirs; which is my second part, and now comes to be discussed, namely the
persons demanded, Sirs: what must I, etc.

2. The more miracles Pharaoh saw, the more was he hardened as appears
plainly in the 8, 9, 10, of Exodus. that great earthquake that was at our
blessed Saviors resurrection Math. 28. when an Angel came and roled away the
stone, for fear of whom the Keepers did shake and become as dead men, did not
so astonish them but that they durst afterward report that loud lie; That his
Disciples came by night while they slept and stole him away; if they slept how
knew they that they were his Disciples? If they did not, it is not probable a
poor company of unarmed fishermen should rescue the body from a guard of
Soldiers? But so ineffectuall is the greatest means, if God work not with
it, and that heart cannot but be hard which he does not touch and mollify by
his spirit: But here a man by nation a Gentile, by condition a Jailer, a kind
of profession that does usually make men barbarous, obdurate, and irreligiously
hard hearted, like the grand keeper of that infernal prison, the Devil
himself yet is so confounded and wrought upon by this one miracle, as that he
becomes truly compassionate unto the persecuted Apostles, pious and solicitous
of his own salvation, Sirs, what must I do etc.

By way of paraphrase, as if he had thus enlarged himself: That you are the
servants of the most high God, and show unto us the way of salvation, the very
Devils could acknowledge, though I vile wretch worse then a Divill would not
believe it, this way many of our City have learned and embraced, though I
miscreant did neglect and contemn it. But now I am amazed, convinced,
confounded, I would go to heaven, I know not the way, I would be saved, I know
not what to do, and therefore (good Sirs,) help me, inform me, direct me,
tell me what must I do etc. Here the points come thick upon us, but we shall
only pitch upon these two.

First you see the state of man by nature, unregenerate, and carnal, before
God does call him unto the knowledge of his truth, ignorant of the way to
heaven, or what to do to save his soul.

Secondly you see of whom you are to seek direction, namely of the Ministers;
the doctrine of salvation must be learned of those unto whom God has committed
the word of reconciliation.

For the First it is apparent in the present pattern, we are all of us in the
very same case naturally; may perhaps have some defire, but are merely
ignorant, for Nascimur universi Civitatis prosus ignari, says a Father, we are
borne all of us ignorant of that City that is above, all the light of purblind
nature, is no more then that of blinded Sampson, as he without a guide could
not find out one pillar of the house, no more can the natural man without the
guide of Gods spirit find out one article of faith. S. Basil therefore
compares carnal men to Howlets that see something in the night, but nothing in
the day, wise to compasle things temporal, but careless for things eternal,
nence it is, that before the knowledge of Christ the people are said to sit in
darkness and in the shadow of death, and in 2 Cor. 2.10. There is a veil on
the heart, a veil of ignorance and infidelity, and there it remains until it
turn unto the Lord: and Ephe. 5.8. (...), ye were sometimes darkness, so long
as ye served Diana, so long as ye were without the Gospel, until Christ Jesus
ransomed you from your vain conversation, ye were not only dark in the
concrete, but darkness it self in the very abstract.

And this came upon us by the fall of Adam, man in the state of innocence had
entire and perfect knowledge both of God and his will, with an universal
conformity thereunto, internal and external Justice inhaerent in him as a
proper accident in it is subject, but while he did desire that which was
forbidden, he lost that which he had, he affected a higher strain of
knowledge, and so brought ignorance on himself and his posterity.

Secondly Christ Jesus he is not only (...) the brightness of his fathers
glory and express image of his substance, but (...): that true light that
lighteneth every man that comes into the world; all that are without Christ
walk in darkness, Egyptian Cimmarian darkness, a man unregenerate must
needs be ignorant, an ignorant man must needs be a profane man, for he that
wants knowledge cannot have grace.

And this discovers and justly reproves the folly and impudence of too many in
these times, who were never truly acquainted with God in his sacred Ordinances,
still wrapped up in the common veil of infidelity and ignorance, and yet blush
not to maintain that they need not instruction, they know as much as any can
tell them, they believe as well as any, hope to be saved as well as the best,
and are as confident of heaven, as if they were already in fruition thereof,
but you know the Proverb; None so bold as Bayard, for the truth is they know
nothing as they ought to know, having their understandings darkened through the
ignorance that is in them and because of the blindness of their heart Ephesians.
4.18.

But as the hoodwinckt fool, because he sees no body, thinks no body sees
him, so these, because they know nothing, think there is nothing to be known,
some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame (says the
Apostle) 1 Cor. 15. but is this possible? (...) the invissible things of him
are seen by the creation of the world Romans 1.20. Oh but they have not the
saving knowledge of him in Christ, some have it not, and some refuse it, the
first are in a pitiful, the second in a fearful, both in a damnable case,
for though simple ignorance may extenuate the sin, and make it less, yet
does it not quite abrogate the guilt and make it no sin at all: because every
man is bound to know his makers will, and a competent measure of saving
knowledge is required in every Christian, who must be able and ready with
meekness to render a reason of that hope that is in him; I must confess here
the Schoolmen mince and are doubtful, especially Aquinas in his 2 did.
22:q:7.^ 2. would not have this native ignorance to be sin, but by the same
reason he may deny original sin, and therefore S. Austen in his 5 contra
Juliannum 3. thus states it, that Caecitas cordis quam solus removit
illuminator Deus, est peccatum, paena peccati, and causa peccati. That
blindness of heart we have by nature which only God the fountain of life and
light does remove, is not only sin, and punishment of sin, but the cause of
sin also; and as for affected and sinful ignorance, that is so far from
extenuating, as that it does every way aggravate both the sin and punishment,
(...), says our Savior, This is the condemnation that light is come into the
world, and men love darkness more then light, because their deeds are evil
John: 3.19. Hence learn we in the second place to bewail and deplore this our
natural ignorance, Man is borne like a wild asses Colt, yet vain man would be
wise Job. 11.12. Where the holy Ghost shows that we are not only Sottish, but
peevish and intractable, not only ignorant of Gods will, but having a will
still to be ignorant.

Secondly labor for knowledge, pray with holy David, Open mine eyes that I may
see the wonders of thy Law; and give me understanding in the way of godliness,
use the help and direction of the Ministry, for the Doctrine of salvation
must be learned of those to whom God has committed the word of
reconciliation, Labia Sacerdotis, The Priests lips must preserve knowledge,
and the People must seek the Law at his mouth for he is the messenger of the
Lord of Hoasts: Mala. 2.7. As before the publishing of the Law the priest went
immediately unto the mouth of God to know his will, so must we now go unto the
book of God, wherein is a peculiar patefaction of his revealed will, and unto
those men whom he has made able Ministers of the new Testament. For they are
the Stewards of God, and dispensers of his sacred Mysteries 1 Cor: 4.1. The
word of reconciliation is committed unto them 2 Cor: 5.19. Ambassadors for
Christ that do in his stead pray us to be reconciled unto God, they are the
light of the world, duces viae, guides unto our spiritual Canaan, Instructors
of the ignorant, Teachers of them that want discretion, they are indeed the
very privy Counselors of heaven. For nihil faciet Dominus nisi prius servis
suis Prophetis revelaverit. God will do nothing, but he will first reveal it
to his servants the Prophets Amos, 3.7. What shall we say then to those that
contemn the Ministry as a calling unworthy and unnecessary altogether?
Certainly it is a grand policy of Satan to bring the leaders into disgrace,
that so he might carry the people hoodwinckt to Hell; and I fear that Jews
and Turks will one day rise in judgment and condemn many that bear the name
of Christians, for they honor the Mufties of Superstition, these contemn the
Ministers of the Gospel.

The pastors then must be (...) and (...) men able to teach for Quod parum
uovit nemo docere potest; as the Poet. No man can instruct others if ignorant
himself, and men apt to teach; 1 Timothy: 3.2. Not suppressing the light of their
learning under the bushel of a lazy and unseasonable silence, like unto
frozen Rivers that make great show but yield no water unto the thirsty
passenger. And for all, we must hence learn to wait at the gates of wisdom to
be frequent in the use of Gods Sacred Ordinances, for though the world think it
not so needful yet (...), says S. Peter, you do well that you take heed unto
the word of God as unto a light shining in a dark place, for this will make
you wise unto salvation, and my third part, the matter in question (...) that I
may be saved.

It was a good Epigram that learned scholar Aldus Manutius wrote upon his
studdy door.

Quisquis es, Aldus, etiam atque etiam te rogat
Vt perpancis agas, deinde arctutum abeas:
Whoever thou art Aldus intreates the briefly to dispatch and presently
begone, unless thou come as Hercules sometime did to wearied Atlas to put thy
shoulder under the burden. Plutarch records of that famous Council assembled
in Greece of 12 several people, that they wrote on the Temple of Apollo,
instead of Homers Iliades, the songs of Pyndarus large and tyring discourses,
such short commemoratives as these, Know thy self, Beware of suretiship, use
moderation; How strickt an observation have we here of these Rules? what
carfulness to avoid the censure of a tedious or unnecessary question? though
so daunted with fear, and distracted with astonishment yet he recollects his
wits, and makes but one Quaere, and that so pithy and material, that I may say
with the Orator in another case, Quam plurima paucis? what a world of matter in
so few words, nay sillables? To besaved comprehends in it the means of our
conversion to Christ, our Regeneration, Justification, Glorification, and
whatsoever tends to our new being here, or our eternal well being hereafter,
for thus I construe his meaning with Aretius, that he is de salute animae
sollicitus, sollicitous now for the welfare of his soul, for the safe abode of
his prisoners freed him from bodily danger: and withal, observe I beseech you,
that he intimates knowledge of action, and promise of obedience, What must I
d^? The Heathen (especially those that rellished the doctrine of the
Perepateticks conceited the chiefest happiness of man to consist in the action
of virtue, and therefore though grace were every way free in God yet he knows
aliquid agendum something on man's part is to be performed.

And lastly he is not curious to pry into the state of others; as once that
prime Apostle Domine quid autem hic? what shall he here do? and therefore is
justly reprehended with quid ad te, what is that to thee? follow thou me, but
hi^ discreet charity begins at home, and in the first place reflects upon
himself, what must I do to be saved, here the observations come thick upon
us, but we will shut up all in this one, namely,

That the business of salvation requires the best care, pains and diligence
of the best, and therefore our Saviors injunction is general. First seek the
Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof Math. 6.33. prae omnibus
conditis animam charius amare debemus, above all things created, a man's
chiefest care must be for the welfare of his soul, and therefore holy David
styleth it his Darling, that is most precious in his esteem. Deliver my soul
from the Lion, my Darling from the power of the dog. And, Domine die animae,
Lord, say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. Psalm. 35.

How slightly soever the world for the most part esteem of Salvation, as if
nothing were more easy and trivial then to be saved, yet they find the fatal
contrary by harsh experience, and Satan himsele that cunning Sophister (who
now by all means labors to perfwade this for a truth in the heart of vain
and careless man, that so he may neglect heaven, defer his conversion and
despise proffered grace,) will one day prove himself a liar, and with utmost
arguments of aggravation, allege the difficulty, nay impossibility thereof,
turning his tale, and flatly telling the amazed conscience, that the Art of
Salvation requires time, and care, and pains, and that long and narrow way to
Heaven will not be trodden in an instant: This the prime apostle tells us 2 Pet.
2.10. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure, for if you do this
you shall never fall. I may add, if you do not, you shall perish for ever: our
blessed Savior justifies this, when being advertised by a worldly Martha of
her many employments, to the end that he should either comm^nd her, or command
her sister, to assist her, answers briefly thus; Martha, Martha thou art
careful for many things and one thing is necessary, and Mary has chosen that
better part, which shall never be taken from her. Where our blessed Savior
tacitly reprehends her needless deligence, and withal plainly applauds her
sisters happy carefullnesse, thou art troubled, one thing is necessary, and
that has thy sister chosen.

Salvation requires our best care and diligence; because tending to the
preservation and eternal welbeing of the soul the best part of man, that
Divinae aurae particula, the inbreathing of God, as the Poet calls it, as far
beyond the body as immortal before mortality, or Heaven the Earth; they were
wont to say, says S. Bernard, Qui corpus curat, bonum curat Castellum; he that
keeps his hody keeps a good Castle, but I say, sterquilinium vile, he is busy
only about a Dunghill but he that is solicitous for the welfare of his soul
chooses the better part, is employed about the best business, and in doing
this has effected all, though he neglect the whole world.

Lastly, without this all other forecast is folly, all gain loss, and
therefore the Holy Ghost styles him a plain fool whose provilence extends
no further then the things of this life; Do thou resolve on nothing but
building of bigger barnes? And because thy fields are laden with a plentiful
Crop, therefore chant that careless requiem to thy soul, Ede, bibe, lude:
Eat, drink, take thy pastime? (...). Thou art a fool, for this night shall
thy soul be required, and then where is all thy plotting and plodding for the
world? Luke. 12: 20. without this happy diligence all other gain is loss, and
therefore our blessed Savior, (...), What shall it profit a man to gain a
world if he loose his soul? Mat. 16, 26. where you see the soul is precious
and invaluable, the loss of it irrecoverable, and a whole world, nay not a
million of worlds, a sufficient recompense for one soul.

How then are the greater part of the world here to be taxed, who think of
that last of all, nay least of all, which does require their prime care and
greatest diligence? how does the Holy Ghost complain of this? Oh that they
were wise! Oh that they would think of their latter end! and O si ad precepta
mea, Oh that thou had taken heed to my precepts, then had thy peace been as
the river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea, Isay. 48.18. And
ideo captivus ductus est populus meus quia caruit scientia, Therefore is my
people g^^e into captivity, because they have no knowledge, they regard not the
work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands, but the harp
and the violl and wine are in their feasts, but alas the dreadful consequence!
for therefore hell has enlarged her self and opened her mouth without
measure, and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that
rejoices among them shall descend into it: And not to insist on generalities,
I speak in Saint Austens phrase, Aures omnium pulso, conscientias singulorum
convenio, I knock at the door of every man's conscience: have we been so
careful in this particular? God has not appointed us unto wrath, but to
attain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Thessal. 5.9. But we live as if
we were appointed only for the service of Mammon, and set upon this dunghill
the earth, only to dig out our own damnation: I question not our desire:
salvation without doubt is every man's desire, none so wretched that would not
be saved: Beatus vult homo esse, etiam non sic vivendo ut possit esse: Man
would be happy though he trace those broad paths that tend to the chambers of
death, but for our actions, there is the matter, wherein I may truly say as holy
David in that Psalm. The wickedness of the ungodly shows to his face, that
there is no fear of God before his eyes: so our supiue negligence our
careless oscitancy. our extravagant intentions show to our faces, that we are
not careful for heaven, nor sollicitous of Salvation: The ambitious plots only
for an addition of honor, some more preferment. The covetous sweats only to
increase his substance, and enlarge his Patrimony; and for us all we can be
content, as the Psalmist says, Torise early, and go to bed late, and to ^at
the bread of carfulness for the things of this world: in this we live, in
this we grow old, in this we dye, and then (alas for pity!) the maine
bufinesse is neglected, heaven is not thought of, Salvation is not finished.
Wherefore, what distress drove this perplexed party in the the text unto, let
(I beseech you) a religious discretion work in every one of you, and make you
sollicitous for the welfare of your souls: I read of Plato, that when the
Cyrenenses sent to him to prescribe them some form of Government, he replied,
that they were too happy to yield obedience unto any laws: Oh let it not be
true of any of you, that your happiness here, will not permit you to think of
being happy hereafter: Consider that weighty reason of our blessed Savior,
what will it profit a man though he gain the whole world, if he loose his own
soul? What did it profit that rich man Luke 16. That he was clothed in purple
and fine linen, and fared deliciously every day, when no sooner dead but in
hell in torments? Nay, it was the aggravation of his misery, that he had once
been happy: so what will it profit you that ye are descended generously, clad
costly, fed choicely and enjoy all the pleasures and delights of the world,
when no sooner dead, but that of S. Bernard proves true, Carodatur esca
vernibus, anima praeda Daemonibus, the body becomes a prey for devouring
worms, the soul for tormenting Devils, see a President in the 5 of Wisdom,
and there the gallants of those times unseasonably bewailing such folly: Nos
stulti, etc. We fools erred from the way of truth, and the light of
Righteousness has not shined unto us, we have wearied our selves in in the
ways of destruction, and gone through desolate places, but as for the way of
the Lord we have not known; what has pride profitted us, and riches withal
their vaunting brought us? These things are past away even as an Arrow shot at
a mark, or as the trace of a Ship at Sea; or as a guest that tarrieth but for
a day. Wherefore (blessed and beloved, in the God of love Christ Jesus blessed
for evermore) when the eye that sees me this day may see me no more, and the
ear that hears me, may hear me no more for ever; when I that speak this to
you, may be dissolved to my original dust; Let not this my poor exhortation,
be as the beating of the Air; or pass unreguarded, but in the fields, in your
houses, at your tables, in your closets, on your bedds, always inturrupt all
extravagant intentions with this, I have a God to serve, a soul to save, What
must I do to be saved? Consider further, God wills not your destruction, he
has not appointed you to wrath, he has made himself known unto you, he does
by me (the unworthiest of his Messengers) entreat you that you would be
reconciled unto him, whose voice if you will this day hear, you shall not
perrish notwithstanding all your former provocations. Oh then! seeing God and
man, grace and nature, heaven and earth concur to do you good, perish not
through your own obstinacy, save your souls, that you perish not in the
condemnation of the world. And when ye have obtained some comfortable assurance
this way, account your selves more happy, then if you were Monarchs of this
whole universe; for, quanta faelicitas? what unspeakable selicity is it to be
saved? Saul had a Kingdom, and yet he did despair. Esau was a Duke, and yet a
castaway. Judas had his Bishopric, and yet the son of perdition; and quanta
facilitas? what facility in the obtaining of it? For heaven is not now tied to
these impossible conditions, do this and live, non reqnirit Deus sanguinem,
sed fidem, says S. Cyprian, God now requires not blood, but faith, only
believe and live for ever; Oh then! labor for faith, follow faith, fight that
good fight of faith, be faithful unto death, which is the end of your days,
and then you shall be sure to receive the end of your faith, which is, the
salvation of your souls, which God of his infinite mercy vouchsafe, for the
Son of his love Christ Jesus sake, to whom with the all sanctifying spirit,
three Persons, one eternal, invisible, indivisible Essence, be ascribed all
power, praise, might, and Majesty, dignity, Dominion, and thanksgiving from
henceforth, and forevermore. Amen.

FINIS.

