BISHOP TAYLOR's Judgment concerning the Power of Parents over their Children
in His Ductor Dubitantium, etc. Edit. IV. 1696.
SO long as the Son is within the Civil Power of his P. 701.
Father, so long as he lives in his House, is subject to his Command, is
nourished by his Father's Charge, has no distinct Rights of his own, he is in
his Father's Possession, and to be reckoned by his Measures.

In the Law of the Twelve Tables it was written, Sacra P. 700.
privata perpetua manento, that the Private Religion of a Family should not be
altered: which CICERO Lib. 2. de Legibus expounds to mean, That all those to
whom the Care of the Father of the Family did appertain, were tied to the
Celebration of the same Rites; and the Lawyers say, that Filii sunt in Sacris
Parentum, dum sunt in eorum potestate; Children are within the Holy Rites of
their Parents, while they are in their Power.

The Father's Commands are exacted before the Laws of Ibid.
GOD or PRINCES do require Obedience; because the Government of Children is
like the Government of the Sick and the Madmen, it is a Protection of them
from Harm, and an Institution of them to Obedience of GOD and of KINGS; and
therefore the Father is to Rule the Understanding of his Child, till it be fit
to be ruled by the Laws of GOD; that is, the Child must Believe and Learn, that
he may Choose and Obey.

The Father has the Prerogative of EDUCATION. Ibid. P. 700. P. 701.


A Turk, a Jew, a Heathen can reckon their Children in Sacris Parentum; they
have a Power, a natural and proper Power to breed up their Children in what
Religion they please, but not to keep them in it; for then when they can choose,
they are under no Power of Man, GOD only is the Lord of the Understanding.

In the Countries of the Roman Communion, -- if the Father P. 701.
be an Heretic in their Accounts, they teach their Children to disobey their
Parents, and suppose Heresy to destroy the Father's Right of Power: and
Government. Between Christian and Christian there is no difference, as to
Matter of Civil Rights, no Law allows that.


