Carigueya, seu Marsupiale Americanum: OR, THE ANATOMY OF AN OPOSSUM, Dissected
at Gresham-College.

By EDWARD TYSON, M. D. Fellow of the College of Physicians, and of the Royal
Society, READER of Anatomy at Chirurgions-Hall, and PHYSICIAN to Bethlem
Hospital.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Smith, and Benj. Walford, Printers to the Royal
Society, at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCVIII.

diagrams of dissected opossum

diagrams of dissected opossum

Carigueya, seu Marsupiale Americanum: OR, THE ANATOMY OF AN OPOSSUM.
THIS Animal was brought from Virginia, and presented to the Royal Society, by
Will. Bird, Esquire and kept alive in their Repository for some time. But of late
languishing and falling from its Meat, it died. The Cause of its Death we shall
see, when we come to the Dissection: But first of all, we shall take notice of
the several Names given it by different Authors: Then shall give a more exact
Description and Figure of its outward Shape: And last of all, we shall observe
the Structure and Formation of the Parts within; especially where different
from other Animals.

And as to the Names, I find that Georg. Margravius Hist. Not. Brasil. l. 6.
cap. 2. p. 222.
, and so likewise Gul. Piso Hist. Not. and Med. l. 5. c. 24. p. 323.
tells us, That it is called in Brasile, and on the Sea Coasts Carigueya; by
some, and in the Inland Contries, Impatiima. In Periguay, Tai-ibi. Franc.
Hernandez Hist. Mexican. l. 9. c. 18. p. 330.
says, It Is called, Tlaquatzin, by the Indians. Antonius Herera calls it
Taquatzin; and the Modern Spaniards, by a Corruption, Tlaquacum; as Joh. Eusebius.
Nierembergius Hist. Not. lib. 9. c. 4. p. 156.
informs us. Joh. Pet. Maffeius Hist. Indic. l. 2. p. m. 46.
, and Caspar Barlaeus Res Gestae sub Mauritio in Brasilia p. m. 222.
calls it, Cerigo. Joh. Lerius Hist. Navigat. in Brasiliam, c. 9. p. m. 180.
calls it Sarigoy or Carigoy. Joh. Stadenius Hist. Brasilianae. Cap. 32. p. m.
129.
or Stadius, as he is Printed in Theodore de Bry, writes it, Servoy or Serwoy.
By Cardan De Subtilitat. l. x. Oper. Tom. 3. p. 531.
, and Oviedo In Summario Indiae Occident.
it is called Chiurca and alibi Chucia. In the Molucca Islands it is called,
Zurca. In Virginia, and generally by the English, it is called Opossum, as by
Ralp Hamor Descript. Virginiae
, and others. Joh. de Laet Descriptio Indiae Occident. l. 3. c. 17. p. 82.
, and Captain John Smith Voyages and Discoveries in Virginia. p. 27.
writes it, Opassum. Mr. Roy Synopsis Animal. p. 182.
calls it, the Possum, as do also our common Seamen. I do not find any Latin
Name given to it by any Body, but by Gesner Hist. Anim. de Quadruped. p. 870.
, who, that it might not be Anonymous, forms that of Semi Vulpa, quasi Simia
Vulpina; or, as Aldrovandus De Quadruped. Digit. Viviparis, l. 2. c. 4. p. 223.
calls it, Vulpi-Simia, as if this Animal was of a middle Nature, between a Fox
and Ape: And, answerably, in Greek it N. B. In my Quotations of any Author, if
what occurs be in the same Book and Place, I always refer to the first Letter
it is quoted by; if otherwise, it is distinguished by different Letters, which I
choose, to avoid needless Multiplication of References.
might be called, (...), or (...); though he tells us, That the Alopecopithecus
and Chiurea, by Cardan and Scaliger, are taken to be different Animals.

Upon the whole, since it is an Animal sui Generis, and in several Parts having
a great Resemblance to those of different Species; I think, a Denomination
might be best given to it, from that Particular, wherein it is most
distinguished from all others; which is that remarkable Pouch or Marsupium it
has in the Belly; into which, upon any Occasion of Danger, it can receive its
Young. Not that it is a Vterus, or the Young Ones are bred there (this Mistake
we shall clear up, when we come to the Dissection): But Nature has only formed
this Part for that Particular Use of receiving or emitting, at Pleasure, the
Young Brood, till such time as they are able to provide better for themselves.

This Consideration (it being so distinguishing a Character of this Animal from
all others, that as yet we know of,) makes me most inclinable to find out some
Name, that might be most expressive thereof; nor can I think of, at present, a
better, than to call it, Marsupiale Americanum. If upon Observation (as very
likely) there should be found different Species of these Animalia Crumenata, as
Jul. Caes. Scaliger De Subtilitate ad Cardan. Exerc. 206. p. m. 277.
calls them, by an Epithste, they may be subdivided.

Bishop Wilkins Real Character, Part 2. c. 5. p. 159.
, and Mr. Ray (o) too, in his Synopsis Animalium, places this Animal amongst
the Dog-Kind. Guil. Piso (b) says it is, Bestiola majorum Glirium Montanorum
numero ascribenda: And Cardan says (i), Mittit and India Occidentalis
Chiurcham e Mustelino Genere. I am apt to think it may be reduced to the
Vermin Kind; but that may be better determinated, had one an Opportunity of
observing the Male; for our Subject was a Female, which I am now to give a
Description of.

And for the better doing this, I caused a Figure Fig. 1. Tab. 1.
of it to be made, exact from the Life: for those Figures that hitherto have
been given of it, are very faulty; as will appear by comparing this with that
of the Caragueya of Margrave (a), which is copied by Piso (b) and Johnson Hist.
Animal Quadruped. Tab. 63.
. The Figure of Eusebius. Nierembergius (d) indeed, seems to be taken from the
Life, and more agreeable; but not in all Particulars exact. That in Gesner (p)
is altogether Monstrous; but withal, he tells us whence he had it; " Imaginem
addidi; qualis in Tabulis Geographicis depingi solet; and mistrusts it himself,
where he says, and Icon si quid ei credendum. However, Johnston (who never
fails to copy an Error, and never mends one) adds this Figure too, vid. ejusd.
Tab. 58. though he owns that he had seen that of Nierembergius. The Figure of
Vlyss. Aldrovandus (q) is much the same with that of Gesner's.

Should one here indulge the Imagination so far, as in the Description of this
Animal, to borrow its several Parts from those of different Species; one should
rather seem to form a Chimerical Monster, than to describe a real Animal. Yet
we find the best Zoographers thus to please themselves in their Accounts of it.

Animal est Tlaquatzin Canis parvi forma and magnitudine, says Hermandez (c).
Animal est Catuli vel Mediocris felis magnitudine, as Margrave (a). Pars
anterior Vulpem, posterior vero Simiam representabat, nisi quod Pedes effingit
Humanos, Aures autem habet Noctuae, says Vincentius Pinzonus Navigatio inter
Novi Orbis Scriptr. p. 86.
. Monstrosum illud Animal Vulpino Rostro, Cercopitheci Cauda, Vespertilionis
Auribus, Manibus Humanis, Pedibus Simiam aemulans, says Peter Martyr Ocean
Decad. 1. lib. 9.
. Corpore vero ac Pedibus Melis, the Mexican History (c). Videtur autem hoc
Animal intermedium esse inter Leporem ac Vulpem, sed alterius generis ab
utroque ob Crumenan, says Gardan De Rerum Varietate, Cap. 33. p. m. 101.
. Est Viverrae facie ac magnitudine, Capite Vulpino, says Jul. Caes. Scaliger
(r). Opassum Capite Porcellum, Cauda Glirem referens, Mole modicum Felem, says
Joh. de Laet (m). Barbam Felinam habet, says Piso (b). Cauda Colubrinae
similis, Hernandez (c). I shall omit more Instances which might be given, Nor
is it that I do disapprove of these Allusions upon the whole; but when they
call it Animal Monstrosum, as P. Martyr (w); or Prodigiosum, as Vinc. Pinzonus
(u), and Hieron. Benzon. Hieron. Benzon. Hist. Novi Orbis, Lib. 2. p. 52. apud
Theodor. de Bry Americ. pars quinta.
; I think it is only our Ignorance makes the Admiration, and that Admiraration
forms the Monster; for Nature, in her regular Actings, produces no such Species
of Animals.

In our Description of this Animal, we will first give the Dimensions of this
we dissected; and then proceed to other Particulars. As from the Extremity of
the Nose, to the Tip of the Tail, it measured One and Thirty Inches: The Length
of the Head was Six Inches: The Tail was One Foot long: The Neck and the Body
was the Complement of the First Dimension: The Girth of the Body, now dead, was
Fifteen Inches and an Half; when alive and well, it seemed much thicker: The
Forelegs were Six Inches long; the Hinder-Legs but Four Inches and an Half:
The Girth of the Tail, near the Root, was Three Inches; near the Tip but One
Inch: The Head, about the Ears was largest; measuring on the Forehead, from one
Ear to the other, Three Inches; thence gradually tapering toward the Nose, and
more resembling that of a Pig than a Fox: The Aperture of the Eyelids were not
Horizontal, but lying in a strait Line from the Ears to the Nose, and not
large: The Ears were about One Inch and an Half long; not sharp, but of a
roundish Figure: The Rictus of h^^ Mouth, from the Corner on One Side, to the
End of the Nose, measured Two Inches and an Half.

These Measures, in several Particulars, I find different from those in other
Authors: But I cannot but think they have made several Mistakes, for want of a
more exact Enquiry and Observation. Thus Margrave (a), and, from him, others
makes the Forelegs shorter than the Hinder; "Crura duo anteriora (says he)
breviora, nimirum quodlibet tres digitos longum; Posteriora paulo plus quatuor:
In our Subject I find the contrary; though, as we shall observe in the Sceleton,
the Bones of the Forelegs are shorter than those of the Hinder. He adds, Pedes
Anteriores quinque digitis Instar manus constant, unguibus albis instar Avium,
Curvis: Posteriores longiores, uti in Cercopithecis esse solent, item quinque
digitis ut manus. But here we find the Fore-Feet to have Five long Claws or
Fingers, equally ranging with one another; and a hooked Nail at the End of each
Finger. But the Hinder-Legs are far differently formed; for here we observe but
Four Fingers armed with hooked Nails, and a perfect Thumb, set off at a
Distance from the Range of the other Fingers; and as in a Humane Body, this
Thumb was shorter than the other Fingers; and had not a hooked or curved
prominent Nail, but a tender flat one, as in our Tab. 1. Fig. 1.
Figure is represented.

This Contrivance of the Feet and the Nails, and the Fore-Feet being longer
than the Hinder, and the Hinder being formed with a Thumb like a humane Hand;
seems very advantageous to this Animal, as to its way of living, and getting
its Food: For what it seems to be most fond of, is, Poultry and Birds; not but
that it eats other things too. But for the Preying upon these, it is very nimble
in climbing up Trees; Scandit Arbores incredibili pernicitate, says the
Mexican History (c); and the same is confirmed by all. Now having the
Hinder-Feet formed like an Hand, and the Four Fingers Armed with hooked Nails,
it may take the better Hold in raising its Body up a Tree; and the Forelegs
being longer, will make the larger Stretch in, Climbing up; the Nails being
hooked and strong, will take the greater Hold. Besides, as we shall observe,
having the Advantage of twisting its Tail about any Stick or Bough it lights
upon, and being able, by that Means, to fuspend the whole Weight of its Body;
when it has a mind to raise it self to the Bough its Tail is twisted about,
these Hinder-Legs, being formed like Hands, will the better take hold of it,
than if they had no Thumbs.

These Fingers, Toes, or Claws were naked, without Hair; the Skin looking of a
Reddish Color here. They were about an Inch long, and the Thumbs almost as
long, but set lower, as I said. The Palms of all, especially if dilated, as it
does in Climbing, were large; but so contrived, as to be able to be contracted,
as in walking; but that they might here be better secured from Injury, I find
at the setting on of each Toe, in the Palms, a Protuberant, Fleshy, and almost
Cartilaginous Body.

In feeding its self, it makes use of the Fore-Feet in bringing the Food to his
Mouth, as do the Monkey and Squirril-Kind.

As the Toes, so likewise the Tail was without Hair, only for a little way near
the setting on; and was most remarkable; being tapering from the Root toward
the Tip, and covered with a regular Order of small Whitish Scales; which, for
the most part, were all oblongish Hexigons, Persimilis Colubrinae, says the
Mexican History (c): But with this difference, that in a Snake's Skin part of
one Scale juts over another; but here each Scale appears wholly in view, and
between each one may observe a little of the Skin or Membrane in which they are
fixed. The Color of these Scales, makes the Tail to appear Whitish, though the
Skin seems of a Darker Color.

As the Feet and Tail, so likewise the Ears were bare, and without Hair:
Auriculis tenuissimis, mollissimisque ac pene translucentibus, says the
Mexican History (c). And although thus soft and slender; and in Color and
Substance almost resembling the Membrane of a Bat's Wing, yet they were erect,
not acuminated or running to a Point, as described by some; but, as in our Icon
is represented, more of a Circular or Oval Figure: They were so slender and
soft, that here I could not perceive that Cartilaginous Body, which usually is
to be met with in the Structure of this Part, in most other Animals; but as if
it was void almost of it, to be formed only by a Duplication of this tender
Membrane or Skin; or if it did enjoy a Cartilage, as likely, 'twas much finer
than in most other Animals. The Concha or Passage to the Porus Auditorius was
very Capacious: But 'twas observed, that when our Subject began to grow ill,
the Verge or Rhyme of the outward Ear seemed to be crimp'd; and when it died, to
be so shrivel'd, as if burnt up, not making a smooth, but jagged Edge.

The general Vogue of almost all Naturalists, resembling the Face and Head of
this Animal, to that of a Fox, would much incline me, could I find but a
tolerable Agreement, to acquiesce herein: But by comparing both together, I
see but very little Likeness. A Fox, it is true, has a large Forehead, and a
slender Rostrum; but in a Fox it does not gradually grow Taper (as in our
Subject, from the Ears to the Nose): But here the Forehead is Prominent, and
somewhat Oval or Circular; then makes a remarkable Break; whence is protruded a
slender Rostrum. I much more think, in this Particular, our Animal resembles
that of a Hog: But Comparisons being so delusive, so un-satisfactory to an
inquisitive Mind; and in all Natural History not meeting with more, and to so
little purpose, as in the Description of this Animal; I should rather think it
far more advisable, to avoid the seducing the Mind into an Error hereby; than
at the same time, when it is pretended to inform, to mis-guide the Imagination
by a mistaken and ill-chosen Simile.

I shall only add, that the Vpper-Jaw was somewhat longer than the Under: The
Nostrils were large; Nares habet patentes, says Margrave (a): The Eyes Black,
small, vivid and exerted, when alive; now dead, very much sunck: The Neck was
short: The Breast was broad; and the Shape of the whole is best apprehended by
consulting our Figure thereof.

It had Mustacio's like a Cat; Barbam habet Felinam, says Margrave (a); but
his Picture of it is very much mistaken. The Fur upon the Face is shorter and
whiter than the rest of the Body: The Mexico History (c) describes it Rostro
tenui, prolixo and depili; but this must be only meant comparatively. On the
Back and Sides the Fur was of an Ash Color, or dappel'd with Black Hair in
Spots, intermixed with White, especially on the Back; on the Belly 'twas more of
an Umber Color, and of a darker on the Legs. The longest Hairs, which were
stronger and courser than the rest, measured Three Inches; being White toward
the Ends: though the Mexican History says the contrary. Pilo longo and
candido, sed circa extrema fusco and nigro, says Hermandez (c). Joh. Eusebius.
Nierembergius (d), in his Figure (which is much to be preferred before the
others) represents him very Shocky, and, as it were, with Curled Hair. If what
Margrave tells us be true, his Subject was different from ours; Pili autem
Capitis (says he (a) Colli inferius cum fine Ventris and Caudae inferius prope
exortum, sunt flavi secundum long itudinem autem Capitis, per Oculos and medium
Capitis tendit ampla nigra stria. But the Color of the Fur may vary in
different Subjects.

But we will have now done with the Outward Parts, to proceed to the Inward:
But that we must first of all take Notice of that most remarkable Part, that no
other Species of Animals enjoys, as I know of, but this; that is neither
Inward, nor Outward, but a Medium between both; I mean that admirable contrived
Pouch or Marsupium that it has in the hinder Belly.

For at the Bottom of the Belly, in the middle, between the Two Hinder-Legs, we
observed a Slit Tab. 1. Fig. 2. and Fig. 3.
or Aperture, moderately extended about Two Inches long; capable of a larger
Extension by dilating it with ones Fingers, even when it is alive. John Stadius
(h) says, in alvo fissuram habet ad dimidiae Spithamae longitudinem: Or, as
it is rendered by Gesner (p) ad sex digitos fere scissum: Possibly it is a little
over stretched; however, it can so exactly close and contract it, that the Eye
does not readily discover it, till dilated by the Fingers. Bursae os ita
clauditur, ut non appareat, nisi duobus digitis ab invicim distendatur, says
Margrave (a). Tanta aequalitate and vi, ut coaluisse cutim omnino putes, says
the Mexican History (c).

This is so surprising a Structure, that all Zoographers do mention it with the
greatest Admiration; and yet their Curiosity has not been so great, but several
Mistakes they have been guilty of, in the Accounts they have given about it.

Mirum autem Animal (says Margrave (a) nam in infimo Ventre prope Crura
posteriora Pellis ejus dupla est, and exterior rima duos and semis digitos
longa, facitque quasi Bursam, quem Brasiliani vocant, Tambeio, Pomi Aurantii
majoris capacem. Est autem Bursa haec intus Pilosa. All of this, I think, is
very just and true: For at the Place he mentions, we observed an Aperture, or
Slit, much of the Largeness he describes, where there is of each Side, a
Reduplication of the Skin inwards, which forms a Bag of the Capacity he
mentions, and of a greater upon Occasion, and Hairy too. But these Hairs here
are so thinly set, that by no means they cover it, but almost every where you
may observe the Skin.

Gul. Piso (b) has much the same Description, but calls this Bursa, Mantica.
Cardan (x) calls it Crumena. Oviedo (k) calls it Ventrale Marsupium. By Joh. de
Laet it is styled, Ascus sub Ventre pendulus Joh. de Laet. descrips. Indiae
Occident. lib. 15. cap. 5. p. 551.
. By Fr. Ximenez, or his Translator Vide Joh. de Laet. ibid. lib. 5. cap. 4. p.
232.
Pelliceus Saccus. By Jul. Caes. Scaliger (r), Scortum subventrale. By Peter
Martyr (w), Vterus Exterior. By Hieron. Benzon. (y), Venture alter. By Captain
John Smith (n) it is called a Bag. The Name we shall use for it, will be, the
Marsupium or Pouch.

Herein all agree, that the use of this Bag, Pouch, or Marsupium, is for the
Preservation of the Young Ones, and securing them upon any Occasion of Danger:
Quaternos, quinosve parit Catulos (says Hernandez (c) quos Vtero conceptos,
editosque in lucem, Alvi Capacitate quadam, dum adhuc parvuli sunt, claudit ac
servat. Peter Martyr (w) tells us, Quod natos sibi Catulos circumfert,
quocunque profiscatur, Vtero exteriore in modum magnae Crumenae dependente,
etc. quo a venatoribus vel alias a caeteris violentis ac rapacibus Animalibus
natos liberet, illos secum asportando: nunquam autem illos emittere dicitur,
nisi aut recreandi, vel lactandi Gratia, donec sibi victum per se queritare
dedicerint. Oviedus (k) adds, Quod Bestia haec ritu mustelarum noctu domos
ingrediatur, necansque Gallinas, earum sanguinem tantum modo sugat: imo illic
Ventrale Marsupium aperit: filiosque dimittit, ut and ipsi ad Gallinaceum
sanguinem sorbendum assuescant: interim si aliquem strepitum senserit, illico
natos in crumenam recipiens, fugam arripit. And Joh. Stadius (h) owns he has
taken out the Young Ones hence; Aliquoties easdem ipse venatus sum, and Catulos
ex sinu ipsemet deprompsi. This Particular, I think, is evident by the
Confession of all; and therefore shall not use more Quotations to confirm it:
And Nierembergius (d), on this Account, in his Picture of this Animal,
represents the Young Ones as crawling out. But when they tell us, there is no
other Vterus: But that the Faetus are formed here, and nourished here; and this
too, when they own they have dissected this Animal; this is too great a Mistake
to be longer Propagated, and from Autopsie we shall demonstrate the contrary,
when we come to the Dissection.

But since the great and wise Design of Nature, in contriving this Part, is for
the Preservation of the Young Oaes, in receiving and emitting them as there is
Occasion; we will contemplate and admire the admirable Structure and Artifice
she uses in forming and adopting it so suitably for this End.

We will therefore here remark the Structure of the Muscles, which, like
Strings, do serve to open and shut this Pouch. But in the doing this, we must
first describe those Two remarkable Bones this Animal has, more than is to be
met with in any Sceleton besides, which are of great Use and Service herein:
And, from their Office, I shall take leave to call them, Ossa Marsupialia, or
Janitores Marsupii. I do not find they have been yet taken notice of by any;
and though they do belong to the Sceleton, yet I cannot avoid their Description
here, because of the Muscles that are inserted to them, that do serve to open
the Pouch.

These Ossa Marsupialia Tab. 1. Fig. 5.
or Janitores Marsupii (as I call them) are Two strong Bones, so fastened to
the upper and inward Edge of the Ossa Pubis, that at their Basis here, they
touched one another, just at the Coalition b.
of the Bones that forms the Ossa Pubis a. a.
. The other Extreme of these Bones were so distant from one another, that it
measured Two Inches and an Half. The Basis d. e.
of these Bones, where joined to the Ossa Pubis, was half an Inch broad, having
Two Heads; the larger d.
lying near the Coalition of the Ossa Pubis, and the lesser e.
toward the Os Coxendicis; having in the middle a Sinus, into which was
received a Protuberance of the Ossa Pubis: By which Contrivance it appears,
there can be no Motion of these Bones, nearer or farther from one another, but
that they must stand always at an equal Distance. Nor did I, upon trial, find
it otherwise; but observed, they were capable of a small Motion inwards toward
the Spine, and outward from it. These Bones, as they ascended from the Os
Pubis, grew slenderer, being about the Middle but a quarter of an Inch broad;
and they were each, Two Inches long.

To each of these Bones there were bestowed Four Pair of Muscles: There was
another Pair that did run over them; to which these Bones did perform the
Office of a Trochlea.

The First Pair of Muscles (i.e. which first came to be dissected, upon the
Pronation of the Animal, and from its Figure, I shall call, Triangularis)
arises Fleshy from the whole Length of the internal Side of these Bones, and
inserted their opposite Tendons on each side of the Rima, or Aperture of the
Marsupium. Under part of these Muscles, lay another, or a Second Pair; slat and
thin; having their Origin from the upper Part of the internal Side of the Ossa
Marsupialia and inserting their opposite Tendons a little above the Tendons of
the former Muscles, the Tendence or Direction of the Muscular Fibers of this
Pair, in Relation to the First, made a Decussation. The Third Pair of Muscles
we shall take notice of, had their Rise from the Forepart of the Basis of
these Bones, where they were jointed to the Os Pubis; and were afterward
inserted into the Linea Aspera of the Thigh Bone. The Fourth Pair did arise
from the external Side of these Bones near the Basis, and are inserted into the
Fore Part of the Thigh Bone near the middle.

The Last Pair of Muscles I hinted at, (to which I thought these Bones might
perform the Office of a Trochlea, or Pully) arises more immediately from the
Marsupium or Pouch it self: For spreading their Muscular Fibers all over this
Bag, as they issue from it, by joining their Fibers together; they more
remarkably form a solid Muscle; which of each side passing over the middle of
these Bones, (i. e. in the prone Posture we are dissecting it) at length were
inserted into the Spine of the Os Ilii.

By considering the Structure of these Muscles, and what must be the Effect of
their Action or Contraction; one cannot but think the Two First must serve
toward the Dilatation or opening this Marsupium or Pouch: For these Bones are
a Fulciment or Basis; their Articulation will not admit of a Contraction
inwards or nearer to one another; wherefore, when the First and Second Pair of
Muscles act or contract, they must necessarily open or dilate the Mouth of the
Marsupium or Pouch. The Third and Fourth Pair of these Muscles may serve to
extend these Bones outward; so that when this Animal hangs by its Tail (as it
does frequently) the Weight of the Faetus in this Pouch by this means will not
press so much upon the inward Viscera. The Fifth and Last Pair, as they may
serve to dilate the Capacity of the Pouch it self, so likewise may serve the
better to suspend its Weight, when the Animal is prono Capite, and if it
gravitates too much, they may retract it up, and the easier, because pasting
over these Bones like a Pully, their force is more augmented.

The Antagonist to these Muscles is, the Sphincter Marsupii; an oval Series of
strong, fleshy Fibers, which serve to constringe and close the Orifice of the
Pouch; which it does so perfectly (as I have already observed), that one would
think the Skin here not to be slit; nor can the Orifice be observed till you
have dilated it with your Fingers.

Nature's Contrivance therefore in placing this Pouch here, in this Hinder Part
of the Body, is very great; her Mechanisme in forming these Two Bones, the
Janitores Marsupii, which no Sceleton besides has, and so artfully furnishing
them with these Muscles, is most admirable; that with the Philosopher, there is
none but must own (...).

The Pouch or Marsupium it self, was a Membranous Body, not very thick, though
consisting of several Coats, and is to be reduced into the Class of the
Vesiculous Parts of the Body; which according to my Notion, are part Muscles,
part Glands, and do perform the Office of both, Motion and Secretion: for the
Concave or Hollow Tab. 1. Fig. 3.
of this Pouch (as I have remarked) was somewhat Hairy; and at several Places I
could observe them matted or cling'd together by a Yellowish Substance, which
did ouze out of the Cutaneous Glands there; as under the Armpits in a Man, it
is observed. This Liquor thus emptied into the Pouch from the Glandulous Coat,
I found was strong Scented, and had more of the Peculiar Foetor of this Animal,
than any part besides; being no ways grateful, but unpleasant to the Smell, as
has been observed of this Creature, when alive: Faetet Animal instar Vulpis vel
Martis, says Margrave (a). Vulpeculis Hispaniensibus sunt similes sed minores,
and long graveolentiores, says Joh. de Laet (z). But after the Skin with the
Pouch had been kept for some Days, and was grown dry, I found so great an
Alteration here in the Smell, that what before was so disagreeable, now was
become a perfect Perfume, and smelt altogether like Musk; which made me call to
mind what formerly I had remarked Philos. Transact. No. 144. p. 39.
of these Scent-Bags in other Animals; that in a Weasel, which Stinks like a
Pole-cat, by spreading this Faeted Liquor contained in the Scent-Bags (as I
call them) on a Paper, and so letting it dry, it became a grateful Persume,
etc. wherefore afterward, in my Description and Anatomy of the Tajacu
Philosoph. Tranfact. No. 153. p. 379.
(a Mexican Wild-Hog); when I came to dissect it, some Days after it had been
dead; and the Virus or horred Faetor of the Liquor contained in the Scent-Bag
(which was a large Gland on the Back) had spent its self, and it became an
agreeable Perfume: Upon this Consideration, I took the Liberty (it may be, a
too great an one) to call it Moschiferus; though the general Consent of all
Authors had branded it with the Note of a Faetid stinking Animal. But at the
same time, I instanced, that in the richest Perfumes we have, as Musk, Civet,
and Ambergriese, the same is observed; and that Passage I quoted in Gul. Piso
De Indiae utriusque re Not. and Med. lib. 1. p. m. 17.
concerning Ambergriese, is very remarkable.

Upon looking over this part of my Account of the Tajacu, I find this Passage
(cc): And I am apt to think, 'twas by removing these Scent-Bags, rather than
taking away the Kidneys, that they made the Saragoy edible; which otherwise
stank so much, that the Barbarous Nations refused them; as out of Lerius, Joh.
Faber Histor Mexican. p. 658.
takes notice. Joh. Lerius his Words are these, as he is printed in Theodore de
Bry Americ. part tertia p. 180.
alia etiam invenitur (Bestia) quam Saragoy appellant, quae ob faetorem a
Barbaris non comeditur, nos autem quibusdam excoriatis, and detracta Renum
pinguedine, unde faetor ille manebat, sine fastidio edimus, carne enim cum
tenera, tum optima est. And I find my Conjecture was not amiss; for although
then I knew not where this Scent-Bag was placed, yet now I find it was the
Marsupium, or Pouch; and that Lerius was altogether mistaken in attributing
this Faetor to the Kidneys, or the Fat about them; for I could not smell any
thing ungrateful, or ill-scented there.

Upon this Occasion, I cannot but make a farther Remark upon the Scent-Bag of
the Musk-Deer; which is likewise placed in the Belly near the Navil, and makes
a large Cod. Lucas Schrockius Historia Moschi.
has wrote a distinct Treatise about it; to whom I shall reser my Reader. But
though there is this Analogy between our Possum and the Musk-Deer, that both
have their Scent-Bags placed in the Belly, and they have an Aperture there; yet
the grand Use of the Pouch of the Possum is very different, as we have already
seen.

Having therefore mentioned the Glandulous Coat of the Marsupium (on whose
Account it may be reckoned as a Scent-Bag) I must here take notice that it had
likewise a Muscular Coat, besides those several other Muscles bestowed upon it,
which we have observed already, that gave it Motion. It had likewise a Vascular
Coat too, being plentifully irrigated with Blood Vessels, especially by Two
large Branches that came from the upper part of the Thorax, and might be
reckoned the Mammaria, as they are styled in other Animals. This Pouch was
fastened by several Membranes to the Muscles of the Abdomen and the Skin; but
so as I could separate it for the most part, with my Fingers.

But here I find, in this Marsupium or Pouch, they place the Mammae or Teats;
and they tell very odd Stories about it: I will only relate what they say of
it, and what I at present observed, or rather, did not observe.

Joh. Petrus Maffeius (e) makes this Pouch, not single, but double, he places
the Mammae here, and the Young Ones to be so fixed to them, as if they almost
grew there. Illud autem mirum in Cerigonibus, ex ejus alvo duae dependent
veluti Manticae, in iis catulos circumfert, and quidem adec pertinaciter suo
quemque Vberi affixos, ut a perpetuo suctu non avellantur, antequam ad pastum
ipsi per se progredi valiant. And much the same has Casp. Barlaeus (f)
Cerignones (says he) Vulpis magnitudine, insolito spectaculo alvum ostentant,
e qua duae veluti Manticae dependent, quibus catulos gestant, tam valido suctu
Vberibus adhaerentes, ut non antea demittunt, quam adultiores ad pabulum ipsi
excurrere valiant. Gul. Piso (b) out does them both; for he makes them not only
Nourished, but Formed here: Ex reiteratis (says he) horum Animalium
sectionibus alium non invenimus Vterum, praeter hane Bursam, in qua semen
Concipitur and Catuli formantur. Quos deinde Quinos vel senos simul circumfert,
mobiles, perfectos, sed depiles adeoque pertinaciter Vberibus affixos, ut a
perpetuo suctu vix avellantur, antequam permittente Matre ad pastum ipsi
egrediuntur; unde redientes denuo, uterum maternum pro lubitu ingrediuntur. So
Joh. Stadius, as I find him Printed in Theodor de Bry Americ. Part Tertia. Joh.
Stadii Hist. Brasilian. cap. 32. p. 129.
In Alvo (says he) fissuram habet ad dimidiae spithamae longitudinem, intra
eam alia Cutis subest, nec enim alvus hiat aut fathiscit, in eo sinu sunt
Vbera, quocunque obambulat proles secum gestat. So likewise Peter Bembus Hist.
Venet. lib. 6.
, writing of the new discovered Islands, says, Animal eae sylvae nutriunt
Cuniculi magnitudine, Gallinis infestissimum, cujus quidem faemina loculum
habet e Pelle Vtero annexum, quasi Vterum alterum faecundum Vberibus, in quo
Catulos secum gestat, emittitque cum vult. And our Countryman, Captain Smith
(n) seems of this Opinion too; where he says, Under her Belly she has a Bag,
wherein she lodges, carries and suckleth her Young. But Gillius, as he is
quoted by Gesner (p), tells us, That non ex receptaculo prodeunt, nisi cum lac
sugunt. So likewise Vincent. Pinzonus (u), Nec unquam exeunt Crumenam, nisi
quum sungunt; which intimates, That the Teats are not placed here, since they
must go out of suck.

I must confess, upon what Observation I could make, I did not find any Teats
here; nor indeed did I find them in the outward Skin; as is usual in other
Multiparous Animals. Possibly this Subject never had a Litter; so for want of
drawing, they might be less; so as to escape our View, for the present: But in
another Subject, I doubt not but that they may be discovered.

But this Bag or Pouch is not only appropriated to the Female, as one would
guess by what P. Bembus (ii) said before: But if we may believe G. Piso (b),
the Male has one too: " Mas faemellae plane similis, etc. (says he) and quod
notatu dignum, manticam (licet a faemellae diversam) habet; qua alternatis
vicibus Catulos quoque circumfert; sicut avis mas amore pullorum, faemellam ab
incubatu subinde liberans. I could have wished he had given us an Account of
the diversity of the Pouch in the Male, from that of the Female; and had one an
Opportunity of Dissecting a Male, it would much illustrate the History of this
Animal. So likewise the Author of the Present State of his Majesty's Isles and
Territories in America, (page 138.) tells us, That the Male has such another
Purse under his Belly, and takes his turn to carry the Young Ones, to ease the
Female. But more of the Male, when I shall come to mention the Tai-ibi.

This Contrivance of Nature for securing the Young Ones from any Danger, till
they are able to shift for themselves, I think, is not to be paralleled in any
Species of Animals, at least of the Quadruped Kind, besides. Not that she is
wanting in abundantly providing for their Preservation; but the pleases her
self in using infinite Variety in attaining the same End. Nor is there wanting
Instances enough to evince it: What most reaches, and comes up to our Subject
is, what I find recorded in Oppianus Halieutic. lib. 1. ver. 132.
in his excellent Poem of Fishes: For in his Halieuticks, describing the
Philostorgia of Fishes, having mentioned the Dolphin, he comes to the Dogfish,
and tells us, that upon any Storm or Danger, if pursued, the Young Ones run
into the Mother's Belly; and when the Fright and Danger is over, they come out
again. I shall not think much to transcribe his Verses; which were so admired
by Antoninus, the present Emperor of Rome, to whom he made the Dedication, that
not only for them, he revoked the Banishment of his Father; but presented him
likewise with a Golden Statera for each Verse; whence they are called Golden
Verses: Which, according to Suidas's Computation, came to Twenty Thousand.
Suidas In Voce Oppianus.
his Words are these: (...).

And upon this Occasion, Oppian not only instances in the Dog fish, but in the
Squatina, and Glaucus too: But there are different Receptacles he does assign,
that these Two latter do make use of, for the receiving their Young, in Case of
Danger. Oppian's (kk) Verses are these: (...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...)


Which an ingenious Friend of mine has thus translated: And indeed, the whole
Poem is so fine, so noble and rich a Thought; that if the Translation of it was
attempted by some good Genius, he would find Charms enough in it to raise his
Fancy; and a Subject Worthy his greatest Skill.

None to their Young so kind as Dolphins are;
Though other Fish of theirs, express their Care.
This in the Dog-fish, we with Wonder see;
To whom her trembling Whelps from Danger flee.
For when a dreadful Storm imbroils the Deep,
Within her Bowels, they for Refuge creep;
They pass directly to her Womb; the Way
By which excluded, first they saw the Day.
She, though distended, and in torturing Pains,
The bulky Burden patiently sustains,
While the loud Terrors of the Tempest last:
But when the Danger, and their Fears are past,
Strait from her suffering Womb, the Whelps retreat,
And she her Labor, they their Birth repeat.
The Squatina does the same Love betray,
As Dog-fish do, but in a different way.
Nature has Bags on either side prepared
Beneath her Gills; where she does hide and guard.
Her frighted Young; with sudden Danger scared.
Some through the Parent's gaping Throat descend;
Whom as a House, or Nest, their Maws defend.
The Glaucus, for Affection, is by none
Of all the Fish Oviparous outdone.
Close by her Spawn, she does unwearied stay,
Her Offspring to protect from Fish of Prey.
And when, with tender Fins, they strike the Tide,
She with them swims, their constant Guard and Guide,
For if it happens, that the trembling Fry
Do some Voracious Enemy descry,
Opening her Jaws, she kindly does devour
Her Young; to save them from the Invaders Power.
Their Fears removed, she spues them up; to ease
Her Labor, and restores them to the Seas.
I must confess, I would not expect in a Poet, that Nicety and Exactness of
Natural History, as in a Philosopher, who is not to give a loose to his
Imagination, but truly to relate Matter of Fact. But this Particular of the
Dog-fish, with me, bears the more Resemblance of Truth; for formerly,
dissecting a Fish of this Kind, that was a Female; as it was surprising to me
at the same time, to observe here the gradual Formation of several Faetus; some
just beginning to be formed, others an Inch long or Two; others Four or Five;
some Nine or Ten, and fit for Birth: So what comes most to our Business was,
That near the Exit of the Pudendum of each side, I observed a Foramen or Hole
that was capable of Extension, and readily enough would admit my Finger, which
led into the Cavity of the Abdomen or Belly it self; and not into any Bag, or
the Vterus, or any other Part. Besides, in the Abdomen I found a Quantity of
Water, which I could not but think was let in this Way. So that if upon
Observation at any time, there should be found loose in the Cavity of the Belly
of this Fish, a Young one; there would be no Reason to mistrust the Relation,
since here are Two Doors to let them in and out.

Aelian Hist. Animal. l. 1. c. 18.
relates the same Story of the Dog-fish; his Words, as they are translated by
P. Gillius, are these; Si quis eorum (speaking of the Young Ones) timeat,
ingreditur rursus per Genitalia in Ventrem Matris; ubi timor abierit, is prodit
tanquam rursus editus. And in the preceding Chapter he tells the same (as our
Poet does) of the Glaucus: And that Passage of Zeza, as it is quoted by the
Learned Conrad. Rittershusius Comment. in lib. 1. Halieut. p. m. 214.
is very express: (...). Nay, Aristottle Hist. Animal lib. 6. cap. 8. p. 677.
himself acknowledges the same thing of the Galeus, which is of the Dog Kind:
(...). Which Jul. Caes. Scaliger thus translates, Gaeterum Mustelorum genera
and emittunt and admittunt intra se Catulos; item Squatinae and Torpedines. And
the like he Hist. Animal. lib. 6. cap. 10. p.m. 682.
affirms of the Dolphin and Porpois: (...). But after all, if what is thus
related of these Fishes should prove but a vulgar Error, it is one of a very
Ancient Date; and it is high time it was removed: and if there should be any
Truth in these Stories, for the gaining a greater Belief thereto, it is
requisite that 'twas supported by some more evident Proof, and confirmed by
later Observation. But what we mention of our Quadruped, the Possum, is
notoriously known and agreed on of all Hands; to whom, after this Digression,
(too large an one it may be) we shall now return; and shall therefore be more
concise in the Description of the other Parts; and shall chiefly take Notice of
those only, wherein I find something remarkable, and different from the common
Make of the same Parts in other Animals.

And for this Reason I have very little to say of those Parts in the Thorax, I
only observed, that the Lungs had Three Lobes on one side; and but One on the
other: But this One, was as large as the other Three. They were soft and
spongy, and easily dilated, and large proportionably to the Animal.

The Heart was included in a Pericardium, as usually; but the Heart it self I
thought proportionably larger, in respect to the Bulk of the Body, than is
commonly; nor was its Cone so sharp, but rather more obtuse. It had Two
Auricles, and Two Ventricles.

About the Throat there were large Glandulae Maxillares. The Tongue was a
little above Three Inches Long, about Three Quarters of an Inch broad; 'twas
rough, having several Protuberances, whose Points looked inwards. Lingua longa
(says) Margravius (a) quam tamen os aperiens and morsum minitans non exserit,
quamvis possit, sed versus posteriora attollit. The Voice or Noise it made, was
a little Growling.

But meeting, or at least not observing any thing farther extraordinary here,
we shall hasten to the Abdomen, where we shall find more Matter to excite our
Admiration, and please our Curiosity.

The Abdomen or Belly was divided from the Thorax or Breast, by a large,
strong, fleshy Diaphragm, for (as we shall observe in the Sceleton) the Thorax
near the Throat was small; then gradually, as it descends, it enlarges its
Capacity; so that here, where the Diaphragm was fastened, its Compass was very
great and large; which might be rendered so the more, by reason it often hangs
by its Tail; and when it does so, the Viscera in the Abdomen cannot but press
upon it. But that they might not too much, to the Injury of the Animal; we
shall see what Provision Nature has made for it, by her great Contrivance in
suspending the Intestines,

But we must observe and describe the Tab. 2. Fig. 1. B.
Stomach, or Ventricle, which was feated under the Diaphragm, having part of
the Liver lying over it; its Figure somewhat resembling the usual make,
inclining to that of an Half Moon; as appeared by that Hairy Tab. 2. Fig. 2.
Tophus we afterward took out of it. But what was most remarkable was, the
Structure and Position of the Two Orifices, ( viz. that of the Tab. 2. Fig. 1.
A.
Gula, that leads into it, and the Pylorus Ibid. e.
, that sends out) for they were both placed so near one another, that they
seemed to touch or meet; and when I opened the Stomach, I found only a very
slender Isthmus, or Wall, parted them. These Orifices were not at the Extremes
of the Stomach, as usually; but inserted almost in the Middle of the upward
Part, but more inclining toward that, that respects the f. f.
Duodenum. The pouching or bagging D D.
out at both Extremes, made it somewhat resemble (as I said) an Half Moon. The
Stomach appeared but small, being much contracted, for it had not eaten any
thing for some Days; it measured about Three Inches and an Half in length, and
about Two Inches in depth: The Gula which coveys the Food into the Stomach,
consisted of strong Muscular Fibers, and was in all about Nine Inches in
Length. The Pylorus, that carries out, seemed to have its Passage free and
open, without that annular Constriction or Valve, as in most other Animals;
though here we observed a larger Body of Muscular Fibers, than in the other
Intestines; which made me wonder how a Regurgitation of the Faeces into the
Stomach was prevented; but this we will consider anon.

But before we opened the Stomach, I observed at one Side a Perforation C.
or Hole thorough, about the Bigness of an ordinary Pea, and Round. That it was
occasioned by an Ulcer there, I plainly perceived by the Lips or Edges; which
were not fresh, but had an ulcerated Matter about them; and this, without
doubt, was the Occasion of its Death; for it had fallen from its Food, and had
pined away for some time before, and by its uneasy Motion, made its Keeper
suspect, it had swallowed something that stuck in its Throat, or injured its
Stomach.

A like Accident as this (as a Perforation of the Stomach) I have Three Times
met with in dissecting Human Bodies; and the last (being joined with another
Physician in Consultation, a little before the Patient's Death) I foretold; and
upon Dissection found confirmed. What appears to me, to be most likely to be
the Cause of this Perforation, is, that some of the Glands in the Stomach (such
as Payerus Exercetat. Anat. Med. de Glandulis Intestinorum.
and Dr. Grew Comparative Anatomy of Stomachs and Guts.
describes in the Intestines) being become Scrophulous or Steatomatous, might
impostumate and so corrode the Coats of the Stomach, and cause a Perforation.
And the rather I am of this Opinion, because in those Instances I mentioned of
Human Bodies, I found in other Places of the Stomach, these Glands very large
and Steatomatous; though Naturally they are but small, and often not observed.
Where there is a Perforation of the Stomach upon an Inflammation, and upon that
an Impostumation; there the Foramen is larger and not regular: as remarkably I
once met with it in a Child, where a large part of one side of the Stomach was
Sphacelated. So likewise upon a Corrosive Poison taken, its Effects dilates its
self more, and is not confined to so narrow a Compass; as I observed once in
one who had taken Rats-bane.

Upon observing this Perforation of the Stomach, I looked to see, whether any
of its Contents had been emptied into the Cavity of the Abdomen; but could find
little or nothing: Nor indeed, when I came to open the Stomach, could I find
any thing that could be evacuated that Way; for there was nothing contained in
the Stomach, but a Body Tab. 2. Fig. 4.
of Clotted Hair, formed into the Shape and Figure of the Stomach, somewhat
like an Half Moon; covered with a slimy viscid Substance, which did serve the
better to glue these Hairs together. These Hairy Tophi are frequently to be met
with, in the Stomachs of Bruits, and I have had, and seen several, which have
been taken out of Oxen; and the Butchers inform me, that they chiefly meet with
them in the Winter Season, after the Hair begins to shed; and the Cattle feed
upon Hay and dry Meat: But after the Spring, and in Summer, they do more seldom
find them; as if the New Grass, which Purges them, did contribute to dissolve
these Tophi likewise. Georg. Hieron. Velscius has wrote Two Medico
Philosophical Dissertations De Aegagropilis.
about these Tophi, that are found in Goats; and others has made distinct
Treatises thereon; to whom I refer the Curious: and Gul. Piso Hist. Not. and
Med. lib. 5. p. 327.
gives a Figure and Description of one.

But our Animal is Carnivorous, and in what all Accounts agree in, most
Rapacious of the Winged Kind; and where it cannot find its Prey on the Land, it
will hunt for it in the Trees; most nimbly climbing them up: and if the tender
Bough cannot bear the Weight of its Body on its Feet; by twisting its Tail
about the Twig, it can hang thereby, and stretch it self the farther, to obtain
its desired Food, or rob a Nest. Nay, if I am not misinformed, by this Means
it can Fly, or pass from one Tree to another, without descending down; for thus
hanging by its Tail, and waving and swinging its Body like a Pendulum, it can
fling it self into the Boughs of a Neighboring Tree; where his Tail is sure to
take fast hold of the first Bough it lights on, if otherwise it misses his
Footing: and, as I have shown, his hinder Legs being made like Hands, with a
Thumb, it can more readily raise its Body up by them.

Noctambulum Animal est (says de Laet (z) and cum caeteris Avibus, tum
Gallinis infestissimum. Georg. Margrave (a) says, Mordax est, vescitur
libenter Gallinis, quas rapit, ut Vulpes, and Arbores scandendo, avibus
insidiatur, vescitur quoque sacchari cannis, quibus sustentavi per quatuor
septimanas in cubiculo meo. So likewise Gul. Piso (b) Mordaces sunt ut Vulpes
earumque more Gallinis and Columnis non solum, sed Avibus in fastigiis Arborum
insidiantur; quarum defectu Cannis sacchareis aliisque optimis vegetabilibus
vescuntur. So that they are not only Carnivorous, but when need drives them,
they can take up with other Food. Scandit Arbores incredibili pernicitate
(says the Mexican History (c) diu in Cavernis latitat, vescitur Cohortalibus,
quas Vulpecularum, Mustelarumque sylvestrium more, jugulat, illarum sanguinem
absorbens. And afterward adds, Vivit enim in Calidis, ac pascitur Carne,
fructibus, Pane, Oleribus, frumentaceis, aliisque generthus, velati nos
experimento cognovimus, alentes illud domi, ac in deliciis habentes. Which last
Account seems true; for this that we dissected would eat any thing, that was
brought from the Table.

We shall now observe how the Food, when it is received into the Stomach, and
contained there, till it is thoroughly digested, is afterward dispensed with the
greatest Advantage, for the Nourishment of this Creature. And what I hinted,
how it is, that a Regurgitation of it into the Stomach again, is prevented;
especially upon the Posture it is frequently in, when it hangs by its Tail,
since (as I observed) the Passage at the Pylorus is so open and patent. And for
the doing this, we must expect Nature's Contrivance (which is always admirable)
to be great; not confining her self still to the same Rules; but is Infinite
and All wise, in attaining the same Ends, with the greatest Variety and
Mechanism.

Which leads me to consider the Structure and Order of the Intestines: But in
doing this, I must first take Notice of the Mesenterie, that Membranous Part
which colligates them, and fixes their Situation; and gives to them the Order
of their Figure. For the Intestines are not just fastened to the Peripherie or
outward Circumference of the Mesenterie; but the outward Membrane of the
Mesenterie of both sides, is entirely projected and continued over the whole
Canalis, or Duct, of the Guts; and is to them the outward or common Membrane:
So that I have often, by separating this outward Membrane, from what lies under
it, the Muscular; I have extracted the whole length of the Guts; leaving only
the Common Membrane, as it is continued from that of the Mesenterie; which I
could inflate, as if the whole of the Guts remained.

Now here we observed that remarkable Difference, from what is in many other
Animals; that we cannot but make Two Mesenteries; one peculiar to the small
Guts, the other belonging to the great ones, or Intestina Crassa, as they are
called; for though continued to one another, yet the difference in their Figure
or Bulk, is so much, that fully justifies the Distinction. And for Distinction
sake, I shall call the former Mesenterium Tab. 2. Fig. 1. u.
minorum, and the latter Mesenterium w.
Majorum, sc. Intestinorum: for minora and majora I think more expressive, than
tenuia and crassa; at least it appeared so in our present Subject.

For here I remarked, that as the f. f.
Duodenum descended from the Stomach, it ran under the s.
Colon, (just where it is joined to the Caecum r.
) toward the Middle of the Spine. Hence I found a Projection of the first
Mesenterie w.
into a Spiral Line, like a Cochlea or winding Pair of Stairs: So that upon
Inslation, these Intestines here, made several Convolutions, or Windings, though
not exactly Spiral, but as represented in our Figure; and the better to show
the Currency of their Canalis here, and how those Gyrations follow each other;
I have signified it by the Order of the Letters of the Alphabet; so that (g) is
succeeded by (h) and (h) by (i) and so on: Not that I could represent the whole
in this Figure; for some of these Gyri, at least great parts of them, lay dipped
and hidden by others, that lay over them.

The Second Mesenterie w.
, or Mesenterium majorum, as I choose rather to call it, than Mesocolon (for it
did belong likewise to the Caecum r. r.
and t.
Rectum, as well as the Colon s. s. s.
) was projected more in a Plain; and made almost a Circular Figure at its
Peripherie; so that the Caecum, and Colon did almost entirely encircle the
small Guts.

The small Guts (as here inslated) measured about Six Feet and an half in
length. The Caecum was about Six Inches long; and the Colon and Rectum Two Foot
long. The Girth of the Duodenum (I mean all along here, as inflated) was Three
Inches; the Ileon q.
Two Inches and an Half; the Girth of the Caecum, in the largest Place, was Six
Inches; of the Colon Four Inches; and the Rectum was Three Inches about. from
the Spine to the utmost Projection of the small Guts, under the same
Circumstance of Inflation, measured about Six Inches; the greatest Diameter
that the Colon in this Circular Figure made, was somewhat above Seven Inches.

In the whole Duct or Canalis of the Intestines, I could not observe any
Valves; no not at the Caecum its self. It Is true, that the Foramen into the
Caecum, was a great deal less than the Capacity of the Gut its self; however,
the Passage into it was so open and wide, as readily to receive or emit its
Contents. For by pouring a large Quantity of Water into the Stomach, so as to
wash out the Faeces contained in the Intestines; I found, that it would first
run into the Caecum, if it was not filled before, and then into the Colon, and
as readily, upon elevating the Colon, it would pass thence, first into the
Caecum; and, when that was filled, into the Ileon.

Passing by other Remarks which I might make upon the Glands in the Inward Coat
of the Intestines, upon the Blood Vessels in the Mesenteries, etc. I shall now
proceed to give my Thoughts upon the whole Structure and Figure of the
Intestines, and how advantageously they are contrived for the Uses designed
them by Nature.

For First, by means of these frequent Gyrations and windings of the
Intestines, there is a greater Opportunity given to the Separation of the Chyle
into the Vasa Chylifera; for the Bore of the Intestines being so large (as I
have shown) and there being no Valves in all their length; if there was not
this Contrivance to give a Let, or Remora to the hasty Descent of the Faeces,
they would pass off so nimbly, that with them a great part of the Chymous
Substance likewise, would be carried off: But the Length of the Intestines
here, being so great; and as they run, making so many Convolutions, they do
prevent this Danger.

Secondly, By means of this Cochlea, or Spiral Figure of the first Mesenterie,
to which the small Guts are affixed, there may be prevented a Regurgitation of
the Contents of the Intestines again into the Stomach, upon a Declivity of the
Body of this Animal, as it is frequently in, when it hangs by its Tail. For
though, as I observed, the Passage from the Stomach, by the Pylorus, into the
Duodenum, is large and open; yet in this Posture of the Body, there cannot but
be a Reduplication, or folding over of the Duodenum; since the great Bulk or
Wallet of these Intestines must incline and swag toward the Diaphragm; by
which Reduplication, the Passage at the Pylorus must, in a great measure, be
occluded; and the ascent of the Contents now, be altogether as difficult and
great, as when the Animal stands upon its Four Feet.

The Reverse of this Structure of the Intestines I found and have described in
my Anatomy (cc) of the Tajacu, or the Mexico Musk Hog: for here the Colon made
a Spiral Figure (as I have there represented, in Tab. 1. Fig. 5.) and the small
Guts made a Plain. In our Possum the small Guts makes a Spiral, and the Colon
and great Guts a Plain. But a Spiral Convolution of the Intestines is to be met
with in several Animals, though their Structure be different; as in the Goat and
Deer-Kind; and very remarkably in a Woodcock.

But we will have done with the Guts, to proceed to other Parts; for their
Comparative Anatomy is too large a Field, and would be too great a Digression,
to engage in the Description of them in a single Subject.

The Pancreas was large, having one part (if I mis-remember not) running
toward the Spleen, and the other down by the Duodenum.

The Spleen was Two Inches and half long, and One Inch in the broadest Part,
and was of a dark Red Color.

The Liver in this Animal was very large, of a bright Red Color, consisting of
Three Lobes Tab. 2. Fig. 5. B B B.
; Two of them were much larger than the third, which lay out of sight, and was
not to be seen, but upon inverting the Liver: and here we found not only at the
Edges of one of the larger Lobes, deep Incisures e e e
, which rendered it jagged; but also in the middle of the Concave part of the
same Lobe, several deep Fissures d d d.
: Possibly for this Reason, that so it might yield and give way the better when
it is inverted, as it is always, when this Animal hangs by its Tail. The Bladder
C.
of Gall here was very large. The Situation of the Liver and Spleen here,
appeared as in other Animals.

In the Vrinary Parts I did not observe any thing peculiar or different from
the usual Structure, unless what we shall remarke of the Bladder of Urine. The
Kidneys Tab. 2. Fig. 2. AA.
of each side were a little above an Inch and half long, about three quarters
of an Inch broad, and of the Figure almost of a Kidney-Bean. The Emulgent b b.
Veins and Arteries c c.
were very plainly seen: But on the inside of the Kidneys, toward the upper
Part, were placed the Glandulae Renales D D.
, or Renes Succenturiati, as they are called by some, and which were here very
large, and of the same Color with the Kidneys themselves, which was a deep
Red; whereas these Glandulae Renales in Men and other Animals, are usually of a
White, Yellowish Color. The Vreters e e.
were about five Inches and an half long, and were inserted into the Neck of
the Bladder of Urine, as is represented f.
, first running under, then ascending up by the two Extremes of each Vterus, as
they lie duplicated. The Bladder G.
of Urine, being inflated, was about the Bigness of a Hen's Egg and of that
Figure. The Neck of the Bladder, or Vrethra h.
, (which was about an Inch long) lay over the Vaginae Vteri i i.
; and here the Vrethra and the Vaginae Vteri emptied themselves into one common
Canalis K.
or Passage, which measured about an Inch and half in length.

In most Animals, about the Kidneys there uses to be observed a large Body of
Fat covering them, being contained in the Membrana Adiposa: But here we found
four large protuberant Lumps of Fat, two of each side; two of them lying in the
Pelvis of the Abdomen, near the Bladder of Urine, and the Vterine Parts; and
the two others, between them and the Kidneys. Upon Examination, I found that
they consisted of regular large Laminae; which were easily separable from one
another, in broad Fleaks; so as I have not observed before; and indeed, before
I had examined these Lumps of Fat, I could not tell well what to make of them;
and I am apt to think, that these Two Bodies of Fat, near the Vterus are, what
Margrave (a) and Piso (b) calls, Testes sub Ano interius jacentes; for, as I
shall show from themselves, in the Male, the Testes are otherwise placed.

We shall proceed now to the Examination of the Vterine Parts: For it is so far
from Truth, what is asserted by some, that it has no Vterus within, that here
we find not only one, but two Vteri; and these too most wonderfully contrived,
and far different from the common Structure and Make of this Part, in other
Animals. And the more too I wonder at this Mistake, since they pretended to
have dissected them; for so Margrave (a), Haec Bursa (speaking of the Marsupium
or Pouch) ipse Vterus est Animalis; nam alium non habet, uti ex sectione illius
Comperi; in hac semen concipitur and catuli formantur. And so Piso (b). Ex
reiteratis horum Animalium Sectionibus, alium non invenimus Vterum praeter hanc
Bursam; in qua semen concipitur and Catuli formantur. But notwithstanding what
they talk of their dissecting them, there is not one Observation (as I know) of
any one of the inward Parts, that they have given us. Hernandez (c) is more in
the Right (and indeed his Account is much more to be valued, and more faithful
in the whole, than any of the others) where he tells us, Quaternos, quinosve
parit Catulos, quos utero conceptos, editosque in Lucem, Alvi capacitate
quadam, dum adhuc parvuli sunt, claudit and servat. We will therefore here take
a Survey, and an Account of these Parts; and we find, that there are two
Ovaria, two Tubae Fallopianae, two Cornua Vteri, two Vteri, and two Vaginae
Vteri.

The Ovaria s s.
were placed one of each side, near the Extremes of the Cornua Vteri, being
fastened to the Alae r r r.
Vteri, and were about the Bigness of a Velch. The Vasa Praeparantia (the
Artery n n n.
and the Venie o o o o.
that did go to and from them) were very plain, and as I have represented them;
though the greatest part of these Vessels were bestowed upon the Cornua Vteri.
Near the Ovaria, I observed the Fimbriae Tab. 2. Fig. 3. b. b.
Foliaceae, and thence a Passage into the Tubae Fallopianae Fig. 3. c c. Fig.
2. t t.
. The Tubae Fallopianae were two fine slender Canales or Ducts, supported by
the Alae Vteri, and running waving, and led into the Extremes of the Cornua
Vteri. The Cornua Fig. 3. d d. Fig. 2. u u. w.
Vteri, being inflated, were about the Bigness of a Goose Quill, about an Inch
and half long, and were fastened to the Alae Vteri, toward both Ends a little
crooked, but where they pass into the Vteri, they were reflected inwards; at
the other Extreme reflected outward. Their Substance seemed rather thicker
than the Vteri themselves, and not so transparent, by reason of the numerous
Blood Vessels which irrigated them almost all over; for in the inside, both
above and under, there ran the whole length of the Cornua, large Trunks of
Blood Vessels, sending from the Sides all along numerous Branches; which is
very requisite: For in Animals that are Multiparous, as is our Subject, the
Litter or Faetus do lie, and are formed in the Cornua Vteri. And I did here
take Notice of some little Risings of the inward Membrane of the Cornua,
whereby they were somewhat divided into Cells; but very imperfectly: However,
for the Nourishment and Formation of the Embrio's here, so great a Number of
Blood Vessels is highly necessary; and they were far more numerous here, than
in the Vteri themselves. It has Four or Five Young Ones at a time, says
Hernandez (c). Piso (b) and Joh. Stadius says, Five or Six. That which
Margrave (a) observed, had Six. Ralph Hamor (l) and Cardan says, it has Seven.
So Joh. de Laet says Six or Seven. But Jul. Caes. Scaliger (r) out-reckons
them all; for he says, Faecundissima est, duodenos parit exiguos: But this
Account I do suspect.

These Two Cornua do empty themselves into the Two Vteri Fig. 3. e e. Fig. 2. x
x.
, just in the Middle, where they are conjoined together; and so outwardly seem
to form, but as it were, one continued Body Fig. 3. e e.
; from this Conjunction, near the Neck of the Bladder, extending themselves on
each side, and afterward, being reflected to the Neck of the Bladder again,
where they pass into the Vaginae Vteri. But having extended this Part by
Inslation, and so letting it dry, and then dissecting it; I observed a Membrane
Fig. 2. y.
like a Diaphragm, perfectly to run cross, and entirely to divide them, near
the insertion of the Cornua, into two distinct Bodies; so that what is
contained in the Vterus on the Right Side, cannot pass into the Vterus on the
Left Side, by means of this Partition Wall; though outwardly (as I said) they
both seemed, but as one continued Body.

I must confess, the Fabric of this Part, seemed very surprising to me; and
such as I have not met with a Parallel, or the like, in any Animal besides; at
least of the Quadrupede Kind. It Is true, in Lobsters and Crabs, in the Female
there are two Vteri, as in the Male there are two Penes, but more distinct and
separated from one another. So two Penes, and each forked too, I have observed
in the Rattle-Snake Philosoph. Tranfact. No. 144.
; but how the Male Possum is provided, I cannot tell: But this I think is the
only Instance of a Land Quadrupede, that has two Vteri; and each of these too,
seemingly double, by that Reflection they make, and by an imperfect Diaphragm,
which divides the Cavity of each Vterus a considerable way, as we shall show.

These Vteri are not fastened to the Alae, as are the Ovaria, Tubae and Cornua;
but where they are conjoined near the Insertion of the Cornua, they do adhere
very firmly to the Neck Fig. 3. l l.
of the Bladder, not easily to be separated thence; and by Membranes to the
Rectum; where more separable. So that the Neck of the Bladder lies over that
Diaphragm or Membrane which parted them (as I said) into two distinct Vteri.
Here the Body of the Vteri seemed to be about the Bigness of the End of my
Finger; or in Compass (thus inflated) it measured about an Inch and three
quarters: Hence they were projected toward each side, and not according to the
Length of the Spine, gradually enlarging the inward Cavity, as it is extended.
For here about the Angle of Reflection, it measured in Compass two Inches and
an Half. The Vteri being thus extended toward each side about the Space of an
Inch and three quarters; and then reflected Fig. 3. e e.
back again, toward the Neck of the Bladder; and so pass into the two Vaginae
Fig. 2. i i.
, which lies under the Vrethra h.
. From this Angle of Reflection, the Cavity of each Vterus gradually lessens,
and is much smaller than the other part of the Vterus. The Capacity of each
Vterus being the largest at the outward Elbow, where it begins to be reflected;
for here it made, as 'twere, one Common Cavity, for almost the length of an
Inch: But on the inside, I observed a Membrane z.
to be projected from the internal side of the Vteri, just from the Corner
where the sides of the Vteri are doubled, whereby this Cavity is in part
divided; and for this Reason, shall call this Membrane, the Second, or an
imperfect Diaphragm of the Vteri.

Here in these Vteri, I observed Four large Trunks of Blood Vessels, which did
run the whole length of them, sending from their sides numerous Branches, and
Ramifications all along. These Trunks were propagated from the Hypogastrick p p
p.
and Spermatic n n n. o o o.
Vessels. I did also here observe in these Vteri (thus by Inflation extended
and dried) several Fasciculi of Muscular Fibers, placed at a regular Distance
from one another; which did run the whole Length of the Vteri likewise: by
means of whose Contraction, the Faetus may be more easily forced out.

These two Vteri (as I mentioned) empty themselves into the two Vaginae i i.
Fig. 3. f.
; for at this Extreme, the Vteri, making a turn at the Neck of the Bladder, are
continued thence into the two Vaginae, which lie just under the Vrethra Fig. 2.
h.
, or that Passage or Pipe which conveys the Urine from the Bladder, and are
much of the same Length with that of the Vrethra, which was about an Inch.
Their Capacity was about the Bigness of a Wheat-Straw. Both these Vaginae and
Vrethra too, emptied themselves into a Common Passage K.
, or Canalis, which was as large as all the other Three; and about an Inch and
half long: it looked Redish, by means of the numerous Blood Vessels it enjoyed,
and at last had its Exit so near the Fundament, that when alive, there was not
observed any other Foramen outwardly, but that which led into the Rectum. But
when I came to dissect it, by elevating the Skin here, which seemed to cover
it, like a Valve; I observed the Foramen that led into this Common Passage, and
putting a Blow-pipe into it, at the same time, by Inflation I extended the
Bladder of Urine, and the Vterine Parts too; viz. The Vaginae, the Vteri, and
the Cornua. So that in the Skin here, there was only one Foramen Tab. 1. Fig.
3. C.
for the Exit of the Faeces, and the Urine and the Faetus too.

I have had no Opportunity of dissecting a Male Possum; and indeed, of none
other but this single Subject: For had I, I might have been more exact in some
Particulars; nor is it almost possible, to observe all in One.

The Account they give of the Male, is but very imperfect and short: Mas
Faeminae per omnia similis, been testiculatus, says Margrave (a) In Bursa
pendulos Testes, more Gati, gerens. And much the same, says Piso (b), Mas
Faemellae plane similis, in Bursa pendulos, more Gati, testiculos fert: But
adds, Et quod notatu dignum, Manticam (licet a Faemellae diversam) habet qua
alternatis vicibus Catulos quoque circumfert. I could wish he had given us,
wherein 'twas different; and what kind of Penis the Male had.

The Ingenious and most Learned Mr. Ray (o) Queries, Whether the Tai-ibi of
Brasile, described by Margrave (a); differs from our Subject, the Possum, only
in Sex? Or, Whether it is another Species of Animal? And indeed, by a Passage in
his Description of it, one would think, that Margrave did take the Tai-ibi to
be only the Male. I will transcribe the whole Paragraph, it not being very
long, that every one may have the Liberty of making their own Conjectures.
Tai-ibi Brasiliensibus, (says he) Lusitanis Chachorro do mato, Belgis even
Boschratte: Animal corpore tereti and oblongo. Totius corporis cum collo
longitudo ab occipitio ad caudae initium quatuordecim digitorum, crassities
december. Caput habet vulpino aemulum, ore acuto, barba felina: oculos conspicuos
and prominentes, nigros: aures subrotundas, molles, graciles, albas, teneras ut
charta mollis. Crura, pedes and digitos cum unguibus habet ut foemella jam
descripta, uti and caudam. Totum corpus vestitum est pilis albis splendentibus,
qui in extremitatibus nigricant, and magis quidem in dorso, maxim tamen in
cruribus: circa anum and initium caudae pene nigricant. Os and aures albicant.
Cauda in exortu ad quinque digitorum longitudinem pilis vestitur albis in
extremitate nigricantibus, reliqua pars major ad finem usque cincta est corio
tenui squamoso albicante instar exuviarum serpentis. Faetet graviter, caro
tamen illius comeditur. Victitat libenter gallinis, ut vulpes. Pili inserti
sunt tenui cuticulae, quae detrahi potest salvo manente corio crassiori.
Testiculos propendentes habet ut felis mas. Had Margrave mentioned in his
Description, the Marsupium or Pouch, it had been more clear; but by the Account
he gives, one cannot but think, that he makes the Carigueya, the Female, and
the Tai-ibi the Male of the same Species of Animal. As they eat the Tai-ibi, so
Ralph Hamor (l) tells us, that he has eaten the Possum, and that it is a
grateful and wholesome Food.

Paso (b) having concluded his Description of the Carigueya, adds, In Indtis
Orientalibus, idque solum quantum hactenus constat in Amboina, similis Bestia
frequens ad Faelis magnitudinem accedens, mactata ab incolis comeditur, si rite
preparetur, nam alias faetet. Nomen illi Cous C^us inditum. What Similitude
this Beast may have with o^r Animal; or whether it is to be reckoned amongst
the Animalia Crumenata, as Scaliger (r) calls them, I do not know. Our Animal
seems to be properly a Native of America. Richardus Dinothus (as I find him
quoted in Aldrovandus (a) says Veram horum Patriam Americam esse, praesertim
Pervanis Regionibus. So Peter Martyr (w), Arbores in Pariana Regione ingentes
sunt, inter quas repertum est animal, etc. and then describes our Possum. That
it is found in Darien and Florida, is asserted by Nierembergius (d); and in
New-Spain, by Cardan, and others. That they are in the Isles of Anguilla and
Tabago, is affirmed by the Author of the Present State of his Majesty's Isles
and Territories in America, page 138, and page 250. And in Virginia they are
frequently to be met with; as Ralph Hamor (l), John de Laet (m), Captain John
Smith (n), and a great many others, tells us; and this that we dissected came
from thence.

But not only in the West, but South America likewise, it is to be found: So
Petrus Maffeius (e) and Caspar Barlaeus (f) assures us, that they are in
Brasile. Whether Cardan (i) was not misinformed, when he tells us, that it is
in Aethiopia; I do very much question; his Words are these: Animal aliud mittit
Aethiopia, part anteriori vulpi persimile, Cauda and posteriore Cercopitheco,
pedibus anterioribus humanis, auribus vespertilionis, quod crumeuam habet sub
Ventre, qua Catulos undiquaque geric nec dimittit, nisi dum lactare vult. What
Authority he had for this, I do not know; but he owns too, that they are in the
West Indies. Nierembergius (d) amongst the Places where this Animal is to be
found, reckons likewise the Molucca Islands; which, if true, there may be
something in what Piso (b) says of Amboina, which is one of them. But I think
it does deserve a farther Enquiry.

I shall proceed now to give a Description of the Sceleton, and so shall
conclude.

We will begin therefore with the Head, which, from the End of the Occiput, to
the Exstream of the Nares, was Four Inches and Three Quarters long; of which
the Rostrum Tab. 1. Fig. 4. A A.
measured Three Inches; and just where the Rostrum and the Cranium b b
met, the Bones were so pinched in, at the Sides, that here, 'twas very narrow;
and I may say, in Proportion to the Bulk of the Animal, this was the least
Cranium that ever I met with in a Quadrupede. On the Forehead, the Rostrum was
an Inch broad, having on each side, a Protuberance i.
jutting out. There was a large Sature K.
just in the Middle, which divided the upper Bones of the Nares lengthways, and
though they ran slender toward the Extreme of the Nares; yet these Bones
toward the Forehead, spread into a Triangular Figure, and as they are joined
together, they form a Rhomboide, or a Lozinge. But I will not be particular in
describing each Bone, that compose the Head; for fear of being tedious: But I
cannot but take notice of that remarkable rising Ridge c c c.
like a Crest, that runs the length of the Cranium, from the Forehead to the
Occiput, just in the Middle; where the Sutura Sagittalis is in other Skuls.
This Ridge, for Distinction take, I shall call, Protuberantia Ossea
longitudinalis; and I observed, it jutted out from the Cranium, above a Quarter
of an Inch: Just at its upper Edge, I could perceive a Seam like a Suture; so
that though now, these Bones are so well united together, that they appeared as
one entire Body; yet in the Faetus, without doubt, they are separable, and are
Two. And this I rather think, because in the upper part of the Cranium I could
not find any Sutures at all. So likewise answerable to the Lamdoidal Suture,
may be those other Ridges in the Extreme of the Occiput, which I shall call,
Protuberantiae Osseae Laterales d.
; which arising on each side from the Processus Styloides, ascends obliquely up
the hinder Part of the Occiput; and just in the Middle at the Top, is joined
with the Longitudinal Ridge, I have described. These Ridges, although as deep
as the first, yet were not standing so upright, but projected rather like a
Penthouse, over this hinder part of the Cranium; by both which Ridges, the
Cranium is so well guarded and defended, that it is almost impossible, the Skull
should be any ways cracked or broken. Something like these Ridges, but nothing
so large, I have observed in the Skull of a Weasel.

And not only the Brain, but the Eyes likewise, are very well guarded and
defended, by the Os Zygomaticum e. f.
; which is very broad and strong; in the broadest Place being above Three
Quarters of an Inch, and in the narrowest Half an Inch, being very thick on its
under Edge; but at its upper, growing thin and sharp. But for the greater
Strengthening this Bone (which is formed by a Process from the Os Temporum e.
, and another from the Maxilla superior f.
) where they meet, they lap over one another, and so become the stronger. This
Os Zygomaticum was Two Inches and an Half long, and standing off from the
Cranium an Inch in Distance.

In the Orbit of the Eye at the inward Canthus, there was a large Foramen e.
, which led into the Cavity of the Nose, and by a Duct placed here, the Tears
or Moisture from the Eyes is conveyed into the Nostrils. In the upper Jaw Bone
likewise, there was a large Foramen h.
, which was for the Passage of some Vessels from the inward Orbit of the Eye.

The Cranium b b.
, which encompassed the Brain, in the largest Place, was about an Inch over;
and about an Inch and Half in Length; but its Cavity jutted out somewhat
farther toward the Nares, making as it were, a particular Cell here, and
pretty capacious, for the receiving the Processus Mamillares, and that fore
Part of the Brain. And afterward I observed the Os Cribriforme very remarkably
perforated with Holes, like a Sive; and indeed, in forming this Organ of
Smelling, Nature seems very careful and sollicitous, the Rostrum making so
great a part of the Head, that the Cranium it self seemed very inconsiderable
in respect to it, its inward Capacity containing not above the Quantity of a
Walnut. Not having dissected the Brain (which I hope I may have hereafter an
Opportunity to do) I will not at present, insist on the Description of the
several Foramina's I observed on the inside, for the Passage of the Nerves and
Blood Vessels. But, as I have shown, since it has so little Brains, Nature has
been very kind to it, in preserving them, by the Defense of those Prominent
Bones I have remarked, both length-ways and laterally behind; and on the Sides
too, it is guarded by the Temporal Process e.
of the Os Zygomaticum.

The Os Spongiosum in each Nostril, seemed very curiously contrived, by the
abundance of Laminae it enjoys; so that the Membrane that covers them, by this
means, is rendered more Capacious, and capable of receiving more plentifully
the Effluvia's of those Animals, it would either catch, or avoid; and in this
Sensory it is known, that Bruits excel even Man himself, and their Organ is more
adapted for it.

The Vnder-Jaw l l.
consisted of Two strong Bones, joined together only at the Mentum; each
measured Four Inches in Length. The Head of this Bone (which was Half an Inch
broad) was received into a Sinus of the Os Temporum, and very firmly
articulated there. It had Two Processus: the Anterior m.
or Superior is large and thin, into which is inserted the Temporal Muscle. The
Inferior n.
Process is smaller, and runs to a sharp Point: Here at this Process, the Edge
of the Mandible is so dilated, that it measured above Half an Inch. On the
inside of the Jaw here, is a large Sinus, which leads to a Foramen that goes
into the Body of the Jaw Bone, and affords a Passage for the Vessels thither.

The Use of these Bones is for Mastication; which leads me to consider the
Teeth. And here we find all the Three Sorts of them; for in the Vpper-Jaw
before, were Eight small Dentes Incisores, Four of each Side; then a void
Space, almost a Quarter of an Inch; then Two large Prominent Dentes Canini, one
of each Side; which jutted out of the Jaw about Half an Inch: these were
succeeded of each Side, with Three Dentes Incisores; but these were much
stronger and larger than the Fore-Teeth; and these imitated the Dentes Molares,
in that they were inserted into the Jaw Bone with Two Phangs: But the Heads of
these Incisores were acuminated; whereas the Heads of the Molares were flat,
and almost of a Triangular Figure. There were Four Dentes Molares of each Side:
in all, Four and Twenty Teeth in the Vpper-Jaw. But the double Phangs of the
Molares, and the Incisores Majores were such, as at first sight, one would
think them Two distinct Teeth; each Phang being inserted into a distinct
Alveolus, or Socket in the Jaw, and remaining separated some way above the
Jaw Bone, and only joined at the Head.

In the Under Jaw Bone, there were likewise of each Side, Four Dentes Incisores
Minores before; then a little void Space; after that, the Dens Caninus; then
Three Dentes Incisores Majores; and last of all Four Dentes Molares, answerable
to those in the Vpper-Jaw, but somewhat smaller. In both Jaws in all, Eight and
Forty Teeth. Georg. Margravius's (a) Account I find is somewhat different from
mine; for he says, Dentes (habet) instar faelis seu Vulpis, anterius nimirum
tam superius, quam inferius parvulos, hinc quatuor longos Caninos, superiores
quidem longiores, inferiores breviores, hinc iterum sex alios, and dein
Molares. Nimirum sedecim Molares, duodecim inter medios, quatuor Caninos, and
incisores parvulos in inferiori mandibula octo, in superiori december, nam duos
majusculos in medio habet, more Leporis.

But we will proceed next to what the Head is fastened to, the Vertebrae: and I
find here, Seven Vertebrae of the Neck; Thirteen of the Back or Thorax; Six of
the Loins; Three of the Os Sacrum; and Two and Twenty of the Tail; One and
Fifty in all, and all extraordinarily contrived.

The First Vertebra No. 1.
of the Neck (to which the Head is fastened, and is therefore called the Atlas)
had two broad transverse Processes, but no Spine. The Second Vertebra 2.
of the Neck, had a very large and thick Spine Tab. 2. Fig. 6. b.
of a Triangular Figure; and in it was observed a large Semi-circular Sinus c.
: which was so deep, as to receive into its Bosom, a great part of the First
Vertebra; by which means, the Articulation was very much strengthened. This
Vertebra is called Dentata, from that Tooth like Protuberance d.
I have represented, and which is received into the Hollow of the First
Vertebra, where the Medulla Spinalis runs. This Vertebra backwards, had Two
Processus obliqui superiores e.
, and Two Oliqui inferiores f.
. The Third Vertebra of the Neck, had the same Processes Fig. 7. e e. f f.
both before and behind; but the Spine d.
here was about Three Quarters of an Inch in Height; about the Third of an Inch
thick; and just at the Top seemed to be a little cleft. The Fourth and the
Fifth Vertebra had the same Processes, as the Third Vertebra; and the Spine
here, likewise very thick, and cleft at the Top; but gradually lessening in
Height, as also Thickness. The Sixth Vertebra, besides the former Processes,
had likewise an acute Transverse one, on each Side; and its Spine much shorter,
and more acuminated than the former. The Seventh Vertebra of the Neck had only
Two oblique Processes before, and none behind; and Two acute transverse
Processes, and a very short and sharp Spine: So that upon holding up the Head,
the Spine of the First Vertebra Tab. 1. Fig. 4. No. 8.
of the Thorax, would touch the Top of the Fifth Vertebra of the Neck. These
Vertebrae are so strongly and closely locked into one another, that though each
of them are large in themselves; yet, thus articulated, they do not make full
Two Inches in Length. But What I most wondered at, was, to observe the
Thickness and Strength of the Spines of the Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth
Vertebrae, far different from what I have observed in any other Animal; and
cannot but think must be, for the better defending its self from the Injuries it
might receive by any Fall; and to perform much the same Office, as that
Prominent Bony Ridge in the Cranium. And not only here, but likewise the Spines
of several of the Vertebrae of the Thorax and Loins, I find are thus flatted,
and broad at the Ends; and they being so, should it happen to fall to the
Ground, by Chance or Design; these Spines being so Prominent and flat, will
better bare off the Blow; and upon this Account, there is no Danger of his
breaking his Neck, his Back, or his Head; since they are all Three so well
secured and guarded.

The first Seven Vertebrae of the Thorax, have Two oblique Processes Tab. 2.
Fig. 8. b b.
forwards, which run under the hinder oblique Processes of the preceding
Vertebra; and have Two oblique Processes c c.
backwards, which rides over those of the succeeding Vertebra; as likewise Two
transverse Processes d d.
, which at their Ends have small Acetabula's e e.
or Sinus's, for the receiving the Heads of the Ribs, which are fastened to
them. The Spines a.
of these Vertebrae, are slender, thin, and sharp; about Three Quarters of an
Inch long. The Six following Vertebrae of the Thorax, have short, thick, and
flat Spines. The oblique Processes being continued on each Side of the Spine,
make as 'twere, a Gutter; and the transverse Processes here, are somewhat
different from the former. The Spines Tab. 2. Fig. 9.
of the Vertebrae of the Back or Loins, the more they approached the Os Sacrum,
so they lessened gradually in their Thickness on the Edge. But here were double
oblique Processes b b. c c.
, viz. Four at each End of the Vertebra, and the undermost spreading themselves
out broad. The Three Vertebrae Tab. 1. Fig. 4. No. 10.
of the Os Sacrum, are firmly fastened to the Os Ilium No. 13.
; but the last not so entirely as the Two former: But this at each Side had a
broad transverse Process, and the Spines of these were thin. The Two First
Vertebrae No. 11.
of the Tail had only One small acute Spine; but in all the other Vertebrae of
the Tail, both at the Head and Tail of each Vertebra, I observed Two Spines;
but those at the Head of the Joint, the larger. In the Six First Vertebrae of
the Tail, there was, of each Side, a broad transverse Process, the Length of
the Joint: In the other Vertebrae only at the Head and Tail, a jutting out at
the Sides. The Vertebrae about the Middle of the Tail, were the longest; being
there about an Inch long; nearer the Root of the Tail, and at the End not so
long.

But what I was most of all pleased to see, and I think, is a wonderful Piece
of Nature's Mechanism, was, those Spines No. 12.12.
or Hooks placed in a Line, in the Middle of the under Side of the Vertebrae of
the Tail. It Is true, the first Three Vertebrae had none of these Spines, nor
were they necessary here, since they lay within the Compass of the Ossa
Coxendicis; but in all the other Vertebrae, to the End of the Tail they were to
be observed; but as they approached the Extreme of the Tail, they grew lesser
and shorter. These Spines Tab. 2. Fig. 10. bbb.
(where longest) were about a Quarter of an Inch, or somewhat more: they were
placed just at the Articulation of each Joint, and, as I said, in the Middle
from the Sides; and seemed to be articulated, both to the preceding and
following Vertebra; not being an entire solid Body, but arising from the
Vertebrae with Two Legs or Crura, become afterward perfectly united at the
Ends. By this means, these Bones are rendered more firm and strong, and this
Hollow c c.
serves for the transmitting the Blood Vessels thorough them; and one may
observe here a Stria, or Furrow, all the Length of the Vertebra, for the
receiving them; whereby they are the better secured from Compression, when this
Animal hangs by his Tail. And for the performing this Office, nothing, I think,
could be more advantageously contrived: For when the Tail is twirl'd or wound
about a Stick, this Hook of the Spine easily sustains the Weight, and there is
but little Labor of the Muscles required, only enough for the bowing or
crooking the Tail; for then, as by a Hook, the Weight of the whole Body is
hereby suspended. And for the doing this, 'twas observed, that in each
preceding Vertebra, there did a Muscle arise, which was inserted on each side
of the succeeding Vertebra; which Acting or Contracting, must necessarily bend
and curve that Joint. But for the strengthening the whole, there was observed
Four Muscles to arise from the Os Sacrum, which did run the whole length of the
Tail; Two on the upper Side; and Two on the under; sending each a Tendon to
each Internode or Vertebra. So that when the Skin was stripped off, the outward
parts of these Muscles seemed to have tendinous Expansions over them, the whole
Length of the Tail, and almost to be covered by them; which must needs very
much contribute, and add Strength to the Tail; besides what may be the Effect
of their Insertion of Tendons into each Joint, or Vertebra, in curling and
unbending the Tail.

What Use this Animal makes of his Tail, when alive, and how advantagiously
it is contrived for that Purpose, we have sufficiently seen: But I find it is
highly commended by Hernandez (c), as an extraordinary Medicine and Specific;
and from him, several others relate the same: I shall give you only his Words,
and so proceed on to our Sceleton; Cauda hujus Animalis (says he) egregium est
Medicamentum; trita enim drachmae unius mensura, atque ex aqua aliquoties
devorata, nullo praeassumpto alimento eo dio quo hauritur, Vrinae meatus mire
abstergit, eadem evocata, tractisque lapillis, and quacunque alia re meatus
obstruente. Venerem excitat, generat lac, ac perfractis medetur, and Cholicis,
Partum accelerat, Menses elicit, extrahitque tusa and imposita aculeos qui sunt
infixi, ac ventrem emollit. And concludes, Et fortassis nullum extat
Medicamentum ad has res omnes peragendas, praestantius.

To the Vertebrae of the Thorax are fastened the Ribs Tab. 2. Fig. 4. (...).
, and there are Thirteen of each Side. The Seven foremost are more perfectly
articulated with the Sternum; the Six succeeding may be reckoned in some Sense,
Costae Nothae: For though they are long, and as they proceed from the
Vertebrae, are inclined backwards, toward the hinder Legs; yet afterward they
are reflected forwards toward the Sternum or Cartilago Scutiformis. But I must
here take Notice, that though in Man, and other Animals, that Part of the Ribs
that is fastened to the Os Pectoris, or Sternum, be usually Cartilaginous; yet
here, in our Subject, I observed it to be all Bony throughout. However, this
Difference I found, that the Ribs did look redder, by reason of the Blood
Vessels in them; and this Part was Whiter, and where it was fastened to the
Ribs, one might plainly see; so that it may well pass for a Bony Cartilage; as
often, the Cartilages do become Bony. The First Rib was only an Inch long, and
its Bony Cartilage a Quarter of an Inch: hence gradully the Ribs increase in
Length; for the Seventh Rib was Three Inches long; and its Cartilage One Inch
and Half. The Four last of the Costae Nothae, gradually lessen again in Length;
for the last Rib of all was only One Inch and Three Quarters long; and its
Cartilage did not run Home to the Os Pectoris, or Sternum, though the First,
Second and Third of the Costae Nothae did.

The Os Pectoris, or Sternum, consisted of Seven Bones, according to the Number
of the Fore-Ribs, that are fastened to them. At the Beginning of the Sternum,
there jutted out a sharp Bony Cartilage, which, from its Figure, I shall call,
Cartilago Ensiformis p.
; and here was fastened One Extreme of the Claviculae o.
; at the End of the Sternum, toward the Belly, there was a broad, roundish
Cartilage, which therefore I shall call, Cartilago Scutiformis.
.

There were Two Claviculae o.
, or Collar-Bones, each an Inch and Half long; having one Extreme fastened to
the First Bone of the Sternum, or the Cartilago Ensiformis; and the other End
to the Spine r.
of the Scapula, near the Conjunction of it to the Os Humeri. By means of this
Bone, it can more advantagiously bring its Fore-Feet to its Mouth; as it uses
to do when it feeds its self, as do the Monkey-Kind, who have Claviculae too as
well as Man; though many Animals want these Bones.

The Scapula q.
or Shoulder Blade was about Two Inches long, about an Inch and Half broad; its
Spine r.
, though thin, yet the nearer it approached the Shoulder, it grew larger and
flatter. Into the Sinus of the Neck of the Scapula, was received the Head Tab.
1. Fig. 6. a.
of the Shoulder Bone, or of the Fore-Thigh-Bone; as to that Protuberance,
called, the Acromium, was fastened the End of the Clavicula.

This Thigh Bone of the Forelegs I found very remarkable; so that I caused a
Figure Tab. 1. Fig. 6.
to be made of it: 'twas about Two Inches and Three Quarters long; 'twas thick
and Strong, having a large rough Spine b.
jutting forward, and running Half the Length of it. The lower Extreme f. g.
of this Thigh Bone, to which was fastened the Tibia and Fibula, grew very
broad, being almost an Inch broad. Above, where this Bone began to grow broad,
on the outside, was a large Protuberance c.
; and on the Inside there was a great oblong Foramen d.
, or hollow Passage, formed by a small Bone arising from the inward Fore Part
of the Thigh Bone, where it begins to grow larger, and was afterward united to
that part of the Basis f.
of this Bone, where the Fibula, or Minus focile is joined. Just in the Middle
of the Basis of this Bone, there was a large Sinus e.
which backwards appeared deeper, which did lock into another deep Sinus of the
Tibia; by which means these Bones were so firmly articulated together, as they
were not easily, if possibly, to be put out of Joint.

The Tibia T. T.
, or Focile majus, was a strong Bone, about Three Inches long; which was
extended V.
upwards about a Quarter of an Inch above its Articulation with the Thigh Bone;
and at the other End, was fastened to the outward Bone of the Tarsus.

The Fibula w. w.
, or Focile Minus, was a smaller Bone, placed more inward and forwarder, and
not so long as the Tibia; being articulated above (but not so firmly) with the
Thigh Bone, and below, with the inward Bone of the Tarsus. For there were but
Two Bones of the Tarsus x x.
, having each a small Sinus, for the receiving the Heads of the Two Fociles.
The Bones of the Metatarsus y y.
were Four, or it may be Five; to which were joined the Five Fingers or Toes of
the Fore-Feet. The innermost Toe had but Two Articulations, or Joints, but at
the End had a large hooked strong Nail: The other Four Fingers had each, Three
Articuli or Joints, armed with Hooked Nails, as the First.

The Hinder-Legs were fastened to the Trunk of the Body by the Os Innominatum;
which, though properly here is but Two Bones, ( viz. One of each Side) being
separated above, by the Os Sacrum, and below, are joined together at the Os
Pubis) yet commonly they do, for Distinction sake, give Three Names to each; as
the uppermost Part of this Bone they call, the Os Ilium No. 13. Fig. 5. GG.
; the lowermost, the Os Ischii, or Coxendicis I I.
; and the fore Part, where the Coalition is, the Os Pubis a a.
. The Length of the whole, in a straight Line, was Three Inches. In the Os
Ischii was the Acetabulum s s.
, being a large Socket, for the receiving the Head of the hinder Thigh Bone;
and deeper in, there was a Space for the fastening the Ligament; from which
Space, there was a Sinus which led outward; so that the Brims of the Acetabulum
was not an entire Circle, but broken off here. But the most remarkable Bones
here, are, the Ossa Marsupialia c c.
, seu Janitores Marsupii, of which I have given a Description before; therefore
now shall proceed.

The Hinder-Thigh-Bone was a little above Three Inches long; 'twas roundish,
and a strong Bone. But the Tibia Tab. 1. Fig. 4. TT.
, or Majus Focile of the Hinder-Leg, was somewhat longer, and a little curved.
The Fibula w. w.
, or Minus Focile, was about the same Length, straighter and slenderer: This,
toward the Foot, was articulated to the Os Calcis; as the Tibia was to to the
Talus, or Astragalus; and these Two Bones I make the Tarsus x. x.
; and joining to them, were the Bones of the Metatarsus y y.
; and to these the Phalanges z.
of the Fingers or Toes. In the innermost, or the Thumb, there were only Two
Articuli, or Bones; in the other Four Toes, or Digiti, in each there were Three
Articuli, or Joints. The End of the Thumb was more flatted, than the Ends of
the other Toes: For the Thumb, as I have observed, had a flat Nail, like a
Human Thumb; in the others, the Nails were long, and curved. I observed
likewise, at the Articulation of each Joint of the Toes, on the under Side,
there were Two small Bones, that are called, Ossa Sesamoidea, and these, both
in the Fore and Hinder-Feet.

I am sensible how tedious I have been, in the Description of this one Animal,
and from a single Observation too. Had I had more Leisure to have drawn it up
in, I might have been much shorter. But it being an Animal, so very remarkable;
and one too, sui Generis, or a distinct Species from all others, I was the more
inclined to be as particular as I could, though not so much as I could have
wished. And I am the more confirmed in what I have formerly wished In my
Preliminary Discourse concerning Anatomy, and a Natural History of Animals,
before my Phocaena.
that for the perfecting a Natural History of Animals, we had a distinct
Account and Anatomy of some One of a Species; which, with a little Variation,
might serve for all of that Family: since I find so great a Master of Natural
History, as Mr. Ray Synopsis Animal. p. 324.
, is of the same Opinion.

Since part of this Discourse was Printed off, I have met with a Passage in a
Treatise of the Bucaniers of America, wrote first in Dutch by John Equemeling,
and since translated into English page 49.
, which I cannot but take Notice of: And if true, (as the Author assures us,
that he has seen it often) it is an Instance of a Quadrupede, which I knew not
of before, that receives its Young into its Belly. But it is not a Land, but
Water Animal; or it may be rather, one Amphibious, between both. It Is a sort of
Crocodile, which he calls a Cayman; his Words are these, which I therefore
repeat, that by farther Observation, if true; it might be confirmed; as also,
it might be more particularly specified, whether their Entrance into the Belly,
was by the Mouth, or any other Part. Many times (says he) their Eggs (for it is
an Animal Oviparous) are destroyed by Birds, that find them out, as they scrape
amongst the Sands: Hereupon the Females of the Caymans, at such times as they
fear the coming of any Flocks of Birds, do oft-times, by Night, swallow these
their Eggs, and keep them in their Stomach till the Danger is over. And from
time to time, they bury them again in the Sand, as I have told you, bringing
them forth again out of their Belly, till the Season is come, of being excluded
the Shell. At this time, if the Mother be nigh at hand, they run unto her, and
play with her, as little Whelps would do with their Dams, sporting themselves
according to their own Custom. In this sort of Sport, they will often times run
in and out of their Mothers Belly, even as Rabits into their Holes. This I have
seen them do many times, as I have spyed them at play with their Dam, over the
Water, upon the contrary Banks of some River: at which time I have often
disturbed their Sport, by throwing a Stone that way, causing them on a sudden
to creep into the Mother's Bowels, for fear of some eminent Danger.

THE EXPLANATION of the FIGURES.
TABULA PRIMA. FIGURA PRIMA
Represents the outward Shape and Figure of the Possum, drawn from the Life.
FIGURA SECUNDA
Represents the Slit or Aperture in the Belly that goes to the Marsupium or
Pouch, where the Young Ones lodge, till they can shift for themselves.
FIGURA TERTIA.
A. Shows the Marsupium or Pouch turned the inside outward where may be
observed the Hair or Fur that covers it, and may help the better to keep the
Young Ones warm. BB. The two hinder Legs cut off. C. The Foramen of the Anus,
which is also the common outward Vent or Exit to the Rectum, the Bladder of
Urine, and the Uteri too. D. The beginning of the Tail.
FIGURA QUARTA
Gives a View of the Sceleton or Bones of this Animal. aa. The Rostrum or
Snout. bb. The Cranium or Skull that did contain the Brain. ccc. A Bony Ridge
or Protuberantia Ossea longitudinalis, that did run the length of the Cranium,
and over a part of the Rostrum. d. The lateral Ridge, which, like a Penthouse,
jutted over the hinder part of the Cranium, Protuberantia Ossea Lateralis. e.f.
The Os Zygomaticum. (e) its Process from the Os Temporum, and (r) that from the
Maxilla Superior, or Upper Jaw. g. A Foramen or Hole in the inward Canthus of
the Orbit of the Eye that leads into the Nostrils, and by a Duct conveys the
Tears or Moisture of the Eyes into them. h. A Foramen or Hole in the upper Jaw
for a Passage to the Vessels. i. A Protuberance of the Os Frontis. k. A Suture
of the Os Narium. ll. The Lower mandible or Jawbone. Maxilla inferior. m. The
Superior Process of the under Jaw. n. The inferior Process of the under Jaw. o.
The Clavicula of one Side. p. The Cartilago Ensiformis of the first Bone of the
Sternum. q. The Scapula or Shoulder Blade Bone. r. The Spine of the Scapula.
SSSS. The Thigh-Bones of all the Feet. TTTT. The Tibia, or Focile majus of all
the Feet. uu. Part of the Tibia in the Forelegs, extended beyond the
Articulation. ww.ww. The Fibula or Focile minus in all the Legs. xxxx. The
Bones of the Tarsus. yy.yy. The Bones of the Metatarsus. zzzz. The Toes. aa The
Thumbs in the hinder Feet. No. 1. The first Vertebra of the Neck called the
Atlas. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. The second, third, fourth, fifth fixth, and seventh
Vertebra of the Neck. 8. The first Vertebra of the Thorax. 9. The first
Vertebra of the Loins. 10. The first Vertebra of the Os Sacrum. 11. The first
Vertebra of the Os Coxygis, or Tail. 12.12.12.12. The Spines or Hooks on the
inside of the Tail. 13, 14. The Os Innominatum, where (13.) is the Os Ilium,
(14) the Os Ischii or Coxendicis. 15.15. The Ossa Marsupialia, seu Janitores
Marsupii. ****. The Ribs, thirteen in all.. The Cartilago Scutiformis.
FIGURA QUINTA
Represents the Situation of the Ossa Marsupialia, etc. aa. The Ossa Pubis. b.
The Coalition or the joining of the Ossa Pubis. cc. The two Ossa Marsupialia,
or Janitores Marsupii. d,e. The Basis of the Ossa Marsupialia, where joined to
the Ossa Pubis, (d) the inward Head of the Basis, (e) the outward. f.f. The
Acetabulum or Socket for receiving the Head of the Thigh Bone. g.g. The Os
Ileum. hh. The Vertebrae of the Os sacrum. II. The Os Ischii or Coxendicis.
FIGURA SEXTA
Exhibits the Figure of the fore side of the Thigh Bone of the fore Leg. a. The
Head of the Thigh Bone, where it is fastened to the Scapula. b. A large rough
Spine, which runs above half the Length of this Thigh Bone. c. A Protuberance
of this Bone on the out side. d. A large Foramen or hollow Passage. e. A Sinus
for receiving the Head of the Tibia. f,g. The Basis or lower Extreme of the
Thigh Bone.
TABULA SECUNDA. FIGURA PRIMA
Represents the Stomach and Guts, and the several Coylings they make. A. The
Gula or Gullet. B. The Stomach. c. A Perforation of the Stomach, caused by an
Ulcer there. dd. The two pouching out of the Stomach at the two Ends. e. The
Pylorus. f. The beginning of the Duodenum. g,h,i,k,l,m,n,o,p,q. Represents the
small Guts, and the Coyles and Convolutions they do make. Some of the Coyles
lie hid, and out of sight; But the order how they follow one another, is
signified by the Order of the Letters of the Alphabet: so that (g) follows (f),
and (g) is succeeded by (i) and (i) by (k), and so on to (q) where the Ilion is
discharged and emptied into the Caecum or, if that is full, into the Colon at
the first Letter S. RR. The Caecum. SSS. The Colon. T. The Rectum. V. The first
Mesenterie, or Mesenterium minorum Intestinorum W. The second Mesenterie, or
Mesenterium majorum Intestinorum.
FIGURA SECUNDA
Exhibits the Urinary and the U terine Parts. AA. The two Kidneys. bb. The
Emulgent Veins. cc. The Emulgent Arteries. dd. The Glandulae Renales. ee. The
two Ureters. f. The Insertion of the left Ureter, into the Neck of the Bladder.
G. The Bladder of Urine turned aside h. The Vrethra. ii. The two Vaginae Uteri.
K. The common Passage from the Urethra, and the two Vaginae. l. The Arteria
Aorta, or Great Artery. m. The Vena Cava. nn.n. The Spermatick Arteries.
oo.oo. The Spermatick Veins. p.p.p. The Hypogastick Arteries and Veins. rrr.
The Alae Uteri, seu potius Cornuum. ss. The Ovaria. tt. The Tubae Fallopianae.
uu. The Cornu Uteri of the Left Side opened. w. The Cornu Uteri of the
Right-Side not opened. xx. The two Uteri opened. y. The Diaphragm that divides
the two Uteri. zz. The imperfect Diaphragma, which partly divides each Uterus,
and lies over the Passage of that Part of the Uterus, which is doubled and
tends to the Vaginae.
FIGURA TERTIA
More particularly shows the Uterine Parts. AA. The two Ovaria. bb. The Fimbria
Foliacea. cc. The Tubae Fallopianae. dd. The two Cornua Uteri. EE. The two
Uteri reduplicated f. A Slit in the Neck of the Left Uterus to show its Passage
into the Vagina on that Side. g. The Left Vagina opened. h. The Ostium or Mouth
of the Right Vagina. i. The common Passage from the Urethra and Vaginae. K. The
Urethra. ll. The Bladder of Urine cut off.
EIGURA QUARTA
Represents the Hairy Tophus, or Ball of Hair that was taken out of the
Stomach.
FIGURA QUINTA
Represents the Liver. A. The Vena Cava. BBB. The three Lobes of the Liver. C.
The Bladder of Gall. ddd. The Fissures in the Body of the Liver. eee. The
Incisures at the Edges of the Liver.
FIGURA SEXTA.
A. The Spine of the second Vertebra of the Neck. b. Represents its Thickness.
c. A large Sinus for the receiving the first Vertebra. d. The Dens or Tooth of
this Vertebra. e. The Processus obliquus superior of one Side. f. The Processus
obliquus inferior of the same Side.
FIGURA SEPTIMA.
A. Represents the Spine of the third Vertebra of the Neck, where is shown its
natural thickness. b. The Hole through which the Medulla Spinalis passes. cc.
Two small Foramina for the Passage of Vessels. d. Represents the Cleft at the
top of the Spine. ee. The two Processus obliqui Superiores before. ff. The two
Processus obliqui Inferiores before.
FIGURA OCTAVA
Represents the first Vertebra of the Thorax. A. The Spine, which is long and
acute. bb. The Oblique Processes before. cc. The Oblique Processes behind. dd.
The Transverse Processes. ee. Where the Ribs are fastened. f. The Hollow where
the Medulla Spinalis passes.
FIGURA NONA
Represents the fourth Vertebra of the Loins. aa. The two upper Oblique
Processes behind. b. The Spine. cc. The two under Oblique Processes behind.
FIGURA DECIMA
Represents the second and third Vertebra of the Tail. aa. Two Vertebrae of the
Tail. bbb. The Spines or Hooks on the inside, by means of which, it can better
hang by its Tail. cc. A Hollow or Foramen in the middle of these Spines,
through which, Blood Vessels passes.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 1. l. 5. r. at Chirurgions. p. 2. l. 21. r. Simi-vulpa. p. 3. l. 26. r.
Epithet. p. 4. l. 1. r. determinec. l. 14. r. addidi. p. 5. l. 7. r. Crumenam.
p. 6. l. 8. r. her. p. 3. l. 6. r. Hexagons. p. 9. l. 23. r. sunk. p. 10. l.
32. r. invicem. p. 12. l. 5. r. proficiscatur. l. 10. r. quaeritare didicerint.
l. 18. r. strepitum. l. penult. adapting. p. 21. l. 12. r (...). p. 29. l. 29.
Columbis. p. 36. l. 25. r. Vetch. l. 26. r. Vein. p. 42. l. 3. r. felis p. 43.
l. 10. r. Extreme. l. 19. r. Suture. p. 44. l. 5. r. Lambdoidal. p. 45. l. 11.
r. Seive. p. 47. l. 9. r. felis.


