THE REMARKABLE LIFE and DEATH of the Lady APOLLINA HALL Widow, deceased in
the 21th year of her age.

By William Typpin, Esquire.

PROVE 12.11. A virtuous woman is a crown to her H^^band, but she that makes
ashamed is a rottenness in hi^ bones.

PROVE 31.30. Favor is deceitful and beauty is vain, but a woman that fears
the Lord, she shall be praised

Imprimatur

EDM CALAMY



LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Christopher Meredith, at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard, 1647.

THE REMARKABLE LIFE and DEATH of the Lady APOLLINA HALL Widow, deceased in
the 21th year of her age.
AS it is a work of charity to measure others by our selves, and to look on
others faults through the glass of our own ^^firmities; so is it likewise a
^atter of prudence and piety, to ^^gulate our lives by the line of others, and
(next to the square (...) Gods word) to take our light, ^m and direction from
such ^ersons, whose lives do hold ^th the (...) uprightest conversations, and
whose actions as well as their professions, do^ speak them holy. I know it is
(...) common complaint in the world, and in truth not without just cause, that
the generality of people do idolize examples, and study men too much but the
fault is not in the action but in the object, because they make not a prudent
choice; for did we carefully make choic^ of, as the word of God for ou^ rule,
so the most holy and experienced Saints of God for ou^ directories, in our
Christian way. Oh how much of heaven should we have in our lives, what gracious
helps would these be to spiritualize and rectify our judgments, to warm our
affections, resolve our doubts, to unbottome us many times from fancies and
superstitious vanities, and settle our unstable ^^arts in the way of truth and
^^ace.

Amongst many sweet ex^^ples and paterns of ho^esse, that yet through the ^ercy
of God, have given ^^rth some luster in these gloo^y days, I have thought good
(...) present this one to public ^^ew, not to be contemned be^^use of sex, for
Gods graces ^^e to be honored wherever we ^^nde them. Her remarkable ^e, and
blessed and sweet de^ture out of the same, do ren^^r her a pattern of
imitation, I ^ight have said, of admiration (...) all posterity. I should but
^^ifle in a serious business, to ^^t forth in this place, those outward
accommodations wherewith God and nature had a^orn'd her, in her person, parts
and parentage, for all these are but as rubbish to true worth, and to inscribe
such trifles (...) any matter of her praise, were but to lay her honor in t^^
dust: but that which is to be commended in her, is her goodness, sweetness in
her disposition, humility in her carriage, holiness in her life,
chearfullnesse in her christian way, stability in her principles which she
held, from the which, when once she had found their footing in the word of God
(for that was her constant touchstone) nothing could make her to decline. These
with many others, are the sweet odours which preserve her as a living monument
amongst us, and keep in fresh memory her name on earth, as I doubt not but the
Lord has honored her with a crown in heaven.

In the declaration of this La^^es short life, for truly she li^^ed but like
the sun flower, ^^ept into the world, and then ^^osed up again: I shall take
my ^^se only from the time she first ^^gan to give up her name to Christ,
accounting of her till ^^en, but in a dead and lost con^^tion; for before we
are in ^^me measure acquainted with (...) ways of Christ, before that ^^y
dawn, and that day star ^ise in our hearts, we may be ^^id to be in life, but
we live ^ot; our very being is little better then death and darkness.

Her education from her very ^^ildhood was in a religious ^ay, but in truth,
through the ^^ult and frailty of an over-in^^gent Guardian too soft and ^^ee,
for this indulgency to her ^^clination in her blossom years (a caveat to fond
Grandmothers) did but serve to advance and strengthen corrupt nature in her
against her better self, and to blow the coal of her corruptions into a greater
flame. But when it pleased God to call her by his grace, and to reveal himself
in her, oh then her former infirmities had an influence on her spirit for her
greater good, (see how the Lord draws an antidote out of poison,) and they
quicken her endeavors in her gracious way.

About some three years before her dissolution, in the eighteenth year of her
age, the Lord began to remove the scales of ignorance from her eyes, and to
give her a more through sense and apprehension of the power of sin and Satan
upon her soul; and now the high mountain is abased, and the stubborn heart ^s
laid low, and she is become (...) lamb in her conversation; ^ow she begins to
enter into a ^ore sad and serious consideration of her former course. Now
^owever God had dispensed the ^omforts of this life to her with ^very free and
liberal hand, yet ^e cares not for man's day, the ^ream of her affections are
car^^ed into another channel: now ^^l the golden vanities of this ^^fe, and
what ever the world before presented as precious in ^^r eye, she lays them as
de^^icable things under her foot; ^er thoughts are now transcen^^ent and
heavenward, and both ^^e and heart are bound for e^^^ity: There is nothing now
^^unds pleasing in her ears, but that has the stamp of everlastingnesse upon
it. An everlasting Christ as her way, an everlasting heaven as her end, an
everlasting glory as her crown. These and the like are the subject of her
meditations, and take up all her joy. She set apart four hours in the day for
divine duties (these were her souls repast) and every night before she laid her
to her rest, she called her soul to a reckoning, (taking the same in writing)
what errors or frailties she had fallen into the day past, what incursions sin
and Satan had made upon her soul; wherein God had been dishonored, and her
profession scandalized in her Christian walk. And here I cannot but commend and
admire her care and cautious circumspection in discharge of this duty; for I am
credibly informed, that if at night when she was to sequester her self to this
soul examination, some extraordinary occurrences had cast her upon a later hour
then usual, so that through heaviness of body, and indisposednesse of mind,
she found her self dispirited and unfitted for that task, her practice then
was, to stir up, quicken and enliven her spirits, by such means as she saw
most conducible to that end, that so she might come before the Lord with life,
love and chearfullnesse, and not present her sacrifice of prayer before his
glorious throne, with a dull and fluggish soul; for she knew well, that the
exercises of Gods worship, how constant soever for time and place, yet are
never carried on to the true comfort of the soul, unless the heart be
quickened, and carefully reduced into a praying condition. Its further
observable in this Lady, that she had always a most loving heart, and free,
affable, courteous deportment toward all, both rich and poor, that had any
thing of Christ in them, especially godly Ministers: and for her charity
otherwise to the poor, her religious heart was so affectionately disposed to
them, that she could have straightened her own bowels to do them good; as she did
fully evidence by her holy repining at that cost and charge which the necessity
of her sickness enforced her to, saying, she had spent that cost upon a rotten
carkase (that was her own expression) which might have comforted many a poor
christian. The wearisome condition of this life, but I believe, much more the
joyful expectation of a better, made her exceeding willing to die: yet with an
humble submission to Gods will, praying, that whether it were life or death,
that condition might befall her, whereby God might have most glory. As it was
the surest, so was it also the greatest comfort her heart did joy in, that God
had spoken peace to her troubled soul, and had graciously vouchsafed her some
inward assurance of her salvation, which cost her, she said, many a sweat, and
much striving, before she attained thereunto. Being in conference with an
intimate friend of hers about the state of her soul; she brake forth into a
holy admiration of Gods abundant grace and favor, and of the overflowing
streams of his loving kindness to her soul: Oh that God should look upon me,
such a poor creature as I am! but all is free grace, says she, all is free
grace: When I enter, says she, into a sad and serious consideration of my
sins, I am exceedingly amazed and cast down; but when again I recollect my
self, and looking out of my self, call to mind the free grace of God to me in
Christ, Oh then, this comfort refreshes my soul.

She took exceeding great delight in the promises of God, set forth in the new
Testament, most whereof (as very credible information gives me) she writ out
with her own hand in time of health. Above the rest, that place of St John,
chap. 11.13. did more especially affect her; If ye shall ask any thing in my
Name, I will do it. She was exceeding sollicitous and fearful over her self,
least any created comforts, (the Dalilaes of corrupt flesh) should creep into,
and take possession of her heart, as appeared by this; that being moved by a
certain person about her, to send for her child, in which she was much
delighted; she durst not, she answered, trust her deceitful heart, lest it
should be immoderately let out upon her child, as formerly it had been upon
her dear husband; not that she condemned that measure of affection which God
and nature requires to husband and children,; for as for her husband, it was
conceived by her Physician, that her extreme endeavors to preserve his life,
was the loss of her own: but to intimate how ready and prone our hearts are to
break the bounds of moderation in the things of this life, and to live more in
the creatures then in God that gave them. It was her ordinary custom, after
the decease of her dear husband, so long as health and strength did permit, to
perform the duties of reading and prayer in her family, in her own person, so
far was she from the total neglect thereof; A fault that lies heavy upon this
Nation, and I fear, one special provocation of Gods judgments against us at
this time, and a prevalent cause that our streets have streamed with blood. One
would think it impossible, that in these Gospel days, there should be so much
atheism in the hearts of any professing the name of Christians, as that they
should with boldness and confidence, every day partake of Gods blessings,
(yea, cannot subsist without them) and yet never return so much as a morning
and evening sacrifice in the family, in a thankful acknowledgement of such
bounty. Truly God is extremely slighted in the world, and therefore no marvel
if we be slighted and rejected by him. Its a sad omen, that they have not much
of God in their hearts, that have so little of his Name in their lips. I say no
more but this, its an infinite mercy of God to men of this constitution, that
Gods mercies prove not snares to them, and their meat their poison. The Lord
put their spirits into a more thankful frame, and make them more sensible of
Gods due, and their own duty. I know I have stepped out of my road, but ^t was to
bring these negligent wanderers into the way. Now to return to my dear friend.
In her ordinary civil communication and converse amongst those she lived
withal, she did ever demean her self, to the honor of her profession, in an
humble, sweet and winning way: but yet if any controversy did chance to arise
in point of Religion, she was passionately zealous in defense of truth: she
would through the weakness of her spirits then, pant in her eager discourse,
and yet contend still, till necessity did enforce her silence. Her heart was
extremely averse both to them and their ways, who any way held of
superstitious vanities. In a word, she was a sincere, single-hearted, downright
Christian, nothing acquainted with the art of guile. She was that which she did
seem to be, and did seem to be that which she ought.

And now I draw on toward her last breathing. The morning in which she died,
finding death to approach; This is the joyfullest day (says she) that ever
mine eyes beheld. Being recovered out of one of her fits (for she had extreme
convulsions) she breathed out these swee, though imperfect expressions: I
thought I should have been with my Savior before this time -- Then abruptly as
breath would bear; My joys are unspeakable. Falling into another grievous fit,
she now desired, if the Lord so pleased, that might be her last: and herein she
was heard in her request: being in this her last and extreme struggling with
death, she often cried out, Come Lord, come Lord, when Lord, how long Lord? and
at last, He is come, he is come; and with that speech she expressed so much
comfort, that she often smiled in this extremity. Lastly, she closed in her
breath with this short ejaculation; Lord I desire to breath out my soul unto
thee.

Thus she lived, and thus she died; how said I, died! not so, it was a change,
not death, a change of place, a change of comforts, a change of inheritance, a
change from a goodly earthly promotion here, to a glorious one for ever: In a
word, it was but a pinch, that did lead to a Paradise; it was but a daybreak
to eternal brightness. And here, I wish from my heart, it were within the
strength and compass of my weak endeavors, to fasten this precious example
upon the thoughts and consciences of the soft and delicate Ladies of our age,
who seek for nothing more, (as many of their lives do speak) then to take out
a heaven here on earth, crumbling out their days on glorious vanities, and
feeding their hearts and eyes, with fading, frivolous, ^ruitlesse contentments.
Oh that ^hey would but sadly consider, ^et a little, a very little while, and
then comes death, and then comes judgment, and then comes eternity, that long
day that will never see an evening; that deep gulf, that has in truth neither
bounds nor bot^om; and what a melancholy ^ntrance will they find into this
^verlasting condition, when their ^^te improvidence shall enforce them to cry
out, in their death^ed lamentation; Once were ^ur joys as full as our desires,
our heads were crowned with rose buds, our faces shined with, -- I tremble to
speak it in these reforming days: but now, oh now, whither away all our glory;
our delights are perished, yea vanished, sunk and gone, (and see their
deceitfullnesse) they have left us nothing behind them but our sins, as so
many serpents to sting us for all eternity; oh this is a long and deadly word,
for all eternity. These or the like will one day be their doleful complaints,
(and if a deep repentance intervene not) this will be the issue of all their
joy. Truly it makes my heart bleed in me, to see and consider that in this
juncture of time, when the land has been so long in (...) mourning garment,
and after so much blood, and fire, and famine, and pestilence, and dreadful
desolation in the several quar^ers of this Kingdom, the daughters of our Sion
are no more sensible of these judgments which ^ave broken in upon us, then ^he
stones in the streets; they ^^gge on in their old way, they (...) the fat, and
drink the sweet, ^elt in pleasures, and cloth themselves as gloriously as if
^hey meant to vie with the Sun ^t noon day, when it exalts it ^elf in its
greatest brightness: ^hey walk with their stretched out ^ecks, and wanton eyes,
and made complexions; should the Lord in the natural composure of their faces,
have engraven ^^ch black spots in them, as now their fancies add, surely they
would have looked on themselves as monsters, and have ^hought nature had been a
stepmother, and dealt unkindly with them: but now (silly souls) because these
vain toys are the imps of their own sick brains, and their own hands have
fashioned them, therefore they hug the work of their own inventions, and the
beauty which God vouchsafes them, seems despicable in their eyes. Surely our
age is worse then heathenish in this sinful liberty; for its reported by a
faithful hand, that the very Indians, (amongst whom the Lord has lately
vouchsafed some dawning of the Gospel) do so abhor the naked breasts of women,
and hair hanging loose, or cut as men's hair is, that they have made some Laws
against them. Oh that our English Ladies should grow so bold, as to practice
that which Indians abhor, which miserable heathens count their shame. Alas,
alas, however their deluded hearts may flatter them for a time, into a self
com^lacency in this their pleasurable way, yet as sure as their souls do live,
it will be bitterness in the latter end. For, tell me, tell me ^e shining
gallantry, how will ^e endure it, when ye shall hear that terrible voice
scunding in your ears, Arise ye dead and come (...) judgment? when ye shall
behold upon your first peeping out of your graves, the world ^n a light fire
round about your ^^ars, the elements melting with heat, the frame of the
heavens dissolved, hideous cryings of the creatures on every side; when ye
shall find nothing but flames and confusion ready to welcome you into the
world again? how will your hearts melt, your hands quiver, your minds faint,
your knees fall away like water, when this gloomy day appears! how will ye
then, when all your golden opportunities of grace are lost and gone, in the
sense of your future sufferings, even vex your selves for your former
abominations? These are the eyes which shot forth so many envious, amarous,
lascivious glaunces, now they are a terror to my self; these are the ears
which have hearkened to so many base, scurrilous, profane, lust provoking songs,
and now they present nothing but everlasting woe and sorrow to my soul; and
now, when all these things come to pass, which way will you turn in the midst
of these perplexities, whence will ye look for succor? will you now address
your self to the fountain of mercy, supplicate grace from Christ: why, with
what confidence and comfort can thou expect grace from him, to whom thou have
been a stranger all thy days? here is horror enough to confound thee, that he
has a fulness of mercy in him, but none for thee; that he has healing in
his wings, but none for thy refreshment; he is a gracious intercessor for
others, but in relation to thy self, a judge to design thee to everlasting
torments. And what a sad thing is ^t, that love it self, mercy it self,
sweetness it self; the Lamb must condemn thee? He that ^ath washed away the
sins of thousands in his blood, who have believed in him, and has also made
many, and many tenders of grace to thy soul, must now for thy stubborn
refusals, separate thee for ever by an irreversible sentence from the glory of
the Lord, and face of the Lamb. Oh think on this, think on this, whosoever you
are whom this counsel may concern; lay it seriously to heart: betimes whilst
your breasts are full of milk, and bones are full of marrow, before the evil
days come, wherein ye shall say, I have no pleasure in them.

Seems it a light thing in your eyes, that the wrath and indignation of the
Lord has broken forth so furiously against this Land? your sex speaks
tenderness and compassion; why where is the sounding of your bowels, where is
your pity to this distracted Kingdom? will ye not cease to provoke the Lord
against his Church, till ye have improved your pride to her utter desolation?
This is the time of Jacobs trouble, and shall it be your day of triumph? Oh let
the threatenings of the Lord prevail upon you: himself has spoken it, Isa. 22.
that he will have even the life of those that let out their affections to
unseasonable jollity, when his judgments call for tears: Believe his word and
tremble. I bessech you be content to lose a lust to save a Land, if you will
not for your own sakes, yet for the kingdoms sake forbear.

Away with your base and lustful baits, those black and infamous patches in
your faces, which render you odious and scandalous in the world, and in every
wise man's eye disfigure you, and lay it close to your hearts what the Lord has
done for you. Has he not in this common spoil and calamity, when he has swept
away thousands, (I believe) far more innocent then your selves, graciously
provided you places of refuge, and given you your lives for a prey, and will ye
now so unkindly requite him, as to turn his grace into wantonness, abuse his
long-suffering, and trample on his love? What, has the Lord, think ye,
preserved you all along through these bloody times, that you should live to
dishonor him? Or can ye possibly imagine, that he has placed you in the earth,
as the Leviathan in the sea, to take your pastime in it? or created you to
enjoy a Paradise of pleasures here, and when you have filled up your
generation, a heaven full of glory hereafter? No, no, believe it, the Lord has
no pleasure in your vanities, your inside beauty is his delight; the Kings
daughter was all glorious within: a life of lust and pleasure, is but the life
of a beast, its a life of folly, not of faith; in a word, its the ^hame of
Religion, and every good man's scorn. God expects ye should up and be doing in
your several vocations, and not ^ive like unprofitable members of the earth,
to waste and consume the good creatures of God: certainly it will be your
truest glory here, and your crown of rejoicing hereafter, under this light of
the Gospel, to lead a gospel life.

Now if any of this sex to whom I direct this discourse, shall reply hereto and
say, I will ^alk in the ways of my heart, and ^ight of my eyes; I will rejoice
in my youth, and my heart shall cheer me in my youth: I say no more but this;
Thou that art filthy, be thou filthy still; thou that art profane, be profane
still; thou that slightest Gods Ordinances, the means of thy salvation, neglect
them still; but take the close, hear thy doom, know thou assuredly, that for
all these things God will bring thee to judgment. But on the contrary, art
thou in the number of those that fear the Lord, and walk in his way? is the
joy of the Lord thy strength, and the word of the Lord thy joy? is thy
affection set on thy treasure, and thy treasure set on high? Oh then well is
thee, and happy shall thou be; however it shall fare with this sinful Nation,
thou art sure for one: yea, though the earth should move, and the hills be
carried into the midst of the sea, yet because thy life is hid in Jesus Christ,
thou art as safe as Noah in his Ark, when storms and waves surrounded him; thou
art above the malice of men, the fury of devils, the power of corruptions; the
rock of ages is thy fortress, thy sun, thy shield, thy sure repose here, thy
sweet repose hereafter; for in his presence is fulness of joy, and at his
right hand are pleasures for evermore.

FINIS.

