Two Famous, and Victorious BATTELIS FOVGHT IN IRELAND THE I.

By Sir William Saintleger, Lord President of Munster, against a great Number
of the Rebels, near the City of Cork, and after a long and tedious fight,
lasting three days, put the Rebels to flight, beating them out of their
Quarters, slew near upon 2000. April 20.

The second, by the Lord Inchequid and Colonel Vavasour against the Lord
Muskry, near Rochfort, April 22. With the Number that were slain in this
Battle. Also a Challenge sent by the Lord Musgrave to the President of Munster,
with the manner of the sending it on the top of a Pike. Likewise, the Names of
the chief Commanders of the Protestant Army in Ireland.

Whereunto is annexed the Copy of a Letter sent from Ireland, and read in the
House of Commons, it being Ordered by them to be forthwith published in Print.

Hen. Elsing Cler, Parl. D. Com.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in (...), That the Votes shall be printed,
and sent to the Sheriffs, and Justices, to be published in all the Market
towns, of the Counties of York and Lincoln.

John Brown Cler Parliament.



Printed for John Wels, 164^.

IT is declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the stopping of
the passages between Hul and the Parliam. and the intercepting of Messengers
employed from the Parliament to Hull, or from any that are in the Service of
the Parliament, or any Letters whatsoever sent by any to, or from the
Parliament is a high breach of the Privilege of Parliament, which by the laws
of this Kingdom, and the Protestation, we are bound to defend with our Lives
and our Fortunes, and to bring the Violat or thereof to condign punishment.

And hereby all Lords Lieutenants, and their Deputies authorized by the
Ordinance of both houses of Parliament, all Sheriffs, Justices, Majors,
Bryliffs, Constables, and other Officers whatsoever, are required to give their
uttermost Aid and Assistance to all that are employed in the said Service, for
their better and more speedy free and safe Passage: And to apprehend all such
as by color of any Warrant or other Authority whatsoever, shall endeavor or go
about to hinder any that are employed about the same, and them to apprehend and
in safe custody to send up to the Parliament.

Resolved upon the Question.

THat Sir John Hotham Knight, according to this relation, has done nothing but
in obedience to the Command of both Houses of Parliament.

Resolved upon the question.

That this declaring of Sir John Hotham traitor, being a Member of the House of
Commons, is a high breach of the privilege of Parliament.

Resolved upon the question.

That this declaring of Sir John Hotham Traitor without due process of law, is
against the liberty of the Subject and against the law of the land.

^^ Brown Cler. Parl

Exceeding Joyful, and comfortable News from Ireland.
Dear and loving Mother.
MY duty remembered unto you, etc. It is the Duty of a Son to write unto
Parents; whereby to give them to understand of the troubles in those dangerous
times.

God be thanked I have my health, with my wife and child in the city of Cork,
under the company of sir Charles Bannister, my very good friend. The enemy is
here round about us, expecting every day a Battle. This City of Cork is
strongly Fortified with Ammunition, so that the enemy dare not attempt against
us, but making some flashes in matters of contempt. Dungarven we took, with the
loss of two men, and two more hurt, many were slain on their side; but
sithence our departure, the enemy have taken it again, The whole town was ours
with the Castle. To give you notice of the State of this Kingdom of Ireland
Sir Richard Boyls Knight, Lord Barronet on Yewf^ll, Lord Vicount of Dangarve,
Earl of Cork, Lord high Treasurer of Ireland, and one of His Majesty's. privy
Counsel of England. The Earl of L^^^^ster, Lord Deputy and General. James
Earl of Ormon Lieutenant General, Sir William (...) Lord President of Munster,
and Sergeant Major General of the Kingdom of Ireland.

Here is nothing expected but fire and sword, we kill them and lay them in
heaps. My Lord President has made choice of this City of Cork for his abode, I
believe that 10000 men are not able to take it, if here be no treachery with
the Inhabitants; which Inhabitants are carefully looked unto: here is a Fort
Sytuated upon a Rock, with Brass Ordnance ready mounted, with Morter-Pieces to
send forth wildfire, the Fort and Castle will command the Country round, the
main S^lyeth three or four miles off this (...), we have watched day and night,
300. Soldiers within the City, and without the Walls. Vicount Musgraue of
Musgraue is of late turned Rebel against his Majesty, for he sent A letter
presented unto my Lord President upon the top of a Pike a Challenge, but he and
his Company dare not attempt, though they be in Number 40000.

This Musgrave is able to ride upon his own Land 30. miles outright; besides
25. miles of breadth: it is spoken he is the greatest monyed man in the whole
Land. My Lord President will have about with him very suddenly. So with my kind
love to my Brothers, and Sister my loving Master and Mistress, and all the rest
of our Neighbors and good Friends, Desiring God to bless you all in
prosperity in these our troubles, I conclude,

Your obedient, and dutiful Son, till death, BENJAMIN FOY.
From Cork April 23. 1642. If you write or send to me, direct your Letter to
Lieutenant Coronel Mym, Sir Charles Bannister Company.



More true News from Ireland.
Right Honorable,
SInce my last Letter, my own indisposition and imbecility has bin such, as in
mine own person I have not bin able to attempt any thing, but have by my
sickness bin confined to my chamber; but the forward earnestness and zeal to
the service in my Lord of Inchequid, Colonel Vavafor Captain Jerpson, and the
rest of the Officers of the small army here, has accomplished some exploits
whereof you may please to receive the ensuing relation, I being besieged on the
north side of the City by my Lord Muskoy, M. Carty Lath, and all the rest of
the western forces, and having notice that my Lord Roche, my Lord of Ikarn
Donbay, the Baron of Loghmy, M. Richard Butler, and all the tipperary forces
were drawing uptobeleager me on the south, I dispatched away the two Troops
then newly landed, under the command of my Lord Inchequid and captain Jephon
into the Lord Roches Country, inexpectance to divert him from his intended
course hitherwards, which sorted to so good purpose, as that I since understand
the tipperary forces have forsaken him, and that he remains himself upon his
keeping in his own Country.

During the stay of these Troops there, they were desired to the relief of a
Castle called Rathgogan by one M. Mead. which M. Iephson having performed with
a Squadron of each troop, and 80 Musketeers drawn out of his house and mine.
In his retreat he was encountered by two or three Companies from Mimeallock,
onwhom he with a horse, and another officer with a foo^ charged in several
places, and routed them, slaying above 150 beside 50 slain in relieving the
Castle. On the 13. of this instant my Lord of Muskry (who has kept this Camp a
long time at Rochforts Town 3. miles from this City) caused a part of his army
to chase home our scouts to the very Suburbs where in a bravado they made a
stand, whereat my Lord Inchequid, Colonel Vavasour, and the rest of the
Officers being much incensed, obtained my leave to issue forth immediately with
300. Musketeers, and two Troops of horse: upon the sallying out they found the
enemy retreated, and pursued him to his quarters, where the main body
consisting of 36 Colors as they were numbered forthwith appeared, and after
several parties sent from the main body to skirmish with our men had bin
beaten back, they began to pack up their Baggage, and forsook their Camp, after
whom our men made all the speed they might: and having chased them two or three
miles, charged upon the Rear routed the whole Army, which betook it self to
flight, and took all their Carriage and Luggage, whereof the Lord of Muskeries
own Armor Tent, and Trunks were apart. slew about 200. of their men that took
to firm ground, and retired without loss of a man, etc.

Your Lordships most humble Servant, W. S.

It is this day Ordered by the Cammons now assembled in Parliament, that this
Letter be forthwith publisheh in Print.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

