PHOCAENA, OR THE ANATOMY OF A PORPESS, DISSECTED AT Gresham College: WITH A
Praeliminary Discourse concerning Anatomy, and a Natural History of ANIMALS.

The World was made to be inhabited by Beasts, but studied and contemplated by
Man: it is the Debt of our Reason we owe unto God, and the Homage we pay him for
not being Beasts. Religio Medici. LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took at the Ship
in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

To the HONORABLE Sr. Joseph Williamson, Knight. President of the Royal Society;
and to the Council, and Fellows of the said Society.
SIR,
THere is no man that has the free use of his Reason and Senses, with
Opportunity, but must as naturally fall to Philosophizing; as a Silkworm that
is full grown, and has a convenient place, must fall to Spinning. But one whom
the Royal Society has so far honored and obliged, as to make him of their
Number; how much less possible is it for him to live a Drone, and not to act
his part in so industrious and noble a Hive? As a Specimen of what I am willing
more particularly to apply my self to, I here humbly offer the following
Discourse to your acceptance. And which I also do with some allowable boldness:
Because upon a subject so suitable to your Design; because, I am sure, I have
at least heartily aimed at my Duty in the management of it: and because it was
first drawn up, and is now published, not without your own favorable Aspect
and good liking. And if, upon your review, it shall again meet with the same, I
shall not only be buyoed up against any ill Reflections that may befall it; but
encouraged to proceed in what I have begun: and to do all that one would do,
who aspires to be in some measure useful, and

Sir, One of Your most Obedient Servants, Edw. Tyson.

A Preliminary Discourse Concerning ANATOMY AND A NATURAL HISTORY OF ANIMALS.
SInce first I applied my self to Physic, and had spent some time in the
various studies thereof; though each had its peculiar Charms, which allured and
greatly delighted the Mind busied and employed therein; yet that of Anatomy in
a more extraordinary manner affected my Genius. The great and useful
discoveries that of late have been made by it in the Lesser World, have
equalled, if not exceeded those done by curious Adventurers and Sailors in the
Greater. New Tracts, new Lands, new Seas are daily sound out, and fresh
descriptions of unknown Countries still from both brought in; so that we are
forced to alter our Maps, and make anew the Geography of both again. Nor have
the discoveries of the Indies more enriched the world of old, than those of
Anatomy now have improved both Natural and Medical Science: Nor can I tell how
otherwise we can attain to that advice of the Oracle, (...), but by Anatomy.
Natures Synthetic Method in the composure and structure of Animal Bodies, is
best learned by this Analytic; by taking to pieces this Automaton, and viewing
asunder the several Parts, Wheels and Springs that give it life and motion.

Physic certainly must acknowledge Anatomy its best Cynosure; and that Pilot
must needs err and wander, who without it, being ignorant of the various Seas
and Coasts he sails in, steers all in the dark and at random: or if possibly it
happens that sometimes he be cast into the desired Port or Haven; yet he is to
be esteemed more fortunate than skilful. The dissection of Morbid Bodies
affords the best account of Diseases; and often indicates the cure in others:
that of Sanous, informs us of the true texture and uses of the parts. Both have
their great advantages, both ought with equal Care and Sollicitousness to be
cultivated. But since we must know what is the right, before we can understand
the various deviations from that Rule; great and laborious have been the
Reserches both of the present and former Ages, for the attaining this: But in
nothing have their endeavors been more successful than in making a comparative
survey. Nature when more shy in one, has more freely confessed and shown herself
in another; and a Fly sometimes has given greater light toward the true
knowledge of the structure and the uses of the Parts in Humane Bodies, than an
often repeated dissection of the same might have done. Hence it is that the
great Improvers of this Learning have dug so much in these rich Mines, and
have brought from thence so vast treasures; though they are still so far from
exhausting them, or proclaiming Nature's Penury, that they cannot sufficiently
extol her Bounty, or with too passionate a Zeal solicit a farther prosecution
of so great a work; which by their example and success therein, they have both
credited and encouraged. We must not therefore think the meanest of the
Creation vile or useless, since that in them in lively Characters (if we can
but read) we may find the knowledge of a Deity and our selves. What often our
inconsiderate Ignorance disregards and thinks but despicable, were there a just
scrutiny made, it could not but excite our greatest admiration, and extort a
Confession of its admirable contrivance and workmanship. In every Animal there
is a world of wonders; each is a Microcosme or a world in it self: And that
great Conqueror of the world, who wept that there was but one for his
ambitious Rage to spoil, at length more nobly had his desires in these, and
with greater Glory has eternized his Name, when after he had ravaged the Air,
Sea and Land, at last committed to Aristotle to write the History of his
Trophies. The wisest of Kings and Men may be thought to have gained great part
of his knowledge from them. Nor ever was there an Age so ignorant and Brutish,
but in some measure or other has endeavored to bequeath to Posterity their
Learning herein. Ours that has so widely extended the Pomoeria or former
Boundaries of all good Learning, and with vast labor has at last pulled down
those Herculean Pillars, that too narrowly confined its Empire; having
vindicated its just Liberties from the Tyranny of usurping Authorities, and the
Credulous slavery to some Great Names, does daily bring in its stores for the
rearing a new and more lasting structure of Natural History. For impartially
viewing the Buildings of the old, and finding in so many Places its foundations
so weak and infirm, although many of its Materials may serve again, yet it has
been thought more advisable to pull it down and begin a new, than to repair
the Ruins of so decrepit an Edifice. In so great a work many hands are daily
employed, some in battering down and removing the Rubbish, others in
endeavoring to lay a good foundation; some dig for new stone, others labor in
polishing it; others in inventing new and more convenient Instruments and tools
to work with; some give their Pains, others their Purses; all their desires and
good wishes to so noble a design. But since it will be some time before we can
expect so vast a Pile to be completed; great care must be had, that what is
brought in, be preserved and secured either from the Injuries of the weather or
times, or danger of being squandered away, and that all may be ready at hand
when they come to have occasion of using it in raising this stately fabric;
for the modelling and contriving of which the skilfullest Artists must be
consulted with, though even the meanest in some things may give in their
Informations. I shall therefore here propose a rude Draught or Sciagraphy of a
Natural History of Animals; such as hastily occurred to me; not what may be
done, or the thing requires, but what happily may afford some Hints to others.

In compiling therefore a Natural History of Animals, I have always thought
that Ambition of some of writing an Universal, more Pompous than Instructive;
for the Method they have usually taken has been to rake in all from former
Authors, without separating the weeds, or sifting the chaff from the Grain: By
this they have farther propagated many antiquated errors, without adding much
new Truths to the stock themselves. But had they taken as much pains and
travail in searching the Books of Nature as they have in those of former
Writers, and instead of giving us an account of Animals of foreign Countries
(which they could not observe) they had made a curious and strict Inquiry into
those of their own, their accounts would have been more faithful and welcome,
and they have deserved more for this Particular, than their universal History.

(...). I could therefore wish we had a good History of the Animals of our own
Country, and not like giddy Travelers ramble abroad to see fine things, and
still remain ignorant of what we have at home. This History I could desire
likewise might commence from the lowest degree of Animation in Zoophyta's or
Plant-animals; inquiring here into Nature's first Rudiments and obscurer
Vestigia of forming the Organs of an Amphibious life in them; then gradually
ascending by her clew to run through all the various Tribes of Animals;
carefully observing all along the Harmony she keeps, or the Liberty she takes
in the different formation of them, and from the whole to give a general
Prospect of her workings.

The various tribes of Animals I may reckon Insects, Reptiles, Fishes, Birds,
Quadrupeds, and the Intermediate species; and of these may be given

An Account Physiological. Anatomical. Medical.
The Physiological Account may contain The Names Synonyma's of our own or other
Nations both Ancient and Modern. Their general and external descriptions. Their
various species and subdivisions, and Characteristical marks. The Places they
most frequent or are bred in. The season when, and the time how long they live.
Their way of Living, their Food, etc. Any remarkable Observations relating to
their sagacity, etc. The use and Benefit they afford to Man, etc. for Food, and
the best way of ordering them. for Clothing. for Mechanical uses, etc. The
Injuries they do, how to be avoided or remedied. The ways of taking,
preserving, propagating or destroying them.
Former Naturalists in their Histories have contented themselves with more or
fewer of these Inquiries, in which yet they too too often misguide us by their
Accounts taken from unsaithful Relators, or the fabulous Records of the
Ancients; nauseating and obscuring the whole by tedious Philological Harangues,
or troublesome quotations for the confronting or establishing the Opinions of
some; relying on others, when Autopsie, and their own Experience can only
inform them; and their Conscience and eyes may be as a thousand Witnesses. I
cannot see how a Natural History of Animals can be writ without Zootomy; at
best their Accounts can be but superficial, and by them we may know a Pig from
a Dog, or that this is a Bull, a Bear or Monky; but still remain ignorant of
the curious Contrivance and Mechanisme of Nature within; just as if a person
should think he had sufficiently described a Watch, when he had only taken
notice of the Case, the Studs, the Glass, the figures and hand; by this he may
know it to be perhaps a Watch, but knows not how it so exactly measures time.
This most necessary part therefore and most instructive,

The Anatomical Account may contain,

1. An accurate Dissection and Description of all the solid Parts, to be
illustrated (where necessary) with Figures; and herein to be mentioned not only
their Site, Number, Figure, Color, Magnitude, their Cavities, Vessels,
Integuments, Substances, Ligaments, and Communications they have with other
Parts, but likewise in some, a more strict scrutiny may be made into their
utmost Textures, by unravelling the same, and by the assistances of Glasses and
other Methods. Thus viewing Nature where she more plainly discovers herself, by
the Logic of a fair Analogy we may conclude she works the same, where yet her
tracts are more obscure, and shuns the view of our most sollicitous Inquiry.

2. But since life and the whole Oeconomia Animalis consists chiefly in the
fluider Parts of our Bodies; I have always thought it a too narrow confinement
of Anatomy, when restrained only to the search of the Containing Parts. The
Contained likewise and Fluids are capable of an Analysis, if not by the knife,
yet fire: and the various mixtures made of them with Acids and Alkali's of
various sorts and consistences; and observing thence the various Results of
Fermentations, Ebullitions, Coagulations, alterations in Colors, and other
Qualities, will afford abundance of curious and instructive speculations: and I
would have not only a view to be made of all the Humors in each single
subject, but upon the whole a Reflection to be made; and from such a stock of
Experiments, we may warrant an Inference, and be more happy in our guesses
about the uses of the Parts, and the Offices they perform in this Economy.

3. The Psychologia likewise will here deserve to be considered. Sensation and
Motion, and what other functions there are of the soul, by such a Comparative
survey may be rendered more intelligible; and from a clearer knowledge of them
in Brutes, at length we may come the better to know our selves.

4. Lastly, Embryotomia and the History of Generation, These as they will
require a great deal of Labor in the Reserch, so will they abundantly
recompense the Pains by the great plenty they will afford of fruitful
Observations. Nature viewed in her naked form, in the first organization of
Animal Bodies, before she has drawn over the veil of slesh, and obscured her
first lines by the succeeding varnish of her last hand, more freely displays
herself, and suffers us to behold the disjoynted Parts of this admirable
Machine, and how it is that in time she puts them all together: this certainly
will be of the greatest consequence both for the knowing the structure and the
uses of the Parts.

But that we may yet reap farther advantage from this disquisition, and render
it serviceable for the Prolongation of Humane, as well as their own lives, I
have added

The Medical Account, which may contain as well the Diseases they are most
obnoxious to, with the History of Cures performed either by themselves, or the
assistance of Others; as also the Copia of Medicines that may be thence
obtained, for the enriching and enlarging Pharmacy.

Physic, if we may believe the Ancients, in its Infancy, took its Rise from
Bruits; they taught us the use of Clysters, Bleeding, Purging, Vomiting, the
Sovereign virtues of Plants against Poisons, Haemorrhagies, Wounds, Blindness,
and almost the whole stock of all Pandora's Evils. And certainly were we but
diligent in observing, our Reason might here learn a great deal, which
Provident Nature has taught them by Instinct to out do us in.

Experience tells us, some Distempers sometimes are more happily cured in them,
than in Men. Physic at first was but Empiricy; success in one, encouraged a
trial in another. I could therefore wish we had an History of Cures performed
on Brutes. The Ancient Physicians thought this study not below them; hence it is
we have the Medicina Veterinaria, Mulo-Medicina, Hippiatria, (...), etc. By
this we may not only preserve their Lives for our Profits or Pleasure; but
likewise be provided with further means of prolonging and lengthening our own.

Likewise on these Subjects when diseased, variety of Experiments may be tried
for the proof of the force of Medicines, for conquering the most stubborn
distempers; the causes of their ailements may be enquired into by Anatomy, and
more daring attempts offered at, which at length by repeated success in them,
may be essayed in Man. In short, there is no part of Physic but what may
receive Improvements from them, there being not that difference between our
Bodies and theirs, only our Intemperance has made us liable to a greater
number of diseases.

As already they have furnished us with a great store of generous Medicines; so
I doubt not, but that if a strict search were made, we might easily augment the
stock from them. I could therefore wish, that this likewise were prosecuted,
and the best Methods of preparing and giving them were faithfully recorded.

Having run through these three Accounts, the Physiological, the Anatomical and
Medical, a reflection upon the whole may be made; and the Pseudodoxia or false
Opinions of the Ancients, and the fabulous traditions concerning them, may be
taken notice of, rather by way of Catalogue than a larger Confutation.

But here it may be objected perhaps by some, That this design is too great to
be effected, since a single subject so to be examined, will make a volume, and
require some years, and the assistances of several heads and hands. But however
slothful Ignorance may hence take a discouragement, yet nothing is insuperable
to diligence and pains. But he certainly is to blame, who because he cannot have
all, grows sullen, and will have none. If what may, were but performed, such a
stock would easily be added to by future diligence; and far better a little
with accurateness, than an heap of rubbish carelessly thrown together. Malpighi
in his Silkworm has done more, than Jonston in his whole book of Insects; and
he and the Ingenious Dr. Grew have taught us far more of Plants, than either
Gerard or Parkinson. Since therefore it requires so much Pains, Expense and
Time, many hands must be engaged therein; although it were to be desired, that
some whose great Labors and Experience had rendered them more capable and
expert, were more immediately concerned. Nor were it difficult, were there more
Alexanders to find out Aristotle's.

All Animals are not capable of all these heads of Inquiry, and several are so
near a kin, that having fully described a Genus, the accidental differences of
its various species would be soon absolved; nor would there need a Repetition,
but a bare Recital of the most remarkable discrepances; as the Anatomy of a
Porpess might indifferently serve for a Dolphin, and most of the Cetaceous
kind. I could therefore wish that at least for the present we had an Account of
the most Anomalous and Heteroclite sorts of Animals; or such whose species are
most different. These Essays as they would animate Others to the Prosecution of
the same, so likewise they would be a great help and assistance to them in the
design. Something this way I may do perhaps my self; and though I may not be so
able or skilful as to hit the mark, or to catch the Game; yet having raised it,
and given the alarm to others, they may more successfully pursue it.

What is here performed in the Anatomy of a Porpess; since it is but from a
single Observation, and the first of the kind I had opportunity of dissecting,
I cannot think it so exact or full, but that another or my self upon a review,
might meet with mistakes, or make additions thereto. Which is but what I have
here done to those Accounts given us already of the Anatomy of this Fish, by
the famous Rondeletius, Bartholine, Jo. Dan. Major, and Mr. Ray. However had it
not met with more favorable Censures than my own, it might have still enjoyed,
what it best deserves, the silent confinement of my Study. But since it creeps
abroad, I must here acknowledge the kindness of my most Ingenious Friend Mr.
Hook, and those worthy Persons, who gave me the opportunity of making the
Observation; And his particular assisting me in designing several of the
figures, and other favors deserve my best Remembrance.

I shall only farther add, that we may here take notice of something of
Nature's working, and gradual formation of the different Species of Animals;
who like a curious Artist in designing the richest Tapistry, does not hastily
pass from one extreme Color to another; but curiously shadowing and
intermixing the same, does give a greater Grace and Beauty to the whole. This
is but what has been formerly observed by that ancient Christian Philosopher
Nemesius in his (...) (p. m. 7.) where he tells us, (...). several instances he
gives of this amphibious or Hermophroditical Nature of Animals and Natural
Bodies; or as it were a scale or Gradation of them; as first in Zoophyta's,
then in the Testaceous Kind and Worms, then in more complete Brutes; after in
such whose sagacity approaches the consines of Reason; at last in Man and
Intelligent Beings, that are a boundary between Divinity and the Creation. What
we have here is a signal Example of the same between Land-Quadrupeds and
Fishes; for if we view a Porpess on the outside, there is nothing more than a
fish; if we look within, there is nothing less. It cannot abide upon the Land
so much as the Phoca, yet is often drowned in its own Element, and has a
constant need of the reciprocal motion of Air in Respiration. It is viviparous,
does give suck, and has all its Organs so contrived according to the standard
of them in Land-Quadrupeds; that one would almost think it to be such, but that
it lives in the Sea, and has but two fore sins. The Contrivance and Structure
of several of its parts are most curious and admirable; much illustrating
diverse late Inventions of some, and affording good hints for making others. And
certainly by carefully perusing these Books of Nature, we shall not squander
away our time in trifles, but may expect to meet with what will both please and
ravish the Fancy, inform the Judgment and enrich the mind with the knowledge
of God in his works, and of our selves.

ERRATA.
PAge 20. line 1. r. roundish: p. 21. l. 17. Phiae r. Plicae: p. 24. l. 14.
after it, insert pallidius: p. 42. l. 24. after Tympanum, add, had a small bone
that did arise upwards; but part of it was broken off. We could not observe
here either Incus, Stapes, or Malleolus, but to the Tympanum --

PHOCAENA, OR THE ANATOMY OF A PORPESS.
THis Fish by Aristotle is called Phocaena; by Pliny, and diverse others Tursio;
in English a Porpess, quasi Porcus Piscis, or Sea-hog; by the Germans Marsovin;
in Latin often Marsuinus, i. e. Maris Sus; and in Athenaeus, (...), and indeed
in several particulars it so much resembles that terrestrial Animal, that this
Name seems not improper, but much more justifiable than those of diverse other
Fishes taken from land Creatures.

It Is placed generally by Ichthyographers amongst the Cetaceous kind, and
reckoned a Species of Dolphins. P. Bellon. de Aquatil. l. 1. p. m. 12.
Bellonius gives several particulars both in the Internal and External parts,
wherein the Dolphin and Porpess differ; but very much suspecting the truth of
his Observations, I shall only take notice of one, mentioned by Rondeletius,
Aristothe and Bellonius himself which is the Rostrum or Snout, which is much
longer in the Dolphin than the Porpess, which is sufficient to distinguish
them: and Vlyss. Aldrovand. de Cetis, p. m. 119.
Ulysses Aldrovandus does seem to make it the only distinction where he says,
Quaecunque etiam de Delphini utroque sexu scripta sunt, Phocaenae similiter
convenient; and nisi Phocaena rostrum brevius haberet, Delphino fere undiquaque
similis soret.

The Vid. Tab. 1. Fig. 1.
figure of this Porpess we dissected was oblong, its body roundish, its Head
and Rostrum obtuse, the Rictus of its Mouth but small; it had two finns on the
sides of its breast, one on its Back, and a semilunary tail placed parallel to
the Horizon, which in most other fishes but of this kind is vertical. The
Aperture of its Eyes was but small. On the Head a little above the Eyes, it had
a fistula or Spout arising from the Palate, which serves him for the drawing in
Air for Respiration; as also for spouting out of water, as in the Cetaceous
kind. On the Belly we observed the Place of the Vmbilicus, and below that the
Tab. 1. Fig. 1. bb.
Pudendum, of each side of which were placed two Ibid. a.
Teats; below the Pudendum was the Anus.

The Dimensions of its Body taken in the Decimal Measure of an Inch were as
follows. From the tip of the Nose to the Extreme of the Tail was 412 decimals.
Its greatest thickness, being at from its Nose, was 82. The Girt of him in its
biggest part was 250. At the beginning of its fins 230.

From the tip of the Nose to its Navel 180. to its Anus 300. to the Fin on the
back 190. to the Fins on the breast 100. to the middle of the Spout 52. to its
Eye 49.

The length or Aperture of its Eye 7. the distance between the two Eyes in a
straight line 52. from the hinder Canthus of the Eye to the Porus Auditorius
was 17.

The length of the Mouth 30. the length of the outward Rima of the Pudendum 30.
the length of those slits that were of each side, occasioned by the retraction
of the teats, 7.

The length of the Fin of the back 40. the height of the same 27. the length of
those on the Breast 70. the breadth 24. the distance between them 42. the
spread of the Tail 100. the broadest part near the Middle 37.

The whole weight of this fish was 96 l. aver du pois, that dissected by
Miscellan. Curiosa Med. Phys. Germanic. anni quarti Obsor. 20.
Daniel Major weighed 124 l. but Jonston Hist. Not. de Pife^^. l. 5. p. m. 221.
Jonston mentions, that in Neustria there was one taken that weighed 1000 l.

The Color of the upper half of the skin, that covered the Back, the Fins and
Tail was of a shining black; the rest very white: but on the sides a little
above the fins, 'twas speckled of an Ash color, or as Major expresses it,
marbled by the mixture of both colors, into spots and streaks.

The Skin was perfectly sinooth, without either hair or scales, which I suppose
did very much advantage its swimming, and may be the reason we did not meet
with those foramina on the head and sides which are frequent in scaly fish, and
which, as Nich. Steno de Raiae Anat. p. m. 55. and Canis O^^thariae dissec^um
cap. p. 93.
Steno has well observed, do discharge an oily substance, that serves for the
lubricating the sides of the fish, and so renders them fitter for swimming; as
our Watermen do commonly trim their boats, that they may the more easily glide
on the water. However on the Nose of each side we observed two small holes that
would only admit of a bristle.

Bellonius, Rondeletius, Major, and others do mention the Meatus Auditorius
which we likewise observed at that distance from the Eye, as has been
expressed: it is extreme small, and whether really perforated at the skin, we
somewhat doubted; for forcing a small bristle into it, after it had entered, it
readily descended toward the os Petrosum.

The sigure of the Aperture of the Tab. 2. fig. 9. A.
Spiraculum or Spout was somewhat semilunar: 'twas placed across the forehead
just before the Brain, and was almost an Inch in length.

The shape of the Back was like the body of a Ship inverted, that were it not
for its Fins and Tail, it would easily turn downwards; but the contrivance is
most convenient for swimming, by reason the water that is removed in swimming
is that above them, which does most readily give way.

The Horizontal site of the Tail in this fish is of great use. Plil^s.
Transact. n. 76. p. 2275.
Mr. Ray conceives it to be partly to supply the hindermost pair of Fins, which
serve to balance the body and keep it up in the water, answering in proportion
to the hinder legs of a Quadruped; Hence we see that those fishes which have
long Bodies, and but one pair of fins, as Eeles and the like, cannot keep
themselves up in water, but lie always grovelling on the bottom: Partly to
facilitate the fishes ascent to the top of the water (to which he can
immediately raise himself by a light jerk of his tail thus placed) for the use
of Respiration, which is as necessary for him as for Quadrupeds.

The structure of the viscera and inward Parts have so great an Analogy and
resemblance to those of Quadrupeds, that we find them here almost the same. The
greatest difference from them seems to be in the external shape, and wanting
feet. But here too we observed that when the skin and flesh was taken off, the
Tab. 2. fig. x. and xi.
fore-fins did very well represent an Arm, there being the Scapula, an os
Humeri, the Vlna, and Radius, the bones of the Carpus, the Metacarp, and 5
digiti curiously joynted; the Tail too does very well supply the defect of
feet both in swimming as also leaping in the water, as if both hinder-feet were
colligated into one, though it consisted not of articulated bones but rather
Tendons and Cartilages.

The Pudendum, Anus and Mammae we shall describe when we come to those Parts to
which they do belong. Next of all we shall take notice that the body was
divided into three Regions or Venters, the Head, the Breast, and Abdomen. All
of them had these common Integuments, a Cuticula, a Cutis, Fat, and a
Panniculus Musculosus.

The Cuticula was a thin scarfe-skin, pretty easily separable by scraping with
a knife from the Cutis. When any part was bent, 'twould wrinkle into exceeding
small solds, but when unbent, 'twould readily return to its former sinoothness.

The Cutis was 1/10 of an Inch thick, pretty easily vulnerable and flexible.
Its Color was the same throughout; but where it was black, there on the
innermost or concave part it was of the deepest color.

The Fat, or as Mr. Ra^ calls it, the Blubber, was an Inch, or in some places
more thick; encompassing the whole Tab. 1. fig. 2. aaaa.
body as in an Hog. It had a curious texture of fibers, which arising from the
Panniculus Musculosus did decussate each other lattice-wise, and terminate in
the Skin. Examining a small part of this Fat in a good Microscope, we observed
it to consist of an admirable structure of numerous small cells or little
bladders, in which was contained the Oil; so that upon cutting any part the Oil
would readily run out. The Fat therefore or Blubber in this fish was nothing
else but Oil contained in those Cells or bladders.

There are three uses Mr. Ray assigns to this part, 1. To keep the cold water
at a distance from the blood, which in this Animal is hot, and by an immediate
contact would be apt to be chilled. 2. To keep in the hot steams of the blood
from evaporating. 3. Perhaps also to lighten and counterpoise the body of the
fish, which would otherwise be too heavy to move and swim in the water.
Bartholin says, that they make use of the Oil for Lamps.

The Panniculus Carnosus here was remarkable, consisting of muscular fibers,
which were of a more florid red, than that of the Muscles. Its fibers from the
back seemed obliquely ascending; but from the joining of the sternum to the
Costae and so proportionably on the Abdomen, descending obliquely and meeting
at the Linea alba. I just now mentioned the fibers that did run from the
Panniculus through the fat to the skin: the use of them may be, more firmly to
hold to the skin, which if joined only to the fat, would be much more easily
separable. They may likewise give a Motion to the skin, as the Panniculus
Carnosus does in Brutes. And lastly running through the Fat or blubber, they
may very much strengthen the Cells or bladders.

The Muscular flesh of this Animal resembled not that of Fish, but rather
Quadrupeds, being very Sanguineous, but of a dark red Color. On the Abdomen we
observed the Musculi oblique ascendentes, oblique descendentes, transversales,
and recti. The tendons of the three former constituted the Linea alba, which
was very broad and of a more curious but looser texture than usually: for we
could easily perceive how they did run in several Manipuli, being interweaved
and decussating each other as represented in Fig. 1. Tab. 2. The Musculi Recti
were very thick and large; on the Inside we observed the Vena and Arteria
Mammaria and Hypogastrica.

Under the Muscles of the Abdomen lies the Peritonaeum, which is a thin though
a double Membrane, in the duplicature of which there lies the Tab. 2. fig. 3.
EE.
Bladder. Of each side the Bladder there are fastened to the Peritonaeum the
two ibid. PP.
Ovaria or Testicles, the Extremes of the nn.
Cornua Vteri, as also the Alae Vteri. The numerous branches of large ib. sss.
blood vessels that run to them, afforded a very pleasant sight. To the Navel
were fastened the Vena and ff.
Arteriae Vmbilicales, as in Quadrupeds.

Tho. Bartholin. Histor. Anat. Cent. 2. Obs. 25.
Bartholine and Jo. Dan. Major do both expressly deny that it has any Omentum;
But in that which we dissected we observed a pretty large one; but not extended
over the Guts as in other Animals, but drawn up and lying loose between the
Stomach and Intestines. 'Twas fastened to all the Stomachs, and received from
them a great number of Sanguinary Vessels. It had its duplicature as in
Quadrupeds, but no fat on it. Its its duplicature as in Quadrupeds, but no fat
on it. Its whole texture seemed to be nothing else but an admirable Schematism
or Network of Vessels and Fibers, which our naked Eye as well as Glasses could
discover, and is in part represented in Fig. 6. Tab. 1. Rond. de Pisc. l. 16.
cap. 8. p. 449.
Rondeletius does mention an Epiploum in Dolphins, as also does M. A. Severini
Phoca illustratus. p. m. 31.
Severinus in his Phoca, which he does describe to be without fat, which I
rather think is natural, than, as he supposes, by a contabescence.

On the Omentum several Glandulous Bodies are fastened, Tab. 1. fig. 6. K.
a large round one growing thereon near the first stomach about the bigness of
an ordinary Wallnut, being of a dark flesh Color, and having a great many
vessels common to it with the stomach, which Bartholine calls the vasa brevia.
At a small distance from this are placed several other lesser ones, some of the
bigness of an Hazel Nut, others of a Pea or Pepper Corn, in all in number about
10 or 12.

Where Mr. Ray does say the Spleen was small and rundish; I suppose he means
the largest of these Globules. Bartholine took notice of two as the most
conspicuous, and calls them the spleen. Dan. Major mentions 4 or 5. and says
they are so like the substance of the spleen, ^ut viderentur totidem splenes
esse; but presently after adds, and ipse Lien quidem peculiaris ac distinctus
in propria sede quoque comparuit, sed ex multis similibus globulis veluti
compactus; if that by this he means any part different from the former
globules, his Animal was different from ours, for we could observe no such
thing. But as the Kidneys here consisted not of one entire substance, but of
abundance of distinct Glands, so likewise the Spleen which is a conglomerated
Glandule, had its various Portions distinct and more separated; so that as it
may be said to have three hundred Kidneys, so likewise ten or more Spleens.
Rond. l. 19. c. 8. p. 449.
Rondeletius observes that in Dolphins, Lien in recens natis magnus pro
corporis ratione, in adultis parvus and niger.

These Globules or Spleens were not fastened, as Major hints, to the stomach,
although placed near it; but to the Omentum; as also was the Tab. 1. Fig. 6. H.
Pancreas, which at its Basis was appended likewise to the Duodenum, where its
Ibid. i.
Ductus entered and emptyed it self a little below the Pylorus, and not into
the third stomach, as Mr. Ray asserts.

The Color of the Pancreas was whitish, as in other Animals. At its basis
'twas thick, and thinner toward the edges, where it seems orbicular or
roundish. It was about 2 Inches and in diameter. One side was slat, the other
protuberant. The ductus Pancreaticus was pretty large. Major says, that the
Pancreas he observed, was longum valde and exporrectum. But Bartholine
describes it to be triquetrum.

The Stomach in this fish was very remarkable, consisting of 3 Bags. The Tab.
1. Fig. 6. A.
first which was the largest, was about ten Inches in length, and 3 in breadth,
resembling a long Pouch or Urinal. Toward the upper B.
part it empties it self into the second C.
Ventricle which is about 6 inches in length, and 2 and in breadth. This at the
D.
side near the fundus by a long descending narrow passage is emptied into the E
E.
third, which is about an Inch broad; which sending one part downwards, is
again reflected upwards as represented in Fig. 6. Tab. 1.

The Stomachs are made up of several Tunicles; for in the first, besides the
Membrana communis we easily discovered a Muscular Tunicle under it, and in the
inside a strong white Nervous one, which very much resembled the inward
Pellicle of the Gizard of Fowls. It had abundance of small rugae or rather
surrows or lines; but at the orifice, where it empties it self into the second
ventricle, the Plice or solds were very large and numerous, that rendered the
Passage so strait, that nothing but a sluid Chymus could be transmitted.

The inward Tunicle of the second slomach was a pleasant sight, having large
rugae length-wayes, from the sides of which at certain small distances issued
mutual, Protuberances of the same substance. The Color of the whole was a
slorid red, very much resembling the branches of red Coral. By scraping with a
knife I could express a great deal of a Chymous substance out of it, and pretty
easily separate this tunicle from the next. It was about 1/12 of an Inch thick,
and seemed to be glandulous. The Passage out of this ventricle into the third
was very strait, having a sort of Rugous Annular valve, and a Passage about an
inch in length before it empties it self into the third ventricle.

The Tunicles of the third ventricle were much the same with those of the
Intestines, and in it nothing is more remarkable than the T. b. 1. fig. 6. j.
Pylorus or Passage into the Duodenum, the Tunicle there being so contracted
and pursed in, that it leaves a Passage only about the bigness of the hollow of
a Goose-quill, though outwardly it is, almost as large as either the Ventricle
it self or the Intestine.

Mr. Ray in the stomach of the Propess he dissected, found a great number of
Sand-Eeles, Lances, or as called by Gesner, Ammodytae. Dan. Major found in his
the Spines of fishes, small Tellinae and particles of other of the Testaceous
and Crustaceous kind, and Sand. In ours we observed the Spines of fishes, and 2
or 3 Herrings pretty entire, having only their outward Parts corroded. Likewise
in the Oesophagus or Gula (whose inward Tunicle was almost the same with that
of the first stomach) were the bones and spines of several fishes. In the
second and third stomach was only a Chymous substance or a Colliquamentum
Chylosum livido-albescens, as Major words it.

Digestion here seems to be performed by a gradual Corrosion first of the
outward parts, and so penetrating inwards. But whence the Menstruum that
performs this Office is transmitted, is difficult to determine. For in the
inward Tunicle of the first Stomach there are no Glands seated, that might
separate such a liquor; nor are the Plicae or Rugae so considerable, as to
contain any great quantity of the Relics of a former digestion, as to serve
for a succeeding ferment; But seem rather a strong close white membrane like
the inward Pellicle of the Gizard of fowls, and by this means less capable of
any injury from the bones and fragments of shells that are often contained in it.
But as in fowls there is placed a little above the Gizard abundance of Glands,
that secern a liquor that serves for the moistening and digesting their hard
food, which afterward is farther comminuated by the grinding of the strong
Muscles of that Ventricle; so I am apt to think that in this fish, the
Glandulae Maxillares and those other that are very large and numerous, and are
placed about the fauces and the neighboring parts, do separate a saliva or
liquor that may conduce much to this use; unless we may think that that large
Glandulous Tunicle in the second stomach may secern a Juice there, that may
regurgitate into the first. However since all Glandules do make some
separation, we may reasonably suppose that this made by this Glandulous tunicle
does serve for the further fermenting the Chymous magma transmitted out of the
first Ventricle. And nature seems very sollicitous herein, by making the
Passages out of one into the other so strait and narrow, that it cannot easily
be transmitted from one to the other, before it has undergone its due
digestion in each.

Meeting with so many Bones in the Gula, it made me think whether possibly
after the flesh is corroded from them, it might not vomit them up; or whether
the Gula may not in part perform the Office of the stomach, having its inward
Tunicle the same. In several fishes there is no Gula, but the stomach reaches
up to the Throat.

The Intestines in this fish were long and small, being eleven times the length
of the fish, or about fifty foot. They were almost equally throughout of a
bigness, only something larger toward the Duodenum and Anus. It had no Caecum
or Colon.

Opening the Extreme of the Rectum in the inside, I observed a white Pellicle
or Skin like the inward Tunicle of the first stomach of this fish. From the
Anus 'twas about three inches in length; above this the Intestine was of the
same make as elsewhere. About an Inch and from the Anus under this Pellicle I
took notice of a pretty large glandulous body that empties it self by several
ductus's that perforate this Pellicle into the Cavity of the Intestine. The
Ostia of some of them were pretty large, of others but small, yet would easily
admit a bristle into them.

The Anus is placed a little below the Pudendum, it had its Sphincter Muscle:
by the falling of the skin in several Rugae 'twas so closed that no water could
get in.

The Mosentery in respect of the length of the Intestines was but small, yet
had numerous Meseraic vessels branched as in other Brutes. The Pancreas Asellii
was large, consisting of abundance of Glands and seated in a somewhat semilunar
figure. From the Pancreas Asellii running toward the Receptaculum we observed
several Venae lactcae pretty large, as likewise some smaller ones coming from
the Intestines to the Pancreas.

The Tab. 2. Fig. 2.
Liver is pretty large, not divided into Lobes as Mr. Ray does affirm, but as
in a Humane Body one entire viscus. It lies under the Diaphragme, the greatest
A.
portion of it in the right Hypochonder, and the B.
lesser in the left. It is in length 10 inches, in the broadest part about 6
and, but in the middle where it has the C C.
Ligamentum suspensorium, about 4. It is about 2 inches thick, it weighed
xxvii.. Its Color was of a florid red: Bartholine observed it (...), The
Ramifications of the sanguinary vessels in it are very large and numerous. It
had no vesicula fellea or Gall bag, as has been likewise observed by former
Writers. The d.
vena Vmbilicalis had its passage yet open. The figure of the Liver is best
understood by the Cut.

The Tab. 2. Fig. 3. cc.
Kidneys were a very pleasant sight, consisting of abundance of distinct Glands
separated by their proper Membranes from one another, but all included in one
common Tunicle as they are in a Bear, a Calf, an Otter and some other Animals.

Each Kidney is in length about 5 Inches about, 2 and in breadth, and in the
thickest part somewhat more than an Inch. Each Gland was about the bigness of a
large Pea. At the outward furface for the most part they seemed Sexangular or
Pentangular, a double order of them composed the body of the Kidney, and they
were in all about 150 or more in each.

Each Gland seemed a distinct Tab. 2. Fig. 4.
Kidney; for opening several of them I observed a Glandulous or Cortical part
which was the outwardmost, and was of a red Color. Inwards there was a
somewhat whiter substance that resembled a Papilla, being larger at its basis
and rising by degrees to a point, which I conceive to be made up of the urinary
Tubuli; which conveys the Urine into the Pelvis or Cavity that is in each of
them, after it is separated by the Cortical part.

The Vena Tab. 2. Fig. 3. A.
Cava was large, and did run along upon the Spine between the two Kidneys.
Toward the upper part of the Kidneys, it sent forth the Emulgents, which are
presently ramified, sending a branch to each Gland. Under the Cava, as also
under the emulgent veins in the Kidneys, the Arteria Aorta runs, and is
branched accordingly. There was no common Pelvis belonging to the Kidneys, but
a distinct one in each single Gland. From every Gland there did arise a
peculiar Vreter, but all at length uniting in one common trunk, it did emerge
out of the body of the Kidney toward the lower end, as is represented in the
Tab. 2. Fig. 3. dd.
figure, and afterward it was inserted into the neck of the bladder.

The Tab. 2. Fig. 3. BB.
Glandulae Renales were of a triangular figure, about an Inch in Diameter. They
seemed to consist of a Glandulous membrane, which being folded up into several
Tab. 2. Fig. 5.
Plicae, between them there was a small Cavity, which yet was not so large or
entire as is in some other Animals.

The Tab. 2. Fig. 3. EE.
Vesica Vrinaria or Bladder was placed between the Duplicature of the
Peritonaeum, as has been related. 'Twas of a Conical figure, five Inches long
and one broad, a little below its neck, and so arising to a point at its
fundus; being blown into, it seemed not capable of much extension. Of each side
it there ran the two ff.
Arteriae Vmbilicales as in Quadrupeds. The Ureters were inserted just below
the neck, and having opened the Bladder we could easily perceive their Ostia,
and probe into them from the bladder.

The neck of the bladder is very strait, and runs along the sides of the
Vterus, and empties its self just at the bottom or rhyme of the Pudendum, having
a protuberant body lying over its Orifice, which Dan. Major calls the h.
Clitoris, which is made up of strong fibers almost Cartilagineous.

This leads me to the Examination of the Organs of Generation in this Animal,
which no less than the other parts did extremely imitate those of Quadrupeds;
and even in the whole dissection I could easilier imagine I was cutting up a
Dog, a Swine, a Calf or any other terrestrial Brute, than an inhabitant of the
watery Element.

Our subject was a Female; and here we shall take notice of the Vasa
praeparantia, Ovaria, Tubi Fallopiani, the Vterus, the Pudendum and Vbera. I
shall begin with the Tab. 2. Fig. 3. L.
Vterus, which was about five inches in length, and had two large N N.
Cornua as in multiparous Animals, each about four inches long. The Cornua were
fastened to the Peritonaeum, and had membranous T T.
Alae fastened to the same also. All along the inside of the Cornua we observed
to run a Manipulus of RRR.
muscular fibers, which expanding themselves at length into two originations,
were inserted into the Peritonaeum at the sides a little below the Diaphragme.
Arising also from the Ovaria and extremes of the Tubi Fallopiani, there were
other QQ.
fibers that inserted themselves likewise into the Peritonaeum. Both these
fibers may serve to regulate the motion of these Parts, either for the
conveighing the Eggs from the Ovarium to the Tubus, or the excluding the foetus
from the Cornua into the Vterus.

Having opened the Vterus I could easily observe a distinction of a Vagina, an
Os Vtert internum, and fundus. The Vagina was pretty large, had several Rugae
or Plicae, but toward the fundus these Plicae cross-wayes were so very large
and over-folding that they seemed almost wholly to occlude the Passage, or at
least to render it very difficult to probe, and made a very strict Ostium. This
part in the inside had striae or sibrae longitudinales. Between its Plicae I
did observe a pretty Quantity of a mucous substance contained, as also in them
and in part of the Vagina several small Glands about the bigness of a Pin's
head. These probably may serve for the separating this mucus, which I cannot
imagine to be any thing of a Colliquamentum Genitale, which Major seemed at
first to suspect; but rather of the same nature with that found in Cows and
other Animals.

At the extremes of the Cornua were the oo.
Tubi Fallopiani pretty large, when blown up, running in an undulating line the
length of the Ovarium, and then reflected and terminating in a large Ostium, to
which as also to the extremes of the Ovarium those muscular fibers before
described did run, being first colligated into a small node or Plexus, and
thence expanding themselves.

This I suppose is what Major means by his pervious passage from the Testicles
to the Vterus, though he had forgot to what part of the Vterus it did go. The
P. P.
Ovaria or testicles in our subject were a little more than an Inch in length,
about the bigness of a Goose-quill, in Color somewhat whitish, its surface
smooth. Major observed it tuberous and unequal. Bartholine in one that had a
faetus in the left Cornu, observed the left testicle tumid and as big as a
Wall-nut, but the right was longer and slenderer. Opening the Ovaria I could
observe the rudiments of many Eggs, but very small.

The Vasa Praeparantia and S S S.
Sanguinary Vessels that came to these parts, were more numerous and larger
than in any Animal I have hitherto dissected, but running in a greater plenty
to the Cornua and Ovaria than to the Vterus its self. They had frequent
Anastomoses one with another; and being so very large and thick set, afforded a
very pleasant sight; Nature seeming here mighty sollicitous and provident for
the nourishment, as well as forming the fatus; it being a Viviparous Animal;
and in one that was pregnant with young that Bartholine dissected, he observed
a Placenta, a Chorion, Amnion and Allanto^s, a funiculus Vmbilicalis, in the
faetus the Vena and Artertae Vmbilicales, an Vrachus, a Canalis Venosus,
Canalis Arteriosus and foramen Ovale, all as in the Embryo's of terrestrial
Animals or Quadrupeds. Nor are the Organs of Generation in the Males different,
they having (as has been observed by the same Bartholine, as also Mr. Ray,
Rondeletius, etc.) a large Penis partly sheathed within the body, as in a Bull,
Testiculi, Epididymides, Vasa Praeparantia, Deferentia and Prostatae, so that
there is no doubt here of their manner of Generation, though in other fishes
where there is no Penis, it is more obscure.

It remains that we describe the Pudendum and Vbera. The outward Rima of the
former was about six inches in length; dilating it a little we could discover
what Major calls the Alae and Tab. 2. Fig. 3. h,
Clitoris. The latter being a small hard body protuberating over the Meatus
Vrinarius. The Passage into the Vterus was straightened by the subsiding of the
membranes into several Rugae. For the governing the Motion of this part we
observed some muscles were appointed, as likewise of each side there were two
small bones which did form an Os Pubis. Rondeletius observed the like in a
Dolphin.

The i i.
Vbera were placed of each side the Pudendum, only two in all, each side one.
The Teat or Papilla was small and retracted inwards, so that without dilating
the Part we could only see outwardly a slit or Rima. In time of Lactation this
part I suppose is much larger and more protuberant, this being but a young one
and never (as was supposed) impregnated. Rond. de Piscib. l. 16. c. 8. p. 462.
Rondeletius denies that there are any Papillae conspicuous in a Dolphin, but
says, Harum vice Alveoli humoris duo sunt, utrinque unus, e quibus lac sluit,
quod ore Catulorum Parents sectantium excipitur; and in another. Rond. de
Pise, l. 3. cap. 23.
place does quote Aristotle (Hist. Animal. l. 2. cap. 13.) for the same
Opinion, which yet does seem to me less probable. The Udder or Vbera under the
skin seemed to be very large, consisting of abundance of small Glands somewhat
distinct and separate from one another. Several bloud-Vessels did run to them;
and generally I may say of the whole Body, there is scarce any Animal in which
the Veins and Arteries are more curiously branched or more numerous than in
this. For on the Tab. 1. Fig. 2. H.
Musculus Psoas their Ramifications were so many and large, and their
Anastomoses into one another so frequent, that they formed a curious Network,
and afforded a very pleasant sight. And no less Curiosity we observed in the
blood it self, by examining a small part of it with a good Microscope: for
after it was a little dried on the object plate which was of Glass, we found
that it had shooted into a most delicate regular figure, being reticular like
the texture of the Omentum; only that from the sides of the several Area's,
there were some small branches or shootings of fibers that were not continued.

We come now to the middle Venture or the Thorax, which was large and capacious,
covered with Muscles almost as in Quadrupeds, having two large Pectoral Muscles
that went to the fore-Fins, as likewise several other Muscles that did serve
for the performing its various Motions, and were curiously contrived. There
were two Musculi Intercostales, externus and internus. It had Vid. Tab. 1. Fig.
2. and Tab. 2. Fig. x.
thirteen Ribs of each side, five fastened to the sternum, two other had
Cartilages, but not quite continued to the sternum unless by tendons. The Ribs
as they descended grew shorter, so that the last was but a little higher than
the Musculus Psoas. I shall give a fuller account of the Ribs, as also the
Sternum, when I come to describe the Skeleton, and shall only add that the Ribs
arising from the Spine do incline toward the Abdomen, so that they make a very
acute angle with the Spine. The Cartilages or rather bones that go from the
first five Ribs to the sternum, are reflected upwards toward the head and make
with the Costae acute angles also. At the upper part of the Tab. 1. Fig. 2. d.
sternum which was broad and somewhat depressed there were inserted two large
and thick Muscles that ran toward the Maxillae. These probably by contracting
may serve to draw the Sternum upwards, as the Musculi recti which are inserted
into the bones of the Sternum, downwards, and so promote Respiration; which
likewise is farthered by those other Muscles, which are also common with this
fish and other Quadrupeds that are destined to that office, and chiefly by the

ib. f.
Diaphragme, which in this Animal was very remarkable; for it had no
Aponeurosis or Membranous tendon in the middle, but was muscular throughout. It
was fastened to the Sternum, the Cartilages and the other Ribs downwards. It
had a deep hollow in the middle, as it were pulled into the Thorax, which was
occasioned by having the Pericardium fastened to it which did draw it in. The
Tendons of this Muscle were very curious: for besides those large ones that did
run down by the Spine, there were several Manipuli of other tendons that went
over the Musculus Psoas, and even in the middle or body of the Diaphragme there
did appear abundance of tendons running over the muscular fibers, as where the
Vena Cava perforates it, and in other places, though not very regularly or in
any set order, but more confusedly. These tendons appeared of both sides the
Diaphragme.

Dan. Major mentions a Mediastinum but we could observe none, but it was
supplied by the joining of the Pericardium to the Sternum; 'twas fastened also
to the Diaphragme as in men, and did draw it upwards. The Pericardium was very
large; what water was in it I do not well remember; Bartholine observed it to
be cruentous, which I suppose was from the dissection.

Tho Tab. 2. Fig. 6.
Heart was long, of a triangular figure, about four Inches from the basis to
the Cone, and as many at the largest part of the basis, about an Inch and
thick. It had two large Ventricles and as many Auricles. Toward the Cone the
Ventricles seemed a little divided. The valves of the Ventricles and of the
Arteriae Pulmonalis and Aorta were not different from those in Quadrupeds, but
the Carneae Columnae in the left Ventricle were larger and more numerous and
curiously interwoven lattice-wise.

The foramen ovale was closed and not open; where it had been, we could
perceive by its thinness and transparency. We did not think of it then to look
for the Canalis Arteriosus, but probably its passage may be likewise shut, as
is also the foramen ovale in a Beavor and an Otter, as it has been observed by
some at Memoires pour servir a l' Hist. Not. des Animaux.
Paris, though it is delivered by others that in these Amphibious Animals it is
kept open, that they may be the better able to keep under water, the
Circulation of the blood being continued by this means without being
transmitted into the lungs as it is in the Embryo's of Quadrupeds in Vtero. The
same is affirmed by Phoca illustrat. p. 37.
Severinus concerning Ducks and Geese, and thence he gives a reason why they
are not suffocated by diving under water so long, or strangled when holden by
the neck in ones hand.

The Tab. 1. Fig. 3. CC.
Lungs had only two large lobes, each of them about ten inches long and about 4
and broad, and two inches thick when not extended, and did in one part adhere
to the Diaphragme a little below the entrance of the Bronchiae. It had several
Glandulae containing a Steatomatous matter. The Lungs were encompassed with a
strong membrane, which being taken off, the minute ramifications of the
Sanguinary Vessels were very pleasant to behold. The Parenckyma of the Lungs
was the same with that of Quadrupeds, and when blown up were very large; which
makes me suspect the truth of that assertion of Rond. de Pisc. l. 16. c. 8.
Rondeletius concerning the lungs in a Dolphin that they are densiore
substantia quam in terrestribus, crassitudine and color Epar referunt. And the
reason he gives wherefore it should be so, seems not satisfactory.

The Windpipe or Arteria aspera was very short, as it must needs be, this fish
having no neck. The Larynx was of a singular figure and very remarkable, which
I shall describe with the parts belonging to the head. But before I leave the
Thorax I must take notice of a seeming Tab. 2. Fig. 7.
Glandulous body that did lie of each side the Spine about two inches broad and
the length of ten or eleven Ribs. It was continued likewise a little over some
of the Sanguinary Vessels that went to the head. It was a curious contexture of
sanguinary vessels variously contorted and winding, emerging from the Medulla
Spinalis at the holes where the Nerves come out between the Ribs, and as we
afterward observed the same substance likewise for a good thickness covered
the Medulla Spinalis throughout. In the Thorax in some places 'twas above a
quarter of an Inch thick, but every where it appeared of the same Contexture, a
winding and convolution of bloud-Vessels. What this part may be, is more
difficult to assign, since it does not usually occur in the dissection of other
Animals, and has not been taken notice of, as I know of, by any in this. But
whether it may be that the heat of so much blood contained in so many vessels
may serve for the invigorating the Animal Spirits in the Medulla Spinalis, or
whether it may not be a Glandulous body and so serve for the draining of the
serosities of the blood and thereby render it fitter for generating Spirits, or
what other uses it may have, is to me yet obscure. Formerly dissecting a fish
which Hippolytus Salvianus calls Lupus, under the Cranium I observed a much
like substance enveloping the Brain, and was of a good thickness; the Pia Matter
in Color and luster exactly imitating leaf Gold.

Above the sternum was placed the Tab. 1. Fig. 2. C.
Thymus, which was a large Conglomerated Glandule. We observed likewise the
Glandulae Maxillares, Glandulae Thyroideae and some others. At the root of the
tongue there were several small Tab. 1. Fig. 3. aa.
foramina's which we supposed to be the Ostia of salivatory Ductus's; We could
probe them with a bristle. But where the ductus salivalis of the Maxillary
Gland was inserted, either our inadvertency or want of leisure made us neglect
to examine.

The Rictus of the Mouth is but small, yet the passage into the Gula is pretty
large and open. The Teeth are so placed that those of one Jaw are received into
the distances of the other. There are twenty four of each side either Maxilla,
ninety six in all. They are but small, and all of the same form, somewhat
acute. Wherefore Jonst. Hist. N. de Pisc. l. 5. p. m. 221.
Jonston is mistaken who says, they have dentes obtusos Hominis molaribus
similes. These teeth are somewhat moveable as is observed by Dan. Major, since
they are not fastened in distinct sockets or Cells as is usual in other
Animals, but only by a strong membrane or Cartilage, there being one common
furrow in each Jaw into which the Extremes of all of them are received: These
teeth are so small and short that they seem unsit either for mastication or
fight, but only to detain their Prey till such time as they can conveniently
swallow it whole. Rend. de Pis^ l. 3. c. 7.
Rondeletius does observe that in fishes that do suck, the teeth are at first
soft and covered, that they might not injure the Breast. But Nature here does
seem farther provident, in that just before it has left a space void of teeth,
and the neighboring teeth that are next it are also shorter than the rest.

The Tab. 1. Fig. 3. A.
Tongue was very curious, of a muscular or fleshy substance, a little indented
at the edges, about 2 Inches and long, and about 1 and broad and pretty thick,
but so firmly fastened all along to the bottom of the Mouth, not to the Palate
as Major and Bartholine say, that it cannot exert or thrust its self out beyond
the Verge or Limits of the Mouth. And herein a Porpess differs from a Dolphin:
for as Rondeletius does observe, Delphinis lingua est mobilis, quae modo exeri,
modo condi potest, non haerens Palato; and the same is asserted likewise by
Pliny, Solinus and others: and expressly in Rond. de Pisc. l. 3. cap. 9.
Rondeletius, Delphin linguam longiorem habet Marsuino, Marsuinus eo latiorem:
and therefore in his Figure he represents it hanging out. The use of the Tongue
here I conceive is not for forming a voice; for that grunnitus they sometimes
make may be rather formed in the parts of the fistula; nor probably for
tasting, since they swallow their prey whole: But rather when young to help the
motion of sucking, and when elder that of deglutition.

At the Root of the Tongue was the Tab. 1. Fig. 3. B.
Larynx which was very long and protuberating, having its extremity answering
and somewhat inserted into the bottom of the sistula, like a Ducks bill:
Bartholin says that Collum Anserinum refert; Mr. Ray makes it to resemble the
Neck of an old fashioned Ewer, as Casserius likens that of a Hog to a
Gutturnium. The make of it was very curious and different from other Animals,
chiefly in the length of the Cartilago Arytainoides, the Epiglottis, and the
Structure of the Scutiformis or Thyroides. The Tab. 1. Fig. 5. A.
Cartilago Annularis, or Cricoides was much the same as in other Brutes. But
the B B.
scutiformis here was not one entire Cartilage but two separated from one
another, by the interposition of the Basis of the Epiglottis, running up the
sides of it pretty broad, and sending down a narrower process to the Extreme of
the Annularis. The Cartilago Arytainoides, Jul. Casterius Placemin. de Vocis
Auditiesque or ^anis, l. (...)
Casterius says, is difficult to describe, praesertim cum pro diversitate
subjectorum, eam quoque variari utplurimum contingat; but in none, as hitherto
I have observed, more than in this. For it is C C.
protuberating beyond the Annularis, above an Inch and It Is two distinct
Cartilages, joined together by a strong membrane. At the end it has Tab. 1.
Fig. 4. a.
thick lips, and in the middle a Tab. 1. Fig. 4. a.
Rimula which And. Vesaluts Corp. human. fabrica. l. 1. c. 38.
Vesalius makes to be the Glottis, though those that make here five Cartilages
do reckon this to make up the number. The Tab. 1. fig. 5. DDD.
Epiglottis was no less remarkable, and its structure as different. 'Twas about
two Inches in length, large at its basis, and fastened to the narrow part of
the Annularis. As it ascends it becomes narrower, having its sides more closed
together. At its extreme it has a large thick semicircular lip which serves to
cover the Rimula or Glottis, though not protuberating much over it as in other
Animals. The various Muscles that did serve to govern the Motion of these
Cartilages were no less admirable and curiously contrived. But in this single
subject we had not leisure to go through with them, being more intent upon the
Viscera. We observed the Glandulae Thrroideae to be pretty large.

The Tab. 1. Fig. 2. B.
Os Hyoides was very large and curious: and although Dan. Major has mentioned
an Os Hyoideum reduplicatum, yet I find he has committed a double mistake
concerning it; for it consisting as it were of two parts, the one he makes, I
know not how, the Os sterni, the other the Clavioulae. The first, which in his
figure he gives us for the Os sterni, and said consisted of three Bones, in
ours it was but one, but was of the figure he has well expressed it in, viz.
triangular or having 3 Processes, 2 whereof were two inches long, and in some
parts about of an Inch broad, and had their extremities distant from one
another about three Inches. The third Process was much shorter, but from it
there did arise two large Cartilages, which after a little while being
reflected, had joined to them two narrow Bones, which were three inches long
and bended like Ribs. These last I suppose Moser took for the Claviculae,
although and. de Pisc. p. 461.
Rondeletius (...) that Dolphins have no Claviculae, nor did I meet with any in
this fish.

In the lower Maxilla there was a large Cavity filled with a substance that
resembled a Glandulous body or rather fat, different from that of the rest of
the body, and consisting of several little bodies orderly placed together, more
shining and less fluid. Since the dissection this part has made me think of
the Sperma Ceti, which is said to be found in the head of a sort of Burmudas
Whale; but since by other Relations it is rendered dubious whether there might
not from other parts likewise be obtained the same tallowy fat we call Sperma
Ceti, or at least being ignorant in what particular part in the head it is,
that this does lie, it has stifled a conjecture, whether possibly this might
not be something analogous to that in Whales, since a Porpess is of the
Cetaceous Kind and has so many parts the same and common to both, as
especially what we shall describe next, the Spiraculum, Fistula or Spout.

The Pipe or Spout in this fish is its Nostrils, and serves for the conveyance
of Air in Respiration, as the Nares in other Animals: But has also this
additional use, for the spouting out of water, which when with its prey it
receives in a great Quantity not convenient to be swallowed, and having no
Gills, it may be sent out this way without hazard of losing what it had taken.
Its contrivance is very curious, arising from the Palate with a single foramen,
but when it perforates the Tab. 2. Fig. x. aa.
Cranium, it is divided by an osseous septum into two, but above it is united
again into one, making in the skin a kind of Tab. 2. fig. 9. A.
semilunar slit or foramen. At the lower Orifice as also above the Cranium it
had several strong and fair muscles, which doubtless served for the regulating
its motions in spouting out the water. In the inside of the fistula below the
septum there were abundance of holes or Papillae which I took for the Orifices
of Glands, and Mr. Ray does observe that if you do press them, there would
start out a certain glutinous liquor: Which Mucus may serve for the lubricating
the insides of the fistula, as also defending them from the acrimony of the
salt water, and may be likewise a recrement cast off from the blood as is the
snot in other Animals. Over the two hollows of the fistula just above the
Crantum there lie two Tab. 2. Fig. 8. CC.
protuberating bodies like an Epiglottis or Valves, which as Mr. Ray does
likewise observe; serve to stop the Pipe that no water gets in there without
the fishes will. Near this there are placed four Bags or two pair of them. The
first Tab. 2. Fig. 9. BB. and fig. 8. DD.
pair which is the largest, lies upon the middle of the Rostrum or snout, it
has at first one common Fig. 8. E.
foramen, then subdivides into two cells, each of which will contain a large
Nutmeg; they are covered on the inside with a black skin, and seem to be made
up of a gristly substance, formed into several Plicae or folds lengthways,
something resembling the os spongiosum in some other Animals, and possibly may
have something of the same use, at least may serve for the forming the noise
they make against storms and bad weather. The two other or Fig. 8. FF.
second pair are placed higher and more to the sides of the Rostrum; their
cavity is not so large, but in it is contained a considerable G G.
Glandule about the bigness of a Filbird, which may separate a liquor serving
to some of the uses before described. By having this membrane over it, it in
part resembled the Tensils. Mr. Ray mentions a third pair tending toward the
brain, having a long but narrow passage, for the use as he conjectured of
smelling; but opening the Brain, neither of us could find either Olfactory
Nerves or Processus Mamillares. This last pair I did not take notice of my
self, though I do not deny but that they may be there.

Rondeletius denies that fishes have Eyelids, where he says, (x) Rond. de
Pisc. l. 3. c. 2. p. 47.
Palpebris vero omnes (sc. Pisces) carent, quod commode nictare in Aqua non
possunt, sed duriores Oculi facti, ne facile ab Aquae salsedine, quae arrodit,
laederentur. And elsewhere, Palpebrarum defectum Corneae duritie pensavit
Natura, quae undique Oculum ambit, non ex adverso Papillae tantum ut in
hominibus. Which though true in several fishes, yet holds not good in this, for
here we must grant Palpebrae or Eyelids. Their aperture was but small, and on
the insides of the upper Eyelid we observed Steno's ductus's very fair, and
did put in Bristles into several of them, that did run into the Glandula
innominata, from whence they did arise, which Gland was very large. Jonston out
of Cardan affirms that a Porpess sometimes weeps; if there be a Passion, there
wants not matter here for tears. However this humor may serve for the washing
off the Brine of the Sea water from fretting the Eye, which in this hot Animal
perhaps may be tenderer than in other fishes, which have for this use a proper
Tunicle, which is a continuation of the Cutis that covers the Cornea and is
transparent, as is plain in Whitings, etc. The Orbit of the Eye was not so
perfect or composed of bones as in other Animals, but at the lower part it had
only a very thin small bone. The Bulk of the Eye in proportion to the body was
but small, being not so big as in a Sheep. It had all the Muscles very fair as
in a Man, and likewise the Musculus septimus or suspensorius that is proper to
Brutes, and which did enclose the Optic Nerve. The use of this in Brutes that
are prono Capite, is thought to be, to suspend the Bulk of the Eye that it
receives no injury from the declivity of the head; but there being not that
danger here, Nature that does nothing in vain, must have some other
intendments, and probably it may be, that by its equal contraction of the
Sclerotis to which it is fastened, it renders the Ball of the Eye more or less
spherical, and so fitter for vision. The Tunica sclerotica was much more dense
and hard than in other Animals. The Choroides was party-colored, a mixture of
Blue and Green, which is not in the Porcus terrestris. The Pupil was Oval which
is not so common in other fishes. The Crystalline Humor was of a Spherical
figure, but seemed to be a little more unequal in the anterior than posterior
part. The Optic Nerve was not inserted so laterally as in Quadrupeds, but
rather in Axe Oculi.

The Brain in this fish was large, it weighed xvi and resembled much more that
of Quadrupeds than fishes. Its figure was somewhat short, but what it wanted in
length, it had in breadth. The Cerebrum was separated from the Cerebellum by an
os triangulare, as in Dogs and some other Animals. The Brain was divided into
two Hemispheres, though Rondeletius does say that in a Dolphin it is not divided
into dextrum and sinistrum. It had its Anfractus, but not so deep as in some.
Its surface was curiously ramified with bloud-vessels. There were the sinus's
and dura and pia Matter, the substantia Corticalis and Medullaris; Nor in any
thing was it more different from the usual make and conformation of it in other
Animals than in the defect of the Olfactory Nerves and Processus Mamillares,
which is likewise taken notice of by Mr. Ray. But for all this Rondel. de Pisc.
l. 3. cap. 8. p. 57.
Rondeletius thinks they smell, where he says, In Delphinis nec foramen
(Narium) nec meatus ullus est, etiamsi sagacissime odorentur, ut testis est
Aristot. (Hist. Anim. c. 8.) and Experientia ipsa confirmat. The Optic Nerves
were large, and did seem to be united as in men, and not so plainly to
decussate each other as is usual in some fishes. We observed the Nervi Oculorum
motorii, Pathetici, etc. in all about eight or nine Pair. The Infundibulum and
Glandula Pituitaria were very fair. How the Glandula Pinealis was, we did not
well observe, it being most decayed, as we supposed by keeping. But the (...)
Choroides did spread its self in both ventricles, and being united on the
Medulla Oblongata, did run down the length of above half an Inch; 'twas the
breadth of a Goose-quill, and did seem thicker than usual, and was a curious
contexture of bloud-vessels. As for the inward parts of the Brain we did
observe all as delineated in Dr. Willis's figures; and though Mr. Ray does say
that he did not observe in that which he dissected, those Protuberances called
Nates and Testes, yet we saw them both very fair, but the Testes were much
larger than the Nates. The substantia Medullaris in the Cerebellum was very
Curious and ramified like Fern. From the Medulla Spinalis upwards the
Cerebellum was flatter and less protuberant than in other Animals. The Medulla
Spinalis was covered, as is related before, with a thick Glandulous, or at
least vascular Tunicle, it sends forth abundance of Nerves, and at length makes
a large Cauda Equina.

Mr. Ray says that the largeness of the Brain in this fish, and the
Correspondence of it to that of a Man's, argues this Creature to be of a more
than ordinary Wit and Capacity, and makes to seem less fabulous and improbable
those ancient stories related by Herodotus concerning Arion, by (a) Plin. Hist.
Not. lib. 9. c. 8.
Pliny the Elder concerning a Dolphin enamoured of a Boy, whom he was wont to
carry cross a Bay of the Sea from Baiae to Puteoli to School, and by Plin.
Epist. 33. lib. 9.
Pliny the younger of another enamoured of a Boy at Hippo in Africa, whom he
was wont to carry on his back in like manner. Pausan. in Laconic.
Pausanias has a like story, and Plutarch. in Sympos.
Plutarch relates how Eualus was saved by Dolphins in like manner as Arion. Dio
Chrysostom not only relates the story of Arion, but adds that the Mariners were
executed, and Jo. Scaliger in Animad. in Eusebius. p. 84. does assert it to be no
fable but a true History. But A. Gellius Noct. Attic. l. 16. c. 19.
A. Gellius makes it to be an Imposture of Herodotus, as also does Strabo l. 13.
Strabo. And considering the Lubricity of the skin of this fish, the
protuberancy of its back, and its undulating not horizontal motion in swimming,
it does confirm their Censure, -- sed quid non Graecia mendax
Audet in Historia?
However Severinus (in his Phoca illustratus, p. m. 27.) relates out of Fran.
Lopes ( Hist. Indicae General. cap. 31.) that a Manatus or sort of Sea-calf was
kept in a Lake in Hispaniola that was grown very tame, and did use to carry on
his back from one side of the Lake to the other ten boys at once.

Aristotle Arist. Hist. Anim. l. 1. c. 11.
grants that Dolphins hear, but says, they have no Ears; Pliny Hist. Not. l.
11. c. 37.
Pliny writes the same, but we rather concur with Rondeletius, Rond. de Pisc.
l. 3. c. 3. p. 50.
sed ista ex dissectione falsa apparent; meatus enim audiendi in Delphino
hujusmodi comperiuntur, quales ad sonos percipiendos idonei esse possunt. It Is
true they have no Auriculae, which though they would advantage their hearing,
yet would injure their swimming; and the Porus Auditorius is extreme minute and
small, for if larger, the water getting into it, might likewise prove an
Inconvenience. But the structure of the Organ of the Ear, or the Os Tab. 2.
Fig. 12.
Petrosum in this Animal is very remarkable, and different from any that I know
yet described. It Is seated in a large cavity of the Cranium, but not locked in
by sutures or the joining of the other Bones, but fastened chiefly by the
intervention of Muscles: It Is the hardest bone in the body, its color white,
its figure irregular, and difficult to be described by words. As fixed in the
Cranium you may observe in its surface a winding Tab. 2. Fig. 12. a.
Sinus or furrow that leads to the ^.
Tympanum that is placed a little within the bone. At the Processus Mamillaris
it has three large Protuberances or Processui, and at its opposite extreme
inwards a hollow, which is better perceived when the bone is taken out, for
then you may observe a large Fig. 13. C.
Cavity that leads into the Hollows of the Ear-bone, besides several other
s^ranuna's that afford passages to the Nerves or some small muscles; so that
the Ear here is not a continued and entire bone forming a Cavity within its
self, but at its inward part where joined to the Cranium it is perfectly divided
and seems to make two bones, being joined together only at its anterior part,
where is the Tympanum. Sawing it there asunder, one part of the bone somewhat
resembled a sort of Concha Veneris, and at one place was very Fig. 13. dd.
thick and solid, the other was a thinner Lamina making the Cavity; the other
part of the bone was likewise very thick, having three large Protuberances, the
middlemost which was opposite to the Tympanum at its outside, had a large B.
foramen, which afterward divided into others; here we supposed the Auditory
Nerve entered. This bone by its winding somewhat resembled a a a.
Cochlea, and at its inside opposite to the Tympanum there went several sibres
or small minute Muscles, which by their contraction and keeping this membrane
tense, might perform their Office and supply their defect, Nature never being
wanting of means for the attaining her end, though not always making use of
the same. So possibly it is that since there is so open a Cavity at its
posterior part, it has made the bones there so thick and dense, that the sound
may be more intense from the greater Collision of the Air on so solid a body.
Where there were a design of giving the Comparative Anatomy of the Organ of
this Sense in various Animals, this may well deserve a stricter inquiry into.
Dan. Major has given two Figures of this bone, but without its explanation.

There remains the Osteology, or to give an account of the Bones and Sceleton
of this fish, and in general I shall observe of them, that as the Muscles and
most of the Viscera very much imitated the structure of those of Quadrupeds, so
likewise the Bones here came very near them, as to their solidity, color and
structure, and in all excepting what differences the necessity of the figure of
this fish occasioned. I shall begin with those of the Head, where I shall take
notice of the Cranium, the Rostrum and lower Jaw or Maxilla. For where ^ond. l.
^. c. 5.
Rondeletius says, a Phocaena has no Rostrum, it must be understood of its
appearing so whilst the flesh and fat is on; whose great bulk does render it
obtuse and curt: but when it is taken off it appears otherwise; for then the
upper Jaw or Rostrum from the Granium to its Extremity is six inches long, but
in a Dolphin much longer. At the beginning of this bone just below the Cranium
is the Fistula or Tab. 2. Fig. x. aa.
Nares, which as is related before was divided by an offeous septum into two
Cavities. The fistula was formed partly by that bone Columbus calls the Vomer,
which arising from the Palate does send a thin Lamina up the Crantum, and is
continued on the os frontis to the great Protuberance in the middle there,
forming three B.
protuberances on the os frontis above the fistula. The other part of the
fistula is formed by two bones, pretty large at their basis and rising above
the surface of the Rostrum, and sending down two c c.
Pyramidal processes about two inches long, between the inward bones of the
Rostrum. For the Rostrum was composed of four Bones, the two d.
outward-most were a continuation of those of the Cramum having two processes,
the first that composed part of the f.
os Zygomaticum, and another about two inches lower; then it grew narrower, not
being almost half the breadth as it was before. To be too nice and serupulous
in the description of all the bones here might seem tedious and troublesome; I
shall therefore take notice only of the most remarkable things: as whereas the
Cranium was five inches in breadth, 'twas only three in length. 'Twas
protuberant much above the at B.
Rostrum. The futures chiefly were those they call Harmoniae, by a simple line,
but the Lambdoidea was somewhat indented.

By reason of the different bones that composed the Cranium the futures
likewise were differently placed. But I observed that where I might expect the
sutura Coronalis there was a large eminency of the c.
bones, and just in the middle of the forehead over the fistula there was a
large Protuberancy jutting out. Other particularities I might take notice of
here as also in the Palate: but passing them aside, within the Cranium we found
an os triangulare, but somewhat different from that in Dogs, having at its
extremity a rising up like a crista Galli. From this bone the length of the
upper part of the Cranium answering to the sinus Longitudinalis, there was a
pretty deep Protuberancy, that as the os triangulare separated the Cerebrum and
Cerebellum, this did the two Hemispheres of the Brain. I observed no Crista
Galli here, and the os Cribriforme was not perforated, as is usual. The
Anterior Processes of the sella Turcica were wanting, though there were
somewhat of the Posterior; but there were not those foramina's from it as in a
man's, and other Brutes; though it had an Infundibulum and Glandula Pituitaria.
That part of the Ear-bone or os Petrosum which I said resembled a Tab. 2. Fig.
13. aa.
Cochlea from its winding, does on the inside here appear very well, and that
passage for the auditory nerve is very fair. The Cavity for this bone is large,
but a great part of it filled with Muscles.

Dan. Major has given a figure of the Cranium, but in some particulars he does
not sufficiently express the life; but that which he gives of part of the lower
Maxilla is more exact. It was a Tab. 2. Fig. x. K.
thin but solid bone; its Lamina on the inside was not continued home to the
Articulation, but leaving a large space, that led into a considerable Cavity
within, which was filled with a particular sort of fatty substance, as is
before hinted. The length of the lower Maxilla or Jaw was about 7 Inches and at
the broadest place, toward the articulation two Inches; and in the narrowest
toward the extreme, not above an Inch. It consisted of two bones that were
joined together at the Mentum.

We shall next describe the Spine which consisted of sixty Vertebrae from the m.
Atlas to the apex of the Tail. Dan. Major numbered but fifty four, the first
or the Atlas to which the Cranium was fastened, was very large, having two
transverse Processes that were long, and two others just below them that were
much shorter and lesser. It had likewise two Spinal Processes: The hindermost
that was much the greatest answering to the Spinal Processes of the other
Vertebrae, and a smaller jutting something toward the head. This hindermost
Spinal Process, at its extremity had a division, that it might receive the
Spinal process of the next Vertebra; which seem providently contrived, that so
it might not hinder the erection or flection backwards of the head. Under this
first Vertebra there was the appearance of two other small ones, which may be
reckoned those of the Neck. The Vertebrae of the Thorax, as also the Abdomen,
had transverse, spinal and oblique processes; but those of the upper Vertebrae
were smaller than of the lower, all being largest about the beginning of the
Abdomen. In the first six Vertebrae the Posterior Spinal process, upon flection
of the body, is received into the Cavity of the Anterior; but in the other
Vertebrae that of the Anterior into the Posterior; but the seventh Vertebra
seems dubious between both. So the transverse or lateral processes of the
Vertebrae of the Thorax are obllque descending. The four first of the Abdomen
do lie at right angles with the Vertebrae; but the remaining are obliquely
ascending. The oblique Processes in the first Vertebrae of the Thorax seem to
be Epiphyses of the transverse, but as they do descend, they grow gradually
higher and higher on the Spinal, forming two cheeks, into which is received the
back of the anterior spinal process.

Besides these processes already mentioned below the Abdomen and opposite to
the spinal processes, I find Fig. z. P P.
others not arising from the vertebrae themselves, but that Cartilaginous body
that joins the vertebrae together. They consist of two small bones joined
together at the end, but distant at the bases, so occasioning a hollow, through
which there runs abundance of bloud-vessels; as the Medulla Spinalis does in
the Cavity of the Spinal processes. These processes, as do all the other, grow
lesser as they approach the Tail till they are quite obliterated. Where the
Tail or hindersins are fastened, the vertebrae do proportionably lessen and do
grow broader and less round. The vertebrae are joined together by the
intervention of a bony Cartilaginous body that consists of a double Lamina,
containing, in a Cavity in the Middle, a gellied substance. This is an
excellent contrivance for the flection of the body, for otherwise the vertebrae
themselves are too rigid for such a motion.

I have before mentioned that there were thirteen S S S.
Ribs, that only five were fastened to the Sternum, that the sixth and seventh
had Cartilages but not continued to the sternum; how that they rose obliquely
from the Spine, etc. I shall add that the first five Ribs, that were continued
to the Spine, had a double origination; the first to the extremity of the
transverse process of a hinder vertebra, and the second to the basis of a
former. The other Ribs were only fastened to the extreme of the transverse or
Lateral Processes. The thirteenth or last Rib did arise only with a
Cartilaginous Origination, and afterward became long. And whereas the os
Pectoris or Sternum, and that which continues the Ribs in other Animals to the
sternum, is usually Cartilages, here 'twas all perfect bones.

The Tab. 1. Fig. 2. d.
Sternum here was one entire bone, four Inches and long; about three and broad
at the upper end, but toward the lower part, it was but one Inch. It had no
Cartilago ensi^ or s^utiformis, that I observed. At the broad end 'twas
somewhat depressed, and in the middle had a perforation; both which I suppose
were for the better adhesion of Muscles. Dan. Major not taking notice of this,
describes part of the os Hyuides for the os Sterni as is mentioned before.

It Is before remarked how much the Fore-sins resembled an Arm, consisting of
Bones and Cartilages curiously articulated together. The Os Tab. 2. Fig. 11. A.
Humeri or Brachii was about one Inch and long. The B.
Radius and C.
Vlna about two Inches, but the Radius toward the Carpe was an Inch broad. The
d d.
Carpus seemed to consist of five pretty large roundish bones, joined by
Cartilages, and two oblong ones that seemed the Epiphyses of the Radius and
Vlna. After this 'twas divided into five fingers, but the Thumb and little
finger were very short. The forefinger was the longest, then the middle
singer, and so the third. These three last mentioned singers had the bones of
the e e e.
Metacarpus. The sore singer had five f f f.
Articuli or Joints, and so the middle finger; but the third had but three.
Between the bones of each Articulus there were very large Cartilages that
seemed double, one belonging to the extremes of each bone. Major has given a
figure of the whole Arm or Fin; Bartholin. Cent. 2. Hist. Auat. 11.
Bartholine has a like picture of the hand of a Siren, and such an one there
is likewise in Septalius his Musaeum; as there is also kept in the Anatomy
School at Oxon.

The Tab. 2. Fig. x. Q.
Scapula to which was fastened the Os Humeri, was pretty large, much of the
usual figure of that of Whales which is commonly made use of for Signs. It
wanted the Spine and had two large Fig. x. rr.
processes, which is best understood by the Cut, as it is well represented by
Dan. Major.

As to the Myology we have little to add, not having had leisure to prosecute
that in this subject; however I shall observe that the Musculus Psoas was very
large, lying on each side the Spine, and having one extreme inserted in the
Thorax and the other by strong tendons in the Tail. Likewise on the Back
between the Spinal and transverse Processes there did lie two very thick
Muscles, rising from the os Occipitis and terminating with a multitude of
tendons in the Tail, but sending tendons all along to the Spinal vertebrae,
etc. These Muscles doubtless contribute very much to their swift and nimble
motion, which as it has been observed by many, so is elegantly expressed by
Ovid, where he says, Vndique dant saltus, multaque aspergine rorant,
Emerguntque iterum, redeuntque sub aequora rursus,
Inque Chori ludunt speciem, lascivaque jactant
Corpora, and acceptum patulis mare naribus efflant.


FINIS.
Tabula 1.ma


TAB. 2da


THE Explication of the Figures.
Tabula 1.
Figura 1.
HEre is given the lateral prospect of this Fish, drawn from the life, and more
exact than those figures of Bellonius, Rondeletius, Jonston, Jo. Dan. Major, or
any I have yet seen. We may here observe the shape of the Body, its Color and
Spottings, the site and proportion of its Fins and Tail, the Eyes, the Mouth,
the Spiraculum or Spout, and at (a) the Rima of the Teats and at (bb) that of
the Pudendum.

Fig. 2.
In the second figure is represented the Fish opened, and the Viscera of the
Abdomen taken out.

AAAA The Skin and Fat.

BB. The Os Hyoides which is mistaken by Dan. Major for the Os Sterni.

C. The Thymus.

d. The Sternum.

eeee. The Ribs.

f. The Diaphragme.

G G. On the left side are represented several tendinous fibers of the Musculus
Psoas, and Diaphragme.

H. On the right side are shown the curious Anastomoses of bloudvessels of the
Membrane investing the Musculus Psoas.

Fig. 3.
In this figure is shown the Tongue, the Larynx and Lungs.

A. The Tongue which is thick and serrated at the edges.

aa. Small Papillae or Eminences at the root of the Tongue.

B. The Larynx which is very protuberating.

C C. The two Lobes of the Lungs.

D. The Gula or Oesophagus.

E. The Great Artery, or Arteria Aorta.

Fig. 4.
Represents the Mouth of the Larynx opened.

a. The Rimula.

Fig. 5.
This figure represents the Larynx and its several Cartilages more distinct.

A. The Cartilago Annularis or Cricoides.

B. The Cartilago Scutiformis or Thyroides.

C C. The Cartilago Arytainoides.

DDD. The Epiglottis.

Fig. 6.
In this figure the three Ventricles or Stomachs which are opened to show their
inward Tunicles, as also the Pancreas, and part of the Omentum, are represented.

A. The inside of the first Stomach.

B. Several large Rugae or Plicae placed about the Passage from the first
stomach to the second.

C. The second stomach.

D. The Passage out of the second stomach into the third.

EE. The third stomach.

f. The Pylorus.

g. Part of the Duodenum.

H. The Pancreas.

i. The entrance of the Ductus Pancreaticus.

K. One of those Glandulous bodies which is supposed to be the Spleen.

L. Part of the Omentum fastened to the stomach.

m m m m. Large bloud-vessels curiously ramified in the Omentum.

nnn. Curious small fibers filling up the Interstices of the bloudvessels, and
rendering the whole structure of the Omentum reticular.

Tabula 2.
Fig. 1.
THis figure does represent the several tendinous sibres of the Abdominal
Muscles which running in various Manipuli, and being curiously interwoven, do
make the Linea alba which is here very broad.

Fig. 2.
Here is shown the figure of the Liver.

A. That part which was in the right Hypochonder.

B. That in the left.

CC. The Ligamentum Sufpensorium.

d. The Vena Umbilicalis.

Fig. 3.
The Glandulae Renales, the Kidneys, Vreters and Bladder, and the various
Organs of Generation belonging to the females, are delineated in this figure.

A. The vena Cava.

BB. The Glandulae Renales, or Capsulae Atrabilares.

CC. The two Kidneys, which consist of abundance of small Kidneys conglomerated
together.

dd. The Vreters.

E E. The Bladder or Vesica Urinaria.

f f. The two Arteriae Umbilicales.

G. The Pudendum.

h. The Clitoris according to Dan. Major.

ii. The two Teats.

K. The Anus.

L. The Uterus or Womb.

NN. The Cornua Uteri.

oo. The Tubi Fallopiani.

Pp. The Ovaria or Testiculi.

QQ. Mascular sibres that run to the Cornua Uteri.

SSS. Numerous Ramifications of bloud-vessels that run to the Cornua Uteri, the
Ovaria, etc.

TT. The Alae Uteri.

VV. Part of the Peritonxum.

Fig. 4.
Represents a single Kidney or one of those Glands cut in two, one part has a
protuberance in the middle, the other a cavity or hollow.

Fig. 5.
Represents the inside of the Glandula Renalis, out hortontally.

Fig. 6.
The figure of the Heart, almost in its natural bigness; wherein may be seen
the division of the Cone, the Auricles, the Arteria Pulmonalis, Aorta, etc.

Fig. 7.
Is a delineation of part of those bloud-vessels which compose that supposed
Glandulous Body that lies on each side the Spine in the Thorax or Breast.

Fig. 8.
Are represented various parts belonging to the Fistula or Spout on the head.

A. The slit in the Skin, or outward Orifice of the sistula, which in its
natural site was placed over

BB. The foramina of the Nares.

CC. Two Valves or Protuberances of the skin which cover part of the foramina.

DD. The first pair of Bags.

E. The common passage into the first pair of bags.

FF. The second pair of bags.

GG. Two Glands contained within the second pair of bags.

Fig. 9.
Does only represent the figure of the Slit or Orifice of the fistula or
spiraculum in the Skin and the first pair of bags.

A. The Slit or Orifice of the Spout or fistula.

BB. The first pair of bags.

Fig. 10.
The Explication of the Skeleton.

A. The upper Maxilla or Rostrum.

aa. The two holes of the fistula or Spout.

B. Several protuberances on the Os Frontis.

cc. Two pyramidal processes of two bones that compose part of the Spiraculum
or Spout.

d. One of the outward bones of the Rostrum.

e. One of the inward bones of the Rostrum.

f. The os Zygomaticum.

g. A large eminence in the Cranium and the sutura Coronalis.

h. The sutura Lambdoidea.

i. The Teeth.

K. The lower Jaw.

m. The transverse process of the first vertebra of the neck called Atlas.

n. The Spinal process of the same Vertebra.

ooo. The Spinal processes of the other Vertebrae.

pp. Processes opposite to the Spinal processes consisting of two small bones,
arising from the Cartilages that join the Vertebrae together.

Q. The Scapula. The bones of the fin are represented in the next figure.

rr. Two processes of the scapula.

SSS. The Ribs.

T. The Sternum.

Fig. 11.
The Bones that compose the forefin are here delineated.

A. The os Humeri.

B. The Radius.

C. The Ulna.

dd. The Bones of the Carpus.

eee. The Bones of the Metacarpe.

fff. The Bones of the Digiti.

Fig. 12.
Represents the Anterior part of the os Petrosum or Ear-bone.

a. The Hollow leading to the Tympanum.

B. The Tympanum.

C. The part of the Ear-bone that lies in the Cranium.

D. That part which is without.

Fig. 13.
Represents the posterior part of the os Petrosum or Ear-bone which here seems
to be two bones.

aa. That part of the Ear-bone that represents a Cochlea.

B. A Cavity for receiving the Auditory Nerve.

C. A large Hollow that leads into the Cavity of the Ear and seems to render it
two bones.

dd. That part of the Ear-bone which is very thick and solid.

FINIS.

