A DISQUISITION Touching the SIBYLLS And the Sibylline VVritings.

IN WHICH Their Number, Antiquity, and by what Spirit they were Inspired, are
succinctly discussed.

The Objections made by Opsopaeus, Isaac Casaubon, David Blondel, and others,
are examined; as also the Authority of those Writings asserted.

Which may serve as an Appendix to the foregoing Learned Discourse touching the
Truth and Certainty of Christian Religion.

Quoniam difficilis est inventu veritas, undique nobis est vestiganda. S.
Basil. in Prooemio Lib. de Sp. S LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

The PREFACE: Together with the occasion of Writing.
SIR,
I Have, to my no little satisfaction and delight, perused your accurate
Tractate concerning the Certainty and Reasonableness of Christian Religion; As
well against the Atheists of this Age, who believe no God at all; As the
Scepticks and Considerers of our time, who before they think themselves bound
to believe any thing, will first contemplate, and by the model of their own
fallacious, and erring reason judge of, and accordingly embrace all Christian
Truths that are propounded, and recommended either to their Faith or Practice.
Not that I would be thought to blame the use of Reason in the examination of
Divine Truths, so as it be still as a Director, and Tutor, not an absolute
King, and Governor, in what is either above or any way past its reach to
comprehend. Against both these you have directed this short Treatise, and in it
insisted on the only right way whereby Gainsayers may be convinced, Atheists
and Unbelievers converted; That is by Arrows fetched out of their own Quiver;
Arguments drawn from the mouths of their own Writers, which they dare not, nay
cannot with any show of Reason deny. This you have happily done in this short
Book, and drawn together into one Scheme not only what has been forced out of
the mouths of the Heathens, but what the ancient Christians, Justin Martyr,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Origin, Arnobius, Lactantius, and St
Augustine, as the later, Ludovicus Vives, Morney du Plessis, with the most
Learned Hugo Grotius, have gathered together upon this Subject. And though I
must acknowledge, that I think it improper for a Layman to busy himself too
much in the abstruse and knotty points of Divinity, fit only for Casuists and
Schoolmen to wade through: Yet surely the study of the Historical and
Practical parts thereof is not only commendable in, but the duty of every
Christian, so far to look into as his time, and abilities will permit: For
certainly, every person whatsoever is bound to be able in some measure to give
an account of his Faith, and Practice: Nay I heartily wish more of our Learned
Nobility, and Gentry would employ some part of their time, and excellent parts
upon Subjects of the like nature, by which Learning would be advanced, the
Country they live in receive benefit, and their own Memory, for ever honored.

But I shall let this pass: Yet because you have had just occasion to insist
upon the Authority of the Sibylline Books, whose Writings I find questioned by
the Learned Pens of Opsopaeus, Isaac Casaubon, David Blundel, and others, I
have thought fit to offer to your consideration my thoughts upon that Subject,
and shall endeavor to vindicate them, at least so much as concerns Christians,
from the unjust exceptions urged against them; leaving it then to your farther
judgment to make use of all, or any part of what shall be written, as your self
shall see occasion.

CHAP. I. That there were Sibylls; whence their Name; their Number, and the
Time of their Living examined.
THat there were certain Foeminae Fatidicae, Women that foretold future Events,
I shall not go about to prove: the Records of all History making it manifest.
Pausanias tells you, speaking of Delphos. That one Daphne was appointed by the
Earth her self the President of the Oracles in that place. (...). Pausanias in
Phocicis, page 320. lin. 29. Edit. Francos. an. 1583.
And a little after intimates, That the gift of Oracles belonged only to women
according to the sense of those that recorded events. (...). page 321. l. 6. in
Phocicis.
Neither shall I spend much pains to examine from whence they had their Name;
whether, as Lactantius, Lactant. li. 1. de falls. Relig. p. 31. Edit. Hackii
1660. Montac. excer 4. p. 126. in analect.
Baronius, and others, from (...) which signifies (...) in the Aeolick Dialect,
and (...) or (...) which signifies Counsel, as if they were Counselors of God:
Which I should not so well like, whilst it remains questionable by what Spirit
they were inspired; and that Phrase, so far as I remember, not used to any
other except to him whose name was Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God. Our
Industrious and Learned Countryman Mr William Howell in his Institution
Historical (a piece well worth the perusal of every man) seems to derive them
from the genitive case of (...), Howell, p. 171.
calling them such to whom the Counsel of Jupiter was imparted: Or whether the
word Sibylla were not the proper name of the first, Hom. Iliad. (...). page 351
Edit. Romans (...).
or Princess of them, as Eustathius (the learned Bishop, and Christian) in his
Notes upon Homer would have it; or lastly, as Suidas, who says it is a mere
Latin word, signifying a Prophetess; any of which the Reader may make choice
of, as it shall most agree with his own judgment.

But how many in number they were, in what ages of the world they lived, and
how inspired, will admit of a larger debate.

Cornelius Tacitus speaking of them, Tac. an. lib. 6. page 149. Edit. Antw.
1627.
and their Verses, has these words, Vna seu pluves fuere, leaving it doubtful
whether there were one or more. Martianus Capella reckons only two, Erophile
the Trojan daughter of Marmesus, Mart. Capel. in nuptiis Philolog. lib. 2.
Sibylla, vel Erithrea quaeque Cumana est, vel Phrygia: Quas non december, ut
asserunt, sed duas fuisse non nescis, id est, Erophilam Trojanam Marmesi
filiam, and Symmachiam Hippotensis filiam; qua Erithrea progenita Cumis quoque
est vaticinata.
which he thinks to be the same with Phrygia, and Cumaea; and Symmachia born at
Erithre, who likewise gave out Oracles at Cumes; and says particularly, they
were not ten, as was affirmed, but only two, Erophila and Symmachia. Pliny
speaks of the statues of three seen at Rome near the pleading Pulpits, Equidem
and Sibyllae statues juxta rostra esse non miror, tres fint licet: Una quam
Sextus Pacuvius Taurus aedilis plebis restituit; duae quas Marcus Messala.
Plin. not. hist. lib. 34. cap. 5.
one of which Sextus Pacuvius Taurus restored, being Aedile of the common
people; the other two Marcus Messala. These Solinus tells you, cap. 7.
Polyhistor. were Delphica, Erithrea, and Cumana. With him agrees the Scholiast
of Aristophanes, in his Comedy of Birds. There were three Sibylls, (...).
Schol. Aristoph. in avibus.
of which one, as her Verses tell you, was the Sister of Apollo, the second
Erithrea, the third Sardiana. Aelianus tells you of four, Erithrea, Samia,
(...).
Aegyptia, and Sardiana; to whom (says he) others have added six, so that in
all they are ten, amongst which Cumaea, and Judaea are reckoned. Lactantius out
of Varro, with whom agree Isidore, Lact. page 33. Isid. l 8. cap. 8. Suidas in
verbo Antim. in Praefat. ad Sibyl. Orac. p. 144. Sixth. Sen Bibliot. page 108.
Edit. Lugd.
Suidas, Antimachus, and most others count ten in this order. 1. The Persian.
2. The Lybian. 3. The Delphick. 4. The Cumaean. 5. The Erithrean. 6. The
Samian. 7. Cumana. 8. The Hellespontick. 9. The Prygian. 10. The Tiburtine.

Onuphrius adds more, as you may see in his Book de Sibyllis, put out before
the Oracles, in the Paris. Edit. 1599. In his account of them I observe this
difference; he accounts the Sibylla Delphica in the first place, and Persica in
the eighth, I think erroneously; for certainly she was much ancienter then
Cumana, if her name was Amalthea, as I shall show anon.

The age of the world in which they lived severally, is uncertain, but
undoubtedly the first of them very ancient, and sundry of them before the
Trojan War. Onup. de Sibyll. page 7.
Onuphrius tells you that Sibylla Delphica lived long before those times, and
quotes Bocchus, or Boethus for it, that she was born at Delphos, that Homer
took some of his Verses from her, which our Learned Doctor Simpson in his
Chron. Simp. Chro. Cat. A.M. 28 29.
Cathol. takes to be those, among others, by him remembered upon the year of the
world 2829. But Pausanias goes much higher, and tells you, speaking of Delphos,
that it was the place where Oracles were delivered from the beginning of the
earth. They say, from the beginning of the earth there was a place of Oracles,
(...), etc. Pausan. in Phocicis, p. 320. 29 Ed. Frank. 1583.
and that Daphne was by the earth her self appointed President there -- That
prophesying was in common between Neptune and the Earth; that the Earth gave
Oracles with her own mouth: That Neptune had for his Minister for that office
one Dircon. And not many lines after has these words.

I have heard that some Shepherds happened upon the place where the Oracle was,
(...). p. 320. 38. Pho.
and became inspired by the vapor of the earth it self, and prophesied by the
power of Apollo. Which thing might very well occasion the building of a Temple
to Apollo in that place wherein Oracles had formerly been given. Nay I find
farther that the same Pausanias tells you of one Herophile that used to give
Oracles where you find this. (...) -- Pausa. Phoc. p. 327. 18.
There is a stone rising up above the rest: Upon this the Delphians say that
one Erophile used to stand and deliver Oracles; and that she first obtained the
name of a Sibyll: But I find her rather in the like manner more ancient, whom
the Grecians call the daughter of Jupiter and Lamia, who was the daughter of
Neptune, and that she first chanted out Oracles of any women, and by those of
Libya was called a Sibyll. Herophile was not so ancient as she was, yet was she
also before the Trojan Wars. --

When I consider and compare with these testimonies what the most Learned
Bochartus says in his Geographia Sacra, That Noah was Saturn, Cham Jupiter
Hammon, Japhet Neptune, Boch p. 1. Noam esse Saturnum tom multa docent, ut
vixsit dubitandi locus. See How. Inst. Hist. p. 4.
and Sem Pluto; in whom you may farther see the concinness of the Story, and
his reasons at large; as likewise that Tubal Cain was Vulcan. Boch. page 432.
by a small change in the pronuntiation, their sounds being almost the same. It
might well stand together, that in that time, when there was a promiscuous use
of all beds, that Cham might marry his brother Japhets daughter; that is,
according to Pausanias, Jupiter married the daughter of Neptune, who, as you
heatd before, was a Diviner, and all this before the flood; so that the story
of one skilled in that Art being shut up in the Ark with Noah, is not only
probable but true; for we are certain, Noah's three Sons with their wives were
shut up there. Josep. li. 1. cap. 5. Lil. Giral. de Poet. Hist. pa. 79.
Josephus, a Jewish Writer, and certainly no friend to Prophesies not owned by
those of his Nation, tells you of one that spoke of the building the Tower of
Babel, and the confusion of tongues also, but without any mark of distrust put
upon it, which probably he would have done, had he found any cause not to
believe the truth of their Writings. Lilius Giraldus tells you, That Sibylla
Persica, called Sambethe, the same with Chaldaica and Hebraea, lived before the
flood, and was shut up in the Ark with Noah. I find her also called Lil. Giral.
de Poet. Hist. pa. 79 Dial. 2. Suidas in verb. Collius l. 3. p. 2. p. 192. De
animabus Paganctuin.
Sambethe Noe, which might as well be the daughter of Noah, as to derive her
name from Noe, a Town near the Red Sea, as Beirlin. in Verb. and our
industrious Countryman Mr. Howel in his Instit. Historical, incline, page 171.
Georg. Cedrenus tells you of one in Solomon's time, it may be the same Pausan
page 327. calls Saba, and to have succeeded Demo, said to be the daughter of
Berosus and Erimanthe. The Queen of Sheba, who was also by the Grecians called
a Sibyll, (...), etc. Glycas. Annal. p. 256.
etc. Onuphrius in his Book de Sibyllis, will tell you of others, that lived in
other ages of the world, Pausan. in Phocic. p. 337. Onup. de Sibyl.
and assuredly long before that Amalthea, who is said to have offered to sale
nine books of Oracles to Tarquinius Priscus, others to Superbus; which story,
because I shall make some use of it, I shall deliver at large, as I have
literally rendered it out of Dionysius Harliearnassaeus, who lived about twenty
six years before the birth of our Savior, as Helvicus has it. Helv. Chron. in
annot. in cat. viror. illustrium.
The story in Dionysius Halicarnassaeus is thus, Another very admirable
accident in the time of the Reign of Tarquinius, (...), etc. Lib. 4. fol 259.
whether given by the good will of the Gods or Demons, is related to have
fallen out in the City of Rome, which not only for a small time, but in all
ages, and often has saved it from great evils. A certain woman, not of that
Country, came to the King, desirous to sell nine books filled with Sibylline
Oracles; but the King not thinking fit to buy them at the price she asked,
shewent from his presence and burnt three of them, and soon after returning,
asked the same price for those that remained; but he thinking her some dotard,
and to be derided, who asked for a fewer in number that price she could not
obtain for them all, she again went away, and burnt half of them that were
left; and bringing again the three that remained, demanded still the same
quantity of gold: The King then wondering at this deliberate counsel in the
woman, sent to the Augurs, (...).
and discoursing the matter with them, inquired what was fit to be done; they
by certain signs having learnt that he had refused a blessing sent from God,
and deeming it a great misfortune that he had not bought all the books,
commanded the gold to be told out to her, and to receive the books that
remained; but she giving the books, with a charge to keep them carefully,
vanished out of their sight. Tarquin made choice of two of the Citizens of good
rank; and joining to them two other public Ministers, gave unto them the
custody of them; one of which was called Marcus Atylius, who because it seemed
he had done something injuriously as to his trust, and being accused as a
Parricide by one of the public Ministers, (...).
was sewen into a sack of leather, and thrown into the Sea. But after the
expulsion of the Kings, the City taking upon themselves the oversight of the
Oracles, constituted for their keepers the most considerable men of their City,
discharging them from all other employments both military, and civil, and
appointed others of the people, without whom they permitted not these men to
take a view of the Oracles. In short, let me tell you, The Romans kept no holy
or sacred possession whatsoever, with that care they did the Sibylline Oracles:
They made use of them according to the Vote of the Senate, when any sedition
fell out in the City, or great misfortune in war, or that wonders, or great and
portentous Apparitsons were seen amongst them, which things often fell out.
These books of Oracles remained until the time of the so called Marsike War,
being laid under ground in the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, and kept in a
Coffer, or Box of stone, by the Decemvirs. But after the 173. Olympiade, the
Temple being burnt, whether on set purpose, as some think, or by chance, they
were, together with other things consecrated to the Gods, destroyed by the
fire. Those which now are; were fetched from sundry places; some out of the
Cities of Italy, some out of Erithre in Asia, Messengers being sent by the
Decree of the Senate to transcribe them; some were fetchd from other Cities,
transcribed by private hands, in which there are some things supposititious, or
inserted among the Sibylline Writings; but they are discovered by those verses
which are called Acrosticks. (...).
Thus far he. Others call this strange woman's name Amalthea of Cumes. But from
this story thus told, with which Varro Lactantius and others agree, give me
leave to make these Observations.

CHAP. II. Observations, and by what Spirit they spoke is discussed.
FIrst, That in the judgment of Dionysius Halicarnassaeus 'twas uncertain by
what Spirit they were inspired; for he relates as doubtful whether those books
were given by God or the Devil. St Ambrose speaking of the spirit of Python,
Amb. Com. in Epist. 1. ad Cor. cap. 11.
has these words; Hic est qui per Sibyllam locutus est, etc. St Augustine
Cont. Manich. has these words; Moreover, touching Sibyll or Sibylls, Orpheus,
Sibylla porro vel Sibyllae, and Orpheus and nescio quis, Homerus, and si qui
alii Vates, vel Theologi, vel Sapientes, vel Philosophi Gentium, de Filio Dei,
aut de Patre Deo vera praedixisse, seu dixisso perhibentur, valet quidem
aliquid ad illorum vanitatem revincendam, non tamen ad istorum authoritatem
amp^cotendam, cum illum Deum colere ostendimus quem nec illi tacere potuerunt,
qui suos congentiles populos Idola and Dae^^na colenda partim docere ausi sunt,
partim prohibere ausi non sunt.
and I know not who, Homer, and whatsoever other Presagers, Divines, Wise men,
or Philosophers of the Gentiles, who are reported to have told or foretold true
things of the Son of God, or God the Father, it is indeed of some use to
overthrow the vanity of the Gentiles, not to make us embrace their Authority;
since we make it appear that we worship that God of whom they could not hold
their peace, who partly taught their Countrymen that Idols, and Demons were
to be worshipped, partly durst not hinder them in it. Perhaps he may mean this
rather of the other Soothsayers and Diviners that were common in those times;
not of the Sibylls, at least all of them; for if our Learned Prelate Richard
Mountacute, sometimes L. Bishop of Norwich, Mount. Analect p. 159.
quote him right, he speaks more favorably of Sibylla Erithrea, saying, She
had nothing among all her Verses which either belonged to the worshipping of
false or feigned gods. Nihil habuit in toto carmine quod ad Deorum falsorum seu
fictorum cultum pertineat.
Isaac Casaubon, a man of great learning, and various reading, speaking of the
use made of them by the Romans, has these words; There was never any thing
produced (he means by the Romans) out of those Books, Nihil enim unquam ex
illis libris prolatum quo gentium error, and ille insanus Daemonum cultus non
confirmarctur, aut etiam nova accessione impietatis non augeretur. Cas. p. 81.
ed Genesis exc. in Bar.
by which the error of the Gentiles, and that mad worship of Demons was not
confirmed or augmented by some new accession of impiety. I believe what he
says to be true; for he that is conversant in any measure with the Roman
story, will find with what superstition and impious facrifices they consulted
those books, and commonly in such cases wherein the good only of their own
Country, and the worship of their feigned Gods might be promoted; insomuch that
whatever else was in these books that concerned the worship of the true God,
being by them not understood, was wholly neglected; and therefore, in my
judgment, Gasaubon deserves not the censure which I find he has received in
this particular, as if he had contradicted what St Augustine before him had
delivered. Blundelius, in his Book De les Sibylles, calls them frequently
Rhapsodists, stale meat, like Nostredamus, etc. And truly, it is justly to be
doubted, whether those persons were endued with the Spirit of God, in whose
writings, among many truths, much that countenanced impiety was mixed. We know
God sometimes forced the truth out of the mouths of false Prophets, Balaam,
Caiaphas, and others; neither is it very material, to examine by what spirit
they were inspired, whether, as Arnobius, Lactantius, Baronius, See Sixth. Sen.
bib p. 108. Edit. Lugd. Mont. excer. 4. p. 186. in Anal. and alii.
and others, that they were (...), filled with Gods Spirit, or spoke only by
his permission, as the Oracles did; so as the truth of what they foretold is
for the generality made good; neither can I think it unreasonable to believe,
with Cardinal Baronius, That the Counsel of God was such, Confilium Dei fuisse
ut long ante Christi adventum tantae rei sacramentum Judais atque Gentibus
innotesceret, illis quidem per Prophetas, hisce vero per suos Vates, Hisdaspem
praecipue, and Sibyllas. Mount. ia Anal. p. 127.
that long before the coming of Christ some sign of so great a blessing should
be made known to the Jews and Gentiles; to them by the Prophets, to these by
their Vates, chiefly Hidaspes, and the Sibylls.

Secondly, Tarquinius could not be of Cumes in Italy; for she is said to be a
stranger, (...)
, not of that Nation; and that any of any other Nation should at that time
inhabit in Cumes in Italy, and there deliver Oracles, and the Roman State not
know of it, seems very improbable.

Thirdly, Scribonius and Octavius in the 176 Olymp. Onup. de Sibyl. page 47.
out of Fenest. Helv. Chron. page 81. Ed. Oxon.
about 15 years after the Capitol was burnt, which happened in the time of the
War between the Marsi and their Confederates, called the Marsick, or Sociale
War, might contain much of what was in the Books burnt by Amalthea, and which
never were before in the Roman hands, and so perished not with the Capitol; and
consequently that they were not necessarily supposititious, or spurious,
because Dionysius Halicarnassaeus says so, who being a Heathen, judged of the
truth, or falsehood of them, by their agreement with what he had learned was in
the former Books; by which, according to the best examination the State could
make, what they received from Erithre, and other Towns of Asia and Italy, were
corrected.

Fourthly, Scribonius, and Octavius motioned it in the Senate, though between
that time and the Reign of Augustus, when the Prophetic Books were burnt, many
more years, near 100, had elapsed.

Fifthly, Tarquinius was the work of some other much ancienter then her self,
perhaps hers that went by the name of Erithrea, and lived at Cumes in Asia, and
Italy also, because the Romans first sent to Erithre, undoubtedly from that
reason, that they believed those books they had lost were likeliest to be found
there; and beside, Montac. in analect. page 150. Oaup. de Sibyl. Lactan. p. 33.
I find this Amalthea counted the Sibylla Cumana, not Cumaea, as Onuphrius,
Suidas, Lactantius, and others, have before taken notice of, though the
similitude of their names made their persons sometimes confounded.

Sixthly,

CHAP. III. What Writings of the Sibylls were kept in the Capitol: The reading
of others promiscuously not forbidden. Justin Martyr so to be understood.
YOu have heard before what care the Romans took to repair their loss, by
getting in again what they could of the Sibylline Books: Amongst those they
obtained, Lactantius will tell you, they strictly laid up only those of Cumaea.
His words are these. Harum omnium Sibyllarum carmina and feruntur and habentur
praeterquam Cumaeae; cujus libri a Romany occuluntur, nec cos ab ullo nifi a
quindecem viris inspici fas est. Lact. de falls. Relig. lib. 1. page 35, 36.
The Verses of all the Sibylls are abroad, and possessed, except those of
Cumaea, whose Books are secretly laid up by the Romans; nor is it lawful for
any, except the Quindecem viri, to look into them.

The curiosity of men continually increasing from the time of the burning of
the Capitol unto the review made by Augustus, which was 60 years, or upward,
there were got into private hands above 2000 Copies of Books of that nature,
which produced that Decree made by Caesar, for the bringing them in to the
Praetors hands; as Suetonius tells you. Quicquid fatidicorum librorum Graci
Latinique generis, nullis, vel parum idoneis auctoribus vulgo ferebantur, supra
duo millia contracta, undique cremavit, ac solos retinuit Sybillinos, hos
quoque delectu habito, condiditque duobus forulis auratis sub Palatini
Apollinis basi. Suet. in vita Aug. page 152. Edit. Hackii. 1651.
Whatsoever presaging or fate-telling Books either in Greek, or Latin, were
commonly vented abroad, either under none, or Authors names of little account,
having gathered together of them above two thousand, he caused to be burnt,
retaining only the Sibylline Books; of these also he took what he liked to make
choice of, and hid them in two gilded hutches under the foot of a pillar in the
Temple of Apollo Palatinus. In which relation it is observable, that the
Sibylline Books were exempted from this Martyrdom; nay indeed none suffered but
such as had no warrantable Author to secure them: What he liked in the
Sibylline Books he laid up in the Temple; so we find here a new accession to
those Books gathered together before by the Roman Ambassadors sent abroad to
that purpose: And I find farther, that after this, when Caninius Gallus, a
Quindecemvir, would have done the like, he was reproved by Tiberius Caesar, for
deviating from the custom observed by the Romans, and put in mind what
Augustus Caesar had before done. Tacit. Ann. lib. 6. p. 149. Edit. Antw.
But I confess, upon the best search I have been able to make, I cannot find
any Law or public Inhibition against the reading of such Books as were either
not burnt, or not retained in the Capitol; neither indeed could there be; for
what the Romans had being now but Transcripts, why might not any man have
recourse to the Originals, as well as the Senate? and indeed how could Tully
and Virgil make use of things out of their Books (which were never looked into
but upon weighty and great occasions) except they had received them from some
other Copies; See the Treatise p.
the curiosity of the Romans extending only unto those in the custody of the
Quindecemviri, to which they only gave credit, and punished the divulging, not
by any new Law, but by that of parricide, which they inflicted upon Atilius
before mentioned. This is made more evident, Harum omnium Sibyllarum carmina
and feruntur and habentur, praeterquam Cumeae. Lactan. lib. 1. p. 35. and 36.
(...). Xiph p. 230. 25. in Tiber.
as well by the Testimony of Lactantius, who tells you many of their Books were
frequently had in his time, as by another, to wit, by Dio Nicaeus, as I find it
in Xiphilinus. In the time of Tiberius there went abroad a Prophecy said to be
in the Sibylline Books, in these words; That after 900 years a civil dissension
should embroil the Romans, and a Sibaritick madness. This Tiberius endeavored
to make appear to be false, though he were much troubled at it; and Nero after
his time finding the peoples troubles not allayed, he told them those Verses
were not to be found, but instead of them they used to recite this, (...). The
last that should reign of the Family of Aeneas should be the killer of his
Mother: But in all this trouble, and endeavors to satisfy the people, I find
no man questioned for reading, or divulging this matter, which undoubtedly
would have been done had there been any general inhibition, or that the
Quindecemvirs had been found faulty in their trust: See the Treatise, page
Neither durst Origin have avowed the reading and owning them against Celsus,
whence the Christians were called Sibyllists: Nor yet Justin Martyr himself,
had there been a general Law upon pain of death not to read them: We cannot,
must not believe Christians so prodigal of their lives, or the Heathens so
merciful, not to have made use of it against them. The words of Justin Martyr
are these, after he had upbraided them with their prohibition to read the Books
of Hidaspes, the Sibylls, (...) In Apologet.
and Prophets, he adds: We do not only possess them without fear, but as you
see, offer them to your view. Which words must necessarily be referred to what
is before said; for it is notoriously known, that till Stilico burnt the
Capitol the second time, about the Reign of Honorius, which was about 395 years
after Christ, the Sibylline Books were kept with the same care; and undoubtedly
all breach of the Law would have been severely punished, of which in truth
there was none but that upon which Atilius was punished, which was that of a
parricide in betraying his Country, and therefore could not extend to others,
in whom no trust was reposed. But because I find in this particular variety of
opinions, Baronius contending the inhibition concerned only the Christians,
with whom agrees Bishop Montacute in analect. p. 154, 155. Isaac Casaubon, and
the Author of the foregoing Treatise think the prohibition concerned all
promiscuously; I shall forbear any determination in this thing.

CHAP. IV. The Objections made by Isaac Casaubon against their Writings are
considered, and answered.
HAving gone thus far, and laid down these things as preliminary to what I
shall farther say, I come now to consider the most material Objections that
have been hitherto offered against their Writings; and in this Chapter insist
chiefly upon those urged by Isaac Casaubon (as learned certainly as any
adversary they have had) and not declined by others. But I desire first to
inform the Reader, that I hold it no way incumbent on me to justify all things
in those Books, as they are now extant with us, to be free from all corruption;
(what perhaps will be hard to maintain of any Book very ancient) but will
believe it fully sufficient for the matter I have in hand, if I shall show that
those places insisted on by the Fathers in their Disputations against the
Heathens have no marks of calumny that can be justly laid upon them, and
therefore very adequate to that end for which they were produced by the Author
of the foregoing Treatise.

Yet shall I farther show ex abundanti, that the most improbable things are so
far from being demonstratively false, that they may be true, notwithstanding
those many Objections that D. Blundel, and others, have heaped together to
weaken them, and through their sides wound those holy men, who for nigh 500
years made use of their Testimony against the Enemies of Christianity. I wish I
could not guess at the reason of it, and why D. Blundel has been so curious to
rake into the ashes of those holy departed Saints that now rest in glory, and
enumerate their mistakes, in which I dare boldly affirm he is oftener deceived
then they: Nor can I believe any judicious Reader will be led away with that
Paralogisme in which he spends his whole second Chapter, See Blundel de les
Sibylles, cap. 2.
and much of his Book: The Fathers were deceived in other things, therefore in
this. Some things are false in the Sibylline Writings, therefore nothing is
true. Whereas he could not but see that the Argument lies as fair on the other
side: The Fathers in many other things were not deceived, therefore not in
this; especially in a particular wherein for the space of above 150 years (for
it is so much, or near it, from Justin Martyr to Constantine) they made it
their business to examine the truth, whereas peradventure in some few other
things through the fluency of their tongue, and exuberancy of Rhetoric, they
might let fall that which makes us see they still retained the frailties of
men, and had not the memories of Angels. Nay D. Blundel himself, when it can
any way be drawn to serve his turn, is not so hard hearted toward the ancient
Writers, that he will not allow the most suspected of them, Hermas, Papias, and
others, a more candid and benign suffrage, as it is well observed by the
Learned D. Hammond in his defense of Ignatius.

If the Reader will be pleased to pardon this short, digression, I shall now
come to answer the Objections. The first insisted upon by Casaubon, is the
clearness of them: His words are, (having before made use of those Texts that
call the Doctrine of Christianity a Mystery) These and the like Testimonies of
the holy Scriptures, and the like, Haec sacrae Scripturae testimonia, and bis
similia, qui stare possunt, si verum est, pleraque, and ea quidem praecipua
doctrinae Christianae mysteria, etiam ante Mosem gentibus fuisse proposita.
Casaub. Excer. 1. ad appar. ann. Bar. fo. 67. Edit. Genev. 1655.
how can they stand together, if it be true that these, and the chief Mysteries
of Christian Doctrine, were before Moses propounded to the Gentiles.

Though in answer to this I might tell you, that if some of the Sibylline
Writings have that antiquity I have already touched, and shall have farther
occasion to speak of; and that those of them that are so, have those clear
revelations of the Mysteries of Christianity, it was before it had pleased God
to separate the Jewish Nation as a peculiar people to himself, but that then
all the world made but one Church, governed and instructed by the Precepts they
had received from Noah; and so the same reason to propound those Mysteries to
them before Moses, as there was after to the Jewish Nation alone: Yet I shall
choose to give you my answer in the words of Castalio in an Epistle of his to
Maurus Musaeus, Anno 1546. as I find it related by Simson, in Disquisit. de
Sibyllis.

There are some (says he) to whom these (Sibylline) Writings seem too open,
Sunt nonnulli, inquit, quibus haec Oracula (Sibyllina) nimis aperta videantur,
ideoque ficta putent ab aliquo Christiano ad pelliciendos Gentiles, and ad
Christianis gratificandum. -- Qui autem nimis aperta putant faciunt arroganter,
sane qui Deo vaticinandi modum praescribant, quasi non ei liberum sit aperte,
obscure, apud Gentiles, apud Judaeos suo arbitratu praedicaere, aut quasi non
extent in sacris quoque literis praedictiones quaedam clarissimae. -- Sed
fateamur sane Sibyllina Oracula esse clariora: Nonne quae Gentilibus de Christo
praedicta sunt clariora esse oportuit, quod Mose, and caetera disciplina
carebant, quae ^is ad Christi lumen praeluceret, ut quod hic decrat id
Oraculorum claritate compensaretur? -- Quanquam non debemu^ hae^ Oracula ex ea
quae nunc est luce existimare: Nam quae nobis post res g^stas notissima sunt,
ea cum futura praedicerentur crant obscurissima. Si quis ea finixisset,
profecto obscuriora de industria fecisset, ut ante rem gestam scripta, and his
similia viderentur quae sunt in sacrit literis.
and therefore think them feigned by some Christian to allure the Gentiles, and
gratify the Christians. -- But they which think them so deal too arrogantly,
who prescribe unto God in what manner he must prophecy, as if it were not free
to him according to his good pleasure to foretell things to come clearly,
obscurely, to the Gentiles, to the Jews; or as if some most clear predictions
were not extant in the Scriptures. -- Yet should we grant that the Sibylline
Oracles are more clear, ought not the revelations to the Gentiles of Christ to
be so, who were destitute both of Moses and the rest of the Jewish Discipline,
which might to them have been as a light to lighten them to Christ, that so
what was otherwise wanting might be recompensed to them by the perspicuity of
the Oracles themselves? -- Neither ought we to take estimate of them from that
light that now shines amongst us: For what is to us most notable who live after
the things fulfilled, might to them to whom they were foretold as future be
most obscure. If any man had feigned them, certainly he would on purpose have
made them more dark, that they might have seemed to have been written before
the thing accomplished, and have more resembled those of the Holy Scriptures.
Thus far he.

But I ask, Were they indeed so clear? What means Lactantius then, that tells
you, They are confused and mingled so together, that though they were many, Et
sunt singularum singuli libri, qui quia Sibyllae nomine inscribuntur, unius
esse creduntur, suntque confusi; nec discerni ac suum cuique assignari potest.
Lact. lib. 1. fol. 36, 37. Ed. Hack. 1660.
yet they seem the works of one body, and are so that every ones proper work
cannot be assigned. And Procopius in his first book of the Gothic Wars says,
That they tell not all from the beginning, nor observe any harmony or order in
their discourse; -- (...). -- (...), etc. Proc. bell. Got. lib. 1.
-- and that for that reason it is impossible for any man whatsoever to
understand them before the thing foretold is accomplished: To which may be
added, that we are in all likelihood beholding to those that gathered together
and set in order what we now have, for their plainness, who have joined to the
same time and place things that seemed to them of like nature, which might at
several times, and perhaps by several persons distant enough in time, be
delivered. Furthermore, things as clear have not been understood. That of
Balaam, quoted by the Author of the foregoing Treatise. That of Isaiah, A
Virgin shall conceive a son, and his name shall be called Immanuel; extremely
clear in the literal sense, and yet not understood by the Jews when foretold,
nor believed, when fulfilled. If the Sibyll names her Name, the Prophet names
his, and leaves out hers, and both name the Town Bethlehem, though the
Scripture indeed do it in another place. Mr. Howel tells you of an Oracle that
said, Howel Instit. Hist. p. 787.
A Temple dedicated to Bacchus should stand donec Virgo peperit, till a Virgin
should have brought forth; upon which the Heathen called that Temple eternal,
because they deemed it impossible for a Virgin to conceive; and the thing not
understood, though true in the literal sense, and fulfilled at the preaching of
our Savior.

A second Objection insisted on by Isaac Casaubon, Postremo illud me vehementur
movet; quod videam primis Ecclesiae temporibus quam plurimos extitisse, qui
facinus palmarium judicabant caelestem veritatem figmentis suis ire adjutum:
quo facilius nova illa doctrina a gentium sapientibus admitteretur: Officiosa
haec mendacia vocabant bono finc excogitata. Casaub. excer. 1. ad app. ann.
Bar. p. 67. Ed. Genesis
and make the new Doctrine with more ease to be received hy the Gentiles; from
which fountain he supposes have proceeded a great number of books under the
Apostles, and other specious names, etc. I deny not but some spurious things
have been anciently vented in the Church, as you may see in Eusebius, and
others, to what end done I will not now dispute, which might by obscurely, and
appear some years, perhaps ages after, when the cheat could not so easily be
discerned: but that the Fathers should in their disputations against the
heathens insist upon what they knew was false money, and make themselves guilty
by pious frauds and officious lies, of putting so great an abuse upon the
world, is a thing so far from the piety and simplicity of that age, that I wish
I could as easily wipe out with a sponge this injury to their persons, as I can
honor the Memory of that Learned Divine from whose pen they have unadvisedly
dropped. Nay, Mont. Analect. Excer. 4. p. 130.
I think I may, with my Lord Bishop of Norwich, challenge any man to produce
one example of Apostle or Apostolic man guilty of such a falsehood: It became
not Christian Piety to go about to deceive the world; and we find them upon all
occasions ready to expose their persons to the fire, their necks to the Ax,
rather than deny a truth, and therefore ought not to believe this of them,
especially being supposed to have happened in that Age woen Miracles were not
ceased, (as is well observed by the Author of the preceding Treatise) and so
they could not be ignorant Christianity would be supported by better means than
their pious frauds or officious lies.

CHAP. V. The second and third Chapter of David Blundell considered, and the
Objections answered.
IN this Chapter I shall chiefly examine the Objections made by David Blundel
against the authority of the Sibylline Writings, in his second and third
Chapter. Part of which is spent (after a short commendation of Justin Martyr)
in enumerating his mistakes, that from them he might lay some colorable ground
that he was likewise overseen in what he said of the Sibylls: He spares not to
tell you, That 'twil be hard to find in all antiquity a more notable mistake
than that of Justin, Il seroit malaise d'en trouver dans toute la suite des
temps, un plus illustre que celuy du mesconte de S. Justin personage
recommendable s'il en fait jam ais; -- Tous ces avantages ont pu le relever par
dessus le commun; mais ils ne l'ont pa empesche de se laisser abuser par de
conteurs, etc. page 3. and 4.
a person as worthy of commendation as any other has been: and after the
interposition of foam few lines touching his learning and virtue, adds, That
though these advantages have raised him above the ordinary rate of men, yet
have not hindered him from permitting himself to be abused by liars. I should
have believed so much confidence would have produced so great Reasons, that
what he laid down was true, that no indifferent Reader ought to have any just
cause to doubt of it; but I find he urges nothing, or very little, for the
confirmation of what he says, more than his own conjecture. The first mistake
he alleges in the Father, is, That he takes the Statue of Semo Sangus, one of
the idol Gods of the Sabines, to be that of Simon Magus, which he contends was
erected at Rome; and that he does this before the Heathens themselves, with so
much confidence, that it is very clear he believed what he wrote to be very
true: That it is not so, David Blundell offers no reason at all, nor refers
himself to any other book, wherein he might before have proved it; so that for
this we have only his conjecture, for ought appears to me: and we have Cyrillus
Hierosolymitanus agreeing with Justin Martyr, That he so far deceived the
Romans, (...). Cyr. Catechesi sexta. Simson. Anno Christi, 67.
that Claudius erected a Statue for him. That Nero was exceedingly, among all
other Vices, adicted to that of Conjuration, and Magic, Dr. Simson will tell
you out of Pliny; and therefore not unlikely that Simon Magus might obtain high
honors at Rome, till such time as pretending to fly, and being carried up into
the air by the Devil, he was brought down head long by the Prayers of St Peter,
and St Paul, who were then at Rome, as you may find in the place before
alleged.

It is well observed by Mr. Howel, Howel Instit. Hist. fol. 91.
that the Ancients had in great veneration such persons as were founders of
their Kingdoms, and would give them the Names of Saturn, Jupiter, Apollo, and
the like, to whom in the blindness of those times, they gave oftentimes divine
honors. Lil. Giral. Synt. deor. p. 19.
Lilius Giraldus will inform you, such as these, a kind of Semi-gods, like the
tutelary Saints now adays, St George, St James, St Andrew, and the like, were
called Semones, whom they held not worthy of heaven, for their want of merit,
nor would allow them to be earthly, for the reverence they bare their Memory,
in respect of the favors received from them: such, I take it, were the ancient
(...) Demons, or Heroes, and as Mr. Mead thinks, Mead, Apostasy of the latter
times.
in his Apostasy of the latter times; the (...) inveighed against by St Paul,
was that doctrine of giving honor to Demons, or Semigods. That the Sabines
had such a one called Semo Sangus, (whom some take to be Hercules) Lactantius,
among others, who calls him Sancus, others Xanthus, others Sanctus, will tell
you. Lil. Giral. Synt. p. 67. Dion. Halicar. p. 113. l. 2.
You may see in the same Lilius Giraldus, farther, that from him the word
Sancire to enact, had its Original, from the agreement made between them and
the Romans, after the rape of the Sabine women, which you may read of in
Florus. That there was a Monument or Inscription of this Oath kept in the
Temple of Jupiter Pistius, Dio^ Halicar^ ^ 4 p. 257. l. 7.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus will inform us. That there was likewise an ancient
Inscription, Sancto Sanco Sermoni Deo Fidio Sacrum, the Annotator upon
Lactantius will assure you out of Fulvius Vrsinus, Lact. fol. 82.
which in all probability was superscribed, and the form of the Oath mentioned
before out of Halicarnassaeus, underneath it: But that there ever was any
Statue erected of him, kept at Rome, is more then I can any way discover; (as
Ciril informs there was of Simon Magus) and much unlike, if any had been, that
it should continue so long as from the time of the war of the Sabines, till
Justin the Martyr.

The next is, concerning the remains of the Cells in Pharos, near Alexandria,
where the 72 Translators of the Hebrew Bible, by the appointment of Ptolomey,
was performed. This Fiction, he tells us, St Jerome derides, who had been
himself upon the place; and therefore Justin the Martyr (who was likewise an
eye witness of what he writes) must be deceived. But why we are bound rather to
believe St Jerome's eyes than Justin Martyr's, with whom Irenaeus and many
others agree, as David Blundel himself confesses, I see not; especially since
both may be true, there being so many years between him and St Jerome, that
there might be no tracts of that in St Jeromes time, which was visible enough
in St Justin's. You may see at large in Mr Gregory's Opuscula, Greg. Opus. dis.
of the 70. inter. 19. page
the opinion of St Jerome disproved; neither see I any reason to believe (nor
does Justin Martyr affirm it) any thing of that miraculous agreement without
alteration of any word, as some have feigned in their translation:
Notwithstanding it should be allowed that there were little Closets in which
they made their Translations apart, which were afterward compared, and showed
the King. Yet will Mr. Gregory tell you, Greg. Opus. of the 70 Inter. page 7.
that the other miraculous way of the story may be taken upon the greatest
trust of Antiquity. But these hitherto have been but light velitations, or
rather handsome insinuations by D. Blundel to gain the favorable attention of
his Readers; that, after he had thus weakened the authority of the Fathers in
these light things, he might with more ease persuade his Readers they were to
blame in preater. We shall now in the next place come to consider his more
weighty Arguments, who has brought together what I have ever found in any
other Author to have been alleged against those Writings of the Sibylls, with
much improvement of his own. In the examination of them I shall not strictly
tie my self to his order, but consider them after my own method, that I may, as
much as I can, avoid the repetition of the same things.

His first and main Objection is drawn from the inconsistency and contradiction
of the Oracles themselves: Blondel, p. 5. etc. Opsopae. in praefat.
For one of them vaunts her self to be the daughter in Law of Noah, to have
been shut up in the Ark, to have been of his blood, guilty of fornication,
adultery, nay, if Opsopaeus conjecture rightly, of incest with her Father, when
as these Oracles, not extant but in Greek, which was not spoken till after the
flood, manifestly discover the imposture: Nay she that pretends to have lived
before the flood, by her own confession lived 1500 years after. The places
referred to are these that follow. Speaking before of the flood, -- (...), etc.
Ora. lib. 1. p. 183.
she expresses the great joy she had to have escaped so eminent danger of
death. The next place referred to is in the third Book, where after she had
told you she had come out of Babylon in Assyria, lib. 3. p. 283. lib. 7. p.
360. in fine.
that she ws to prophecy against Greece, and that they should account her of
another Country, to wit of Erithre, others the daughter of Circe and Gnostus,
etc. She after the interposition of a few lines says she was of the blood, and
daughter in Law of Noah; and in the seventh Book, where the words are faulty,
and very obscure, gives color to Opsopaeus his conjecture of incest with her
Father. lib. 3. p. 260.
The third, and last place is in the third Book, where she tells you 'twas 1500
years since the beginning of the Grecian Monarchy; therefore that Author must
live after that time.

Before I come to give a particular answer to each member of this Objection,
every thing in that book now extant set down in that order, and time in which
they were delivered by the true Authors, but many times confounded, and
intermixed one with another; so that if it can be evidenced that some one of
these Sibylls might have lived before the flood, it no way invalidates their
authority, that some things may be put together by the composer, or gatherer of
these Oracles as the works of one and the same person, which indeed were the
predictions of persons very different one from another both in age and time.

That there were predictions of the flood by many others beside Noab, Berosus
will tell you, if we believe his authority, as in that I think we safely may;
That many preached, prophesied, Beros. de tempor. ante diluv. lib. 1. p. 48.
Edit. Antw. 1552. Tum multi praedicabant and vaticinabantur, and lapidibus
excidebant de ea quae ventura erat orbis perditione, etc.
nay graved in stone the destruction that was to come upon the earth, though
they were derided, and not believed. Neither seems it to me improbable, that
many pious, and holy men lived about that time, though they were by God brought
unto their rest before this general deluge of water happened, to which Noab and
his Family only survived. The same Berosus tells you, that the Chaldeans kept
Records of many things before the flood; tells you of Enos a Town of Giants;
with him agrees Martinius the Jesuit in his History of China printed at
Amsterdam, 1659. where he relates many things out of the Records of that
Kingdom before the flood; and truly, that our predecessors were never Masters
of some pieces of Antiquity, of which we have now no footsteps left, is to
believe them less careful to enquire after knowledge then we are, or less
curious to transmit it to posterity; for how is it possible that Noah himself,
and those of his generation that succeeded him, should either not tell, or
their children not enquire what was done in the old world, and also leave some
memorials of it to succeeding times, till the Graecians (whose Language quickly
grew almost universal) having robbed the Phenicians, and Chaldeans of their
Learning, robbed us also of a great part of that knowledge we might otherwise
have been partakers of, by clouding it under Muthological tales and fictions of
their own, by which means they eclipsed Learning, which they made show to
promote, out of their pride to make the world beholding to them as the first
Inventors of all knowledge in it, and not letting us know out of what fountain
they drew it. From this and another artifice frequent in very ancient times, of
calling by the names of Saturn, Apollo, Jupiter, and the like, persons whom for
some desert they had a mind to honor with those appellations, came so great
confusion in story: Where we shall find sometime that attributed to a later
person which was true of some Predecessor of his of the same name. Something to
this purpose you may see in Xenophon, and Bochartus; Zenop. de aequivocis in
princi pio.

Bochart. in praef^a. ad ^^b de S^rm. Phaentcum

Sar Walt. Raw: lib. Sect. 6. cap. 4.

Bochar. cap. 12. page 432.

Lil Gir. Synt. Deor. p. 39^. 32. page 214 39.

Onup. de Sibyl.


neither were it hard to give many examples of it, were it proper in this place
to do it.

The use I shall make of it is, that from hence I may induce you to believe it
very possible, that a Sibyl might be before the flood, and shut up with Noah;
for if it be true, as Bochartus thinks, that Vulcan, and Tubal Cain were the
same. Lilius Giraldus among others will tell you, that Apollo (who, as
Onuphrius says, taught Sibylla Delphica the art of Divination; and that she
lived long before the Wars of Troy) was the Son of Vucan or Tubal Cain; and so
it might very well be that the Son of Tubal Cain might converse with a Daughter
in Law of Noah, which might also live a good while after the Confusion of
Tongues, especially since Sem is by some thought (I am sure might) to have
lived in Abraham's time, Simp. Chron. p. 19. Anno M. 1988.
who was born 18 years before the death of Noah, as Dr. Simpson says.

But we need not go so high; for if Noah were Saturn, his three sons, Sem,
Cham, and Japhet, were Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto, as is proved in the second
Chapter; as also out of Pausanias, that the ancientest Sibyll was the daughter
of Jupiter and Lamiah, who was the daughter of Neptune, that is to say of Cham,
by his Niece who was Japhets daughter; I see no reason why that art of
Divination, which Pausanias tells you was in the daughter, might not be known
both to her mother as well as father, who we are sure were shut up in the Ark
with Noah, especially since the same Pausanias tells you, that Oracles were
delivered long before, as anciently as the earth it self, as you may see in the
second Chapter of this Discourse. I shall farther out of the same Author show,
that Divination was common between Neptune (that is Japhet) and the earth; that
before any Temple was made, the earth her self used to pronounce them: Nay the
same Pausanias yet farther tells you of certain Verses mentioned by those of
Delos, (...), etc. Pausan. in Phocicis, page 327.
in which one of them names her self sometime Herophile, sometime the wife,
sometime sister, sometime daughter of Apollo. Possibly these Hymns were the
same with those called Eumolpia, written by one Musaeus, as you have it, page
320. of the same Author. Sometime you will find Daphne called the president of
the Oracles, sometime Phemonoe, sometime of a tradition of a Temple built by
Vulcan, and all this confessedly before the Trojan Wars, but no time when;
which certainly was because by reason of its antiquity they could not: And I
confess in the relation of Pausanias there is a little uncertainty, and
obscurity; but I think I may with as much probability (upon what you have
heard) affirm some of his sort of Diviners were before the flood, as D. Blundel
can demonstrate the contrary; especially since the foisting in this particular
could not serve for any other end then to make the whole book be rejected,
which not conducing to the interest of any party, either Christian or Heathen
(who both allowed them) cannot well be supposed. Nay if Sir Walter Rawleigh be
not mistaken, who says, that very learned men were of that opinion, the names
of Saturn, Jupiter, and the like, were in use from the very Creation; Adam
being the first Saturn, Cain the first Jupiter, etc. Rawl. l. 1. c. 6. Sect. 4.
And since Grandchildren are often called by the names of sons and daughters, no
man can assuredly affirm that one of Cains posterity was not daughter in Law to
Noah; so that although I allow that D. Blundel might have reason to suspect
this place as spurious, yet all he says amounts not to a demonstration that it
is so; and therefore all the Books not to be rejected upon the only account of
this place. The confession that she was guilty of the knowledge of strange
beds, rather makes for, then against the truth of them; for it is like enough
she was polluted with the sins of the old world, having lived in it; the
confession that she was so, argues rather her repentance then another
falsifying that place. That they are extant only in Greek, which at the flood
was not spoken, may receive a double answer, either that they were made so by
the Graecians after they came into their hands; or that the Author, as she well
might, lived both before, and after the Confusion of Tongues. The last part of
this Objection is, that she, whoever she be, mentions 1500 years to have passed
of the Grecian Monarchy, which could not be true, had she lived at the time of
the flood.

In the answer to this Objection, I must needs remember what I find runs
through his whole Book, and I shall repeat no more; that whatever he finds in
these Oracles that cannot agree with her that calls her self the daughter in
Law of Noah, are therefore untrue; as if there never had been but one Sibyl,
the contrary to which is proved in the second Chapter; so that it might be true
that there was one in the time of Neah, and yet this the prediction of another.
But let us a little more narrowly look into his reason, and we shall find it no
way consequent, that because the word there used is in a Tense that signifies
the time past, therefore the thing it self must be also past at the time of the
delivery thereof; whereas nothing is more frequent in Prophesies, and Visions,
then to use the time present, or past, for what is to come. Now the truth of
the thing is no more then this. The Author of those Verses, whoever she was,
after a sharp reproof of the Graecians for their Idolatry, has these words.
(...)
That the Graecians had reigned fifteen hundred years, (...), etc. lib. 3. p.
260.
who first led men unto wickedness: And after tells them of the wrath of God,
and that then upon the feeling of it they should begin to seek him: And lastly,
speaks of the growth and flourishing of Christianity; in all which it will be
evident many things are foretold which were not at that time past; and indeed
they import no more then that 1500 years after the beginning of the Grecian
Monarchy Christianity should flourish: Now whether this happened true in the
event is impossible to judge, since Historians cannot agree when to begin the
Grecian Monarchy; nor is it to be known what period in Christianity is pointed
at by these Verses.

Another Objection he insists upon not much unlike the former; Sibylla) that
calls her self daughter in Law of Noah, is by Justin the Martyr called the
daughter of Berosus, who wrote the Chaldean History. The words are these.
(...), etc. In Parenesi ad Gent. p. 30. Edit. Rob. Step. (...).
You may easily learn in part the right way of worshipping God from the ancient
Sibylla. This Sibyll they say came out of Babylon, being the daughter of
Berosus that wrote the Chaldean History, etc. And soon after has these words
in the same page. Of this Sibyll Plato (among many other Writers of his time
that mention her) speaks of in Phaedro; nay whom himself afterward calls the
most ancient Sibyll. I reply to this Testimony: Though the words are indeed so
in the Father, yet it carries so great a wound in its own breast, that we may
easily suspect some foul play has been used toward him, and this place
corrupted; for how could Plato remember her that was daughter to Berosus that
writ the Chaldean History, who dedicated his books to Antiochus Soter (as D.
Blundel himself confesses out of Tatian) when as Plato dyed in the year of the
world 3656, Armagh. ann. fol 198. and 344 of the English Edit.
and Antiochus Seter, who succeeded Seleucus his Father, and was the third King
of Syria after the death of Alexander, began not his Reign till the year of the
world 3724, in which year Seleucus dyed; so that there are 68 years between the
death of Plato, and the first year of the Reign of Antiochus; therefore in the
most modest account Berosus must be above 100 years old when Antiochus came to
the Crown, or else Plato could not mention his daughter as a Sibyll; for we
cannot reasonably believe she was inspired before twenty, or him married before
the like age; so that at the death of Plato he must be 40 years old, and have
lived to 108, and then have spirit, and quickness enough to write History;
except we will suppose he kept it by him during the whole time of Alexander,
(who we know was always an encourager of Learning) and those that succeeded him
to dedicate it to Anticchus, a man not at all in repute to be compared with
Alexander, which is very improbable. This mistake then must either be
attributed to some inadvertency in the Father, or, which I rather think, some
later Writer intending to explain the words, corrupted the sense by foisting in
these words, (...), the Writer of the Chaldaean History; the words running very
clear without that addition. The cause of this mistake I think proceeded from
their not considering that there might be more then one Berosus. Pausan. p.
328. in Phocicis.
Now Pausanias tells you that she that succeeded Demo was by the Jews called
Sabba; that Sabba was the daughter of Berosus and Erimanthe according to some;
others that this Sabba was called Sibylla Babylonica; others Aegyptiaca: Much
incertainty there is in what age to place her; probably it has come from that
mistake in Justin Martyr, which I believe misled Onuphrius, who makes the same
person mentioned by Justin Martyr (whom he calls Sambethe Noe) to be the eighth
in number, but by Lactantius and others is reckoned the first; in my opinion
with more reason; for she mentioned by Justin is called the first and very
ancient Sibyll, and must certainly point at one more ancient then the age of
Alexander. But whoever she was, and when ever she lived, whether in Solomon's
time, as you have it in the end of the second Chapter out of Cedrenus, but
denied by Collius, Collius de animabus Pagan. pars 2. lib. 3. pa. 190, 191.
or much ancienter, certainly she could not be daughter to that Berosus who
writ the Chaldaean History, for the reasons before alleged: And of the same
opinion I since find was Montacute Lord Bishop of Norwich in his Excercitations
upon Baronius. Montac. in analect. p. 153.


A third Objection, Adam is, by the Author of the first book of the Sibylline
works, D. Blund. p. 7. Il est pense que l'imposteur qui a voulu se signaler
par. la feint d'une si grang antiquite s' est monstre fort neut 1. en derivant
Adam de (...) comme si c'estoit un mot d'extraction Grecque.
derived from the greek work (...), as if it were a word of Greek extraction,
and also denoted from the Hebrew the four Quarters of the World, (...), East,
Orac. Sibyl. lib. 2. page 216.
West, North, and South, whereas his Name in the Hebrew and Chaldean Language
consists only of three letters.

He that considers who it was (even God himself) that imposed the Name upon our
first Father, S. Paul. Romans cap. 1. v. 16. cap. 10. v. 12.
as appears by the first and tenth of the Romans, with many other places. He (I
say) that considers this, will not, I persuade my self, believe it strange that
the same appellation might be significant in more Languages then one, though
not then in being; that he that was not created a man only, but a King over all
the Earth and the creatures thereon, should have a Name that reached over all
the Quarters thereof, shows rather the providence of God, who by it would let
us see, that not only Monarchical Government was the first, and therefore best,
but by himself instated upon Adam, stamped and imprinted in his very name, in
which the point under (...) supplieth the third letter, which he pretends is
wanting.

But what can be answered to David Blundels inadvertency, if after all this the
book, as to that part of the objection which concerns the derivation of the
name of Adam from (...), warrant no such thing, but quite contrary; the words
are these; Having first told you of the increasing of mankind after that of
their wars and wickedness, she tells you, that God took them away by death;
That Hades received them; That indeed they called it H^des from Adam, (...).
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).

because he having tasted of death went thither first; for which reason all men
that are born of the earth are said to go down to the houses of Hades. What can
be imagined more contrary than this to the affirmation of David Blundel; he
tells you, Adam took his name from (...), when the book warrants, that the word
(...) had its derivation from Adam, not Adam from it. Of this opinion likewise
is Mr. Sanford, in his book De descensu Christi ad inferos, published and
perfected after his death by Robert Parker; he tells you, page 8. -- luce
clarius est, Adamah primum in Hadam deinde in Haden abiisse; and page 39, and
40. disputes it, that whoever go about to derive it from a Greek fountain are
mistaken.

1 10 n 8 (...) 200 (...) 70 (...) 400 (...) 200 888
the one consisting of 1697. the other of 888. the number of 1697. not agreeing
to any name of God, and the other only to the Greek (...). Sibyl. Orac. page
184. in fine, and page 171.

Though for answer to that part of this Objection which concerns the ineffable
name of God, Leo Suavius who contends it agrees to (...), of Morellus who says
it agrees to (...), Johannes Auratus who tells you (...) is understood; of
Brentius who expounds it by the word (...): All which you may see gathered
together by Opsopaeus in his Notes upon the place; Opsop. p. 11, 12.
and lastly to D. Blundels own conceit, which you may see page 7.) (...)
Yet I rather choose to acknowledge my own ignorance in not knowing whence to
draw it, then to condemn the Book because I do not: Only let me observe, that
he suspects the Book because the first Aenigme is obscure, and passes the same
censure upon it, because it is intelligible in the second.

I confess, I think the second Aenigme agreeing to the name of Jesus,
consisting of the number 888. may have much in it of mystery, since it is
composed of the first number which constitutes the first cubical or solid
figure that does complere locum, fill a place, as the Mathematicians will tell
you, disposed per monadas, decadas, and hecatontadas, to show that the
foundation of our Salvation by Jesus is solid, that the Author and Finisher
thereof is in all things perfect and complete; whereas the name 666 given in
Scripture to Antichrist is not at all so. Much more to this purpose might be
added, but this touch shall suffice.

Sixthly, He accuses them of falsehood, Rome should continue but 948 years,
which were deduced from the number contained in the Greek word (...).

I find by this Objection, David Blundel was a very good Grecian, as appears by
all his Books, yet he here rather chose to make use of the Latin Translation
which served his turn, whereas the Greek warrants no such thing. The words are,
That Rome should fill up the number of 948 years, (...)
(...)
(...).
Lib. 8. p. 375.
at which time she having filled up the number of her name, a sad portion or
violent fate should approach her: For that is the sense of the words, which
warrant no such thing as a final end of the City; and in truth in my judgment
are not unlike those before quoted out of Xiphilinus the Epitomizer of Dion,
that after 900 years a strange dissension and madness should divide and embroil
them, which caused so much trouble in Tiberius his time, as you may see in the
fourth Chapter foregoing: Insomuch that both he and Nero endeavored to appease
the fears of the people, who were much perplexed with the apprehension of it:
So that you may see they harped much upon 900 years, as if some fatal accident
should then happen: Upon which Opsopaeus thinks that these Verses were by some
later Writer inserted in imitation of those former, because no sinister
accident happened then to the City: Which time fell out about the second or
third year of Severus, as D. Blundel, and Opsopaeus both agree, and is easily
proved.

That no solid Argument can be raised always out of the Numeral Letters of a
word, to determine by it the fate or downfall of any City or Kingdom, I easily
grant; but that nothing at all can at any time be gathered from thence, is to
condemn all the Cabalistical Learning of the Jews, and bring them upon our
ears, who, as we all know, lay oftentimes much weight upon such kind of
argumentations: But let us see if nothing notable happened about that time. By
that sad portion which should then happen to the City might well be understood
the growth of Christianity, which at last should bring a final ruin to
Heathenisme, as indeed it did. Now we find at this very time Clemens
Alexandrinus and Tertullian, two Heathen Philosophers, and converted
Christians, great Champions for the Faith as ever it had, flourished, and writ
in the Defense of Christians, and Christianity. About four years before,
Apollonius a most Learned Philosopher, and Christian, gave an account of his
Faith before the Senate, and was beheaded for it, as Eusebius in his
Chronology, and Helvicus both have it. These things then happening might well
be as so many warning pieces presaging the downfall of Heathenisme, and
undoubtedly must of necessity produce much civil dissension, and partaking on
all hands, and could not but be looked upon as a sad and unfortunate accident to
the City, which might well be called (...). Beside, between the years 900 and
948 lived Justin Martyr, and suffered Martyrdom; Polycarp appeared at Rome
about the difference of Easter; Eleutherius and Victor Popes of Rome then
flourished; Athenagoras writ an Apology for the Christians, as you may see in
Helvicus his Chronology: All which had, if in nothing else, yet in their very
sufferings, a kind of Victory over Paganism, and a shaking of Rome, which
afterward fell in that sense, when the Emperor became Christian, about 300
years after the Birth of our Savior.

A seventh Objection is, Ararat, where the Ark rested, to be in Phrygia: The
words are in the first Book, p. 180. (...)
(...)


And after the interposition of two Verses, follows (...)
(...)
(...).
Sib. Orac. p. 180. There is, says she, upon the Continent of black Phrygia a
long and arduous Mountain called Ararat, within which the Springs of the River
Marsyas arise, upon whose high top, when the waters abated, the Ark rested.

By these words nothing more can be necessarily collected, Ararat is upon the
same Continent with Phrygia; for so (...) signifies the Continent as it is
distinguished from an Island. Phrygia is indeed in the lesser Asia bounded with
Cappadocia on the East part of the Mountain, Taurus on the South, Troas on the
West, and Galatia on the North; and if Ararat be in Armenia, the West part of
Armenia borders upon Cappadocia; so that, for ought appears to the contrary, if
the Ark rested in Arm^nia, as some hold, the Springs of the River Marsvas that
runs through Phrygia might well enough arise there, the Mountain Ararat
extending very far in length. Sir Walter Rawleigh places Armenia the less in
Natolia, or the lesser Asia, makes the Mountain Ararat, Rawleigh, cap. 7. Sect.
10 page 108.
now called Taurus, extend very far, as you may see in the Map annexed to the
seventh Chapter, Sect. 10.

But let us take it with David Blundel in the most rigid sense that the words
of the Sibylls do indeed import, that the Ark did rest in Phrygia near the
Springs of the River Marsyas, is he so assured of the place of its rest, that
he dares from this falsity conclude all the Oracles spurious. Bocbart. Geog.
Sac. lib. 1. p. 15. and Seq.
The Learned Bochartus in his Geograp. Sac. p. 18. tells you the common opinion
is, that Ararat is Armenia, but leaves the place of its resting very doubtful,
inclines to the Gordiaean Hills, which indeed lie in Armenia the great, but no
part of the Mountain Ararat, but a good way distant. Beros. p. 55. Edi.
Antwerp. 1552.
Annius the Friar in his Notes upon Berosus labors much to prove it rested
upon the Caspian Mountains, which separate Armenia from the upper Media, and do
equally belong to both. Rawleigh, lib. 1. cap. 7. Sect. 10. p. 108.
Sir Walter Rawleigh makes that long ridge of Mountains which extend from
Phrygia to the Confines of Scythia intra Imaum, to be by Moses called Ararat,
endeavors by many, and weighty reasons to prove that the Ark rested upon that
part of Ararat near Caucasus that borders upon Scythia intra Imaum, as you may
see in the Map by him annexed of those parts, agreeing in that his opinion with
Goropius Becanus, and our Dr. Heylin with them both. Heylin, Geog. p. 8, 9. etc.
Whilst then we remain under so great an uncertainty touching this matter, what
can be reasonably concluded to the overthrow of the Sibylline Books from this
medium? Some light we might have, did we certainly know that part of the world
where it was built, whose fabric and bulk, with the great burden of all the
creatures, and provision for their nourishment for a years time at least kept
within it, would not suffer to float very far, but only as the current of the
waters and wind might drive it. But where ever it rested, the Scripture tells
you they journeyed from the East to the plains of Shinaar, Genes. 11. v. 1.
where they built the Tower of Babel, and the confusion of Tongues happened.
This reason, among others, induced Sir Walter Rawleigh, as diligent and
judicious a Writer as any other, to place the resting of the Ark in that part
he does, and makes Nimrod to have a very long journey from thence, being the
East part to the place where Babylon stood: Whereas otherwise if you place it
upon the Gordaean Hills, as Bochartus, or in Phrygia as Sibylla, Babylon lying
South or South-East to both these places, they could not be said to journey
from, but toward the East, that traveled from those parts to Babylon. To solve
this difficulty, Bochart. Geog. Sac p. 35. ca. 7.
Bochartus tells you his own conjecture, and seems to dislike others; that the
Assyrians called all that part of their Empire which lay on the other side of
the River Tygris, the Eastern part, all on this side the West; and so would
make the Mountains of Ararat belong to the East, because they were in that
Tract that lay on the other side of Tigris: Whereas if this division of the
Assyrian Empire were not as well his conjecture as the other part of it, and
that in truth there was no such division in use among the Assyrians in the time
of Moses; yet is it no more then if one should say, that the Inhabitants of
England traveling into Virginia could be said to come out of the West, because
they were heretofore part of the Western Empire. Jacobus Capillus makes the
Hebrew word (...) Kedem to signify a Region, and says; Noae posteritas ab
Armenia montibus progressa fuerat in came regionem quae postea dicta est (...)
Kedem a Kedma novissimo Ismaelis filio. Bochart. page 35.
the posterity of Noah came from the Mountains of Ararat to that Region which
was afterward called K^dem from Kedma the youngest Son of Ismael. Others will
tell you, that Kedem signifies as well the beginning as the East, and that the
same word is so used Habak. chap. 1. Habak. chap. 1. verse. 12. Genesis 2. v. 8.
Art not thou (...) from everlasting, or from the beginning? So Genesis 2. the
Chaldee Paraphrase renders the same word in that sense; so does Theodosion, St.
Jerome, and some others. And the Lord planted a garden of Paradise from the
beginning. Psalm. 68. we render the words so. Psalm. 68.33.
To him that rides upon the Heaven of Heavens which were of old, or from the
beginning. With this Translation agree Montanus his Interlineary, and the
Chaldee Paraphrase, as you may see in Bib. Polyglot. Bib. Polyglot.
If this version may be allowed, as undoubtedly the words will bear it, then is
that difficulty wholly taken away, and the words import no more, then that
after the Ark had rested, and the Inhabitants of the earth began to enlarge
their bounds, the beginning of their peregrination was toward the Land of
Shinaar; and thus is the word rendered in this very place by the Chaldee
Paraphrast, Bib. Poly. Genesis 11. v. 1.
as you may see in Bib. Poly. But let us see if we may discover any farther
light out of the Sibylline Writing it self. Admitting the words before quoted
do necessarily imply, that Ararat, where the Ark rested, does indeed, according
to those Oracles, lie in Phrygia, then must it be in a place not far from the
Springs of the River Marsyas: Now the River Marsyas rises about Celaene near
the River Maeander, as appears by Xenophon, lib. 1. Anabas. The Court of the
great King is in Celaene, (...). Xenoph. lib. 1. Anab.
fortified near, or about the Springs of the River Marsyas, beneath the Castle,
which runs likewise through the City, and empties it self into Maeander. With
whom agree Livy, Strabo, and others. Then probably there may be a mistake in
the Transcriber, Live. lib. 38.
and the verse ought to run, (...) etc. the Letters ch and m not being so very
unlike, but that the same mistake has been before made in that word, as
Bochartus, and before him, Casaubon have observed. Now the same Bochartus will
tell you, that Apamia, Bochart. Geog Sac. p. 16, 17.
long after built by Antiochus Soter, and whither the Inhabitants of Celaene
transplanted themselves, was called (...), which signifies an Ark, perhaps from
the tradition that the Ark of Noah rested there, as likely as from any other
reason, in which let the Reader be judge: Sure I am what I have said is enough
in answer to D. Blundel, whose only exception is, that Ararat is made to lie in
Phrygia, when himself, were he alive, could not determine neither what that
Mountain is now called, nor where it lies. But I must not dissemble what the
learned Bochartus farther adds out of Plutarch, Bochart. p. 17. lib. 1.
that the River Marsyas had its name from Marsyas the Son of Midas, which was
many ages after the flood; and so that she that was with Noah could not
remember it. To which I shall say, this seems to be only a conjecture of
Plutarch, and the Son of Midas might as well receive his name from the River,
as that from him; except you like better to believe this verse foisted in by
some late Writer, who remembering that Celaene was called (...) from the
tradition of the Arks resting there, thought by this means to explain the
Oracle, but indeed corrupted it: A misfortune like to it I have before showed
you happened to the text of Justin Martyr: For if that verse be left out, the
sense of the Oracle is no more, then that in the Continent of black Phrygia
there is a long and arduous Mountain called Ararat, upon whose high top the Ark
rested.

But D. Blond. cap. 3. p. 9
Blundel will not thus give us over, but tells us, that this very person
discovers her self to be a Christian, and that she compiled this her Rapsodie
between the years after Christ 138 and 151. that is between the time of the
death of Adrian, and that part of the Reign of Antoninus, when Justin Martyr
presented his Apology. The words referred to are these. (...), etc. -- Lib. 8.
p. 403.
We therefore that are sprung from the holy, and heavenly generation of Christ,
etc. By which words, says he, she evidently manifests her self to have lived
after Christ.

Though I might accommodate many answers to this place, and tell you, that all
persons whatsoever that have been saved were regenerated by Christ, whether
exhibited or to be exhibited, and that future things are often declared as
past: Yet since it is not my task to justify all things in those eight Books
to be as ancient as the flood, but only to show it is possible some things
therein might, I shall not contend with him about it; so as on his part it
might be as equally conceded, that there were more Sibylls then one, which I
find him very hard to be induced to, as you may see in his seventeenth Chapter
at the end, Blond cap. 17. p. 78.
where he says, all the eight Books which we have were written by one and the
same hand; I confess very pertinently to his purpose, had he proved it, but
contrary to the sense of all the world before him; except by writing he
understand composing, and setting in order the works of many persons, which
probably might be the labor of one and the same person, according to the
custom of the Eastern Countries at this day (as I am informed by a Learned
Divine that has traveled in those parts) where their manner is to gather
together the wise sayings of their Progenitors, who ever they were, without any
order, or consideration of time, or other circumstance, and so transmit them to
posterity, indeed as a Rapsody, or disjointed things that have no necessary
connection or dependence one upon another, and yet all, or much of them very
true. That these Writings of the Sibylls may have had their share in this fate,
as to some particulars therein, I think probable enough, but that will not
serve to impugn the authority of them all.

D. Blundel against these Books is taken from their direct contradiction of the
Holy Scripture; Genes. 7.11. Genes. 8.14.
for whereas Moses tells you that Noah continued in the Ark from the 17th day
of the second month to the 27th day of the second month following, (...)
(...)
(...).
Sibyl. Orac. lib. 1. p. 183.
the Author of this work plainly says, that Noah went out of the Ark the
eighth person, after he had fulfilled forty and one days in the waters,
according to the will of God.

If this learned man had as much endeavored to have gathered Arguments for the
asserting the truth of the Sibylline Predictictions, Moses in Genesis: (...)
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
etc. Sibyl. Orac. lib. 1. page 179.
The opening the floodgates and cataracts of Heaven, of his opening the roof
of the Ark, of his great fear, of the endless extent of the waters, of the
earths being covered and drowned by them many days, and of the terrible face of
the Heavens during that time. She then tells you the story of the first sending
out of the Dove, her return; then the sending her out the second time, her
return with an Olive branch in her mouth: After this the sending forth the
Raven, who returned not: And before the first sending forth the Dove, tells you
of some remission in the air after the earth had been watered with the rain
many days: And after this and the first return of the Dove, his remaining in
the Ark more days: And much more to that purpose, all which could not probably
be performed in the space of 40 or 41 days, in which time it is scarce
imaginable either how or from whence so great a bulk of water could come, as
was sufficient to cover the whole globe of the earth so high, as to be enough
above the highest mountain upon the face of it, that all the Inhabitants might
be drowned, had not the immediate hand, and power of God intervened to effect
it. Insomuch that no Impostor whatsoever, except he had been more foolish then
false, would have transcribed a story out of Moses with circumstances
comprehending some length of time in their performance, and at last contradict
his own relation in a matter which lay directly before his eyes, and impossible
not to be detected. We may therefore with more reason believe this relation not
to have been taken out of Moses, but rather to have proceeded out of the mouth
of her that was in the Ark with Noah, which being no way prophetical but
historical, may admit of a greater latitude, and lead us to conclude the
Writer, whoever she was, pitched upon some considerable, or notable period of
41 days, in which they were in the greatest danger. Let us therefore see if we
can any way discover when this was. Moses says, Genes. 7. Genesis 7. v. 11.
That on the seventeenth day of the second month, when Noah and all his Family
with the creatures were in the Ark, and that the Lord had shut up the door upon
them, that the fountains of the deep were broken up, and the cataracts of
Heaven opened, and that it rained upon the earth by the space of forty days and
forty nights. This certainly was the period aimed at by the Sibyll (who might
well call it 41 days, reckoning the day they all, or some of them, entered into
the Ark before the rain fell, for one, and Moses only reckoning the time whilst
the rain was falling) during which time they might well be said to be shut up
by the Lord, as well for their defense against the impetuosity of the weather
and waves, which shook the ribs of their wooden habitation, as the violence
might have been offered to it both by men and beasts, before the waters had
force enough to raise it out of their reach, or depth enough to drown them: All
which time, if we believe the Eastern Traditions, Noah and his Sons kept a
solemn Fast, taking meat but once a day, as I find it in Gregory's Opuscula, p.
Catena veterum praecipue Orientalium in Pentateuchum. Arabice M.S. in orchivis
Bibliot. Bodl.
28. out of the Catena Arabica: And Noah was the first who made the 40 days
holy, or instituted the Quadragesimal Fast in the Ark. The words thus explained
are fully consonant with what is recorded in Scripture; the many days mentioned
by the Sibyll comprehending all that time definitively set down by Moses till
their going out; the 41 containing only those in which they fasted, and were in
continual horror and fear of death, which they might truly say to have
fulfilled in the water, being environed with it both above their head, and
beneath the soles of their feet. So that this Argument is so far from standing
D. Blundel in any stead, that it much serves to confirm, not weaken their
authority.

In the ninth place he urges, Jerusalem.

That much concerning the Titans or Giants, as their story is related by Poets,
D. Blundel has not proved. They are mentioned in several places in the
Sibylline Writings: First in the first Book.

-- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Lib. 1. p. 184. Again,

-- (...)
(...)
(...)
Lib. 2. p. 204. Again,

(...)
(...)
(...).
Lib. 3. p. 232. From all which places there is no more imported, then that God
would at last execut judgment upon those Titans or Giants whom the flood had
devoured, who were a wicked generation. Prove. 21.16. The man that wandereth out
of the way of understanding shall remain in the Congregation of the dead, as we
render it, in the Congregation of the Rephaim in the Original, See Mead in
Diatrib. upon Prove. 21.16.
which word by the Septuagint is always rendered Giants, Titans, or the like: So
that I see nothing to be excepted against in their Writings, or to accuse them
as fabulous for calling the Inhabitants of the old world Titans.

That which he calls the Haeresie of the Chiliasts he could not be ignorant had
received learned Supporters both in ancient and modern times: Whether what ever
has been hitherto urged in their defense be confuted, remains yet sub judice;
certainly those which believe the Jews shall yet once more be graffed into
their own Olive Tree, will not think it unreasonable that Jerusalem may be
again as famous in the profession of Christianity, as it has formerly been of
Judaisme.

D. farther objects, That those Books make Adrian the Roman Emperor that
succeeded Trajan, by whom he was adopted, as some say, to have strangled
himself, which was in no sort true.

Adrian was not indeed strangled,

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Sibyl. Orac. lib. 8. p. 367. The sense of them is, that when fifteen Kings had
subjected the world to themselves from the East to the West, one should arise
wearing a white helmet, having a name almost of the Sea, overlooking the world
with his polluted feet, that gathered and spent much money, skilful, or making
use of all the Mysteries of Magic, etc. After the interposition of two or
three verses, she says, then shall be a lamentable time, because he perished
by a halter.

This person, though no body is particularly named, is commonly taken to be
Adrian, both because he is the fifteenth from Julius Caesar, his name seems to
resemble the Adriatic Sea, and that he made use of Magic spells for the
curing his disease, of which Xiphilinus tells you he was once by the help of
Magic recovered, Xiphil. Epit. Dion. p. 360. lin. 29.
but after fell again into the same, whereof he miserably dyed, after he had in
vain implored death from the hands of his servants, but could find none to
afford it him.

The difficulty of this place is easily reconciled, by admitting an easy
mistake in the Transcriber, by putting an [n] in the place of a [b]; for if we
read the Verse thus, (...), it is then true according to the story, that a
dropsy should destroy him; for (...) signifies a drop of water or a tear, and
in poesy may, especially in aenignatical or prophetical speeches, denote a
dropsy.

Some other Objections D. Blundel has gathered together touching some
Geographical mistakes, some doubts concerning Gog and Magog, concerning
Antichrist, and such like, to which satisfaction might be eafily given; but I
rather forbear, being persuaded that no man that is in some measure satisfied
with the answers given already to the most material Objections, of which I have
pretermitted none, but will easily satisfy himself as to the rest in that
Chapter.

But having gone thus far, and seen the strength of D. Blundel as an opposer,
we shall in the next Chapter consider him as an answerer, and see if in that he
succeeds any better.

CHAP. VI. The Opposition made by D. Blundel to the Authorities and Quotations
of the Ancient Writers in favor of the Sibylline books, and his answers to
them weighed.
THis Learned Divine, and great Reader of Authors both Christian and Heathen,
having left no stone unmoved which could any way serve his turn to the
overthrow of these Writings; yet at last could not but see the Authorities of
so many Writers of great Antiquity, and for many hundred years together which
had decurrently made use of the Testimonies of the Sibylls for the confutation
of their Adversaries, would still remain like so many thorns in his feet, he
thought it very necessary to say something in reply to what had been urged by
them. The first he takes into consideration is Clemens Alenandrinus, a person,
he knew, of variety of Learning, insomuch that some part of his Books were
called (...), from the variety of the subjects they handled, and of great
antiquity in the Church, having flourished (and written, as it is thought)
within 160 years, Heloic. Chronol. pa. 91.
or thereabout, after the death of our blessed Savior; and finding that he had
in sundry places mentioned the Sibylls, and their Books, particularly in his
first Book Strom. Clem. Alexand. Strom. lib. 1. p. 323 B. Edit. Paris. 1629.
and p. 304.
in which he mentions many of them, and among others Phemonoe, whom he affirms
to have lived twenty seven years before Orpheus, who was one of the Captains in
the expedition of the Argonauts against Jason for the golden Fleece, about the
year from the Creation, according to D. Simpson, 2743. (according to Helvicus
not so much) who by the way tells you, Simpson in an.
that what before was read 27, ought to be 107, as the same Author had before
noted in the same Book; who had also before mentioned another ancienter then
this Phemonoe, another later, namely Sibylla Erythre^, with others, whereas D.
Blundel contends there was but one and the same person Author of all the
Sibylline Books now extant much after Christ: Nay farther, that he was not
ignorant that Pausanias mentions the daughter of Jupiter and Lamia long before
the building of Delphos, in which place Phemonoe was perhaps one of the first
that gave out Oracles, though long after the first Sibyll: And had farther
observed, that many verses now extant in the Books we have, and other passages
therein, were mentioned in Heathen as well as Christian Authors: That
Constantine who was not only a Christian, and so by his profession bound to
speak truth; but an Emperor, and so in a capacity by his power to examine all
Records, and other means by which the truth might be discovered, had not only
asserted their authority, but made it evident that both Virgil and Tully had
seen and made use of some passages now in those Books we have: He had great
reason to believe, that some of his Readers would lay more weight upon the
judgment of so many grave Writers, then to be led away by his bare suspicion.

The passage he first lays hold on is in Clemens Alexandrinus, in his sixth
Book, in these words. (...). Lib. 6. Strom. p. 636.
Over and above the preaching of S. Peter, Paul the Apostle says, Take unto
your selves the Grecian Writers; read Sibylla how she manifestly declares one
God, and the things that are to come.

That which he replies to this place is very fit to be set down in his own
words, though they are somewhat long. They shall give me pardon (by their
leave) if I say they accumulate one ill upon another; Mais il me pardonneront
(s'il leur plaist) si je dis que ils accumulent mal sur mal; car s'il ya de la
fault a souscrire (comme S. Justin) a une faussete que l'on n'a peu
recognoistre, combien doit estre odicux le crime de ce faux tesmoign qui (pour
tromper Clement Alexandrin and les autres Chrestiens) a voulu soustenir la
supposition des escrits Sibyllins, par une pire imposture, and feindre que S
Paul luy mesme leur avoit concilie de l'authorite par sa recommendation? Si les
bonnes ames ont de la pe ne a souffrir que l'on done en leur presence les
eloges de la pudicite a de louues de bordel, qui d'entre les vrais Chrestiens
pourra supporter que l'on egale aux prophets de dieu des hypocondriaques. and
a leurs oracles coelestes, des resveries embarassees, and que l'inventeur d'une
si indigne fourbe, ose pour la maintenir, produtre l'Apostre comme complice de
son audace sacrilege? On veut n^ant moins que de ce vaisseau d'election soient
sorties les paroles rapportees par Clement, and pour ce que rien de tell ne se
trouve en ses epistres on se figure qu'il les a prononcees en ses sermons
populairs, come s'il avoit este possible a celuy qui a sacrific sa vie par un
glorieux martyr l'an 65 de nostre Seigaeur, de donner son approbation a une
piece pleine de fautes, and forge de puis l'an 137, etc. Blond. des Sibylles,
cap. 5. p. 15. and 16.
for if it were a fault to give consent (with S. Justin) to an untruth which he
could not know, how odious ought the fault to be of this false witness, who (to
the end he might deceive Clemens Alexandrinus and the rest of the Christians)
has showed himself willing to maintain the supposition of the Sibylline
Writings by a worse imposture, and feigns that S. Paul himself had given them
authority by his recommendation? If those good souls would be unwilling that
one in their presence should commend for chastity the persons hired in unclean
houses, what true Christian could endure to hear equalled to the Prophets of
God and their Prophesies the embroiled fancies of Hypochondriacks, and that the
Inventor of this so unworthy cheat should dare for the maintenance of it to
produce the Apostle as a Partner of his sacrilegious boldness? Notwithstanding
all this there are that would have these words quoted by Clemens to have
proceeded out of the mouth of this Vessel of Election; and because no such
thing is found in his Epistles, they feign to themselves that he spoke them in
his Sermons to the people, as if it were possible for him who sacrificed his
life by so glorious a Martyrdom 65 years after our Savior, could give
approbation to a piece full of faults, and forged 137 years after.

I ask first who was this false witness whose crime was so odious, who was the
inventor of that so unworthy a cheat; and that durst make St Paul his partner
in so sacrilegious a boldness; and that deceived Clemens, and the rest of the
Christians? I am sure there is nothing extant in their Writings, that tells you
that St Paul made use of them; and I think he did not believe any body stood at
Clemens his elbow to engage him to father that upon St Paul which he would not
own; so that it must necessarily follow, that Clemens Alexandrinus himself must
be the person guilty of this cheat, this sacrilegious boldness, to deceive both
himself and other Christians: Certainly D. Blundel had too much worth to intend
any such calumny to this Writer, or to affix so ill language of him; and I
observe it only to let you see how far that (...), the immoderate drawing of
all things to the contrary part, to serve their ends, may mislead wise men,
after they have espoused the defense of any cause, though never so unjust.

We will now examine what in this Allegation is Argumentative on David Blundels
part: His design is to show these eight Books of the Sibylline Writings, to be
embroyled fancies, rapsodies proceeding from hypochondriaques full of faults,
and written 137. years after Christ. To do this he tells you Clemens
Alexandrinus urges, That St Paul remitts the Gentiles to the Books of one of
the Sibylls to prove the unity of the Godhead, and other things to come; but
there is no such thing extant in St Paul's Epistles, that we have; therefore
those Books are spurious, false, and I know not what else. Were he able to
prove that St Paul never said or wrote any other thing than what we have in
those sew Epistles of his, and that little that is related of him in the Acts,
nothing more would follow than that Clemens misalledged him, nothing at all to
the overthrow of the Books, which we know were in the world both in Tully's and
Virgil's time, and therefore could not be unknown to St Paul, being sometime in
the Court of Nero, and bred up unto much learning. We know he did upon the like
occasion remember them of the Poems of Aratus and Epimenides, and why not of
the Sibylls? We have reason enough to believe Clemens might have some pieces of
St Paul which are unknown unto us, the rather since we see new things are daily
discovered; witness the first Epistle of Clemens Romanus (the genuineness of
which few doubt, yet) not brought to light till our days; and why the like may
not be supposed of St Paul, I see not: This is clear, he had a good esteem of
those Writings, and that in his judgment St Paul might have made use of their
authority in that point. Oh, but here is a great deal of clearness in these
Oracles more than in the Scriptures; therefore St Paul could not be the Author
of this Allegation. Touching the clearness of these Writings in general, I have
spoke at large in the fourth Chapter; as to their plainness for the proving the
Unity of the Godhead, certainly nothing in the world can be more clear than the
Scripture in many places; so that D. Blundel, as to this particular, has not
made his reply good against Clemens his Authority in any part. I wonder he did
not as much find fault with his quotation of the Sermon of St Peter a little
before, (...), etc. Lib. 6. Stromat. p. 635.
where he tells you of the Unity, Incomprehensibleness, Invisibility, of his
filling all things, and standing need of nothing, of his making all things by
the power of his Word, that is, his Son, and many more undoubted truths, but
not delivered, at least not all of them, in those words, by St Peter in any
thing of his now extant. I cannot doubt but could that have been useful, he
would have heaped it up also amongst Clemens his mistakes, with which he fills
up his next Chapter; and, were they all true, would be very little to his
purpose.

After this, from the beginning of the eleventh Chapter to the end of the
fifteenth, he spends his whole time, and as much paper as I have alloted my
self to this whole discourse, in showing you the more important mistakes in the
Emperor Constantine, in his eleventh Chapter; then his mistakes of less
importance in the fourteenth; the discovery and clearing the opinion of Cicero,
in the twelfth, and of Virgil in the thirteenth Chapter; that Virgil did not
disguise his opinion, is the subject of his fifteenth Chapter. Whereas after
all this labor and pains, he wholly mistakes both the design and drift, not
only of the Emperor, but of all other the Christians that have made use of the
Sibylline Writings, whose aim was not to concern themselves what was the
opinion either of Tully touching them, or what Virgil meant in his fourth
Eclogue; but whether the words of one do not clearly import that there were
Sibylls, and that in their Writings were Acrostiques; and that the words of the
other import that which is not applicable to any but our Savior: Now that this
is made good in every particular, is so clear, that the very recitation of the
words are of themselves able to confute any man. The words of Tully, in his
second Book of Divination, are these. Speaking of the Sibylls. The Poem it self
evidently shows, Non esse autem illud carmen furentis cum ipsum Poema declarat
(est enim magis artis, and dilig ^tiae, quam iucitationis, and motus) tum vero
ea quae (...) dicitur cum deinc^ps exprimis versus literis aliquid connectitur
ut in quibusdam Ennianis quae Ennius fecit. Cicer. de Divinat. lib 2.
that the Verses are not a mad bodies, (for it savours more of Art and
diligence, than of sudden motion, or incitation) especially that which is
called an Acrostich, in which, from the first letters of every verse downward,
something is framed or knit together, as it is in some of those which Ennius
has made. It Is clear enough from these words that there were Acrosticks, and
such as Ennius made; but of what sort those were we cannot know, since of him
we have nothing left that I know of, but certain fragments gathered together
out of all Authors by Robert Stephen, and put out by Henry his brother: But if
we may guess at them by those in the Arguments of most, if not all the
Comoedies of Plautus, who was near, Helvic. Chron. act. ann. mun. 3712.
if not of his time, (for between the birth of Ennius and death of Plautus are
but 60. years, or thereabout, and both before Tully) we shall find them such as
those quoted out of the eighth Book of the Sibylline Oracles, and repeated by
Constantine; so that I look upon that in D. Blundel, page 55. as a fancy; who
would have Acrosticks so made, that the number of the letters in the first
Verse should contain the number of the verses in the whole Poem, and that the
second of the first should be the first letter of the second verse, and so
consecutively; of which sort he gives one only verse, as an example, 705 years
after Christ, and perhaps the only one ever made of that sort. Lil. Giral. de
Poet. Hist. Dial. 2. p. 11.
Lillius Giraldus tells you of Acrosticks, and Parasticks, but of none of this
sort; so that we have little reason to believe those in the Sibylline Oracles
were other than what we have. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus tells you, the true
Sibylline Writings were discovered by the Acrosticks, enough to prove there
were such.

Those of Virgil are in his fourth Eclogue too long to transcribe, and such,
that Constantine, in his Oration Ad Sanctorum Caetum, spends his nineteenth and
twentieth Chapters to show they could not be understood of any other but our
Savior, and shows there, that those, as well Acrosticks as other Writings of
the Sibylls, had been seen both by Cicero and Virgil, and the Acrosticks
translated by Cicero, and all this made so manifest by those that had
accurately computed the time, that their testimony is beyond exception. Of the
same opinion is Lactantius, Lact. l. 5. de ver. sap. p. 400.
who tells you, None that has either read Cicero or Varro will believe these
Writings counterfeited by the Christians; out of which these testimonies had
been produced by persons dead long before the birth of our Savior. But I had
almost forgotten that he offers some reason against the Acrostick mentioned in
the Oration of Constantine, because in the Sibylline Books it is (...),
consisting of one letter more than the name ought to have according to the true
writing thereof; whereas D. Blundel, who makes this Objection, could not be
ignorant that the ancient Graecians accounted the name of Christus
octosyllabum, as Irenaeus tells him: Iron. li. 1. ca. 10.
And Valesius in his Notes upon Eusebius, lately put out at Paris, 1659. has
these wrods; The ancient Graecians accounted the Name of Christ to consist of
eight syllables (taking sylable there for Sance veteres Graeci nomen Christi
octofyllabum faciebant (...) (...) cum dipth^r. (...) l. 1. c 10.
a letter) writing Christ, Creist, with a dipthong. I confess I find not that
particular in Irenaeus, in the place quoted, nor remember it in any other; but
of this I am sure to have observed in ancient Greek Inscriptions upon Statues
and Pillars, Vid. Seldini Marmora Arundeliana.
what we now write with a single I, expressed by a dipthong, and the like,
which is evident in the writing of the word (...), Latinus.

CHAP. VII. Of Predictions of things to come; and of Divination in general,
what sorts lawful, what uncertain. Of Enthusiasme, the definition of it. Of
Enthusiasticks, and such of our Time who have pretended to Visions, and
Revelations. The difference between true and falls Prophets: In what rank the
Sibylls are to be accounted.
DAvid Blundel having urged all the Arguments he could against the Sibylline
Books, now at last employs many Chapters touching Enthusiasme, the
consideration whereof I shall now take in hand, but think it not amiss in the
first place to speak something of Predictions in general, and the several ways
by which future events are foretold, and frequently come to pass. The first is
of wise and Learned men, who from their Observations out of History, and
comparing the times past and present, when they shall see the same things come
again upon the stage of the world that have formerly been, and then considering
all circumstances of agreement, and difference, are able to give a probable
conjecture, which seldom fails, of what is like to come to pass, which sort of
Predictions are not only lawful, but worthy of much commendation, and are very
frequently conducible to the good of Kingdoms, by preventing evils otherwise
like to come upon them.

A second sort is Astrological Prediction, wherein the Artist undertakes from
the position of the Heavens, and configurations of the Planets, at such a
certain moment of time, to foretell future accidents: This Art I cannot say is
unlawful, but I take it to be conjectural, uncertain, and by ignorant people
much abused: Strange things are, I confess, often foretold, and sometime prove
true, when a skillful Artist has the handling of the matter, but many times
are otherwise; sometime from the ignorance of him that undertakes the judgment,
other while from the influence of some of the fixed stars, which being seldom
taken notice of, may cross or hinder what would otherwise happily have come to
pass; or thirdly, from the want of a sufficient treasure of Observations, by
which judgment ought to be given; the same posture of the Heavens having never
twice happened alike in every circumstance since the Creation; and by that
means leaving the world destitute of stable means to judge upon, since what can
be rationally said in that kind must proceed from the comparing of events which
have happened under such and such Configurations, with what are like to be when
the same fall out again; or, lastly, from the care of the party himself, who
may by his own industry prevent what his destiny from the influence of the
Stars would have been, which at most do not necessitate, but incline, and by
the providence and overruling power of God are sometimes diverted.

A third sort is a geomantical or terrestrial Divination, in which from certain
voluntary points made by the hand at adventure, certain figures are raised;
from the four first of them called Fathers, are produced other four called
daughters; those eight bring forth four grandchildren, from them come out two
Witnesses, from those a Judge, in all twelve, answerable to the twelve Houses
in Astrology, and the judgment upon this sort of Divination not much unlike
that of Astrology. The ground of this Art and its foundation is laid upon a
false supposition, that the soul of man knows things to come, but is hindered
by the dullness of the Organs of the body; and theresore in the practice of it a
great sedateness of mind is required, a freedom from all noise that may
disturb it, and such like circumstances, which he that has a mind to know may
find in Cattan, Dr. Flood, and H. de Pisis, who have all written largely upon
it. This kind of Divination I take to be idle, vain, and superstitious, as not
built upon any stable foundation of Reason, or supported by any thing but fancy.

A fourth sort is by framing certain Figures of stone or metal, underneath such
Constellations, and placing them either in some conspicuous place of a Town, or
sometime under ground, by which strange things are wrought; these are called
Talismans, of which, as also the language of the Stars, with an Alphabetical
Table, and how from that words are framed, which shall declare the event of
things to come, according to the nature of the Question; Gaffarel, a Learned
Frenchman, has largely written in his Book called Unheard of Curiosities; such
they will prove to him that spends much time in the study of them. Other
frivolous ways of sortiledge there are, which I shall purposely pass over.

The next way of Divination I shall mention is Enthusiasme, or Illumination;
and this is most to our purpose to treat of; Hesychius in his Glossary
interprets it thus: An Enthusiastic is one that is mad or full of the Spirit.
(...).
Enthusiasme is a stupor or horror: Or, Enthusiasme is when the whole soul is
enlightened by God. By which several interpretations of the word, it may easily
be gathered, that Enthusiasm may be of several kinds; some natural, or at least
proceeding from some distemper of the body, which arising from a natural cause,
it may be so called; others come by possession or inspiration of some spirit
either good or bad, which may be well deemed supernatural. Much contest there
is whether all Enthusiasme be natural, and to that purpose the authority of
Aristotle is produced, who discoursing of the several passions arising from
drink, love, and the like, or from some melancholy heat, tells you the story of
one Maracus of Siracuse, a Poet, who never made so good verses as when he was
made, and immediately before has these words; Many because that heat is near
the seat of the mind, (...), etc. Arist. Probl. 30. Quest. 1.
are taken with sundry frantic and Enthusiastic diseases; from whence they
all become Sibylls, Bakides, or inspired, whereas they become not so by any
disease, but a natural temperament. From which words we may observe two things.
First, That he does not in this place point at any Sibyll in particular, of
which many had been before his time, but takes Sibylls there for persons any
way inspired, as the Bakides and (...) joined with them, were supposed to be:
And in the next place, That he must (not to contradict himself) take disease in
a different sense in the same place; for in the beginning of the sentence he
tells you, They are taken with many frantic or Enthusiastic diseases, and
soon after says, They become so not from any disease, but a natural crasis or
temperaments; in the last place therefore he must take disease in that stricter
notion, for such an affection as shakes and weakens the whole frame of the
body; in the first, for such a distemper as drunkenness, love, poetical
rapture, and the like, such as he calls natural Enthusiasme, which will either
be its own cure, or vanish away with time, the constitution being sound, though
the action be altered; but however it will from these words of Aristotle
follow, that in his sense much of this kind of illumination proceeded from an
exaltation of the mind by some ecstatick operation of the soul, and not from
any possession or inspiration of it by either good or evil spirits: And
undoubtedly great examples in all ages may be produced out of the Observations
of several Physicians, to this purpose, some where of have been mere cheats, to
gain credit to such as should cure or exorcise them; others true, or natural,
where through some melancholy heat, or strong imagination, or lastly, through
custom and use; See Montagnes Essays, Strange effects from the force of
imagination, in his Chapter upon that subject. Fienus de viribus imaginationis.
the persons affected have brought upon themselves such a habit of body, that
their fancy prevailing over their judgment and understanding, they have really
believed themselves possessed with a spirit of Prophecy, and enlightening from
God, whereas in truth there was no such thing. I my self have known two
examples in Persons both of this Nation, of good Rank and Quality; the one a
man whom I have often seen, and sometimes heard discourse, but was then too
young my self to converse with him, but am well assured he was otherwise a very
sober person; but in that particular of explaining difficult prophesies, did
think himself strangely endowed; insomuch that his confidence so far misled
him, that he could no way be driven out of that opinion, That the eleventh
Chapter of the second Apocryphal Book of Esdras denoted King James, who was the
Lion of the North, who plucked at the feathers of the Eagle, which he conceived
to be the Emperor: Nay, his confidence in this fancy was so great, that after
the death of the King, he believed he should rise again out of his grave to
make good his conjecture. The other was a Lady of Noble Rank, who pretended
much to this gift of Prophecy, and having unhappily foretold the death of a
great person which by chance fell out true, she was mightily puffed up with it,
and followed by some of the giddy multitude; she undertook to denounce the end
of the world, writ upon the prophecy of Daniel, very idly, and at last lived to
see her self deceived in all her vain extravagancies. These two might certainly
be reckoned amongst the Enthusiasts of Aristotle, who labored under some light
disorder of the brain, which disturbed their judgment as to that particular,
though in other matters they were sober enough; and under the same notion must
I look upon the false Prophets, Dreamers, and Quakers, whereof this Age has
been very fertile, who pretend themselves endued with an extraordinary measure
of the Spirit of God; first dream dreams, then see visions, then expound them
after their own imaginations, and would obtrude these upon the ignorant
multitude as Revelations of God, which are indeed no other than the effects of
a disturbed brain, what they foretell rarely coming in any measure to pass, and
themselves never able to confirm their mission by any miracle whatsoever, to
induce men to believe them Prophets: Some of them are not unlike the Derevises
or Torlaces in Turkey; who by frequent using their bodies to turn round, can at
their pleasure fall into ecstasies, in which they pretend to receive messages
from God, and deceive those that give credit to them; though, to speak truth,
the sad consequences that have followed from the doctrine of some of these
pretenders to new Lights, may give us good cause to believe them to have been
led away into these extravagancies by the spirit of error and delusion, and
not wholly by a natural disturbance of the brain: Unless (as we have great
reason to suspect) that many of them have been carried on by interest and
design, by such pretenses to deceive others, thereby to compass their wicked
designs, of which we have seen too sad effects. From this, and much more which
might be materially added to this purpose, it will be evinced, that Aristotle
had much of truth and reason in what he said; but because some were either
cheats, or Hypochondriaque, that therefore all were, and among them the
Sibylls, as D. Blundel would infer, I can no way be induced to believe; nor
does he produce any reason that they were so, whereas the very great time
between the predictions, and the fulfilling of them sufficiently evince, that
they came from a higher cause then a melancholic heat: In which I have ever
observed, that between the Prophecy and the time allotted for the adimpletion
of it, seldom interceded more then a score of years, sometimes not so many
months. Beside we find, that as well the Sibylline Predictions as all other
Oracles ceased at, or soon after the preaching of our Savior, whereas
melancholic distempers continue still, which to me seems a strong argument
that they were different in their causes. Neither ought the authority of
Aristotle too much to sway us in this thing: I allow him to be one of the
greatest Masters of reason that ever was, but withal must remember, that being
contemporary with Plato, and sometime his Scholar, but resolving to set up a
new Philosophy different from that of his Master, would not comply with him in
that particular in which he deemed him faulty: For it is observable, that as
Plato often speaks of Sibylls Prophesies and Revelations, Aristotle mentions
none, or very ambiguously, resolving to go a quite contrary way, not meddling
with any thing of which he was not able to give a probable reason. And all
others of the Ancients who have denied the truth of all Oracles or Predictions
whatsoever, except natural, were still of the Sect of Epicurus, mere Atheists,
and consequently bound by their Sect to believe nothing in this kind but what
they conceived to be so: For which Lucian a professed Atheist does commend
Democritus, Metrodorus, and Epicurus, for their constant adhesion to their own
opinion, though never so much contrary to reason and authority: His words are
these, speaking of one Alexander a cheat, as it seems, and an Impostor, he
tells you he did so strange things, (...) Lucian. Pseudomantis, p. 481. Edit.
Par. 1615.
That indeed the trick stood in need of some Democritus, nay of Epicurus
himself, or Metrodorus, or some other that had an adamantine opinion toward
that or things of the like nature, as not to believe them, and cast about which
way it might be, which if they could no way find, they resolved to conclude it
a lie, and impossible to be done, though the manner of the cheat was hid from
them. Amongst them Democritus has endeavored to give a reason why all
Divination may be natural, because, according to the opinion of the Stoic
Philosophers, nothing did ever happen in the world but by an eternal
concatenation of causes, which have such a dependence one upon another, that
they render an aptitude in every thing to be foreseen in its causes, which
being natural, Divination may be so too: And Democritus farther asserts, that
out of all things that happened by natural causes, there proceed certain
effluxes or emanations, not only in the things themselves when existent, but
from their causes also; so that these causes being in any subject, may from the
emanations proceeding from them give an aptitude to the subject to be disposed
accordingly; and consequently, that the cause of Divination being in any man,
the effluxes of it may render him a Diviner.

This speculation I confess is subtle, and high, if there be any sense in it,
fitter for the mouth of an Atheist then a Christian; for admitting such
emanations or species may come out of material bodies, how they can proceed out
of causes that are sometimes inexistent, till they produce the effect,
sometimes immaterial, I understand not. Will any man say that love, which is a
passion, and immaterial now in any man, upon the sight of an Object to be
beloved was in him causally either before his own existence, or the existence
of the object; if there were such effluxes in that cause, why not in the cause
of that cause, and so in infinitum. These subtle inventions to avoid manifest
convictions of their own consciences clearly show there were among them
undeniable testimonies of such predictions, of which no true reason could be
given, which put them so to their shifts; because they were indeed
supernatural: Such I take the Predictions of the Sibylls to be, but whether any
or all of them were endued with the Holy Spirit of God (as I have before said)
remains to me questionable. This difference from them I observe to be in the
true Prophets, that they were never during their Prophecy deprived of their
wits or senses; if at any time they have been surprised with any consternation
or astonishment upon the appearance of an Angel, or the like, they have been by
the power of God soon restored to a temper fit to understand, and deliver the
message entrusted to them: Nay they have been farther able to confirm by
Miracle, that they were truly sent by God, when it stood with his glory to have
it so, and the distrust of the people required it. Whereas these Sibylls are
never reputed to have done any other Miracle save that of truly foretelling
things to come. It Is made indeed the mark of a Prophet not sent by God, Deuteronomy.
18. ult.
if the things foretold come not to pass; and this undoubtedly is true; but it
follows not convertibly, that where ever things foretold come to pass, that
person is sent by God, except meant permissively; for we know the Oracles of
the Heathen Gods gave often true answers, suffered so to do indeed by God, but
inspired by the Devil. We know farther, that these Sibylls were generally
supposed in the delivery of their Oracles to be in a rapture and fury, that
themselves understood not what they delivered, nor were able to make perfect
what was imperfectly taken by the Writer: This we have upon the authority of
Virgil, Tully, Virg. Aenei. 3. Cic. de Divin. li. 2. Ovid. Met. li. 14.
and others: Nay, that Sibylla commonly called Erythrea, says she is (...)
surprised by a rapture or fury. The consideration of these things makes me
prone enough to believe they had in their predictions (...) a powerful
inspiration, as Justin Martyr twice calls it in his Admonitory to the Gentiles,
but not true Prophetesses of God, and sanctified by his holy Spirit, at least
not all, if any of them; yet do I very little doubt of their Antiquity, or
suspect any great corruption to have happened to their Books, for the
genuineness of which we have as much to say, as for most ancient Writings left
amongst us, all or most of the things quoted out of them by any ancient Writer
being now extant in those we have, and as they now are from ancient Copies
transmitted to us. I know some go yet higher than I do, and conceive them true
prophetesses of God, as you may see in the beginning of this Discourse, of
which opinion St Jerome seems to be. Jerome. lib. 1. adversus Jovini. long post
medium. Collius de Sibyll. c. 35. p. 226.
Collius in a straight it seems what to determine, goes a middle way, and says
their Oracles are of two sorts, one that concerns Christ, his Birth, Worship,
or the like, these he thinks proceeded from divine inspiration; others which
concerned Kingdoms, and their Idol worship, he believes came from the Devil.
Such a mixture of God and the Devil in the same person may seem hard to some to
believe, yet will not this conjecture seem altogether void of probability, when
the case of Balaam is fully considered, who though he were a Magician and
wicked person, yet for ought appears to the contrary, was guided in his
prophecy by the Spirit of God, and yet not allways so in the counsel he gave
to Balak, as you may read Numbers 22. and 23. Chapters. Aug. de Civit. Dei. l.
9. c. 23.
St Augustine in his Book of the City of God thinks that she that goes under
the name of Sibylla Erythrea (whom some think to be Sibylla Cumea) was a
Citizen of the City of God, because she has nothing in all her verses tending
to Idolatry, but against the false Gods and their worship; mentions there the
Acrosticks containing these words JESUS CHRIST SON OF GOD THE SAVIOR; Which
the Translator of that Book having turned into our tongue, I have thought fit
to transcribe, for the English Readers sake, who perhaps will not have the Book
by him.

In sign of doomes-day the whole earth shall sweat;
Ever to reign a King in heavenly seat
Shall come to judge all flesh; the faithful and
Unfaithful too before this God shall stand,
Seeing him high with Saints in times last end:
Corporeal shall he sit, and thence extend
His doom on souls. The earth shall quitely waste,
Ruined oregrown with thorns; and men shall cast
Idols away, and treasure; searching fire
Shall burn the ground, and thence it shall inquire
Through Seas and Sky, and break hells blackest gate;
So shall free light salute the blessed state
Of Saints; the guilty lasting flames shall burn;
No act so hid but thence to light shall turn,
Nor breast so close, but God shall open wide;
Each where shall cries be heard, and noise beside
Of gnashing teeth. The Sun shall from the sky
Fly forth, and stars no more move orderly.
Great Heaven shall be dissolved, the Moon deprived
Of all her light: Places at height ativ'd,
Deprest, and Valleys raised to their seat.
There shall be naught to mortals high or great:
Hills shall be levied with the plains; the Sea
Endure no burden; and the earth as they
Shall perish; cleft with lightning; every Spring
And River burn: The fatal trump shall ring,
Unto the world from heaven a dismal blast,
Including plagues to come for ill deeds past.
Old Chaos through the cleft Mass shall be seen;
Unto this Bar shall all earths Kings convene,
Rivers of fire and brimstone flowing from heaven.
These Verses and many others in the Sibylline Books, carry in them a great
show of plainness and sincerity; so that I could willingly subscribe to the
opinion of St Augustine, That some of them were Citizens of the City of God,
were I able to fix upon any person in particular, or to satisfy my self that
any one of the Books, as they are now extant, were not a mixture of the
Prophesies of different persons. She upon whom St Augustine pitches, to wit,
the Sibylla Erythrea, if there were truly any one of that Country, which to my
understanding the words do not necessarily import, after she had told you she
left Babylon in Assyria, she has these words, which I should choose thus to
render; Men call me according to the Grecian manner of another Country (to
wit) of Erythrea, (...),
(...)
(...), etc.
S^b. Or. l. 3. p. 283.
impudent, others the daughter of Circe and Gnostus. The interpunction of the
words favor this construction; for if they were thus to be understood, Men
call me born indeed at Erythre, an impudent person, according to the Grecian
manner of another Country: Lact. l. 1. de falsa Relig. pa. 37. -- Nisi
Erythreae quae and nomen suum verum carmini inseruit, and Erythream se
nominatam iri praelocuta est cum esset orta Babyloniae.
There ought to have been a distinction at the first (...), to show us that
(...), ought to be read in a parenthesis, that the reference might truly be
made; beside the Article (...) in the second verse will be impertinent, and no
Country at all from whence she came is named. This I have inserted here,
because I had in the preceding Discourse so rendered the words, without giving
any reason; and I find some conclude out of this place, that one of the Sibylls
acknowledges her self born at Erythrea; Moreover that Sibylla Erythrea or
Cumea, upon whom St Augustine pitches, was certainly that person whose books
were kept in, and burnt with the Capitol, and from which the Romans fetched out
all their superstitious follies; besides, she seems by Virgil to be possessed
in the delivery of her Prophesies with that kind of madness and fury usually
observed in the delivery of Oracles by Apollo; for which reasons, of all others
of them, I should think Sibylla Cumea, if the same with Erythrea, the most
unlikely to be of the City of God, which is more likely to be true of her that
came out of Babylon, and foretold she should be counted of Enythrea. Under so
great an uncertainty therefore and variety of opinions, I think it safest to
suspend my own judgment, and agree in this conclusian, That whether all or any
of them were immediately guided by God, or what other spirit they spoke by, yet
were they by his power so overruled, that where in his wisdom he thought fit,
they could not lie; so that the truth they delivered was indeed his, though the
spirit by which they spoke came not from him. However this is clear, such
persons there were, such predictions they left, which in their due time were
accomplished, which was all I designed to prove in this discourse.

Thus Sir, have I gone through my intended disquisition of the Sibylls, and in
it have I hope made it appear, That the Arguments produced against them are not
of that value to take from them the authority they have been allowed by the
testimonies of Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Theophilus Antiochensis,
Tempor. Chron. An. mun. 610.
Lactantius, who as Temporarius says, was a Priest of the Capitol before his
conversion, and so permitted to read these Books, and many others of the
Ancients, with innumerable latter Writers, amongst whom I cannot forget two
very learned Prelates of our own Church, Richard Montacute sometimes Lord
Bishop of Norwich, who has a particular Excercitation in the defense of them;
and Lancelot Andrews late Lord Bishop of Winchester, who has these words
speaking of the truth of Christianity; For the credit of the History it self,
we know that the Sibylls Oracles were in so great credit amongst the Heathen,
that they were generally believed. Now if they be true, with we have of them, as
there is no question but many of them are, (diverse of which we refer to Christ,
being mentioned in their own writers, Virgil, Cicero, and others) it will
follow, that nothing can make more in their esteem for the credit and truth of
the Nativity, Life, and Death of Christ, than their Oracles; for we may see
almost every circumstance in them. Andrews Pat of Catechist. Doct. Introduct.
c. 12. Sect. 3.
And by reading these Verses diverse of their Learned men were converted to
Christianity, as Marcellinus, Secundanus, and others.

If after all this there remain yet some that had rather believe D. Blundel,
and some others but of yesterday, I shall only add, That the thing in
controversy is not of faith; and that for the truth and certainty of our
Christian Religion, we have in the undeniable Word of God a more stable and
un-erring Testimony.

FINIS.

