TWO HYMNS For the Nativity of CHRIST. Whereunto are added, A New-yeers Gift,
AND An HYMN for the Feast of TWELF-TIDE.

The Musical part being set by Mr R. M.

Printed at LONDON, 1650.

An HYMN For the Nativity of Christ, Sung as by Shepherds.
RIse, sullen Sun, what lie a bed!
Thou deep, dull traitorous hypocrite:
The Sun of Heaven has shown his head
This morn, and not your beams light yet?
For shame, for shame, bring perfect day;
For here is a Sun in beams of Hay;
Who has brought perfect beams to night,
(...) yet your beams must give them light.
Then rear thy head, and go along
With us, in power of Praise and Song.
Hark, how the Angels from the sky,
All sorts of Cherubins beside,
Divinely make one Harmony,
At this Decembers blessed Tide:
Angels above, and Kings below,
To make complete this day, bestow
Sweet Odours from the East,
To scent our Phoenix nest,
And Gold to enrich this Feast.
The Firmament in bright array,
Is beautified with Stars, and laid
In Gold, as if upon this day
Ordered to wait upon the Babe.
Stars splendent show, cause from us far,
Out of a Manger, shines a Star
Which more light to the world
Affords, then those Stars twirl'd,
Or 'bout the Poles are whirled.
In the vast Sky a Star did shine
To us poor Shepherds: by that light
W'were brought unto the Babe divine,
Delivered from Natures night;
Where in an Inn, nay Horses Inn,
The Babe his first breath did begin.
O vast Eternity,
Godhead-Divinity,
Manhood-Nativity!
This is the News we Shepherds bring;
Our eyes have seen a starry Stranger:
We kissed the Cradle of our King
At Bethlehem, a dirty Manger;
Whose body tender close did lie
Unto his Mother, Virgin Mary.
A Virgin chaste and pure,
As Mother, did endure
The pangs of Woman sure.
We saw no Curtains but black Night,
The Virgin Mother to keep warm:
Earths nightly raiment turned to white,
When Blessedness it self was born:
And so the Firmament did strew
Its Winter-stars, pure Snow, below.
So bedded was the Cradle,
And lined was the Stable
With pure, but cold Movables.
No sooner from the womb he came,
Translated God for Man did cry:
Virgin, Maid, Mother, Married-dame,
She was by this blessed Deity.
Earth, wonder much; Heaven, much more!
Godhead clothed in Manhood poor.
Gold like to Gold, when sod,
Appears, though in dirt trod:
And God, in Flesh, was God.
The Babe sings, cries, and tunes out groans,
As if he hence departing were.
What draws out groans, but inward moans
And after groans, drop trickling tears.
Oh what a day is this to us,
That God for Man must suffer thus!
Highest with One above,
Man amongst men must move,
Vastness of depths in love.
We saw the Babe, the Babe this morn;
Compute we cannot yet his age:
Before years were, he long was born,
In Gods intent, to feed his Rage,
Lest it should Man devour. We see
Him born, who was born before we.
Adam first, this Adam next;
So in order to the Text,
This born before That expressed.
Farewell, dear Virgin, rich with Balms,
And Sweets of heavenly Paradise:
Paradise thou have in thine arms,
A fleshy Bundle of heavens Spice,
Which dropped from heaven in Humane form.
Regained is Paradise this morn.
Oblest Nativity,
Which from the Deity
Sprang this Benignity.
And thee, dear Babe, whose Royal head
Embalmed lies in Innocence;
Betwixt two breasts making thy bed:
She could procure none other fence.
Should he return to earth again,
'Would find less Faith, and more Disdain.
With Garlands wreathed with Bays,
And Rose-Mary always,
We'll crown this birth of days.
God is become an earthly guest:
It Is the sweet pride of his Humility,
To board himself at Mary's breast;
And where he tables, there to lie.
Sweet are thy shifts, thou King of kings,
Sucking all day two milky springs:
And when at night thou art called to bed,
No more they are food, but pillows spread,
To rest thy wearied head. They prove
At once both Food, and Bed of love.
Another.
NOt yet arrived, swift Post of Day!
Into the Stars thy Chariot
Is driven, or else another way
Turned; so the nearest way forgot.
Thou flying Day, thou winged Car,
Thou art out-gone by a Foot-post Star,
Which shined a Sun, and had such streams,
As led us to the Son of beams.
A gross Mistake! the Sun's awake,
And dances on the Ocean;
Now draws his streams from off the Lake,
And to the Earth's in motion.
Thus are we cozened with a fine Mistake;
The Sun's long rose, we new awake.
Vollies of voice both strong and loud
We'll sing, till he is wrapped in his Cloud.
Glory has changed seats with the high
And mighty Majesty of Heaven:
For, in this little Majesty,
Is perfect God to the Earth given.
Thus God above here made a bed
For God below to lay his head.
Eternal vast Eternity
Heaven does this day afford the Earth.
Welcome, sweet Span of endless glory!
Angels and we thus sound thy Birth.
Since Heaven is here, we'll look no higher,
Finding God here, in Man's attire.
What need we upwards roll our eyes,
To view the firmament of Stars?
For here is the Sphere, where fixed lies
All beauty, which their beauty mars.
Oh here is Heaven below; we see
God lying on his mother's knee.
But we'll up look, and view the clear
Bright firmament of Stars: What now?
They Are fixed in his eyes, the Sphere
All circled by his smoothe white brow.
Thus are we taught by what is here given,
No more to look up, but down, to Heaven,
Hark, here is more of Heaven now heard;
Stars from his eyes do fall apace;
At which brisk Cherubs not afraid,
Enthrone themselves upon his face,
Sucking the Diamondt from his eyes,
Then fly away, and in the skies
Scatrer fresh Stars, and so became
The watery region twixt two Heavens,
To be remade a spangled frame,
Since Heaven and Earth were twins themselves.
Therefore no eldership is made
Twixt Heaven and Earth, since here he is laid,
For, long before a day was made,
He, as you see, in earth was laid.
Now welcome all that is from above,
And welfare all that are below:
Let Us sing the story of heavens love:
The Spheres are at it long ago:
And shall the Earth, that is new made Heaven,
Not with the Spheres in praise be even?
Music and Love shall have a Duel,
Which shall outvie in sound and show;
And yet we'll add some sacred fuel,
To heighten Voice with Music too.
But such a Concord shall agree,
As if Earth were Heavens harmony.
Sound, Heaven and Earth, each sweet-lipp'd thing,
And burn Perfumes at every Song;
Bedew with Myrrh each well-stretch'd string,
And tune a Base that is heard among
The Quire of Angels; so they shall,
To hear our sounds, be ravished all.
Whilst the small Music shall affright
The Inn th'rowont, and wake each Groom*
That has not slept two hours this night,
And yawning, wonder it should be noon.
With speed, affrighted, to the Stable
They run, to cleanse, but are not able.
Some of the Hay has Angels quilted,
To cover here this All-Small-Great;
Whilst some, like rays, his eyes have gilded,
As lacing to his lodging-sheet.
You see the Babe, a minute old,
Turns spires of Grass to beams of Gold.
If any ask why yellow's Hay,
It Is soon resolved; God amongst it lay.
No more of mirth, the Babe's at rest,
Lulled with the Lullabies of Mary,
In the warm Cradle 'twixt her breast,
Lest the pure Lamb should else miscarry.
Sweet Babe, it is thy mothers faith,
To fear, though God in arms she has.
Fear not, weep not, sweetest Mary;
Why strew you tears on the face
Of your lulled Babe? Tears will carry
News to his Father from this place,
That you, for pain of this poor morn,
More sigh, then joy that God is born.
Let not thy faith, sweet Mary, slinch:
Hosts of bright Angels center can,
With all their glory, in an inch,
And cannot yours in this blessed Span?
Many in less, and cannot one
Have faith enough in God, her own?
Oh would thou know what heaven is doing?
Preparing Maps to draw a new
Celestial Compass: They are viewing
Thee and the Babe; that Heaven's you two*
A Heavenly Substance, not a Map,
Mary, thou have upon thy lap.
Oh Virgin-son, by title Heir
No Heaven; by birth, a Heaven it self:
Thy Virgin-mothers Dearest fair,
Thou King of Earth, not of its Wealth:
What shall we offer up unto thee?
Thou King of Heaven we have nothing for thee.
The Infant-day's an hour old:
Day and thy Beams do clear discover
The Vileness of poor Shepherds bold,
To tune thy birth before thy mother.
Give thee us leave hence to depart,
We'll come and praise thee with new heart,
And fill this Kingly Court of thine,
If thou accept our homespun loves,
With this our Sacrifice Divine,
A flain fat Lamb, fair Turtle Doves:
Such, and our selves, we will prefer
A Sacrifice at thy Alter:
And so we'll spend in clouds of Bays,
And Rosemary, this Christ-tide praise.
And if thy Court, dread Babe, remove from us,
The Sun not Stars, shall guide us to the Jesus.
THE NEW-YEERS GIFT.
THou have the art of Time: Always in haste,
Flying continually, and yet not waste
One grain of sand! Nor does thy rossing speed
Make Times pass wider, or the sand more glide;
But Measur'st Time so truly by thy Glass,
That not a sand, till its due time, does pass.
Thou wastes not by thy haste; but bringst about
Thy hour unto our years end; so turn'st out
The Old, to entertain a New; and then
Turn'st up thy Annual Glass, to run again;
Charging thy hour to hold course with the Sun,
And with such speed to haste, till th'yeer be done.
What! Is our year an hour? Time flies indeed:
And is thy hour a year? there wants winged speed;
Thy yeer's but short, thy hour wondrous long:
Both short of ours, yet with our year art gone.
Dark Riddles of Mysterious Time! What Is day,
If that thy hour's a year? Resolve I pray.
Nay, what are Days and Months? when sum'd up all,
Are in an hour, and yet that is Annual!
Time with such time thou have no time; yet thou have
The hour for this year, that thou had for the last.
And since thy golden Minutes run a fresh,
Heaven open our hands and hearts, that we may express
The bounty of this Day in several ways;
And whilst some give, let others give their praise
For what is received; others that on this day
Do nothing give, lift up their hands and Pray,
That Joy would kiss this infant-budding-yeer,
And crown our hopeful Seasons that appear,
Through the fresh Springtide of this glorious day:
Heavens Casements open, and all its beams display,
Kissing and courting Earth, as if there were
At once two Deities in Heaven and Here.
How sweetly tune the Spheres? How moves the Sun?
That antic Masquer knows not where to run
To hide his head this morn, seeing one shines
In Earth more glorious: he droops, and so declines.
An HYMN for the EPIPHANIE, Or, Feast of Twelftide.
WHat rocked asleep in a Ruby-bed
Of Worth, or Imitation!
Come, rise, and show thy Rosy head,
After the Circumcision.
What, must thy Chariot still appear
Lined with Vermillion lacings?
It Is Twelftide now; present most clear
Thy self in golden facings.
Shine circumgloriously th'rowout
The Universe, and let thy tresses
Be hung with Diamonds all about:
Show Earth a wonder in Heavens dresses.
So shall a day of Joy be shown,
By the brisk masquing of thy beauty:
Although to All the cause not known
Why so thou shinest; it is but thy duty
To keep, this day, a Revelling
Th'rowout thy Azure Territories;
Whilst Angels come a gossiping,
Crowning the earth with equal glories,
Bright Sun, this is thy Wedding Day:
The Nightly Ladies soft-foot Teem
Will meet thee in a starry way,
Whilst Thou art King, and She thy Queen.
Matching and making Pairs is Heaven,
To keep on Earth Society:
Judge by this Heaven, that Heaven has given;
Here God and Man a couple lie.
A highborn Festival is this;
The Last the Greatest kept it seems.
Twelf-day the highest Number is;
We'll crown it with crowned Kings and Queens.
And since our Ioys can mount no higher
(...) Sight, they shall in Faith. Then rear
Each winged soul, made to admire
The Festivals kept there and here.
^ut what the Babe has, look; he lies
^ucking his food through pipes of Cherries.
FINIS.



