The Rule and Exercises of holy Dying by Ier Tailor D. D.


THE RVLE AND EXERCISES OF HOLY DYING.

In which are described The MEANS and INSTRUMENTS of preparing our selves, and
others respectively, for a blessed Death: and the remedies against the evils
and temptations proper to the state of Sickness.

Together with Prayers and Acts of Virtue to be used by sick and dying persons,
or by others standing in their Attendance.

To which are added. Rules for the visitation of the Sick, and offices proper
for that Ministry.

(...)
(...).
Isoc. ad Demonic. LONDON, Printed for R. R. and are to be sold by Edward
Martin Bookseller in Norwich. 1651.

To the Right Honorable and most truly Noble RICHARD Lord VAVGHAN, Earl of
CARBERY, Baron of EMLIN, and MOLINGAR; Knight of the Honorable Order of the
BATH.
My Lord,
I Am treating your Lordship as a Roman Gentleman did Saint Augustine and his
Mother; I shall entertain you in a Charnel house, and carry your meditations
awhile into the chambers of death, where you shall find the rooms dressed up
with melancholy arts, and fit to converse with your most retired thoughts,
which begin with a sigh and proceed in deep consideration, and end in a holy
resolution. The sight that S. Augustine most noted in that house of sorrow was
the body of Caesar clothed with all the dishonours of corruption, that you can
suppose in a six months burial. But I know that without pointing, your first
thoughts will remember the change of a greater beauty, which is now dressing
for the brightest immortality; and from her bed of darkness calls to you to
dress your soul for that change which shall mingle your bones with that beloved
dust, and carry your soul to the same Quire, where you may both sit and sing
for ever. My Lord it is your dear Ladies Anniversary, and she deserved the
biggest honor, and the longest memory, and the fairest monument, and the most
solemn mourning; and in order to it give me leave (My Lord) to cover her
Hearse with these following sheets; this book was intended first to minister to
her piety; and she desired all good people should partake of the advantages
which are here recorded: she knew how to live rarely well, and she desired to
know how to dye; and God taught her by an experiment. But since her work is
done and God supplied her with provisions of his own, before I could minister
to her, and perfect what she desired, it is necessary to present to your
Lordship those bundles of Cypress which were intended to dress her Closet,
but come now to dress her Hearse. (My Lord) both your Lordship and my self
have lately seen and felt such sorrows of death, and such sad departure of
Dearest friends, that it is more then high time we should think our selves
nearly concerned in the accidents; Death has come so near to you as to fetch a
portion from your very heart; and now you cannot choose but dig your own
grave and place your coffin in your eye when the Angel has dressed your scene
of sorrow and meditation with so particular and so near an object; and
therefore as it is my duty, I am come to minister to your pious thoughts, and
to direct your sorrows that they may turn into virtues and advantages.

And since I know your Lordship to be so constant and regular in your
devotions, and so tender in the matter of justice, so ready in the expressions
of charity and so apprehensive of religion, and that you are a person whose
work of grace is apt, and must every day grow toward those degrees, where when
you arrive you shall triumph over imperfection, and choose nothing but what may
please God, I could not by any compendium conduct and assist your pious
purposes so well as by that which is the great argument and the great
instrument of holy living, the consideration and exercises of death.

My Lord, it is a great art to dye well, and to be learnt by men in health, by
them that can discourse and consider; by those whose understanding, and acts of
reason are not abated with fear or pains, and as the greatest part of death is
passed by the preceding years of our life, so also in those years are the
greatest preparation to it: and he that prepares not for death, before his last
sickness, is like him that begins to study Philosophy when he is going to
dispute publicly in the faculty. All that a sick and dying man can do is but
to exercise those virtues, which he before acquired, and to perfect that
repentance which was begun more early. And of this (My Lord) my Book I think is
a good testimony, not only because it represents the vanity of a late and
sickbed repentance, but because it contains in it so many precepts and
meditations, so many propositions and various duties, such forms of exercise,
and the degrees and difficulties of so many graces which are necessary
preparatives to a holy death, that the very learning the duties require study
and skill, time and understanding in the ways of godliness; and it were very
vain, to say so much is necessary, and not to suppose more time to learn them,
more skill to practice them, more opportunities to desire them, more abilities
both of body and mind then can be supposed in a sick, amazed, timorous, and
weak person; whose natural acts are disabled, whose senses are weak, whose
discerning faculties are lessened, whose principles are made intricate and
entangled, upon whose eye sits a cloud, and the heart is broken with sickness,
and the liver pierced through with sorrows and the strokes of death. And
therefore (my Lord) it is intended by the necessity of affairs, that the
precepts of dying well be part of the studies of them that live in health, and
the days of discourse and understanding: which in this case has another
degree of necessity superadded; because in other notices, an imperfect study
may be supplied by a frequent exercise, and a renewed experience: Here, if we
practice imperfectly once, we shall never recover the error: for we die but
once; and therefore it will be necessary that our skill be more exact, since it
is not to be mended by trial, but the actions must be for ever left imperfect,
unless the habit be contracted with study and contemplation before hand.

And indeed I were vain, if I should intend this book to be read and studied by
dying persons: and they were vainer that should need to be instructed in those
graces which they are then to exercise and to finish. For a sick bed is only a
school of severe exercise, in which the spirit of a man is tried, and his
graces are rehearsed: and the assistances which I have in the following pages
given to those virtues which are proper to the state of sickness, are such as
suppose a man in the state of grace; or they confirm a good man, or they
support the weak, or add degrees, or minister comfort, or prevent an evil, or
cure the little mischiefs which are incident to tempted persons in their
weakness; this is the sum of the present design, as it relates to dying
persons. And therefore I have not inserted any advices proper to old age, but
such as are common to it and the state of sickness; for I suppose very old age
to be a longer sickness, it is labor and sorrow when it goes beyond the
common period of nature; but if it be on this side that period, and be
healthful, in the same degree it is so, I reckon it in the accounts of life;
and therefore it can have no distinct consideration. But I do not think it is a
station of advantage to begin the change of an evil life in: It is a middle
state between life and deathbed, and therefore although it has more of hopes,
then this, and less then that, yet as it partakes of either state: so it is to
be regulated by the advices of that state, and judged by its sentences.

Only this: I desire, that all old persons would sadly consider that their
advantages in that state are very few, but their inconveniences are not few:
Their bodies are without strength, their prejudices long and mighty, their
vices (if they have lived wickedly) are habitual, the occasions of their
virtues not many, the possibilities of some (in the matter of which they stand
very guilty) are past, and shall never return again (such are, chastity, and
many parts of self-denial;) that they have some temptations proper to their
age, as peevishness, and pride, covetousness, and talking, wilfulness and
unwillingnesse to Vel quia nil rectum nisi quod placuit ^ibi ducunt,
Vel quia turpe putant parere mino^ibus, and quae
Imberbes didicere, senes perdenda fateri.

learn, and they think they are protected by age from learning anew, or
repenting the old; and do not Tenellis adhuc infantiae suae persuasionibus in
senectute puerascunt Mamertus.
leave, but change their vices: And after all this, either the day of their
repentance is past, as we see it true in very many, or it is expiring and
toward the Sunset, as it is in all; and therefore although in these, to
recover is very possible, yet we may also remember that in the matter of virtue
and repentance, possibility is a great way off from performance; and how few do
repent, of whom it is only possible that they may; and that many things more
are required to reduce their possibility to act: a great grace, an assiduous
ministry, an effective calling, mighty assistances, excellent counsel, great
industry, a watchful diligence, a well disposed mind, passionate desires, deep
apprehensions of danger, quick perceptions of duty, and time, and Gods good
blessing, and effectual impression and seconding all this, that to will, and
to do, may by him be wrought to great purposes, and with great speed.

And therefore it will not be amiss, but it is hugely necessary, that these
persons who have lost their time and their blessed opportunities should have
the diligence of youth, and the zeal of new converts, and take account of every
hour that is left them, and pray perpetually, and be advised prudently, and
study the interest of their souls carefully, with diligence, and with fear; and
their old age which in effect is nothing, but a continual deathbed, dressed
with some more order and advantages, may be a state of hope, and labor, and
acceptance, through the infinite mercies of God in Jesus Christ.

But concerning sinners, really under the arrest of death, God has made no
deathbed covenant, the Scripture has recorded no promises, given no
instructions; and therefore I had none to give, but only the same which are to
be given to all men that are alive, because they are so, and because it is
uncertain when they shall be otherwise; But then this advice I also am to
insert. That they are the smallest number of Christian men, who can be divided
by the characters of a certain holiness, or an open villainy: and between
these, there are many degrees of latitude, and most are of a middle sort,
concerning which we are tied to make the judgments of charity, and possibly
God may do so too; But however, all they are such to whom the rules of holy
dying are useful and applicable, and therefore no separation is to be made in
this world; but where the case is not evident, men are to be permitted to the
unerring judgment of God, where it is evident, we can rejoice or mourn for
them that die.

In the Church of Rome they reckon otherwise concerning sick and dying
Christians then I have done. For they make profession, that from death to life,
from sin to grace, a man may very certainly be changed, though the operation
begin not before his last hour, and half this, they do upon his death bed* and
the other half when he is in his grave: and they take away the eternal
punishment in an instant, by a school distinction or the hand of the Priest;
and the temporal punishment shall stick longer, even then when the man is no
more measured with time, having nothing to do with any thing of, or under the
sun; but that they pretend to take away too, when the man is dead; and, God
knows, the poor man for all this, pays them both in hell. The distinction of
temporal and eternal is a just measure of pains, when it referres to this life
and another; but to dream of a punishment temporal when all his time is done,
and to think of repentance when the time of grace is past, are great errors;
the one in Philosophy, and both in Divinity, and are a huge folly in their
pretense, and infinite danger if they are believed; being a certain destruction
of the necessity of holy living, when men dare trust them, and live at the rate
of such doctrines. The secret of these is soon discovered: for by such means
though a holy life be not necessary, yet a priest is; as if God did not appoint
the Priest to minister to holy living, but to excuse it; so making the holy
calling not only to live upon the sins of the people, but upon their ruin;
and the advantages of their function to spring from their eternal dangers. It
is an evil craft to serve a temporal end upon the death of souls; that, is an
interest not to handled but with nobleness and ingenuity, fear and caution,
diligence and prudence, with great skill, and great honesty, with reverence and
trembling, and severity: a soul is worth all that, and the need we have
requires all that; and therefore those doctrines that go less then all this,
are not friendly, because they are not safe.

I know no other great difference in the visitation and treating of sick
persons, then what depends upon the article of late repentance; for all
Churches agree in the same essential propositions, and assist the sick by the
same internal ministeries; as for external, I mean unction, used in the Church
of Rome, since it is used when the man is above half dead, when he can exercise
no act of understanding, it must needs be nothing; for no rational man can
think that any ceremony can make a spiritual change without a spiritual act of
him that is to be changed; nor work by way of nature, or by charm; but morally
and after the manner of reasonable creatures; and therefore I do not think that
ministry at all fit to be reckoned among the advantages of sick persons. The
Fathers of the Council of Trent first disputed and after their manner at last
agreed, that extreme unction was instituted by Christ. But afterward, being
admonished by one of their Theologues, that the Apostles ministered unction to
infirm people before they were Priests (the Priestly order according to their
doctrine being collated in the institution of the last Supper) for fear that it
should be thought that this unction might be administered by him that was no
Priest, they blotted out the word [instituted] and put in its stead
[insinuated] this Sacrament; Council. Trid. hist lib 4.
and that it was published by Saint James. So it is in their Doctrine: and yet
in their anathematismes, they curse all them that shall deny it to have been
[instituted] by Christ. I shall lay no more prejudice against it, or the weak
arts of them that maintain it, but add this only, that there being but two
places of Scripture pretended for this ceremony, some chief men of their own
side have proclaimed those two invalid as to the institution of it; for Suarez
says that the unction used by the Apostles in S. Mark 6.13. is not the same
with what is used in the Church of Rome; and that it cannot be plainly gathered
from the Epistle of Saint James, Cajetan affirms, and that it did belong to the
miraculous gift of healing, not to a Sacrament. The sick man's exercise of grace
formerly acquired, his perfecting repentance begun in the days of health, the
prayers and counsels of the Holy man that ministers, the giving the Holy
Sacrament, the Ministry and assistance of Angels, and the mercies of God, the
peace of conscience and the peace of the Church are all the assistances and
preparatives that can help to dress his lamp. But if a man shall go to buy
oil, when the Bridegroom comes, if his lamp be not first furnished, and then
trimmed, that in his life, this upon his deathbed, his station shall be
without doors, his portion with unbelievers, and the unction of the dying man
shall no more strengthen his soul, then it cures his body, and the prayers for
him after his death shall be of the same force as if they should pray that he
should return to life again the next day, and live as long as Lazarus in his
return. But I consider, that it is not well, that men should pretend any thing
will do a man good when he dies, and yet the same ministeries and ten times
more assistances are found for forty or fifty years together to be
ineffectual; can extreme unction at last cure what the Holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist all his life time could not do? Can prayers for a dead man do him
more good then when he was alive? If all his days the man belonged to death
and the dominion of sin, and from thence could not be recovered by Sermons, and
counsels, and perpetual precepts, and frequent Sacraments, by confessions and
absolutions, by prayers and advocations, by external ministeries and internal
acts, it is but too certain that his lamp cannot then be furnished; his extreme
unction is only then of use when it is made by the oil that burned in his lamp
in all the days of his expectation and waiting for the coming of the
Bridegroom.

Neither can any supply be made in this case by their practice of praying for
the dead: though they pretend for this the fairest precedents of the Church and
of the whole world. The Heathens they say did it; and the Jews did it, and the
Christians did it; some were baptized for the dead in the days of the
Apostles; and very many were communicated for the dead Tertul de Monog. S.
Cyprian l. 1. ep. 9 Sa. Athan q. 33. S. Cyril. mist. cat. 5. Epiphan. Haeres.
75. Aug. de haeres. c. 33. Council. Carth. 3. c. 29
for many ages after: It Is true they were so, and did so: the Heathens prayed
for an easy Dii majorum umbris tenuem and sine pondere terram

Spirantesque crocos and in urna perpetuum yer.

Pers. Sat. 7.
grave and a perpetual spring, that Saffron would rise from their beds of
grass. The Jews prayed that the souls of their dead might be in the garden of
Eden, that they might have their part in Paradise, and in the world to come,
and that they might hear the peace of the fathers of their generations sleeping
in Hebron: and the Christians prayed for a joyful resurrection, for mercy at
the day of judgment, for the hastening of the coming of Christ, and the kingdom
of God; and they named all sorts of persons in their prayers, all I mean but
wicked persons, all but them that lived evil lives; they named Apostles,
Saints, and Martyrs; and all this is so nothing to their purpose, or so much
against it, that the prayers for the dead used in the Church of Rome are moct
plainly condemned, because they are against the doctrine and practices of all
the world; in other forms to other purposes, relying upon distinct doctrines,
until new opinions began to arise about S. Augustines time, and changed the
face of the proposition. Concerning prayer for the dead the Church has
received no commandment from the Lord; and therefore concerning it we can have
no rules, nor proportions, but from those imperfect revelations of the state of
departed souls, and the measures of charity, which can relate only to the
imperfection of their present condition, and the terrors of the day of
judgment: but to think that any suppletory to an evil life can be taken from
such devotions after the sinners are dead may encourage a bold man to sin, but
cannot relieve him when he has.

But of all things in the world me thinks men should be most careful not to
abuse dying people; not only because their condition is pitiable, but because
they shall soon be discovered, and in the secret regions of souls, there shall
be an evil report concerning those men who have deceived them; and if we
believe we shall go to that place where such reports are made, we may fear the
shame and the amazement of being accounted impostors in the presence of Angels,
and all the wise holy men of the world. To be erring and innocent is hugely
pitiable, and incident to mortality, that, we cannot help; but to deceive or to
destroy so great an interest as is that of a soul, or to lessen its advantages
by giving it trifling and false confidences, is injurious and intolerable. And
therefore, it were very well, if all the Churches of the world would be
extremely curious concerning their offices and ministeries of the visitation of
the sick; that their Ministers they send be holy, and prudent; that their
instructions be severe and safe; that their sentences be merciful and
reasonable; that their offices be sufficient and devout; that their attendances
be frequent and long; that their deputations be special, and peculiar; that the
doctrines upon which they ground their offices be true, material and holy; that
their ceremonies be few; and their advices wary; that their separation be full
of caution; their judgments not remiss; their remissions not loose and
dissolute; and that all the whole ministration be made by persons of experience
and charity; for it is a sad thing to see our dead go forth of our hands; they
live incuriously and dye without regard, and the last scene of their life,
which should be dressed with all spiritual advantages, is abused by flattery
and easy propositions, and let go with carelessness and folly.

My Lord, I have endeavored to cure some part of the evil as well as I could;
being willing to relieve the needs of indigent people in such ways as I can,
and therefore have described the duties which every sick man may do alone, and
such in which he can be assisted by the Minister; and am the more confident
that these my endeavors will be the better entertained, because they are the
first entire body of directions for sick and dying people that I remember to
have been published in the Church of England: In the Church of Rome there have
been many, but they are dressed with such Doctrines which are sometimes
useless, sometimes hurtful, and their whole design of assistance which they
commonly yield, is at the best imperfect, and the representment is too
careless and loose for so severe an employment: So that in this affair I was
almost forced to walk alone, only that I drew the rules and advices from the
fountains of Scripture, and the purest channels of the Primitive Church, and
was helped by some experience in the cure of souls. I shall measure the
success of my labors, not by popular noises or the sentences of curious
persons, but by the advantage which good people may receive; my work here is
not to please the speculative part of men, but to minister to practice, to
preach to the weary, to comfort the sick, to assist the penitent, to reprove
the confident, to strengthen weak hands and feeble knees, having scarce any
other possibilities left me of doing alms, or exercising that charity by which
we shall be judged at Doomsday. It is enough for me to be an underbuilder in
the House of God, and I glory in the employment; I labor in the foundations,
and therefore the work needs no Apology for being plain, so it be strong and
well laid. But (My Lord) as mean as it is, I must give God thanks for the
desires and the strength, and next to him, to you for that opportunity and
little portion of leisure which I had to do it in; for I must acknowledge it
publicly (and besides my prayers, it is all the recompense I can make you) my
being quiet I owe to your Interest, Otia das nobis sed qualia forat ulio^
Meccenas Placco Virgilio. que m^.
much of my support to your bounty, and many other collateral comforts I
derive from your favor and nobleness. (My Lord) because I much honor you,
and because I would do honor to my self, I have written your Name in the
entrance of my Book, I am sure you will entertain it because the design
related to your Dear Lady, and because it may minister to your spirit in the
day of visitation when God shall call for you to receive your reward for your
charity and your noble piety, by which you have not only endeared very many
persons, but in great degrees have obliged me to be

My Noblest Lord Your Lordships most thankful and most humble servant TAILOR.

THE TABLE.
CHAP. I.
A General preparation toward a holy and blessed death by way of
consideration, 1. I. Consideration of the vanity and shortness of man's life,
ibid. II. The consideration reduced to practice, 10. III. Rules and spiritual
arts of lengthening our days, and to take off the objection of a short life,
21. IV. Consideration of the miseries of man's life, 35. V. The consideration
reduced to practice. 43.
CHAP. II.
A general preparation toward a holy and blessed death, by way of exercise,
48. I. Three precepts preparatory to a holy death to be practiced in our whole
life. ibid. II. Of daily examination of our actions in the whole course of our
health, preparatory to our death bed, 55. Reasons for a daily examination,
ibid. The benefits of this exercise, 59 III. Of exercising charity during our
whole life, 67. IV. General considerations to enforce the former practices, 71.
The circumstances of a dying man's sorrow and danger, 72.
CHAP. III.
Of the temptations incident to the state of sickness with their proper
remedies, 77. I. Of the state of sickness, ibid. II. Of Impatience, 81. III.
Constituent or integral parts of patience, 84. IV. Remedies against impatience
by way of consideration. 87. V. Remedies against impatience by way of exercise.
98. VI. Advantages of sickness, 104. Three appendant considerations, 1^0, 121,
122. VII. Remedies against fear of death, by way of consideration. 127 VIII.
Remedies against fear of death, by way of exercise. 134. IX. General Rules and
Exercises whereby our sickness may become safe and sanctified, 143.
CHAP. IV.
Of the practice of the graces, proper to the state of sickness which a sick
man may practice alone, 156. I. Of the practice of patience by way of Rule,
156, 157. II. Acts of patience by way of prayer and ejaculation. 167. A prayer
to be said in the beginning of a sickness. 173. An act of resignation to be
said in all the evil accidents of his sickness 174. A prayer for the grace of
patience 175. A prayer to be said at the taking Physic, 177. III. Of the
practice of the grace of faith in time of sickness, 178. IV. Acts of faith by
way of prayer, and ejaculation to be said by sick men in the days of their
temptation 184. The prayer [for the grace and strengths of faith, 186. V. Of
repentance in the time of sickness, 188. VI. Rules for the practice of
repentance in sickness, 195. Means of exciting contrition, etc. 200 VII. Acts
of repentance by way of prayer and ejaculation 208. The prayer] for the grace
and perfection of repentance 210. A prayer for pardon of sins to be said
frequently in time of sickness 212. An act of holy resolution of amendment of
life in case of recovery 214. VIII. An analysis or resolution of the Decalogue,
enumerating the duties commanded, and the sins forbidden in every Commandment,
for the helping the sick man in making his confession 216. The special precepts
of the Gospel enumerated 69, 227. IX. Of the sick man's practice of charity and
justice by way of Rule 231. X. Acts of charity by way of prayer and ejaculation
which may also be used for thanksgiving in case of recovery. 238.
CHAP. V,
Of visitation of the sick, or I. The assistance that is to be done to dying
persons by the ministry of their Clergy-Guides. 242. II. Rules for the manner
of visitations of the sick 245. III. Of ministering in the sick man's confession
of sins and Repentance 250 Arguments and exhortations to move the sick man to
confession of sins ibid. Instruments by way of consideration to awaken a
careless person and a stupid conscience 255. IV. Of ministering to the
restitution and pardon. or reconciliation of the sick person by administering
the holy Sacrament 268. V. Of ministering to the sick person by the Spiritual
man as he is the Physician of souls 282. Considerations against unreasonable
fears concerning forgiveness of sins, and its uncertainty and danger 283. An
exercise against despair in the day of our death 293. VI. Considerations
against Presumption 301. VII. Offices to be said by the Minister in his
visitation of the sick 306. The prayer of S. Eustratius the Martyr 310. A
prayer taken out of the Greek Euchologion, etc. 311. The order of
recommendation of the soul in its agony 313. Prayers to be said by the
surviving friends in behalf of them selves 318. A prayer to be said in the case
of a sudden death, or pressing fatal danger 321. VIII. A peroration concerning
the contingencies, and treatings of our departed friends after death, in order
to their will and burial. 322.
Vigilate et Orate quia nescitis horam


CHAP. I. A general preparation toward a holy and blessed Death: by way of
consideration.
SECT. I. Consideration of the vanity, and shortness of Man's life.
A Man is a Bubble (said the Greek Proverb); (...).
which Lucian represents with advantages and its proper circumstances, to this
purpose; saying, that all the world is a storm, and Men rise up in their
several generations like bubbles descending a Jove pluvio, from God, and the
dew of Heaven, from a tear and drop of Man, from Nature and Providence: and
some of these instantly sink into the deluge of their first parent, and are
hidden in a sheet of Water, having had no other business in the world, but to
be born that they might be able to die: others float up and down two or three
turns, and suddenly disappear and give their place to others: and they that
live longest upon the face of the waters are in perpetual motion, restless and
uneasy, and being crushed with the great drop of a cloud sink into flatness and
a froth; the change not being great, it being hardly possible it should be more
a nothing then it was before. So is every man: He is born in vanity and sin; he
comes into the world like morning Mushromes, soon thrusting up their heads into
the air and conversing with their kindred of the same production, and as soon
they turn into dust and forgetfulness; some of them without any other interest
in the affairs of the world, but that they made their parents a little glad,
and very sorrowful: others ride longer in the storm; it may be until seven
years of Vanity be expired, and then peradventure the Sun shines hot upon their
heads and they fall into the shades below, into the cover of death, and
darkness of the grave to hide them. But if the bubble stands the shock of a
bigger drop, and outlives the chances of a child, of a careless Nurse, of
drowning in a pail of water, of being overlaid by a sleepy servant, or such
little accidents, then the young man dances like a bubble, empty and gay, and
shines like a Doves neck or the image of a rainbow, which has no substance,
and whose very imagery and colors are fantastical; and so he dances out the
gayety of his youth, and is all the while in a storm, and endures, only
because he is not knocked on the head by a drop of bigger rain, or crushed by
the pressure of a load of indigested meat, or quenched by the disorder of an
ill placed humor: and to preserve a man alive in the midst of so many chances,
and hostilities, is as great a miracle as to create him; to preserve him from
rushing into nothing and at first to draw him up from nothing were equally the
issues of an Almighty power. And therefore the wise men of the world have
contended who shall best fit man's condition with words signifying his vanity
and short abode. Homer calls a man a leaf, the smallest, the weakest piece of a
short lived, unsteady plant. Pindar calls him the dream of a shadow: Another,
the dream of the shadow of smoke. But S. James spoke by a more excellent
Spirit, saying, 4 James 14. (...).
Our life is but a vapor] viz. drawn from the earth by a celestial influence;
made of smoke, or the lighter parts of water, tossed with every wind, moved by
the motion of a superior body, without virtue in it self, lifted up on high,
or left below, according as it pleases the Sun its Foster-father. But it is
lighter yet. It is but appearing. (...)
A phantastic vapor, an apparition, nothing real; it is not so much as a mist,
not the matter of a shower, nor substantial enough to make a cloud; but it is
like Cassiopeia's chair, or Pelops shoulder, or the circles of Heaven, (...),
for which you cannot have a word that can signify a veryer nothing. (...).
And yet the expression is one degree more made diminutive: A vapor, and
fantastical, or a mere appearance, and this but for a little while neither:
the very dream, the phantasm disappears in a small time, like the shadow that
departs, or like a tale that is told, or as a dream when one awaketh: A man
is so vain, so unfixed, so perishing a creature, that he cannot long last in
the scene of fancy: a man goes off and is forgotten like the dream of a
distracted person. The sum of all is this: (...).
That thou art a man, then whom there is not in the world any greater instance
of heights and declensions, of lights and shadows, of misery and folly, of
laughter and tears, of groans and death.

And because this consideration is of great usefulness and great necessity to
many purposes of wisdom and the Spirit; all the succession of time, all the
changes in nature, all the varieties of light and darkness, the thousand
thousands of accidents in the world, and every contingency to every man, and to
every creature does preach our funeral sermon, and calls us to look, and see,
how the old Sexton Time throws up the earth, and digs a Grave where we must lay
our sins, or our sorrows, and sow our bodies till they rise again in a fair,
or in an intolerable eternity. Nihil sibi quisquam de futuro debet promittere.
Id quoque quod te^etur per (...) anus exit, and ipsam quam premirous horam,
casus inci^it. Volvitur tempus rata quidem lege, sed per obscurum

Senec.
Every revolution which the sun makes about the world, divides between life and
death; and death possesses both those portions by the next morrow; and we are
dead to all those months which we have already lived, and we shall never live
them over again: and still God makes little periods of our age. First we change
our world, when we come from the womb to feel the warmth of the sun: Then we
sleep and enter into the image of death, in which state we are unconcerned in
all the changes of the world; and if our Mothers, or our Nurses die, or a wild
boar destroy our vineyards, or our King be sick, we regard it not, but, during
that state, are as disinterest, as if our eyes were closed with the clay that
weeps in the bowels of the earth. At the end of seven years, our teeth fall and
dye before us, representing a formal prologue to the Tragedy; and still every
seven year it is odds but we shall finish the last scene: and when Nature, or
Chance, or Vice takes our body in pieces, weakening some parts, and loosing
others, we taste the grave and the solennities of our own Funerals, first in
those parts that ministered to Vice, and next in them that served for Ornament;
and in a short time even they that served for necessity become useless, Ut
mortem citius venire credas,
Scito jam capitis perisse partem.

and entangled like the wheels of a broken clock. Baldness is but a dressing
to our funerals, the proper ornament of mourning, and of a person entered very
far into the regions and possession of Death: And we have many more of the same
signification: Gray hairs, rotten teeth, dim eyes, trembling joints, short
breath, stiff limbs, wrinkled skin, short memory, decayed appetite. Every
days necessity calls for a reparation of that portion which death fed on all
night when we lay in his lap, and slept in his outer chambers: The very spirits
of a man prey upon the daily portion of bread and flesh, and every meal is a
rescue from one death, and lays up for another; and while we think a thought,
we die; and the clock strikes, and reckons on our portion of Eternity; we form
our words with the breath of our nostrils, we have the less to live upon, for
every word we speak.

Thus Nature calls us to meditate of death by those things which are the
instruments of acting it; and God by all the variety of his Providence, makes
us see death every where, in all variety of circumstances, and dressed up for
all the fancies, and the expectation of every single person. Nature has given
us one harvest every year, but death has two: and the Spring and the Autumn
send throngs of Men and Women to charnel houses; and all the Summer long men
are recovering from their evils of the Spring, till the dog days come, and
then the Syrian star makes the summer deadly; And the fruits of Autumn are laid
up for all the years provision, and the man that gathers them eats and sursets,
and dies and needs them not, and himself is laid up for Eternity; and he that
escapes till winter, only stays for another opportunity, which the distempers
of that quarter minister to him with great variety. Thus death reigns in all
the portions of our time. The Autumn with its fruits provides disorders for us:
and the Winters cold turns them into sharp diseases, and the Spring brings
flowers to strew our hearse, and the Summer gives green turfe and brambles to
bind upon our graves. Calentures, and Sur^et, Cold, and Agues, are the four
quarters of the year, and all minister to Death; and you can go no whither, but
you tread upon a dead man's bones.

The wild fellow in Petronius that escaped upon a broken table from the furies
of a shipwreck, as he was sunning himself upon the rocky shore espied a man
rolled upon his floating bed of waves, ballasted with sand in the folds of his
garment, and carried by his civil enemy the sea toward the shore to find a
grave; and it cast him into some sad thoughts: that peradventure this man's wife
in some part of the Continent, safe and warm looks next month for the good
man's return; Navigatione longas and pererratis littoribus alienis, seros in
patriam redicus proponimus militiam, and castrensium laborumtarda manu pretia,
procurationes, officiorumque per officia processus, cum interim ad latus a ors
est: quae q^oniam nun^ quam cogitatur nisi aliena, subinde nobis ingerantur ^
o^talitatis exempla, non diutius quam mi^annur haesura

Senec.
or it may be his son knows nothing of the tempest; or his father thinks of
that affectionate kiss which still is warm upon the good old man's cheek ever
since he took a kind farewell; and he weeps with joy to think how blessed he
shall be when his beloved boy returns into the circle of his Fathers arms.
These are the thoughts of mortals, this is the end and sum of all their
designs: a dark night, and an ill Guide, a boisterous sea, and a broken Cable,
a hard rock, and a rough wind dashed in pieces the fortune of a whole family,
and they that shall weep loudest for the accident, are not yet entered into the
storm, and yet have suffered shipwreck. Then looking upon the carcass, he knew
it, and found it to be the Master of the ship, who the day before cast up the
accounts of his patrimony and his trade, and named the day, when he thought to
be at home: see how the man swims who was so angry two days since; his
passions are becalmed with the storm, his accounts cast up, his cares at an
end, his voyage done, and his gains are the strange events of death, which
whither they be good or evil, the men that are alive, seldom trouble themselves
concerning the interest of the dead.

But seas alone do not break our vessel in pieces: Every where we may be
shipwracked. A valiant General when he is to reap the harvest of his crowns and
triumphs, fights unprosperously, or falls into a Fever with joy and wine, and
changes his Laurel into Cypress, his triumphal chariot to an Hearse; dying the
night before he was appointed to perish in the drunkenness of his festival
joys. It was a sad arrest of the loosenesses and wilder feasts of the French
Court, when their King [ Henry 2.] was killed really by the sportive image of a
fight. And many brides have died under the hands of Paranymphs and Maidens
dressing them for uneasy joy, the new and undiscerned chains of Marriage:
according to the saying of Bensirah the wise Jew, The Bride went into her
chamber, and knew not what should befall her there. Some have been paying their
vows, and giving thanks for a prosperous return to their own house, and the
roof has descended upon their heads, and turned their loud religion into the
deeper silence of a grave: And how many teeming Mothers have rejoiced over
their swelling wombs, and pleased themselves in becoming the channels of
blessing to a family; and the Midwife has quickly bound their heads and feet,
Quia lex eadem manet omnes
Gemitum dare sort sub una,
Cognataque funera nobit
Aliena in mortedolere. Prud. hymn. exequiis defunctor.

and carried them forth to burial? Or else the birth day of an Heir has seen
the Coffin of the Father brought into the house, and the divided Mother has
been forced to travel twice, with a painful birth, and a sadder death.

There is no state, no accident no circumstance of our life, but it has been
sowred by some sad instance of a dying friend: a friendly meeting often ends in
some sad mischance, and makes an eternal parting: and when the Poet Eschylus
was sitting under the walls of his house, an eagle hovering over his bald head,
mistook it for a stone, and let fall his oyster, hoping there to break the
shell, but pierced the poor man's skull.

Death meets us every where, and is procured by every instrument, and in all
chances, and enters in at many doors: by violence, and secret influence, by the
aspect of a star, and the stink of a mist, by the emissions of a cloud, and the
meeting of a vapor, by the fall of a chariot, and the stumbling at a stone, by
a full meal, or an empty stomach, by watching at the wine, or by watching at
prayers, by the Sun or the Moon, by a heat or a cold, by sleeplesse nights, Aut
ubi mors non est si jugulatis aquae?

Martial.
or sleeping days, by water frozen into the hardness, and sharpness of a
dagger, or water thawd into the floods of a river; by a hair, or a raisin, by
violent motion, or sitting still, by severity, or dissolution, by Gods mercy,
or Gods anger, by every thing in providence, and every thing in manners, by
every thing in nature and every thing in chance. -- Cur^it mortalibus aevum
Nec nasci bis posse datur, fugit hora, ra^itque
Tartareus terrens, ac secum far sub umbras
Si qua animo placuere negat --
Sil. Ital. l. 15.
Eripitur persona, manet res, we take pains to heap up things useful to our
life, and get our death in the purchase; and the person is snatch^ed away, and
the goods remain: and all this is the law and constitution of nature, it is a
punishment to our sins, the unalterable event of providence, and the decree of
heaven. The chains that confine us to this condition are strong as destiny and
immutable as the eternal laws of God.

I have conversed with some men who rejoiced in the death or calamity upon
others, and accounted it as a judgment upon them, for being on the other side,
and against them in the contention; but within the revolution of a few months
the same man met with a more uneasy and unhandsom death: which when I saw, I
wept, and was afraid: for I knew that it must be so with all men, (...).
for we also shall die and end our quarrels and contentions by passing to a
final sentence.

SECT. II. The Consideration reduced to practice.
IT will be very material to our best and noblest purposes, if we represent
this scene of change and sorrow a little more dressed up in Circumstances, for
so we shall be more apt to practice those Rules, the doctrine of which is
consequent to this consideration. * It is a mighty change that is made by the
death of every person, and it is visible to us who are alive. Reckon but from
the spritefulnesse of youth, and the fair cheeks and full eyes of childehood,
from the vigorousnesse, and strong flexure of the joints of five and twenty, to
the hollownesse and dead palenesse, to the loathsomeness and horror of a three
days burial, and we shall perceive the distance to be very great, and very
strange. But so have I seen a Rose newly springing from the clefts of its hood,
and at first it was fair as the Morning, and full with the dew of Heaven, as a
Lambs fleece; but when a ruder breath had forced open its virgin modesty, and
dismantled its too youthful and unripe retirements, it began to put on
darkness, and to decline to softness, and the symptoms of a sickly age; it
bowed the head, and broke its stalk, and at night having lost some of its
leaves, and all its beauty, it fell into the portion of weeds and outworn
faces: The same is the portion of every man, and every woman; the heritage of
worms and serpents, rottenness and cold dishonor, and our beauty so changed
that our acquaintance quickly knew us not, and that change mingled with so much
horror, or else meets so with our fears and weak discoursings, that they who
six hours ago tended upon us, either with charitable or ambitious services
cannot without some regret stay in the room alone where the body lies stripped
of its life and Honor. I have read of a fair young German Gentleman, who
living, often refused to be pictured, but put of^ the importunity of his
friends desire, by giving way that after a few days burial they might send a
painter to his vault, Anceps forma bonum mortalibus.
^xigui donum breve temporis
Utsulgor teneris qui radiat genis
Momento rapitur, nula laque non dies
For^ osi spolium corporis abs^ulit,
Senec.
and if they saw cause for it, draw the image of his death unto the life. They
did so, and found his face half eaten, and his midriffe and back bone full of
serpents, and so he stands pictured among his armed Ancestors. So does the
fairest beauty change, and it will be as bad with you and me; and then, what
servants shall we have to wait upon us in the grave, what friends to visit us,
what officious people to cleanse away the moist and unwholsom cloud reflected
upon our faces from the sides of the weeping vaults, which are the longest
weepers for our funeral.

This discourse will be useful, if we consider and practice by the following
Rules and Considerations respectivly.

1. All the Rich, and all the Covetous men in the world will perceive, and all
the world will perceive for them, that it is but an ill recompense for all
their cares, Rape, congere, auser, posside, relinquendum est. Martial
that by this time all that shall be left will be this, that the Neighbors
shall say he died a rich man: and yet his wealth will not profit him in the
grave, but hugely swell the sad accounts of Doomsday; And he that kills the
Lords people with unjust or ambitious wars for an unrewarding interest, Annos
omnes prodeg^t ut ex eo annus unus numeretur, and per mill indignitates
laboravit in ^itulum sepulchri Senec.
shall have this character, that he threw away all the days of his life, that
one year might be reckoned with his Name, and computed by his reign, or
consulship; and many men by great labors and affronts, Jam eorum praebendas
alii possident, and nes^io utrum de iis cogi^ant. Gerson.
many indignities and crimes labor only for a pompous Epitaph, and a loud
title upon their Marble; whilst those into whose possessions their heirs, or
kindred are entered, are forgotten, and lie unregarded as their ashes, and
without concernment or relation, as the turf upon the face of their grave. --
Me veterum frequens
Memphis Pyramidum docet
Me pressae tumulo lachryma gloriae

A man may read a sermon, the best and most passionate that ever men preached,
if he shall but enter into the sepulchers of Kings. Me projecta jacentium,
passum
Per populos Busta quiritium
Et vilis Zephyro jocus, jactati cineres and procerum rogi
Lyric. Cas l 2. od. 27.
In the same Escurial where the Spanish Princes live in greatness and power,
and decree war or peace, they have wisely placed a coemeterie where their ashes
and their glories shall sleep till time shall be no more: and where our Kings
have been crowned, their Ancestors lay interred, and they must walk over their
Grandsires head to take his crown. There is an acre sown with royal seed, the
copy of the greatest change, from rich to naked, from ci^led roofs to arched
coffins, from living like Gods to dye like Men. There is enough to cool the
flames of lust, to abate the heights of pride, to appease the itch of covetous
desires, to ^ully and dash out the dissembling colors of a lustful,
artificial, and imaginary beauty. There the warlike and the peaceful, the
fortunate and the miserable, the beloved and the despised Princes mingle their
dust, and pay down their symbol of Mortality, and tell all the world, that when
we die, our ashes shall be equal to Kings, and our accounts easier, and our
pains or our crowns shall be less. * To my apprehension it is a sad record
which is left by Athenaeus concerning Ninus the great Assyrian Monarch, whose
life and death is summed up in these words: Ninus the Assyrian had an Ocean of
gold, and other riches more then the sand in the Caspian sea: he never saw the
stars, and perhaps he never desired it; he never stirred up the holy fire among
the Magi, nor touched his God with the sacred rod according to the Laws; he
never offered sacrifice, nor worshipped the Deity, nor administered justice, nor
spoke to his people, nor numbered them; but he was most valiant to eat and
drink, and having mingled his wines he threw the rest upon the stones: This man
is dead; Behold his Sepulcher, and now hear where Ninus is. Some times I was
Ninus, and drew the breath of a living man, but now am nothing but clay. I have
nothing, but what I did eat, and what I served to my self in lust [that was and
is all my portion;] the wealth with which I was [esteemed] blessed, my enemies
meeting together shall bear away, as the mad Thyades carry a raw Goat. I am
gone to Hell, and when I went thither, I neither carried Gold, nor Horse, nor
silver Chariot. I that wore a Miter, am now a little heap of dust. (...)
(...)
(...)
Menand.
I know not any thing that can better represent the evil condition of a wicked
man, or a changing greatness. From the greatest secular dignity to dust, and
ashes, his nature bears him; and from thence to Hell his sins carry him, and
there he shall be for ever under the dominion of chains and devils, wrath, and
an intolerable calamity. This is the reward of an unsanctified condition, and
a greatness ill gotten, or ill administered.

(...);
2. Let no man extend his thoughts, or let his hopes wander toward future and
far distant events and accidental contingencies. This day is mine and yours,
but ye know not what shall be on the morrow: and every morning creeps out of a
dark cloud, leaving behind it an ignorance and silence deep as midnight and
undiscerned as are the phantasms that make a Chrysome child to smile: Quid sit
futurum cras fuge quaerer^
Et quem fors dicrum
Cunque da^ it, lucro appone.
Horat.
so that we cannot discern what comes hereafter, unless we had a light from
Heaven, brighter then the vision of an Angel, even the Spirit of Prophecy.
Without revelation we cannnot tell whether we shall eat to morrow, or whether a
Squinzy shall choke us: and it is written in the unrevealed folds of Divine
Predestination, that many who are this day alive, shall to morrow be laid upon
the cold earth, and the women shall weep over their shroud, and dress them for
their funeral. S. James in his Epistle notes the solly of some men his
contemporaries, who were so impatient of the event of to morrow, or the
accidents of next year, or the good or evils of old age, that they would
consult Astrologers and witches, Oracles and Devils what should befall them the
next Calends? what should be the event of such a voyage, what God had written
in his book concerning the success of battles, the Election of Emperors, the
Heir of families, the price of Merchandise, the return of the Tyrian fleer, the
rate of Sidonian Carpets, and as they were taught by the crafty and lying
Demons, so they would expect the issue; and oftentimes by disposing their
affairs in order toward such events, really did produce some little accidents
according to their expectation; and that made them trust the Oracles in greater
things, and in all. Against this, he opposes his Counsel, that we should not
search after forbidden records, much less by uncertain significations: for
whatsoever is disposed to happen by the order of natural causes, or civil
counsels may be rescinded by a peculiar decree of providence or be prevented by
the death of the interested persons; Nec Babylonios tentaris numeros
Vt melius quicquid erit, pati
Seu plures hyemes, seu tribuit Jupiter ultimam. Horat.
Incertam frustia Mortales funeris horam
Quaeritis and qua sit mors aditutura via.
Po^na minor certam subito perferre ruinam,
Quod timeas gravius sustinuisse diu.
Catul. eleg. 1.29
who while their hopes are full, and their causes conjoined, and the work
brought forward, and the sickle put into the harvest, and the first fruits
offered, and ready to be eaten, even then if they put forth their hand to an
event that stands but at the door, at that door their body may be carried forth
to burial, before the expectation shall enter into fruition. When Richilda the
Widow of Albert Earl of Ebersberg had feasted the Emperor Henry III. and
petitioned in behalf of her Nephew Welpho for some lands formerly possessed by
the Earl her Husband; just as the Emperor held out his hand to signify his
consent, the chamber-floor suddenly fell under them, and Richilda falling upon
the edge of a bathing vessel, was bruised to death, and stayed not to see her
Nephew sleep in those lands which the Emperor was reaching forth to her, Certa
amictimus dum incerta potimus atque hoc eve nit in labor atque indolor ut mors
obrepat interim. Plaut. Pseud.
and placed at the door of restitution.

3. As our hopes must be confined, so must our designs; let us not project
long designs; crafty plots, and diggings so deep that the intrigues of a
design shall never be unfolded till our Grand children have forgotten our
virtues or our vices. The work of our soul is cut short, facile, sweet and
plain, and fitted to the small portions of our shorter life: and as we must not
trouble our inquiry, so neither must we intricate our labor and purposes with
what we shall never enjoy. This rule does not forbid us to plant Orchards which
shall feed our Nephews with their fruit; for by such provisions they do
something toward an imaginary immortality, and do charity to their Relatives:
But such projects are reproved which discompose our present duty by long and
future designs; such which by casting our labors to events at distance, Quid
brevi fortes iaculemur (...) Multa?
Jam te premet nox, Fabulae^ Manes
Et domus exilis Plutonia.
Horat.
make us less to remember our death standing at the door. It is fit for a Man
to work for his days wages, or to contrive for the hire of a week, or to lay a
train to make provisions for such a time as is within our eye, and in our duty,
and within the usual periods of Man's life, for whatsoever is made necessary, is
also made prudent; but while we plot, and buisy our selves in the toils of an
ambitious war, or the levies of a great estate, Night enters in upon us, and
tells all the world, how like fools we lived, and how deceived and miserably we
dyed. Epist. 1^
Seneca tells of Senecio Cornelius, a man crafty in getting, and tenacious in
holding a great estate, and one who was as diligent in the care of his body, as
of his money, curious of his health, as of his possessions; that he all day
long attended upon his sick and dying friend; but when he went away was quickly
comforted, supped merrily, went to bed cheerfully, and on a sudden being
surprised by a Squinzy, scarce drew his breath until the Morning, but by that
time dyed, being snatched from the torrent of his fortune, and the swelling
tide of wealth, and a likely hope bigger then the necessities of ten men. This
accident was much noted then in Rome, because it happened in so great a
fortune, and in the midst of wealthy designs; and presently it made wise men
to consider, how imprudent a person he is, who disposes of ten years to come,
when he is not Lord of to morrow.

I^le enim ex futuro suspenditur, cui i^^itum est prae^^ns

Senec.
4. Though we must not look so far of^, and prey abroad, yet we must be buisie
near at hand; we must with all arts of the Spirit seize upon the present,
because it passes from us while we speak, and because in it all our certainty
does consist. We must take our waters as out of a torrent and sudden shower,
which will quickly cease dropping from above, and quickly cease running in our
channels here below; This instant will never return again, and yet it may be
this instant will declare, or secure the fortune of a whole eternity. The old
Greeks and Romans taught us the prudence of this rule: but Christianity teaches
us the Religion of it. They so seized upon the present that they would lose
nothing of the days pleasure. E^tate fruere, mobili c^^su sug^t. Senec
Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die; that was their philosophy;
and at their solemn feasts they would talk of death to heighten the present
drinking, and that they might warm their veins with a fuller chalice, as
knowing the drink that was poured upon their graves would be cold and without
relish. Martial. l 2. epig. 59.
Break the beds, drink your wine, crown your heads with roses, and besinear
your curled locks with Nard; for God bids you to remember death; so the
Epigrammatist speaks the sense of their drunken principles. Something toward
this signification is that of Solomon, There is nothing better for a man then
that he should eat and drink, Eccles 3.12. and chap. 2.4.
and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labor, for that is his
portion, for who shall bring him to see that which shall be after him? But
although he concludes all this to be vanity, yet because it was the best thing
that was then commonly known A (...) du^n vivimus, vivamus.
(...)
(...).
Hoc etiam faciunt ubi discubuere, te entque
Pocula saep homines, and inumbrant ora coronis
Ex animo ut dicant brevis est hic ^ructus homillis,
Jam fuerit neq post unquam revocare licebit
Lucret lib. 3.
that they should seize upon the present with a temperate use of permited
pleasures, had reason to say that Christianity taught us to turn this into
religion. For he that by a present and a constant holiness secures the present,
and makes it useful to his noblest purposes, he turns his condition into his
best advantage, by making his unavoidable fate become his necessary religion.

To the purpose of this rule is that collect of Tuscan hieroglyphics which we
have from Gabriel Simeon. Our life is very short, beauty is a cosenage, money
is false and fugitive, Empire is odious, and hated by them that have it not,
and uneasy to them that have, victory is always uncertain, and peace most
commonly is but a fraudulent bargain; old age is miserable, death is the
period, and is a happy one if it be not sowred by the sins of our life: but
nothing continues but the effects of that wisdom which imployes the present
time in the acts of a holy religion, and a peaceable conscience: for they make
us to live even beyond our funerals, embalmed in the spices and odours of a
good name, and entombed in the grave of the Holy Jesus where we shall be
dressed for a blessed resurrection to the state of Angels and beatified Spirits.

5. Since we stay not here, being people but of a days abode, and our age is
like that of a fly, and contemporary with a gourd, we must look some where
else for an abiding city, a place in another country to fix our house in,
whose walls and foundation is God, where we must find rest, or else be
restless for ever. For whatsoever ease we can have or fancy here is shortly to
be changed into sadness, Quis sapiens bono
Confidat fragili: dum licet, utere:
Tempus sed tacitum subruit: hora
Se^per prae^erita deterior subit.
Hippol.
or tediousness: it goes away too soon like the periods of our life; or stays
too long, like the sorrows of a sinner: its own weariness or a contrary
disturbance is its load; or it is eased by its revolution into vanity and
forgetfulness; and where either there is sorrow or an end of joy, there can be
no true felicity: which because it must be had by some instrument, and in some
period of our duration, we must carry up our affections to the mansions
prepared for us above, where eternity is the measure, felicity is their state,
Angels are the Company, the Lamb is the light, and God is the portion, and
inheritance.

SECT. III. Rules and Spiritual arts of lengthening our days, and to take off
the objection of a short life.
IN the accounts of a man's life we do not reckon that portion of days in which
we are shut up in the prison of the womb: we tell our years from the day of our
birth: and the same reason that makes our reckning to stay so long, says also
that then it begins too soon. For then we are beholding to others to make the
account for us: for we know not of a long time, whether we be alive or no,
having but some little approaches and symptoms of a life. To feed, and sleep,
and move a little, and imperfectly, is the state of an unborn child; and when
it is born, he does no more for a good while; and what is it that shall make
him to be esteemed to live the life of a man? and when shall that account
begin? For we should be loath to have the accounts of our age taken by the
measures of a beast: and fools and distracted persons are reckoned as civilly
dead; they are no parts of the Commonwealth, not subject to laws, but secured
by them in Charity, and kept from violence as a man keeps his Ox; and a third
part of our life is spent, before we enter into a higher order, into the state
of a man.

2. Neither must we think, that the life of a Man begins when he can feed
himself or walk alone, when he can fight, or beget his like; for so he is
contemporary with a camel, or a cow; but he is first a man when he comes to a
certain, steady use of reason, according to his proportion, and when that is,
all the world of men cannot tell precisely. Some are called at age, at
fourteen, some at one and twenty, some never; but all men, late enough; for the
life of a man comes upon him slowly and insensibly. But as when the Sun
approaches toward the gates of the morning, he first opens a little eye of
Heaven, and sends away the spirits of darkness, and gives light to a cock, and
calls up the lark to Mattins, and by and by gilds the fringes of a cloud and
peeps over the Eastern hills, thrusting out his golden horns, like those which
decked the brows of Moses when he was forced to wear a vail, because himself
had seen the face of God; and still while a man tells the story, the sun gets
up higher, till he shows a fair face and a full light, and then he shines one
whole day, under a cloud often, and sometimes weeping great and little showers,
and sets quickly: so is a man's reason and his life. He first begins to perceive
himself to see or taste, making little reflections upon his actions of sense,
and can discourse of flies and dogs, shells and play, horses and liberty; but
when he is strong enough to enter into arts and little institutions, he is at
first entertained with trifles and impertinent things, not because he needs
them, but because his understanding is no bigger; and little images of things
are laid before him, like a cock-boat to a whale only to play withal: but
before a man comes to be wise he is half dead with gouts and consumptions, with
Catarrhes and aches, with sore eyes, and a worn out body: so that if we must
not reckon the life of a man but by the accounts of his reason, he is long
before his soul be dressed; and he is not to be called a man without a wise and
an adorned soul, a soul at least furnished with what is necessary toward his
well being; but by that time his soul is thus furnished, his body is decayed;
and then you can hardly reckon him to be alive, when his body is possessed by
so many degrees of death.

3. But there is yet another arrest. At first he wants strength of body, and
then he wants the use of reason; and when that is come, it is ten to one, but
he stops by the impediments of vice, and wants the strengths of the spirit; and
we know that Body and Soul and Spirit are the constituent parts of every
Christian man. And now let us consider, what that thing is, which we call years
of discretion? The young man is passed his Tutors, and arrived at the bondage
of a caytive spirit; he is run from discipline, and is let loose to passion;
the man by this time has wit enough to choose his vice, to act his lust, to
court his Mistress, to talk confidently, and ignorantly, and perpetually, to
despise his betters, to deny nothing to his appetite, to do things, that when
he is indeed a man he must for ever be ashamed of; for this is all the
discretion that most men show in the first stage of their Manhood; they can
discern good from evil; and they prove their skill by leaving all that is good,
and wallowing in the evils of folly, and an unbridled appetite. And by this
time, the young man has contracted vicious habits, and is a beast in manners,
and therefore it will not be fitting to reckon the beginning of his life; he is
a fool in his understanding, and that is a sad death; and he is dead in
trespasses and sins, and that is a sadder: so that he has no life but a
natural, the life of a beast or a tree; in all other capacities he is dead; he
neither has the intellectual, nor the spiritual life, neither the life of a
man, nor of a Christian; and this sad truth lasts too long. For old age seizes
upon most men while they still retain the minds of boys and vicious youth,
doing actions from principles of great folly, and a mighty ignorance, admiring
things useless and hurtful, and filling up all the dimensions of their abode
with businesses of empty affairs, being at leisure to attend no virtue: they
cannot pray, because they are busy, and because they are passionate: they
cannot communicate because they have quarrels and intrigues of perplexed
causes, complicated hostilities, and things of the world; and therefore they
cannot attend to the things of God, little considering, that they must find a
time to die in; when death comes, they must be at leisure for that. Such men
are like Sailers loosing from a port, and tossed immediately with a perpetual
tempest lasting till their cordage crack, and either they sink, or return back
again to the same place: they did not make a voyage, though they were long at
sea. The business and impertinent affairs of most men, steal all their time,
and they are restless in a foolish motion; but this is not the progress of a
man; he is no further advanced in the course of a life though he reckon many
years: Bis jam consul trigesimus instat
Et numerat paucos vi^ tua vita dies.

for still his soul is childish, and trifling like an untaught boy.

If the parts of this sad complaint find their remedy, we have by the same
instruments also cured the evils and the vanity of a short life. Therefore,

1. Be infinitely curious you do not set back your life in the accounts of God
by the intermingling of criminal actions, or the contracting vicious habits.
There are some vices which carry a sword in their hand and cut a man off before
his time. There is a sword of the Lord, and there is a sword of a Man; and
there is a sword of the Devil. Every vice of our own managing in the matter of
carnality, of lust, or rage, ambition or revenge is a sword of Satan put into
the hands of a man: These are the destroying Angels, sin is the Apollyon, the
destroyer that is gone out, not from the Lord, but from the Tempter; and we hug
the poison, and twist willingly with the vipers, till they bring us into the
Regions of an irrecoverable sorrow. We use to reckon persons as good as dead if
they have lost their limbs and their teeth, and are confined to an Hospital,
and converse with none but Surgeons and Physicians, Mourners and Divines, those
pollinctores, the Dressers of bodies and souls to Funeral: But it is worse when
the soul, the principle of life is employed wholly in the offices of death: and
that man was worse then dead of whom Seneca tells, that being a rich fool, when
he was lifted up from the baths and set into a soft couch, asked his slaves An
ego jam sedeo? Do I now sit. The beast was so drowned in sensuality and the
death of his soul, that whether he did sit or no, he was to believe another.
Idleness and every vice is as much of death as a long disease is, or the
expense of ten years: and she that lives in pleasures is dead while she lives
(says the Apostle), and it is the style of the Spirit concerning wicked
persons, They are dead in trespasses and sins. For as every sensual pleasure
and every day of idleness and useless living lops off a little branch from our
short life; so every deadly sin and every habitual vice does quite destroy us:
but innocence leaves us in our natural portions, and perfect period; we lose
nothing of our life, if we lose nothing of our souls health; and therefore he
that would live a full age must avoid a sin, as he would decline the Regions of
death, and the dishonors of the grave.

2. If we would have our life lengthened, let us begin b^times to live in the
accounts of reason and sober counsels, Aedepol proinde ut been vivitur, diu
vivitur. Plaut Trinum. Non accepimus brevem vitam, fed fecimus, nec inopes
ejus, sed prodigi sumus. Senec.
of religion and the Spirit, and then we shall have no reason to complain that
our abode on earth is so short: Many men find it long enough, and indeed it is
so to all senses. But when we spend in waste, what God has given us in plenty,
when we sacrifice our youth to folly, our manhood to lust and rage, our old age
to covetousness and irreligion, not beginning to live till we are to die,
designing that time to Virtue which indeed is infirm to every thing and
profit^ble to nothing, then we make our lives short, and lust runs away with
all the vigorous and healthful part of it; and pride and animosity steal the
manly portion, and craftiness and interest possess old age; velut ex pleno
and abundanti perdimus; we spend as if we had too much time, and knew not what
to do with it: We fear every thing like weak and silly mortals; and desire
strangely and greedily as if we were immortal: we complain our life is short,
and yet we throw away much of it, and are weary of many of its parts: We
complain the day is long, and the night is long, and we want company, and seek
out arts to drive the time away, and then weep because it is gone too soon. But
so the treasure of the Capitol is but a small ^state when Caesar comes to
finger it, and to pay with it all his Legions; and the Revenue of all Egypt and
the Eastern provinces was but a little sum when they were to support the
luxury of Marc. Antony, and feed the riot of Cleopatra: But a thousand crowns
is a vast proportion to be spent in the cottage of a frugal person, or to feed
a Hermit. Just so is our life; it is too short to serve the ambition of a
haughty Prince, or an usurping Rebel: too little time to purchase great wealth,
to satisfy the pride of a vainglorious fool, to trample upon all the enemies
of our just, or unjust interest; but for the obtaining virtue; for the purchase
of sobriety and modesty, for the actions of Religion God gave us time
sufficient, if we make the outgoings of the Morning and Evening, that is, our
infancy and old age to be taken into the computations of a man. Which we may
see in the following particulars.

1. If our childhood being first consecrated by a forward baptism, it be
seconded by a holy education, and a complying obedience; If our youth be chaste
and temperate, modest and industrious, proceeding through a prudent and sober
Manhood to a Religious old age, Sed potes, Publi, geminare magna
Secula fama.
Quem sui raptum gemuere ^ives
Hic diu vixit. Sibi quisque famam
Scribat haeredem: rapiunt avarae
Caetera Lunae.
then we have lived our whole duration, and shall never die, but be changed in
a just time to the preparations of a better, and an immortal life.

2. If besides the ordinary returns of our prayers and periodical and festival
solemnities, and our seldom communions we would allow to religion and the
studies of wisdom, those great shares that are trifled away upon vain sorrow,
foolish mirth, troublesome ambition, buisy covetousness, watchful lust, and
impertinent amors, and balls and revellings and banquets, all that which was
spent vitiously and all that time that lay fallow and without employment, our
life would quickly amount to a great sum. Tostatus Abulensis was a very painful
person and a great Cleark, and in the days of his manhood he wrote so many
books, and they not ill ones, that the world computed a sheet for every day of
his life; I suppose they meant, after he came to the use of reason, and the
state of a man: and John Scotus died about the two and thirtieth year of his
age; and yet besides his public disputations, his daily Lectures of Divinity
in public and private, the Books that he wrote being lately collected and
printed at Lions do equal the number of volumes of any two the most voluminous
Fathers of the Latin Church. Every man is not enabled to such employments, but
every man is called and enabled to the works of a sober and a religious life;
and there are many Saints of God that can reckon as many volumes of religion
and mountains of piety, as those others did of good books. S. Ambrose (and I
think from his example, S. Augustine) divided every day into three tertia's of
employment: eight hours he spent in the necessities of nature and recreation,
eight hours in charity and doing assistance to others, dispatching their
bu^sinesses, reconciling their enmities, reproving their vices, correcting
their errors, instructing their ignorances, transacting the affairs of his
Diocese, and the other eight hours he spent in study and prayer. If we were
thus minute and curious in the spending our time, it is impossible but our life
would seem very long. For so have I seen an amorous person tell the minutes of
his absence from his fancied joy, and while he told the sands of his
hour-glasse, or the throbs and little beatings of his watch, by dividing an
hour into so many members, he spun out its length by number, and so translated
a day into the tediousness of a month. And if we tell our days by Canonical
hours of prayer, our weeks by a constant revolution of fasting days, or days
of special devotion, and over all these draw a black Cypress a veil of
penitential sorrow, and severe mortification, we shall soon answer the calumny
and objection of a short life. He that governs the day and divides the hours
hastens from the eyes and observation of a merry sinner; but loves so stand
still, and behold, and tell the sighs, and number the groans, and sadly
delicious accents of a grieved penitent. It is a vast work that any man may do
if he never be idle; and it is a huge way that a man may go in virtue if he
never goes out of his way by a vicious habit, or a great crime, and he that
perpetually reads good books, if his parts be answerable, will have a huge
stock of knowledge. It is so in all things else. Strive not to forget your
time, and suffer none of it to pass undiscerned, and then measure your life,
and tell me how you find the measure of its abode. However, the time we live,
is worth the money we pay for it: and therefore it is not to be thrown away.

3. When vicious men are dying, and scared with the affrighting truths of an
evil conscience, they would give all the world for a year, for a month; nay we
read of some that called out with amazement inducias usque ad mane, truce but
till the morning: and if that year, or some few months were given, those men
think they could do miracles in it. And let us a while suppose what Dives would
have done if he had been loosed from the pains of hell and permitted to live on
earth one year. Would all the pleasures of the world have kept him one hour
from the Temple? would he not perpetually have been under the hands of Priests,
or at the feet of the Doctors, or by Moses chair, or attending as near the
Altar as he could get, or relieving poor Lazars, or praying to God, and
crucifying all his sin? I have read of a Melancholy person who saw hell but in
a dream or vision, and the amazement was such that he would have chosen ten
times to die, rather then feel again so much of that horror: and such a person
cannot be fancied but that he would spend a year in such holiness, that the
religion of a few months would equal the devotion of many years, even of a
good man. Let us but compute the proportions. If we should spend all our years
of reason so as such a person would spend that one, can it be thought that life
would be short and trifling in which he had performed such a religion, served
God with so much holiness, mortified sin with so great a labor, purchased
virtue at such a rate, and so rare an industry? It must needs be that such a
man must dye when he ought to die, and be like ripe and pleasant fruit falling
from a fair tree and gathered into baske^s for the planters use: He that has
done ^ll his business, Huic neque defungi visum est, nec vivere pulchrum;
Cura f^it recte vivere, sicque mori.

and is begotten to a glorious hope by the seed of an immortal Spirit, can
never die too soon, nor live too long.

Xerxes wept sadly when he saw his army of 2300000 men, because he considered
that within a hundred years all the youth of that army should be dust and
ashes: and yet as Seneca well observes of him, he was the man that should bring
them to their graves; and he consumed all that army in two years, for whom he
feared, and wept the death after an hundred. Just so we do all. We complain
that within thirty or forty years, a little more, or a great deal less we
shall descend again into the bowels of our Mother, and that our life is too
short for any great employment; and yet we throw away five and ^hirty years of
our forty, and the remaining five we divide between art and nature, civility
and customs, necessity and convenience, prudent counsels and religion; but the
portion of the last, is little and contemptible, and yet that little is all
that we can prudently account of our lives: We bring that fate and that death
near us, of whose approach we are so sadly apprehensive.

4. In taking the accounts of your life do not reckon by great distances, and
by the periods of pleasure, or the satisfaction of your hopes, or the stating
your desires: but let every intermedial day and hour pass with observation. He
that reckons he has lived but so many harvests, In spe viventibus, proximum
quodque tempus elabitur, subatque aviditas temporis, and miserrimus, atque
miserrim^ omnia efficiens, me^us mortis..... Ex hac autem indigentia timer
nascitur, and cupiditas futuri ex^dens animum. Senec.
thinks, they come not often enough, and that they go away too soon. Some lose
the day with longing for the night, and the night in waiting for the day. Hope
and phantastic expectations spend much of our lives; and while with passion we
look for a coronation, or the death of an enemy, or a day of joy, passing from
fancy to possession without any intermedial notices, we throw away a precious
year, and use it but as the burden of our time, fit to be pared off, and thrown
away, that we may come at those little pleasures which first steal our hearts,
and then steal our life.

5. A strict course of piety is the way to prolong our lives in the natural
sense, and to add good portions to the number of our years; and sin is
sometimes by natural causality, very often by the anger of God, and the Divine
judgment, a cause of sudden and untimely death. Concerning which I shall add
nothing (to what I have some where else Life of Christ, Part. 3. Disc. 14.
said of this article) but only the observation of Epiphanius: that for 3332
years, even to the twentieth age, there was not one example of a son that died
before his Father, Lib. 1. To^. 1. Panar. Sect. 6.
but the course of Nature was kept, that he who was first born in the
descending line did first die (I speak of natural death, and therefore Abel
cannot be opposed to this observation) till that Terah the Father of Abraham
taught the people a new religion, to make images of clay and worship them; and
concerning him it was first remarked, that Haran died before his Father Terah
in the land of his Nativity: God by an unheard of judgment, and a rare
accident punishing his newly invented crime: by the untimely death of his son.

6. But if I shall describe a living man; a man that has that life that
distinguishes him from a fool or a bird, that which gives him a capacity next
to Angels; we shall find that even a good man lives not long, because it is
long before he is born to this life, Seneca de vita beata. c. 20.
and longer yet before he has a man's growth. He that can look upon death, and
see its face with the same countenance with which he hears its story; that can
endure all the labors of his life with his soul supporting his body; that can
equally despise riches when he has them, and when he has them not; that is
not sadder if they lie in his Neighbors trunks, nor more brag if they shine
round about his own walls; he that is neither moved with good fortune coming to
him, nor going from him; that can look upon another man's lands evenly and
pleasedly as if they were his own; and yet look upon his own, and use them too,
just as if they were another man's; that neither spends his goods prodigally,
and like a fool, nor yet keeps them avaritiously and like a wretch; that weighs
not benefits by weight and number, but by the mind and circumstances of him
that gives them; that never thinks his charity expensive if a worthy person be
the receiver; he that does nothing for opinion sake, but every thing for
conscience, being as curious of his thoughts, as of his actings in markets and
Theaters, and is as much in awe of himself, as of a whole assembly; he that
knows God looks on, and contrives his secret affairs as in the presence of God
and his holy Angels; that eats and drinks because he needs it, not that he may
serve a lust or load his belly; he that is bountiful and cheerful to his
friends, and charitable and apt to forgive his enemies; that loves his country
and obeyes his Prince, and desires and endeavors nothing more then that he may
do honor to God, this person may reckon his life, to be the life of a man, and
compute his months, not by the course of the sun, but the Zodiac and circle of
his virtues: because these are such things which fools and children, and birds
and beasts cannot have: These are therefore the actions of life, because they
are the feeds of immortality. That day in which we have done some excellent
thing, we may as truly reckon to be added to our life, as were the fifteen
years to the days of Hezekiah.

SECT. IV. Consideration of the miseries of Man's life.
AS our life is very short so it is very miserable, and therefore it is well it
is short: God in pity to mankind, lest his burden should be insupportable and
his nature an intolerable load, has reduced our state of misery to an
abbreviature; and the greate^ our misery is, the less while it is like to
last; the sorrows of a man's spirit being like ponderous weights which by the
greatness of their burden make a swifter motion and descend into the grave to
rest and ease our wearied limbs; for then only we shall sleep quietly when
those fetters are knocked off which not only bound our souls in prison, but
also eat the flesh till the very bones opened the secret garments of their
cartilages, discovering their nakedness and sorrow.

1. Here is no place to sit down in, but you must rise as soon as you are set:
Nulla (...) in (...) surg^te post quam seder^t^s; hic es ^ocus pulicu^ and
culicu^^.
for we have gnats in our chambers, and worms in our gardens, and spiders and
flies in the palaces of the greatest Kings. How few men in the world are
prosperous? what an infinite number of slaves and beggars, of persecuted and
oppressed people fill all corners of the earth with groans, and Heaven it self
with weeping prayers, and sad remembrances? how many Provinces and Kingdoms are
afflicted by a violent war, or made desolate by popular diseases? some whole
countries are remarked with fatal evils, or periodical sicknesses. Gran Cairo
in Egypt feels the plague every three years, returning like a Quartan ague, and
destroying many thousands of persons. All the inhabitants of Arabia the desert
are in continual fear of being buried in huge heaps of sand, and therefore
dwell in tents and ambu^atory houses or retire to unfruitful mountains to
prolong an uneasy and wilder life: and all the Countries round about the
Adriatic sea feel such violent convulsions by Tempests and intolerable
Earthquakes, that sometimes whole cities find a Tomb, and every man ^inks
with his own house made ready to become his Monument, and his bed is crushed
into the disorders of a grave. Was not all the world drowned at one deluge, and
breach of the Divine anger? and shall not all the world (...)
(...)
Sibyll. Ora^:
again be destroyed by fire? Are there not many thousands that die every night,
and that groan and weep sadly every day? But what shall we think of that great
evil, which for the sins of men, God has suffered to possess the greatest part
of Mankind? Most of the men that are now alive, or that have been living for
many ages, are Jews, Heathens, or Turcs: and God was pleased to suffer a base
Epileptic person, a villain and a vicious to set up a religion which has
filled almost all Asia, and Africa, and some parts of Europe; so that the
greatest number of men and women born in so many kingdoms and provinces are
infallibly made Mahumetans, strangers and enemies to Christ, by whom alone we
can be saved. This consideration is extremely sad, when we remember how
universal, and how great an evil it is, that so many millions of sons and
daughters are born to enter into the possession of Devils to eternal ages.
These evils are the miseries of great parts of mankind, and we cannot easily
consider more particularly, the evils which happen to us, being the inseparable
affections, or incidents to the whole nature of man.

2. We find that all the women in the world are either born for barrenness or
the pains of Childbirth, and yet this is one of our greatest blessings; but
such indeed are the blessings of this world: we cannot be well with, nor
without many things. Perfumes make our heads ache, roses prick our fingers, and
in our very blood where our life dwells is the Scene under which nature acts
many sharp Fevers and heavy sicknesses. It were too sad if I should tell how
many persons are afflicted with evil spirits, with specter and illusions of
the night; and that huge multitudes of men and women live upon man's flesh: Nay
worse yet, upon the sins of men, upon the sins of their sons and of their
daughters, and they pay their souls down for the bread they eat, buying this
days meal with the price of the last nights sin.

3. Or if you please in charity to visit an Hospital, which is indeed a map of
the whole world, there you shall see the effects of Adams sin and the ruins of
humane nature, bodies laid up in heaps like the bones of a destroyed town,
homines precarii spiritus, and male haerentis, men whose souls seem to be
borrowed, and are kept there by art and the force of Medicine; whose miseries
are so great, that few people have charity or humanity enough to visit them,
fewer have the heart to dress them, and we pity them in civility or with a
transient prayer, but we do not feel their sorrows by the mercies of a
religious pity, and therefore as we leave their sorrows in many degrees
unrelieved and uneased, so we contract by our unmercifulness a guilt by which
our selves become liable to the same calamities. Those many that need pity, and
those infinites of people that refuse to pity are miserable upon a several
charge, but yet they almost make up all mankind.

4. All wicked men are in love with that which intangles them in huge variety
of troubles, they are slaves to the worst of Masters, to sin and to the Devil,
to a passion, and to an imperious woman. Good men are for ever persecuted, and
God chastises every son whom he receives, and whatsoever is easy is trifling
and worth nothing, and whatsoever is excellent is not to be obtained without
labor and sorrow; and the conditions and states of men that are free from
great cares, are such as have in them nothing rich and orderly, and those that
have are stuck full of thorns and trouble. Kings are full of care; and learned
men Vilis adulator picto iacete, brius ostro
Et qui solicitat nuptas, ad pr^mia peccat.
Sola prumo^is horret facundia pannis
Atque inopi lingua desertas invocat arts.
Petron.
Hinc and jocus apud Aristophanem in avibus;
(...).

in all ages have been observed to be very poor, and honestas miserias
accusant; they complain of their honest miseries.

5. But these evils are notorious and confessed; even they also whose felicity
men stare at and admire, besides their splendor and the sharpness of their
light, will with their appendant sorrows wring a tear from the most resolved
eye. For not only the winter quarter is full of storms and cold and darkness,
but the beauteous spring has blasts and sharp frosts, the fruitful teeming
summer is melted with heat, and burnt with the kisses of the sun her friend,
and choked with dust, and the rich Autumn is full of sickness, and we are
weary of that which we enjoy, because sorrow is its biggest portion: and when
we remember that upon the fairest face is placed one of the worst sinks of the
body, the nose, we may use it, not only as a mortification to the pride of
beauty, but as an allay to the fairest outside of condition which any of the
sons and daughters of Adam do possess. Vilis servus habet regni bona, cellaque
capti
Deridet sestam Romuleamque casa ^.
Petron.
Omnia creed ^^hi etia ^f licibu dubia sunt.
Senec.
For look upon Kings and conquerours: I will not tell that many of them fall
into the condition of servants, and their subjects rule over them, and stand
upon the ruins of their families, and that to such persons, the sorrow is
bigger then usually happens in smaller fortunes: but let us suppose them still
conquerers, and see what a goodly purchase they get by all their pains and
amazing fears, and continual dangers. They carry their arms beyond Ister, and
pass the Euphrates, and bind the Germans with the bounds of the river Rhyne:
I speak in the style of the Roman greatness: for now adays, the biggest
fortune swells not beyond the limits of a petty province or two, and a hill
confines the progress of their prosperity, or a river checks it: But
whatsoever tempts the pride and vanity of ambitious persons is not so big as
the smallest star which we see scattered in disorder, and unregarded upon the
pavement and floor of Heaven. And if we would suppose the pismires had but our
understandings, they also would have the method of a Man's greatness, and
divide their little Mole-hils into Provinces and Exarchats: and if they also
grew as vicious and as miserable, one of their princes would lead an army out,
and kill his neighbor Ants that he might reign over the next handful of a
Turse. But then if we consider at what price, and with what felicity all this
is purchased, the s^ing of the painted snake will quickly appear, and the
fairest of their fortunes will properly enter into this account of humane
infelicities.

We may guess at it by the constitution of Augustus fortune; who strugled for
his power, first with the Roman Citizens, then with Brutus and Cassius and all
the fortune of the Republike; then with his Colleague Marc. Anthony; then with
his kindred and nearest Relatives; and after he was wearied with slaughter of
the Romans, before he could sit down and rest in his imperial chair he was
forced to carry armies into Macedonia, Galatia, beyond Euphrates, Rhyne, and
Danubius: And when he dwelt at home in greatness and within the circles of a
mighty power, he hardly escaped the sword of the Egnatii, of Lepidus, Caepio,
and Muraena: and after he had entirely reduced the felicity and Grandeur into
his own family, his Daughter, his only child conspired with many of the young
Nobility, Et adulterio velut sacramento adacti. facit. Plusque and iterum^ia
^enda cum Antonio mulier.
and being joined with adulterous complications as with an impious sacrament
they affrighted and destroyed the fortune of the old man, and wrought him more
sorrow then all the troubles that were hatched in the baths and beds of Egypt,
between Anthony and Cleopatra. This was the greatest fortune that the world had
then, or ever since, and therefore we cannot expect it to be better in a less
prosperity.

6. The prosperity of this world is so infinitely sowred with the overflowing
of evils, that he is counted the most happy who has the fewest; all conditions
being evil and miserable, they are only distinguished by the Number of
calamities. The Collector of the Roman and foreign examples, when he had
reckoned two and twenty instances of great fortunes every one of which had been
allayed with great variety of evils; in all his reading or experience he could
tell but of two who had been famed for an entire prosperity; Quintus Metellus,
and Gyges the King of Lydia; and yet concerning the one of them he tells that
his felicity was so inconsiderable (and yet it was the bigger of the two) that
the Oracle said that Aglaus Sophidius the poor Arcadian Shepherd was more happy
then he, that is, he had fewer troubles; for so indeed we are to reckon the
pleasures of this life; (...)
the limit of our joy is the absence of some degrees of sorrow, and he that
has the least of this, is the most prosperous person. But then we must look
for prosperity, not in Palaces or Courts of Princes, not in the tents of
Conquerers, or in the gaieties of fortunate and prevailing sinners; but
something rather in the Cottages of honest innocent and contented persons,
whose mind is no bigger then their fortune, nor their virtue less then their
security. As for others whose fortune looks bigger, and allures fools to follow
it like the wand^ing fires of the night, till they run into rivers or are
broken upon rocks with staring and running after them, they are all in the
condition of Marius, Quem si inter mi sero ^o ^ueri mi serrimus, inter felices,
^elicissimus reperte ba^ur.
then whose condition nothing was more constant, and nothing more mutable; if
we reckon them amongst the happy, they are the most happy men, if we reckon
them amongst the miserable, they are the most miserable. For just as is a man's
condition, great or little, so is the state of his misery; All have their
share; but Kings and Princes, great Generals and Consuls, Rich men and Mighty,
as they have the biggest business and the biggest charge, and are answerable
to God for the greatest accounts, so they have the biggest trouble; that the
uneasinesse of their appendage may divide the good and evil of the world,
making the poor man's fortune as eligible as the Greatest; and also restraining
the vanity of man's spirit which a great Fortune is apt to swell from a vapor
to a bubble; but God in mercy has mingled wormwood with their wine, and so
restrained the drunkenness and follies of prosperity.

7. Man never has one day to himself of entire peace from the things of this
world, but either something troubles him, or nothing satisfies him, or his very
fullness swells him and makes him breath short upon his bed. Men's joys are
troublesome, and besides that the fear of losing them takes away the present
pleasure (and a man had need of another felicity to preserve this) they are
also wavering and full of trepidation, not only from their inconstant nature,
but from their weak foundation: They arise from vanity, and they dwell upon
ice, and they converse with the wind, and they have the wings of a bird, and
are serious but as the resolutions of a child, commenced by chance, and
managed by folly and proceed by inadvertency, and end in vanity and
forgetfulness. So that as Livius Drusus said of himself, he never had any play
days, or days of quiet when he was a boy, ^ni sibi necpuer^ unquam ferias
contigisse. S^di^iosu and fo^o gravis.
for he was troublesome and busy, a restless and unquiet man, the same may
every man observe to be true of himself: he is always restless and uneasy, he
dwells upon the waters and leans upon thorns, and lays his head upon a sharp
stone.

SECT. V. This Consideration reduced to practice.
1. THe effect of this consideration is this* That the sadnesses of this life
help to sweeten the bitter cup of Death. For let our life be never so long, if
our strength were great as that of oxen and camels; if our sinews were strong
as the cordage at the foot of an Oak, if we were as fighting and prosperous
people as Siccius Dentatus, who was on the prevailing side in 120 battles, who
had 312 public rewards assigned him by his Generals and Princes for his
valor, and conduct in sieges and short encounters, and besides all this had
his share in nine triumphs, yet still the period shall be, that all this shall
end in death, and the people shall talk of us a while, good or bad, according
as we deserve, or as they please; and once it shall come to pass, that
concerning every one of us it shall be told in the Neighborhood that we are
dead. This we are apt to think a sad story; but therefore let us help it with a
sadder; For we therefore need not be much troubled that we shall die, because
we are not here in ease, nor do we dwell in a fair condition. But our days are
full of sorrow and anguish, dishonored and made unhappy with many sins, with a
frail and a foolish spirit, entangled with difficult cases of conscience,
ins^ared with passions, amazed with fears, full of cares, divided with
curiosities and contradictory interests, made aerie and impertinent with
vanities, abused with ignorance and prodigious errors, made ridiculous with a
thousand weaknesses, worn away with labors, laden with diseases, daily vexed
with dangers and temptations, and in love with misery; we are weakened with
delights, afflicted with want, with the evils of my self, and of all my family,
and with the sadnesses of all my friends, and of all good men, even of the
whole Church; and therefore me thinks we need not be troubled that God is
pleased to put an end to all these troubles, and to let them sit down in a
natural period, which if we please, may be to us the beginning of a better
life. When the Prince of Persia wept because his army should all die in the
revolution of an age, Artabanus told him, that they should all meet with evils
so many and so great, that every man of them should wish himself dead long
before that. Indeed it were a sad thing to be cut of the stone; and we that are
in health tremble to think of it; but the man that is wearied with the disease,
looks upon that sharpness as upon his cure and remedy: and as none need to
have a tooth drawn, so none could well endure it, but he that has felt the
pain of it in his head: so is our life so full of evils, that therefore death
is no evil to them that have felt the smart of this, or hope for the joys of a
better.

2. But as it helps to ease a certain sorrow, as a fire draws out fire, and a
nail drives forth a nail; so it instructs us in a present duty; that is; that
we should not be so fond of a perpetual storm, nor dote upon the transient
gaudes and gilded thorns of this world. They are not worth a passion, not worth
a sigh or a groan, not of the price of one nights watching; and therefore they
are mistaken and miserable persons who since Adam planted thorns round about
Paradise, are more in love with that hedge, then all the fruits of the garden,
sottish admirers of things that hurt them, of sweet poisons, gilded daggers and
silken halters. Tell them they have lost a bounteous friend, a rich purchase, a
fair farm, a wealthy donative, and you dissolve their patience; it is an evil
bigger then their spirit can bear, it brings sickness and death, they can
neither eat nor sleep with such a sorrow. But if you represent to them the
evils of a vicious habit, and the dangers of a state of sin; if you tell them
they have displeased God, and interrupted their hopes of heaven, it may be they
will be so civil as to hear it patiently, and to treat you kindly, and first
commend, and then to forget your story, because they prefer this world with all
its sorrows, before the pure unmingled felicities of heaven. But it is strange
that any man should be so passionately in love with the thorns that grow on his
own ground, that he should wear them for armelets, and knit them in his shirt,
and prefer them before a kingdom and immortality. No man loves this world the
better for his being poor; but men that love it, because they have great
possessions, love it because it is troublesome and chargeable, full of noise
and temptation; because it is unsafe and ungoverned, flattered and abused: and
he that considers the troubles of an overlong garment, and of a crammed
stomach, a trailing gown and a laden Table, may justly understand that all
that for which men are so passionate, is their hurt and their objection, that
which a temperate man would avoid, and a wise man cannot love.

He that is no fool, but can consider wisely; if he be in love with this world;
we need not despair but that a witty man might reconcile him with tortures, and
make him think charitably of the Rack, and be brought to dwell with Vipers and
Dragons, and entertain his Guests with the shrikes of Mandrakes, Cats and
Scrich Owls, with the filing of iron, and the harshnesse of rending silk; or to
admire the harmony that is made by a herd of Evening wolves when they miss
their draught of blood in their midnight Revels. The groans of a man in a fit
of the stone are worse then all these; and the distractions of a troubled
conscience are worse then those groans; and yet a careless merry sinner is
worse then all that. But if we could from one of the battlements of Heaven
epsy how many men and women at this time lie fainting and dying for want of
bread, how many young men are hewn down by the sword of war; how many poor
Orphans are now weeping over the graves of their Father, by whose life they
were enabled to eat. If we could but hear how many Mariners, and Passengers are
at this present in a storm, and shrike out because their keel dashes against a
Rock, or bulges under them; how many people there are that weep with want, and
are mad with oppression, or are desperate by too quick a sense of a constant
infelicity, in all reason we should be glad to be out of the noise and
participation of so many evils. This is a place of sorrows and tears, of great
evils and a constant calamity; let us remove from hence, at least in affections
and preparation of mind.

CHAP. II. A general preparation toward a holy and blessed Death: by way of
exercise.
SECT. I. Three precepts preparatory to a holy death, to be practiced in our
whole life.
1. HE that would die well must always loook for death, Propera vivere, and
singulo, die, singulas vitas puta Nihil interest inter diem and secu^lum.
every day knocking at the gates of the grave, and then the gates of the grave
shall never prevail upon him to do him mischief. This was the advice of all the
wise and good men of the world; who especially in the days and periods of
their joy and festival egressions chose to throw some ashes into their
chalices, some sober remembrances of their fatal period. Such was the black
shirt of Saladine, Si sap^s, utatis totis Coline diebu,
Extremumque tibi semper adesse putes.
Martial.
the tombstone presented to the Emperor of Constantinople on his Coronation
day; the Bishop of Romes two reeds with flax and wax taper, the Egyptian
skeleton served up at feasts, and Trimalcions banquet in Petronius, in which
was brought in the image of a dead man's bones of silver with spondiles exactly
turning to every of the Guests, and saying to every one, Heu, Heu! nos miseros,
quam totus homuncio nil est
Sic erimus cuncti postquam nos auseret Orcus:
Ergo vivamus dum licet osse, been.

that you, and you must die, and look not one upon another, for every one is
equally concerned in this sad representment. These in phantastic semblances
declare a severe counsel and useful meditation; and it is not easy for a man to
be gay in his imagination, or to be drunk with joy or wine, pride or revenge,
who considers sadly that he must ere long dwell in a house of darkness and
dishonor, and his body must be the inheritance of worms, and his soul must be
what he pleases, even as a man makes it here by his living good or bad. I have
read of a young Hermit who being passionately in love with a young Lady could
not by all the arts of religion and mortification suppress the trouble of that
fancy, till at last being told that she was dead and had been buried about
fourteen days, he went secretly to her Vault, and with the skirt of his mantle
wiped the moisture from the Carcass, and still at the return of his temptation
laid it before him, saying, Behold this is the beauty of the woman thou did
so much desire; and so the man found his cure. And if we make death as present
to us, our own death, dwelling and dressed in all its pomp of fancy and proper
circumstances, if any thing will quench the heats of lust, or the desires of
money, or the greedy passionate affections of this world, this must do it. But
withal, the frequent use of this meditation, by curing our present
inordinations will make death safe and friendly, and by its very custom will
make that the King of terrors shall come to us without his affrighting
dresses; and that we shall sit down in the grave as we compose our selves to
sleep, and do the duties of nature and choice. -- Certe populi quos despicit
Arctos
Felices errore suo, quos ille timorum
Maximus haud urget Lethi metus --
-- Inde ruendi
In ferrum men's prona viris, animaeque capaces
Mortis, and i navum rediturae parcerevitae

The old people that lived near the Riphaean mountains, were taught to converse
with death, and to handle it on all sides and to discourse of it, as of a thing
that will certainly come, and ought so to do. Thence their minds and
resolutions became capable of death, and they thought it a dishonorable thing,
with greediness to keep a life that must go from us, to lay aside its thorns,
and to return again circled with a glory and a Diadem.

2. He that would die well must all the days of his life lay up against the
day of death, not only by the general provisions of holiness and a pious life
indefinitely, Qui quotidie vitae tu^e ma number i^posuit n^n indigettempore. Senec.
but, provisions proper to the necessities of that great day of expense, in
which a man is to throw his last cast for an eternity of joys or sorrows; ever
remembering, that this alone well performed is not enough to pass us into
Paradise, but that alone done foolishly is enough to send us to hell; and the
want of either a holy life, or death, makes a man to fall short of the mighty
price of our high calling. Insere nunc Melibaee pyros, ponc ordine vites.
In order to this rule we are to consider what special graces we shall then
need to exercise, and by the proper arts of the Spirit, by a heap of
proportioned arguments, by prayers, and a great treasure of devotion laid up in
Heaven, provide before hand a reserve of strength and mercy. Men in the course
of their lives walk lazily and incuriously as if they had both their feet in
one shoe, and when they are passively revolved to the time of their dissolution
they have no mercies in store, no patience, no faith, no charity to God, or
despite of the world, being without gust or appetite for the land of their
inheritance, which Christ with so much pain and blood had purchased for them.
When we come to die indeed, we shall be very much put to it to stand firm upon
the two feet of a Christian, faith and patience. When we our selves are to use
the articles, to turn our former discourses into present practice, and to feel
what we never felt before, we shall find it to be quite another thing to be
willing presently to quit this life, and all our present possessions for the
hopes of a thing which we were never suffered to see, and such a thing of which
we may sail so many ways, and of which if we fail any way we are miserable for
ever. Then we shall find how much we have need to have secured the Spirit of
God, and the grace of says by an habitual, perfect unmovable resolution. * The
same also is the case of patience, which will be assaulted with sharp pains,
disturbed fancies, great fears, want of a present mind, natural weaknesses,
frauds of the Devil, and a thousand accidents and imperfections. It concerns us
therefore highly in the whole course of our lives, not only to accustom our
selves to a patient suffering of injuries and affronts, of persecutions and
losses, of cross accidents and unnecessary circumstances; but also by
representing death as present to us, to consider with what arguments then to
fortify our patience; and by assiduous and fervent prayer to God, all our life
long call upon God to give us patience, and great assistances, a strong faith
and a confirmed hope, the Spirit of God, and his Holy Angels assistants at that
time, to resist and to subdue the devils temptations and assaults; and so to
fortify our hearts that it break not into intolerable sorrows and impatience,
and end in wretchlessenesse and infidelity. * But this is to be the work of our
life, and not to be done at once; but as God gives us time by succession, by
parts and little periods. For it is very remarkable that God who gives
plenteously to all creatures, he has scattered the firmament with stars as a
man sowes corn in his fields, in a multitude bigger then the capacities of
humane order; he has made so much variety of creatures, and gives us great
choice of meats and drinks, although any one of both kinds would have served
our needs; and so in all instances of nature; yet in the distribution of our
time, God seems to be strait-handed, and gives it to us, not as Nature gives us
Rivers, enough to drown us, but drop by drop, minute after minute, so that we
never can have two minutes together, but he takes away one when he gives us
another. This should teach us to value our time, since God so values it, and by
his so small distribution of it, tells us, it is the most precious thing we
have. Since therefore in the day of our death, we can have but still the same
little portion of this precious time, let us in every minute of our life, I
mean, in every discernable portion lay up such a stock of reason and good
works, that they may convey a value to the imperfect and shorter actions of our
deathbed; while God rewards the piety of our lives by his gracious acceptance
and benediction, upon the actions preparatory to our deathbed.

3. He that desires to die well and happily, above all things must be careful,
that he do not live a soft, a delicate and voluptuous life; but a life severe,
holy, and under the discipline of the cross; under the conduct of prudence and
observation, a life of warfare and sober counsels, labor and watchfulness. No
man wants cause of tears and a daily sorrow. Let every man consider what he
feels and acknowledge his misery; let him confess his sin and chastise it; let
him bear his cross patiently, and his persecutions nobly, and his repentances
willingly and constantly; let him pity the evils of all the world, and bear his
share of the calamities of his Brother; let him long and sigh for the joys of
Heaven; let him tremble and fear because he has deserved the pains of hell;
let him commute his eternal fear with a temporal suffering, preventing Gods
judgment by passing one of his own; let him groan for the labors of his
pilgrimage, and the dangers of his warfare; and by that time he has summed up
all these labors; and duties, and contingencies, all the proper causes,
instruments and acts of sorrow, he will find, that for a secular joy and
wantonness of spirit, there are not left many void spaces of his life. It was
Saint James's advice; Ch 4. v 9
Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep; let your laughter be turned into mourning,
and your joy into weeping: And Bonaventure in the life of Christ, reports that
the H. Virgin Mother said to S. Elizabeth, That Grace does not descend into the
soul of a man but by prayer and by affliction. Certain it is, that a mourning
spirit, and an afflicted body are great instruments of reconciling God to a
sinner, and they always dwell at the gates of atonement and restitution. Neque
e^nim Deus u^la ^e perinde atque corporis aeru ^na conciliatur. Na^. Orat. 18.
But besides this; a delicate and prosperous life is hugely contrary to the
hopes of a blessed eternity. Woe be to them that are at ease in Sion; so it was
said of old; Amo 6.1 Luke ^. ^5 Mat. 5.4
and our B. Lord said, Woe be to you that laugh, for you shall weep: but Blessed
are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Here or hereafter we must
have our portion of sorrows. Psa 1:6.6.
He that now goes on his way weeping and bears forth good seed with him,
shall doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaves with him. And
certainly, he that sadly considers the portion of Dives, and remembers that the
account which Abraham gave him for the unavoidablenesse of his torment, was
because he had his good things in this life, must in all reason, with trembling
run from a course of banquets, and faring deliciously every day, as being a
dangerous estate, and a consignation to an evil greater then all danger, the
pains and torment of unhappy souls. If either by patience or repentance, by
compassion or persecution, by choice or by conformity, by severity or
discipline, we allay the festival follies of a soft life, and profess under
the Cross of Christ, we shall more willingly and more safely enter into our
grave: But the deathbed of a voluptuous man upbraids his little and cosening
prosperities, and exacts pains made -- Sed longi poenas fortuna favoris
Exigit a misero, qu^e ^anto pondere famae
Res prea it adversas, fatisque prioribus urget. Lucan. l. 8

sharper by the passing from soft beds, and a softer mind. He that would die
holily and happily, must in this world love tears, humility, solitude and
repentance.

SECT. II. Of daily examination of our actions, in the whole course of our
health, preparatory to our deathbed.
HE that will die well and happily, must dress his soul by a diligent and
frequent scrutiny: He must perfectly understand, and watch the state of his
soul; he must set his house in order before he be fit to die. And for this
there is great reason, and great necessity.

Reasons for a daily examination.
1. For if we consider the disorders of every day, the multitude of impertinent
words, the great portions of time spent in vanity, the daily omissions of duty,
the coldness of our prayers, the indifference of our spirit in holy things,
the uncertainty of our secret purposes, our infinite deceptions and hypocrisy,
sometimes not known, very often not observed by our selves; our want of
charity, our not knowing in how many degrees of action and purpose every virtue
is to be exercised, the secret adherencies of pride, and too forward
complacencie in our best actions, our failings in all our relations, the
niceties of difference between some virtues and some vices, the secret
undiscernable passages from lawful to unlawful in the first instances of
change, the perpetual mistakings of permissions for duty, and licentious
practices for permissions, our daily abusing the liberty that God gives us, our
unsuspected sins in the managing a course of life certainly lawful, our little
greedinesses in eating, our surprises in the proportions of our drinkings, our
too great freedoms and fondnesses in lawful loves, our aptness for things
sensual, and our deadness and tediousness of spirit in spiritual employments,
besides infinite variety of cases of conscience that do occur in the life of
every man, and in all entercourses of every life, and that the productions of
sin are numerous and increasing, like the families of the Northern people, or
the genealogies of the first Patriarks of the world; from all this we shall
find that the computations of a man's life are buisie as the Tables of Signs
and Tangents, and intricate as the accounts of Eastern Merchants: and therefore
it were but reason we should sum up our accounts at the foot of every page, I
mean, that we call our selves to scrutiny every night when we compose our
selves to the little images of Death.

2. For if we make but one General account, and never reckon till we die,
either we shall only reckon by great sums, and remember nothing but
clamorous and crying sins, and never consider concerning particulars, or forget
very many; or if we could consider all that we ought, we must needs be
confounded with the multitude and variety. But if we observe all the little
passages of our life, and reduce them into the order of accounts and
accusations, we shall find them multiply so fast, that it will not only
appear to be an ease to the accounts of our deathbed, but by the instrument of
shame will restrain the inundation of evils; it being a thing intolerable to
humane modesty to see sins increase so fast, and virtues grow up so slow; to
see every day stained with the spots of leprosy, or sprinkled with the marks
of a lesser evil.

3. It is not intended, we should take accounts of our lives only to be
thought religious, but that we may see our evil and amend it, that we dash our
sins against the stones, that we may go to God, and to a spiritual Guide, and
search for remedies and apply them. And indeed no man can well observe his own
grows in Grace, but by accounting seldomer returns of sin, and a more
frequent victory over temptations; concerning which every man makes his
observations according as he makes his inquiries and search after himself: In
order to this it was, that Saint Paul wrote; Before receiving the Holy
Sacrament Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat. This precept was given
in those days when they communicated every day, and therefore a daily
examination also was intended.

4. And it will appear highly fitting, if we remember that at the day of
judgment, no only the greatest lines of life, but every branch and
circumstance of every action, every word, and thought shall be called to
scrutiny and severe judgment; insomuch that it was a great truth which one
said; Woe be to the most Innocent life if God should search into it, without
mixtures of mercy. And therefore we are here to follow S. Paul's advice; Judge
your selves and you shall not be judged of the Lord. The way to prevent Gods
anger is to be angry with our selves, and by examining our actions and
condemning the Criminal, by being Assessors in Gods Tribunal, at least we shall
obtain the favor of the Court. As therefore, every night we must make our bed
the memorial of our grave, so let our Evening thoughts be an image of the day
of judgment.

5. This advice was so reasonable and proper instrument of virtue, that it was
taught even to the Scholars of Pythagoras by their Master: Let not sleep seiz
upon the Regions of your senses, before you have three times recalled the
conversation and accidents of the day:Examine what you have committed against
the Divine Law, what you have omitted of your duty, and in what you have made
use of the Divine Grace to the purposes of virtue and religion, Hierocl.
joining the Judge reason to the legislative mind or conscience, that God may
reign there as a Lawgiver and a Judge. Then Christ's kingdom is set up in our
hearts; then we always live in the Eye of our Judge, and live by the measures
of reason, religion, and sober counsels.

The benefits we shall receive by practicing this advice, in order to a blessed
death, will also add to the account of reason and fair inducements.

The Benefits of this exercise.
1. By a daily examination of our actions we shall the easier cure a great sin
and prevent its arrival to become habitual. For [ to examine] we suppose to be
a relative duty and isntrumental to something else. We examine our selves that
we may find out our failings, and cure them: and therefore if we use our
remedy when the wound is fresh and bleeding, we shall find the cure more
certain, and less painful. For so a Taper when its crown of flames is newly
blown off, retains a nature so symbolical to light, that it will with
greediness reenkindle and snatch a ray from the neighbor fire: So is the soul
of Man, when it is newly fallen into sin; although God be angry with it, and
the state of Gods favor, and its own graciousnesse is interrupted, yet the
habit is not naturally changed; and still God leaves some roots of virtue
standing, and the Man is modest, or apt to be made ashamed, and he is not grown
a bold sinner; but if he sleeps on it, and returns again to the same sin, and
by degrees grows in love with it, and gets the custom, and the strangeness
of it is taken away, then it is his Master, and is sweld into a heap, and is
abetted by use, and corroborated by newly entertained principles, and is
insinuated into his Nature, and has possessed his affections, and tainted the
will and the understanding; and by this time a man is in the state of a
decaying Merchant, his accounts are so great, and so intricate, and so much in
arrear, that to examine it will be but to represent the particulars of his
calamity: therefore they think it better to pull the napkin before their eyes,
then to stare upon the circumstances of their death.

2. A daily, or frequent examination of the parts of our life will interrupt
the proceeding, and hinder the journey of little sins into a heap. For many
days do not pass the best persons in which they have not many idle words, or
vainer thoughts to sully the fair whiteness of their souls: Some indiscreet
passions, or trifling purposes, some impertinent discontents, or unhandsome
usages of their own persons or their dearest Relatives. And though God is not
extreme to mark what is done amiss, and therefore puts these upon the accounts
of his Mercy, and the title of the Cross, yet in two cases, these little sins
combine and cluster; and we know that grapes were once in so great a bunch,
that one cluster was the load of two men: that is, 1. When either we are in
love with small sins; or 2. When they proceed from a careless and incurious
spirit into frequency and continuance. For so the smallest atoms that dance in
all the little cells of the world, are so trifling and immaterial that they
cannot trouble an eye, nor vex the tenderest part of a wound where a barbed
arrow dwelt; yet when by their infinite numbers (as Melissa and Parmenides
affirm) they danced first into order, then into little bodies, at last they
made the matter of the world: So are the little indiscretions of our life; they
are always inconsiderable if they be considered, and contemptible if they be
not despised, and God does not regard them if we do. We may easily keep them
asunder by our daily or nightly thoughts, and prayers, and severe sentences:
But even the least sand can check the tumultuous pride, and become a limit to
the Sea, when it is in a heap and in united multitudes; but if the wind scatter
and divide them, the little drops and the vainer froth of the water begins to
invade the Strand. Our sighs can scatter such little offenses; but then, be
sure to breath such accents frequently, least they knot, and combine, and grow
big as the shore, and we perish in sand, Ecclus. 1^.1.
in trifling instances. He that despises little things, shall perish by little
and little. So said the son of Sirach.

3. A frequent examination of our actions will intenerate and soften our
consciences, so that they shall be impatient of any rudeness or heavier load:
Qui levi comminatione pellitur, non opus est ut fortitudine and armis
invadatur. Senec.
And he that is used to shrink when he is pressed with a branch of twining
Osier, will not willingly stand in the ruins of a house, when the beam dashes
upon the pavement. And, provided that our nice and tender spirit be not vexed
into scruple, nor the scruple turn into unreasonable fears, nor the fears into
superstition; he that by any arts can make his spirit tender, and apt for
religious impressions, has made the fairest seat for religion, and the
unaptest and uneasiest entertainment for sin, and eternal death, in the whole
world.

4. A frequent examination of the smallest parts of our lives is the best
instrument to make our repentance particular, and a fit remedy to all the
members of the whole body of sin. For our examination put off to our deathbed
of necessity brings us into this condition, that very many thousands of our
sins must be (or not be at al) washed off with a general repentance; which the
more general and indefinite it is, it is ever so much the worse: And if he that
repents the longest and the oftnest, and upon the most instances, is still
during his whole life, but an imperfect penitent, and there are very many
reserves left to be wiped off by Gods mercies, and to be eased by collateral
assistances, or to be groaned for at the terrible day of judgment; it will be
but a sad story to consider, that the sins of a whole life, or of very great
portions of it, shall be put upon the remedy of one examination, and the
advices of one discourse, and the activities of a decayed body, and a weak and
an amazed Spirit. Let us do the best we can, we shall find that the mere sins
of ignorance, and unavoidable forgetfulness will be enough to be entrusted to
such a bank, and that if a general repentance will serve toward their
expiation, it will be an infinite mercy: but we have nothing to warrant our
confidence, if we shall think it to be enough on our deathbed to confess the
notorious actions of our lives, (and to say [ The Lord be merciful to me for
the infinite transgressions of my life, which I have wilfully or carelessly
forgot] for very many of which, the repentance, the distinct, particular,
circumstantiate repentance of a whole life would have been too little, if we
could have done more.

5. After the enumeration of these advantanges I shall not need to add that if
we decline or refuse to call our selves frequently to account, and to use daily
advices concerning the state of our souls, it is a very ill sign, that our
souls are not right with God, or that they do not dwell in religion. But this I
shall say, that they who do use this exercise frequently will make their
conscience much at ease by casting out a daily load of humor and surfeit, the
matter of diseases and the instruments of death. He that does not frequently
search his conscience, is a house without a window, and like a wild untutored
son of a fond and undiscerning widow.

But if this exercise seem too great a trouble, and that by such advices,
religion will seem a burden, I have two things to oppose against it.

1. One is; that we had better ^ear the burden of the Lord, then the burden of
a base and polluted conscience. Religion cannot be so great a trouble as a
guilty soul; and whatsoever trouble can be fancied in this or any other action
of religion, it is only to unexperienced persons. It may be a trouble at
first, El^ge vitam optimam, consuetudo faciet jucundissimam. Senec.
just as is every change, and every new accident: but if you do it frequently
and accustom your spirit to it, as the custom will make it easy, so the
advantages will make it delectable; that will make it facile as nature, these
will make it as pleasant and eligible as reward.

2. The other thing I have to say is this: That to examine our lives will be no
trouble if we do not intricate it with businesses of the world, and the
Labyrinths of care and impertinent affairs. Securae and quierae mentiae est in
omnes vitae parte^ discurrere; occupatorum animi velut sub ^^go sunt, respicere
non possunt. Seneca.
A man had need have a quiet and disintangled life, who comes to search into
all his actions, and to make judgment concerning his errors and his needs, his
remedies and his hopes. They that have great intrigues of the world, have a
yoke upon their necks, and cannot look back; and he that covets many things
greedily, and snatches at high things ambitiously, that despises his Neighbor
proudly, and bears his crosses peevishly, or his prosperity impotently and
passionately; he that is prodigal of his precious time, and is tenacious and
retentive of evil purposes, is not a man disposed to this exercise, he has
reason to be afraid of his own memory, and to dash his glass in pieces,
because it must needs represent to his own eyes an intolerable deformity. He
therefore that resolves to live well whatsoever it costs him; he that will go
to Heaven at any rate, shall best tend this duty by neglecting the affairs of
the world, in all things where prudently he may. But if we do otherwise, we
shall find that the accounts of our deathbed and the examination made by a
disturbed understanding will be very empty of comfort and full of
inconveniences.

6. For hence it comes that men dye so timorously, and uncomfortably, as if
they were forced out of their lives by the violencies of an executioner. Then,
without much examination they remember how wickedly they have lived, without
religion, against the laws of the covenant of grace, without God in the world;
then they see sin goes off like an amazed, wounded, affrighted person from a
lost battle, without honor, without a veil, with nothing but shame and sad
remembrances. Then they can consider that if they had lived virtuously, all the
trouble and objection of that would now be past, and all that had remained
should be peace and joy, and all that good which dwells within the house of
God, and eternal life. But now they find they have done amiss and dealt
wickedly, they have no bank of good works, but a huge treasure of wrath, and
they are going to a strange place, and what shall be their lot is uncertain;
(so they say, when they would comfort and flatter themselves) but in truth of
religion their portion is sad and intolerable, without hope, and without
refreshment* and they must use little silly arts, to make them go off from
their stage of sins with some handsome circumstances of opinion: They will in
civility be abused that they may die quietly, and go decently to their
execution, and leave their friends indifferently contented, and apt to be
comforted, and by that time they are gone awhile, they see that they deceived
themselves all their days, and were by others deceived at last.

Let us make it our own case; we shall come to that state and period of
condition, in which we shall be infinitely comforted, if we have lived well, er
else be amazed and go off trembling, because we are guilty of heaps of
unrepented and unforsaken sins. It may happen we shall not then understand it
so, because most men of late ages have been abused with false principles, and
they are taught (or they are willing to believe) that a little thing is enough
to save them, and that heaven is so cheap a purchase, that it will fall upon
them whether they will or no. The misery of it is, they will not suffer
themselves to be confuted, till it be too late to recant their error. In the
interim, they are impatient to be examined, as a leper is of a comb, and are
greedy of the world, as children of raw fruit; and they hate a severe reproof,
as they do thorns in their beds; and they love to lay aside religion, as a
drunken person does to forget his sorrow; and all the way they dream of fine
things, and their dreams prove contrary, and become the hieroglyphics of an
eternal sorrow. The daughter of Polycrates dreamed that her Father was lifted
up, and that Jupiter washed him and the Sun anointed him; but it proved to him
but a sad prosperity: for after a long life of constant prosperous successes he
was surprised by his enemies, and hanged up till the dew of heaven wet his
cheeks, and the Sun melted his grease. Such is the condition of those persons
who living either in the despite, or in the neglect of religion, lie wallowing
in the drunkenness of prosperity, or worldly cares; they think themselves to
be exalted, till the evil day overtakes them; and then they can expound their
dream of life to end in a sad and hopeless death. I remember that Cleomenes
that was called a God by the Egyptians, because when he was hanged, a serpent
grew out of his body, and wrapped it self about his head, till the Philosophers
of Egypt said, it was natural that from the marrow of some bodies such
productions should arise: and indeed it represents the condition of some men,
who being dead are esteemed saints and beatified persons when their head is
encircled with dragons, and is entered into the possession of Devils, that old
serpent and deceiver; For indeed their life was secretly so corrupted, that
such serpents fed upon the ruins of the spirit, and the decays of grace and
reason. To be cosened in making judgments concerning our final condition is
extremely easy, but if we be cosened, we are infinitely miserable.

SECT. III. Of exercising Charity, during our whole life.
HE that would die well and happily must in his life time according to all his
capacities exercise charity; and because Religion is the life of the soul, and
charity is the life of religion, Respice quid prodest praesenti^ temporis aevum,
Omne quod est, nihil est, praeter amare Deum.

the same which gives life to the better part of man which never dies, may
obtain of God a mercy to the inferior part of man in the day of its
dissolution.

1. Charity is the great chanel through which God passes all his mercy upon
mankind. For we receive absolution of our sins in proportion to our forgiving
our brother: this is the rule of our hopes, and the measure of our desire in
this world; and in the day of death and judgment the great sentence upon
mankind shall be transacted according to our alms, which is the other part of
Charity. Certain it is that God cannot, will not, Quod expendi habui,
Quod donavi habeo,
Quod negavi punior,
Quod servavi perdidi.

never did reject a charitable man in his greatest needs, and in his most
passionate prayers; for God himself is love, and every degree of charity that
dwells in us, is the participation of the divine nature; and therefore when
upon our deathbed, a cloud covers our heads, and we are enwrapped with sorrow;
when we feel the weight of a sickness, and do not feel the refreshing
visitations of Gods loving kindness; when we have many things to trouble us,
and looking round about us, we see no comforter; then call to mind what
injuries you have forgiven, how apt you were to pardon all affronts and real
persecutions? how you embraced peace when it was offered you? how you followed
after peace, when it run from you? and when you are weary of one side, turn
upon the other; and remember the alms, that by the grace of God, and his
assistances you have done, and look up to God, and with the eye of faith behold
him coming in the cloud, and pronouncing the sentence of dooms day according to
his mercies and thy charity.

2. Charity with its Twin-daughters, alms and forgiveness is especially
effectual for the procuring Gods mercies in the day and the manner of our
death: alms deliver from death, said old Tobias, Tob. 4.10 and 12.9.
and alms make an atonement for sins, said the son of Sirach: Ecclus. 2.30.
and so said Daniel, Dan. 4.
and so say all the wise men of the world. 1 Pet. 4.8
And in this sense also is that of S. Peter, Love covers a multitude of sins;
Isai 1.17.
and Lib. 7. cap. 13. (...).
S. Clement in his Constitutions gives this counsel; If you have any thing in
your hands, give it that it may work to the remission of thy sins; for by faith
and alms sins are purged. The same also is the counsel of Salvi^n, who wonders
that men who are guilty of great and many sins, will not work out their pardon
by alms and mercy. But this also must be added out of the words of Lactantius,
who makes this rule complete and useful; But think not, that because sins are
taken away by alms, that by thy money thou may purchase a license to sin.
For sins are abolished, if because thou have sinned thou give to God, that
is, Agere autem poenitentiam nihil aliud est quam pronteri and affirmare se non
ulterius peccaturum.
to Gods poor servants and his indigent, necessitous creature: But if thou
sinnest upon confidence of giving, thy sins are not abolished. For God desires
infinitely that men should be purged from their sins, and therefore commands us
to repent, But to repent is nothing else, but to profess and affirm (that is,
to purpose and to make good that purpose) that they will sin no more.

Now alms are therefore effective to the abolition and pardon of our sins,
because they are preparatory to, and impetratory of the grace of repentance,
Orat 2. de poenitentia.
and are fruits of repentance; and therefore S. Chrysostom affirms, that
repentance without alms is dead, and without wings, and can never soar upwards
to the element of love. But because they are a part of repentance, and hugely
pleasing to Almighty God, Nunquam memmi melegisse mala morte mortuum qui
libenter opera charitatis exercuit. ad Nepo.
therefore they deliver us from the evils of an unhappy and accursed death; for
so Christ delivered his Disciples from the sea, when he appeased the storm,
though they still sailed in the chanel: and this S. Hierome verifies with all
his reading and experience, saying, I do not remember to have read, that ever
any charitable person died an evil death: and although a long experience has
observed Gods mercies to descend upon charitable people like the dew upon
Gideons fleece when all the world was dry, yet for this also, we have a
promise, which is, not only an argument of a certain number of years (as
experience is) but a security for eternal ages. Luke 16.9. (...).
Make ye friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail they may
receive you into everlasting habitations: When faith fails, and chastity is
useless, and temperance shall be no more, then charity shall bear you upon
wings of cherubins, to the eternal mountain of the Lord. I have been a lover
of mankind, and a friend, and merciful, and now I expect to communicate in
that great kindness which he shows, that is, the great God and Father of men
and mercies: said Cyrus the Persian, on his deathbed.

I do not mean this should only be a deathbed charity, any more then a
deathbed repentance; but it ought to be the charity of our life, and
healthful years; Da dum tempus habes, tibi propria sit manus haeres;
Auferet hoc nemo quod ^abis ipse Deo. Goner in voce adamant.

a parting with portions of our goods then, when we can keep them: we must not
first kindle our lights, when we are to descend into our houses of darkness,
or bring a glaring torch suddenly to a dark room, that will amaze the eye and
not delight it, or instruct the body; but if our Tapers have in their constant
course descended into their grave crowned all the way with light, then let the
deathbed charity be doubled, and the light burn brightest when it is to deck
our hearse. But concerning this I shall afterward give account.

SECT. IV. General considerations to enforce the former practices.
THese are the general instruments of preparation, Quod ^aepe fieri non potest
fiat diu.
in order to a holy death. It will concern us all to use them diligently and
speedily; for we must be long in doing that which must be done but once; Senec.
and therefore we must begin betimes, and lose no time; especially since it is
so great a venture, and upon it depends so great a state. Seneca said well,
Nullius rei quam vivere difficilior est scientia. Professores aliarum artium
vulgo multique sunt. Senec.
There is no Science or Art in the world so hard as to live and die well: The
professors of other arts are vulgar and many, but he that knows how to do this
business is certainly instructed to eternity. But then let me remember this,
that a wise person will also put most upon the greatest interest. Common
prudence will teach us this. No man will hire a General to cut wood, or shake
hay with a Scepter, or spend his soul and all his faculties upon the purchase
of a cockleshell; Nunc ratio nulla est restan di nulla facultas Aeternas
quoniam po^na in ^orte ti^endum. Luc^et.
but he will fit instruments to the dignity and exigence of the design; and
therefore since heaven is so glorious a state, and so certainly designed for
us, if we please, let us spend all that we have, all our passions and
affections, all our study and industry, all our desires and stratagems, all our
witty and ingenuous faculties toward the arriving thither, whither if we do
come, every minute will infinitely pay for all the troubles of our whole life:
Virtutem videant, intabe^cantque relicta.
If we do not, we shall have the reward of fools, an unpitied and an upbraided
misery.

To this purpose I shall represent the state of dying and dead men in the
devout words of some of the Fathers of the Church, whose sense I shall exactly
keep; but change their order, that by placing some of their dispersed
meditations into a chain, or sequel of discourse, I may with their precious
stones make an Union, and compose them into a jewel; for though the meditation
is plain and easy, yet it is affectionate, and material, and true, and
necessary.

The circumstances of a dying man's sorrow and danger.
When the sentence of death is decreed, and begins to be put in execution, it
is sorrow enough to see or feel respectively the sad accidents of the agony,
and last contentions of the soul, and the reluctancies and unwillingnesses of
the body. The forehead washed with a new and stranger baptism, besmeared with
a cold sweat, tenacious and clammy, apt to make it cleave to the roof of his
coffin; the nose cold and undiscerning, not pleased with perfumes, Nilus.
nor suffering violence with a cloud of unwholesome smoke; the eyes dim as a
sullied mirror, or the face of heaven, when God shows his anger in a prodigious
storm; the feet cold, the hands stiff, the Physicians despairing, our friends
weeping, the rooms dressed with darkness and sorrow, and the exterior parts
betraying what are the violences which the soul and spirit suffer; S. Basil.
the nobler part like the lord of the house, being assaulted by exterior
rudenesses, and driven from all the outworks; at last, faint and weary, with
short and frequent breathings, interrupted with the longer accents of sighs,
without moisture, but the excrescencies of a spilt humor, when the pitcher is
broken at the cisterne; it retires to its last sort, the heart, whither it is
pursued and stormed, and beaten out, as when the barbarous Thracian sacked the
glory of the Grecian Empire. Then calamity is great, and sorrow rules in all
the capacities of man: then the mourners weep, because it is civil, or because
they need thee, or because they fear, but who suffers for thee with a
compassion sharp as is thy pain? Then the noise is like the faint echo of a
distant valley, and few hear, and they will not regard thee, who seem like
a person void of understanding, and of a departing interest. Vere tremendum est
mortis sacramentum. But these accidents are common to all that die, and when a
special providence shall distinguish them, they shall die with easy
circumstances; but as no piety can secure it, so must no confidence expect it,
but wait for the time, and accept the manner of the dissolution. But that which
distinguishes them is this.

He that has lived a wicked life, if his conscience be alarmed, and that he
does not die like a Wolf, or a Tigre without sense or remorse of all his
wildness, and his injury, his beastly nature, and desert, and untilled
manners, if he have but sense of what he is going to suffer, or what he may
expect to be his portion, then we may imagine the terror of their abused
fancies, how they see affrighting shapes, and because they fear them, they feel
the gripes of Devils, urging the unwilling souls from the kinder and fast
embraces of the body, calling to the grave, and hasting to judgment,
exhibiting great bills of uncancelled crimes, awaking and amazing the
conscience, breaking all their hope in pieces, and making faith useless and
terrible, because the malice was great and the charity was none at all. S.
Chrysostomus.
Then they look for some to have pity on them, but there is no man. No man
dares be their pledge, No man can redeem their soul, which now feels what it
never feared. Then the tremblings and the sorrow, the memory of the past sin,
and the fear of future pains, and the sense of an angry God, and the presence
of some Devils consigne him to the eternal company of all the damned and
accursed spirits: Ephraem Syrus.
then they want an Angel for their guide, and the Holy Spirit for their
comforter, and a good conscience for their testimony, and Christ for their
Advocate, and they die and are left in prisons of earth or air, in secret and
undiscerned regions to weep and tremble, and infinitely to fear the coming of
the day of Christ; at which time they shall be brought forth to change their
condition into a worse, where they shall for ever feel more then we can believe
or understand.

But when a good man dies; one that has lived innocently or made joy in Heaven
at his timely and effective repentance, and in whose behalf the Holy Jesus has
interceded prosperously, and for whose interest the Spirit makes
interpellations with groans and sighs unutterable, and in whose defense the
Angels drive away the Devils on his deathbed, because his sins are pardoned,
and because he resisted the Devil in his life time, and fought successefully,
and persevered unto the end, then the joys break forth through the clouds of
sickness, and the conscience stands upright, and confesses the glories of God,
and owns so much integrity that it can hope for pardon, and obtain it too: Then
the sorrows of the sickness, and the flames of the Fever, or the faintness
of the consumption do but untye the soul from its chain, and let it go forth,
first into liberty, and then to glory; for it is but for a little while that
the face of the sky was black, like the preparations of the night, but quickly
the cloud torn and rent, the violence of thunder parted it into little
portions, that the Sun might look forth with a watery eye, and then shine
without a tear; but it is an infinite refreshment to remember all the comforts
of his prayers, the frequent victory over his temptations, the mortification of
his lust, the noblest sacrifice to God in which he most delights, that we have
given him our wills, and killed our appeti^es for the interest of his services;
then all the trouble of that is gone, and what remains is a portion in the
inheritance of Jesus, of which he now talks no more as a thing at distance, but
is entering into the possession. When the veil is rent, and the prison doors are
open at the presence of Gods Angel, S. Martyrius. S. Eustratius Martyr.
the soul goes forth full of hope, sometimes with evidence, but always with
certainty in the thing, and instantly it passes into the throngs of Spirits,
where Angles meet it singing, and the Devils flock with malicious and vile
purposes, desiring to lead it away with them into their houses of sorrow; there
they see things which they never saw, and hear voices which they never heard:
There the Devils charge them with many sins; And the Angels remember that
themselves rejoiced when they were repented of. Then the Devils aggravate and
describe all the circumstances of the sin, and add calumnies, and the Angels
bear the soul forward still, because their Lord does answer for them: Then the
Devils rage and gnash their teeth: Chrysostomus.
they see the soul chaste and pure, and they are ashamed; they see it penitent,
and they despair; they perceive that the tongue was restrained and sanctified,
and then hold their peace: Then the soul passes forth and rejoices, passing by
the Devils in scorn and triumph, being securely carried into the bosom of the
Lord, where they shall rest till their crowns are finished, and their mansions
are prepared, and then they shall feast and sing, rejoice and worship for
(...). Philo.
ever and ever. Fearful and formidable to unholy persons is the first meeting
with spirits in their separation. But the victory which holy souls receive by
the mercies of Jesus Christ, and the conduct of Angels is a joy that we must
not understand till we feel it: and yet such which by an early and a
persevering piety we may secure: but let us enquire after it no further,
because it is secret.

CHAP. III. Of the state of sickness, and the temptations incident to it with
their proper remedies.
SECT. I. Of the state of sickness.
ADams sin brought death into the world, and man did die the same day in which
he sinned, according as God had threatened: He did not die, as death is taken
for a separation of soul and body; that is not death properly; but the ending
of the last act of death: just as a man is said to be born, when he ceases any
longer to be born in his mothers womb. But whereas to man was intended a life
long and happy, without sickness, sorrow or infelicity, and this life should
be lived here or in a better place, and the passage from one to the other
should have been easy, safe and pleasant, now that man sinned, he fell from
that state to a contrary.

If Adam had stood he should not always have lived in this world; for this
world was not a place capable of giving a dwelling to all those myriads of men
and women which should have been born in all the generations of infinite and
eternal ages; for so it must have been, if man had not dyed at all, nor yet
have removed hence at all: Neither is it likely that man's innocence should have
lost to him all possibility of going thither, where the duration is better,
measured by a better time, subject to fewer changes, and which is now the
reward of a returning virtue, which in all natural senses is less then
innocence, save that it is heightened by Christ to an equality of acceptance
with the state of innocence: But so it must have been, that his innocence
should have been punished with an eternal confinement to this state, which in
all reason is the less perfect, the state of a traveller, not of one possessed
of his inheritance. It is therefore certain Man should have changed his abode:
for so did Enoch, and so did Elias, and so shall all the world that shall be
alive at the day of judgment: They shall not die, but they shall change their
place, and their abode, their duration and their state, and all this without
death.

That death therefore which God threatened to Adam and which passed upon his
posterity, is not the going out of this world, but the manner of going. If he
had staid in innocence, he should have gone from hence placidly, and fairly,
Prima quae vitam dedit, hora carpsit. Hercul. Tur.
without vexatious and afflictive circumstances; he should not have dyed by
sickness, misfortune, defect, or unwillingnesse; but when he fell, then he
began to die; the same day, (so said God:) and that must needs be true: and
therefore it must mean, that upon that very day he fell into an evil and
dangerous condition; a state of change and affliction; Nascentes me^ rimur
sinisque ab origin pendet. Manil.
then death began, that is, the man began to die by a natural diminution, and
aptness to disease and misery. His first state was and should have been (so
long as it lasted) a happy duration; His second was a daily and miserable
change; and this was the dying properly.

This appears in the great instance of damnation, which in the style of
Scripture is called eternal death; not because it kills or ends the duration;
it has not so much good in it; but because it is a perpetual infelicity,
Change or separation of soul and body is but accidental to death. Death may be
with, or without either: but the formality, the curse and the sting of death,
that is, misery, sorrow, fear, diminution, defect, anguish, dishonor, and
whatsoever is miserable, and afflictive in nature, that is death: death is not
an action, but a whole state and condition; and this was first brought in upon
us by the offense of one man.

But this went no further then thus to subject us to temporal infelicity. If it
had proceeded so as was supposed, Man had been much more miserable; for man had
more then one original sin in this sense: and though this death entered first
upon us by Adams fault, yet it came nearer unto us, and increased upon us by
the sins of more of our forefathers. For Adams sin left us in strength enough
to contend with humane calamities for almost a thousand years together. But the
sins of his children, our forefathers, took off from us half the strength about
the time of the flood; and then from 500. to 250. and from thence to 120. and
from thence to threescore and ten, so halfing it, till it is almost come to
nothing. But by the sins of men in the several generations of the world, death,
that is, misery and disease, is hastened so upon us, that we are of a
contemptible age; and because we are to die by suffering evils, and by the
daily lessening of our strength and health; this death is so long a doing, that
it makes so great a part of our short life useless and unserviceable, that we
have not time enough to get the perfection of a single manufacture; but ten or
twelve generations of the world must go to the making up of one wise man, or
one excellent Art: and in the succession of those ages, there happens so many
changes and interruptions, so many wars and violencies, that seven years
fighting sets a whole Kingdom back in learning and virtue, to which they were
creeping, it may be, a whole age.

And thus also we do evil to our posterity, as Adam did to his, and Cham did to
his, and Eli to his, and all they to theirs, who by sins caused God to shorten
the life, and multiply the evils of mankind: and for this reason it is, the
world grows worse and worse, because so many original sins are multiplied, and
so many evils from Parents descend upon the succeeding generations of men, that
they derive nothing from us but original misery.

But he who restored the law of Nature, did also restore us to the condition of
Nature; which being violated by the introduction of death, Christ then repaired
when he suffered and overcame death for us: that is, he has taken away the
unhappiness of sickness, and the sting of death, and the dishonours of the
grave, of dissolution and weakness, of decay and change; and has turned them
into acts of favor, into instances of comfort, into opportunities of virtue;
Christ has now knit them into rosaries, and coronets, he has put them into
promises and rewards, he has made them part of the portion of his elect; they
are instruments, and earnests, and securities, and passages to the greatest
perfection of humane nature, and the Divine promises. So that it is possible
for us now to be reconciled to sickness; It came in by sin, and therefore is
cured when it is turned into virtue; and although it may have in it the
uneasinesse of labor, yet it will not be uneasy as sin, or the restlessenesse
of a discomposed conscience: If therefore we can well manage our state of
sickness, that we may not fall by pain, as we usually do by pleasure, we need
not fear; for no evil shall happen to us.

SECT. II. Of the first temptation proper to the state of sickness; Impatience.
MEn that are in health are severe exactors of patience at the hands of them
that are sick, and they usually judge it not by terms of relation, between God
and the suffering man; but between him and the friends that stand by the
bedside. It will be therefore necessary that we truly understand to what
duties and actions the patience of a sick man ought to extend.

1. Sighs and groans, sorrow and prayers, humble complaints, and dolorous
expressions are the sad accents of a sick man's language; Biulatu, questu,
gemitu, fremitibus reso nando multum flebiles voces ^efert. Cic. sus^
for it is not to be expected that a sick man should act a part of patience
with a countenance like an Orator, or grave like a Dramatick person. It were
well if all men could bear an exterior decency in their sickness, and
regulate their voice, their face, their discourse, and all their circumstances
by the measures, and proportions of comeliness and satisfaction to all the
standers by. But this would better please them then assist him; the sick man
would do more good to others, then he would receive to himself.

2. Therefore, silence and still composures, and not complaining, are no parts
of a sick man's duty; they are not necessary parts of patience: Conesd^ndu^ es^
gementi.
We find that David roared for the very disquietnesse of his sickness; and he
lay chattering like a swallow, and his throat was dry with calling for help
upon his God. That's the proper voice of sickness; and certain it is, that the
proper voices of sickness are expressly vocal, and petitory in the ears of
God, and call for pity in the same accent, as the cries and oppressions of
Widows and Orphans do for vengeance upon their persecutors, though they say no
Collect against them. For there is the voice of man, and there is the voice of
the disease, and God hears both; And the louder the disease speaks, there is
the greater need of mercy and pity, and therefore God will the sooner hear it.
Abels blood had a voice and cried to God, and humility has a voice and cries
so loud to God, that it pierces the clouds; and so has every sorrow, and every
sickness: and when a man cries out, and complains but according to the
sorrows of his pain, -- Flagrantior aequo Non debet dolor esse viri nec
vulnere major. ^u. Sat. 13.
it cannot be any part of a culpable impatience, but an argument for pity.

3. Some senses are so subtle, and their perceptions so quick and full of
relish, and their spirits so active, that the same load is double upon them, to
what it is to another person; and therefore comparing the expressions of the
one to the silence of the other, a different judgment cannot be made
concerning their patience: Some natures are querulous, and melancholy, and
soft, and nice, and tender, and weeping, and expressive; others are sullen,
dull, without apprehension, apt to tolerate and carry burdens; and the
crucifixion of our Blessed Savior falling upon a delicate and virgin body, of
curious temper, and strict, equal composition, was naturally more full of
torment then that of the ruder thieves, whose proportions were course^ and
uneven.

4. In this case it was no imprudent advice which Cicero gave: Nothing in the
world is more amiable then an even temper in our whole life, Omnino si qu equ^m
est do (...) nihil est pro^ero (...), qua (...) singularium (...): quam (...)
con e^vare non nossis si^a io^um naturam imitans (...).
and in every action: but this evennesse cannot be kept unless every man
follows his own nature, without striving to i^itate the circumstances of
another: and what is so in the thing it self, ought to be so in our judgments
concerning the things. We must not call any one impatient if he be not silent
in a fever as if he were asleep, or as if he were dull, as Herod's son of
Athens.

5. Nature in some cases has made cryings out, and exclamations to be an
entertainment of the spirit, and an abatement or diversion of the pain. For so
did the old champions when they threw their fatal nets that they might load
their enemy with the snares and weights of death, they groaned aloud,
Quiaprofundenda voce omne corpus intenditur venitque plaga vehementior. Cic.
Tusc
and sent forth the anguish of their spirit into the eyes and heart of the man
that stood against them: so it is in the endurance of some sharp pains, the
complaints and shrikings, the sharp groans, and the tender accents send forth
the afflicted spirits and force a way that they may ease their oppression and
their load, that when they have spent some of their sorrows, by a sally sorth,
they may return better able to fortify the heart. Nothing of this is a
certain sign, much less an action or part of impatience; and when our blessed
Savior suffered his last, and sharpest pang of sorrow, he cried out with a
loud voice, and resolved to die, and did so.

SECT. III. Constituent or integrall parts of patience.
1. THat we may secure our patience, we must take care that our complaints be
without despair. Despair sins against the reputation of Gods goodness, and the
efficacy of all our old experience: By despair we destroy the greatest comfort
of our sorrows, and turn our sickness into the state of Devils, and perishing
souls. No affliction is greater then despair, for that is it which makes hell
fire, and turns a natural evil into an intolerable; it hinders prayers, and
fills up the intervalls of sickness with a worse torture; it makes all
spiritual arts useless, and the office of spiritual comforters and guides to
be impertinent.

Against this, hope is to be opposed; and its proper acts as it relates to the
virtue and exercise of patience are; 1 Praying to God for help and remedy; 2
sending for the guides of souls; 3. using all holy exercises and acts of grace,
proper to that state; which who so does has not the impatience of despair;
every man that is patient has hope in God in the day of his sorrows.

2. Our complaints in sickness must be without murmr. Murmur sins against
Gods providence and government: by it we grow rude, and like the falling
Angels, displeased at Gods supremacy: and nothing is more unreasonable: it
talks against God, for whose glory all speech was made; it is proud and
phantastic, has better opinions of a sinner then of the Divine justice, and
would rather accuse God then himself.

Against this is opposed that part of patience which resignes the man into the
hands of God; saying with old Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what he will; and
[ Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven] and so by admiring Gods justice
and wisdom, does also dispose the sick person for receiving Gods mercy; and
secures him the rather in the grace of God. The proper acts of this part of
patience are, 1. To confess our sins and our own demerits. 2. It increases and
exercises humility. 3. It loves to sing praises to God, even from the lowest
abyss of humane misery.

3. Our complaints in sickness must be without peevishness. This sins against
civility, and that necessary decency, which must be used toward the ministers
and assistants. By peevishness we increase our own sorrows, and are
troublesome to them that stand there to ease ours. It has in it harshnesse of
nature, and ungentlenesse, wilfulness, and Phantastic opinions, morosity and
incivility.

Against it are opposed obedience, tractability, easiness of persuasion,
aptness to take counsel. The acts of this part of patience are, 1. To obey our
Physicians. 2. To treat our persons with respect to our present necessities.
Vide chap. 4. Sect. 1.
3. Not to be ungentle, and uneasy to the ministers, and nurses that attend us;
But to take their diligent and kind offices as sweetly as we can, and to bear
their indiscretions, or unhandsome accidents contentedly, and without
disquietnesse within, or evil language, or angry words without. 4. Not to use
unlawful means for our recovery.

If we secure these particulars, we are not lightly to be judged of, by noises
and postures, by colors and images of things, by palenesse, or tossings from
side to side. For it were a hard thing that those persons who are loa^en with
the greatness of humane calamities, should be strictly tied to ceremonies and
forms of things. He is patient that calls upon God, that hopes for health or
heaven, that believes God is wise and just in sending him afflictions; that
confesses his sins and accuses himself, and justifies God; that expects God
will turn this into good; that is civil to his Physicians and his servants;
that converses with the guides of souls, the ministers of religion; and in all
things submits to Gods will; and would use no indirect means for his recovery;
but had rather be sick and die, then enter at all into Gods displeasure.

SECT. IV. Remedies against impatience, by way of consideration.
AS it happens concerning death, so it is in sickness which is death^
handmaid. It has the fate to suffer calumny and reproach, and has a name
worse th^n its nature.

1. For there is no sickness so great but children endure it, and have natural
strengths to bear them out quite through the calamity, what period soever
nature has allotted it. Indeed they make no reflections upon their sufferings
and complain of sickness with an uneasy sigh, or a natural groan, but consider
not what the sorrows of sickness mean; and so bear it by a direct sufferance,
and as a pillar bears the weight of a roof: But then why cannot we bear it so
to? For this which we call a reflection upon, or a considering of our sickness,
is nothing but a perfect instrument of trouble, and consequently a temptation
to impatience. It serves no end of nature, it may be avoided, and we may
consider it only as an expression of Gods Anger, and an emissary, or
procurator of repentance. But all other considering it, except where it serves
the purposes of medicine and art, Praetulerim delyrus inersque videri,
Dum mea delectant mala me, vel denique fallant,
Quam sapere and ^ingi.
Hor. lib. 2. ep. 2.
is nothing, but under the color of reason, an unreasonable device to heighten
the sickness, and increase the torment. But then, children want this act of
reflex perception, or reasonable sense whereby their sickness becomes less
pungent and dolorous; so also do they want the helps of reason, whereby they
should be able to support it. For certain it is, reason was as well given us to
harden our spirits and stiffen them in passions and sad accidents, as to make
us bending and apt for action: and if in men God has heightened the faculties
of apprehension, he has increased the auxiliaries of reasonable strengths;
that Gods rod, and Gods staff might go together, and the beam of Gods
countenance may as well refresh us with its light, as scorch us with its heat.
But poor children that endure so much, have not inward supports and
refreshments to bear them through it; they never heard the sayings of old men,
nor have been taught the principles of severe philosophy, nor are assisted with
the results of a long experience, nor know they how to turn a sickness into
virtue, and a Fever into a reward; nor have they any sense of favors, the
remembrance of which may alleviate their burden; and yet nature has in them
teeth and nails enough to scratch, and fight against the sickness, and by such
aids as God is pleased to give them, they wade thorough the storm, and murmur
not: and besides this yet, although infants have not such brisk perceptions
upon the stock of reason, they have a more tender feeling upon the accounts of
sense, and their flesh is as uneasy by their natural softness and weak
shoulders, as ours by our too forward apprehensions. Therefore bear up: either
you or I, or some man wiser, (...)
(...).
Ulysses apud Hom.
and many a woman weaker then us both, or the very children have endured worse
evil then this that is upon thee now.

That sorrow is hugely tolerable which gives its smart but by instants and
smallest proportions of time. No man at once feels the sickness of a week, or
of a whole day; but the smart of an instant: and still every portion of a
minute, feels but its proper share; and the last groan ended all the sorrow of
its peculiar burden: and what minute can that be, which can pretend to be
intolerable? and the next minute is but the same as the last: and the pain
flows like the drops of a river, or the little shreds of time: and if we do
but take care of the present minute, it cannot seem a great charge, or a great
burden; but that care will secure our duty, if we still will but secure the
present minute.

3. If we consider how much men can suffer if they list, and how much they do
suffer for great and little causes, and that no causes are greater then the
proper causes of patience in sickness (that is necessity and religion) we
cannot without huge shame to our nature, to our persons, and to our manners
complain of this tax and impost of nature. This experience added something to
the old Philosophy. When the Gladiators were exposed naked to each others short
swords, and were to cut each others souls away in portions of flesh, as if
their forms had been as divisible as the life of worms: Spectatores
vociferantur, ictus tacet.
they did not sigh or groan, it was a shame to decline the blow, but according
to the just measures art. The women that saw the wounds shrike out; and he that
receives it holds his peace. Qui mediocris gladiator ingemuit? Quis vultum
mutavit unquam? Quis non modo sterit, verum etiam decubuit turpiter? Tusc. Qu.
lib. 2.
They did not only stand bravely, but would also fall so; and when he was down,
scorned to shrink his head, when the insolent conqueror came to lift it from
his shoulders: and yet this man in his first design, only aimed at liberty,
and the reputation of a good fencer; and when he sunk down, he saw he could
only receive the honor of a bold man; the noise of which he shall never hear,
when his ashes were crammed in his narrow Urne. And what can we complain of the
weakness of our strengths, or the pressures of diseases, when we see a poor
soldier stand in a breach almost starved with cold and hunger; and his cold
apt to be relieved only by the heats of Anger, a Fever of a fired musket? and
his hunger slacked by a greater pain, and a huge fear? this man shall stand in
his arms and wounds, patiens liminis atque solis, pale and faint, weary and
watchful; and at night shall have a bullet pulled out of his flesh, and shivers
from his bones, and endure his mouth to be sewed up from a violent rent to its
own dimension, and all this for a man whom he never saw, or if he did, was not
noted by him; but one that shall condemn him to the gallows if he runs from all
this misery. It is seldom that God sends such calamities upon men, as men
bring upon themselves, and suffer willingly. But that which is most
considerable, is, that any passion and violence upon the spirit of man makes
him able to suffer huge calamities, with a certain constancy and an unwearied
patience. Scipio Africanus was wont to commend that saying in Xenophon, that
the same labors of warfare were easier far to a General then to a common
soldier, because he was supported by the huge appetites of honor, which made
his hard marches nothing but steppings forward, and reaching at a triumph. Did
not the Lady of Sabinus for others interest bear twins privately and without
groaning? Are not the labors and cares, the spare diet, and the waking nights
of covetous and adulterous, of ambitious and revengful persons, greater
sorrows and of more smart then a Fever, or the short pains of childebirth?
what will not render women suffer to hide their shame? And if vice, and
passion, lust, and inferior appetites can supply to the tenderest persons
strengths more then enough, for the sufferance of the greatest natural
violences, can we suppose that honesty and religion, and the grace of God are
more nice, tender, and effeminate?

4. Sickness is the more tolerable because it cures very many evils, and takes
away the sense of all the cross fortunes which amaze the spirits of some men,
and transport them certainly beyond all the limits of patience. Here all losses
and disgraces, domestic cares and public evils, the apprehensions of pity,
and a sociable calamity, the fears of want and the troubles of ambition, lie
down and rest upon the sick man's pillow. One fit of the stone takes away from
the fancies of men, all relations to the world and secular interests; at least
they are made dull and flat, without sharpness and an edge.

And he that shall observe the infinite variety of troubles which afflicts some
busy persons, and almost all men in very busy times, will think it not much
amiss that those huge numbers were reduced to certainty, to method, and an
order; and there is no better compendium for this, then that they be reduced to
one. And a sick man seems so unconcerned in the things of the world, that
although this separation be done with violence; yet it is no otherwise then all
noble contentions are, and all honors are purchased, and all virtues are
acquired, and all vices mortified, and all appetites chastised, and all rewards
obtained: there is infallibly to all these a difficulty and a sharpness
annexed, without which there could be no proportion between a work and a
reward. To this add, that sickness does not take off the sense of secular
troubles, and worldly cares from us, by employing all the perceptions, and
apprehensions of men, by filling all faculties with sorrow, and leaving no room
for the lesser instances of troubles; as little rivers are swallowed up in the
Sea: But sickness is a messenger of God, sent with purposes of abstraction and
separation, with a secret power and a proper efficacy to draw us off from
unprofitable and useless sorrows: and this is effected partly by reason that
it represents the uselessnesse of the things of this world, and that there is a
portion of this life in which honors and things of the world cannot serve us
to many purposes, partly by preparing us to death, and telling us that a man
shall descend thither whence this world cannot redeem us, and where the goods
of this world cannot serve us.

5. And yet after all this, sickness leaves in us appetites so strong, and
apprehensions so sensible, and delights so many, and good things in so great a
degree, that a healthlesse body, Debilona facitomanu debilem pede, coxa,
lubricos quato dentes, vita dun^ superest, been est.
and a sad disease do seldom make men weary of this world; but still they
would fain find an excuse to live. The gout, the stone, and the toothach, the
sciatica, sore eyes, and an aching head, are evils indeed; But such, which
rather then die, most men are willing to suffer, and Mecenas added also a wish,
rather to be crucified then to die; and though his wish was low, timorous, and
base, yet we find the same desires in most men, dressed up with better
circumstances. Hanc mihi, vol acuta^, si das, sustineo crucem. Sen. ep. 101.
It was a cruel mercy in Tamerlan who commanded all the leprous persons to be
put to death, as we knock some beasts quickly on their head, to put them out of
pain, and lest they should live miserably. The poor men would rather have
endured another leprosy, and have more willingly taken two diseases then one
death; therefore Caesar wondered that the old crazed soldier that begged leave
he might kill himself, and asked him, Do thou think then to be more alive
then now thou art? We do not die suddenly, but we descend to death by steps,
and slow passages; and therefore men (so long as they are sick) are unwilling
to proceed and go forward in the finishing that sad employment. Between a
disease and death, there are many degrees, and all those are like the reserves
of evil things, the declining of every one of which is justly reckoned amongst
those good things, which alleviate the sickness and make it tolerable. Never
account that sickness intolerable, in which thou had rather remain, then
die: And yet if thou had rather die then suffer it, the worst of it that can
be said is this, that this sickness is worse then death; that is, it is worse
then that which is the best of all evils, and the end of all troubles; and then
you have said no great harm against it.

6. Remember that thou art under a supervening necessity. Nothing is
intolerable that is necessary; and therefore when men are to suffer a sharp
incision, or what they are pleased to call intolerable, tie the man down to it,
and he endures it. Improbaeque Tigres indulgent patientiam flagello.
Now God has bound this sickness upon thee by the condition of Nature (for
every flower must wither and droop) it is also bound upon thee by special
providence, and with a design to try thee, and with purposes to reward and to
crown thee. These cords thou can not break; and therefore lie thee down
gently, and suffer the hand of God to do what he please, Impiger and fortis
virtute coacta.
that at least thou may swallow an advantage, which the care and severe
mercies of God forces down thy throat.

7. Remember that all men have passed this way, Cerno equidem gemina camstratos
morte Philippos
Thessaliaeque rogos and funera gentis Iberae.

the bravest, the wisest, and the best men, have bin subject to sickness and sad
diseases; and it is esteemed a prodigy, that a man should live to a long age
and not be sick: and it is recorded for a wonder concerning Xenophilus the
Musician, that he lived to 106 years of age in a perfect and continual health:
No story tells the like of a Prince, or a great or a wise person; Rara est in
nobilitate senectu^^ ^erre quam sortem patiuntur omnes nemo recusat.
unless we have a mind to believe the tales concerning Nestor and the Euboean
Sibyl. Old age and healthful bodies are seldom made the appendages to great
fortunes: and under so great, and so universal precedents, so common fate of
men, he that will not suffer his portion, deserves to be something else then a
man, but nothing that is better.

8. We find in story that many Gentiles who walked by no light but that of
reason, opinion, and humane examples, did bear their sickness nobly, and with
great contempt of pain, and with huge interests of virtue. When Pompey came
from Syria and called at Rhodes, to see Posidonius the Philosopher, he found
him hugely afflicted with the gout, and expressed his sorrow, that he could not
hear his Lectures from which by this pain he must needs be hindered. Posidonius
told him, but you may hear me for all this; and he discoursed excellently in
the midst of his tortures, even then, Tusc. l. 2. Cum faces doloris ad^
moverentur.
when the torches were put to his feet, that nothing was good but what was
honest; and therefore nothing could be an evil, if it were not criminal, and
summed up his Lectures with this saying; O pain, in vain do thou attempt me;
for I will never confess thee to be an evil as long as I can honestly bear
thee. And when Pompey himself was desperately sick at Naples, the Neopolitans
wore crowns and triumphed; and the men of Puteoli came to congratulate his
sickness, not because they loved him not, but because it was the custom of
their country to have better opinions of sickness then we have. The boys of
Sparta would at their Altars endure whipping till their very entrails saw the
light through their torn flesh; and some of them to death, without crying or
complaint. Caesar would drink his potions of Rhubarb rudely mixed, and unfitly
allayed with little sippings, and tasted the horror of the medicine spreading
the loathsomeness of his physic so, that all the parts of his tongue and
palate might have an entire share: and when C. Marius suffered the veins of his
leg to be cut out for the curing his gout, and yet shrunk not, he declared not
only the rudeness of their physic, but the strength of a man's spirit, if it
be contracted and united by the aids of reason or Religion, by resolution or
any accidental harshnesse, against a violent disease.

9. All impatience howsoever expressed, is perfectly useless to all purposes
of ease, Tantum doluerunt, quantum doloribuse inseruerunt. S. Aug.
but hugely effective to the multiplying the trouble; and the impatience and
vexation is another, but the sharper disease of the two; it does mischief by it
self, and mischief by the disease. For men grieve themselves as much as they
please, and when by impatience they put themselves into the retinue of sorrows,
they become solemn mourners. Virgil. ^.8 v. 2.
For so have I seen the rays of the Sun or Moon dash upon a brazen vessel
whose lips kissed the face of those waters that lodged within its bosom, but
being turned back and sent off with its smooth pretenses, Ceu rore seges viret,
sic croscunt rigui tristia fletibus
Urget lachryma lachrymam
Fecundusquo sui se numerat dolor
Quem fortuna se^el virum udo degenerem lumine viu derit.
Illum saepe ferit. --

or rougher waftings, it wandered about the room and beat upon the roof, and
still doubled its heat and motion: So is a sickness and a sorrow entertained
by an unquiet and a discontented man, turned back either with anger, or with
excuses; but then the pain passes from the stomach to the liver, and from the
liver to the heart, and from the heart to the head, and from feeling to
consideration, from thence to sorrow, and at last ends in impatience, and
useless murmur, and all the way the man was impotent, and weak; but the
sickness was doubled and grew imperious and tyrannical over the soul and
body. Massurius Sabinus tells, Levius sic patientia quicquid corrigere est nefas.
that the image of the goddess Angerona was with a mufler upon her mouth
placed upon the Altar of Volupia, to represent, that those persons who bear
their sicknesses and sorrows without murmur, shall certainly pass from sorrow
to pleasure, and the ease and honors of felicity; but they that with spite and
indignation bite the burning coal, or shake the yoke upon their necks, gall
their spirits, and fret the skin, and hurt nothing but themselves.

10. Remember that this sickness is but for a short time; If it be sharp it
will not last long; If it be long, it will be easy and very tolerable. And
although S. Eadsine Archbishop of Canterbury had twelve years of sickness, yet
all that while he ruled his Church prudently, gave example of many virtues, and
after his death was enrolled in the Calender of Saints, who had finished their
course prosperously. Nothing is more unreasonable then to entangle our spirits
in wildness, and amazement, like a Partrich fluttering in a net, which she
breaks not, though she breaks her wings.

SECT. V. Remedies against Impatience by way of exercise.
THe fittest instrument of esteeming sickness easily tolerable, is to remember
that which indeed makes it so; and that is, that God does minister proper aids
and supports to every of his servants whom he visits with his rod. He knows our
needs, he pities our sorrows, he relieves our miseries, he supports our
weakness, he bids us ask for help, and he promises to give us all that, and he
usually gives us more, and indeed it is observable, that no story tells of any
godly man, who living in the fear of God fell into a violent and unpardoned
impatience in his natural sickness, if he used those means which God and his
holy Church have appointed. We see almost all men bear their last sickness
with sorrows indeed, but without violent passions; and unless they fear death
violently, they suffer the sickness with some indifferency; and it is a rare
thing to see a man who enjoyes his reason in his sickness, to express the
proper signs of a direct and solemn impatience. For when God lays a
sickness upon us, he seizes commonly on a man's spirits, which are the
instruments of action and business; and when they are secured from being
tumultuous, the sufferance is much the easier; and therefore sickness secures
all that, which can do the man mischief. It makes him tame and passive, apt for
suffering, and confines him to an unactive condition. To which if we add, that
God then commonly produces fear, and all those passions which naturally tend to
humility and poverty of spirit, we shall soon perceive by what instruments God
verifies his promise to us, (which is the great security for our patience, and
the easiness of our condition) that God will lay no more upon us then he will
make us able to ^ear, 1 Cor. 10.13.
but together with the affliction he will find a way to escape: Nay, if any
thing can be more then this; we have two or three promises, Psalm. 9.9 Mat. 7.7
Iam. ^.13 P^al. 31.19, 24. ^sal. 34.21, 22.
in which we may safely lodge our selves, and roll from off our thorns and
find ease and rest: God has promised to be with us in our trouble, and to be
with us in our prayers, and to be with us in our hope and con^idence.

2. Prevent the violence and trouble of thy spirit by an act of thanksgiving;
for which in the worst of sicknesses thou can not want cause, especially if
thou remembrest that this pain is not an eternal pain. Bless God for that;
But take heed also lest you so order your affairs that you pass from hence to
an eternal so^r^w. If that be hard, this will be intolerable, But as for the
present evil, a few days will end it

3. Remember that thou art a man and a Christian: as the Covenant of nature
has made it necessary, so the covenant of grace has made it to be chosen by
thee, to be a suffering person: either you must renounce your religion, or
submit to the impositions of God, and thy portion of sufferings. So that here
we see our advantages, and let us use them accordingly. The barbarous and
warlike nations of old, could fight well and willingly, but could not bear
sickness manfully. The Greeks were cowardly in their fights, as most wise men
are, but because they were learned and well taught, they bore their sickness
with patience and severity. The Cimbrians and Celtiberians rejoice in battle
like Giants, but in their diseases they weep like Women. These according to
their institution and designs had unequal courages, and accidental fortitude;
but since our Religion has made a covenant of sufferings; and the great
business of our lives is sufferings, and most of the virtues of a Christian
are passive graces, and all the promises of the Gospel are passed upon us
through Christ's cross, we have a necessity upon us to have an equal courage in
all the variety of our sufferings: for without an universal fortitude we can do
nothing of our duty.

4. Resolve to do as much as you can: for certain it is, we can suffer very
much, if we list; and many men have afflicted themselves unreasonably by not
being skilful to consider how much their strength and state could permit; and
our flesh is nice and imperious, crafty to persuade reason that she has more
necessities th^n indeed belong to her, and that she demands nothing
superfluous: suffer as much in obedience to God as you can suffer for
necessity, or passion, fear, or desire. And if you can for one thing, you can
for another, and there is nothing wanting but the mind. Never say; I can do no
more, I cannot endure this. For God would not have sent it, if he had not known
thee strong enough to abide it; only he that knows thee well already, would
also take this occasion to make thee know thy self. But it will be fit that you
pray to God to give you a discerning spirit, that you may rightly distinguish
just necessity from the flattery and fondnesses of flesh and blood.

5. Propound to your eyes and heart the example of the holy Jesus upon the
cross; he endured more for thee then thou can either for thy self or him:
and remember that if we be put to suffer, and do suffer in a good cause, or in
a good manner, so that in any sense your sufferings be conformable to his
sufferings, or can be capable of being united to his, we shall reign together
with him. The high way of the Cross which the King of sufferings has trodden
before us, is the way to ease, to a kingdom, and to felicity.

6. The very suffering is a title to an excellent inheritance: for, God
chastens every son whom he receives, and if we be not chastised, we are
bastards and not sons: and be confident, that although God often sends pardon
without correction, yet he never sends correction without pardon, unless it be
thy fault: and therefore take every or any affliction as an earnest penny of thy
pardon; and upon condition there may be peace with God, let any thing be
welcome that he can send as its instrument or condition. Suffer therefore God
to choose his own circumstances of adopting thee, and be content to be under
discipline when the reward of that is, to become the son of God: and by such
inflictions he hewes and breaks thy body, first dressing it to funeral, and
then preparing it for immortality: and if this be the effect or the design of
Gods love to thee; let it be occasion of thy love to him: and remember that the
truth of love is hardly known, but by somewhat that puts us to pain.

7. Use this as a punishment for thy sins; and so God intends it most commonly;
that is certain, if therefore thou submittest to it, thou approvest of the
divine judgment: and no man can have cause to complain of any thing, but of
himself; if either he believes God to be just, or himself to be a sinner: if he
either thinks he has deserved Hell, or that this little may be a means to
prevent the greater, and bring him to Heaven.

8. It may be that this may be the last instance, and the last opportunity that
ever God will give thee to exercise any virtue, to do him any service, or thy
self any advantage; be careful that thou losest not this; for to eternal ages,
this never shall return again.

9. Or if thou peradventure shall be restored to health, be careful that in
the day of thy thanksgiving, thou may not be ashamed of thy self, for having
behaved thy self poorly and weakly upon thy bed: it will be a sensible and
excellent comfort to thee, and double upon thy spirit, if when thou shall
worship God for restoring thee, thou shall also remember that thou did do him
service in thy suffering, and tell that God was hugely gracious to thee in
giving thee the opportunity of a virtue, at so easy a rate as a sickness,
from which thou did recover.

10. Few men are so sick, but they believe that they may recover; and we shall
seldom see a man lie down with a perfect persuasion that it is his last hour;
for many men have been sicker, and yet have recovered; but whether thou do
or no, thou have a virtue to exer^ise, which may be a handmaid to thy patience.
Epaphroditus was sick, sick unto death, and yet God had mercy upon him; and he
has done so to thousands, to whom he found it useful in the great order of
things, and the events of universal providence. If therefore thou desire to
recover, here is cause enough of hope; and hope is designed in the arts of God
and of the Spirit, to support patience. But if thou recoverest not, yet there
is something that is matter of joy naturally, and very much Spiritually if thou
belongest to God, and joy is as certain a support to patience, as hope; and it
is no small cause of being pleased, when we remember that if we recover not,
our sickness shall the sooner sit down in rest and joy. For recovery by death,
as it is easier and better then the recovery by a sickly health, so it is not
so long in doing: it suffers not the tediousness of a creeping restitution,
nor the inconvenience of Surgeons and Physicians, watchfulness and care,
keepings in, and suffering trouble, fears of relapse and the little relics of
a storm.

11. While we hear, or use, or think of these remedies, part of the sickness
is gone away, and all of it is passing. And if by such instruments we stand
armed and ready dressed before hand, we shall avoid the mischiefs of amazements
and surprise; Nulla mihi nova nunc facies inopinaque surgit
Omnia praecepi atque animo me^um ante revolvi.
Virgil. lib. 6.
while the accidents of sickness are such as were expected, and against which
we stood in readiness with our spirits, contracted, instructed and put upon
the defensive.

12 But our patience will be the better secured, if we consider that it is not
violently tempted by the usual arrests of sickness; for patience is with
reason demanded while the sickness is tolerable; that is, so long as the evil
is not too great; but if it be also eligible, and have in it some degrees of
good, our patience will have in it the less difficulty, and the greater
necessity. This therefore will be a new stock of consideration. Sickness is in
many degrees eligible to many men, and to many purposes.

SECT. VI. Advantages of Sickness.
1. I Consider: one of the great felicities of heaven consists in an immunity
from sin: then we shall love God without mixtures of malice; then we shall
enjoy without envy; then we shall see fuller vessels running over with glory,
and crowned with bigger circles, and this we shall behold without spilling from
our eyes (those vessels of joy and grief) any sign of anger, trouble or a
repining spirit: our passions shall be pure, our charity without fear, our
desire without lust, our possessions all our own, and all in the inheritance of
Jesus, in the richest soil of Gods eternal kingdom. Now half of this reason
which makes heaven so happy by being innocent, is also in the state of
sickness, making the furrows of old age smooth, and the groans of a sick heart
apt to be joined to the music of Angels; and though they sound harsh to our
untuned ears and discomposed Organs, yet those accents must needs be in
themselves excellent which God loves to hear, and esteems them as prayers and
arguments of pity, instruments of mercy and grace, and preparatives to glory.

In sickness, the soul begins to dress her self for immortality: and first
she unties the strings of vanity that made her upper garment cleave to the
world and sit uneasily. First she puts off the light and phantastic summer robe
of lust, and wanton appetite, and as soon as that Cestus that lascivious girdle
is thrown away, then the reins chasten us and give us warning in the night:
then that which called us formerly to serve the manliness of the body, and the
childishness of the soul, keeps us waking, to divide the hours with the
intervals of prayer, and to number the minutes with our penitential groans:
Then the flesh sits uneasily and dwells in sorrow, and then the spirit feels it
self at ease, freed from the petulant solicitations of those passions which in
health were as buisie and as restless as atoms in the sun, always dancing
and always busy and never sitting down till a sad night of grief and
uneasinesse draws the vail, and lets them dye alone in se^ret dishonor.

2. Next to this; the soul by the help of sickness knocks off the fetters of
pride and vainer complacencies. Then she draws the curtains, and stops the
lights from coming in, Nunc festinatos nimium tibi sent^t honores
Actaque lauriferae damnat Syllana juventae.
Lucan. lib. 8.
and takes the pictures down, those phantastic images of self-love, and gay
remembrances of vain opinion, and popular noises. Then the Spirit stoops into
the sobrieties of humble thoughts and feels corruption chiding the forwardness
of fancy, and allaying the vapors of conceit and factious opinions. For
humility is the souls grave into which he enters, not to die, but to meditate
and i^ terre some of its troublesome appendages. There she sees the dust, and
feels the dishonours of the body, and reads the Register of all its sad
adherencies; and then she lays by all her vain reflections, beating upon her
Crystal and pure mirror from the fancies of strength and beauty, and little
decayed prettinesses of the body. And when in sickness we forget all our
knotty discourses of Philosophy, and a Syllogism makes our head ache, and we
feel our many and loud talkings served no lasting end of the soul, no purpose
that now we must abide by; and that the body is like to descend to the land,
where all things are forgotten, then she lays aside all her remembrances of
applauses, all her ignorant confidences, and cares only to know Christ Jesus
and him crucified, to know him plainly, and with much heartinesse, and
simplicity. And I cannot think this to be a contemptible advantage* for ever
since man tempted himself by his impatient desires of knowing, and being as
God, Man thinks it the finest thing in the world to know much, and therefore is
hugely apt to esteem himself better then his brethren, if he knows some little
impertinencies, and them imperfectly, and that with infinite uncertainty; But
God has been pleased with a rare art to prevent the inconveniences apt to
arise by this passionate longing after knowledge; even by giving to every man a
sufficient opinion of his own understanding; and who is there in the world that
thinks himself to be a fool, or indeed not fit to govern his brother? There are
but few men but they think they are wise enough, and every man believes his own
opinion the soundest, and if it were otherwise, men would burst themselves with
envy, or else become irrecoverable slaves to the talking and disputing man. But
when God intended this permission to be an antidote of envy, and a satisfaction
and allay to the troublesome appetites of knowing, and made that this universal
opinion by making men in some proportions equal should be a keeper out, or a
great restraint to slavery, and tyranny respectively, Man (for so he uses to
do) has turned this into bitterness: for when nature had made so just a
distribution of understanding, that every man might think he had enough, he is
not content with that, but will think he has more then his brother: and
whereas it might well be employed in restraining slavery, he has used it to
break off the bands of all obedience, and it ends in pride and schisms, in
heresies and tyrannies: and it being a spiritual evil, it grows upon the soul
with old age and flattery, with health and the supports of a prosperous
fortune. Now besides the direct operations of the Spirit, and a powerful
grace, there is in nature left to us no remedy for this evil, but a sharp
sickness, or an equal sorrow, and allay of fortune; and then we are humble
enough to ask counsel of a despised Priest, and to think that even a common
sentence from the mouth of an appointed comforter streams forth more
refreshment then all our own wiser and more reputed discourses. Ubi jam validi^
quassatum est viribus aevi
Corpus and obtusis ceciderunt viribus artus
Claudicat ingenium, delirat lin ^aque n^ensque.
Lucr. l. 3.
Then our understandings and our bodies peeping through their own breaches see
their shame and their dishonor, their dangerous follies, and their huge
deceptions, and they go into the clefts of the rock, and every little hand may
cover them.

3. Next to these; As the soul is still undressing, she takes off the
roughness of her great and little angers, and animosities, and receives the
oil of mercies, and smooth forgiveness, fair interpretations, and gentle
answers, designs of reconcilement, and Christian atonement in their places.
For so did the wrastlers in Olympus, they stripped themselves of all their
garments, and then anointed their naked bodies with oil, smooth and vigorous,
with contracted nerves and enlarged voice, they contended vehemently, till they
obtained their victory, or their ease, and a crown of Olive* or a huge pity was
the reward of their fierce contentions. Quatenus excidi penitus vitiu^^irae,
Caetera item nequ^unt stultis haeren^ia
Hor. l. 1 sat. 3.
Some wise men have said, that anger sticks to a man's nature as inseparably as
other vices do to the manners of fools, and that anger is never quite cured;
but God that has found out remedies for all diseases, has so ordered the
circumstances of man, that in worser sort of men, anger and great indignation
consume and shrivell into little peevishnesses and uneasy accents of
sickness, and spend themselves in trifling instances: and in the better and
more sanctified, it goes off in prayers, and alms, and solemn reconcilement:
And however, the temptations of this state, such I mean which are proper to it,
are little and inconsiderable: The man is apt to chide a servant too bitterly,
and to be discontented with his nurse, or not satisfied with his Physician, and
he rests uneasily and (poor man) nothing can please him; and indeed these
little undecencies must be cured and stopped, lest they run into an
inconvenience. But sickness is in this particular a little image of the state
of blessed Souls, or of Adams early morning in Paradise, free from the troubles
of lust, and violencies of anger, and the intricacies of ambition, or the
restlesnesse of covetousness. For though a man may carry all these along with
him into his sickness, yet there he will not find them, and in despite of all
his own malice, his soul shall find some rest from laboring in the galleys,
and baser captivity of sin: and if we value those moments of being in the love
of God, and in the kingdom of grace, which certainly are the beginnings of
felicity, we may also remember that the not sinning actually, is one step of
innocence; and therefore that state is not intolerable, which by a sensible
trouble, makes it in most instances impossible to commit those great sins,
which make death, and hell, and horrid damnations. And then let us but add
this to it; that God sends sicknesses, but he never causes sin; that God is
angry with a ^inning person, but never with a man for being sick; that sin
causes God to hate us, and sickness causes him to pity us; that all wise men
in the world choose trouble rather then dishonor; affliction rather then
baseness; and that sickness stops the torrent of sin, and interrupts its
violence; and even to the worst men, makes it to retreat many degrees; we may
reckon sickness amongst good things, as we reckon Rhubarb, and Aloes, and
childbirth, and labor, and obedience, and discipline: These are unpleasant,
and yet safe; they are troubles in order to blessings, or they are securities
from danger, or the hard choices of a less and a more tolerable evil.

4. Sickness is in some sense eligible, because it is the opportunity and the
proper scence of exercising Nolo quod cupio ^tatin tenere
N^c victor a mi place* pa^ata.
Petron.
some virtues. It is that agony in which men are tried for a crown; and if we
remember what glorious things are spoken of the grace of faith, that it is the
life of just men, the restitution of the dead in trespasses and sins, the
justification of a sinner, the support of the weak, the confidence of the
strong, the magazine of promises, and the title to very glorious rewards; we
may easily imagine that it must have in it a work and a difficulty, in some
proportion answerable to so great effects. But when we are bidden to believe
strange propositions, we are put upon it when we cannot judge, and those
propositions have possessed our discerning faculties, and have made a party
there, and are become domestic before they come to be disputed, and then the
articles of faith are so few, and are made so credible, and in their event and
in their object are so useful and gaining upon the affections, that he were a
prodigy of man, and would be so esteemed, that should in all our present
circumstances disbeleeve any point of faith: and all is well as long as the Sun
shines, and the fair breath of heaven gently wa^ts us to our own purposes. But
if you will try the excellency, and feel the work of faith, place the man in a
persecution, let him ride in a storm, let his bones be broken with sorrow, and
his eyelids loosened with sickness, let his bread be dipped in tears, and all
the daughters of Music be brought low; Let God commence a quarrel against
him, and be bitter in the accents of his anger or his discipline, then God
tries your faith. Can you then trust his goodness, and believe him to be a
Father when you groan under his rod? Can you rely upon all the strange
propositions of Scripture, and be content to perish if they be not true? C^n
you receive comfort in the discourses of death and heaven, of immortality, and
the resurrection, of the death of Christ, and conforming to his sufferings?
Truth is; There are but two great periods, in which faith demonstrates it self
to be a powerful, and mighty grace; and they ^re, persecution and the
approaches of death, for the passive part: and a temptation, for the active. In
the days of pleasure and the night of pain, faith is to fight her agonisticon,
to contend for mastery: and faith overcomes all alluring and fond temptations
to sin, and faith overcomes all our weaknesses and faintings in our troubles.
By the faith of the promises we learn to despise the world, choosing those
objects which faith discovers; and by expectation of the same promises, we are
comforted in all our sorrows, and enabled to look through and see beyond the
cloud: but the vigor of it is pressed, and called forth, when all our fine
discourses come to be reduced to practice. For in our health and clearer days,
it is easy to talk of putting trust in God: we readily trust him for life when
we are in health; Mors ipsa beatior inde est Quod per cruciamina lethi via
panditur ardua justis and ad astra doloribus itur. Prud. hymn. in exeq. defunct.
for provisions when we have fair revenues; and for deliverance when we are
newly escaped, but let us come to fit upon the margent of our grave, and let a
Tyrant lean hard upon our fortunes, and dwell upon our wrong, let the storm
arise, and the keels toss till the cordage crack, or that all our hopes bulge
under us, and descend into the hollownesse of sad misfortunes; then can you
believe, when you neither hear, nor see, nor feel any thing but objections?
This is the proper work of sickness: Virtutes avidae periculi. Monstrant quam
non poeniteat tanto pretio aesti mass virturem. Senec.
faith is then brought into the theater, and so exercised, that if it abides
but to the end of the contention, we may see that work of faith which God will
hugely crown. The same I say of hope, and of charity, or the love of God, and
of patience, which is a grace produced from the mixtures of all these: they are
virtues which are greedy of danger. And no man was ever honored by any wise or
discerning person for dining upon Persian Carpets, nor rewarded with a crown
for being at ease. It was the fire that did honor to Mutius Scevola, poverty
made Fabritius famous, Rutilius was made excellent by banishment, Non enim
h^laritate nec lascivia, nec risu, aut joco comit^ levitatis, sed saepe etia^
tristes firmitate and constantia sunt beati. Cicer. de fin. l. ^^
Regulus by torments, Socrates by prison, Cato by his death: and God has
crowned the memory of Job with a wreath of glory because he sat upon his
dunghill wisely and temperatly: and his potsheard and his groans mingled with
praises and justifications of God, pleased him like an Anthem sung by Angels in
the morning of the resurrection. God could not choose but be pleased with the
delicious accents of Martyrs, when in their tortures they cried out nothing but
[ Holy Iesus] and [ blessed be God] and they also themselves who with a hearty
resignation to the Divine pleasure can delight in Gods severe dispensation,
will have the transportations of Cherubins, when they enter into the joys of
God. If God be delicious to his servants when he smites them, he will be
nothing but ravishments and ecstasies to their spirits when he refreshes them
with overflowings of joy, in the day of recompenses. Nihil infelicius eo, cui
nihil unquam contigit adversi. Non licuit illi se experiti. Senec.
No man is more miserable then he that has no adversity; that man is not tried
whether he be good or bad; and God never crowns those virtues which are only
faculties, and dispositions: but every act of virtue is an ingredient into
reward. And we see many children f^irly planted, whose parts of nature were
never dressed by art, nor called from the furrows of their first possibilities
by discipline, and institution, and they dwell for ever in ignorance, and
converse with beasts: and yet if they had been dressed and exercised, might
have stood at the chairs of Princes, or spoken parables amongst the rulers of
cities? Our virtues are but in the seed, when the grace of God comes upon us
first: but this grace must be thrown into broken furrows, -- Illa seges votis
respondet avari
Agricolae, bis quae solemn, bis frigora sensit.
Virgil. Georg. 1.
and must twice feel the cold, and twice feel the heat, and be softened with
storms and showers, and then it will arise into fruitfulness and harvests: And
what is there in the world to distinguish virtues from dishonours, or the
valor of Caesar from the softness of the Egyptian Eunuchs, or that can make
any thing rewardable, but the labor and the danger, the pain and the
difficulty? Virtue could not be any thing but sensuality, if it were the
entertainment of our senses and fond desires; and Apicius had been the noblest
of all the Romans, if seeding a great appetite and despising the severities of
temperance had been the work and proper employment of a wise man. But otherwise
do fathers, and otherwise do mothers handle their children: These soften them
with kisses and imperfect noises, with the pap and breast milk of soft
endearments, they rescue them from Tutors, I anguent per in^rtiam saginata, nec
labor tan^um sed mole and ipso sui onere de^eiunt. Senec.
and snatch them from discipline, they desire to keep them fat and warm, and
their feet dry and their bellies full; and then the children govern, and cry,
and prove fools, and troublesome, so long as the feminine republike does
endure. But fathers, because they design to have their children wise and
valiant, Callum per injurias ducunt.
apt for counsel, or for arms, send them to severe governments, and tie them to
study, Ut sit luminisatque aqu^ c^elestis pa^iens latus.
to hard labor, and a^^lictive contingencies. They rejoice when the bold boy
strikes a lion with his hunting spear, Modestia filiorum delectantur,
vernularum licentia and canum non puerorum.
and shrinks not when the beast comes to affright his early courage. Softness
is for slaves and beasts, for minstrels and useless persons, for such who
cannot ascend higher then the state of a fair ox, or a servant entertained for
vainer offices: But the man that designs his son for noble employments, to
honors, and to triumphs, to consular dignities and presidences of counsels,
loves to see him pale with study or panting with labor, hardened with
sufferance or eminent by dangers: and so God dresses us for heaven. He loves to
see us struggling with a disease, and resisting the Devil, and contesting
against the weaknesses of nature, and against hope to believe in hope,
resigning our selves to Gods will, praying him to choose for us, and dying in
all things but faith and its blessed consequents, ut ad officium cum periculo
simus prompti; and the danger and the resistance shall endeare the office.
Ventus ut amittit vires nisi robo^re densae
O^currunt silvae spatio diffusu^ inani.
Lucan.
For so have I known the boisterous north-winde pass thorough the yielding
air which opened its bosom, and appeased its violence by entertaining it with
easy compliance in all the regions of its reception. But when the same breath
of Heaven has been checked with the stiffnesse of a tower, Marcet sine
adversario virtus.
or the united strength of a wood; it grew mighty, and dwelt there, and made
the highest branches stoop, and make a smooth path for it on the top of all its
glories: So is sickness, and so is the grace of God. When sickness has made
the difficulty, then Gods grace has made a triumph, and by doubling its power
has created new proportions of a reward; and then shows its biggest glory,
when it has the greatest difficulty to Master, the greatest weaknesses to
support, Laetius est quoti e^magno tibi constat ho^nestum.
the most busy temptations to contest with: For so God loves that his strength
should be seen in our weakness, and our danger. Happy is that state of life in
which our services to God are the dearest, and the most expensive.

5. Sickness has some degrees of eligibility, at least by an after-choice;
because to all persons which are within the possibilities and state of pardon,
it becomes a great instrument of pardon of sins. For as God seldom rewards here
and hereafter too: So it is not very often that he punishes in both states; In
great and final sins he does so; but we find it expressed only in the case
of the sin against the Holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven in this world,
nor in the world to come; that is, it shall be punished in both worlds, and the
infelicities of this world shall but usher in the intolerable calamities of
the next. But this is in a case of extremity, and in sins of an unpardonable
malice: In those lesser stages of death which are deviations from the rule, and
not a destruction and perfect antinomy to the whole institution; God very often
smites with his rod of sickness, that he may not for ever be slaying the soul
with eternal death. Ps. 89.33
I will visit their offenses with the rod, and their sin with scourges:
Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him: nor suffer
my truth to fail. And there is in the New Testament a delivering over to Satan,
1 Cor. 5.5
and a consequent buffeting for the mortification of the flesh indeed; but that
the soul may be saved in the day of the Lord. 1 ^im. 1.20.
And to some persons the utmost process of Gods anger reaches but to a sharp
sickness, or at most, but to a temporal death, and then the little momentany
anger is spent, and expires in rest, and a quiet grave. Origin, S. Austin, and
Cassian say concerning Ananias and Sapphira, Digni erant in hoc saeculo
recipere peccatum suum, ut mundiores exeant ab hac vita, mundati castigatione
sibi illata per mortem com nunem, quoniam credentes erant in Christum. Origin
S. Aug. l. 3. c. 1. contr. Parmen. and Cassian. colla^. 6. c. 11.
that they were slain with a sudden death, that by such a judgment their sin
might be punished, and their guilt expiated, and their persons reserved for
mercy in the day of judgment. And God cuts off many of his children from the
land of the living; and yet when they are numbered amongst our dead, he finds
them in the book of life, written amongst those that shall live to him for
ever: and thus it happened to many new Christians in the Church of Corinth for
their little undecencies, and disorders in the circumstances of receiving the
holy Sacrament. S. Paul says; 1 Cor. 11.30.
[that many amongst them were sick, may were weak, and some were fallen asleep]
He expresses the divine anger against those persons in no louder accents; which
according to the style of the New Testament, where all the great transactions
of duty and reproof are generally made upon the stock of Heaven, and Hell is
plainly a reserve, and a period set to the declaration of Gods wrath. For God
knows that the torments of hell are so horrid, so insupportable a calamity,
that he is not easy and apt to cast those souls, which he has taken so much
care, and has been at so much expense to save, into the eternal never dying
flames of Hell, lightly, for smaller sins, or after a fairly begun repentance,
and in the midst of holy desires to finish it: But God takes such penalties,
and exacts such fines of us, which we may pay, salvo contenemento saving the
main stake of all, even our precious souls. And therefore S. Augustine prayed
to God in his penitential sorrows. Here O Lord burn and cut my flesh that thou
may spare me for ever. For so said our blessed Savior, Every sacrifice must
be seasoned with salt, and every sacrifice must be burnt with fire, that is, we
must abide in the state of grace, and if we have committed sins we must expect
to be put into the state of affliction, and yet the sacrifice will send up a
right and un^roubled cloud, and a sweet smell to join with the incense of the
Altar, where the eternal Priest offers a never ceasing sacrifice. And now I
have said a thing against which there can be no exceptions, and of which no
just reason can make abatement. For when sickness which is the condition of
our nature is called for, with purposes of redemption; when we are sent to
death to secure eternal life, when God strikes us that he may spare us, it
shows that we have done things which he essentially hates, and therefore we
must be smitten with the rod of God: but in the midst of judgment God
remembers mercy and makes the rod to be medicinal, and like the rod of God in
the hand of Aaron to shoot forth buds, and leaves, and Almonds, hopes, and
mercies and eternal recompenses in the day of restitution. This is so great a
good to us, if it be well conducted in all the channels of its intention and
design, that if we had put off the objections of the flesh with abstractions,
contempts and separations, so as we ought to do, were as earnestly to be prayed
for, as any gay blessing that crowns our cups with joy and our heads with
garlands and forgetfulness. But this was it which I said, that this may, nay
that it ought to be chosen, at least by an after-election: for so said S. Paul,
If we judge our selves we shall not be condemned of the Lord, that is, if we
judge our selves worthy of the sickness; if we acknowledge and confess Gods
justice in smiting us, if we take the rod of God in our own hands, and are
willing to imprint it in the flesh, we are workers together with God, in the
infliction, and then the sickness beginning, and being managed in the virtue of
repentance, and patience and resignation and charity, will end in peace and
pardon and justification, and consignation to glory. That I have spoken truth I
have brought Gods Spirit speaking in Scripture for a witness. But if this be
true, there are not many states of life that have advantages which can
outweigh this great instrument of security to our final condition. Deuteronomy. 4.5.
Moses dyed at the mouth of the Lord; said the story; he died with the kisses
of the Lords mouth, (so the Chaldee Paraphrase) it was the greatest act of
kindesse that God did to his servant Moses; he kissed him and he died; But I
have some things to observe for the better finishing this consideration.

1. All these advantages and lessenings of evil in the state of sickness are
only upon the stock of virtue, and religion. There is nothing can make
sickness in any sense eligible, or in many senses tolerable but only the
grace of God; Haec clemencia non paratur art Sed norunt cui serviunt leones.

Silatus aut renes morbo tentantur acuto.

Quaere fugam morbi. vis recte vivere? quis non?

Si virtus hocuna potest dare, fortis omissis

Hoca^e deliciis.

Hor. l. 1. ep. 6.
that only turns sickness into easiness and felicity, which also turns it
into virtue. For whosoever goes about to comfort a vicious person when he lies
sick upon his bed, can only discourse of the necessities of nature, of the
unavoidableness of the suffering, of the accidental vexations and increase of
torments by impatience, of the fellowship of all the sons of Adam, and such
other little considerations, which indeed if sadly reflected upon and found to
stand alone, teach him nothing, but the degree of his calamity, and the evil of
his condition; and teach him such a patience and minister to him such a comfort
which can only make him to observe decent gestures in his sickness, and to
converse with his friends and standers by so as may do them comfort, and ease
their funeral and civil complaints; but do him no true advantage. For all that
may be spoken to a beast when he is crowned with hairlaces and bound with
fillets to the Altar, to bleed to death to appease the anger of the Deity, and
to ease the burden of his Relatives. And indeed what comfort can he receive,
whose sickness as it looks back is an effect of Gods indignation, and fierce
vengeance, and if it goes forward and enters into the gates of the grave is a
beginning of a sorrow that shall shall never have an ending. But when the
sickness is a messenger sent from a chastising Father; when it first turns
into degrees of innocence, and then into virtues, and thence into pardon, this
is no misery, but such a method of the Divine economy, and dispensation, as
resolves to bring us to heaven without any new impositions, but merely upon the
stock and charges of nature.

2. Let it be observed that these advantages which spring from sickness, are
not in all instances of virtue, nor to all persons. Sickness is the proper
scene for patience, and resignation, for all the passive graces of a Christian,
for faith and hope, and for some single acts of the love of God. But sickness
is not a fit station for a penitent; and it can serve the ends of the grace of
repentance but accidentally: Sickness may Nec t^^ men putaverant ad rem
pertinere ubi in cia perent quod pl^cuerat ut sieret.
begin a repentance, if God continues life, and if we cooperate with the Divine
grace: or sickness may help to alleviate the wrath of God and to facilitate
the pardon, if all the other parts of this duty be performed in our healthful
state; so that it may serve at the entrance in, or at the going out. But
sickness at no hand is a good stage to represent all the substantial parts of
this duty: 1. It invites to it, 2. It makes it appear necessary, 3. It takes
off the fancies of vanity, 4. It attempers the spirit, 5. It cures hypocrisy,
6. It tames the fumes of pride, 7. It is the school of patience, 8. And by
taking us from off the brisker relishes of the world, it makes us with more
gust to taste the things of the Spirit: and all this, only when God fits the
circumstances of the sickness, so as to consist with acts of reason,
consideration, choice, and a present and reflecting mind: which then God sends
when he means that the sickness of the body should be the cure of the soul. But
let no man so rely upon it, as by design, to trust the beginning, the
progress, and the consummation of our piety to such an estate which for ever
leaves it unperfect: and though to some persons it adds degrees, and ministers
opportunities, and exercises single acts with great advantage, in passive
graces, yet it is never an entire or sufficient instrument for the change of
our condition, from the state of death to the liberty and life of the sons of
God.

3. It were good if we would transact the affairs of our souls with nobleness
and ingenuity, and that we would by an early and forward religion prevent the
necessary arts of the Divine providence. It is true, that God cures some by
incision, by fire and torments, but these are ever the more obstinate and more
unrelenting natures. Neque tam aversa unquam videbitur ab ope^e suo providentia
ut debiltas inter optima inventa ^it.
Gods providence is not so afflictive and full of trouble as that it has
placed sickness and infirmity amongst things simply necessary; and in most
persons it is but a sickly and an effeminate virtue which is imprinted upon our
spirits with fears and the sorrows of a fever, or a peev^sh consumption. It
is but a miserable remedy to be beholding to a sickness for our health, and
though it be better to suffer the loss of a finger, then that the arm and the
whole body should putrify, yet even then also it is a trouble, and an evil to
lose a finger. He that mends with sickness pares the nails of the beast, when
they have already torn off part of the flesh: But he that would have a
sickness become a clear and an entire blessing, a thing indeed to be reckoned
among the good things of God, and the evil things of the world, must lead an
holy life, and judge himself with an early sentence, and so order the affairs
of his soul, that in the usual method of Gods saving us, there may be nothing
left to be done, but that such virtues should be exercised which God intends to
crown: and then, as when the Athenians upon a day of battle with longing and
uncertain souls sat in their Common Hall expecting what would be the sentence
of the day, at last received a messenger, who only had breath enough left him
to say, [ We are conquerours] and so died: So shall the sick person, who has
fought a good fight, and kept the faith, and only wait^ for his dissolution,
and his sentence, breaths forth his spirit, with the accents of a conqueror,
and his sickness and his death shall only make the mercy and the virtue more
illustrious.

But for the sickness it self; if all the calumnies were true concerning it,
with which it is aspersed, yet it is far to be preferred before the most
pleasant sin, and before a great secular business, and a temporal care; and
some men wake as much in the foldings of the softest beds, as others on the
cross: and sometimes the very weight of sorrow, and the weariness of a
sickness presses the spirit into slumbers and the images of rest, when the
intemperate or the lustful person rolls upon his uneasy thorns, and sleep is
departed from his eyes. Certainly it is, some sickness is a blessing. Indeed,
blindness were a most accursed thing, Detesta. bilis ^rit caecitas si nemo
oculos per diderit nisi cui eruondisunt.
if no man were ever blind, but he whose eyes are pulled out with tortures, or
burning basins; and if sickness were always a testimony of Gods anger, and a
violence to a man's whole condition, then it were a huge calamity: but because
God sends it to his servants, to his children, to little infants, to Apostles
and Saints, with designs of mercy, to preserve their innocence, to overcome
temptation, to try their virtue, to fit them for rewards; it is certain, that
sickness never is an evil, but by our own faults; and if we will do our duty,
we shall be sure to turn it into a blessing. If the sickness be great it may
end in death; Memineris ergo maximos dolores morte finiri, parvos habere multa
intervalla requietis, mediocrium nos esse dominos. Cicero.
and the greater it is, the sooner; and if it be very little, it has great
intervalls of rest; if it be between both we may be Masters of it, and by
serving the ends of Providence serve also the perfective end of humane nature,
and enter into the possession of everlasting mercies.

The sum is this; He that is afraid of pain, is afraid of his own nature, and
if his fear be violent, it is a sign his patience is none at all; and an
impatient person is not ready dressed for heaven. None but suffering, humble,
and patient persons can go to heaven: and when God has given us the whole
stage of our life to exercise all the active virtues of religion, it is
necessary in the state of virtues that some portion and period of our lives be
assigned to passive graces; for patience, for Christian fortitude, for
resignation, or conformity to the Divine will. But as the violent fear of
sickness makes us impatient, so it will make our death without comfort and
without religion, and we shall go off from our stage of actions and sufferings,
with an unhandsome exit, because we were willing to receive the Kindness of
God when he expressed it as we listed: But we would not suffer him to be kind
and gracious to us in his own method, nor were willing to exercise and improve
our virtues at the charge of a sharp Fever or a lingering consumption. Ecclus.
2.14.
Woe be to the man that has lost patience, for what will he do when the Lord
shall visit him.

SECT. VII. The second temptation proper to the state of sickness; Fear of
death, with its remedies.
THere is nothing which can make sickness unsanctified, but the same also will
give us cause to fear death. If therefore we so order our affairs and spirits,
that we do no^ fear death, our sickness may easily become our advantage, and we
can then receive counsel, and consider, and do those acts of virtue, which are
in that state the proper services of God: and such which men in bondage and
fear are not capable of doing, or of advices how they should, when they come to
the appointed days of mourning. And indeed if men would but place their
design of being happy in the nobleness, courage and perfect resolutions of
doing handsome things, and passing thorough our unavoidable necessities; in the
contempt and despite of the things of this world, and in holy living, and the
perfective desires of our natures, the longings and pursuances after Heaven, it
is certain they could not be made miserable by chance and change, by sickness
and death. But we are so softened and made effeminate with delicate thoughts and
meditations of ease, and brutish satisfactions, that if our death comes before
we have seized upon a great-fortune, or enjoy the promises of the fortune
tellers, we esteem our selves to be robbed of our goods, to be mocked, and
miserable. Hence it comes that men are impatient of the thoughts of death;
hence comes those arts of protraction and delaying the significations of old
age Montiris, juvenem tinctis Lentine, capillis
Tam subito corvus qui modo cygnus eras.
Non omnes fallis, scit te Proserpina canum,
Personam capiti detrahet illa tuo.
Mar. l. 3. ep. 43.
; thinking to deceive the world men cosen themselves, and by representing
themselves youthful, they certainly continue their vanity, till Proserpina
pull the perruke from their heads. We cannot deceive God and nature; for a
coffin is a coffin, though it be covered with a pompous veil; and the minutes
of our time strike on, and are counted by Angels, till the period comes which
must cause the passing bell to give warning to all the neighbors that thou art
dead, and they must be so: and nothing can excuse or retard this: and if our
death could be put off a little longer, what advantage can it be in thy
accounts of nature or felicity? They that 3000 years agone dyed unwillingly,
and stopped death two days, or staid it a week, what is their gain? where is
that week? and poor spirited men use arts of protraction, Audet iter numeratque
dies spatioq, viarum
Metitur vitam, torquetur morte futur^.
Hor. lib. 3. Od. 1.
and make their persons pitiable, but their condition contemptible; being like
the poor sinners at Noah's flood; (...)
(...).
Soph.
the waters drove them out of their lower rooms, then they crept up to the
roof, Nihil est miserius dubitatione volutantium quar^um evadan^, quantum sit
illud quod resta^ aut quale?

Seneca l. 17. ep. 102.
having lasted half a day longer: and then they knew not how to get down: some
crept upon the top branch of a tree, and some climbed up to a mountain, and
staid it may be three days longer; but all that while they endured a worse
torment then death; they lived with amazement, and were distracted with the
ruins of mankind, and the horror of an universal deluge.

Remedies against the fear of death by way of consideration.
1. God having in this world placed us in a sea, and troubled the sea with a
continual storm, has appointed the Church for a ship, and religion to be the
stern: but there is no haven or port, but death. Death is that harbor whither
God has designed every one, that there he may find rest from the troubles of
the world. How many of the noblest Romans have taken death for sanctuary, and
have esteemed it less then shame or a mean dishonor? And Caesar was cruel to
Domitius Captain of Corfinium, when he had taken the town from him, -- Heu
quanto melius vel cede peracta
Parcere Romano potuit fortuna pudori.
Lucan.
that he refused to sign his petition of death. Death would have hid his head
with honor, but that cruel mercy reserved him to the shame of surviving his
disgrace. The Holy Scripture giving an account of the reasons of the divine
providence taking Godly men from this world; and shutting them up in a hasty
grave, says, that they are taken from the evils to come: and concerning our
selves it is certain, if we had ten years agone taken seizure of our portion of
dust, death had not taken us from good things, but from infinite evils, such
which the sun has seldom seen. Haec omnia vidit in flammari, Jovis aram
sanguine ^urpari.
Did not Priamus weep oftener then Troilus? and happy had he been if he had died
when his sons were living, and his kingdom safe, and houses full, and his city
unburnt. It was a long life that made him miserable, and an early death only
could have secured his fortune. -- Sic longius aevum
Destruit ingentes animos and vitasuperstes;
Imperio nisi summa dies cum fine bonorum
A^fluit and celeri praevertit tristia leto
Dedecori est fortuna prior.
Lucan. lib. 8.
and it has happened many times that persons of a fa^r life and a clear
reputation, of a good fortune, and an honorable name, have been tempted in
their age to folly and vanity, have fallen under the disgrace of dotage, or
into an unfortunate marriage, or have besottted themselves with drinking, or
outlived their fortunes, or become tedious to their friends, or are afflicted
with lingering and vexatious diseases, or lived to see their excellent parts
buried, and cannot understand the wise discourses and productions of their
younger years; Mors il^ melius quam tu consuluit quidem. -- quisquamne secundis
Tradere se fatis audet nisi morte parata.

Luc. l. 8.
In all these cases and infinite more, do not all the world say but it had been
better this man had died sooner? But so have I known passionate women to shrike
aloud when their nearest relatives were dying, and that horrid shrike has
stayed the spirit of the man, a while to wonder at the folly, and represent the
inconvenience, and the dying person has lived one day longer, full of pain,
amazed with an undeterminate spirit, distorted with convulsions, and only come
again to act one scene more of a new calamity, and to die with less decency: so
also do very many men, with passion and a troubled interest, they strive to
continue their life longer, and it may be they escape this sickness, and live
to fall into a disgrace; they escape the storm and fall into the hands of
pirates, and instead of dying with liberty, they live like slaves, miserable and
despised, servants to a little time, and sottish admirers of the breath of their
own lungs. Paulus Aemilius did handsomely reprove the cowardice of the King of
Macedon, who begged of him for pities sake and humanity, that having conquered
him and taken his kingdom from him he would be content with that, and not lead
him in triumph a prisoner to Rome. Aemilius told him he need not be beholding
to him for that: himself might prevent that in despite of him. But the timorous
King durst not die: But certainly every wise man will easily believe that it
had been better the Macedonian Kings should have dyed in battle, then protract
their life so long, till some of them came to be Scriveners and Joyners at
Rome: or that the Tyrant of Sicily better had perished in the Adriatic, then to
be wafted to Corinth safely and there turn Schoolmaster. It is a sad calamity
that the fear of death shall so imbecill man's courage and understanding, that
he dares not suffer the remedy of all his calamities; but that he lives to say
as Liberius did, Nimirum hac die una plus vixi mihi quam vivendum fuit. Hoc
homo morte lucratur ne malum esset immortale.

Naz.
I have lived this one day longer then I should: either therefore let us be
willing to die when God calls, or let us never more complain of the calamities
of our life which we feel so sharp and numerous. And when God sends his Angel
to us with a scroll of death, let us look on it as an act of mercy, to prevent
many sins and many calamities of a longer life; and lay our heads down softly,
and go to sleep without wrangling like babies and froward children. For a man
(at least) gets this by death, that his calamities are not immortal.

But I do not only consider death by the advantages of comparison, but if we
look on it in it self it is no such formidable thing, if we view it on both
sides and handle it, and consider all its appendages.

2. It is necessary and therefore not intolerable: and nothing is to be
esteemed evil which God and nature have fixed with eternal sanc^ions. Nihil in
malis ducamus quod fit a Diis immortalibus vel a natura parente omnium^
cnstitutum.
It is a law of God, it is a punishment of our sins, and it is the constitution
of our nature. Two differing substances were joined together with the breath of
God, and when that breath is taken away they part asunder, and return to their
several principles: Concre tum fuit, disere tum est, rediitque unde venerat;
terra deorsum, spirtu; sursum. Quid ex his omnibus iniquum est? nihi. Epichar.
the soul to God our Father, the body to the earth our Mother: and what in all
this is evil? Surely nothing, but that we are men; nothing but that we were not
born immortal: but by declining this change with great passion, or receiving
it with a huge natural fear, we accuse the Divine Providence of Tyranny, and
exclaim against our natural constitution and are discontent that we are men.

3. It is a thing that is no great matter in it self: if we consider that we
die daily, that it meets us in every accident, that every creature carries a
dart along with it and can kill us. And therefore when Lysimachus threatened
Theodorus to kill him, he told him, that was no great matter to do, and he
could do no more then the Cantharides could; a little fly could do as much.

4. It is a thing that every one suffers, Natura dedit u^uram vitae ta^quam
pecuniae, quid est ergo quod querare si repetat cum vult? eadem enim lege
acceperas.

Senec.
even persons of the lowest resolution, of the meanest virtue, of no breeding,
of no discourse. Take away but the pomps of death, the disguises and solemn
bug-bears, the tinsell, and the actings by candlelight, and proper and
phantastic ceremonies, the minstrels and the noise-makers, the women and the
weepers, the swoonings and the shrikings, the Nurses and the Physicians, the
dark room and the Ministers, the Kindred and the Watchers, and then to die is
easy, ready and quitted from its troublesome circumstances. It is the same
harmless thing, that a poor shepherd suffered yesterday, or a maidservant to
day; and at the same time in which you die, Vitae est avidus Quisquis non vult
mundo secum pe^eunte mori.

Sen.
in that very night, a thousand creatures die with you, some wise men, and many
fools; and the wisdom of the first will not quit him, and the folly of the
latter does not make him unable to die.

5. Of all the evils of the world which are reproached with an evil character,
(...)
death is the most innocent of its accusation. For when it is present, it hurts
no body; and when it is absent, Par est moriri: neque est melius morte in malis
rebus misery.

Plaut. Rud.
it is indeed troublesome, but the trouble is owing to our fears, not to the
affrighting and mistaken object: and besides this, if it were an evil, it is so
transient, that it passes like the instant, Aut fuit, aut veniet nihil est
praesentis in illa.

Morsque minus poenae quam mora mortis habet.


or undiscerned portion of the present time; and either it is past, or it is
not yet; for just when it is, no man has reason to complain of so insensible,
so sudden, so undiscerned a change.

6. It is so harmless a thing, that no good man was ever thought the more
miserable for dying, but much the happier. When men saw the graves of
Calatinus, of the Servicij, the Scipio's, the Metelli, did ever any man among
the wisest Romans think them unhappy? And when S. Paul fell under the sword of
Nero, and S. Peter died upon the cross, and S. Stephen from an heap of stones
was carried into an easier grave, they that made great lamentation over them,
wept for their own interest, and after the manner of men; but the Martyrs were
accounted happy, and their days kept solemnly, and their memories preserved in
never dying honors. When S. Hilary Bishop of Poictiers in France went into the
East to reproove the Arian heresy, he heard that a young noble Gentleman,
treated with his daughter Abra for marriage: The Bishop wrote to his daughter,
that she should not engage her promise, nor do countenance to that request,
because he had provided for her a husband fair, rich, wise and noble, far
beyond her present offer. The event of which was this: She obeyed, and when her
father returned from his Eastern triumph to his Western charge, he prayed to
God that his daughter might die quickly, and God heard his prayers, and Christ
took her into his bosom, entertaining her with antepasts and caresses of holy
love, till the day of the marriage Supper of the Lamb shall come. But when the
Bishops wife observed this event, and understood of the good man her husband
what was done, and why, she never left him alone till he obtained the same
favor for her; and she also at the prayers of S. Hilary went into a more early
grave and a bed of joys.

7. It is a sottish and an unlearned thing to reckon the time of our life as it
is short or long, to be good or evil fortune; life in it self being neither
good nor bad, but just as we make it, and therefore so is death.

8. But when we consider, death is not only better then a miserable life, not
only an easy and innocent thing in it self, but also that it is a state of
advantage, we shall have reason not to double the sharpnesses of our sickness
by our fear of death: Certain it is, death has some good upon its proper
stock: praise and a fair memory, a reverence and religion toward them so great,
Virtutem incolu nem odimus Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus invidi

Horat.
that it is counted dishonest to speak evil of the dead; Et laudas nullos nisi
mortuos poetas.

Mart.
then they rest in peace and are quiet from their labors and are designed to
immortality. Cleobis and Biton, Throphonius and Agamedes had an early death
sent them as a reward, to the former for their piety to their Mother, to the
latter for building of a Temple. To this, all those arguments will minister,
which relate the advantages of the state of separation and resurrection.

SECT. VIII. Remedies against fear of death, by way of exercise.
1. HE that would willingly be fearlesse of death, must learn to despise the
world; he must neither love any thing passionately, nor be proud of any
circumstance of his life. (...)
(...)
(...)
Pindar.
O death how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest in
his possessions, to a man that has nothing to vex him, and that has
prosperity in all things, yea unto him that is yet able to receive meat?
Ecclus. 41.1.
said the son of Sirach. But the parts of this exercise help each other. If a
man be not incorporated in all his passions to the things of this world, he
will less fear to be divorced from them by a supervening death; and yet
because he must part with them all in death, it is but reasonable he should not
be passionate for so fugitive and transient interest. But if any man thinks
well of himself for being a handsome person, or if he be stronger and wiser
then his neighbors, he must remember that what he boasts of will decline into
weakness and dishonor; but that very boasting and complacency, will make
death keener, and more unwelcome, because it comes to take him from his
confidences and pleasures, making his beauty equal to those Ladies that have
slept some years in Charnel houses, and their strength not so stubborn as the
breath of an infant, and their wisdom such which can be looked for in the land
where all things are forgotten.

2. He that would not fear death, must strengthen his spirit with the proper
instruments of Christian fortitude. All men are resolved upon this, that to
bear grief honestly and temperately and to dye willingly and nobly is the duty
of a good and of a valiant man: and they that are not so, are vicious, and
fools, and cowards. Amittenda fortitudo est aut sepeliendus dolor. Cic.
Forrem polce animum mortis terrore carente ^
Qui spatium vitae extremu^ inter munera ponat.

All men praise the valiant, and honest, and that which the very Heathen
admired in their noblest examples, is especially patience and contempt of
death. Zeno Eleates endured torments rather then discover his friends or betray
them to the danger of the Tyrant: and Calanus the barbarous and unlearned
Indian willingly suffered himself to be burnt alive: and all the women did so,
to do honor to their Husbands Funeral, and to represent and prove their
affections great to their Lords. The religion of a Christian does more command
fortitude, then ever did any institution; for we are commanded to be willing to
die for Christ, to dye for the brethren, to dye rather then give offense or
scandal; the effect of which is this; that he that is instructed to do the
necessary parts of his duty; is by the same instrument fortified against death:
As he that does his duty need not fear death: so neither shall he; the parts of
his duty, are parts of his security. It is certainly a great baseness and
pusillanimitie of spirit that makes death terrible and extremely to be avoided.

3. Christian prudence is a great security against the fear of death. For if we
be afraid of death it is but reasonable to use all spiritual arts to take off
the apprehension of the evil: but therefore we ought to remove our fear,
because fear gives to death wings and spurs, and darts. Death hastens to a
fearful man: if therefore you would make death harmless and slow; to throw off
fear is the way to do it; and prayer is the way to do that. If therefore you be
afraid of death, consider you will have less need to fear it, by how much the
less you do fear it: and so cure your direct fear by a reflex act of prudence,
Hostem cum fugeret se Fan^nius ipse peremit. Mar.
and consideration. Fannius had not dyed so soon, if he had not feared death:
and when Cneius Carbo begged the respite of a little time for a base employment
of the soldiers of Pompey, he got nothing, but that the baseness of his fear
dishonored the dignity of his third Consulship; and he chose to dye in a
place, where none but his meanest servants should have seen him. I remember a
story of the wrastler Polydamas that running into a cave to avoid the storm,
the water at last swelled so high, that it began to press that hollownesse to
a ruin: which when his fellows espied they chose to enter into the common
fate of all men, and went abroad: but Polydamas thought by his strength to
support the earth till its intolerable weight crushed him into flatnesse and a
grave. Many men run for shelter to a place, and they only find a remedy for
their fears by feeling the worst of evils: fear it self finds no sanctuary but
the worst of sufferance; and they that fly from a battle are exposed to the
mercy and fury of the pursuers, who if they faced about, were as well disposed
to give laws of life and death, as to take them; and at worst can but die
nobly; but now even at the very best, they live shamefully or die timorously.
Courage is the greatest security; for it does most commonly safeguard the man,
but always rescues the condition from an intolerable evil.

4. If thou will be fearlesse of death, endeavor to be in love with the
felicities of Saints and Angels: and be once persuaded to believe that there is
a condition of living better then this; that there are creatures more noble
then we; that above there is a country better then ours; that the inhabitants
know more and know better; and are in places of rest and desire: and first
learn to value it, and then learn to purchase it; and death cannot be a
formidable thing, which lets us into so much joy and so much felicity. And
indeed who would not think his condition mended if he passed from conversing
with dull mortals, with ignorant and foolish persons, with Tyrants and enemies
of learning, to converse with Homer and Plato, with Socrates and Cicero, with
Plutarch and Fabricius? So the Heathens speculated: but we consider higher. The
dead that die in the Lord shall converse with S. Paul, and all the College of
the Apostles, and all the Saints and Martyrs; with all the good men whose
memory we preserve in honor: with excellent Kings and holy Bishops, and with
the great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls Jesus Christ, and with God himself.
For Christ dyed for us, that whether we wake or sleep we might live together
with him. Then we shall be free from lust and envy, from fear and rage, from
covetousness and sorrow, from tears and cowardice; and these indeed properly
are the only evils that are contrary to felicity and wisdom. Beati er^mus cum
corporibus ^e lictis and cupiditatu^ and aemu^ationum erimus expertes quodque
nunc facimus, cum laxatique curis sumus, ut spectare aliquid yelimus and vi^ere.

Tuscul. Qu.
Then we shall see strange things and know new propositions, and all things in
another manner, and to higher purposes. Cleombrotus was so taken with this
speculation, that having learned from Plato's Phaedon the souls abode, he had
not patience to stay natures dull leisure, but leapt from a wall to his portion
of immortality. And when Pomponius Atticus resolved to die by famine, to ease
the great pains of his gout, in the abstinence of two days found his foot at
ease: But when he began to feel the pleasures of an approaching death, and the
delicacies of that ease he was to inherit below, he would not withdraw his
foot, but went on and finished his death; and so did Cleanthes; and every wise
man will despise the little evils of that state, which indeed is the daughter
of fear, but the mother of rest, and peace, and felicity.

5. If God should say to us, Cast thy self into the Sea (as Christ did to S.
Peter, or as God concerning Jonas) I have provided for thee a Dolphin, or a
Whale, or a Port, a safety or a deliverance, security or a reward, were we not
incredulous and pusillanimous persons if we should tremble to put such a
felicity into act, and our selves into possession? The very duty of
resignation, and the love of our own interest are good antidores against fear.
In forty or fifty years we find evils enough, and arguments enough to make us
weary of this life: And to a good man there are very many more reasons to be
afraid of life then death, this having in it less of evil and more of
advantage. And it was a rare wish of that Roman, that death might come only to
wise and excellent persons, Mor utinam pavidos vita subducer^ nolle^
Sed virtus te sola ^ daret --
Lucan.
and not to fools and cowards, that it might not be a sanctuary for the
timorous, but the reward of the virtuous; and indeed they only can make
advantage of it.

6. Make no excuses to make thy desires of life seem reasonable; neither cover
thy fear and pretenses, but suppress it rather, with arts of severity and
ingenuity. Some are not willing to submit to Gods sentence and arrest of death,
Maneant opera interrupta, minaeque Murorum ingentes.
till they have finished such a design, or made an end of the last paragraph
of their book, or raised such portions for their children, or preached so many
sermons, or built their house, or planted their orchard, or ordered their
estate with such advantages; It is well for the modesty of these men that the
excuse is ready; but if it were not, it is certain they would search one out:
for an idle man is never ready to die, and is glad of any excuse; and a busied
man has always something unfinished, and he is ready for every thing but
death: and I remember that Petronius brings in Eumolpus composing verses in a
desperate storm, and being called upon to shift for himself when the ship
dashed upon the rock, cried out to let him alone till he had finished and
trimmed his verse, which was lame in the hinder leg; the man either had too
strong a desire to end his verse, or too great a desire not to end his life.
But we must know Gods times are not to be measured by our circumstances; and
what I value, God regards not, or if it be valuable in the accounts of men, yet
God will supply it with other contingencies of his providence: and if
Epaphroditus had died when he had his great sickness S. Paul speaks of, God
would have secured the work of the Gospel without him, and he could have spared
Epaphroditus as well as S. Stephen, and S. Peter, as well as S. James: Say no
more, but when God calls, lay aside thy papers and first dress thy soul, and
then dress thy hearse.

Blindness is odious, and widow-hood is sad, and destitution is without
comfort, and persecution is full of trouble, and famine is intolerable, and
tears are the sad ease of a sadder heart; but these are evils of our life, not
of our death. For the dead that die in the Lord are so far from wanting the
commodities of this life, that they do not want life it self.

After all this, I do not say it is a sin to be afraid of death: we find the
boldest spirit that discourses of it with confidence, and dares undertake a
danger as big as death, yet does shrink at the horror of it when it comes
dressed in its proper circumstances; And Brutus who was as bold a Roman to
undertake a noble action, as any was since they first reckoned by Consuls, yet
when Furius came to cut his throat after his defeat by Anthony, he ran from it
like a girl, and being admonished to die constantly, he swore by his life, that
he would shortly endure death. But what do I speak of such imperfect persons?
Our B. Lord was pleased to legitimate fear to us, by his agony and prayers in
the garden. It is not a sin to be afraid, (...).
but it is a great felicity to be without fear, which felicity our dearest
Savior refused to have, because it was agreeable to his purposes to suffer any
thing that was contrary to felicity, every thing but sin. But when men will by
all means avoid death, they are like those who at any hand resolve to be rich:
The case may happen in which they will blaspheme, and dishonor providence, or do
a base action, or curse God, and die: But in all cases they die miserable and
ensnared, and in no case do they die the less for it. Nature has left us the
key of the Churchyard, and custom has brought Caemeteries and charnell houses
into Cities and Churches, Quam pellunt lachrymae fovent sor^em: dura negant
cedere mollibus.
places most frequented, that we might not carry our selves strangely in so
certain, so expected, Siccas si videat genas Durae cedet hebes sors patientiae.
so ordinary, so unavoydable an accident. All reluctance or unwillingnesse to
obey the Divine decree, is but a snare to our selves, and a load to our
spirits, and is either an entire cause, or a great aggravation of the calamity.
Who did not scorn to look upon Xerxes when he caused 300. stripes to be given
to the Sea, and sent a chartell of defiance against the Mountain Atho? (...)
Il. o.
Who did not scorn the proud vanity of Cyrus when he took so goodly a revenge
upon the river Cyndus for his hard passage over it? or did not deride or pity
the Thracians for shooting arrows against heaven, when it thunders? To be
angry with God, to quarrel with the Divine providence, Et cum nihil imminuat
doloris, cur f^ustra turpes esse volumus? Senec.
by repining against an unalterable, a natural, an easy sentence, is an
argument of a huge folly, and the parent of a great trouble; as man is base and
foolish to no purpose, he throws away a vice to his own misery and to no
advantages of ease and pleasure. Fear keeps men in bondage all their life,
says Saint Paul, and patience makes him his own man, and lord of his own
interest and person. Non le vat misero, dolor
Therefore possess your selves in patience, with reason, and religion, and you
shall die with ease.

If all the parts of this discourse be true; if they be better then dreams, and
unless virtue be nothing but words, virtutem verba pucas ut l^cumligna
as a grove is a heap of trees; if they be not the Phantasmes of
hypochondriacall persons, and designs upon the interest of men, and their
persuasions to evil purposes; then there is no reason, but that we should
really desire death, and account it among the good things of God, and the sour
and laborious felicities of man. S. Paul understood it well, when he desired to
be dissolved: he well enough knew his own advantages, and pursued them
accordingly; But it is certain that he that is afraid of death, I mean, with a
violent and transporting fear, with a fear apt to discompose his duty, or his
patience, that man either loves this world too much, or dares not trust God for
the next.

SECT. IX. General rules and exercises whereby our sickness may become safe
and sanctified.
1. TAke care that the cause of thy sickness be such as may not sour it in
the principle and original causes of it. It a sad calamity to pass into the
house of mourning through the gates of intemperance, by a drunken meeting, or
the surfets of a loathed and luxurious Table; for then a man suffers the pain
of his own ^olly, and he is like a fool smarting under the whip which his own
vitiousnesse twisted for his back; then a man pays the price of his sin, and
has a pure and an unmingled sorrow in his suffering; and it cannot be
alleviated by any circumstances; for the whole affair is a mere process of
death and sorrow. Sin is in the head, sickness is in the body, and death and
an eternity of pains in the tail, and nothing can make this condition
intolerable unless the miracles of the Divine mercy will be pleased to
exchange the eternal anger for the temporal. Solatium est pro honesto dura
tolerare and ad causam a patientia respicit. 1 Pet. 2.19. Heb. 11.36. Mat. 5.11
True it is, that in all sufferings the cause of it makes it noble or ignoble,
honor or shame, tolerable or intolerable. For when patience is assaulted by a
ruder violence, and by a blow from heaven or earth, from a gracious God, or an
unjust man, patience looks forth to the doors which way she may escape, and if
innocence or a cause of religion keep the first entrance, then whether she
escapes at the gates of life or death there is a good to be received, greater
then the evils of a sickness; but if sin thrust in that sickness, and that
hell stands at the door, then patience turns into fury, and seeing it
impossible to go forth with safety, rouls up and down with a circular and
infinite revolution, making its motion not from, but upon its own center; it
doubles the pain and increases the sorrow, Magis his quae patitur vexat causa
patiendi.
till by its weight it breaks the spirit and bursts into the agonies of
infinite and eternal ages. If we had seen S. Policarp burning to death, or S.
Laurence roasted upon his gridiron, or S. Ignatius exposed to lions, or S.
Sebastion pierced with arrows, or S. Attalus carried about the theater with
scorn unto his death for the cause of Jesus, for religion, for God and a holy
conscience, we should have been in love with flames, and have thought the
gridiron fairer then the spondae, the ribs of a maritall bed: and we should
have chosen to converse with those beasts rather then those men that brought
those beasts forth; and estimated the arrows to be the rays of light brighter
then the moon; and that disgrace and mistaken pageantry were a solemnity richer
and more magficent then Mordecai's procession upon the Kings horse, and in the
robes of majesty; for so did these holy men account them: they kissed their
stakes, and hugged their deaths, and ran violently to torments, and counted
whippings and secular disgraces to be the enamel of their persons, and the
ointment of their heads, and the embalming their names, and securing them for
immortality. But to see Sejanus torn in pieces by the people, or Nero crying
or creeping timorously to his death when he was condemned to dye more majorum,
to see Judas pale and trembling, full of anguish, sorrow and despair, to
observe the groanings and intolerable agonies of Herod and Antiochus, will tell
and demonstrate the causes of patience and impatience to proceed from the
causes of the suffering; and it is sin only that makes the cup bitter and
deadly; when men by vomiting measure up the drink they took in, Hi quicquid
biberint vomitum remetientur tristes, and bilem suam regustantes. Senec.
and sick and sad do again taste their meat turned into choler by intemperance,
the sin and its punishment are mingled so, that shame covers the face, and
sorrow puts a veil of darkness upon the heart, and we scarce pity a vile
person that is haled to execution for murder or for treason, but we say he
deserves it, and that every man is concerned in it that he should dye. If lust
brought the sickness or the shame; if we truly suffer the reward of our evil
deeds, we must thank our selves; that is, we are fallen into an evil condition,
and are the sacrifice of the Divine justice. But if we live holy lives, and if
we enter well in, we are sure to pass on safe, and to go forth with
advantage, if we list our selves.

2. To this relates, that we should not counterfeit sickness; For he that is
to be careful of his passage into a sickness will think himself concerned
that he fall not into it through a trap door: for so it has sometimes
happened, that such counterfeiting, to light and evil purposes has ended in a
real sufferance: Appian tells of a Roman Gentleman, who to escape the
proscription of the Triumvirate, fled, and to secure his privacy counterfeited
himself blind on one eye, and wore a plaster upon it, till beginning to be
free from the malice of the three prevailing princes, he opened his hood, but
could not open his eye, but for ever lost the use of it, and with his eye paid
for his liberty and hypocrisy. Tantum cura potest and ars doloris desiit
Caelius fingere podagram. Mart. l. 7 ep. 38.
And Celius counterfeited the gout, and all its circumstances and pains, its
dressings and arts of remedy, and complaint, till at last the gout really
entered and spoiled the pageantry. His arts of dissimulation were so witty that
they put life and motion into the very image of the disease; he made the very
picture to sigh and groan.

It is easy to tell upon the interest of what virtue, such counterfeiting is
to be reproved. But it will be harder to snatch the politics of the world from
following that which they call a canonized and authentic precedent^: and
David's counterfeiting himself mad before the King of Gath, to save his life and
liberty, will be sufficient to entice men to serve an end upon the stock and
charges of so small an irregularity; not in the matter of manners, but in the
rules and decencies of natural or civil deportment. I cannot certainly tell
what degrees of excuse David's action might put on. This only: besides his
present necessity; the Laws whose coercitive or directive power David lived
under, had less of severity and more of liberty; and toward enemies had so
little of restraint, and so great a power, that what amongst them was a direct
sin, if used to their brethren the sons of Jacob, was lawful and permitted to
be acted against enemies. To which also I add this general caution, that the
actions of holy persons in Scripture are not always good precedents to us
Christians, who are to walk by a rule and a greater strictness, with more
simplicity and heartinesse of pursuit. And amongst them, sanctity and holy
living did in very many of its instances increase in new particulars of duty;
and the prophets reproved many things which the law forbad not, and taught many
duties which Moses prescribed not; and as the time of Christ's approach came, so
the sermons and revelations too were more evangelical, and like the patterns
which were ^ully to be exhibited by the Son of God. Amongst which it is
certain, that Christian simplicity and godly sincerity is to be accounted, *
and counterfeiting of sickness is a huge enemy to this: * it is an upbraiding
the Divine providence, * a jesting with fire, * a playing with a thunderbolt, *
a making the decrees of God to serve the vicious or secular ends of men; * it
is a tempting of a judgment, * a fal^e accusation of God, * a forestalling and
antidating his anger, * it is a cousening of men by making a God party in the
fraud; and therefore if the cousenage returns upon the man's own head, he enters
like a fox into his sickness, and perceives himself catched in a trap, or
earthed in the intolerable dangers of the grave.

3. Although we must be infinitely careful to prevent it, that sin does not
thrust us into a sickness, yet when we are in the house of sorrow, we should
do well to take Physic against sin, and suppose that it is the cause of the
evil; if not by way of natural causality and proper effect, yet by a moral
influence, and by a just demerit. We can easily see when a man has got a
surfeit; intemperance is as plain as the hand writing upon the wall, and easier
to be read: but covetousness may cause a Fever as well as drunkenness, and
pride can produce a falling sickness as well as long washings, and dilutions of
the brain, and intemperate lust: and we find it recorded in Scripture that the
contemptuous and unprepared manner of reception of the Holy Sacraments caused
sickness and death; and Sacrilege and Vow-breach in Ananias and Saphira made
them to descend quick into their graves. Therefore when sickness is upon us,
let us cast about, and if we can, let us find out the cause of Gods
displeasure, that it being removed, we may return into the health and
securities of Gods loving kindness. Thus in the three years famine David
enquired of the Lord what was the matter? and God answered, it is for Saul, and
his bloody house: and then David expiated the guilt, and the people were full
again of food and blessing: and when Israel was smitten by the Amorites,
Ioshuah cast about, and found out the accursed thing, and cast it out, and the
people after that fought prosperously. And what God in that case said to
Joshua, Josh. 7.12.
he will also verify to us; I will not be with you any more unless you
destroy the accursed thing from among you. But in pursuance of this we are to
observe that although in case of loud and clamorous sins the discovery is easy
and the remedy not di^ficult; yet because Christianity is a nice thing, and
religion is as pure as the sun, and the soul of man is apt to be troubled from
more principles then the in^ricate and curiosluy composed body in its
innum^rable parts, it will often happen that if we go to enquire into the
particular, we shall never find it out: and we may suspect drunkenness when
it may be also a morose delectation in unclean thoughts, or covetousness, or
oppression, or a crafty invasion of my neighbors rights, or my want of charity
or my judging unjustly in my own cause, or my censuring my neighbors, or a
secret pride, or a base hypocrisy, or the pursuance of little ends with
violence and passion, that may have procured the present messenger of death.
Therefore ask no more after any one, but heartily endeavor to reform all:
(...) Soph.
sin no more lest a worse thing happen, for a single search or accusation may
be the design of an imperfect repentance; but no man does heartily return to
God, but he that decrees against every irregularity; and then only we can be
restored to health or life, when we have taken away the causes of sickness and
a cursed death.

4. He that means to have his sickness turn into safety and life, into health
and virtue, must make religion the employment of his sickness, and prayer the
employment of his religion. For there are certain compendiums or abbreviatures
and shortnings of religion, fitted to several states. They that first gave up
their names to Christ, and that turned from Paganism to Christianity had an
abbreviature fitted for them; they were to renounce their false worshippings,
and give up their belief, and vow their obedience unto Christ, and in the very
profession of this they were forgiven in Baptism. For God hastens to snatch
them from the power of the Devil, and therefore shortens the passage, and
secures the estate. In the case of poverty God has reduced this duty of man,
to an abbreviature of those few graces which they can exercise; such as are
patience, contentedness, truth, and diligence; and the rest he accepts in good
will, and the charities of the soul, in prayers and the actions of a cheap
religion. And to most men charity is also an abbreviature. And as the love of
God shortens the way to the purchase of all virtues, so the expression of this
to the poor, goes a huge way in the requisites, and toward the consummation of
an excellent religion: and Martyrdom is another abbreviature: and so is every
act of an excellent and heroical virtue. But when we are fallen into the state
of sickness, and that our understanding is weak and troubled, our bodies sick
and useless, our passions turned into fear, and the whole state into
suffering, God in compliance and man's infirmity has also turned our religion
into such a duty, which a sick man can do most passionately, and a sad man and
a timorous can perform effectually, and a dying man can do to many purposes of
pardon and mercy, and that is, prayer. For although a sick man is bound to do
many acts of virtue of several kinds, yet the most of them are to be done in
the way of prayer. Prayer is not only the religion that is proper to a sick
man's condition, but it is the manner of doing other graces which is then left,
and in his power. For thus the sick man is to do his repentance, and his
mortifications, his temperance and his chastity, by a fiction of imagination
bringing the offers of the virtue to the spirit, and making an action of
election, and so our prayers are a direct act of chastity when they are made in
the matter of that grace; just as repentance for our cruelty, is an act of the
grace of mercy: and repentance for uncleanness is an act of chastity, is a
means of its purchase, an act in order to the habit: and though such acts of
virtue which are only in the way of prayer are ineffective to the entire
purchase, and of themselves cannot change the vice into virtue, yet they are
good renewings of the grace, and proper exercise of a habit already gotten.

The purpose of this discourse is to represent the excellency of prayer, and
its proper advantages which it has in the time of sickness. For besides that
it moves God to pity, piercing the clouds and making the Heavens like a pricked
eye to weep over us, and refresh us with showers of pity; it also does the work
of the soul, and expresses the virtue of his whole life in effigy, in pictures
and lively representments, so preparing it for a never ceasing crown, by
renewing the actions in the continuation of a never ceasing, a never hindered
affection. Prayer speaks to God, when the tongue is stiffned with the
approachings of death: prayer can dwell in the heart and be signified by the
hand or eye, by a thought or a groan; prayer of all the actions of religion is
the last alive, and it serves God without circumstances, and exercises material
graces by abstraction from matter, and separation, and makes them to be
spiritual: and therefore best dresses our bodies for funeral, or recovery, for
the mercies of restitution, or the mercies of the grave.

5. In every sickness whether it will or will not be so in nature and in the
event, yet in thy spirit and preparations resolve upon it, and treat thy self
accordingly as if it were a sickness unto death. For many men support their
unequal courages by flattery and false hopes, and because sicker men have
recovered, believe that they shall do so; but therefore, they neglect to adorn
their souls, or set their house in order; besides the temporal inconveniences
that often happen by such persuasions and putting off the evil day, such as
are, dying Intestate, leaving estates entangled, and some Relatives unprovided
for, they suffer infinitely in the interest and affairs of their soul, they die
carelessly and surprised, their burdens on, and their scruples unremoved, and
their cases of conscience not determined, and like a sheep, without any care
taken concerning their precious souls. Some men will never believe that a
villain will betray them, though they receive often advices from suspicious
persons and likely accidents, till they are entered into the snare, and then
they believe it when they feel it, and when they cannot return; but so the
treason entered, and the man was betrayed by his own folly, placing the snare in
the regions and advantages of opportunity. This evil looks like boldness and a
confident spirit, but it is the greatest timerousnesse and cowardice in the
world. They are so fearful to die, that they dare not look upon it as
possible; and think that the making of a Will is a mortal sign, and sending
for a spiritual man an irrecoverable disease, and they are so afraid lest they
should think and believe now they must die, that they will not take care that
it may not be evil in case they should. So did the Eastern slaves drink wine,
and wrapped their heads in a vail, that they might die without sense or sorrow,
and wink hard that they might sleep the easier. In pursuance of this rule let a
man consider, that whatsoever must be done in sickness ought to be done in
health; only let him observe that his sickness as a good monitor chastises
his neglect of duty, and forces him to live as he always should; and then all
these solemnities and dressings for death, are nothing else but the part of a
religious life, which he ought to have exercised all his days; and if those
circumstances can affright him, let him please his fancy by this truth, that
then he does but begin to live. But it will be a huge folly if he shall think
that confession of his sins will kill him, or receiving the holy Sacrament will
hasten his agony, or the Priest shall undo all the hopeful language and
promises of his Physician. Assure thy self thou can not die the sooner; But
by such addresses thou may die much the better.

6. Let the sick person be infinitely careful that he do not fall into a state
of death upon a new account; that is, at no hand commit a deliberate sin, or
retain any affection to the old; for in both cases he falls into the evils of a
surprise, and the horrors of a sudden death. For a sudden death is but a sudden
joy, if it takes a man in the state and exercises of virtue: and it is only
then an evil when it finds a man unready. They were sad departures when
Tegillinus, Cornelius Gallus the Praetor, Lewis the son of Gonzaga Duke of
Mantua, Ladislaus king of Naples, Speusippus, Giachettus of Geneva, and one of
the Popes died in the forbidden embraces of abused women; or if Job had cursed
God and so died; or when a man sits down in despair, and in the accusation and
calumny of the Divine mercy; they make their night sad, and stormy and
eternal. When Herod began to sink with the shameful torment of his bowels,
and felt the grave open under him, he imprisoned the Nobles of his Kingdom, and
commanded his Sister that they should be a sacrifice to his departing ghost.
This was an egresse fit only for such persons who meant to dwell with Devils
to eternal ages, and that man is hugely in love with sin who cannot forbear,
in the week of the Assizes, and when himself stood at the bar of scrutiny and
prepared for his final, never to be reversed sentence. He dies suddenly to the
worst sense and event of sudden death, who so manages his sickness that even
that state shall not be innocent, but that he is surprised in the guilt of a
new account. It is a sign of a reprobate spirit, and an habitual prevailing,
ruling sin, which exacts obedience when the judgment looks him in the face. At
least go to God with the innocence and fair deportment of thy person in the
last scene of thy life, that when thy soul breaks into the state of separation,
it may carry the relishes of religion and sobriety to the places of its abode
and sentence. Who so him bethost
Inwardly and often
How hard it were to flit
From bed unto the pit
From pit unto pain
That nere shall cease again
He would not do one sin
All the world to win.



7. When these things are taken care for, Inscript. marmori in Ecclosparoch de
Feversham in agro Cantiano.
let the sick man so order his affairs that he have but very little
conversation with the world, but wholly (as he can) attend to religion, and
antedate his conversation in heaven, always having intercourse with God, and
still conversing with the Holy Jesus, kissing his wounds, admiring his
goodness, beging his mercy, feeding on him with faith, and drinking his blood,
to which purpose it were very fit (if all circumstances be answerable) that the
narrative of the passion of Christ be read or discoursed to him at length, or
in brief according to the style of the four Gospels. But in all things, let his
care and society be as little secular as is possible.

CHAP. IV. Of the practice of the graces, proper to the state of sickness,
which a sick man may practice alone.
SECT. I. Of the practice of Patience.
NOw we suppose the man entering upon his Scene of sorrows, and passive graces:
It may be he went yesterday to a wedding, merry and brisk, and there he felt
his sentence, that he must return home and die. For men very commonly enter
into the snare singing, and consider not whither their fate leads them; nor
feared that then the Angel was to strike his stroke; till his knees kissed the
earth, and his head trembles with the weight of the rod, which God put into the
hand of an exterminating Angel. But whatsoever the ingresse was, when the man
feels his blood boil, or his bones weary, or his flesh diseased with a load of
a dispersed and disordered humor, or his head to ache, or his faculties
discomposed, then he must consider that all those discourses he has heard
concerning patience and resignation, and conformity to Christ's sufferings, and
the melancholy lectures of the Cross, must all of them now be reduced to
practice, and pass from an ineffective contemplation to such an exercise as
will really try whether we were true disciples of the Cross, or only believed
the doctrines of religion when we were at ease, and that they never passed
through the ear to the heart, and dwelt not in our spirits. But every man should
consider God does nothing in vain, that he would not to no purpose send us
Preachers, and give us rules, and furnish us with discourse, and lend us books,
and provide Sermons, and make examples, and promise his Spirit, and describe
the blessedness of holy sufferings, and prepare us with daily alarums; if he
did not really purpose to order our affairs so that we should need all this,
and use it all, there were no such thing as the grace of patience if we were
not to feel a sickness, or enter into a state of sufferings; whether when we
are entered, we are to practice by the following rules.

The practice and acts of patience by way of rule.
1. At the first address and presence of sickness, stand still and arrest thy
spirit, that it may without amazement, or affright consider that this was that
thou lookedst for, and were always certain should happen, and that now thou
art to enter into the actions of a new religion, the agony of a strange
constitution; but at no hand suffer thy spirits to be dispersed with fear, or
wildness of thought, but stay their looseness and dispersion by a serious
consideration of the present and future employment. For so does the Lybian Lion
spying the fierce huntsman, first beats himself with the strokes of his tail,
and curles up his spirits, making them strong with union and recollection, till
being struck with a Mauritanian spear, he rushes forth into his defense and
noblest contention; and either scapes into the secrets of his own dwelling, or
else dies, the bravest of the forest: Every man when shot with an arrow from
Gods quiver, must then draw in all the auxiliaries of reason, and know, that
then is the time to try his strength, and to reduce the words of his religion
into action, and consider that if he behaves himself weakly and timerously, he
suffers never the less of sickness; but if he turns to health he carries
along with him the mark of a coward and a fool; and if he descends into his
grave, he enters into the state of the faithless and unbeleevers. Let him set
his heart firm upon this resolution, I must bear it inevitably; and I will by
Gods grace do it nobly.

2. Bear in thy sickness all along the same thoughts, propositions, and
discourses concerning thy person, thy life, and death, thy soul and religion,
which thou had in the best days of thy health, and when thou did discourse
wisely concerning things spiritual. For it is to be supposed (and if it be not
yet done, let this rule remind thee of it, and direct thee) that thou have cast
about in thy health and considered concerning thy change, and the evil day,
that thou must be sick and die, that you must need a comforter, and that it was
certain thou should fall into a state in which all the cords of thy anchor
should be stretched, and the very rock and foundation of faith should be
attempted; and whatsoever fancies may disturb you, or whatever weaknesses may
invade you, yet consider, when you were better able to judge and govern the
accidents of your life, you concluded it necessary to trust in God, and
possess your souls with patience. Think of things as they think that stand by
you, and as you did when you stood by others, that it is a blessed thing to be
patient,, that a quietness of spirit has a certain reward, that still there
is infinite truth and reality in the promises of the Gospel, that still thou
art in the care of God, in the condition of a son, and working out thy
salvation with labor and pain, with fear and trembling, that now the Sun is
under a cloud, but it still sends forth the same influence; and be sure to make
no new principles upon the stock of a quick and an impatient sense, or too
busy an apprehension: keep your old principles, and upon their stock discourse
and practice on toward your conclusion.

3. Resolve to bear your sickness like a child, that is, without considering
the evils and the pains, the sorrows and the danger; but go straight forward,
and let thy thoughts cast about for nothing, but how to make advantages of it
by the instrument of religion. He that from a high tower looks down upon the
precipice and measures the space through which he must descend, and considers
what a huge fall he shall have, shall feel more by the horror of it, then by
the last dash on the pavement: and he that tells his groans and numbers his
sighs, and reckons one for every gripe of his belly, or throb of his
distempered pulse, will make an artificial sickness greater then the
natural; and if thou be ashamed that a child should bear an evil better
then thou, then take his instrument and allay thy spirit with it.; reflect not
upon thy evil, but contrive as much as you can for duty, and in all the rest,
inconsideration will ease your pain.

4. If thou fear thou shall need; observe and draw together all such things
as are apt to charm thy spirit, and ease thy fancy in the sufferance. It is the
counsel of Socrates: (...)
It is (said he) a great danger, and you must by discourse and arts of
reasoning inchant it into slumber and some rest. It may be thou were moved much
to see a person of honor to die untimely; or thou did love the religion of
that death bed, and it was dressed up in circumstances fitted to thy needs, and
hit thee on that part, where thou were most sensible; or some little saying in
a Sermon, or passage of a book was chosen and singled out by a peculiar
apprehension, and made consent lodge a while in thy spirit, even then when thou
did place death in thy meditation, and did view it in all its dress of
fancy: whatsoever that was which at any time did please thee in thy most
passionate and fantastic part, let not that go, but bring it home at that time
especially; because then thou art in thy weakness, such little things will
easier move thee then a more severe discourse and a better reason. For a sick
man is like a scrupulous: his case is gone beyond the cure of arguments, and it
is a trouble that can only be helped by chance, or a lucky saying; and
Ludovico Corbinelli was moved at the death of Henry the second more then if he
had read the saddest Elegy of all the unfortunate Princes in Christendom, or
all the sad sayings of Scripture, or the threnes of the funeral prophets. I
deny not, but this course is most proper to weak persons; but it is a state of
weakness for which we are now providing remedies and instruction; a strong man
will not need it: But when our sickness has rendered us weak in all senses, it
is not good to refuse a remedy, because it supposes us to be sick. But then if
to the Catalogue of weak persons we add all those who are ruled by fancy, we
shall find that many persons in their health, and more in their sickness, are
under the dominion of fancy, and apt to be helped by those little things, which
themselves have found fitted to their apprehension; and which no other man can
minister to their needs, unless by chance, or in a heap of other things. But
therefore every man should remember by what instruments he was at any time much
moved, and try them upon his spirit in the day of his calamity.

5. Do not choose the kind of thy sickness, or the manner of thy death; but
let it be what God please, so it be no greater then thy spirit, or thy
patience: and for that, you are to rely upon the promise of God; and to secure
thy self by prayer and industry; but in all things else, let God be thy
chooser, and let it be thy work to submit indifferently, and attend thy duty.
It is lawful to beg of God that thy sickness may not be sharp, or noisome,
infectious or unusual, because these are circumstances of evil which are also
proper instruments of temptation; and though it may well concern the prudence
of thy religion to fear thy self, and keep thee from violent temptations, who
have so often fallen in little ones; yet even in these things be sure to keep
some degrees of indifferency; that is, if God will not be entreated to ease
thee, or to change thy trial, then be importunate that thy spirit and its
interest be secured, and let him do what seems good in his eyes; but as in
the degrees of sickness thou art to submit to God; so in the kind of it,
(supposing equal degrees) thou art to be altogether incurious; whether God
call thee by a consumption or an asthma, by a dropsey or a palsy, by a fever
in thy humors, or a fever in thy spirits, because all such nicety of choice
is nothing but a color to legitimate impatience, and to make an excuse to
murmr privately, and for circumstances, when in the sum of affairs we durst
not own impatience. I have known some persons vehemently wish that they might
die of a consumption, and some of these had a plot upon heaven, and hoped by
that means to secure it after a careless life; as thinking a lingering
sickness would certainly infer a lingering and a protracted repentance; and by
that means they thought they should be safest; others of them dreamed it would
be an easier death, and have found themselves deceived, and their patience has
been tired with a weary spirit and a useless body, by often conversing with
healthful persons and vigorous neighbors, by uneasinesse of the flesh, and
the sharpness of his bones, by want of spirits and a dying life; and in
conclusion have been directly debauched by peevishness and a fretfull
sickness, and these men had better have left it to the wisdom and goodness of
God, for they both are infinite.

6. Be patient in the desires of religion, and take care that the forwardness
of exterior actions do not discompose thy spirit: while thou fear that by
less serving God in thy disability, thou runnest backward in the accounts of
pardon and the favor of God. Be content that the time which was formerly spent
in prayer be now spent in vomiting, and carfulness and attendances: since God
has pleased it should be so, it does not become us to think hard thoughts
concerning it: Do not think that God is only to be found in a great prayer, or
a solemn office; he is moved by a sigh, by a groan, by an act of love; and
therefore when your pain is great and pungent, lay all your strength upon it,
to bear it patiently; when the evil is something more tolerable, let your mind
think some pious, though short meditation; let it not be very busy, and full
of attention; for that will be but a new temptation to your patience, and
render your religion tedious and hateful; But record your desires, and present
your self to God by general acts of will and understanding, and by habitual
remembrances of your former vigorousnesse, and by verification of the same
grace, rather then proper exercises: if you can do more, do it; but if you
cannot, let it not become a scruple to thee; we must not think man is tied to
the forms of health, or that he who swoons and faints, is obliged to his usual
forms and hours of prayer; if we cannot labor, yet let us love. Nothing can
hinder us from that, but our own uncharitableness.

7. Be obedient unto thy Physician in those things that concern him, if he be a
person fit to minister unto thee; Ipsi ceu vi Deo nullo est opus; apud Senecam.
Scaliger recte emendat; Ipsi ceu Deo etc Ex Graeco scilicet (...).
God is he only that needs no help; and God has created the Physician for
thine: therefore use him temperately, without violent confidences; and sweetly
without uncivil distrustings, or refusing his prescriptions upon humors or
impotent fear. A man may refuse to have his arm or leg cut off, or to suffer
the pains of Marius his incision: and if he believes that to dye is the less
evil, he may compose himself to it without hazarding his patience, or
introducing that which he thinks a worse evil; but that which in this article
is to be reproved and avoided, is, that some men will choose to die out of fear
of death, and send for Physicians, and do what themselves list, and call for
counsel and follow none. When there is reason they should decline him it is not
to be accounted to the stock of a sin; but where there is no just cause, there
is a direct impatience.

Hither is to be reduced that we be not too confident of the Physician or drain
our hopes of recovery from the ^ountain, through so imperfect channels; laying
the wells of God dry, and digging to our selves broken cisterns. Physicians are
the Ministers of Gods mercies, and providence, in the matter of health and
ease, of restitution or death; and when God shall enable their judgments and
direct their counsels, and prosper their medicines, they shall do thee good,
for which you must give God thanks, and to the Physician the honor of a
blessed instrument. But this cannot always be done; L. Cornel. legatus sub
Fabio Consule vividam naturam and virilem animam servavi, quoad animam e^flavi;
and tandem disertus open medicorum and Esculapii dei ingrati cui me voveram
sodalem perpetuo futurum si fila aliquantulum optata protulisset. Vetus
inscriptio in Lusitania.
and Lucius Cornelius the Lieutenant in Portugal under Fabius the Consul,
boasted in the inscription of his monument, that he had lived a healthful and
vegete age till his last sickness, but then complained he was forsaken by his
Physician, and railed upon Esculapius, for not accepting his vow and passionate
desire of preserving his life longer: and all the effect of that impatience and
the folly was, that it is recorded to following ages, that he died without
reason and without religion. But it was a sad sight to see the favor of all
France confined to a Physician and a Barber, and the King ( Lewis the XI.) to
be so much their servant that he should acknowledge and own his life from them,
and all his ease to their gentle dressing of his gout, and friendly
ministeries; Nunc omnibus anxius aris
Illachrimat signatque fores and pectore terget
Limina; nunc frustra vo^at exorabile nomen.
Papin. l. 5.
for the King thought himself undone and robbed if he should die; his portion
here was fair: and he was loath to exchange his possession for the interest of a
bigger hope.

8. Treat thy nurses and servants sweetly and as it becomes an obliged and a
necessitous person; remember that thou art very troublesome to them; that they
trouble not thee willingly; that they strive to do thee ease and benefit, that
they wish it and sigh, and pray for it, and are glad if thou likest their
attendance: that whatsoever is amiss is thy disease, and the uneasinesse of
thy head or thy side, thy distemper or thy disaffections; and it will be an
unhandsome injustice to be troublesome to them because thou art so to thy self;
to make them feel a part of thy sorrows that thou may not bear them alone;
evilly to requite their care by thy too curious and impatient wrangling, and
fretful spirit. That tenderness is vicious and unnatural that shrikes out
under the weight of a gentle cataplasm; and he will ill comply with Gods rod,
that cannot endure his friends greatest kindness: And he will be very angry
(if he durst) with Gods smiting him, that is peevish with his servants that go
about to ease him.

9. Let not the smart of your sickness make you to call violently for death;
(...) Graeci vocant cum ^ors propter impatientiam pe^itur.
you are not patient, unless you be content to live. God has wisely ordered
that we may be the better reconciled with death, because it is the period of
many calamities. But where ever the General has placed thee, stir not from
thy station until thou be called off, but abide so, that death may come to
thee by the design of him who intends it to be thy advantage; God has made
sufferance to be thy work, and do not impatiently long for evening, lest at
night thou find the reward of him that was weary of his work; for he that is
weary before his time is an unprofitable servant, and is either idle or
diseased.

10 That which remains in the practice of this grace is that the sick man
should do acts of patience by way of prayer and ejaculations. In which he may
serve himself of the following collection.

SECT. II. Acts of patience by way of prayer and ejaculation.
I Will seek unto God, unto God will I commit my cause which does great things
and unsearchable: Job 5.8.10.
mavelous things without number.

To set upon high those that be low, that those which mourn may be exalted to
safety. verse. 11.16.
So the poor have hope and iniquity stops her mouth.

Behold, happy is the man whom God corrects: therefore despise not thou the
chastening of the Almighty. 17.


For he makes sore and binds up, he wounds and his hands make whole. 18.


He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil touch
thee. Thou shall come to thy grave in a just age like as a shock of corn comes
in his season 26.


I remember thee upon my bed, Psalm 63.6.
and meditate upon thee in the night watches. Because thou have been my help,
therefore under the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice. 7, 8.
My soul follows hard after thee, for thy right hand has upholden me.

God restores my soul: he leads me in the path of righteousness for his
names sake. Yea though I walk thorough the valley of the shadow of death, I
will fear no evil: Psalm 23.3, 4,
for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me.

In the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: Psalm 27.5.
in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me, he shall set me up upon a rock.

The Lord has looked down from the height of his sanctuary, from the heaven
did the Lord behold the earth. To hear the groaning of his prisoners, to loose
those that are appointed to death. Psalm. 102 v. 19, 20


I cried unto God with my voice: even unto God with my voice, and he gave ear
unto me; In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord; my sore ran in the night
and ceased not; my soul refused to be comforted. * I remember God and was
troubled: I complained and my spirit was overwhelmed; thou hold mine eyes
waking: I am so troubled that I cannot speak; will the Lord cast me off for
ever, and will he be favorable no more? Is his promise clean gone for ever?
does his promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious? Psalm
77.1, etc
has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? And I said, this my infirmity:
but I will remember the years of the right hand of the most High.

No temptation has taken me, but such as is common to man: but God is faithful
who will not suffer me to be tempted above what I am able; but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape that I may be able to bear it. 1 Cor.
10.13.


Whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Romans 15.4, 5.
Now the God of peace and consolation grant me to be so minded.

It is the Lord, let him do what seems good in his eyes. 1 Samuel 3.18.


Surely the word that the Lord has spoken is very good: But thy servant is
weak; O remember mine infirmities; and lift thy servant up that leans upon
thy right hand.

There is given unto me a thorn in the flesh to buffet me. For this thing I
besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me; and he said unto me, My
grace is sufficient for thee. For my strength is made perfect in weakness.
Most gladly therefore will I glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ
may rest upon me. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9
For when I am weak then am I strong.

O Lord thou have pleaded the causes of my soul; thou have redeemed my life.
And I said, My strength and my hope is in the Lord, remembering my affliction
and my misery; the wormwood and the gall. Lam. 3.18, 19, etc.
My soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled within me. This I
recall to my mind, therefore I have hope.

It is the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail
not. They are new every morning, great is thy faithfulness. ibid.
The Lord is my portion said my soul, therefore will I hope in him.

The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that seeks him It
is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the
Lord. For the Lord will not cast off for ever. But though he cause grief, yet
will he have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies. ibid.
For he does not afflict willingly nor grieve the children of men.

Wherefore does a living man complain? a man for the punishment of his sins? O
that thou would hide me in the grave [of Jesus] that thou would keep me
secret until thy wrath be past, that thou would appoint me a set time and
remember me! Job 14.13.


Job 2.10.
Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?

The sick man may recite or hear recited the following Psalms in the intervals
of his agony.
I.
O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, Psalm. 6.
neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak, O Lord heal me, for my bones are
vexed.

My soul is also sore vexed, but thou, O Lord how long? Return O Lord, deliver
my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake*

For in death no man remembers thee: in the grave who shall give thee thanks.

I am weary with my groaning: all the night make I my bed to swim: I water my
couch with my tears.

Mine eye is consumed because of grief; it waxes old because of all my
[sorrowes.

Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity, for the Lord has heard the voice
of my weeping.

The Lord has heard my supplication: the Lord will receive my prayer.

Blessed be the Lord who has heard my prayer: and has not turned his mercy
from me.

II.
IN the Lord put I my trust; how say ye to my soul, flee as a bird to your
mountain?

The Lord is in his holy temple, Psalm. 11
the Lords throne is in heaven, his eyes behold, his eyelids try the children
of men.

Preserve me O God; Psalm. 16
for in thee do I put my trust.

O my soul thou have said unto the Lord: thou art my Lord, my goodness
extends not to thee.

The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest my
lot.

I will bless the Lord who has given me counsel, my reins also instruct me in
the night seasons.

I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my right hand I shall
not be moved.

Therefore my heart is glad and my glory rejoices, my flesh also shall rest in
hope.

Thou will show me the path of life: in thy presence is the fullness of joy, at
thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

As for me I will behold thy face in righteousness: Psalm. 17
I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness.

III.
Psalm 31.9.
HAve mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in trouble: mine eye is consumed with
grief; yea my soul and my belly.

For my life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing: my strength
fails because of mine iniquity and my bones are consumed. * I am like a
broken vessel.

But I trusted in thee O Lord, I said thou art my God.

My times are in thy hand: make thy face to shine upon thy servant: save me for
thy mercies sake.

When thou said, seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee, 27.
thy face Lord will I seek.

Hide not thy face from me; put not thy servant away in thy anger: thou had
been my help, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation.

I had fainted unless I had believed the goodness of the Lord in the land of
the living.

O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee:
31.
which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of men.

Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man, thou
shall keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues [from the
calumnies and aggravation of sins by Devils.]

I said in my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes: nevertheless thou
heardest the voice of my supplication, when I cried unto thee.

O love the Lord all ye his Saints: for the Lord preserves the faithful, and
plenteously rewards the proud doer.

Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart: all ye that hope in
the Lord.

The Prayer: to be said in the beginning of a sickness.
O Almighty God merciful and gracious, who in thy justice did send sorrow
and tears, sickness and death into the world as a punishment for man's sins,
and have comprehended all under sin and this sad covenant of sufferings, not to
destroy us, but that thou might have mercy upon all; making thy justice to
minister to mercy, short afflictions to an eternal weight of glory; as thou
have turned my sins into sickness, so turn my sickness to the advantages of
holiness and religion, of mercy and pardon, of faith and hope, of grace and
glory: thou have now called me to the fellowship of sufferings; Lord by the
instrument of religion, let my present condition be so sanctified that my
sufferings may be united to the sufferings of my Lord, that so thou may pity
me, and assist me; relieve my sorrow and support my spirit; direct my thoughts,
and sanctify the accidents of my sickness; and that the punishment of my sin
may be the school of virtue; In which since thou have now entered me, Lord make
me a holy proficient; that I may behave my self as a son under discipline,
humbly, and obediently, evenly, and penitently; that I may come by this means
nearer unto thee; that if I shall go forth of this sickness by the gate of
life and health, I may return to the world with great strengths of spirit, to
run a new race of a stricter holiness, and a more severe religion: Or if I
pass from hence with the outlet of death, I may enter into the bosom of my
Lord, and may feel the present joys of a certain hope of that Sea of pleasures
in which all thy Saints and servants shall be comprehended to eternal ages.
Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake, our Dearest Lord and Savior. Amen.

An act of resignation to be said by a sick person in all the evil accidents of
his sickness.
O Eternal God, thou have made me and sustained me, thou have blessed me in
all the days of my life, and have taken care of me in all variety of
accidents; and nothing happens to me in vain; nothing without thy providence;
and I know thou smitest thy servants in mercy and with designs of the greatest
pity in the world: Lord I humbly lie down under thy rod; do with me as thou
please; do thou choose for me, not only the whole state and condition of
being, but every little and great accident of it. Keep me safe by thy grace,
and then use what instrument thou please of bringing me to thee: Lord I am
not sollicitous of the passage, so I may get thee. Only, O Lord, remember my
infirmities, and let thy servant rejoice in thee always, and feel and
confess, and glory in thy goodness. O be thou as delightful to me in this my
medicinal sickness, as ever thou were in any of the dangers of my prosperity,
let me not peevishly refuse thy pardon at the rate of a severe discipline. I am
thy servant and thy creature, thy purchased possession, and thy son, I am all
thine, and because thou have mercy in store for all that trust in thee, I cover
my eyes, and in silence wait for the time of my redemption. Amen.

A Prayer for the grace of Patience.
MOst Merciful and Gracious Father, who in the redemption of lost Mankind by
the passion of thy most holy Son have established a Covenant of sufferings, I
bless and magnify thy Name that thou have adopted me into the inheritance of
sons, and have given me a portion of my elder Brother: Lord, the cross falls
heavy and sits uneasy upon my shoulders; my spirit is willing, but my flesh is
weak, I humbly beg of thee that I may now rejoice in this thy dispensation and
effect of providence; I know and am persuaded that thou art then as gracious
when thou smitest us for amendment or trial, as when thou releevest our
wearied bodies, in compliance with our infirmity: I rejoice O Lord in thy rare
and mysterious mercy, who by sufferings have turned our misery into advantages
unspeakable; for so thou make us like to thy Son, and give us a gift that
the Angels never did receive; for they cannot die in conformity to, and
imitation of their Lord and ours; but blessed be thy Name; we can, and dearest
Lord, Let it be so. Amen.

II.
THou who art the God of patience and consolation strengthen me in the inner
man, that I may bear the yoke and burden of the Lord without any uneasy and
useless murmurs, and ineffective unwillingnesse. Lord, I am unable to stand
under the cross, unable of my self, but thou, O Holy Jesus, who did feel the
burden of it, who did sink under it, and were pleased to admit a man to bear
part of the load when thou underwentest all for him; be thou pleased to ease
this load by fortifying my spirit; that I may be strongest when I am weakest,
and may be able to do and suffer every thing thou please through Christ which
strengthens me. Lord, if thou will support me, I will for ever praise thee; If
thou will suffer the load to press me yet more heavily; I will cry unto thee
and complain unto my God, and at last I will lie down and die, and by the
mercies and intercession of the Holy Jesus, and the conduct of thy blessed
Spirit, and the ministry of Angels, pass into those mansions where Holy souls
rest and weep no more. Lord pity me; Lord sanctify this my sickness; Lord
strengthen me; Holy Jesus save me and deliver me; thou know how shamefully I
have fallen with pleasure; in thy mercy and very pity, let me not fall with
pain too. O let me never charge God foolishly, nor offend thee by my impatience
and uneasy spirit, nor weaken the hands and hearts of those that charitably
minister to my needs: but let me pass through the valley of tears, and the
valley of the shadow of death with safety and peace, with a meek spirit, and a
sense of the divine mercies; and though thou breakest me in pieces, my hope is,
thou will gather me up in the gatherings of eternity. Grant this eternal God,
Gracious Father, for the merits and intercession of our merciful high Priest,
who once suffered for me, and for ever intercedes for me, our most gracious and
ever Blessed Savior Jesus.

A Prayer to be said when the sick man takes Physic.
O Most blessed and eternal Jesus, thou who art the great Physician of our
souls, and the Sun of righteousness arising with healing in thy wings; to thee
is given by thy heavenly Father the Government of all the world, and thou
disposest every great and little accident to thy Fathers honor, and to the
good and comfort of them that love and serve thee: Be pleased to bless the
ministry of thy servant in order to my ease and health, direct his judgment,
prosper the medicines, and dispose the chances of my sickness fortunately,
that I may feel the blessing and loving kindness of the Lord, in the ease of
my pain, and the restitution of my health; that I being restored to the society
of the living, and to thy solemn Assemblies, may praise thee and thy goodness
secretly among the faithful, and in the Congregation of thy redeemed ones,
here in the outer-courts of the Lord, and hereafter in thy eternal temple for
ever and ever. Amen.

SECT. III. Of the practice of the grace of Faith in the time of sickness.
NOw is the time in which faith appears most necessary and most difficult. It
is the foundation of a good life; and the foundation of all our hopes; it is
that without which we cannot live well, and without which we cannot die well;
it is a grace that then we shall need, to support our spirits to sustain our
hopes, to alleviate our sickesse, to resist temptations, to prevent despair:
upon the belief of the articles of our religion we can do the works of a holy
life; but upon belief of the promises, we can bear our sickness patiently and
die cheerfully. The sick man may practice it in the following instances.

1. Let the sick man be careful that he do not admit of any doubt concerning
that which he believed, and received from common consent in his best health and
days of election and religion. For if the Devil can but prevail so far as to
unfix and unrivet the resolution and confidence or fullness of assent, it is
easy for him so to unwinde the spirit, that from why to whether or no, from
whether or no, to scarcely not, from scarcely not, to absolutely not at all are
steps of a descending and falling spirit: and whatsoever a man is made to doubt
of by the weakness of his understanding in a sickness, it will be hard to get
an instrument strong or subtle enough to reenforce and ensure; For when the
strengths are gone by which faith held, and it does not stand firm by the
weight of its own bulk and great constitution, nor yet by the cordage of a
tenacious root, then it is prepared for a ruin, which it cannot escape in the
tempests of a sickness and the assaults of a Devil. * Discourse and argument,
* the line of tradition, and a never * failing experience, * the Spirit of God
and the * truth of miracles, * the word of prophecy, * and the blood of
Martyrs, * the excellency of the doctrine and * the necessity of men, Non jam
validi, radicibus haerens Pondere fixa suo.
* the riches of the promises, * and the wisdom of the revelations, * the
reasonableness and * sublimity, the * concordance and the * usefulness of the
articles, and * their compliance with all the needs of man, * and the government
of common wealths, are like the strings and branches of the roots, by which
faith stands firm and unmovable in the spirit, and understanding of a man. But
in sickness the understanding is shaken and the ground is removed in which the
root did grapple, and support its trunk, and therefore there is no way now, but
that it be left to stand upon the old confidences, and by the firmament of its
own weight; it must be left to stand because it always stood there before:
Sanctiusque ac reverentius visum de actis ^^orum credere quam scire. facit
and as it stood all his life time in the ground of understanding, so it must
now be supported with will and a fixed resolution. But disputation tempts it,
and shakes it with trying, and overthrowes it with shaking. Above all things in
the world, let the sick man fear a proposition which his sickness has put into
him, contrary to the discourses of health, and a sober untroubled reason.

Fides tua te salvum faciet; non exercitati^ scriptururam. Fides in regula
posita est; (scil. in symbolo quod jam recitaverat) habet legem, and salutem de
observatione legi^^t exercitatio autem in curiositate consistit, habens gloriam
solam de peritiae studio: Cedat curiositas fidei; cedat gloria saluri. Tert. de
praescript.
2. Let the sick man mingle the recital of his Creed together with his
devotions, and in that let him account his faith; not in curiosity and
factions, in the confessions of parties and interests; for some over froward
zeals are so earnest to profess their little and uncertain articles, S.
Augustinus vocat symbolum comprehensionem fidei vestrae atque perfectionem
Cordis signaculum, and nostrae militiae^ acramentum. Amb lib. 3. de veland
virgin. Aug. sermon. 115.
and glory so to die in a particular and divided communion, that in the
profession of their faith they lose or discompose their charity; Non per
difficiles nos Deus ad beatam vita^n quaestiones vocat. In absoluto nobis and
facili est aeternitas: ^esum suscitatum a mortuis per Deum credere and ipsum
esse Dominum confiteri. S. Hilar. lib. 10. de Trinit.
let it be enough that we secure our interest of heaven, though we do not go
about to appropriate the mansions to our sect; for every good man hopes to be
saved as he is a Christian, and not as he is a Lutheran or of another division.
Haec est fides Catholica (de symbolo suo dixit Athanasiu, velqu cuncque author
est. S. Athanas. de fide Nicena, (...). Ep ad Epict.
However those articles upon which he can build the exercise of any virtue in
his sickness, or upon the stock of which he can improve his present condition,
are such as consist in the greatness and goodness, the veracity and mercy of
God thorough Jesus Christ; nothing of which can be concerned in the fond
disputations which faction and interest has too long maintained in Christendom.

3. Let the sick man's faith especially be active about the promises of grace,
and the excellent things of the gospel; those which can comfort his sorrows,
and enable his patience; those upon the hopes of which, he did the duties of
his life, and for which he is not unwilling to dye; such as the intercession
and advocation of Christ, remission of sins, the resurrection, the mysterious
arts and mercies of man's redemption, Christ's triumph over death, and all the
powers of hell, the covenant of grace, or the blessed issues of repentance, and
above all, the article of eternal life, upon the strength of which 11000
virgins went cheerfully together to their martyrdom, and 20000 Christians were
burned by Dioclesian on a Christmas day, and whole armies of Asian Christians
offered themselves to the Tribunals of Arius Anthonius, Tertul. ad Sapul.
and whole colleges of severe persons were instituted, who lived upon
religion, whose dinner was the Eucharist, whose supper was praise, and their
nights were watches, and their days were labor; for the hope of which then
men counted it gain to lose their estates and gloried in their sufferings, and
rejoiced in their persecutions, and were glad at their disgraces; this is the
article that has made all the Martyrs of Christ confident and glorious, and if
it does not more then sufficiently strengthen our spirits to the present
suffering it is because we understand it not, but have the appetites of beasts
and fools. But if the sick man fixes his thoughts and lets his habitation to
dwell here, he swells his hope and masters his fears, and eases his sorrows,
and overcomes his temptations.

4. Let the sick man endeavor to turn his faith of the Articles into love of
them; and that will be an excellent instrument, not only to refresh his
sorrows, but to confirm his faith in defiance of all temptations. For a sick
man and a disturbed understanding are not competent and fit instruments, to
judge concerning the reasonableness of a proposition; But therefore let him
consider and love it, because it is useful and necessary, profitable and
gracious; and when he is once in love with it, and then also renews his love to
it, when he feels the need of it; he is an interested person, and for his own
sake will never let it go, and pass into the shadows of doubting, or the
utter-darknesse of infidelity. An act of love will make him have a mind to it,
and we easily believe what we love, but very uneasily part with our belief
which we for so great an interest have chosen, and entertained with a great
affection.

5. Let the sick person be infinitely careful that his faith be not tempted by
any man, or any thing, and when it is in any degree weakened, let him lay fast
hold upon the conclusion, upon the Article it self, and by earnest prayer beg
of God to guide him in certainty and safety. For let him consider that the
Article is better then all its contrary or contradictory, and he is concerned
that it be true, and concerned also that he do believe it: but he can receive
no good at all, if Christ did not die, if there be no resurrection, if his
Creed has deceived him: therefore all that he is to do is to secure his hold,
which he can do no way but by prayer and by his interest. And by this Argument
or instrument it was that Socrates refreshed the evil of his condition, when he
was to drink his aconite. If the soul be immortal, and perpetual rewards be
laid up for wise souls, In Phoedo.
then I lose nothing by my death; but if there be not, then I lose nothing by
my opinion, for it supports my spirit in my passage, and the evil of being
deceived cannot overtake me when I have no being. So it is with all that are
tempted in their faith. If those Articles be not true, then the men are
nothing; if they be true, then they are happy; and if the Article fails there
can be no punishment for believing; but if they be true, my not believing
destroys all my portion in them and possibility to receive the excellent
things which they contain. By faith we quench the fiery darts of the Devil; but
if our faith be quenched, wherewithal shall we be able to endure the assault?
therefore seiz upon the Article, and secure the great object, and the great
instrument, that is, the hopes of pardon, and eternal life through Jesus
Christ, and do this by all means and by any instrument artificial, or
inartificiall, by argument, or by stratagem, by perfect resolution, or by
discourse, by the hand and ears of premises, or the foot of the conclusion, by
right or by wrong, because we understand it, or because we love it, super totam
materiam, because I will, and because I ought, because it is safe to do so, and
because it is not safe to do otherwise, because if I do I may receive a good,
and because if I do not I am miserable; either for that I shall have a portion
of sorrows, or that I can have no portion of good things.

SECT. IV. Acts of faith by way of prayer and ejaculation to be said by sick
men in the days of their temptation.
LOrd whither shall I go? thou have the words of eternal life?

I believe in God the Father Almighty, and in Jesus Christ his only Son our
Lord, etc.

And I believe in the Holy Ghost, etc.

Lord I believe; help thou mine unbelief.

I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus] that none of us lives to himself,
and no man dies to himself. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and
whether we die, we die unto the Lord: Romans 14.6.
whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lords.

If God be for us, who can be against us? He that spared not his own Son but
delivered him up for us all: how shall he not with him give us all things?

Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that
justifies; who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, Romans 8.31. etc.
who also makes intercession for us.

If any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.1.
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins.

This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners. O grant, that I may obtain mercy, that in
me Jesus Christ may show forth all long-suffering, 1 Timothy 1.15.
that I may believe in him to life everlasting.

I am bound to give thanks unto God always, because God has from the beginning
chosen me to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the
truth whereunto he called me by the Gospel, 2 These. 2.13.
to the obtaining of the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father which has loved
us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace,
Ibid. v. 16, 17.
Comfort my heart and stablish me in every good word and work.

The Lord direct my heart into the love of God, 2 These. 3.5.
and into the patient waiting for Christ.

O that our God would count me worthy of this calling, and fulfill all the good
pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power. That the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in me, 2 These. 1.11.
and I in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Let us who are of the day be sober, putting on the breast plate of faith and
love, and for an helmet, the hope of salvation. For God has not appointed us
to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us,
that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him. Wherefore
comfort your selves together and edify one another. 1 These. 5.9, 10.


There is no name under heaven whereby we can be saved, but only the Name of
the Lord Jesus. Act. 3.23.
And every soul which will not hear that Prophet shall be destroyed from among
the people.

God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of Jesus Christ. I desire
to know nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified. For to me to live is
Christ, and to die is gain.

Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils: Isa. 2.22
for wherein is he to be accounted of? But the just shall live by faith.

Lord, I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, the Savior of the
world, the resurrection and the life; and he that believes in thee, Joh. 11.25.
though he were dead, yet shall he live.

Jesus said unto her, Said I not to thee, that if thou would believe thou
should see the glory of God? Ibid. ver. 40.


O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? the sting of death
is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law. But thanks be to God which gives
us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 15.55.
Lord make me steadfast and unmovable always abounding in the work of the
Lord; Ibid.
For I know that my labor is not in vain in the Lord.

The Prayer [for the grace and strengths of faith.
O Holy and eternal Jesus, who did die for me and for all mankind,
abolishing our sin, reconciling us to God, adopting us into the portion of
thine heritage, and establishing with us a covenant of faith and obedience,
making our souls to rely upon spiritual strengths, by the supports of a holy
belief, and the expectation of rare promises, and the infallible truths of God:
O let me for ever dwell upon the rock, leaning upon thy arm, believing thy
word, trusting in thy promises, waiting for thy mercies, and doing thy
commandments, that the Devil may not prevail upon me, and my own weaknesses
may not abuse or unsettle my persuasions, nor my sins discompose my just
confidence in thee and thy eternal mercies. Let me always be thy servant and
thy disciple, and die in the communion of thy Church, of all faithful people;
Lord I renounce whatsoever is against thy truth, and if secretly I have or do
believe any false proposition, I do it in the simplicity of my heart and great
weakness; and if I could discover it, would dash it in pieces by a solemn
disclaiming it; for thou art the Way, the Truth, and the Life; and I know that
whatsoever thou have declared that is the truth of God, and I do firmly adhere
to the religion thou have taught, and glory in nothing so much as that I am a
Christian, that thy name is called upon me: O my God, though I die yet will I
put my trust in thee. In thee O Lord have I trusted, let me never be
confounded. Amen.

SECT. V. Of the practice of the Grace of Repentance in time of the Sickness.
MEn generally do very much dread sudden death, and pray against it
passionately; and certainly it has in it great inconveniences accidentally to
men's estates, to the settlement of families, to the culture and trimming of
souls, and it robs a man of the blessings which may be consequent to sickness,
and to the passive graces, and holy contentions of a Christian, Desce^^li sti
ad Olympia sed ne^o praeter te: coronam habes, victoriam non habes.
while he descends to his grave without an adversary or a trial: and a good man
may be taken at such a disadvantage, that a sudden death would be a great evil,
even to the most excellent person, if it strikes him in an unlucky
circumstance: But these considerations are not the only ingredients into those
men's discourse, who pray violently against sudden deaths; for possibly if this
were all, there may be in the condition of sudden death something to make
recompense for the evils of the overhasty accident. For certainly, it is a
less temporal evil to fall by the rudeness of a sword, then the violences of
a Fever, and the axe is much a less affliction then a strangury; and though a
sickness tries our virtues, yet a sudden death is free from temptation: a
sickness may be more glorious and a sudden death more safe; the deadest deaths
are best, the shortest and least premeditate; Mitius ille perit subita qui
mergitur unda;
Quam sua qui liquidis brachia lassat aquis.
Ovid.
so Caesar said; and Pliny called a short death the greatest fortune of a man's
life. For even good men have been forced to an undecencie of deportment by the
violences of pain: Etiam innocents mentiri cogit dolor.
and Cicero observes concerning Hercules, that he was broken in pieces with
pain, even then when he sought for immortality by his death, being tortured
with a plague knit up in the lappet of his shirt. Ipse illigatus peste
interimor textili.
And therefore as a sudden death certainly loses the rewards of a holy
sickness, so it makes that a man shall not so much hazard and lose the rewards
of a holy life.

But the secret of this affair is a worse matter; men live at that rate; either
of an habitual wickedness, or else a frequent repetition of single acts of
killing and deadly sins, that a sudden death is the ruin of all their hopes,
and a perfect consignation to an eternal sorrow. But in this case also, so is a
lingering sickness; for our last sickness may change us from life to health,
from health to strength, from strength to the firmness and confirmation of
habitual graces; but it cannot change a man from death to life, and begin and
finish that process which sits not down but in the bosom of blessedness. He
that washes in the morning when his bath is seasonable and healthful is not
only made clean, but sprightly, and the blood is brisk and colored like the
first springing of the morning; but they that wash their dead, cleanse the
skin, and leave palenesse upon the cheek, and stiffnesse in all the joints. A
repentance upon our deathbed bed is like washing the coarse, Lavor honesta hora
and salubri quae mihi and calorem and sanguine^ servet. Rigere and pallere post
lavacrum mortuus possum Tertul. Apol. c. 42.
it is cleanly and civil; but makes no change deeper then the skin; But God
knows, it is a custom so to wash them that are going to dwell with dust, and
to be buried in the lap of their kindred, earth; Cognata faece sepulti.
but all their lives time wallow in pollutions without any washing at all; or
if they do it is like that of the Dardani who washed but thrice in all their
life time; (...) Aelian. lib. 4. var. hist. cap. 1.
when they are born, and when they marry, and when they die; when they are
baptized, or against a solemnity, or for the day of their funeral: but these
are but ceremonious washings, and never purify the soul, if it be stained and
has sullied the whiteness of its baptismal robes.

* God intended we should live a holy life, * he contracted with us in Jesus
Christ for a holy life, Vide August. lib. 50. Hom. Hom. 4. and sermon. 57. de
te^pore. Faustum ad Paulinum. Ep. 1. in Biblioth. pp. tom. ^. vet. ed t.
Council. Arelat. 1. c. 3. Carthag. 4. c 7.8.
* he made no abatements of the strictest sense of it, but such as did
necessarily comply with humane infirmities or possibilities, that is he
understood it in the sense of repentance, which still is so to renew our duty,
that it may be a holy life in the second sense; that is, some great portion of
our life to be spent in living as Christians should, * a resolving to repent
upon our deathbed is the greatest mockery of God in the world, and the most
perfect contradictory to all his excellent designs of mercy and holiness; for
therefore he threatened us with hell if we did not, and he promised heaven, if
we did live a holy life: and a late repentance promises heaven to us upon other
conditions, -- Quis luce suprema Dimisiste mea^sero non ingemit horas Sil.
Ital. l. 15.
even when we have lived wickedly. * It renders a man useless and intolerable
to the world; taking off the great curb of religion, of fear, and hope, and
permitting all impiety with the greatest impunity and encouragement in the
world; * by this means we see so many (...) as Philo calls them, Sic contra
r^rum natnraemunera nota
Corvus maturis frugitus ova refert.

or as the prophets pueros centum annorum, children of almost an hundred years
old, In Adrian. (...)
upon whose grave we may write the inscriptions which was upon the tomb of
Similis in Xiphilin. Here he lies who was so many years, but lived but seven; *
and the course of nature runs counter to the perfect designs of piety, and *
God who gave us a life to live to him is only served at our death, when we die
to all the world; * and we undervalue the great promises made by the Holy
Jesus, for which the piety, the strictest unerring piety of ten thousand ages
is not a proportionable exchange; Vide life of Christ, Dise of repentance Rule
of holy living chap. 4. Sect. of repentance; and volume of Sermon. sermon. 5, 6.
yet we think it a hard bargain to get heaven, if we be forced to part with one
lust, or live soberly twenty years: But like Ne tamen ad stygia famulus
descenderet umbras
Ureret implicitum cum scelerata lues
Cavimus --
Demetrius Afer who having lived a slave all his life time, yet desired to
descend to his grave in freedom, begged manumission of his Lord) we lived in
the bondage of our sin all our days and hope to dye the Lords freed man: * but
above all, this course of a delayed repentance must of necessity therefore be
ineffective, and certainly mortal, because it is an entire destruction of the
very formality and essential constituent reason of religion; which I thus
demonstrate.

When God made man and propounded to him an immortal and a blessed state, as
the end of his hopes and the perfection of his condition, he did not give it
him for nothing, but upon certain conditions, which although they could add
nothing to God, yet they were such things which man could value, and they were
his best: and God had made appetites of pleasure in man, that in them the scene
of his obedience should lie. For when God made instances of man's obedience, he
1. either commanded such things to be done, which man did naturally desire, or
2. such things which did contradict his natural desires, or 3. such which were
indifferent. Not the first and the last. For it could be no effect of love or
duty toward God for a man to eat when he was impatiently hungry, and could not
stay from eating; neither was it any contention of obedience or labor of love
for a man to look Eastward once a day, or turn his back when the North wind
blew fierce and loud. Therefore for the trial and instance of obedience, God
made his laws so, that they should lay restraint upon man's appetites; so that
man might part with something of his own, that he may give to God his will, and
deny it to himself for the interest of his service; and chastity is the denial
of a violent desire, and justice is parting with money that might help to
enrich me, and meekness is a huge contradiction to pride and revenge; and the
wandering of our eyes, and the greatness of our fancy, and our imaginative
opinions are to be lessened, that we may serve God; there is no other way of
serving God, we have nothing else to present unto him; we do not else give him
any thing or part of our selves, but when we for his sake part with what we
naturally desire; and difficulty is essential to virtue, and without choice
there can be no reward, and in the satisfaction of our natural desires there is
no election, we run to them as beasts to the river or the crib. If therefore
any man shall teach or practice such a religion that satisfies all our natural
desires in the days of desire and passion, of lust and appetites, and only
turns to God when his appetites are gone, and his desires cease, this man has
overthrown the very being of virtues, and the essential constitution of
religion; Religion is no religion, and virtue is no act of choice, and reward
comes by chance and without condition, if we only are religious when we cannot
choose, if we part with our money when we cannot keep it, with our lust when we
cannot act it, with our desires when they have left us; Cogimur a suetis animum
suspendere rebus,
Atque ut vivamus vivere desinimus
Corn. Gallus.
death is a certain mortifier; but that mortification is deadly, not useful to
the purposes of a spiritual life. When we are compeld to depart from our evil
customs and leave to live, that we may begin to live, then we dye to dye; that
life is the prologue to death and thenceforth we die eternally.

S. Cyril speaks of certain people that chose to worship the sun because he was
a day God; for believing that he was quenched every ^^ght in the sea, or that
he had no influence upon them that light up candles and lived by the light of
fire, they were confident they might be Atheists all night and live as they
list. Men who divide their little portion of time between religion and
pleasures, between God and Gods enemy, think that God is to rule, but in his
certain period of time, and that our life is the stage for passion and folly,
and the day of death for the work of our life; but as to God, both the day and
night are alike, so are the first and the last of our days; all are his due,
and he will account severely with us for the follies of the first, and the evil
of the last; The evils and the pains are great which are reserved for those who
defer their restitution to Gods favor till their death. Gnossius haec
Rhadamanthus habet durissima regna
Castigatque auditque dolos subigit; fateri
Quae quis apud superos furto laetatus inani
Disttulit in seram commissa piacula mortem.
Aened. 6.
And therefore Antisthenes said well; It is not the happy death, but the happy
life that makes man happy. It is in piety as in fame and reputation: he secures
a good name but loosely that trusts his fame and celebritie only to his ashes:
-- Cineri gloria sera venit.
and it is more a civilitie (...) then the base of a firm reputation, that men
speak honor of their departed relatives: but if their life be virtuous it
forces honor from contempt, and snatches it from the hand of envy, Tu mihi
quod rarum est, vivo sublime dedisti,
Nomen ab exequiis quod dare fama solet.

and it shines thorough the crevises of detraction, and as it anointed the head
of the living, so it embalms the body of the dead. From these premises if
follows that when we discourse of a sick man's repentance, it is intended to
be, not a beginning but the prosecution and consummation of the covenant of
repentance, which Christ stipulated with us in Baptism, and which we needed
all our life, and which we began long before this last arrest, and in which we
are now to make further progress, that we may arrive to that integrity and
fullness of of duty, that our sins may be blotted out, when the times of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.

SECT. VI. Rules for the practice of Repentance in sickness.
1. LEt the sick man consider at what gate this sickness entered; and if he can
discover the particular, let him instantly, passionately, and with great
contrition dash the crime in pieces, lest he descend into his grave in the
midst of a sin and thence remove into an ocean of eternal sorrows; but if he
only suffers the common fate of man, and knows not the particular inlet, he
is to be governed by the following measures.

2. Inquire into the repentance of thy former life, particularly; whether it
were of a great and perfect grief, and productive of fixed resolutions of holy
living, and reductive of these to act? How many days and nights have we spent
in sorrow or care, in habitual and actual pursuances of virtue? what instrument
we have chosen and used for the eradication of sin? how we have judged our
selves, and how punished? and in sum whether we have by the grace of
repentance changed our life from criminal to virtuous, from one habit to
another? and whether we have paid for the pleasure of our sin by smart, or
sorrow, by the effusion of alms, or pernoctations or abodes in prayers, so as
the spirit has been served in our repentance, as earnestly, and as greatly as
our appetites have been provided for in the days of our shame and folly?

3. Supply the imperfections of thy repentance by a general or universal
sorrow, for the sins not only since the last communion or absolution, but of
thy whole life; for all sins known and unknown, repented and unrepented, of
ignorance or infirmity, which thou know, or which others have accused thee
of; thy clamorous and thy whispering sins, the sins of scandal, and the
sins of a secret conscience, of the flesh and of the spirit: for it would be
but a sad arrest to thy soul wandering in strange and unusual regions to see a
scroll of uncancelled sins represented and charged upon thee for want of care
and notices, and that thy repentance shall become invalid, because of its
imperfections.

4. To this purpose it is usually advised by spiritual persons, that the sick
man make an universal confession, or a renovation and repetition of all the
particular confessions and accusations of his whole life; that now at the foot
of his account he may represent the sum total to God, and his conscience,
and make provisions for their remedy and pardon according to his present
possibilities.

5. Now is the time to make reflex acts of repentance; that as by a general
repentance we supply the want of the just extension of parts: so by this we may
supply the proper measures of the intension of degrees. In our health we can
consider concerning our own acts whether they be real or hypocritical,
essential or imaginary, sincere or upon interest, integrall or imperfect,
commensurate or defective, and although it is a good caution of securities
after all our care and diligence still to suspect our selves, and our own
deceptions, and for ever to beg of God pardon and acceptance in the union of
Christ's passion, and intercession; yet in proper speaking, reflex acts of
repentance, being a suppletory after the imperfection of the direct, are then
most fit to be used when we cannot proceed in, and prosecute the direct
actions. To repent because we cannot repent, and to grieve because we cannot
grieve, was a device invented to serve the turn of the mother of Peter Gratian;
but it was used by her, and so advised to be in her sickness, and last actions
of repentance: for in our perfect health and understanding if we do not
understand our first act, we cannot discern our second; and if we be not sorry
for our sins, we cannot be sorry for want of sorrows; it is a contradiction to
say we can; because want of sorrow to which we are obliged is certainly a great
sin; and if we can grieve for that, then also for the rest; if not for all,
then not for this: but in the days of weakness the case is otherwise; for
then our actions are imperfect, our discourse weak, our internal actions not
discernable, our fears great, our work to be abbreviated, and our defects, to
be supplied by spiritual arts; and therefore it is proper and proportionate to
our state, and to our necessity, to beg of God pardon for the imperfections of
our repentance, acceptance of our weaker sorrows, supplies out of the treasures
of grace, and mercy; and thus repenting of the evil and unhandsome adherencies
of our repentance, in the whole integrity of the duty, it will become a
repentance not to be repented of.

6. Now is the time beyond which the sick man must at no hand defer to make
restitution of all his unjust possessions, or other men's rights, Ou pondre, ou
render, ou les peines denfers attendre.
and satisfactions for all injuries, and violencies according to his
obligation, and possibilities; for although many circumstances might impede the
acting it in our livestime, and it was permitted to be deferred in many cases,
because by it, justice was not hindered, and oftentimes piety and equity were
provided for; yet because this is the last scene of our life, he that does not
act it so far as he can, or put it into certain conditions and order of
effecting, can never do it again, and therefore then to defer it, is to omit
it, and leaves the repentance defective in an integrall and constituent part.

7. Let the sick man be diligent and watchful, that the principle of his
repentance be contrition, or sorrow for sins, commenced upon the love of God.
For although sorrow for sins upon any motive may lead us to God by many
intermediall passages, and is the threshold of returning sinners, yet it is not
good, nor effective upon our deathbed; because repentance is not then to
begin, but must then be finished, and completed, and it is to be a supply and
reparation of all the imperfections of that duty: and therefore it must by that
time be arrived to contrition, that is, it must have grown from fear to love,
from the passions of a servant, to the affections of a son; The reason of which
(besides the precedent) is this, because when our repentance is in this state,
it supposes the man also in a state of grace, a well grown Christian; for to
hate sin out of the love of God is not the felicity of a new convert, or an
infant grace (or if it be, that love also is in its infancy) but it supposes a
good progress, and the man habitually virtuous, and tending to perfection: and
therefore contrition, or repentance so qualified, is useful to great degrees
of pardon, because the man is a gracious person, and that virtue is of good
degree, and consequently fit employment for him that shall work no more, but is
to appear before his Judge to receive the hire of his day. And if his
repentance be contrition, even before this state of sickness, let it be
increased by spiritual arts; and the proper exercises of charity.

Means of exciting contrition, or repentance of sins, proceeding from the love
of God.
TO which purpose the sick man may consider, and is to be reminded (if he does
not) that there are in God, all the motives and causes of amability in the
world; that God is so infinitely good, that there are some of the greatest and
most excellent spirits of heaven, whose work, and whose felicity, and whose
perfections, and whose nature it is, to flame and burn in the brightest and
most excellent love * that to love God is the greatest glory of Heaven, that in
him there are such excellencies, that the smallest rays of them communicated
to our weaker understandings are yet sufficient to cause ravishments and
transportations, and satisfactions, and joys unspeakeable, and full of glory *
that all the wise Christians of the world know and feel such causes to love God
that they all profess themselves ready to die for the love of God * and the
Apostles and millions of the Martyrs did die for him * And although it be
harder to live in his love then to die for it, yet all the good people that
ever gave their names to Christ did for his love endure the crucifying their
lusts, the mortification of their appetites, the contradictions and death of
their most passionate, natural desires * that Kings and Queens have quitted
their Diadems, and many married Saints have turned their mutual vows into the
love of Jesus, and married him only, keeping a virgin chastity in a married
life, that they may more tenderly express their love to God * that all the
good we have, derives from Gods love to us, and all the good we can hope for is
the effect of his love, and can descend only upon them that love him * that by
his love it is that we receive the holy Jesus * and by his love we receive the
Holy Spirit, * and by his love we feel peace and joy within our spirits * and
by his love we receive the mysterious Sacrament * And what can be greater, then
that from the goodness and love of God, we receive Jesus Christ, and the Holy
Ghost, and Adoption, and the inheritance of sons, and to be coheirs with Jesus,
and to have pardon of our sins, and a divine nature, and restraining grace, and
the grace of sanctification, and a rest and peace within us, and a certain
expectation of glory, * who can choose but love him, who when we had provoked
him exceedingly sent his Son to die for us, that we might live with him; who
does so desire to pardon us and save us, that he has appointed his Holy Son
continually to intercede for us? *That his love is so great that he offers us
great kindness, and entreats us to be happy, and makes many decrees in heaven
concerning the interest of our soul, and the very provision and support of our
persons * That he sends an Angel to attend upon every of his servants, and to
be their guard, and their guide, in all their dangers and hostilities * That
for our sakes he restrains the Devil, and puts his mightiness in fetters and
restraints, and chastises his malice with decrees of grace and safety * That he
it is who makes all the creatures serve us, and takes care of our sleeps, and
preserves all plants and elements, all mineralls and vegetables, all beasts and
birds, all fishes and insects for food to us, and for ornament, for physic and
instruction, for variety and wonder, for delight and for religion * That as God
is all good in himself, and all good to us, so sin is directly contrary to God,
to reason, to religion, to safety and pleasure, and felicity * That it is a
great dishonor to a man's spirit to have been made a fool, by a weak
temptation, and an empty lust; and to have rejected God, who is so rich, so
wise, so good, and so excellent, so delicious, and so profitable to us * That
all the repentance in the world of excellent men does end in contrition, or a
sorrow for sins proceeding from the love of God; because they that are in the
state of grace do not fear hell violently, and so long as they remain in Gods
favor, although they suffer the infirmities of men, yet they are Gods portion,
and therefore all the repentance of just and holy men which is certainly the
best, is a repentance not for lower ends but because they are the friends of
God, and they are full of indignation that they have done an act against the
honor of their Patron, and their dearest Lord and Father * That it is a huge
imperfection and a state of weakness, to need to be moved with fear or
temporal respects, and they that are so, as yet are either immerged in the
affections of the world, or of themselves; and those men that bear such a
character, are not yet esteemed laudable persons, or men of good natures, or
the sons of virtue. * That no repentance can be lasting, that relies upon any
thing but the love of God; for temporal motives may cease, and contrary
contingencies may arise, and fear of hell, may be expelled by natural or
acquired hardnesses, and is always the least when we have most need of it, and
most cause for it; for the more habitual our sins are, the more cauterized* our
conscience is, the less is the fear of hell, and yet our danger is much the
greater, * that although fear of hell or other temporal motives may be the
first inlet to a repentance, yet repentance in that constitution and under
those circumstances cannot obtain pardon; because there is in that no union
with God, no adhesion to Christ, no endeerment of passion, or of spirit, no
similitude, or conformity to the great instrument of our peace, our glorious
Mediator: for as yet a man is turned from his sin, but not converted to God;
the first and last of our returns to God being love, and nothing but love: for
obedience is the first part of love, and fruition is the last, and because he
that does not love God cannot obey him, therefore he that does not love him
cannot enjoy him.

Now that this may he reduced to practice, the sick man may be advertised that
in the actions of repentance * he separate low, temporal, sensual, and self
ends from his thoughts, and so do his repentance * that he may still reflect
honor upon God; * that he confess his justice in punishing, that he
acknowledge himself to have deserved the worst of evils, * that he heartily
believe and profess, that if he perish finally, yet that God ought to be
glorified by that sad event, and that he has truly merited so intolerable a
calamity, * that he also be put to make acts of election and preference;
professing that he would willingly endure all temporal evils rather then be in
the disfavour of God or in the state of sin; for by this last instance he will
be quitted from the suspicion of leaving sin, for temporal respects, because he
by an act of imagination or fained presence of the object to him, entertains
the temporal evil that he may leave the sin; and therefore unless he be a
hypocrite does not leave the sin to be quit of the temporal evil. And as for
the other motive of leaving sin our of the fear of hell, because that is an
evangelical motive conveyed to us by the spirit of God, and is immediate to the
love of God; if the Schoolmen had pleased, they might have reckoned it as the
handmaid, and of the retinue of contrition; but the more the considerations
are sublimed above this, of the greater effect and the more immediate to pardon
will be the repentance.

8. Let the sick persons do frequent actions of repentance by way of prayer,
for all those sins which are spiritual, and in which no restitution or
satisfaction material can be made, and whose contrary acts cannot in kind be
exercised. For penitential prayers in some cases are the only instances of
repentance that can be. An envious man, if he gives God hearty thanks for the
advancement of his brother, has done an act of mortification of his envy, as
directly as corporal austerities are an act of chastity, and an enemy to
uncleanness: and if I have seduced a person that is dead or absent, if I cannot
restore him to sober counsels by my discourse and undeceiving him, I can only
repent of that by way of prayer: and intemperance is no way to be rescinded or
punished by a dying man but by hearty prayers. Prayers are a great help in all
cases; in some they are proper acts of virtue and direct enemies to sin; but
although alone and in long continuance, they alone can cure some one or some
few little habits, yet they can never alone change the state of the man; and
therefore are intended to be a suppletory to the imperfections of other acts;
and by that reason are the proper and most pertinent employment of a Clinick or
deathbed penitent.

9. In those sins whose proper cure is mortification corporal, the sick man is
to supply that part of his repentance by a patient submission to the rod of
sickness: For sickness does the work of penances or sharp afflictions, and
dry diet, perfectly well: to which if we also put our wills, and make it our
act by an after election, by confessing the justice of God, by bearing if
sweetly, by begging it may be medicinal, there is nothing wanting to the
perfection of this part, Quid debent ^aesi a^ere u ^^ rei ad paenam confugiunt?
but that God confirm our patience and hear our prayers. When the guilty man
runs to punishment, the injured person is prevented and has no whither to go
but to forgiveness.

10. I have learned but of one suppletory more, for the perfection and proper
exercise of a sick man's repentance; but it is such a one as will go a great way
in the abolition of our past sins, and making our peace with God, even after
a less severe life: and that is, that the sick man do some heroical actions in
the matter of charity, or religion, of justice or severity. There is a story of
an infamous thief who having begged his pardon of the Emperor Mauritius was yet
put into the Hospital of S. Sampson where he so plentifully bewailed his sins
in the last agonies of his death, that the Physician who attended found him
unexpectedly dead, and over his face a handkerchief bathed in tears, and soon
after some body or other pretended to a revelation of this man's beatitude. It
was a rare grief that was noted in this man, which begat in that age a
confidence of his being saved, and that confidence (as things then went) was
quickly called a revelation. But it was a stranger severity which is related by
Thomas Cantipratanus concerning a young Gentleman condemned for robbery and
violence, who had so deep a sense of his sin, that he was not content with a
single death, but begged to be tormented and cut in pieces joint by joint, with
intermedial senses, that he might by such a smart signify a greater sorrow;
Some have given great estates to the poor and to religion; some have built
colleges for holy persons, many have suffered martyrdom, and though those that
died under the conduct of the Maccabees in defense of their country and
religion, had pendants on their breasts consecrated to the idols of the
Iamnenses, yet that they gave their lives in such a cause with so great a duty,
(the biggest things they could do or give) it was esteemed to prevail hugely
toward the pardon and acceptance of their persons. An heroic action of virtue
is a huge compendium of religion; for if it be attained to by the usual
measures and progress of a Christian, from inclination to act, from act to
habit, from habit to abode, from abode to reigning, from reigning to perfect
possession, from possession to extraordinary emanations, that is, to heroic
actions, then it must needs do the work of man, by being so great toward the
work of God; but if a man comes thither per saltum, or on a sudden (which is
seldom seen) then it supposes the man always well inclined, but abused by
accident or hope, by confidence or ignorance; taen it supposes the man for the
present in a great fear of evil, and a passionate desire of pardon; it supposes
his apprehensions great, and his time little; and what the event of that will
be, no man can tell; but it is certain that to some purposes God will account
for our religion on our death bed, not by the measures of our time, Vera ad
Deum conversio in ultim^ positorum mente potius est aesti^anda quam tempore.
^el p. ep. 2. c..vera conversio) scil. ab insi delitate ad fidem ^hristi per
Baptismum.
but the eminency of affection (as said Celestin the first) that is, supposing
the man in the state of grace, or in the revealed possibility of salvation,
then an heroical act has the reward of a longer series of good actions, in an
even and ordinary course of virtue.

11. In what can remain for the perfecting a sick man's repentance, he is to be
helped by the ministeries of a spiritual Guide.

SECT. VII. Acts of repentance by way of prayer and ejaculation; to be used
especially by old men in their age; and by all men in their sickness.
LEt us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord: let us lift up
our hearts with our hands unto God in the heavens. We have transgressed and
rebelled and thou have not pardoned: Thou have covered with anger and
persecured us; Lamen. 3.41.
thou have slain, thou have not pitied, O cover not thy self with a cloud; but
let our prayer pass thorough.

I have sinned what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? why have
thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my self? and why
do not thou pardon my transgression, and take away mine iniquity? for now
shall I sleep in the dust, Job 7.20.
and thou shall seek me in the morning, but I shall not be.

The Lord is righteous for I have rebelled against his commandments. Hear I
pray, all ye people, behold my sorrow, behold O Lord I am in distress, Lamen.
1.18, 20.
my bowels are troubled, my heart is turned within me, for I have grievously
rebelled.

Thou O Lord remainest for ever, thy throne from generation to generation:
wherefore do thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time? turn thou
us unto thee, O Lord, and so shall we be turned: renew our days as of old:
Lamen. 5.19.
O reject me not utterly, and be not exceeding wroth against thy servant.

O remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions, but according to
thy mercies remember thou me for thy goodness sake O Lord: Do thou for me O
God the Lord, for thy Names sake, Psalm 25.7. Psalm. 109.21.
because thy mercy is good, deliver thou me, for I am poor and needy, and my
heart is wounded within me; I am gone like the shadow that declineth, I am
tossed up and down as the locust.

Then Zacheus stood forth and said, Behold Lord, half of my goods I give to the
poor, and if I have wronged any man I restore him fourfold.

Hear my prayer O Lord, and consider my desire, let my prayer be set forth in
thy sight as the incense, and let the lifting up of my hands be an evening
sacrifice. Psalm 143.
And enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified. Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art
my God, let thy loving spirit lead me forth into the land of righteousness.

I will [speak] of mercy and judgment, unto thee O Lord will I make my prayer:
I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way. O when will thou come unto me, I
will walk in my house with a perfect heart. I will set no wicked thing before
my eyes; Psalm 101.1.
I hate the work of them that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me.

Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities; create in me a
clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Deliver me from blood
guiltiness O God, [from malice, envy, the follies of lust and violences of
passion, etc.] thou God of my salvation and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy
righteousness. Psalm 5.1.


The sacrifice of God is a broken heart, a broken and a contrite heart, O God
thou will not despise.

Lord I have done amiss; I have been deceived, let so great a wrong as this be
removed.

The prayer] for the grace and perfection of Repentance.
I.
O Almighty God, thou art the great Judge of all the world, the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, the Father of men and Angels, thou
love not that a sinner should perish, but delightest in our conversion and
salvation, and have in our Lord Jesus Christ established the Covenant of
repentance, and promised pardon to all them that confess their sins and
forsake them; O my God be thou pleased to work in me what thou have commanded
should be in me. Lord I am a dry tree who neither have brought forth fruit unto
thee and unto holiness, nor have wept out salutary tears, the instrument of
life and restitution, but have behaved my self like an unconcerned person in
the ruins and breaches of my soul: But O God, thou art my God, earnestly will I
seek thee; my soul thirsts for thee in a barren and thirsty land where no
water is; Lord give me the grace of tears and pungent sorrow, let my heart be
as a land of rivers of waters, and my head a fountain of tears: turn my sin
into repentance, and let my repentance proceed to pardon and refreshment.

II.
SUpport me with thy graces, strengthen me with thy Spirit, soften my heart
with the fire of thy love, and the dew of heaven, with penitential showers:
make my care prudent, and the remaining portion of my days like the perpetual
watches of the night, full of caution and observance, strong and resolute,
patient and severe, I remember O Lord, that I did sin with greediness and
passion, with great desires and an unabated choice; O let me be as great in my
repentance as ever I have been in my calamity and shame; let my hatred of sin
be great as my love to thee, and both as near to infinite, as my proportion can
receive.

III.
O Lord, I renounce all affection to sin, and would not buy my health nor
redeem my life with doing any thing against the Laws of my God; but would
rather die then offend thee. O dearest Savior have pity upon thy servant, let
me by thy sentence be doomed to perpetual penance during the abode of this
life; let every sigh be the expression of a repentance,, and every groan an
acccent of spiritual life, and every stroke of my disease a punishment of my
sin, and an instrument of pardon, that at my return to the land of innocence I
may eat of the votive sacrifice of the supper of the Lamb, that was from the
beginning of the world sl^in for the sins of every sorrowful and returning
sinner. O grant me sorrow here, and joy hereafter through Jesus Christ, who is
our hope, the resurrection of the dead, the justifier of a sinner, and the
glory of all faithful souls. Amen.

A prayer for pardon of sins to be said frequently in time of sickness; and in
all the portions of old age.
I.
O Eternal and most gracious Father, I humbly throw my self down at the foot of
thy mercy seat, upon the confidence of thy essential mercy, and thy
commandment, that we should come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may
find mercy in time of need; O my God, hear the prayers and cries of a sinner,
who calls earnestly for mercy; Lord my needs are greater then all the degrees
of my desire can be; unless thou have pity upon me I perish infinitely and
intolerably; and then there will be one voice fewer in the quire of singers,
who shall recite thy praises to eternal ages. But O Lord in mercy deliver my
soul. O save me for thy mercy sake. For in the second death there is no
remembrance of thee, in that grave who shall give thee thanks?

II.
O Just and dear God, my sins are innumerable, they are upon my soul in
multitudes, they are a burden too heavy for me to bear; they already bring
sorrow and sickness, shame and displeasure, guilt, and a decaying spirit, a
sense of thy present displeasure, and fear of worse, of infinitely worse; But
it is to thee so essential, so delightful, so usual, so desired by thee to show
mercy, that although my sin be very great and my fear proportionable, yet thy
mercy is infinitely greater then all the world, and my hope and my comfort rise
up in proportions toward it, that I trust the Devils shall never be able to
reprove it, nor my own weakness discompose it. Lord thou have sent thy Son to
die for the pardon of my sins; thou have given me thy holy Spirit, as a seal of
adoption to consigne the article of remission of sins; thou have for all my
sins still continued to invite me to conditions of life, by thy ministers the
prophets; and thou have with variety of holy acts softened my spirit, and
possessed my fancy, and instructed my understanding, and bended and inclined
my will, and directed or overruled my passions in order to repentance and
pardon, and why should not thy servant beg passionately, and humbly hope for
the effect of all these thy strange and miraculous acts of loving kindness?
Lord I deserve it not, but I hope thou will pardon all my sins, and I beg it of
thee for Jesus Christ his sake, whom thou have made the great endearment of thy
promises, and the foundation of our hopes, and the mighty instrument, whereby
we can obtain of thee, whatsoever we need and can receive.

III.
O My God, how shall thy servant be disposed to receive such a favor, which is
so great that the ever blessed Jesus did die to purchase for us; so great that
the falling angels never could hope, and never shall obtain? Lord I do from my
soul forgive all that have sinned against me. O forgive me my sins, as I
forgive them that have sinned against me; Lord I confess my sins unto thee
daily, by the accusations and secret acts of conscience; and if we confess our
sins thou have called it a part of justice to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Lord, I put my trust in thee, and thou
art ever gracious to them that put their trust in thee. I call upon my God for
mercy, and thou art always more ready to hear then we to pray. But all that I
can do, and all that I am, and all that I know of my self is nothing but sin,
and infirmity, and misery; therefore I go forth of my self, and throw my self
wholly into the arms of thy mercy, through Jesus Christ; and beg of thee for
his death and passions sake, by his resurrection and ascension, by all the
parts of our redemption, and thy infinite mercy in which thou please thy self
above all the works of the creation, to be pitiful, and compassionate to thy
servant in the abolition of all my sins; so shall I praise thy glories with a
tongue not defiled with evil language, and a heart purged by thy grace, quitted
by thy mercy, and absolved by thy sentence, from generation to generation.

Amen.
An act of holy resolution of amendment of life in case of recovery.
O Most just and most merciful Lord God, who have sent evil diseases, sorrow,
and fear, trouble and uneasinesse, briars and thorns into the world, and
planted them in our houses, and round about our dwellings to keep sin from our
souls or to drive it thence, I humbly beg of thee that this my sickness may
serve the ends of the Spirit, and be a messenger of spiritual life, an
instrument of reducing me to more religious and sober courses; I know O Lord,
that I am unready and unprepared in my accounts, having thrown away great
portions of my time in vanity, and set my self hugely back in the accounts of
eternity; and I had need live my life over again, and live it better; but thy
counsels are in the great deep, and thy footsteps in the water; and I know not
what thou will determine of me. If I die, I throw my self into the arms of the
Holy Jesus, whom I love above all things: and if I perish, I know I have
deserved it; but thou will not reject him that loves thee: But if I recover, I
will live by thy grace and help to do the work of God, and passionately pursue
my interest of Heaven, and serve thee in the labor of love, with the charities
of a holy zeal, and the diligence of a firm and humble obedience; Lord I will
dwell in thy temple, and in thy service, religion shall be my employment, and
alms shall be my recreation, and patience shall be my rest, and to do thy will
shall be my meat and drink, and to live shall be Christ, and then to die shall
be gain.

O spare me a little that I may recover my strength before I go hence and be no
more seen. Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Amen.

SECT. VIII. An Analysis or resolution of the Decalogue, and the special
precepts of the Gospel, describing the duties enjoined and the sins forbidden
respectively; for the assistance of sick men in making their confessions to God
and his Ministers, and the rendering their repentance more particular and
perfect.
I THou shall have none other Gods but me.]
Duties commanded are. 1. To love God above all things. 2. To obey him, and
fear him. 3. To worship him with prayers, vows, thanksgivings, presenting to
him our souls and bodies, and all such actions and expressions which the
consent of Nations, or the Laws and Customs of the place where we live have
appropriated to God. 4. To design all to Gods glory. 5. To enquire after his
will. 6. To believe all his word. 7. To submit to his providence. 8. To proceed
toward all our lawful ends by such means as himself has appointed. 9. To
speak and think honorably of God, and recite his praises, and confess his
Attributes and perfections.

They sin against this Commandment. 1. Who love themselves or any of the
creatures inordinately, and intemperately. 2. They that despise or neglect any
of the Divine precepts. 3. They that pray to unknown, or false gods. 4. They
that disbeleeve or deny there is a God. 5. They that make vows to creatures. 6.
Or say prayers to the honor of men or women, or Angels, as Pater nosters, to
the honor of the Virgin Mary, or S. Peter, which is a taking a part of that
honor which is due to God, and giving it to the creature, it is, a religion
paid to men and women out of Gods proper portion, out of prayers directed to
God immediately; and it is an act contrary to that religion which makes God the
last end of all things: for this through our addresses to God, passes something
to the creatures, as if they stood beyond him; for by the intermediall worship
paid to God, they ultimately do honor to the man, or Angel. 7. They that make
consumptive oblations to the creatures, as the Collyridians who offered cakes,
and those that burn incense or candles to the Virgin Mary. 8. They that give
themselves to the Devil, or make contracts with him, and use phantastic
conversation with him. 9 They that consult Witches and Fortune Tellers. 10.
They that rely upon dreams and superstitious observances. 11 That use charms,
spells, superstitious words and characters, verses of Psalms; the consecrated
elements to cure diseases, to be shot free, to recover stolen goods, or inquire
into secrets. 12. That are wilfully ignorant of the laws of God, or love to be
deceived in their persuasions; that they may sin with confidence. 13. They that
neglect to pray to God. 14. They that arrogate to themselves the glory of any
action or power and do not give the glory to God, as Herod. 15. They that doubt
of or disbeleeve any article of the Creed, or any proposition of Scripture, or
put false glosses to serve saecular or vicious ends, against their conscience,
or with violence any way done to their reason. 16. They that violently or
passionately pursue any temporal end with an eagerness greater then the thing
is, in prudent account. 17 They that make religion to serve ill ends, or do
good to exil purposes, or evil to good purposes. 18. They that accuse God of
injustice, or unmercifulness, remissness or cruelty; such as are the
presumptuous, and the desperate. 19. All hypocrites and pretenders to religion,
walking in forms and shadows, but denying the power of godliness. 20. All
impatient persons, all that repine or murmur against the prosperities of the
wicked, or the calamities of the godly, or their own afflictions. 21. All that
blaspheme God, or speak dishonorable things of so Sacred a Majesty. 22. They
that tempt God, or rely upon his protection against his rules and without his
promise, and besides reason, entering into danger, from which without a miracle
they cannot be rescued. 23. They that are bold in the midst of judgment, and
fearlesse in the midst of the Divine vengeance, and the accents of his anger.

II. Comm. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor worship it.
The moral duties of this commandment are.
1. To worship God with all bodily worship and external forms of address,
according to the custom of the Church we live in. 2. To believe God to be a
spiritual and pure substance without any visible form, of shape. 3. To worship
God in ways of his own appointing, or by his proportions or measures of
nature, and right reason, or public and holy customs.

They sin against this Commandment. 1. That make any image or pictures of the
Godhead, or fancy any likeness to him. 2. They that use images in their
religion, designing or addressing any religious worship to them; For if this
thing could be naturally tolerable, yet it is too near an intolerable for a
jealous God to suffer. 3. They that deny to worship God with lowly reverence of
their bodies, according as the Church expresses her reverence to God
externally. 4. They that invent or practice superstitious worshippings,
invented by man against Gods word, or without reason, or besides the public
customs or forms of worshipping, either foolishly or ridiculously, without
the purpose of order, decency, proportion to a wise or a religious end, in
prosecution of some virtue or duty.

III. Comm. Thou shall not take Gods Name in vain.
The duties of this Comm. are; 1. To honor and revere the most holy Name of
God. 2. To invocate his Name directly, or by consequence in all solemn and
permitted adjurations, or public oaths. 3. To use all things and persons upon
whom his Name is called, or any ways imprinted with a regardfull and separate
manner of usage, different from common, and far from contempt and scorn. 4. To
swear in truth and judgment.

They sin against this Commandment; 1. Who swear vainly and customarily,
without just cause, without competent authority. 2. They that blasphem or curse
God. 3. They that speak of God without grave cause or solemn occasion. 4. They
that forswear themselves; that is, they that do not perform their vows to God;
or that swear, or call God to witness to a lie. 5. They that swear rashly, or
maliciously, to commit a sin, or an act of revenge. 6. They that swear by any
creature falsely, or any way but as it relates to God, and consequently invokes
his testimony. 7. All curious inquiries into the secrets; and intruders into
the mysteries and hidden things of God. 8. They that curse God, or curse a
creature by God. 9. They that profane Churches, holy Utensils, holy persons,
holy customs, holy Sacraments. 10 They that provoke others to swear
voluntarily, and by design, or incuriously, or negligently, when they might
avoid it. 11 They that swear to things uncertain, and unknown.

IV. Comm. Remember that thou keep holy the S. day]
The duties of this Comm. are; 1. To set apart some portions of our time for
the immediate offices of religion, and glorification of God. 2. This to be done
according as God or his holy Church has appointed. 3. One day in seven is to
be set apart. 4. The Christian day is to be subrogated into the place of the
Jews day: the resurrection of Christ and redemption of man was a greater
blessing then then to create him. 5. God on that day to be worshipped and
acknowledged as our Creator, and as our Savior. 6. The day to be spent in holy
offices; in hearing Divine service, public prayers, frequenting the
Congregations, hearing the word of God read or expounded; reading good books,
meditations, alms, reconciling enmities; remission of burdens, and of offenses,
of debts, and of work; friendly offices, neighborhood, and provoking one
another to good-works; and to this end, all servile works must be omitted,
excepting necessary and charitable offices to men or beasts, to our selves, or
others.

They sin against this Comm. 1. That do, or compel, or entice others to do
servile works without the cases of necessity or charity, to be estimated
according to common and prudent accounts. 2. They that refuse or neglect to
come to the public assemblies of the Church, to hear and assist at the divine
offices entirely. 3. They that spend the day in idleness, forbidden or vain
recreations, or the actions of sin and folly. 4. They that buy and sell without
the cases of permission. 5. They that travel unnecessary journeys. 6 They that
act or assist in conten^ions, or law-suites, markets, fairs, etc. 7. They that
on that day omit their private devotion unless the whole day be spent in
public. 8. They that by any cross or contradictory actions against the
customs of the Church do purposely desecrate or unhallow and make the day
common: as they that in despite and contempt, fast upon the Lords day, lest
they may celebrate the festival after the manner of the Christians.

V. Com. Honor thy father and thy mother]
The duties are; 1. To do honor and reverence and to love our natural parents.
2. To obey all their domestic commands; for in them the scene of their
authority lies. 3. To give them maintenance and support in their needs. 4. To
obey Kings and all that are in authority. 5. To pay tribute and honors,
custom and reverence. 6. To do reverence to the aged and all our betters. 7.
To obey our Masters, spiritual governors and Guides in those things which
concern their several respective interest and authority.

They sin against this commandment. 1. That despise their parents age, or
infirmity. 2. That are ashamed of their poverty and extraction. 3. That publish
their vices, errors and infirmities to shame them. 4. That refuse and reject
all or any of their lawful commands. 5. Children that marry without or against
their consent when it may be reasonably obtained. 6. That curse them, from whom
they receive so many blessings. 7 That grieve the souls of their parents by not
complying in their desires, and observing their circumstances. 8. That hate
their persons, that mock them or use uncomely jestings. 9. That discover their
nakedness voluntarily. 10. That murmr against their injunctions, and obey
them involuntarily. 11. All Rebels against their Kings or the supreme power in
which it is legally and justly invested. 12. That refuse to pay tributes and
impositions imposed legally. 13. They that disobey their Masters, murmr or
repine against their commands, abuse or deride their persons, talk rudely, etc.
14. They that curse the king in their heart, Credebant hoc grande nefa, and
morte piandum,
Si juvenis vetulo non assurrexerat and si
Barbato cu^cu^q puer --
Iuven. Sat. 13.
or speak evil of the ruler of their people. 15. All that are uncivil and rude
toward aged persons, mockers and scorners of them.

VI. Com. Thou shall do no murder.
The duties are. 1. To preserve our own lives, the lives of our relatives and
all with whom we converse (or who can need us, and we assist) by prudent
reasonable and wary defenses, advocations, discoveries of snares, etc. 2. To
preserve our health, and the integrity of our bodies and minds, and of others.
3. To preserve, and follow peace with all men.

They sin against this Commandment. 1. That destroy the life of a man or woman,
himself or any other. 2. That do violence or dismember, or hurt any part of the
body with evil intent. 3. That fight duels or commence unjust wars. 4. They
that willingly hasten their own or others death. 5. That by oppression or
violence imbitter the spirits of any, so as to make their life sad, and their
death hasty. 6. They that conceal the dangers of their neighbor, which they can
safely discover. 7. They that sow strife and contention among neighbors. 8.
They that refuse to rescue or preserve those whom they can and are obliged to
preserve. 9. They that procure abortion. 10 They that threaten, or keep men in
fears; or hate them.

VII. Com. Thou shall not commit adultery.
The duties are. 1. To preserve our bodies in the chastity of a single life, or
of marriage. 2. To keep all the parts of our bodies in the care and severities
of chastity; so that we be restrained in our eyes as well as in our feet.

They sin against this Commandment, 1. Who are adulterous, incestuous,
Sodomitical, or commit fornication. 2. They that commit folly alone;
dishonouring their own bodies with softness and wantonness. 3. They that
immoderately let loose the reins of their bolder appetite, though within the
protection of marriage. 4 They that by wanton gestures, wandering eyes
lascivious dressings, discovery of the nakedness of themselves or others,
filthy discourse, high diet, amorous songs, balls and revellings, tempt and
betray themselves, or others to folly. 5. They that marry a woman divorced for
adultery. 6. They that divorce their wives, except for adultery, and marry
another.

VIII. Com. Thou shall not steal.
The duties are. 1. To give every man his due. 2. To permit every man to enjoy
his own goods and estate quietly.

They sin against this Commandment. 1. That injure any man's estate by open
violence, or by secret robbery, by stealth or cousenage, by arts of bargaining
or vexatious lawsuits. 2. That refuse or neglect to pay their debts, when they
are able. 3 That are forward to run into debt knowingly beyond their power,
without hopes or purposes of repaiment. 4. Oppressors of the poor. 5. That
exact usury of necessitous persons, or of any beyond the permissions of equity
as determined by the laws. 6. All sacrilegious persons; people that rob God of
his dues, or of his possessions. 7. All that game, viz. at Cards and Dice, etc.
to the prejudice and detriment of other men's estates. 8. They that imbase coin
and metals and obtrude them for perfect and natural. 9. That break their
promises to the detriment of a third person. 10 They that refuse to stand to
their bargains. 11. They that by negligence imbecil other men's estates,
spoiling or letting any thing perish which is entrusted to them. 12. That
refuse to restore the pledge

IX. Com. Thou shall not bear false witness.
The duties are. 1. To give testimony to truth, when we are called to it by
competent authority. 2. To preserve the good name of our neighbors. 3. To
speak well of them that deserve it.

They sin against this commandment. 1. That speak false things in judgment
accusing their neighbors unjustly; or denying his crime publicly when we are
asked, and can be commanded lawfully to tell it. 2. Flatterers, and 3.
slanderers, 4. backbiters, 5. and detracters. 6. They that secretly raise
jealousies, and suspicion of their neighbors causelessly.

X. Thou shall not covet.
The duties are. 1. To be content with the portion God has given us. 2. Not to
be covetous of other men's goods.

They sin against this commandment. 1. That envy the prosperities of other men.
2. They that desire passionately to be possessed of what is their neighbors.
3. They that with greediness pursue riches, honors, pleasures and
curiosities. 4. They that are too careful, troubled, distracted or amazed,
affrighted and afflicted with being sollicitous in the conduct of temporal
blessings.

These are the general lines of duty by which we may discover our failings, and
be humbled, and confess accordingly; only the penitent person is to remember,
that although these are the kinds of sins described after the sense of the
Jewish Church, which consisted principally in the external action, or the deed
done, and had no restraints upon the thoughts of men, save only in the tenth
commandment, which was mixed and did relate as much to action as to thought (as
appears in the instances) yet upon us Christians there are many circumstances
and degrees of obligation, which endear our duty with greater severity and
observation; and the penitent is to account of himself and enumerate his sins,
not only by external actions or the deed done, but by words and by thoughts;
and so to reckon if he have done it directly or indirectly, if he have caused
others to do it, by tempting or encouraging, by assisting or counselling, by
not dissuading when he could and ought, by fortifying their hands or hearts, or
not weakening their evil purposes; if he have designed or contrived its action,
desired it or loved it, delighted in the thought, remembered the past sin with
pleasure or without sorrow, these are the by-ways of sins, and the crooked
lanes in which a man may wander and be lost as certainly as in the broad high
ways of iniquity.

But besides this, our blessed Lord and his Apostles have added diverse other
precepts; some of which have been with some violence reduced to the Decalogue,
and others have not bin noted at all in the catalogues of confession, I shall
therefore describe them entirely, that the sick man discover his failings, that
by the mercies of God in Jesus Christ, and by the instrument of repentance he
may be presented pure and spotless before the throne of God.

The special precepts of the Gospel.
1. PRayer, frequent, servent, holy, and persevering. 1 These. 5.17. Luke 18.1.
1 These. 5.17.
2. Faith. Mark 16.16.
3. Repentance, Luke 13.3 Acts 3.19.
4. Poverty of spirit, as opposed to ambition, high designs, Matthew. 5.3.
5. and in it is humility, or sitting down in the lowest place, and in giving
honor to go before another, Luke 14.10. John 13.14.
6. meekness, as it is opposed to waywardness, fretfulnesse, immoderate
grieving, disdain and scorn, Math. 5.5.
7. contempt of the world, Colos. 3.1, 2.
8. prudence, or the advantageous conduct of religion, Matthew. 10.16.
9. simplicity or sincerity in words and actions, pretenses and substances, 1
These. 5.8.
10. hope, Romans 8.24.
11. hearing the word, Luke 16.29. Mark 4.44.
12. Reading, 1 Timothy 4.13.
13. Assembling together, Heb. 10.25.
14. obeying them that have the rule over us in spiritual affairs, Heb. 13.17.
Matthew. 18.17.
15. Refusing to communicate with persons excommunicate: whither also may be
reduced, To reject Heretics. 2 These. 3.6. 2 ep. John 10. Titus 3.10.
16 Charity, viz. love to God above all things, Colos. 3.14. 1 Timothy 1.5. 1 Timothy
2.22. Mark 12.30.
brotherly kindness, Matthew. 6.14.
or profitable love to our neighbors as our selves, 1 John 3.16.
to be expressed in alms, forgiveness, Matthew. 18.9.
and to dye for our brethren, Matthew. 18.15.
17 To pluck out the right eye, or violently to rescind all occasions of sin,
James 1.4. Luke 21.19.
though dear to us as an eye, 18 To reprove our erring brother, Heb. 12.3. Gal.
6.9.
19 To be patient in afflictions, and longanimity is referred hither, or long
sufferance; Ephesians. 5 20. 2 Thessalonians. 1.3. Luke 6.32.
which is the perfection and perseverance of patience; and is opposed to
hastiness and weariness of spirit, 2 Timothy 3.2.
20 To be thankful to our benefactors, but above all, in all things to give
thanks to God, 1 These. 5.16. Philip. 3.1.4.4.
21. To rejoice in the Lord always, 1 These 5.19. Ephesians. 4.30.
22. Not to quench, not to grieve, not to resist the Spirit, Acts. 7.51.
23 To love our wives as Christ loved his Church, and to reverence our
husbands, Ephesians. 5.33.
24. To provide for our families, 1 Timothy 5.8. Colos. 3.21. Ephesians. 6.4. 1 These.
5.20.
25 Not to be bitter to our children, 26. To bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, 2 Timothy 2.24.
27. Not to despise prophesying, Matthew. 18.7. 1 Cor. 10.32.
28. To be gentle and easy to be entreated, Heb. 12.14.
29. To give no scandal, or offense, 1 Cor. 6.1.
30. To follow after peace with all men and to make peace, Philip. 4.8.
31. Not to go to law before the unbelievers, 2 Cor. 8.21.
32. To do all things that are of good report, or the actions of public
honesty; 1 These. 5.22.
abstaining from all apearances of evil, 33 To convert souls or turn sinners
from the error of their ways. James 5.19, 20.
34. To confess Christ before all the world, Matthew. 10.32.
35. To resist unto blood if God calls us to it, Heb. 12.4.
36. To rejoice in tribulation for Christ's sake, Matthew. 5.12. James 1.2.
37. To remember and show forth the Lords death till his second coming, by
celebrating the Lords supper, Luke 22.19.
38. To believe all the New Testament, Joh. 20.30.31. Acts 3.23. Mark 1.1. Luke
10.16.
39. To add nothing to S. John's last Book, that is, to pretend to no new
revelations, Revel. 22.18.
40. To keep the customs of the Church, her festivals and solemnities, 1 Cor.
11.16.
lest we be reproved as the Corinthians were by S. Paul, we have no such
customs nor the Churches of God, Jude 3.
41. To contend earnestly for the faith. Romans 14.13.22
Nor to be contentious in matters not concerning the eternal interest of our
souls; but in matters indifferent to have faith to our selves, Romans 16.17.
42. Not to make schisms or divisions in the body of the Church, Mat. 23.8, 9,
10.
43. To call no man Master upon earth, but to acknowledge Christ our Master,
and law giver. 1 Pet. 5.3.
44. not to domineer over the Lords heritage, 1 John 4.1. 1 These. 5.21.
45 To try all things, and keep that which is best, 1 Cor. 9.25. Titus 2.2.
46 To be temperate in all things, Matthew. 16.24.
47. To deny our selves, Colos. 3.5. Romans 8.13.
48. To mortify our lusts and their instruments, Luke 6.34.
49. To lend looking for nothing again, nothing by way of increase, nothing by
way of recompense. Mark 13.35. Matthew. 24.42 and 25.13.
50 To watch and stand in readiness against the coming of the Lord, Matthew. 5.22.
Ephesians. 4.26.
51* Not to be angry without cause, 1 Cor. 6.10. Matthew. 5.22,
52. not at al to revile, 53. not to swear, 54 not to respect persons, Matthew.
5.34.
55. to lay hands suddenly on no man James 2.1.
[This especially pertains to * 1 Timothy 5.22.
Bishops.* 2 Timothy 4.12.
To whom also, and to all the Ecclesiastical order it is enjoined, that they
preach the word, that they be instant in season, and out of season, that they
rebuke, reprove, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine. 56. To keep the
Lords day (derived into an obligation from a practice Apostolical) 57. 1 Cor.
10.31.
to do all things to the glory of God, Matthew. 5.6.
58. to hunger and thirst after righteousness and its rewards, Titus 3.9.
59. to avoid foolish questions, Matthew. 5.44. Romans 12.14.
60 to pray for persecuters, and to do good to them that persecute us, and
despitefully use us, 1 Timothy 2.1.
61 to pray for all men, 62. to maintain good works for necessary uses. Titus
3.14.
63. to work with our own hands that we be not burdensome to others, Ephesians.
4.28.
avoiding idleness, Matthew. 5.48.
64 to be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect, 1 Pet. 3.8. 2 Pet. 1.6, 7.
2 Cor. 8.7. 2 Cor. 9.5.
65. to be liberal and frugal; for he that will call us to account for our
time, will also for the spending our money, 66 not to use uncomely jestings,
Ephesians. 5.4.
67. modesty; as opposed to boldness, 1 Timothy 2.9.
to curiosity, to undecency, James 1.9.
68. to be swift to hear, slow to speak, Philip. 2.10.
69. to worship the holy [Jesus] at the mention of his holy name; as of old God
was at the mention of [Jehovah.

These are the straight lines of scripture, by which we may also measure our
obliquities, and discover our crooked walking; if the sick man has not done
these things, or if he have done contrary to any of them in any particular, he
has cause enough for his sorrow, and matter for his confession: of which he
need no other forms, but that he heartily deplore and plainly enumerate his
follies, as a man tells the sad stories of his own calamity.

SECT. IX. Of the sick man's practice of charity and justice, by way of rule.
1. LEt the sick man set his house in order before he die; Magnifica verba mors
prope admota excutit
state his cases of conscience, reconcile the fractures of his family, reunite
brethren, cause right understandings, and remove jealousies; give good counsels
for the future conduct of their persons, and estates, charm them into religion
by the authority and advantages of a dying person: Nam verae voces tum demum
pectore ab imo e iciu^tur -- Lucret.
because the last words of a dying man are like the tooth of a wounded Lion,
making a deeper impression in the agony, then in the most vigorous strength.

2. Let the sick man discover every secret of art, or profit, physic, or
advantage to mankind, if he may do it without the prejudice of a third person.
Some persons are so uncharitably envious that they are willing that a secret
receipt should die with them, and be buried in their grave; like treasure in
the sepulcher of David. But this which is a design of charity must therefore
not be done to any man's prejudice; and the Mason of Herodotus the King of
Egypt who kept secret his notice of the Kings treasure, and when he was a
dying told his son, betrayed his trust then when he should have kept it most
sacredly for his own interest. In all other cases let thy charity outlive
thee, that thou may rejoice in the mansion of rest, because by thy means
many living persons are eased or advantaged.

3. Let him make his will with great justice and piety, that is, that the right
heirs be not defrauded for collateral respects, fancies or indirect
fondnesses; but the inheritances descend in their legal and due channel; and
in those things where we have a liberty, that we take the opportunity of doing
virtuously, that is, of considering how God may be best served by our
donatives, or how the interest of any virtue may be promoted; in which we are
principally to regard the necessities of our nearest kindred, and relatives,
servants and friends.

4. Let the Will or Testament be made with ingenuity, opennesse, (...) Cyrus
apud Xenoph. l. 8. institut.
and plain expression, that he may not entail a lawsuit upon his posterity and
relatives, and make them lose their charity, or entangle their estates, or make
them poorer by the gift. Vide Chap. 1. Sect. 4.
He has done me no charity, but dies in my debt that makes me sue for a legacy.

5. It is proper for the estate of sickness, and an excellent anealing us to
burial, that we give alms in this state, so burying treasure in our graves,
that will not perish but rise again in the resurrection of the just. Let the
dispensation of our alms be as little entrusted to our Executors as may be,
excepting to lasting and successive portions; Lucian de luctu. Vid. reg. 6.
paulo infr Herod^t. Musa. 5. Plin l. 4. c. ^1. Xiphilin. in Severo.
but with our own present care let us exercise the charity, and secure the
stewardship. It was a custom among the old Greeks, to bury horses, clothes,
arms, and whatsoever was dear to the dece^sed person, supposing they might
need them, and that without clothes they should be found naked by their Judges;
(...). Nicarchus.
and all the friends did use to bring gifts; by such liberality thinking to
promote the interest of their dead. But we may offer our (...) our selves best
of all; Fallax saepe fides, testataqne vota peri^un^;
Constitues tumulum si ^apis ipse tuum.

our doles and funeral meals if they be our own early provisions, will then
spend the better; and it is good so to carry our passing penny in our hand, and
by reaching that hand to the poor make a friend in the everlasting habitations.
He that gives with his own hand shall be sure to find it, and the poor shall
find it: but he that trusts Executors with his charity, and the Economy and
issues of his virtue, by which he must enter into his hopes of heaven and
pardon, shall find but an ill account, when his Man thee behooves often to have
this in mind: Written upon a wall in S. Edmunds Church in Lumbard-street.

That thou gives with thine hand, that shall thou find;
For widows be slofull, and children be^h unkind,
Executors beth covetous, and keep all that they find,
If any body ask where the de^ds goods became
^hey answer
So God me help and Halidam, he died a poor man.
Think on this
executors complain he died poor. Think on this. To this purpose wise and pious
was the counsel of Salvian; Contra avaritiam
Let a dying man who has nothing else of which he may make an effective
oblation, offer up to God of his substance; Let him offer it with compunction
and tears, with grief and mourning, as knowing that all our oblations have
their value, not by the price, but by the affection: and it is our faith that
commends the money, since God receives the money by the hands of the poor, but
at the same time gives, and does not take the blessing; because he receives
nothing but his own, and man gives that which is none of his own, that, of
which only he is a steward, and shall be accountable for every shilling. Let
it therefore be offered humbly as a Creditor pays his debts, not magnifically
as a Prince gives a donative; and let him remember that such doles do not pay
for the sin, but they ease the punishment; they are not proper instruments of
redemption, but instances of supplication, and advantages of prayer; and when
we have done well remember that we have not paid our debt, but showen our
willingness to give a little of the vast sum we owe: and he that gives
plentifully according to the measure of his estate, is still behind hand
according to the measure of his sins; let him pray to God that this late
oblation may be accepted, and so it will, if it sails to him in a sea of
poenitentiall tears or sorrows, that it is so little, and that it is so late.

6. Let the sick man's charity be so ordered that it may not come only to deck
the funeral and make up the pomp; charity waiting like one of the solemn
mourners; but let it be continued, that beside the alms of health and
sickness, there may be a rejoicing in God for his charity, long after his
funerals, so as to become more beneficial and less public; that the poor may
pray in private and give God thanks many days together. This is matter of
prudence: and yet in this, we are to observe the same regards which we had in
the charity and alms of our lives; with this only difference, that in the
funeral alms also of rich and able persons, the public customs of the Church
are to be observed, and decency and solemnity, and the expectations of the
poor, and matter of public opinion, and the reputation of religion; In all
other cases, let thy charity consult with humility and prudence, that it never
ministers at all to vanity; but be as full of advantage and usefulness as it
may.

7. Every man will forgive a dying person, (...).
and therefore let the sick man be ready and sure if he can, to send to such
persons whom he has injured, and beg their pardon and do them right; For in
his case, he cannot stay for an opportunity of convenient and advantageous
reconcilement; he cannot then spin out a treaty, nor beat down the price of
composition, nor lay a snare to be quit from the obligation and coercion of
laws; but he must ask forgiveness downright, and make him amends as he can,
being greedy of making use of this opportunity of doing a duty, that must be
done, but cannot any more, if not now, until times return again, and tells the
minutes backward, so that yesterday shall be reckoned in the portions of the
future.

8. In the intervalls of sharper pains, when the sick man am^sses together all
the arguments of comfort and testimonies of Gods love to him, and care of him,
he must needs find infinite matter of thanksgiving, and glorification of God:
and it is a proper act of charity and love to God, and justice too, that he do
honor to God on his deathbed for all the blessings of his life, not only in
general communications, but those by which he has been separate and discerned
from others, or supported and blessed in his own person: Such as are; [ In all
my life time I never broke a bone, I never fell into the hands of robbers;
never into public shame, or into noisome diseases: I have not begd my bread,
nor been tempted by great and unequal fortunes: God gave me a good
understanding, good friends, or delivered me in such a danger, and heard my
prayers in such particular pressures of my spirit.] This or the like
enumeration and consequent acts of thanksgiving are apt to produce love to God,
and confidence in the day of trial; for he that * gave me blessings in
proportion to the state and capacities of my life, I hope also will do so in
proportion to the needs of my sickness, and my deathbed. This we find
practiced as a most reasonable piece of piety by the wisest of the Heathens. So
Antipater Tarsensis gave God thanks for his prosperous voyage into Greece; and
Cyrus made a handsome prayer upon the tops of the mountains, when by a phantasme
he was warned of his approaching death. Receive [O God] my Father these holy
rites by which I put an end to many and great affairs: and I give thee thanks
for thy celestial signs and prophetic notices, whereby thou have signified to
me what I ought to do and what I ought not: I present also very great thanks
that I have perceived and acknowledged your care of me, and have never exalted
my self above my condition for any prosperous accident. And I pray that you
will grant felicity to my wife, my children, and friends, and to me a death,
such as my life has been. But that of Philagrius in Gregory Nazianzen is
eucharisticall, but it relates more especially to the blessings and advantages
which are accidentally consequent to sickness. I thank thee O Father and maker
of all thy children, that thou art pleased to bless and to sanctify us even
against our wills, and by the outward man purgest the inward, and leadest us
through cross ways to a blessed ending, for reasons best known unto thee.]
However when we go from our hospital and place of little intermediall rest in
our journey to heaven, it is fit that we give thanks to the major domo for our
entertainment. When these parts of religion are finished, according to each
man's necessity, there is nothing remaining of personal duty to be done alone,
but that the sick man act over these virtues, by the renewings of devotion, and
in the way of prayer; and that is to be continued as long as life, and voice,
and reason dwell with us.

SECT. X. Acts of charity by way of prayer and ejaculation, which may also be
used for thanksgiving, in case of recovery.
O My soul thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord: my goodness
extends not to thee: But to the saints that are in the earth, and to the
excellent in whom is all my delight. Psalm. 16.2, etc.
The Lord is the portion of my inheritance and of my cup, thou maintainest my
lot.

As for God, his way is perfect: the word of the Lord is tried, he is a buckler
to all those that trust in him. For who is God save the Lord? or who is a rock
save our God? It is God that girdeth me with strength, Psalm. 18.30, 31.
and makes my way perfect.

Be not thou far from me O Lord: O my strength, haste thee to help me.

Deliver my soul from the sword, my darling from the power of the dog, save me
from the lions mouth: and thou have heard me also from among the horns of the
Unicorns.

I will declare thy Name unto my brethren, in the midst of the Congregation
will I praise thee.

Ye that fear the Lord, praise the Lord ye sons [of God J Glorify him and fear
before him all ye sons [of men. For he has not despised nor abhorred the
affliction of the afflicted, neither has he hid his face from him, but when he
cried unto him he heard. Ps. 22.19.


As the heart pants after the water brooks, so longs my soul after thee O
God.

My soul thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear
before the Lord.

O my God, my soul is cast down within me; all thy waves and billows are gone
over me: as with a sword in my bones I am reproached: yet the Lord will command
his loving kindness in the day time, and in the night his song shall be with
me, Psalm. 42.
and my prayer unto the God of my life.

Bless ye the Lord in the congregations, even the Lord from the fountains of
Israel: My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness and thy salvation all the
day, Psalm. 68 26. and Psalm. 71.
for I know not the numbers thereof.

I will go in the strength of the Lord God, I will make mention of thy
righteousness, even of thine only. O God thou have taught me from my youth.
And hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works. But I will hope continually,
Psalm. 71.
and will yet praise thee more and more.

Thy righteousness, O God is very high, who have done great things. O God who
is like unto thee? thou which have showed me great and sore troubles shall
quicken me again, and shall bring me up again from the depth of the earth.

Thou shall increase thy goodness toward me, ibid.
and comfort me on every side.

My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee. And my soul which thou
have redeemed. Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does
wondrous things. And blessed be his glorious name for ever; and let the whole
earth be filled with his glory. Psalm. 72
Amen. Amen.

I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my supplication. The
sorrows of death compassed me, I found trouble and sorrow. Then called I upon
the name of the Lord, O Lord I beseech thee deliver my soul. Gracious is the
Lord and righteous, Psalm. 116
yea our God is merciful.

The Lord preserves the simple, I was brought low, and he helped me. Return to
thy rest O my soul, the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. ibid.
For thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet
from falling.

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints; O Lord, truly I
am thy servant, ibid.
I am thy servant and the son of thine handmaid, thou shall loose my bonds.

He that loves not the Lord Jesus, let him be accursed.

O that I might love thee, as well as ever any creature loved thee. He that
dwells in love dwells in God. There is no fear in love.

The prayer.
O Most Gracious and eternal God and loving Father, who have powered out thy
bowels upon us, and sent the son of thy love unto us to die for love, and to
make us dwell in love, and the eternal comprehensions of thy divine mercies, O
be pleased to inflame my heart with a holy charity; toward thee and all the
world. Lord I forgive all that ever have offended me and beg that both they and
I may enter into the possession of thy mercies, and feel a gracious pardon from
the same fountain of grace: and do thou forgive me all the acts of scandal,
whereby I have provoked or tempted, or lessened, or disturbed any person; Lord,
let me never have my portion amongst those that divide the union, and disturb
the peace, and break the charities of the Church, and Christian communion; And
though I am fallen into evil times, in which Christendom is divided by the
names of an evil division, yet I am in charity with all Christians, with all
that love the Lord Jesus, and long for his coming: and I would give my life to
save the soul of any of my brethren; and I humbly beg of thee that the public
calamity of the several societies of the Church, may not be imputed to my
soul, to any evil purposes.

II.
LOrd preserve me in the unity of the holy Church, in the love of God, and of
my neighbors; let thy grace enlarge my heart to remember, deeply to resent,
faithfully to use, wisely to improve, and humbly to give thanks to thee for all
thy favors, with which thou have enriched my soul, and supported my estate,
and preserved my person, and rescued me from danger, and invited me to
goodness in all the days and periods of my life. Thou have led me through it
with an excellent conduct: and I have gone astray after the manner of men: but
my heart is toward thee. O do unto thy servant as thou usest to do unto those
that love thy Name: let thy truth comfort me, thy mercy deliver me, thy staff
support me, thy grace sanctify my sorrow, and thy goodness pardon all my
sins: thy Angels guide me with safety in this shadow of death, and thy most
holy Spirit lead me into the land of righteousness, for thy Names sake which
is so comfortable, and for Jesus Christ his sake, our Dearest Lord and most
Gracious Savior. Amen.

CHAP. V. Of visitation of the sick: or the assistance that is to be done to
dying persons, by the ministry of their Clergy Guides.
SECT. I.
GOd who has made no new Covenant with dying persons distinct from the
Covenant of the living, has also appointed no distinct Sacraments for them, no
other manner of usages, but such as are common to all the spiritual
necessities of living and healthful persons. In all the days of our religion,
from our baptism to the resignation and delivery of our soul, God has
appointed his servants to minister to the necessities, and eternally to bless,
and prudently to guide, and wisely to judge concerning souls; and the Holy
Ghost that anointing from above, descends upon us in several effluxes, but
ever by the ministeries of the Church. Our heads are anointed with that sacred
unction Baptism (not in ceremony, but in real and proper effect) our
foreheads in confirmation, our hands in ordinations; all our senses in the
visitation of the sick, and all by the ministry of especially deputed and
instructed persons; and we who all our life time derive blessings from the
fountains of grace, by the channels of Ecclesiastical ministeries, must do it
then especially, when our needs are most pungent and actual. 1. We cannot give
up our names to Christ, but the Holy man that ministers in religion must enroll
them and present the persons, and consigne the grace: when we beg for Gods
Spirit, the Minister can best present our prayers, and by his advocation hallow
our private desires, and turn them into public and potent offices. 2. If we
desire to be established and confirmed in the grace and religion of our
Baptism, the Holy man, whose hands were anointed by a special ordination to
that and its symbolical purposes, lays his hands upon the Catechumen and the
anointing from above descends by that ministry. 3. If we would eat the body
and drink the blood of our Lord, we must address our selves to the Lords
Table, and he that stands there to bless and to minister, can reach it forth,
and feed thy soul; and without his ministry thou can not be nourished with
that heavenly feast, nor thy body consigned to immortality, nor thy soul
refreshed with the Sacramental bread from heaven, except by spiritual
suppletories, in cases of necessity and an impossible communion. 4. If we have
committed sins, the spiritual man is appointed to restore us, and to pray for
us, and to receive our confessions, and to enquire into our wounds, and to
infuse oil and remedy, and to pronounce pardon. 5. If we be cut off from the
communion of the faithful by our own demerits, their holy hands must reconcile
us, and give us peace; they are our appointed comforters, our instructers, our
ordinary Judges; and in the whole: what the children of Israel begged of Moses,
that God would no more speak to them alone, Exodus 20.19.
but by his servant Moses, lest they should be consumed, God in compliance with
our infirmities has of his own goodness established as a perpetual law in
all ages of Christianity; that God will speak to us by his Ministers, and our
solemn prayers shall be made to him by their advocation, and his blessings
descend from heaven by their hands, and our offices return thither by their
presidencies, and our repentance shall be managed by them, and our pardon in
many degrees ministered by them; God comforts us by their Sermons, and reproves
us by their Discipline, and cuts off some by their severity, and reconciles
others by their gentleness, and relieves us by their prayers, and instructs us
by their discourses, and heals our sicknesses by their intercession, presented
to God and united to Christ's advocation; and in all this, they are no causes,
but servants of the will of God, instruments of the Divine Grace and order,
stewards and dispensers of the mysteries, and appointed to our souls to serve
and lead, and to help in all accidents, dangers, and necessities.

And they who received us in our baptism, are also to carry us to our grave,
and to take care that our end be as our life was, or should have been; and
therefore, it is established as an Apostolical rule; (...) Xenoph. (...). lib.
8.
Is any man sick among you, let him send for the Elders of the Church, and let
them pray over him, etc. Jam. 5.14.
The sum of the duties and offices respectively implied in these words is in
the following rules.

SECT. II. Rules for the manner of visitations of sick persons.
1. LEt the Minister of religion be sent to, not only against the agony of
death, but be advised with in the whole conduct of the sickness; for in
sickness indefinitely, and therefore in every sickness, and therefore in such
which are not mortal, which end in health, which have no agony, or final
temptations, S. James gives the advice: and the sick man being bound to require
them, is also tied to do it, when he can know them, and his own necessity. It
is a very great evil both in the matter of prudence and piety, that they fear
the Priest as they fear the Embalmer; or the Sextons spade; and love not to
converse with him, unless he can converse with no man else; and think his
office so much to relate to the other world, that he is not to be treated with,
while we hope to live in this; and indeed that our religion be taken care of,
only when we die; and the event is this, (of which I have seen some sad
experience) that the man is deadly sick, and his reason is useless, and he is
laid to sleep, and his life is in the confines of the grave, so that he can do
nothing toward the trimming of his lamp; and the Curate shall say a few
prayers by him, and talk to a dead man, and the man is not in a condition to be
helped; but in a condition to need it hugely. He cannot be called upon to
confess his sins; and he is not able to remember them, and he cannot
understand an advice, nor hear a free discourse, nor be altered from a passion,
nor cured of his fear, nor comforted upon any grounds of reason or religion,
and no man can tell what is likely to be his fate; or if he does, he cannot
prophecy good things concerning him, but evil; Let the spiritual man come when
the sick man can be conversed withal, and instructed; when he can take
medicine and amend; when he understands, or can be taught to understand the
case of his soul, and the rules of his conscience; and then his advice may turn
into advantage; It cannot otherwise be useful.

2. The entercourses of the Minister with the sick man have so much variety in
them, that they are not to be transacted at once: and therefore they do not
well that send once to see the good man with sorrow, and hear him pray, and
thank him and dismiss him civilly, and desire to see his face no more; To
dress a soul for funeral is not a work to be dispatched at one meeting: At
once he needs a comfort, and anon something to make him willing to die; and by
and by he is tempted to impatience, and that needs a special cure, and it is a
great work to make his confessions well, and with advantages; and it may be the
man is careless and indifferent, and then he needs to understand the evil of
his sin, and the danger of his person: and his cases of conscience may be so
many and so intricate, that he is not quickly to be reduced to peace; and one
time the holy man must pray, and another time he must exhort; a third time
administer the holy Sacrament; and he that ought to watch all the periods and
little portions of his life, lest he should be suprized and overcome, had need
be watched when he is sick, and assisted, and called upon, and reminded of the
several parts of his duty, in every instant of his temptation. This article was
well provided for among the Easterlings; for the Priests in their visitations
of a sick person did abide in their attendance and ministry for seven days
together. The want of this makes the visitations fruitless and the calling of
the Clergy contemptible, while it is not suffered to imprint its proper effects
upon them that need it in a lasting ministry.

3. S. James advises that when a man is sick he should send for the elders:
James ^.14. Gabriel in 4 ^on^. did. ^^.
one sick man for many Presbyters; and so did the Eastern Churches, they sent
for seven: and like a college of Physicians they ministered spiritual remedies,
and sent up prayers like a quire of singing Clerks. In cities they might do so,
while the Christians were few and the Priests many. But when they that dwelt in
the Pagi or villages ceased to be Pagans, and were baptized, it grew to be an
impossible felicity, unless in few cases, and to some more eminent persons:
but because they need it most, God has taken care that they may best have it;
and they that can, are not very prudent, if they neglect it.

4. Whether they be many or few that are sent to the sick person, let the
Curate of his Parish or his own Confessor be amongst them that is, let him not
be wholly advised by strangers who know not his particular necessities; but he
that is the ordinary Judge, cannot safely be passed by in his extraordinary
necessity, which in so great portions depends upon his whole life past; and it
is a matter of suspicion when we decline his judgment that knows us best, and
with whom we formerly did converse, either by choice or by law, by private
election or public constitution. It concerns us then to make severe and
profitable judgments, and not to conspire against our selves, or procure such
assistances which may handle us softly, or comply with our weaknesses more then
relieve our necessities.

5. When the Ministers of religion are come; first let them do their ordinary
offices, that is, pray for grace to the sick man, for patience, for
resignation, for health (if it seems good to God in order to his great ends.)
For that is one of the ends of the advice of the Apostle; and therefore the
minister is to be sent for, not while the case is desperate, but before the
sickness is come to its crisis or period.) Let him discourse concerning the
causes of sickness, and by a general instrument move him to consider
concerning his condition. Let him call upon him to set his soul in order, to
trim his lamp, to dress his soul, to renew acts of grace by way of prayer, to
make amends in all the evils he has done, and to supply all the defects of
duty, as much as his past condition requires, and his present can admit.

6. According as the condition of the sickness, or the weakness of the man is
observed, so the exhortation is to be less and the prayers more, because the
life of the man was his main preparatory, and therefore if his condition be
full of pain and infirmity, the shortness and small number of his own acts is
to be supplied by the act of the Ministers and standers by; who are in such
cases to speak more to God for him, then to talk to him. For the prayer of the
righteous when it is servent has a promise to prevail much in behalf of the
sick person. James 5.16.
But exhortations must prevail with their own proper weight, not by the passion
of the Speaker. But yet this assistance by way of prayers is not to be done by
long offices, but by frequent. and fervent, and holy: in which offices, if the
sick man joins, let them be short and apt to comply with his little strength,
and great infirmities; if they be said in his behalf without his conjunction,
they that pray may prudently use their own liberty, and take no measures, but
their own devotions and opportunities and the sick man's necessities.

When he has made this general address and preparatory entrance to the work
of many days and periods, he may descend to particulars by the following
instruments and discourses.

SECT. III. Of ministering in the sick man's confession of sins and repentance.
THe first necessity that is to be served is that of repentance, in which the
Ministers can in no way serve him but by first exhorting him to confession of
his sins, and declaration of the state of his soul. For unless they know the
manner of his life, and the degrees of his restitution, either they can do
nothing at all, or nothing of advantage, and certainty: His discourses like
Ionathans arrows, may shoot short, or shoot over, but not wound where they
should, nor open those humors that need a lancet or a cautery. To this purpose
the sick man may be reminded.

Arguments and exhortations to move the sick man to confession of sins.
Prove. 28 ^3.
1. That God has made a special promise to confession of sins. 1 John ^.9.
He that confesses his sins and forsakes them shall have mercy: and if we
confess our sins, God is righteous to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness. Baptist repented of their sins, they confessed John
in the susception of Baptism. Matthew. 3.^.
* That the converts in the days of the Apostles returning to Christianity
instantly declared their faith, and their repentance, by confession and
declaration of their deeds which they then renounced, Acts 1^ 18
abjured, and confessed to the Apostles. * That confession is an act of many
virtues together. * It is the gate of a glorification of God, so called by
Ioshuah particularly in the Achan, * an acknowledgement that God is just in
punishing; for by confessing Paul expressly exhorting us to it upon that very
inducement. 1 Cor. 11.31.
* That godly sorrow, and an integral or constituent part of that grace, which
together with faith m^kes up the whole duty of the Gospel. * That in convenient
in all cases is fit to be done by all James gives an express precept, that we
Christians should confess our sins to each other, that is, Christian to
Christian, brother to brother, the people to their Minister, and then he makes
a specification of that duty which a sick man is to do when he has sent for
the elders of the Church. * That in all this there is no force if he hides his
sins he shall not be directed, (so said the Wise man) but ere long he must
appear before the great Judge of men and Angels; Si ta^uerit quis percussus est
and non egerit poenitentiam, nec vulnus suum fratri and magist^o voluerit
confiteri, magister qui linguam habet ad curandum ^acile ei prodesse non
poterit. Si enim ^rubescat aegrotus vulnus medico confiteri, quod ignorant
medicina non curat S. Hiezon. ad caput 10. Eccles. Si enim hoe fecerimus and
revelavorimus peccam nostra, non solum Deo, sed and his qui pof^une mederi
vulneribus nostris atque peccatis, delebuntur peccata nostra. Origin hom. 17.
in Lucam.
and his Spirit will be more amazed and confounded to be seen among the Angels
of light with the shadows of the works of darkness upon him, then he can
suffer by confessing to God in the presence of him whom God has sent to heal
him. However, it is better to be ashamed here, then to be confounded hereafter:
Plaut. ^^inum. mus.
pol pudere praestat quam pigere, totidem literis. * That confession being in
order to pardon of sins, it is very Tam facile and pronum est superos
contemnere testes Si morta. lis idem nemo sciat. Juv. Sat. 13.
and that, of pardon of sins God has made the Minister the publisher and
dispenser; and all this is besides the accidental advantages which accrue to the
conscience; which is made ashamed, and timorous, and restrained by the
mortifications and blushings of discovering to a man the faults committed in
secret. * That the Ministers of reconciliation, are commanded to restore such
persons as are overtaken in a fault, and to that purpose, they come to offer
their Ministry, if they may have cognizance of the fault and person. * That in
the matter of prudence it is and the sin it self is pungent and grievous, and
that we are certain we shall not escape shame for them hereafter, Qui homo
culpam admisit in se nullus est tam parvi pre^^^ quin pude at, qu^n* urget sese
unless we be ashamed of them here, Qui homo culpam admisit in so ^ullus est
tam parvi pretij quin pude at, qu'n ^urget sese Plaut. Aulul.
and use all the proper instruments of their pardon; this man I say is very
near death, but very far off from the kingdom of heaven.

2. The spiritual man will find in the conduct of this duty, many cases and
variety of accidents, which will alter his course and forms of proceedings. 1.
Most men are of a rude indifferency, apt to excuse themselves, ignorant of
their condition, abused by evil principles, content with a general and
indefinite confession, and if you provoke them to it by the foregoing
considerations, Verum hoc se amplecti ^ur uno Hoc amat, h^claudat, matro, ^a^n
nullam ego rango. Hor. Ser. l. 1. sat. 2.
lest their spirits should be a little uneasy, or not secured in their own
opinions, will be apt to say, They are sinners, as every man has his
infirm^ty, and he as well as any man; But God be thanked, they bear no ill will
to any man, or are no adulterers, or no rebels, or they have fought on the
right side; and God be merciful to them for they are sinners. But you shall
hardly open their breast further; and to enquire beyond this, would be to do the
office of an accuser.

3 But which is vet worse; there are very many persons, who have been so used
to an habitual course of a constant intem^er^nce, or dissolution in any other
instance, that ^he crime is made natural and necessary, and the conscience
has digested all the trouble, and the man thinks himself in a good estate, and
never reckons any sins, but those which are the egressions and passings beyond
his ordinary and daily drunkenness. This happens in the cases of drunkenness,
and intemperate eating, and idleness, and uncharitableness, and in lying and
vain jestings, and particularly in such evils which the laws do not punish,
and public customs do not shame, but which are contenanced by potent sinners,
or evil customs, or good nature, and mistaken civilities.

Instruments by way of consideration, to awaken a careless person, and a
stupid conscience.
IN these and the like cases, the spiritual man must awaken the L^thargy, and
prick the conscience by representing to him. 1. * That Christianity is a holy
and a strict religion. 2. * That many are called but few are chosen. * That the
number of them that are to be saved are but very few in respect of those that
are to descend into sorrow and everlasting darkness. * That we have covenanted
with God in baptism, to live a holy life. * That the measures of holiness in
Christian religion are not to be taken by the evil proportions of the
multitude, and common ^ame of looser and less severe persons, because the
multitude is that which does not enter into heaven, but the few, the elect, the
holy servants of Jesus. * That every habitual sin does amount to a very great
guilt in the whole, though it be but in a small instance. * That if the
righteous scarcely be saved, then there will be no place for the righteous and
the sinner to appear in, but places of horror and amazement. * That confidence
has destroyed many souls, and many have had a sad portion who have reckoned
themselves in the Calendar of Saints. * That the promises of heaven are so
great, that it is not reasonable to think that every man, and every life, and
an easy religion shall possess such infinite glories. * That although heaven
is a gift, yet there is a great severity and strict exacting of the conditions
on our part to receive that gift. * That some persons who have lived strictly
for 40. years together, yet have miscarried by some one crime at last, or some
secret hypocrisy, or a latent pride, or a creeping ambition, or a phantastic
spirit; and therefore much less can they hope to receive so great portions of
felicities, when their life has been a continual declination from those
severities which might have created confidence of pardon and acceptance,
through the mercies of God and the merits of Jesus. * That every good man ought
to be suspicious of himself, and in his judgment concerning his own condition
to fear the worst, that he may provide for the better. * That we are commanded
to work out our salvation with fear and trembling. * That this precept was
given with very great reason, considering the thousand thousand ways of
miscarrying. * That S. Paul himself, Apud Surium. die 27. Sept.
and S. Arsenius, and S. Elzearius, and diverse other remarkable Saints had at
some times great apprehensions of the dangers of failing of the mighty price of
their high calling. * That the stake that is to be secured is of so great an
interest, that all our industry, and all the violences we can suffer in the
prosecution of it are not considerable. * That this affair is to be done but
once, and then never any more unto eternal ages. * That they who profess
themselves servants of the institution and servants of the law and discipline
of Jesus will find, that they must judge themselves by the proportions of that
law by which they were to rule themselves. * That the laws of society and
civility, and the voices of my company are as ill judges as they are guides;
but we are to stand or fall by his sentence, who will not consider or value the
talk of idle men, or the persuasion of wilfully abused consciences; but of him,
who has felt our infirmity in all things, but sin, and knows where our
failings are unavoidable, and where and in what degree they are excusable; but
never will endure a sin should seize upon any part of our love, and deliberate
choice, or careless cohabitation. * That if our conscience accuse us not, 1
John 3.20.
yet are we not hereby justified, for God is greater then our consciences. *
That they who are most innocent have their consciences most tender and
sensible. 1 Cor. 4.4.
* That scrupulous persons are always most religious, and that to feel
nothing, is not a sign of life but of death. * That nothing can be hid from
the eyes of the Lord, to whom the day and the night, public and private, words
and thoughts, actions and designs are equally discernable. * That a lukewarm
person is only secured in his own thoughts, but very unsafe in the event, and
despised by God. * That we live in an Age in which that which is called and
esteemed a holy life, in the days of the Apostles and holy primitives would
have been esteemed indifferent, sometimes scandalous, and always cold. That
what was a truth of God then, is so now; and to what severities they were tied,
for the same also we are to be accountable; and heaven is not now an easier
purchase then it was then. * That if he will cast up his accounts, even with a
superficial eye, Let him consider how few good works he has done, how
inconsiderable is the relief which he gave to the poor, how little are the
extraordinaries of his religion, and how unactive and lame, how polluted and
disordered, how unchosen and unpleasant were the ordinary parts and periods of
it? and how many and great sins have stained his course of life, and until he
enters into a particular scrutinie, let him only revolve in his mind what his
general course hth been; and in the way of prudence, let him say, whether it
was laudable and holy, or only indifferent and excusable; and if he can think
it only excusable, and so as to hope for pardon by such suppletories of faith,
and arts of persuasion, which he and others use to take in, for auxiliaries to
their unreasonable confidence, then he cannot but think it very fit that he
search into his own state, Illi mors gravis incubat q^i notus n^mis omnibus
ignotus moritur sibi.
and take a Guide, and erect a tribunal, or appear before that which Christ
has erected for him on earth, that he may make his access fairer when he
shall be called before the dreadful Tribunal of Christ in the clouds. For if
he can be confident upon the stock of an unpraised, or a looser life, and
should dare to venture upon wild accounts, without order, without abatements,
without consideration, without conduct, without fear, without scrutinies and
confessions, and instruments of amends or pardon, he either knows not his
danger, or cares not for it; and little understands how great a horror that
is, that a man should rest his head for ever upon a cradle of flames, and lie
in a bed of sorrows, and never sleep, and never end his groans, or the gnashing
of his teeth.

This is that which some spiritual persons call a wakening the sinner by the
terrors of the law, which is a good analogy or Tropical expression to
represent the threatenings of the Gospel, and the dangers of an incurious and a
sinning person: but we have nothing else to do with the terrors of the law;
for, Blessed be God, they concern us not; the terrors of the law were the
intermination of curses upon all those that ever broke any of the least
Commandments; once, or in any instance: And to it the righteousness of faith
is opposed: The terrors of the law admitted no repentance, no pardon, no
abatement; and were so severe, that God never inflicted them at all according
to the letter, because he admitted all to repentance, that desired it with a
timely prayer, unless in very few cases, as of Achan, or Corah, the gatherer
of sticks upon the Sabbath Day, or the like: but the state of threatenings in
the Gospel is very fearful, because the conditions of avoiding them are easy
and ready, and they happen to evil persons after many warnings, second
thoughts, frequent invitations to pardon and repentance, and after one entire
pardon consigned in Baptism: and in this sense it is necessary that such
persons as we now deal withal should be instructed concerning their danger.

4. When the sick man is either of himself, or by these considerations set
forward with purposes of repentance, and confession of his sins in order to all
its holy purposes, and effects, then the Minister is to assist him in the
understanding the number of his sins, that is, the several kinds of them, and
the various manners of prevaricating the divine commandments; for as for the
number of the particulars in every kind, he will need less help; and if he
did, he can have it no where but in his own conscience, and from the witnesses
of his conversation: Let this be done by prudent insinuation, by arts of
remembrance, and secret notices, and propounding occasions and instruments of
recalling such things to his mind, which either by public fame he is accused
of, or by the temptations of his condition it is likely he might have
contracted.

5. If the person be truly penitent and forward to confess all that are set
before him or offered to his sight at a half face, then he may be complied
withal in all his innocent circumstances, and his conscience made placid and
willing, and he be drawn forward by good nature and civilitie, that his
repentance in all the parts of it, and in every step of its progress and
emanation, may be as voluntary and chosen as it can. For by that means if the
sick person can be invited to do the work of religion, it enters by the door of
his will and choice, and will pass on toward consummation, by the instrument
of delight.

6. If the sick man be backward and without apprehension of the good natured
and civil way; let the Minister take care that by some way or other the work of
God be secured; and if he will not understand, when he is secretly prompted, he
must be hollowed to, and asked in plain interrogatives concerning the crime of
his life. He must be told of the evil things that are spoken of him in markets
and exchanges, the proper temptations and accustomed evils of his calling and
condition, of the actions of scandal, and in all those actions which were
public, or of which any notice is come abroad, let care be taken that the
right side of the case of conscience be turned toward him; and the error truly
represented to him, by which he was abused; as the injustice of his contracts,
his oppressive bargains, his rapine and violence; and if he has persuaded
himself to think well of a scandalous action, let him be instructed and
advertised of his folly and his danger.

7. And this advice concerns the Minister of religion to follow without
partiality or fear, or interest: in much simplicity and prudence, and hearty
sincerity; having no other consideration, but that the interest of the man's
soul be preserved, and no caution used, but that the matter be represented with
just circumstances, and civilities fitted to the person with prefaces of honor
and regard; but so that nothing of the duty be diminished by it, that the
introduction do not spoil the sermon, and both together ruin two souls [of the
speaker and the hearer.] For it may soon be considered; if the sick man be a
poor or an indifferent person in secular account, yet his soul is equally dear
to God, and was redeemed with the same highest price, and therefore to be highly
regarded: and there is no temptation, but that the spiritual man may speak
freely without the allayes of interest, or fear, or mistaken civilities; but if
the sick man be a Prince, or a person of eminence or wealth, let it be
remembered it is an ill expression of reverence to his authority; or of regard
to his person, to let him perish for the want of an honest, and just, and a
free homily.

Let the sick man in the scrutiny of his conscience and confession of his sins,
be carefully reminded to consider those sins which are only condemned in the
court of conscience, and no where else. For there are certain secrecies and
retirments, places of darkness, and artificial veils, with which the Devil
uses to hide our sins from us, and to incorporate them into our affections by a
constant uninterrupted practice, before they be prejudiced fighting a duel,
answering a blow with a blow, carrying armies into a neighbor country,
robbing with a navy, violently seizing upon a kingdom. Usury in all countries;
and because every excess of it is a certain sin, the permission of so
suspected a matter makes it ready for us, lying in ordinary discourse, jeering,
scoffing, intemperate eating, ingratitude, selling too dear, circumventing
another in contracts, importunate entreaties, and temptation of persons to many
instances of sin, pride, ambition. 4. Some others do not reckon the sin against
God, if the laws have seized upon the person; and many that are imprisoned for
debt, think themselves disobliged from payment; and when they pay the penalty,
think they owe nothing for the scandal and disobedience. 5. Some sins are
thought not idle thoughts, foolish talking, looser revellings, impatience,
anger, and all the events of evil company. 6. Lastly, many things idol
reputation, and impunity, public permission, a temporal penalty, infirmity,
prejudice, and direct error in judgment, and ignorance. Now in all these
cases the Ministers are to be inquisitive and observant, lest the fallacy
prevail upon the penitent to evil purposes of death or diminution of his good;
and that those things which in his life passed without observation, may now be
brought forth and pass under sawes and barrows, that is, the severity and
censure of sorrow and condemnation.

9. To which I add for the likeness of the thing, that the matter of omission
be considered; for in them lies the bigger half of our failings; and yet in
many instances they are undiscerned, because they very often sit down by the
conscience, but never upon it; and they are usually looked upon as poor men do
upon their not having coach and horses, or as that knowledge is missed by
boys, and hindes which they never had; it will be hard to make them understand
their ignorance; it requires knowledge to perceive it; and therefore he that
can perceive it, has it not. But by this pressing the conscience with
omissions, I do not mean, recessions or distances, from states of eminency or
perfection; for although they may be used by the Ministers as an instrument of
humility, and a chastiser of too big a confidence, yet that which is to be
confessed and repented of, is omission of duty in direct instances and matters
of commandment, or collateral, and personal obligations, and is especially
to be considered by Kings and Prelates, by Governors and rich persons, by
Guides of souls, and Presidents of learning in public charge; and by all
others in their proportions.

10. The ministers of religion must take care that the sick man's confession be
as minute and particular as it can: and that as few sins as may be, be
entrusted to the general prayer of pardon for all sins: for by being
particular and enumerative of the variety of evils which have disordered his
life, his repentance is disposed to be more pungent and afflictive, and
therefore more salutary and medicinal; it has in it more sincerity, and makes
a better judgment of the final condition of the man; and from thence it is
certain, the hopes of the sick man can be more confident and reasonable.

11. The spiritual man that assists at the repentance of the sick must not be
inquisitive into all the circumstances of the particular sins, but be content
with those that are direct parts of the crime, and aggravation of the sorrow;
Such as frequency, long abode, and earnest choice in acting them, violent
desires, great expense, scandal of others, dishonor to the religion, days of
devotion and religious solemnities, holy places, and the degrees of boldness
and impudence, perfect resolution, and the habit. If the sick person be
reminded or inquired into concerning these, it may prove a good instrument to
increase his contrition, and perfect his penitential sorrows, and facilitate
his ablution, and the means of his amendment. But the other circumstances, as
of the relative person in the participation of the crime, the measures or
circumstances of the impure action, the name of the injured man or woman, the
quality or accidental condition; these and all the like are but questions
springing from curiosity, and producing scruple, and apt to turn into many
inconveniences.

11. The Minister in this duty of repentance must be diligent to observe
concerning the person that repents, Nun^ si depositum non insiciatur amicus si
reddat veteremou^ tota aerugine sollem, Prodigiosa si les and ^huscis ^ign^
libelli.
that he be not imposed upon by some one excellent thing that was remarkable in
the sick man's former life. For there are some people of one good thing. Some
are charitable to the poor out of kindheartednesse, and the same goodnature
makes them easy and compliant with drinking persons, and they die with drink,
but cannot live with charity: and their alms it may be shall deck their
monument, or give them the reward of loving persons, Iuven. sat. 13.
and the poor man's thanks for alms, and procure many temporal blessings, but
it is very sad that the reward should be all spent in this world: some are
rarely just persons, and punctual observers of their word with men, but break
their promises with God, and make no scruple of that. In these and all the like
cases, the spiritual man must be careful to remark, that good proceeds from
an entire and integrall cause, and evil from every part: That one sickness can
make a man die; but he cannot live and be called a sound man, without an entire
health; and therefore if any confidence arises upon that stock, so as that it
hinder the strictness of the repentance, it must be allayed with the
representment of this sad truth; That he who reserves one evil in his choice,
has chosen an evil portion, and colliquintida and death is in the pot: and he
that worships the God of Israel with a frequent sacrifice, and yet upon the
anniversary will bow in the house of Venus, and loves to see the follies and
the nakedness of Rimmon, may eat part of the flesh of the sacrifice, and fill
his belly, but shall not be refreshed by the holy cloud arising from the altar,
or the dew of heaven descending upon the mysteries.

12. And yet the Minister is to estimate, that one (or more good things) is to
be an ingredient into his judgment, concerning the state of his soul, and the
capacities of his restitution, and admission to the peace of the Church; and
according as the excellency and usefulness of the grace has been, and
according to the degrees and the reasons of its prosecution, so abatements are
to be made in the injunctions and impositions upon the penitent. For every
virtue is one degree of approach to God; and though in respect of the
acceptance, it is equally none at all, that is, it is as certain a death if a
man dies with one mortal wound, as if he had twenty, yet in such persons who
have some one or more excellencies, though not an entire piety, there is
naturally a nearer approach to the estate of grace, then in persons who have
done evils and are eminent for nothing that is good. But in making judgment of
such persons, it is to be inquired into and noted accordingly, why the sick
person was so eminent in that one good thing; whether by choice and
apprehension of his duty, or whether it was a virtue from which his state of
life ministered nothing to dehort or discourage him, or whether it was only a
consequent of his natural temper and constitution. If the first, then it
supposes him in the neighborhood of the state of grace, and that in other
things he was strongly tempted. The second is a felicity of his education, and
an effect of providence. The third is a felicity of his nature and a gift of
God in order to spiritual purposes. But yet of every one of these, advantage
is to be made. If he conscience of his duty was the principle, then he is ready
formed to entertain all other graces upon the same reason, and his repentance
must be made more sharp and penal; because he is convinced to have done
against his conscience in all the other parts of his life; but the judgment
concerning his final state ought to be more gentle, because it was a huge
temptation that hindered the man and abused his infirmity: but if either his
calling or his nature were the parents of the grace, he is in the state of a
moral man, (in the just and proper meaning of the word) and to be handled
accordingly: that virtue disposed him rarely well to many other good things,
but was no part of the grace of sanctification; and therefore the man's
repentance is to begin anew, for all that; and is to be finished in the returns
of health, if God grants it, but if he denies it, it is much, very much the
worse for all that sweet natured virtue.

13. When the confession is made, the spiritual man is to execute the office
of a Restorer and a Judge in the following particulars and manner.

SECT. IIII. Of the ministering to the restitution and pardon, or reconciliation
of the sick person, by administering the Holy Sacrament.
IF any man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a one
in the spirit of meekness. Gal. 6.1.
That Is the Commission: and Let the Elders of the Church pray over the sick
man, and if he have committed sins, Jam. 5.15.
they shall be forgiven him, that is the effect of his power and his ministry.
But concerning this, some few things are to be considered.

not to bid him God speed, not to eat and celebrate synaxes and Church-meetings
with such who are declared criminal and dangerous: and therefore
excommunication is in a very great part, 1 Cor. 5.5, 12, 13 2 Cor. 2.6.
the act of the Congregation and communities of the faithful, and S. Paul said
to the Church of the Corinthians, that they had inflicted the evil upon the
incestuous person; that is, by excommunicating him: all the acts of which, are,
as they are subjected in the people; acts of caution and liberty, but no more
acts of direct, proper power or jurisdiction, then it was when the scholars of
Simon Magus lef^ his chair and went to hear S. Peter. But as they are actions
of the Rulers of the Church, so they are declarative, ministerial, and
effective too by moral causality, that is, by persuasion, and discourse, by
argument, and prayer, by homily, and material representment, by
reasonableness of order, and the superinduced necessities of men; though not
by any real change of state as to the person, nor by diminution of his right,
or violence to his condition.

2. He that baptises, and he that ministers the Holy Sacrament, and he that
prays, does holy offices of great advantage, but in these also, just as in the
former he exercises no jurisdiction or pre-eminence after the manner of
saecular authority; Homines in remissione peccatorum ministerium suum exhibe^t,
non jus alic. (...) potestatis exercent: Neque enim in suo sed in nomine Pat^i,
Fihj. and Spiritu, Sancti peccata dimittuntur: ^sti rogant, divinitas donat.
and the same is also true if he should deny them. He that refuses to baptize
an indisposed person, S. Ambr. de spir. S. l. 3. c. 19
has by the consent of all men no power or jurisdiction over the unbaptized
man; and he that for the like reason refuses to give him the Communion,
preserves the sacredness of the mysteries, and does charity to the undisposed
man, to deny that to him which will do him mischief; and this is an act of
separation just as it is for a friend or Physician to deny water to an Hydropic
person, or Italian wines to a hectic fever, or as if Cato should deny to
salute Bibulus, or the Censor of manners to do countenance to a wanton and
vicious person: and though this thing was expressed by words of power, such as
separation, abstention, excommunication, deposition, yet these words we
understand by the thing it self, which was notorious and evident, to be matter
of prudence, security and a free, unconstrained discipline; and they passed
into power by consent and voluntary submission; having the same effect of
constraint, fear and authority, which we see in secular jurisdiction, not
because ecclesiastical discipline has a natural proper coercion as
lay-Tribunals have, but because men have submitted to it, and are bound to do
so upon the interest of two or three Christian graces.

3. In pursuance of this caution and provision the Church superinduced times
and manners of abstention, and expressions of sorrow, and canonical punishments
which they tied the delinquent people to suffer before they would admit them to
the holy Table of the Lord. For the criminal having obliged himself by his sin,
and the Church having declared it when she could take notice of it, he is bound
to repent, to make him capable of pardon with God, and to prove that he is
penitent, he is to do such actions, which the Church in the virtue and
pursuance of repentance shall accept as a testimony of it, sufficient to inform
her; for as she could not bind at all (in this sense) till the crime was
public, though the man had bound himself in secret: so neither can she set him
free till the repentance be as public as the sin; or so as she can note it and
approve it: Though the man be free as to God by his internal act, yet as the
publication of the sin was accidental to it, and the Church censure consequent
to it, so is the publication of repentance and consequent absolution
extrinsecal to the pardon, but accidentally and in the present circumstances
necessary. This was the same that the Jews did, (though in other instances and
expressions) and do to this day to their prevarica^ing people; and the Essenes
in their assemblies; and private Colleges of scholars, and public
Universities. For all these being assemblies of voluntary persons, and such as
seek for advantage, are bound to make an artificial authority in their
superiors, and so to secure order, and government by their own obedience and
voluntary subordination, which is not essential and of proper jurisdiction in
the superior; and the band of it is not any coe^citive power, but the denying
to communicate such benefits which they seek in that communion and fellowship.

4. These I say were introduced in the special manners and instances by
positive authority, and have not a divine authority commanding them; but there
is a divine power that verefies them, and makes these separations effectual and
formidable: for because they are declarative and ministerial in the spiritual
man, and suppose a delinquencie and demerit in the other, and a sin against
God, our blessed Savior our has declared, that what they bind in earth shall
be bound in heaven, that is in plain signification; The same sins and sinners
which the Clergy condemns in the face of their assemblies, the same is
condemned in heaven before the face of God; and for the same reason too. Gods
law has sentenced it, and these are the preachers and publishers of his law,
by which they stand condemned; and these laws are they that condemn the sin, or
acquit the penitent there and here; whatsoever they bind here shall be bound
there, that is, Summum futuri judicii prae^us dicium est, si quis ita
deliquerit ut a communicatione orationis and conventus and on ^is ^ancti
commercii rele^etur.
the sentence of God at the day of judgment shall sentence the same men whom
the Church does rightly sentence here; Tertul. pol. c. 39.
it is spoken in the future [ it shall be bound in heaven] not but that the
sinner is first bound there, or first absolved there; Atque hoc idem innuitur
per summam Apostoli censurano, in reos ma imi crimmis, sit (...), id est,
excommunicatus majori excommunicatione: Don inus veniet: ^cil ad judicandum eum
adquod iudiciu haec corsura colesiae est relativa, and inordine. Tum demum
pena* dabit; ad qua nisi resipiscat, hic consignatur.
but because all binding and loosing in the interval is imperfect and relative
to the day of judgment; the day of the great sentence: therefore it is set
down in the time to come, and says this only; The Clergy are tied by the word
and laws of God to condemn such sins and sinners; and that you may not think it
ineffective, because after such sentence the man lives and grows rich, or
remains in health and power, therefore be sure it shall be verified in the day
of judgment. This is hugely agreeable with the words of our Lord, and certain
in reason; for that the minister does nothing to the final alteration of the
state of the man's soul by way of sentence is demonstratively certain, because
he cannot bind a man, but such as has bound himself, and who is bound in
heaven by his sin before his sentence in the Church: as also be-because the
binding of the Church is merely accidental, and upon publication only; and when
the man repents he is absolved before God, before the sentence of the Church,
upon his contrition and dereliction only; and if he were not, the Church could
not absolve him: The consequent of which evident truth is this, that whatsoever
impositions the Church officers impose upon the criminal, they are to avoid
scandal, to testify repentance, and to exercise it, to instruct the people, to
make them fear, to represent the act of God, and the secret and the true state
of the sinner; and although they are not essentially necessary to our pardon,
yet they are become necessary when the Church has seized upon the sinner by
public notice of the crime; necessary (I say) for the removing the scandal,
and giving testimony of our contrition, and for the receiving all that comfort
which he needs, and can derive from the promises of pardon, as they are
published by him that is commanded to preach them to all them that repent: and
therefore although it cannot be necessary as to the obtaining pardon, that the
Priest should in private absolve a sick man from his private sins, and there is
no loosing where there was no precedent binding, and he that was only bound
before God, can before him only be loosed, yet as to confess sins to any
Christian in private may have many good ends, and to confess them to a
Clergyman may have many more; so to hear Gods sentence at the mouth of the
Ministers, pardon pronounced by Gods ambassador, is of huge comfort to them,
that cannot otherwise be comforted, and whose infirmity needs it; and therefore
it were very fit it were not neglected in the days of our fear and danger, of
our infirmities and sorrow.

5. The execution of this ministry, being an act of prudence and charity, and
therefore relative to changing circumstances it has been and in many cases
may, and in some must be rescinded and altered; the time of separation may be
lengthned and shortened, the condition made lighter or heavier, and for the same
offense the Clergy man is deposed, but yet admitted to the communion, for which
one of the people who has no office to lose, is denied the benefit of
communicating; and this sometimes when he might lawfully receive it; and a
private man is separate when a multitude or a prince is nor, cannot, ought not;
and at last, when the case of sickness and danger of death did occur, they
admitted all men that desired it; sometimes without scruple or difficulty,
sometimes with some little restraint in great or insolent cases (as in the case
of Apostacy, in which the Council of Arls denied absolution, unless they
received and gave public satisfaction by acts of repentance; Arelat. ^^ 3.
and some other Councels denied at any time to do it to such persons) according
as seemed sitting to the present necessities of the Church: all which
particulars declare it to be no part of a divine commandment, that any man
should be denied to receive the Communion if he desires it, and if he be in any
probable capacity of receiving it.

Vide 2 Cor. 2 10 and ^^ Cyprian ep. 73.
6. Since the separation was an act of liberty and a direct negative, it
follows that the restitution was a mere doing that which they refused
formerly, and to give the holy Communion was the formality of absolution, and
all the instrument and the whole matter of reconcilement, the taking off the
punishment, is the pardoning of the sin; for this without the other is but a
word; and if this be done I care not whether any thing be said or no. Vinum
Dominicum ministratoris gratia est: is also true in this sense: to give the
chalice and cup is the grace and indulgence of the Minister; and when that is
done the man has obtained the peace of the Church; and to do that is all the
absolution the Church can give; and they were vain disputes which were
commenced some few ages since, concerning the forms of absolution, whether they
were indicative or optative, by way of declaration, or by way of sentence; for
at first they had no forms at all; but they said a prayer, and after the manner
of the Jews laid hands upon the penitent, when they prayed over him, and so
admitted him to the holy Communion; for since the Church had no power over her
children, but of excommunicating and denying them to attend upon holy offices
and ministeries respectively, neither could they have any absolution, but to
admit them thither from whence formerly they were forbidden; whatsoever
ceremony or forms did signify, this was superinduced and arbitrary, alterable
and accidental, it had variety, but no necessity.

7. The practice consequent to this is, that if the penitent be bound by the
positive censures of the Church, he is to be reconciled upon those conditions
which the laws of the Church tie him to, in case he can perform them; if he
cannot, he can no longer be prejudiced by the censure of the Church, which had
no relation but to the people, with whom the dying man is no longer to
converse; Cause. 6. Q. 6 and q. 7.
for whatsoever relates to God, is to be transacted in spiritual ways, by
contrition, and internal graces; and the mercy of the Church is such, as to
give him her peace and her blessing upon his undertaking to obey her
injunction, if he shall be able; which injunctions if they be declared by
public sentence, the Minister has nothing to do in the affairs but to remind
him of his obligation, and reconcile him, that is, give him the Holy Sacrament.

8. If the penitent be not bound by public sentence, the Minister is to make
his repentance as great, and his heart as contrite as he can; to dispose him by
the repetition of acts of grace in the way of prayer, and in real and
exterior instances where he can, and then to give him the Holy Communion in
all the same cases, in which he ought not to have denied it to him in his
health, that is, even in the beginnings of such a repentance, which by humane
signs he believes to be real and holy; and after this, the event must be left
to God. The reason of the rule depends upon this; Because there is no Divine
commandment directly forbidding the Rulers of the Church to give the Communion
to any Christian that desires it, and professes repentance of his sins. And all
Church discipline in every instance, and to every single person was imposed
upon him by men, who did it according to the necessities of this state and
constitution of our affairs below; but we who are but Ministers and delegates
of pardon and condemnation, must resign and give up our judgment when the man
is no more to be judged by the sentences of man, and by the proportions of this
world, but of the other; to which if our reconciliation does advantage, we
ought in charity to send him forth with all the advantages he can receive; for
he will need them all: and therefore the Nicene Council commands, Ca^ 13. vide
etiam Conc. Ancyr. c. 6 ^ure^. 2. c. 12.
that no man be deprived of this necessary pasport in the article of his death,
and calls th^s the ancient and canonical law of the Church: and to minister
it, only supposes the man in the communion of the Church, not always in the
state, but ever in the possibilities of sanctification. They who in the article
and danger of death were admitted to the communion, and tied to penance if they
recovered (which was ever the custom of the ancient Church, unless in very
few cases) were but in the threshold of repentance, in the commencement and
first introductions to a devout life: and indeed then it is a fit ministry, O
sacrum convivium in quo Christus sumicur, recolitur memoria passi ni^ e^us,
men's impletur gratia and futurae glory nobis pignus datur.
that it be given in all the periods of time in which the pardon of sins is
working, since it is the Sacrament of that great mystery, and the exhibition of
that blood which is shed for the remission of sins.

9. The Minister of religion ought not to give the Communion to a sick person,
if he retains the affection to any sin, and refuses to disavow it, or profess
repentance of all sins whatsoever, if he be required to do it. The reason is,
because it is a certain death to him, Ita vide ut prosit illis ignosci quos ad
poenam ipse Deus deduxit: quod ad me attinet non sum crudelis, sed vereor no
quod remisero patiar.
and an increase of his misery if he shall so profane the body and blood of
Christ, as to take it into so unholy a breast, Tryphaena dixit apud Petro^ium.
where Satan reigns, and sin is principal, and the Spirit is extinguished;
and Christ loves not to enter, because he is not suffered to inhabit. But when
he professes repentance and does such acts of it as his present condition
permits, Saeviquoque and implacabiles Domini crude litatem suam impediuntsi
quando penitentia fugitivos re duxit. dedititiis hostibus par^imus.
he is to be presumed to intend heartily what he professes solemnly; and the
Minister is only the Judge of outward act, and by that only he is to take
information concerning the inward. But whether he be so or no, or if he be,
whether that be timely, and effectual and sufficient toward the pardon of sins
before God, is another consideration, of which we may conjecture here, but we
shall know it at doomsday. The spiritual man is to do his ministry by the
rules of Christ, and as the customs of the Church appoint him; and after the
manner of men; the event is in the hands of God, and is to be expected not
directly and wholly according to his ministry; but to the former life, or the
timely Quaecunque ergo de poenitentia jubendo dicta sunt, non ad exteriorem sed
ad interiorem referenda sunt, sine qua nullus unquam Deo reconciliari poterit.
internal repentance and amendment; of which I have already given accounts.
These ministeries are acts of order and great assistances, but the sum of
affairs does not rely upon them. Gratian. de penit, d. 1. Quis aliquando.
And if any man puts his whole repentance upon this time, or all his hopes upon
these ministeries, he will find them and himself to fail.

10. It is the Ministers office to invite sick and dying persons to the Holy
Sacrament; such whose lives were fair, and laudable, and yet their sickness
sad and violent, making them list-lesse and of slow desires, and flower
apprehensions; that such persons who are in the state of grace, may lose no
accidental advantages of spiritual improvement, but may receive into their
dying bodies the symboles and great consignations of the resurrection, and into
their souls the pledges of immortality; and may appear before God their Father
in the union, and with the impresses and likeness of their elder Brother. But
if the persons be of ill report, and have lived wickedly, they are not to be
invited, because their case is hugely suspicious, though they then repent and
call for mercy; but if they demand it, they are not to be denied; only let the
Minister in general represent the evil consequents of an unworthy
participation; and if the penitent will judge himself unworthy let him stand
candidate for pardon at the hands of God, and stand or fall by that unerring
and merciful sentence; to which his severity of condemning himself before men,
will make the easier and more hopeful address. And the strictest among the
Christians, who denied to reconcile lapsed persons after baptism, yet
acknowledged that there were hopes reserved in the court of heaven for them,
though not here; since we who are easily deceived by the pretenses of a real
return, are tied to dispense Gods graces as he has given us commission, with
fear and trembling, 1. Cor. 2.3.
and without too forward confidences, and God has mercies which we know not
of, and therefore because we know them not, such persons were referred to Gods
Tribunal, where he would find them, if they were to be had at all.

11. When the holy Sacrament is to be administered, let the exhortation be made
proper to the mystery; but fitted to the man; that is, that it be used for the
advantages of faith or love, or contrition; let all the circumstances and parts
of the Divine love be represented; all the mysterious advantages of the blessed
Sacrament be declared, * That it is the bread which came from heaven, * That it
is the representation of Christ's death to all the purposes and capacities of
faith, * and the real exhibition of Christ's body and blood to all the puposes
of the Spirit, * That it is the earnest of the resurrection, * and the seed of
a glorious immortality, * That as by our cognation to the body of the first
Adam we took in death, so by our union with the body of the second Adam, we
shall have the inheritance of life; for as by Adam came death, so by Christ
comes the resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor. 15.22.
* That if we being worthy Communicants of these sacred pledges be presented to
God with Christ within us, our being accepted of God is certain even for the
sake of his well beloved that dwells within us, * That this is the Sacrament of
the body which was broken for our sins, of that blood which purifies our
souls, by which we are presented to God pure and holy, in the beloved, * That
now we may ascertain our hopes and make our faith confident, for he that has
given us his Son, how should not he with him give us all things else? Upon
these or the like considerations, Romans 8.32.
the sick man may be assisted in his address, and his faith strengthened, and
his hope confirmed, and his charity be enlarged.

12. The manner of the sick man's reception of the holy Sacrament has in it
nothing differing from the ordinary solemnities of the Sacrament, i^e rule of
holy living Chap. 4. Sect. 10. and (...) of the life of jesus, Part 3. Disc. 18.
save only that abatement is to be made of such accidental circumstances, as
by the laws or customs of the Church healthful persons are obliged to; such
as fasting, kneeling, etc. though I remember that it was noted for great
devotion in the Legate that died at Trent, that he caused himself to be
sustained upon his knees, when he received the viaticum or the holy Sacrament
before his death, and it was greater in Hunniades that he caused himself to be
carried to the Church, that there he might receive his Lord, in his Lords
house; and it was recorded for honor, that William the pious Archbishop of
Bourges, a small time before his last agony, sprang out of his bed at the
presence of the holy Sacrament, and upon his knees and his face recommended his
soul to his Savior. But in these things no man is to be prejudiced or censured.

13. Let not the holy Sacrament be administered to dying persons, when they have
no use of reason to make that duty acceptable, and the mysteries effective to
the purposes of the soul. For the Sacraments and ceremonies of the gospel
operate not without the concurrent actions and moral influences of the
suscipient. To infuse the chalice in to the cold lips of the Clinick may
disturb his agony, but cannot relieve the soul, which only receives
improvement by acts of grace and choice, to which the external rites are apt
and appointed to minister, in a capable person. All other persons, as fools,
children, distracted persons, lethargical, apoplectical, or any ways
senseless and incapable of humane and reasonable acts, are to be assisted
only by prayers; for they may prevail even for the absent, and for enemies,
and for all those who join not in the office.

SECT. V. Of Ministering to the sick person by the Spiritual man, as he is the
Physician of souls.
1. IN all cases of receiving confessions of sick men, and the assisting to the
advancement of repentance, the Minister is to apportion to every kind of sin
such spiritual remedies which are apt to mortify and cure the sin, such as
abstinence from their occasions, and opportunities, to avoid temptations, to
resist their beginnings, to punish the crime by acts of indignation against the
person, fastings and prayer, alms and all the instances of charity, asking
forgiveness, restitution of wrongs, satisfaction of injuries, acts of virtue
contrary to the crimes: and although in great and dangerous sicknesses they are
not directly to be imposed, unless they are direct matters of duty, yet where
they are medicinal they are to be insinuated, and in general signification
remarked to him, and undertaken accordingly: concerning which when he returns
to health he is to receive particular advices; and this advice was inserted
into the penitential of England in the time of Theodore Archbishop of
Canterbury, Cause. 26. q. 7. ab infirmis.
and afterward adopted into the Canon of all the Western Churches.

2. The proper temptations of sick men for which a remedy is not yet provided:
are unreasonable fears, and unreasonable confidences, which the Minister is to
cure by the following considerations.

Considerations against unreasonable fears of not having our sins pardoned.
Many good men, especially such who have tender consciences, impatient of the
least sin, to which they are arrived by a long grace and a continual
observation of their actions, and the parts of a lasting repentance, many times
overact their tenderness, and turn their caution into scruple, and care of
their duty into inquiries after the event, and askings after the counsels of
God, and the sentences of doomsday.

He that asks of the standers by, or of the Minister, whether they think he
shall be saved or damned, are to be answered with the words of pity and
reproof. Seek not after new light for the searching into the privatest records
of God; look as much as you list into the pages of revelation; for they concern
your duty; but the event is registered in heaven, and we can expect no other
certain notices of it, but that it shall be given to them for whom it is
prepared by the Father of mercies; we have light enough to tell our duty; and
if we do that we need not fear what the issue will be; and if we do not, let us
never look for more light, or inquire after Gods pleasure concerning our souls,
since we so little serve his ends in those things where he has given us light.
But yet this I add, that as pardon of sins in the old Testament was nothing
but removing the punishment which then was temporal, Matthew. 9.6.
and therefore many times they could tell if their sins were pardoned, and
concerning pardon of sins they then had no fears of conscience, but while the
punishment was on them, for so long indeed it was unpardoned, and how long it
would so remain it was matter of fear, and of present sorrow: Besides this, in
the Gospel, pardon of sins is another thing. Acts 3.26.
Pardon of sins is a sanctification: Christ came to take away our sin by
turning every one of us from our iniquities. And there is not in the nature of
the thing any expectation of pardon, or sign or signification of it, but so
far as the thing it self discovers it self; As we hate sin and grow in grace,
and arrive at the state of holiness, which is also a state of repentance and
imperfection; but yet of sincerity of heart and diligent endeavor, in the same
degree we are to judge concerning the forgiveness of sins; for indeed that is
the Evangelical forgiveness, and it signifies our pardon, because it effects
it, or rather it is in the nature of the thing; so that we are to enquire into
no hidden records: forgiveness of sins is not a secret sentence, a word or a
record: but it is a state of change and effected upon us; and upon our selves
we are to look for it, to read it, and understand it. We are only to be
curious of our duty, Est modus gloriandi in consei^ntia ut noveris fidem tuam
esse sinceram, spem tuam esse certam.
and confident of the Article of remission of sins, and the conclusion of these
premises will be, that we shall be full of hopes of a prosperous resurrection:
August. Psalm. 149.
and our fear and trembling are no instances of our calamity, but parts of
duty; we shall sure enough be wafted to the shore, although we be tossed with
the winds of our sighs, and the unevenness of our fears, and the ebbings and
flowings of our passions, if we sail in a right chanel, and steer by a perfect
compass, and look up to God, and call for his help, and do our own endeavor.
There are very many reasons why men ought not to despair: and there are not
very many men that ever go beyond a hope, till they pass into possession; if
our fears have any mixture of hope, that is enough to enable and to excite our
duty, and if we have a strong hope, when we cast about, we shall find reason
enough to have many fears: let not this fear weaken our Una est nobilitas,
argumentumq coloris
Ingenui, timidas non habuisse manus.

hands, and if it allay our gayeties and our confidences, it is no harm. In
this uncertainty we must abide, if we have committed sins after baptism: and
those confidences which some men glory in, are not real supports or good
foundations. The fearing man is the safest, and if he fears on his deathbed,
it is but what happens to most considering men, and what was to be looked for
all his life time, he talked of the terrors of death, and death is the king of
terrors: and therefore it is no strange thing if then he be hugely afraid: if
he be not it is either a great felicity or a great presumption: but if he wants
some degree of comfort or a greater degree of hope, let him be refreshed by
considering.

1 Timothy 1.15.
1. That Christ came into the world to save sinners. 2 That Ezekiel. 33.11.
God delights not in the confusion and death of sinners. 3. That Luke 15.7.
in heaven there is great joy at the conversion of a sinner. 4. That 1 John 2.1.
Christ is a perpetual advocate daily interceding with his Father for our
pardon. 5. That God uses infinite arts, instruments and devices to reconcile us
to himself. 6. That 1 Cor. 5.20.
he prays us to be in charity with him, and to be forgiven. 7. That he sends
Angels to keep us from violence, and evil company, from temptations and
surprises; and his holy Spirit to guide us in holy ways, and his servants to
warn us and reminde us perpetually; and therefore since certainly he is so
desirous to save us, as appears by his word, by his oaths, by his very nature,
and his daily artifices of mercy, it is not likely that he will condemn us
without great provocations of his Majesty, and perseverance in them. 8. That
the covenant of the Gospel is a covenant of grace, and of repentance, and being
established with so many great solemnities and miracles from heaven, must
signify a huge favor, and a mighty change of things, and therefore that
repentance which is the great condition of it is a grace that does not expire
in little accents and minutes, but has a great latitude of signification, and
a large extension of parts, under the protection of all which persons are safe,
even when they fear exceedingly. 9. That there are great degrees and
differences of glory in heaven; and therefore if we estimate our piety by
proportions to the more eminent persons and devouter people, we are not to
conclude we shall not enter into the same state of glory, but that we shall not
go into the same degrees. (9) That although forgiveness of sins is consigned
to us in Baptism, and that this Baptism is but once, and cannot be repeated,
yet forgiveness of sins is the grace of the gospel, which is perpetually
remanent upon us, and secured unto us so long as we have not renounced our
Baptism; For then we enter into the condition of repentance; and repentance is
not an indivisible grace, or a thing performed at once; but is working all our
lives, and therefore so is our pardon, which ebbes and flows according as we
discompose or renew the decency of our Baptismall promises; and therefore it
ought to be certain, that no man despair of pardon, but he that has
voluntarily renounced his Baptism, or willingly estranged himself from that
covenant: He that sticks to it, and still professes the religion, and approves
the faith, and endeavors to obey and to do his duty, this man has all the
veracity of God to assure him, and give him confidence that he is not in an
impossible state of salvation, unless God cuts him off before he can work, or
that he begins to work when he can no longer choose. 10. And then let him
consider: the more he fears, the more he hates his sin, that is the cause of
it, and the less he can be tempted to it, and the more desirous he is of
heaven, and therefore such fears are good instruments of grace, and good signs
of a future pardon. 11. That God in the old law, although he made a Covenant of
perfect obedience, and did not promise pardon at all after great sins, yet he
did give pardon, and declared it so to them for their own, and for our sakes
too: So he did to David, to Manasses, to the whole Nation of the Israelies ten
times in the wilderness, even after their Apostacies, and Idolatries; and in
the Prophets, Ezekiel. 18.
the mercies of God and his remissions of sins were largely preached; Joel 2.
though in the Law God put on the robes of an angry Judge, and a severe Lord:
but therefore in the Gospel, where he has established the whole sum of
affairs upon faith and repentance; if God should not pardon great sinners that
repent after baptism, with a free dispensation, the Gospel were far harder
then the intolerable Covenant of the Law. 12. That if a Proselyte went into the
Jewish communion and were circumcised and baptized, he entered into all the
hopes of good things which God had promised, or would give to his people, and
yet that was but the Covenant of works. If then the Gentile Proselytes by their
circumcision and legal baptism, were admitted to a state of pardon to last so
long as they were in the Covenant, even after their admission; for sins
committed against Moses law which they then undertook to observe exactly. In
the Gospel which is the Covenant of Faith, it must needs be certain, that there
is a great grace given, and an easier conditon entered into, then was that of
the Jewish law; and that is nothing else, but that abatement is made for our
infirmities, and our single evils, and our timely repented and forsaken habits
of sin, and our violent passions, when they are contested withal, and fought
with, and under discipline, and in the beginnings and progresses of
mortification. 13. That God has erected in his Church a whole order of men,
the main part and dignity of whose work it is to remit and retain sins by a
perpetual and daily ministry; and this they do, not only in baptism, but in
all their offices to be administered afterward: in the Holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist which exhibits the Symbols of that blood which was shed for pardon of
our sins, and therefore by its continued ministry and repetition declares that
all that while we are within the ordinary powers and usual dispensations of
pardon, even so long as we are in any probable dispositions to receive that
Holy Sacrament. And the same effect is also signified and exhibited in the
whole power of the Keys, which if it extends to private sins, sins done in
secret, it is certain it does also to public; but this is a greater testimony
of the certainty of the remissibility of our greatest sins; for public sins as
they always have a sting and a superadded formality of scandal and ill
example, so they are most commonly the greatest; such as murder, sacrilege,
and others of unconcealed nature, and unprivate action; and if God for these
worst of evils has appointed an office of ease and pardon, which is and may
daily be administered, that will be an uneasy pusillanimity, and fond suspicion
of Gods goodness to fear, that our repentance shall be rejected, even although
we have not committed the greatest, or the most of evils. 14. And it was
concerning baptized Christians that Saint John said, If any man sin we have an
Advocate with the Father, and he is the propitiation for our sins; and
concerning lapsed Christians S. Paul gave instruction, that if any man be
overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a man, in the spirit
of meekness, considering lest ye also be temted: the Corinthian Christian
committed incest, and was pardoned; and Simon Magus after he was baptized
offered to commit his own sin of Simony, and yet Saint Peter bid him pray for
pardon; and S. James tells, that if the sick man sends for the Church, and they
pray over him, and he confess his sins they shall be forgiven him. 15. That
only one sin is declared to be irremissible, the sin against the Holy Ghost,
the sin unto death, as S. John calls it, for which we are not bound to pray,
for all others we are: and certain it is, no man commits a sin against the Holy
Ghost, if he be afraid he has, and desires that he had not; for such
penitential passions are against the definition of that sin. 16. That all the
Sermons in the Scripture written to Christians and Disciples of Jesus,
exhorting men to repentance, to be afflicted, to mourn and to weep, to
confession of sins, are sure testimonies of Gods purpose and desire to forgive
us, even when we fall after baptism; and if our fall after baptism were
irrecoverable, then all preaching were in vain, and our faith were also vain,
and we could not with comfort rehearse the Creed, in which as soon as ever we
profess Jesus to have died for our sins, we also are condemned by our own
conscience of a sin that shall not be forgiven; and then all exhortations, and
comforts, and fasts, and disciplines were useless, and too late; if they were
not given us before we can understand them; for most commonly as soon as we can
we enter into the regions of sin; For we commit evil actions before we
understand, and together with our understanding they begin to be imputed. 17.
That if it could be otherwise, infants were very ill provided for in the Church
who were baptized, when they have no stain upon their brows, but the misery
they contracted from Adam; and they are left to be Angels for ever after, and
live innocently in the midst of their ignorances and weakness, and
temptations, and the heat and follies of youth; or else to perish in an
eternal ruin: we cannot think or speak good things of God, if we entertain
such evil suspicions of the mercies of the Father of our Lord Jesus. 18. That
the long-sufferance and patience of God is indeed wonderful; but therefore it
leaves us in certainties of pardon, so long as there is possibility to return,
if we reduce ^he power to act. 19. That God calls upon us to forgive our
brother seventy times seven times, and yet all that is but like the forgiving a
hundred pence for his sake who forgives us ten thousand talents; for so the
Lord professed that he had done to him that was his servant and his domestic.
20. That if we can forgive a hundred thousand times, it is certain God will do
so to us; Our Blessed Lord having commanded us to pray for pardon as we pardon
our offending and penitent brother. 21. That even in the case of very great
sins, and great judgments inflicted upon the sinners, wise and good men and
Presidents of Religion have declared their sense to be, that God spent all his
anger, and made it expire in that temporal misery; and so it was supposed to
have been done in the case of Ananias; but that the hopes of any penitent man
may not rely upon any uncertainty, we find in holy Scripture, that those
Christians who had for their scandalous crimes deserved to be given over to
Satan to be buffetted, yet had hopes to be saved in the day of the Lord. 22.
That God glories in the titles of mercy and forgiveness, and will not have his
appellatives so finite and limited as to expire in one act, or in a seldom
pardon. 23. That man's condition were desperate and like that of the falling
Angels, equally desperate, but unequally oppressed, considering our infinite
weaknesses, and ignorances, (in respect of their excellent understanding and
perfect choice) if he could be admitted to no repentance after his infant
Baptism: and if he may be admitted to one, there is nothing in the Covenant of
the Gospel but he may also to a second, and so for ever as long as he can
repent, and return and live to God in a timely religion. 24. That every man is
a sinner: James 3.2.
In many things we offend all, and if we say we have no sin we deceive our
selves; 1 John 1.8.
and therefore either all must perish, or else there is mercy for all; and so
there is, upon this very stock, Romans 11.32.
because Christ died for sinners, and God has comprehended all under sin that
he might have mercy upon all. 25. That if ever God sends temporal punishments
into the world with purposes of amendment, and if they be not all of them
certain consignations to hell; and unless every man that breaks his leg, or in
punishment loses a child, or wife be certainly damned, it is certain that God
in these cases is angry and loving, chastises the sin, to amend the person, and
smites that he may cure, and judges that he may absolve. 26. That he that will
not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed, will not tie us to
perfection, and the laws and measures of heaven upon earth; and if in every
period of our repentance he is pleased with our duty, and the voice of our
heart, and the hand of our desires, he has told us plainly that he will not
only pardon all the sins of the days of our folly, but the returns and
surprises of sins in the days of repentance, if we give no way, and allow no
affection, and give no peace to any thing that is Gods enemy; all the past
sins, and all the seldom returning and ever repented evils being put upon the
accounts of the Cross.

An exercise against despair in the day of our death.
TO which may be added this short exercise, to be used for the curing the
temptation to direct despair, in case that the hope and faith of good men be
assaulted in the day of their calamity.

I consider that the ground of my trouble is my sin; and if it were not for
that I should not need to be troubled; but the help that all the world looks
for, is such as supposes a man to be a sinner. * Indeed if from my self I were
to derive my title to heaven, then my sins were a just argument of despair; but
now that they bring me to Christ, that they drive me to an appeal to Gods
mercies, and to take sanctuary in the Cross, they ought not, they cannot infer
a just cause of despair. * I am sure it is a stranger thing that God should
take upon him hands and feet, and those hands and feet should be nailed upon a
cross, then that a man should be partaker of the felicities of pardon, and
life eternal; and it were stranger yet, that God should do so much for man,
and that a man that desires it, that labors for it, that is in life and
possibilities of working his salvation, should inevitably miss that end, for
which that God suffered so much. For what is the meaning, and what is the
extent, and what are the significations of the Divine mercy, in pardoning
sinners? If it be thought a great matter that I am charged with original sin:
I confess I feel the weight of it in loads of temporal infelicities, and
proclivities to sin. But I fear not the guilt of it, since I am baptized; and
it cannot do honor to the reputation of Gods mercy, that it should be all
spent in remissions of what I never chose, never acted, never knew of, could
not help, concerning which I received no commandment, no prohibition: But
(blessed be God) it is ordered in just measures that, that original evil which
I contracted without my will, should be taken away without my knowledge; and
what I suffered before I had a being, was cleansed before I had an useful
understanding. But I am taught to believe Gods mercies to be infinite, not
only in himself, but to us; for mercy is a relative term, and we are its
correspondent; of all the creatures which God made, we only in a proper sense
are the subjects of mercy and remission; Angels have more of Gods bounty then
we have, but not so much of his mercy; and beasts have little rays of his
kindness, and effects of his wisdom and graciousnesse in petty donatives; but
nothing of mercy; for they have no laws, and therefore no sins, and need no
mercy, nor are capable of any: Since therefore man alone is the correlative or
proper object and vessel of reception of an infinite mercy, and that mercy is
in giving and forgiving, I have reason to hope that he will so forgive me that
my sins shall not hinder me of heaven; or because it is a gift, I may also upon
the stock of the same infinite mercy hope he will give heaven to me; and if I
have it either upon the title of giving, or forgiving, it is alike to me, and
will alike magnify the glories of the Divine mercy. Romans 6.23.
And because eternal life is the gift of God, I have less reason to despair;
for if my sins were fewer, and my disproportions toward such a glory were
less, and my evennesse more, yet it is still a gift, and I could not receive
it, but as a free, and a gracious donative; and so I may still; God can still
give it me; and it is not an impossible expectation to wait and look for such a
gift at the hands of the God of mercy; the best men deserve it not, and I who
am the worst, may have it given me. * And I consider, that God has set no
measures of his mercy, but that we be within the Covenant, that is, repenting
persons, endeavoring to serve him with an honest single heart; and that within
this Covenant there is a very great latitude, and variety of persons, and
degrees and capacities; and therefore that it cannot stand with the proportions
of so infinite a mercy that obedience be exacted to such a point (which he
never expressed) unless it should be the least, and that to which all
capacities though otherwise unequal are fitted, and sufficiently enabled. *
But however I find that the Spirit of God taught the writers of the New
Testament to apply to us all in general, and to every single person in
particular some gracious words which God in the Old Testament spoke to one man
upon a special occasion in a single and temporal instance: such are the words
which God spoke to Ioshuah, I will never fail thee nor forsake thee, and upon
the stock of that promise S. Paul forbids covetousness, Hebr. 13.5.
and persuades contentedness because those words were spoken by God to Ioshuah
in another case. If the gracious words of God have so great extension of parts,
and intension of kind purposes, then how many comforts have we upon the stock
of all the excellent words which are spoken in the Prophets, and in the Psalms?
and I will never more question whether they be spoken concerning me, having
such an authentic precedent so to expound the excellent words of God; all the
treasures of God which are in the Psalms are my own riches, and the wealth of
my hope; there will I look, and whatsoever I can need, that I will depend upon:
for certainly if we could understand it; that which is infinite (as God is)
must needs be some such kind of thing; it must go whither it was never sent,
and signify what was not first intended, and it must warm with its light, and
shine with its heat, and refresh when it strikes, and heal when it wounds, and
ascertain where it makes afraid, and intend all when it warms one, and mean a
great deal in a small word; and as the Sun passing to its Southern Tropic looks
with an open eye upon his sunburnt Aethiopians, but at the same time sends
light from its posterns and collateral influences from the backside of his
beams, and sees the corners of the East, when his face tends toward the West,
because he is a round body of fire, and has some little images and
resemblances of the infinite; so is Gods mercy; when it looked upon Moses it
relieved S. Paul, and it pardoned David, and gave hope to Manasses, and might
have restored Judas, if he would have had hope and used himself accordingly. *
But as to my own case, I have sinned grievously and frequently. But I have
repented it, Vixi, p^^cavi, poenital, naturae cessi.
but I have begged pardon, I have confessed it and forsaken it, I cannot undo
what was done, and I perish if God has appointed no remedy; if there be no
remission: but then my religion falls together with my hope; and Gods word
fails as well as I: but I believe the article of forgiveness of sins; and if
there be any such thing I may do well; for, I have, and do, and will do that
which all good men call repentance, that is, I will be humbled before God, and
mourn for my sin, and for ever ask forgiveness, and judge my self, and leave
it with haste, and mortify it with diligence, and watch against it carefully;
and this I can do but in the manner of a man, I can but mourn for my sins, as I
apprehend grief in other instances; but I will rather choose to suffer all
evils then to do one deliberate act of sin; I know my sins are greater then my
sorrow, and too many for my memory, and too insinuating to be prevented by all
my care; but I know also that God knows and pities my infirmities; and how far
that will extend, I know not, but that it will reach so far as to satisfy my
needs, is the matter of my hope. * But this I am sure of, that I have in my
great necessity prayed humbly and with great desire, and sometimes I have been
heard in kind, and sometimes have had a bigger mercy instead of it, and I have
the hope of prayers, and the hope of my confession, and the hope of my
endeavor, and the hope of many promises and of Gods essential goodness; and I
am sure that God has heard my prayers and verified his promises in temporal
instances: for he ever gave me sufficient for my life, and although he promised
such supplies and grounded the confidences of them upon our first seeking the
kingdom of heaven and its righteousness, yet he has verified it to me, who
have not sought it as I ought: But therefore I hope he accepted my endeavor,
or will give his great gifts and our great expectation even to the weakest
endeavor, to the least, so it be a hearty piety. * And sometimes I have had
some cheerful visitations of Gods Spirit, and my cup has been crowned with
comfort, and the wine that made my heart glad danced in the chalice, and I was
glad that God would have me so; and therefore I hope this cloud may pass; for
that which was then a real cause of comfort is so still, if I could dis^ern it;
and I shall discern it when the veil is taken from my eyes,* (and blessed be
God) I can still remember that there are temptations to despair; and they could
not be temptations if they were not apt to persuade; and had seeming
probability on their side; and they that despair think they do it with greatest
reason; for if they were not confident of the reason, but that it were such an
argument as might be opposed or suspected, then they could not despair; despair
assents as firmly and strongly as faith it self; but because it is a
temptation, and despair is a horrid sin, therefore it is certain those persons
are unreasonably abused, and they have no reason to despair, for all their
confidence; and therefore although I have strong reasons to condemn my self,
yet I have more reason to condemn my despair, which therefore is unreasonable,
because it is a sin, and a dishonor to God, and a ruin to my condition; and
verifies it self, if I do not look to it; for as the hypochondriac person that
thought himself dead, made his dream true when he starved himself, because dead
people eat not: so do despairing sinners lose Gods mercies by refusing to use,
and to believe them. * And I hope it is a disease of judgment, not an
intolerable condition that I am falling to, because I have been told so
concerning others, who therefore have been afflicted, because they see not
their pardon sealed after the manner of this world; and the affairs of the
Spirit are transacted by immaterial notices, by propositions and spiritual
discourses, by promises which are to be verified hereafter; and here we must
live in a cloud, in darkness under a veil, in fear and uncertainties, and our
very living by faith and hope, is a life of mystery and secrecy, the only
part of the manner of that life in which we shall live in the state of
separation; and when a distemper of body or an infirmity of mind happens in
the instances of such secret and reserved affairs, we may easily mistake the
manner of our notices for the uncertainty of the thing; and therefore it is but
reason I should stay, till the state and manner of my abode be changed before I
despair; there it can be no sin, nor error, here it may be both; and if it be
that, it is also this; and then a man may perish for being miserable, and be
undone for being a fool. In conclusion, my hope is in God, and I will trust him
with the event, which I am sure will be just, and I hope full of mercy. *
However, now I will use all the spiritual arts of reason and religion to make
me more and more to love God, that if I miscarry, Charity also shall fail, and
something that loves God shall perish, and be damned; which if it be impossible
then I may do well.

These considerations may be useful to men of little hearts and of great piety;
or if they be persons who have lived without infamy, or begun their repentance
so late, that it is very imperfect, and yet so early that it was before the
arrest of death. But if the man be a vicious person and has persevered in a
vicious life till his deathbed, these considerations are not proper. Let him
inquire in the words of the first Disciples after Pentecost: Men and brethren
what shall we do to be saved? and if they can but entertain so much hope as to
enable them to do so much of their duty as they can for the present, it is all
that can be provided for them; an inquiry in their case can have no other
purposes of religion or prudence: and the Minister must be infinitely careful
that he do no not go about to comfort vicious persons with the comforts
belonging to Gods elect, lest he prostitute holy things, and make them common,
and his sermons deceitful, and vices be encouraged in others, and the man
himself find that he was deceived, when he descends into his house of sorrow.

But because very few men are tempted with too great fears of failing, but very
many are tempted by confidence and presumption; the Ministers of religion had
need be instructed with spiritual armor, to resist this fiery dart of the
Devil, when it operates to evil purposes.

SECT. VI. Considerations against Presumption.
I Have already enumerated many particulars to provoke a drowzy conscience to a
scrutinie, and to a suspicion of himself, that by seeing cause to suspect his
condition he might more freely accuse himself and attend to the necessities and
duties of repentance; but if either before or in his repentance he grow too big
in in his spirit, so as either he does some little violence to the modesties of
humility, or abate his care and zeal of his repentance, the spiritual man must
allay his frowardness by representing to him. 1. That the growths in grace are
long, difficult, uncertain, hindered, of many parts and great variety. 2. That
an infant grace is soon dashed and discountenanced, often running into an
inconvenience and the evils of an imprudent conduct, being zealous, and
forward, and therefore confident, but always with the least reason, and the
greatest danger; like children and young fellows whose confidence has no other
reason, but that they understand not their danger and their follies. 3. That he
that puts on his armor ought not to boast, as he that puts it off; and the
Apostle chides the Galatians, for ending in the flesh after they had begun in
the spirit: 4. that a man cannot think too meanly of himself, but very easily
he may think too high. 5 That a wise man will always in a matter of great
concernment think the worst, and a good man will condemn himself with hearty
sentence. 6. That humility and modesty of judgment and of hope, are very good
instruments to procure a mercy and a fair reception at the day of our death;
but presumption or bold opinions serve no end of God or man; and is always
imprudent, ever fatal, and of all things in the world is its own greatest
enemy; for the more any man presumes, the greater reason he has to fear. 7.
That a man's heart is infinitely deceitful, unknown to it self, not certain in
his own acts, praying one way, and desiring another, wandering and imperfect,
loose and various, worshipping God and entertaining sin, following what it
hates, and running from what it flatters, loving to be tempted and betrayed,
petulant like a wanton girl, running from, that it might invite the fondness
and enrage the appetite of the foolish young man or the evil temptation that
follows it; cold and indifferent one while, and presently zealous and
passionate, furious and indiscreet; not understood of it self or any one else,
and deceitful beyond all the arts and numbers of observation. 8. That it is
certain we have highly sinned against God, but we are not so certain that our
repentance is real and effective, integral and sufficient. 9. That it is not
revealed to us whether or no the time of our repentance be not past, or if it
be not, yet how far God will give us pardon; and upon what condition, or after
what sufferings or duties, is still under a cloud. 10. That virtue and vice are
oftentimes so near neighbors, that we pass into each others borders without
observation, and think we do justice when we are cruel, or call our selves
liberal when we are loose and foolish in expenses; and are amorous when we
commend our own civilities, and good nature. 11. That we allow to our selves so
many little irregularities, that insensibly they swell to so great a heap, that
from thence we have reason to fear an evil; for an army of frogs and flies may
destroy all the hopes of our harvest. 12. That when we do that which is lawful,
and do all that we can in those bounds we commonly and easily run out of our
proportions. 13. That it is not easy to distinguish the virtues of our nature
from the virtues of our choice; and we may expect the reward of temperance,
when it is against our nature to be drunk; or we hope to have the coronet of
virgins for our morose disposition, or our abstinence from marriage upon
secular ends. 14. That it may be we call every little sigh or the keeping a
fish-day the duty of repentance, or have entertained false principles in the
estimate, and measures of virtues; and contrary to the Steward in that Gospel,
we write down fourscore when we should set down but fifty. 15. That it is
better to trust the goodness, and justice of God with our accounts then to
offer him large bits. 16. That we are commanded by Christ to sit down in the
lowest place, till the Master of the house bids us sit up higher. 17. That when
we have done all that we can we are unprofitable servants; and yet no man does
all that he can do; and therefore is more to be despised and undervalued. 18.
That the self-accusing Publican was justified rather then the thanksgiving and
confident Pharisee. 19. That if Adam in Paradise, and David in his house, and
Solomon in the Temple, and Peter in Christ's family, and Judas in the College of
Apostles, and Nicholas among the Deacons, and the Angels in heaven it self did
fall so foully and dishonestly, then it is prudent advice that we be not high
minded, but fear, and when we stand most confidently take heed lest we fall,
and yet there is nothing so likely to make us fall as pride and great opinions;
which ruined the Angels, which God resists, which all men despise, and which
betrays us into carelessness and a wretchlesse, undiscerning and an unwary
spirit.

4. Now the main parts of the Ecclesiastical ministry are done; and that which
remains is, that the Minister pray over him, and reminde him to do good
actions, as he is capable, * to call upon God for pardon, * to put his whole
trust in him, * to resign himself to Gods disposing, * to be patient and even,
* to renounce every ill word or thought, or undecent action which the violence
of his sickness may cause in him, * to beg of God to give him his holy Spirit,
to guide him in his agony, and * his holy Angels to guard him in his passage.

5. Whatsoever is besides this, concerns the standers by; that they do all
their ministeries diligently, and temperately, * that they join with much
charity and devotion in the prayer of the Minister, * that they make no
outcries or exclamations in the departure of the soul, * and that they make no
judgment concerning the dying person, by his dying quietly or violently, with
comfort or without, with great fears or a cheerful confidence, with sense or
without, like a lamb or like a lion, with convulsions or semblances of great
pain, or like an expiring and a spent candle; for these happen to all men,
without rule, without any known reason, but according as God pleases to
dispense the grace, or the punishment for reasons only known to himself; Let
us lay our hands upon our mouth, and adore the mysteries of the divine wisdom
and providence, and pray to God to give the dying man rest and pardon, and to
our selves grace to live well, and the blessing of a holy and a happy death.

SECT. VII. Offices to be said by the Minister in his visitation of the sick.
IN the Name of the Father, of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Let the Priest say this prayer secretly.
O Eternal Jesus, thou great lover of souls: who have constituted a ministry
in the Church to glorify thy Name, and to serve in the assistance of those
that come to thee, professing thy discipline and service; give grace to me the
unworthiest of thy servants, that I in this my ministry may purely and
zealously intend thy glory, and effectually may minister comfort and advantages
to this sick person, (whom God assoil from all his offenses) and grant that
nothing of thy grace may perish to him by the unworthiness of the Minister;
but let thy Spirit speak by me, and give me prudence and charity, wisdom and
diligence, good observation and apt discourses, a certain judgment, and
merciful dispensation, that the soul of thy servant may pass from this state
of imperfection, to the perfections of the state of glory, thorough thy
mercies, O Eternal Jesus. Amen.

The Psalm.
OUt of the depths have I cried unto thee O Lord: Psalm 130.
Lord hear my voice: let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my
supplications.

If thou Lord should mark iniquities: O Lord, who shall stand? but there is
forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.

I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his word do I hope: my soul
waits for the Lord more then they that watch for the morning.

Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is
plenteous redemption: and he shall redeem his servants from all their
iniquities.

Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the wickedness of my heels
shall compass me about? Psalm 49.
No man can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him
(for the redemption of their soul is precious, and it cease for ever) that he
should still live for ever, and not see corruption.

But wise men die, likewise the fool and the brutish person perish, and leave
their wealth to others: but God will redeem my soul from the power of the
grave, for he shall receive me.

As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied when
I awake in thy likeness.

Psalm. 16.15.
Thou shall show me the path of life, in thy presence is the fullness of joy, at
thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the beginning, etc.

Let us Pray.
ALmighty God, Father of mercies, the God of peace and comfort, of rest and
pardon, we thy servants though unworthy to pray to thee, yet in duty to thee
and charity to our brother, humbly beg mercy of thee for him, to descend upon
his body and his soul; One sinner, O Lord, for another, the miserable for the
afflicted, the poor for him that is in need; but thou give thy graces and thy
favors by the measures of thy own mercies, and in proportion to our
necessities; we humbly come to thee in the Name of Jesus, for the merit of our
Savior, and the mercies of our God, praying thee to pardon the sins of this
thy servant, and to put them all upon the accounts of the Cross, and to bury
them in the grave of Jesus, that they may never rise up in judgment against
thy servant, nor bring him to shame and confusion of face in the day of final
inquiry and sentence. Amen.

II.
GIve thy servant patience in his sorrows, comfort in this his sickness, and
restore him to health if it seem good to thee, in order to thy great ends, and
his greatest interest. And however thou shall determine concerning him in this
affair, yet make his repentance perfect, and his passage, and his faith strong,
and his hope modest and confident, that when thou shall call his soul from the
prison of the body, it may enter into the securities and rest of the sons of
God, in the bosom of blessedness, and the custodies of Jesus. Amen.

III.
THou, O Lord, know all the necessities, and all the infirmities of thy
servant, fortify his spirit with spiritual joys and perfect resignation, and
take from him all degrees of inordinate or insecure affections to this world,
and enlarge his heart with desires of being with thee, and of freedom from
sins, and fruition of God.

IV.
LOrd, let not any pain or passion discompose the order and decency of his
thoughts and duty; and lay no more upon thy servant then thou will make him
able to bear, and together with the temptation do thou provide a way to escape;
even by the mercies of a longer and a more holy life, or by the mercies of a
blessed death, even as it pleases thee, O Lord, so let it be.

V.
LEt the tenderness of his conscience, and the Spirit of God call to mind his
sins, that they may be confessed and repented of: because thou have promised,
that if we confess our sins, we shall have mercy: Let thy mighty grace draw
out from his soul every root of bitterness, lest the remains of the old man be
accursed with the reserves of thy wrath; but in the union of the Holy Jesus,
and in the charities of God and of the world, and the communion of all the
saints let this soul be presented to thee blameless and entirely pardoned, and
thoroughly washed through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Here also may be inserted the prayers set down after the Holy Communion is
administered.

The Prayer of S. Eustratius the Martyr to be used by the sick or dying man, or
by the Priests, or assistants in his behalf, which he said when he was going to
martyrdom.
I Will praise thee O Lord, that thou have considered my low estate, and have
not shut me up in the hands of my enemies, nor made my foes to rejoice over me:
and now let thy right hand protect me, and let thy mercy come upon me, for my
soul is in trouble and anguish because of its departure from the body. O let
not the assemblies of its wicked and cruel enemies meet it in the passing
forth, nor hinder me, by reason of the sins of my passed life. O Lord be
favorable unto me, that my so I may not behold the hellish countenance of the
spirits of darkness, but let thy bright and joyful Angels entertain it. Give
glory to thy Holy Name and to thy Majesty; place me by thy merciful arm before
thy seat of Judgment, and let not the hand of the prince of this world snatch
me from thy presence, or bear me into hell. Mercy sweet Jesu. Amen.

A Prayer taken out of the Euchologion of the Greek Church, to be said by or in
behalf of people in their danger, or near their death. (...), etc.
I.
BEmired with sins and naked of good deeds, I that am the meat of worms cry
vehemently in spirit; Cast not me wretch away from thy face; place me not on
the left hand who with thy hands did fashion me; but give rest unto my soul,
for thy great mercy sake, O Lord.

II.
SUpplicate with tears unto Christ, who is to judge my poor soul, that he would
deliver me from the fire that is unquenchable. I pray you all my friends and
acquaintance make mention of me in your prayers, that in the day of Judgment I
may find mercy at that dreadful Tribunal.

III. Then may the bystanders pray.
WHen in unspeakable glory thou do come dreadfully to judge the whole world,
vouchsafe O gracious Redeemer that this thy faithful servant may in the clouds
meet thee cheerfully. They who have been dead from the beginning, with terrible
and fearful trembling stand at thy Tribunal waiting thy just, O Blessed
Savior Jesus. None shall there avoid thy formidable and most righteous
judgment. All Kings and Princes with servants stand together and hear the
dreadful voice of the Judge condemning the people, which have sinned, into
hell, from which sad sentence, O Christ deliver thy servant. Amen.

Then let the sick man be called upon to rehearse the Articles of his Faith; or
if he be so weak he cannot, let him (if he have not before done it) be called
to say Amen, when they are recited, or to give some testimony of his faith and
confident assent to them.

After which it is proper (if the person be in capacity) that the Minister
examine him, and invite him to confession; and all the parts of repentance,
according to the foregoing rules; after which, he may pray this prayer of
absolution.

OUr Lord Jesus Christ who has given Commission to his Church in his Name, to
pronounce pardon to all that are truly penitent, he of his mercy pardon and
forgive thee all thy sins, deliver thee from all evils past, present, and
future, preserve thee in the faith and fear of his holy Name to thy lives end,
and bring thee to his everlasting Kingdom, to live with him for ever and ever.
Amen.

Then let the sick man renounce all heresies, and whatsoever is against the
truth of God, or the peace of the Church, and pray for pardon for all his
ignorances and errors, known and unknown.

After which let him (if all other circumstances be fitted) be disposed to
receive the Blessed Sacrament, in which the Curate is to minister according to
the form prescribed by the Church.

When the rites are finished, let the sick man in the days of his sickness be
employed with the former offices and exercises before described; and when the
time draws near of his dissolution, the Minister may assist by the following
order of recommendation of the soul.

I.
O Holy and most Gracious Savior Jesus, we humbly recommend the soul of thy
servant into thy hands, thy most merciful hands; let thy Blessed Angels stand
in ministry about thy servant, and defend him from the violence and malice of
all his ghos^ly enemies, and drive far from hence all the spirits of darkness.
Amen.

II.
LOrd receive the soul of this thy servant; Enter not into judgment with thy
servaant; spare him whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood,
deliver him from all evil, and mischief; from the crafts and assaults of the
Devil, from the fear of death, and from everlasting death, Good Lord deliver
him. Amen.

III.
IMpute not unto him the follies of his youth, nor any of the errors and
miscarriages of his life, but strengthen him in his agony, let not his faith
waver, nor his hope fail, nor his charity be disordered: Let none of his
enemies imprint upon him any afflictive or evil phantasme; let him die in
peace, and rest in hope, and rise in glory. Amen.

IIII.
LOrd, we know and believe assuredly, that whatsoever is under thy custody,
cannot be taken out of thy hands, nor by all the violences of hell robbed of
thy protection: preserve the work of thy hands, rescue him from all evil, for
whose sake thou did suffer all evil: Take into the participation of thy
glories him to whom thou have given the seal of Adoption, the earnest of the
inheritance of the Saints. Amen.

V.
LEt his portion be with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with Job and David, with
the Prophets and Apostles, with Martyrs and all thy holy Saints, in the arms of
Christ, in the bosom of felicity, in the Kingdom of God to eternal ages. Amen.

These following prayers are fit also to be added to the foregoing offices in
case there be no communion or intercourse; but prayer.

Let us Pray.
O Almighty and eternal God, there is no number of thy days or of thy
mercies, thou have sent us into this world to serve thee and to live according
to thy laws; but we by our sins have provoked thee to wrath, and we have
planted thorns and sorrows round about our dwellings, and our life is but a
span long, and yet very tedious because of the calamities that enclose us in on
every side: the days of our pilgrimage are few and evil: we have frail and
sickly bodies, violent and distempered passions, long designs and but a short
stay, weak understandings, and strong enemies, abused fancies, perverse wills: O
Dear God, look upon us in mercy and pity; let not our weaknesses make us to sin
against thee, nor our fear cause us to betray our duty, nor our former follies
provoke thy eternal anger, nor the calamities of this world vex us into
tediousness of spirit and impatience; but let thy Holy Spirit lead us through
this valley of misery with safety and peace, with holiness and religion, with
spiritual comforts and joy in the Holy Ghost, that when we have served thee in
our generations, we may be gathered unto our Fathers, having the testimony of a
holy conscience, in the communion of the Catholic Church, in the confidence of
a certain faith, and the comforts of a reasonable, religious and holy hope, and
perfect charity with thee our God, and all the world; that neither death nor
life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any other creature may be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.

II.
O Holy and most gracious Savior Jesus, in whose hands the souls of all
faithful people are laid up till the day of recompense, have mercy upon the
body and soul of this thy servant, and upon all thy elect people who love the
Lord Jesus, and long for his coming. Lord refresh the imperfection of their
condition with the aids of the Spirit of grace, and comfort, and with the
visitation and guard of Angels, and supply to them all their necessities known
only unto thee; let them dwell in peace and feel thy mercies, pitying their
infirmities, and the follies of their flesh, and speedily satisfying the
desires of their spirits; and when thou shall bring us all forth in the day of
Judgment, O then show thy self to be our Savior Jesus, our Advocate, and our
Judge. Lord then remember that thou have for so many ages prayed for the pardon
of those sins which thou art then to sentence. Let not the accusations of our
consciences, nor the calumnies and aggravation of Devils, nor the effects of
thy wrath press those souls which thou love, which thou did redeem, which
thou do pray for, but enable us all by the supporting hand of thy mercy to
stand upright in judgment. O Lord have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, O
Lord let thy mercy lighten upon us as our trust is in thee. O Lord in thee have
we trusted, let us never be confounded. Let us meet with joy, and for ever
dwell with thee, feeling thy pardon, supported with thy graciousnesse, absolved
by thy sentence, saved by thy mercy, that we may sing to the glory of thy Name
eternal Allelujahs. Amen. Amen. Amen.

Then may be added in the behalf of all that are present these ejaculations.

O spare us a little that we may recover our strength, before we go hence and
be no more seen. Amen.

Cast us not away in the time of age, O forsake us not when strength fails.
Amen.

Grant that we may never sleep in sin, or death eternal, but that we may have
our part of the first resurrection, and that the second death may not prevail
over us. Amen.

Grant that our souls may be bound up in the bundle of life, and in the day
when thou bindest up thy Jewels, remember thy servants for good and not for
evil, that our souls may be numbered amongst the righteous Amen.

Grant unto all sick and dying Christians, mercy and aids from heaven; and
receive the souls returning unto thee, whom thou have redeemed with thy most
precious blood. Amen.

Grant unto thy servants to have faith in the Lord Jesus, a daily meditation of
death, a contempt of the world, a longing desire after heaven, patience in our
sorrows, comfort in our sicknesses, joy in God, a holy life and a blessed
death, that our souls may rest in hope and my body may rise in glory, and both
may be beatified in the communion of Saints, in the kingdom of God and the
glories of the Lord Jesus. Amen.

The blessing.
Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that
great shepherd of the sheep thorough the blood of the everlasting covenant make
you perfect in every good work, Heb. 13.20.
to do his will, working in you that which is pleasing in his sight, to whom be
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

The doxology.
To the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and the Lord of Lords,
who only has immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach
unto, 1 Timothy 6.15, 16.
whom no man has seen nor can see, be honor and power everlasting. Amen.

After the sick man is departed, the Minister if he be present, or the Major
dome, or any other fit person may use the following prayers in behalf of
themselves.

I.
ALmighty God, with whom do live the spirits of them that depart hence in the
Lord, we adore thy Majesty, and submit to thy providence, and revere thy
justice, and magnify thy mercies thy infinite mercies, that it has pleased
thee to deliver this our brother out of the miseries of this sinful world. Thy
counsels are secret, and thy wisdom is infinite; with the same hand thou have
crowned him and smitten us: thou have taken him into regions of felicity, and
placed him among Saints and Angels, and left us to mourn for our sins and thy
displeasure, which thou have signified to us, by removing him from us to a
better, a far better place: Lord turn thy anger into mercy, thy chastisements
into virtues, thy rod into comforts, and do thou give to all his nearest
relatives comforts from heaven, and a restitution of blessings equal to those
which thou have taken from them. And we humbly beseech thee of thy gracious
goodness shortly to satisfy the longing desires of those Holy souls who pray,
and wait and long for thy second coming. Accomplish thou the number of thine
elect, and fill up the Mansions in heaven which are prepared for all them that
love the coming of the Lord Jesus; that we with this our Brother, and all other
departed this life in the obedience and faith of the Lord Jesus, may have our
perfect consummation and bliss in thy eternal glory, which never shall have
ending. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

II.
O Merciful God, Father of our Lord Jesus, who is the first fruits of the
resurrection and by entering into glory has opened the kingdom of heaven to all
the believers, we humbly beseech thee to raise us from the death of sin to the
life of righteousness, that being partakers of the death of Christ, and
followers of his Holy life, we may be partakers of his Spirit and of his
promises; that when we shall depart this life, we may rest in his arms, and lie
in his bosom, as our hope is this our brother does. O suffer us not for any
temptation of the world, or any snares of the Devil, or any pains of death to
fall from thee. Lord let thy H. Spirit enable us with his grace to fight a good
fight with perseverance, to finish our course with holiness, and to keep the
faith with constancy unto the end; that at the day of judgment we may stand
at the right hand of the throne of God, and hear the blessed sentence of [Come
ye blessed children of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world] O blessed Jesus thou art our Judge, and thou art our
Advocate; even because thou art good and gracious never suffer us to fall into
the intolerable pains of hell, never to lie down in sin; and never to have our
portion in the everlasting burning. Mercy sweet Jesu: Mercy. Amen.

A prayer to be said in the case of a sudden surprise by death, as by a mortal
wound, or evil accidents in childebirth, when the forms and solemnities of
preparation cannot be used.
O Most gracious Father, Lord of heaven and earth, Judge of the living and the
dead, behold thy servants running to thee for pity and mercy in behalf of our
selves and this thy servant whom thou have smitten with thy hasty rod, and a
swift Angel; if it be thy will preserve his life, that there may be place for
his repentance and restitution; O spare him a little that he may recover his
strength, before he go hence and be no more seen: but if thou have otherwise
decreed, let the miracles of thy compassion, and thy wonderful mercy supply to
him the want of the usual measures of time, and the periods of repentance and
the trimming of his lamp: and let the greatness of the calamity be accepted by
thee as an instrument to procure pardon for those defects and degrees of
unreadiness which may have caused this accident upon thy servant. Lord stir
up in him a great and effectual contrition that the greatness of the sorrow,
and hatred against sin, and the zeal of his love to thee may in a short time do
the work of many days; and thou who regardest the heart and the measures of
the mind more then the delay and the measures of time, let it be thy pleasure
to rescue the soul of thy servant from all the evils he has deserved, and all
the evils that he fears, that in the glorifications of eternity and the songs
which to eternal ages thy Saints and holy Angels shall sing to the honor of
thy mighty Name, and invaluable mercies, it may be reckoned among thy glories,
that thou have redeemed this soul from the dangers of an eternal death, and
made him partaker of the gift of God, eternal life, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

If there be time, the prayers in the foregoing offices may be added according
as they can be fitted to the present circumstances.

SECT. VIII. A peroration concerning the contingencies, and treatings of our
departed friends after death, in order to their burial, etc.
(...) Iliad..
WHen we have received the last breath of our friend and closed his eyes, and
composed his body for the grave, then seasonable is the counsel of the son of
Syrach: Weep bitterly and make great moan, and use lamentation as he is worthy,
and that a day or two, lest thou be evil spoken of; Ecolus. 38.17.
and then comfort thy self for thy heaviness. But take no grief to heart; for
there is no turning again, thou shall not do him good, but hurt t^y self.
Solemn and appointed mournings are good expressions of our dearnesse to the
departed soul, and of his worth, and our value of him; and it has its praise
in nature, and in manners (...); dixit Socrates de Ergastulario lugente.
and public customs; but the praise of it is not in the Gospel, that is, it
has no direct and proper uses in religion. For if the dead did die in the
Lord, N^mo me lachrymis decoret nec funera fletu
Faxit; cur? volito vivus per ora virum.
Ennius.
then there is joy to him, and it is an ill expression of our affection and our
charity to weep uncomfortably at a change that has carried my friend to the
state of a huge felicity. (...). Cyrus apud Xenop.
But if the man did perish in his folly and his sins, there is indeed cause to
mourn, but no hopes of being comforted; for he shall never return to light, or
to hopes of restitution; therefore beware lest thou also come into the same
place of torment; and let thy grief sit down and rest upon thy own turf, and
weep till a flower springs from thy eyes to heal the wounds of thy spirit; turn
thy sorrow into caution, thy grief for him that is dead, to thy care for thy
self who art alive, lest thou die and fall like one of the fools whose life is
worse then death, and their death is the consummation of all infelicities. S.
Chrysostom. hom. 4. Hebr.
The Church in her funerals of the dead used to sing Psalms, and to give
thanks for the redemption and delivery of the soul from the evils and dangers
of mortality. And S. Chrysostom asks to what purpose is it that thou singest,
Return unto thy rest, O my soul, etc. if thou do not believe thy friend to
be in rest? and if thou do, why do thou weep impertinently and
unreasonably? Nothing but our own loss can justly be deplored; and him that is
passionate for the loss of his money or his advantages, we esteem foolish and
imperfect; (...). Il..
and therefore have no reason to love the immoderate sorrows of those, who too
earnestly mourn for their dead, when in the last resolution of the inquiry, it
is their own evil and present or feared inconveniences they deplore; Mors op^i^
a est periredum lachrimant sui^ ^ippol. Sen.
the best that can be said of such a grief is, that those mourners love
themselves too well. Something is to be given to custom, something to fame, to
nature, and to civilities, and to the honor of the deceased friends; for that
man is esteemed to dye miserable, for whom no friend or relative sheds a tear
or pays a solemn sigh. (...)
(...).

I desire to dye a dry death, but am not very desirous to have a dry funeral:
some flowers sprinkled upon my grave would do well and comely; and a soft
shower to turn those flowers into a springing memory or a fair rehearsal, that
I may not go forth of my doors as my servants carry the entrails of beasts.

But that which is to be faulted in this particular is, when the grief is
immoderate, and unreasonable; and Paula Romana deserved to have felt the weight
of S. Hieroms severe reproof, when at the death of every of her children, she
almost wept her self into her grave: But it is worse yet when people by an
ambitious and a pompous sorrow, and by ceremonies invented for the Expectavimus
^achrymas ad ostentati nem doloris paratas ut ergo ambitiosu^ detonuit te it
surerbum pallio caput and m^n^bus inter se usque ad articulorum str^pi um
contritis, etc. Petron.
ostentation of their grief fill heaven and earth with (...)
(...)
(...).

exclamations and grow troublesome because their friend is happy, or themselves
want his company. It is certainly a sad thing in nature to see a friend
trembling with a palsy, or scorched with fevers, or dried up like a potsheard
with immoderate heats, and rolling upon his uneasy bed without sleep which
cannot be invited with Non Siculae da^ pes dulcem elaborabunt sapo^e^o non
avium Citharaeque cantus so ^num reducent
music, or pleasant murmurs, or a decent stillnesse; nothing but the servants
of cold death, poppy and weariness can tempt the eyes to let their curtains
down; and then they sleep only to taste of death, and make an essay of the
shades below; and yet we weep not here: the period and opportunity for tears we
choose when our friend is fallen asleep, when he has laid his neck upon the
lap of his mother, and let his -- Tremulumque caput descendere jus^it
In Coelum and longam manantia labra salivam.

head down to be raised up to heaven: this grief is ill placed and undecent.
But many times it is worse; and it has been observed that those greater and
stormy passions do so spend the whole stock of grief, that they presently admit
a comfort and contrary affection, while a sorrow that is even and temperate
goes on to its period with expectation and the distances of a just time. The
Ephesian Woman that the soldier told of in Petronius, was the talk of all the
town, and the rarest example of a dear affection to her husband; she descended
with the corpse into the vault, and there being attended with her maiden
resolved to weep to death, or dye with famine, or a distempered sorrow: from
which resolution nor his, nor her friends, nor the reverence of the principal
citizens, who used the entreaties of their charity and their power, could
persuade her. But a soldier that watched seven dead bodies hanging upon trees
just over against this monument, crept in, and a while stared upon the silent
and comely disorders of the sorrow: and having let the wonder a while breath
out at each others eyes, at last he fetched his supper and a bottle of wine
with purpose to eat and drink, and still to feed himself with that sad
prettiness; His pity and first draught of wine made him bold and curious to
try if the maid would drink, who having many hours since felt her resolution
faint as her wearied body, took his kindness, and the light returned into her
eyes and danced like boys in a festival; and fearing lest the
pertinaciousnesse of her Mistress sorrows should cause her evil to revert, or
her shame to approach, assayed whether she would endure to hear an argument to
persuade her to drink and live. The violent passion had laid all her spirits
in wildness and dissolution and the maid found them willing to be gathered into
order, at the arrest of any new object; being weary of the first, of which like
leeches they had sucked their fill, till they fell down and burst. The weeping
woman took her cordial and was not angry with her maid, and heard the soldier
talk, and he was so pleased with the change, that he who first loved the
silence of the sorrow was more in love with the music of her returning voice,
especially which himself had strung and put in tune; and the man began to talk
amorously, and the woman's weak heart and head was soon possessed with a little
wine, and grew gay, and talked, and fell in love, and that very night in the
morning of her passion, in the grave of her husband, in the pompes of mourning,
and in her funeral garments, married her new and stranger Guest. For so the
wild forragers of Lybia being spent with heat, and dissolved by the too fond
kisses of the sun, do melt with their common fires, and die with faintness,
and descend with motions slow and unable to the little brooks that descend from
heaven in the wilderness; and when they drink they return into the vigor of a
new life, and contract strange marriages; and the Lioness is courted by a
Panther, and she listens to his love, and conceives a monster that all men call
unnatural, and the daughter of an equivocal passion and of a sudden
refreshment: and so also i^ was in the Cave at Ephesus: for by this time the
soldier began to think it was fit he should return to his watch, and observe
the dead bodies he had in charge; but when he ascended from his mourning bridal
chamber, he found that one of the bodies was stolen by the friends of the dead,
and that he was fallen into an evil condition, because by the laws of Ephesus
his body was to be fixed in the place of it. The poor man returns to his woman,
cries out bitterly, and in her presence resolves to dye to prevent his death,
and in secret to prevent his shame; but now the woman's love was raging like her
former sadness, and grew witty, and she comforted her soldier, and persuaded
him to live, lest by losing him who had brought her from death and a more
grievous sorrow, she should return to her old solemnities of dying and lose her
honor for a dream, or the reputation of her constancy without the change and
satisfaction of an enjoyed love. The man would fain have lived if it had been
possible, and she found out this way for him, that he should take the body of
her first husband whose funeral she had so strangely mourned, and put it upon
the gallows in the place of the stolen thief; he did so and escaped the present
danger to possess a love which might change as violently as her grief had
done: But so have I seen a crowd of disordered people rush violently and in
heaps till their utmost border was restrained by a wall, or had spent the fury
of the first fluctuation and watery progress, and by and by it returned to the
contrary with the same earnestness, only because it was violent and ungoverned;
a raging passion is this crowd, which when it is not under discipline and the
conduct of reason, and the proportions of temperate humanity, runs passionatly
the way it happens, and by and by as greedily to another side, being swayed by
its own weight, and driven any whither by chance, in all its pursuits having no
rule, but to do all it can, and spend it self in haste and expire with some
shame and much undecency

When thou have wept a while compose the body to burial; which that it be done
gravely, decently and charitably, we have the example of all nations to engage
us, and of all ages of the world to warrant: so that it is against common
honesty, and public fame and reputation not to do this office.

It is good that the body be kept veiled and secret, and not exposed to curious
eyes, or the dishonours wrought by the changes of death discerned and stared
upon by impertinent persons. When Cyrus was dying he called his sons and
friends to take their leave, to touch his hand, to see him the last time, and
gave in charge, that when he had put his veil over his face, no man should
uncover it; and Epiphanius his body was rescued from inquisitive eyes by a
miracle; Let it be interred after the manner of the country and the laws of
the place, and the dignity of the person. (...).
For so Jacob was buried with great solemnity, and Joseph's bones were carried
into Canaan after they had been embalmed and kept four hundred years: and
devout men carried S. Stephen to his burial making great lamentation over him.
Iliad..
And Aelian tells that those who were the most excellent persons were buried in
purple: Lib. 6. variae histor. cap. 6. (...).
and men of an ordinary courage, and fortune, had their Graves only trimmed
with branches of Olive, and mourning flowers. But when Marc. Anthony gave the
body of Brutus to his freed man to be buried honestly, he gave also his own
mantle to be thrown into his funeral pile: and the magnificence of the old
funeral we may see largely described by Virgil in the obsequies of Misenus, and
by Homer in the funeral of Patroclus. It was noted for piety in the men of
Iabesh-Gilead that they showed kindness to their Lord Saul and buried him; and
they did it honorably. And our blessed Savior who was temperate in his
expense, and grave in all the parts of his life and death, as age and sobriety
itself; yet was pleased to admit the cost of Mary's ointment upon his head and
feet, because she did it against his burial; and though she little thought it
had bin so nigh, yet because he accepted it for that end, he knew he had made
her apology sufficient: Nam quid sibi saxa cavata
Quod pulchra volunt monumenta
Res quid nisi creditur illis
Non mortua sed data somno.
Prud. him. in exeq. defunct.
by which he remarked it to be a great act of piety, and honorable to inter our
friends and relatives according to the proportions of their condition, and so
to give a testimony of our hopes of their resurrection. So far is piety: beyond
it may be the ostentation and braging of a grief, or a design to serve worse
ends; such was that of Herod when he made too studied and elaborate a funeral
for Aristobulus whom he had murdered; and of Regulus for his boy, at whose pile
he killed dogs, nightingales, parrots, and little horses; and such also was the
expense of some of the Romans, who hating their left wealth gave order by their
Testament to have huge portions of it thrown into their fires, bathing their
locks which were presently to pass thorough the fire with Arabian and Egyptian
liquors, -- Cupit omnia far
Prodigus and totos melior succendere census,
Desertas e^osus opes;
Statius lib. 2. Silvar.
and balsam of Judea. In this as in every thing else, as our piety must not
pass into superstition or vain expense, so neither must the excess be turned
into parcimony and chastised by negligence and impiety to the memory of their
dead.

But nothing of this concerns the dead in real and effective purposes; Totus
hic locus contemnendus est^m nobis, non negligendus in nostris. Cicero.
nor is it with care to be provided for by themselves. But it is the duty of
the living. For to them it is all one whether they be carried forth upon a
chariot, or a wooden bier, whether they rot in the air, or in the earth,
whether they be devoured by fishes or by worms, by birds or by sepulchral dogs,
by water or by fire, or by delay: Id cine^rem aut manes credis curare sepultos?
when Chriton asked Socrates how he would be buried, he told him; I think I
shall escape from you, and that you cannot catch me; But so much of me as you
can apprehend, use it as you see cause for, and bury it; but however do it
according to the laws. (...)
There is nothing in this but opinion and the decency of fame to be served.
Where it is esteemed an honor and the manner of blessed people to descend into
the graves of their Fathers, Fugientibus Trojanis minatus est Hector (...) Il.
^.
there also it is reckoned as a curse to be buried in a strange land, or that
the birds of the air devour them. Some Nations used to eat the bodies of their
friends, and esteemed that the most honored sepulture, but they were
barbarous: the Magi never buried any but such as were torn of beasts: the
Persians besmeared their dead with wax, and the Egyptians with gummes, and
with great art did condite the bodies, and laid them in charnell houses: But
Cyrus the elder would none of all this, (...). Xenop. (...).
but gave command that his body should be interred, not laid in a coffin of
gold or silver, but just into the earth, from whence all living creatures
receive bir^h and nourishment, and whether they must return. Among Christians
the honor which is valued in the behalf of the dead is that they be buried in
holy ground, Sit tibi terra levis mollique tegaris arena
Ne tua non possinteruere ossa cane^. Mart

that is in appointed coemitaries, in places of religion, there where the field
of God is sown with the seeds of the resurrection, Nam quod requiescere corpus
vacuum sine mente videmus
Spacium breve restat ut alti repetat collegia sensus:
Hinc maxima cura sepulchris impenditur --
Prudent. hymn. in exeq. defunc.
that their bodies also may be among the Christians, with whom their hope and
their portion is and shall be for ever. Quicquid feceris, omnia haec eodem
ventura sunt. That we are sure of; our bodies shall all be restored to our
souls hereafter, and in the intervall they shall all be turned into dust, by
what way soever you or your chance shall dress them. Licinus the freed man
slept in a Marble Tomb, but Cato in a little one, ^armoreo Licinu tuu^ulo
sacet, at Cato parvo,
Pompeius nullo, credi nus esse Deos.
Varro Aracinus.
Pompey in none, and yet they had the best fate among the Romans, and a memory
of the biggest honor. And it may happen that to want a Monument may best
preserve their memories, while the succeeding ages shall by their instances
remember the changes of the world, and the dishonours of death, and the
equality of the dead; and Fama orbem replet, mortem for occulit, at tu
Desine scrutari quod tegit ossa solum.
Si mihi dent animo non impar fata sepulchrum
Angusta est tumulo terra Britanna meo.

James the fourth K* of the Scot^ obtained an Epitaph for wanting of a Tomb;
and K. Stephen is remembered with a sad story, because 400. years after his
death, his bones were thrown into a river, that evil men might sell the leaden
coffin. It is all one in the final event of things. Ninus the Assyrian had a
Monument erected whose height was nine furlongs, and the breadth ten (says
Diodorus) but John the Baptist had more honor when he was humbly laid in the
earth between the bodies of Abdias and Elizeus. And S. Ignatius who was buried
in the bodies of Lions, and S. Polycarpe who was burned to ashes, shall have
their bones, and their flesh again, with greater comfort then those violent
persons who slept amongst kings having usurped their throns when they were
alive, Ce^nit ibi maestos and mortis honor carentes.
I eucaspim and Lyciae ductorem classi Orontem.
Aeneid. 6.
and their sepulchers when they were dead.

Concerning doing honor to the dead: I ustravitque ^iros di, itque novissima
verba. Aeneid.
the consideration is not long. Anciently the friends of the dead used to make
their funeral Orations and what they spoke of greater commendation was pardoned
upon the accounts of friendship; but when Christianity seized upon the
possession of the world, this charge was devolved upon Priests and Bishops, and
they first kept the customs of the world, and adorned it with the piety of
truth and of religion; but they also so ordered it that it should not be cheap:
for they made funeral Sermons only at the death of Princes, or of such holy
persons, who shall judge the Angels; the custom descended, and in the channels
mingled with the veins of earth through which is passed; and now adays men that
die are commended at a price; and the measure of their Legacy is the degree of
their virtue; but these things ought not so to be: The reward of the greatest
virtue ought not to be prostitute to the doles of common persons, but preserved
like Laurel and Coronets, to remark and encourage the noblest things. Persons
of an ordinary life should neither be praised publicly nor reproached in
private: for it is an office and charge of humanity to speak no evil of the
dead, (which I suppose is meant concerning things not public and evident) but
then neither should our charity to them teach us to tell a lie, or to make a
great flame from a heap of rushes and mushrooms, and make Orations crammed with
the narrative of little observances and acts of civil, and necessary, and
external religion.

But that which is most considerable, is that we should do something for the
dead, (...)
(...)
(...).
Il..
something that is real and of proper advantage. That we perform their will
the laws oblige us, and will see to it; but that we do all those parts of
personal duty which our dead left unperformed, and to which the laws do not
oblige us, is an act of great charity, and perfect kindness: and it may
redound to the advantage of our friends also, that their debts be paid even
beyond the Inventary of their movables.

Besides this, let us right their causes, and assert their honor: When Marcus
Regulus had injured the memory of Herennius Senecio, Metius Carus asked him,
What he had to do with his dead? and became his advocate after death, of whose
cause he was Patron when he was alive: And David added this also, that he did
kindness to Mephibosheth for Ionathans sake, and Solomon pleaded his Fathers
cause by the sword against Ioab and Shimei. And certainly it is the noblest
thing in the world to do an act of kindness to him whom we shall never see;
(...). Isoc. Plataica.
but yet has deserved it of us, and to whom we would do it if he were present;
and unless we do so, our charity is mercenary, -- miserum in lattore Tenxi
flebant and cineri ingrato suprema ferebant. Eneid. 6.
and our friendships are direct merchandise, and our gifts are brokage; but
what we do to the dead, or to the living for their sakes, is gratitude and
virtue for virtues sake, and the noblest portion of humanity.

And yet I remember that the most excellent Prince Cyrus in his last
exhortation to his sons upon his death bed, charms them into peace and union of
hearts and designs, by telling them that his soul would be still alive, and
therefore fit to be revered: and accounted as awful and venerable as when he
was alive; and what we do to our dead friends is not done to persons
undiscerning as a fallen tree, but to such who better attend to their
relatives, and to greater purposes though in other manner, then they did here
below. And therefore those wise persons who in their funeral orations made
their doubt, with an [(...), If the dead have any perception of what is done
below] which are the words of Isocrates, in the funeral encomium of Evagoras,
did it upon the uncertain opinion of the souls immortality; but made no
question if they were living they did also understand what could concern them.
The same words Nazianzen uses at the exequies of his sister Gorgonia, and in
the former invective against Julian; but this was upon another reason; even
because it was uncertain what the state of separation was, and whether our dead
perceive any thing of us till we shall meet in the day of judgment: If it was
uncertain then, it is certain, since that time we have had no new revelation
concerning it; but it is ten to one, but when we dye we shall find the state of
affairs wholly differing from all our opinions here, and that no man of sect
has guessed any thing at all of it as it is. Here I intend not to dispute, but
to persuade, and therefore in the general, if it be probable that they know or
feel the benefits done to them, though but by a reflex revelation from God, or
some under communication from an Angel, or the s^ock of acquired notices here
below, it may the rather endear us to our charities or duties to them
respectively; since our virtues use not to live upon abstractions, and
Metaphysical perfections, or inducements; (...)
but then thrive when they have material arguments; -- (...) Il..
such which are not too far from sense. However it be it is certain they are
not dead, and though we no more see the souls of our dead friends then we did
when they were alive, yet we have reason to believe them to know more things
and better: And if our sleep be an image of death, we may also observe
concerning it, that it is a state of life so separate from communications with
the body, that it is one of the ways of Oracle and prophecy, H (...) Cyrus
apud Xenop. lib. 8. instit.
by which the soul best declares her immortality, and the nobleness of her
actions, and powers, if she could get free from the body, (as in the state of
separation) or a clear dominion over it, (as in the resurrection): To which
also this consideration may be added, that men long time lived the life of
sense, before they use their reason; (...) Illiad..
and till they have sumished their head with experiments and notices of many
things, they cannot at all discourse of any thing; but when they come to use
their reason, all their knowledge is nothing but remembrance; and we know by
proportions, by similitudes and dissimilitudes, by relations and oppositions,
by causes and effects, by comparing things with things; all which are nothing,
but operations of understanding upon the stock of former notices, of something
we knew before; nothing but remembrances; all the heads of Topics which are
the stock of all arguments and sciences in the world are a certain
demonstration of this: And he is the wisest man that remembers most, and joins
those remembrances together to the best purposes of discourse. From whence it
may not be improbably gathered, that in the state of separation if there be any
act of understanding, that is, if the understanding be alive, it must be
relative to the notices it had in this world, and therefore the acts of it must
he discourses upon all the parts and persons of their conversation and
relation, excepting only such new revelations which may be communicated to it;
concerning which we know nothing. But if by seeing Sacrates I think upon Plato,
and by seeing a picture I remember a Man, and by beholding two friends I
remember my own, and my friends need, (and he is wisest that draws most lines
from the same Center, and most discourses from the same Notices) it cannot but
be very probable to believe, since the separate souls understand better, if
they understand at all, that from the Notices they carried from hence, and what
they find there equal or unequal to those Notices, they can better discover
the things of their friends then we can here by our conjectures, and craftiest
imaginations: and yet many men here can guess shrewdly at the thoughts and
designs of such men with whom they discourse, or of whom they have heard, or
whose characters they prudently have perceived. I have no other end in this
discourse, but that we may be engaged to do our duty to our Dead; lest
peradventure they should perceive our neglect, and be witnesses of our
transient affections, and forgetfulness. Dead persons have religion passed
upon them, and a solemn reverence; and if we think a Ghost beholds us, it may
be we may have upon us the impressions likely to be made by love, and fear, and
religion. However, we are sure that God sees us, and the world sees us; and if
it be matter of duty toward our Dead, God will exact it: if it be matter of
kindness, the world will: and as Religion is the band of that, so fame and
reputation is the endearment of this.

It remains, that we who are alive should so live, and by the actions of
Religion attend the coming of the day of the Lord, that we neither be
surprised, nor leave our duties imperfect, nor our sins uncanceld, nor our
persons unreconciled, nor God unappeased: but that when we descend to our
graves we may rest in the bosom of the Lord, till the mansions be prepared,
where we shall sing and feast eternally. Amen.

Te Deum laudamus.

THE END.
BEsides this Rule of Holy Dying, the Author has in Print,
1. The Rule of Holy Living. 2. The Liberty of Prophesying. 3. Episcopacie
asserted. 4o 4. The History of the Life and Death of the ever blessed Jesus
Christ. 4o 5. An Apology for Authorized and ^et forms of Lyturgie. 4o 6. A
Sermon Preached at Oxon. on the Anniversary of the fifth of November. 4o 7.
Together with 28. Sermons Preached at Golden grove. fol.
Lately published, viz.
SErmon 1.2. Of the Spirit of Grace. Romans 8. ver. 9.10. Sermon 3.4. The
descending and entailed curse cut off. Exodus 20. part of the 5. verse. Sermon
5.6. The invalidity of a late, or deathbed repentance. Ier. 13.6. Sermon 7.8.
The deceitfulness of the heart. Ierem. 17.9. Sermon 9.10.11. The faith and
patience of the Saints: Or the righteous cause oppressed. 1 Pet. 4.17. Sermon
12.13. The mercy of the Divine judgments; or Gods method in curing sinners.
Romans 2.4. Sermon 14.15. Of grows in grace, with its proper instruments and
signs. 2 Pet. 3.18. Sermon 16.17. Of grows in sin, or the several states
and degrees of sinners, with the manner how they are to be treated. Jude Epist.
ver. 22, 23. Sermon 18.19. The foolish exchange. Matthew. 16. ver. 26. Sermon
20.21.22. The Serpent and the Dove, or a Discourse of Christian Prudence.
Matthew. 10. latter part of ver. 16. Sermon 23.24. Of Christian simplicity.
Matt. 10. latter part of ver. 16. Sermon 25.26.27. The Miracles of the Divine
Mercy. Psalm. 86.5. A Funeral Sermon, Preached at the Obsequies of the right
Honorable the Countess of Carbery. 2 Samuel 14.14. A Discourse of the Divine
Institution, necessity, sacredness, and separation of the Office Ministerial.
Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane.


