THE COMMONERS LIBERTY: OR, THE ENGLISH-MANS BIRTHRIGHT.

COKE INST. 2. PAGE 56.

If any by color of any authority (where he has not any in that particular
case) arrest or imprison any man, or cause to be arrested or imprisoned, this
is against this Act, (viz. Magna Charta, cap. 29.) and it is most hateful when
it is done by countenance of Justice.

Ibid. page 56.

L exest tutissima cassis.

Ibid. page 161.

Dormiunt aliquando Leges, moriuntur nunquam.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-lane.

1659.

THE COMMONERS LIBERTY: OR, The English-man's Birthright.
1. THE Subjects of this Kingdom have ever esteemed (amongst earthly blessings)
the greatest to have consisted in the due administration of Justice, and
therefore have on all occasions, had recourse to their Princes for the
confirmation, and right execution of their Laws, the undoubted birthright of
every Englishman, the surest sanctuary any can take, and the strongest
fortress to protect the weakest.

2. This made Aldred, Archbishop of York at the Coronation of the Conqueror,
take a solemn Oath of him, Mals, de Pontif. in vita Aldred. fo. 154. b. 9.
That aequo jure Anglos, quo Francos tractaret. And the people still call for
their old customs, the Laws of S. Edward, and such like, even to the granting
of Magna charta by Mat. Par. An. 1215. page 254. l. 20.
King John, quae ex part maxima leges antiquas and regni consuetudines
continebat. And these are those we now call the Common Law, which is no other
then 2 (...). Accion sur le case, 25.
the common Custom of the Realm, which is seldom at any time Coke Inst. 2.
p. 210. Coke Inst. 2. p. 29.
changed or taken away without some notable damage to the people.

3. One of these ancient Customs is, That no Freeman of England should be
tried or proceeded against nisi per legale judicium parium suorum, by his
Peers, that is, his equals, such who either in respect of his Nobility is of
the Lords House, or if he be Commoner of such as is capable of being of the
House of Commons, at least, unless some Law have disabled him.

4. The Original of this Custom in England is, for ought I know, as Ancient
as any Trial in this Nation, no doubt long See M. Pyrus Plea for the Lords, p.
29
before the Conquest, and since that time amongst the Laws of Henry the First,
(which were apparently for the most part drawn from the Customs Leg. H. 1.
cap. 70. cap. 87.
of the Kingdom) we find them speak as an undoubted Maxim, that Unusquisque
per pares suos judicandus est, and ejusdem Provinciae, we now say de Vicineto
peregrina vera judicia modis omnibus submovemus, and in those times a man might
challenge whom, and as many as he would. Leg. H. 1. cap. 5.
Iudices non debent esse nisi quos impetitus elegerit: which must be understood
for the trial by Jury: for other Judges (as the chief Justice, etc.) he might
not except against. According to this William de Brauce, Anno 1208. Mat. Par.
An. 1208. p. 227.
affirmed he was ready to satisfy the King, secundum judicium Curiae suae and
Baronum parium meorum, says he, which was before Magna Charta. And this
Custom thus ancient was at the first establishing of Magna Charta confirmed by
express words in the 29. Chapter, and ever since taken as a great injury when
any has otherwise been proceeded against. K. John soon after the first grant
of the Great Charter had recourse to the Pope against the Barons, who takes
notice their trial ought to be Epist. Innocent. 3. apud Mat. Par. p. 266 46. ^
n. 1215.
in curia sua per pares eorum secundum leges and consuetudines regni, M. Par.
An. 1227. p. 337.
An. 1227. King Hen: the 3. urging his brother to deliver a Manor of his to
one Waleran, The Earl answered, the Manor belonged to him, yet he was ready
Curiae regiae subire judicium and Magnatum terrae. At which the King being very
angry, told him, if he persisted in the refusal he should leave the Kingdom,
who with great resolution answered, he would not, sine judicio Parium suorum.
So An. 1234. one of the reasons the Earl Mareschall gives for his taking up of
arms was, that the King had several times defied him, M. Par. An. 1234. 22.
Edit. 1640.
cum semper, says he, paratus essem in curia, juri parere, and stare judicio
parium meorum. By all which and many more Examples, which for brevity I here
omit, it has ever been held an undoubted injury, when any has been proceeded
against otherwise then per Pares, in such cases as were of their cognizance.

5. Some of the grounds of reason (for avoiding all partiality) on which this
is built, I shall hereafter touch, though I can add nothing to that is so
learnedly done by other men: Yet it will not be here amiss to show that this
ancient and fundamental way of proceeding, has been never in any kind
altered, but to the intolerable detriment of the Subject. The cause of making
the Statute of 3 Hen. 7. cap. 1. is said, to be for that by several enormities
in untrue demeanings of Sheriffs in making of Panells, and other untrue
returns, little or nothing could be found, but diverse were almost utterly
destroyed, etc. And therefore it does enact, that certain Counselors there
named, should upon Bill or Information call before them the said misdoers, and
examine them, and others by whom the truth might be known, and to punish such
as they should find defective, after the form and effect of Statutes thereof
made, etc. Yet how intoller able a burden the proceedings, Censures, Decrees
of the Star Chamber were found to the Subject, and the means to introduce an
Arbitrary power, every man's memory reaches to, and the Act for abolishing it,
sufficiently declares.

The 11 H. 7. cap. 3. authorized Justices of Assize, and of the Peace upon a
bare information (without any finding or presenting by verdict of twelve men)
to hear and determine all offenses, by color of which Act, shaking (says
Inst. 2. p. 51.
Sir Robert Coke) the Fundamental Law, it is not credible what horrible
oppressions were committed, etc. I might here remember the 31 H. 8. cap. 8. and
the 34 H. 8. cap. 23. which altering that ancient and known try all by Jury,
were not long lived, being both repealed, the 1 E. 3. cap. 12. nor could the
King by them work that Reformation he expected. And whereas it is objected,
There must somewhere be an Arbitrary power. I grant, some must judge, whether
Laws to be made are for the good government of a Commonwealth, and that is the
Parliament, but not in the executing of them: For Inst. 4. p. 43.
Cum leges institutae fuerint, non erit liberum arbitrium judicare de ipsis,
sed oportebit ipsum judicare de ipsas.

6. Under this impartial way of distributing equal justice to all men (in
receiving which certain it is reasonable the highest Duke should be level
with the lowest beggar, and is for ought I know the chiefest Levelling aimed at
the Subjects of England have enjoyed great Peace and happiness, ever struggling
against the exercise of any arbitrary power whatsoever. But now of late when we
are freed of the Star Chamber, etc. there is an opinion raised by some Grandees
who are feared to aim at an Arbitrary power, to carry on their designs, that
the Lords, without any presentment upon Oath, or trial by Jury, may upon a
bare information, and examining of certain Witnesses, proceed against any
Commoner whatsoever, and that to deny this, or not submit unto them, is a
breach of the Privilege of the House of Peers: And a great Lawyer of late
has writ a Tract to justify their Sentencing, Fining, and Imprisoning any
Commoner, and handling all who refuse to answer to them, and by pen defend
their so M. Pryns plea for the Lords, page 18, 30, 36, 45.
doing, as contemners of their authority, ignorant, sottish Sectaries,
illiterate Ignoramus's, altogether unacquainted with our Histories and Records,
etc. To which I must needs say, (to answer once for all) that this is not a
sincere way of treating the matter in question, to make the world believe there
are none but such as contemn the authority of Parliament, ignorant persons,
and the like, which believe this: when I dare boldly say, of such as have
studied, and understand the question, four parts of five are of that opinion.
And himself, page 45. holds their indubitable right of Judicature of Commoners
to be but in extraordinary cases of Treason, Felony, Trespass, and
Misdemeanors, tryable only in Parliament; which, if he shall be pleased to
enumerate, what they are that cannot elsewhere be tried, I shall not much
differ with him, but that the trial of such offenses might be proper for
Parliament, but such I confess I know none. And to make that a crime, which no
known Law calls a crime, is against the Apostles definition of one, Sin is
the 1 Ioh. 3. 4. Romans 7. 7.
Transgression of the Law, and again, I had not known sin but by the Law.
It is likewise against the Laws of this Land.

7. Before I pass farther, it will not be amiss to agree upon the Question,
which is not, Whether upon the Petition of the Commons, and that passing the
Lords House, the King assenting to it, a Commoner may not be condemned, it
being indeed then an Act of Parliament, such were those of 50 E. 3. against
Richard Lions, William Ellis, etc. which were confirmed by the King at Eltham.
Neither if the King and Lords (which I neither affirm, nor deny) can censure
in some cases a man according to Law, does it therefore follow the Lords alone
can cause a Commoner to be fined, imprisoned, or executed? It being certain,
the King for ratifying any such thing in Parliament, must be present in his
natural capacity, of which there needs no other instance then the last I
mentioned of 50 Ed. 3. (...). 51.
the 50 E. 3. when the King being sick, sent for the Lords and Commons to
Eltham; which certain he had not done, had there been any other practiced way
for confirming what he intended to pass (besides his own presence) before the
Statute 33 H. 8. cap. 21. which yet enacts that every law confirmed in his
absence shall be both under his Seal, and signed with his hand, of which the
last is certainly personal. Neither is it the Question, Whether the Lords can
judge such cases as come into their House, according to the Statute 14 E. 3. c.
5. Stat. 1. or give Judgment upon a Writ of Error on a Cause legally brought
thither, out of the Kings Bench.

Neither do I impugn, but that their opinion is of great Authority in point of
Law; every circumstance rightly considered, before their delivering of it, of
which an undoubted one I conceive to be, the knowing what the Law is, by the
Judges, or other, who best understand the thing in question, for if otherwise,
it is contrary to sense, to imagine a few Lords (of whom, not many are usually
skilled in the Laws, and being out of the House, are but like other men)
should within those walls, as it were by inspiration, be the supreme
Judicature of the Realm. There must at the trial of a Peer be at Inst. 3.
page 28. 30. page 29. n. 12. 13. The 4. Febr. 27 Elizab. there was only 4.
Earls, 1. Viscount, 18 Barons. The 29 Elizab. 15 Febr. 3. Earls, 1. Viscount,
15 Barons.
least 12. or above, who have ever assisting them some of the Judges to advise
the Lord Steward and them, what the Law is; who coming up to the House of
Peers, may direct the Judges (who have spent much time in studying it) what
the Law is. This is so clear it needs no proof, else I could show where the
opinion of the Judges not Rot. Parl. 15 Edw. 3. n. 42 and 50. Edw. 3. n. 48.
See no. 10.
taken, the Judgment of the Lords was soon made void; And in other, where
being given according to their sense, it remains Law to this day.

But the Question is, whether the Lords alone, upon a bare Information (for a
Trial by Jury they use not, nor ever did, to my knowledge, without the King)
can Try and Censure any Commoner to his Detriment, either in his Person or
Estate*

8. First. And this, I conceive they cannot, being not certain to be de
Vicineto.

Secondly. Because in point of Life, no Commoner can ever Try a Lord of
Parliament.

Thirdly. Because the party Accused; cannot challenge any of the Lords his
Tryers, etc.

Fourthly. Because it is expressly enacted, 4 Edw. 3. that they should never
have any power of so doing, which, because the Act it self is not Printed, and
is by some, said to be only a Protestation; I will therefore, for the clearing
of it, set down at large.

Rot Parl. die Lunae prox. post festum sanctae Kathcrinae. nu. 6.
Concordia ne trahatur in consequentiam.
Et est affentu and accord par nostre Seignieur leRoy, and touz les grantz en
plein Parliament, que tout soit il que le ditz peers come juges du Parliament
empristrent en la presence nostre Seign. le Roy, a fair and a render les ditz
jugeme^ts par assent du Roy sur aucuns de ceux que n'estoient pas lour peers
and ce par encheson de murdre de Seig. Liege, and destruction de celui que fut
si pres de sank Royal and fitz du Roy que per tant les ditz peers q' ore sont,
ou les peers q' serront en temps avenir ne soient mes tenuz ne charges a render
jugements sur autre que sur lur peers ne ace fair, mes ayent les peers de la
terre poer einz de ce pur touz jours soient dischargez and quites: and que les
avantditz jugementz ore rendez ne soient tret en ensample n'en consequence en
temps avenir pur quoy les ditz Peers puissent estre charges desore a juger
autres que lour peers contre la ley de la terre, si au tiel eas aveine, que
Dieu defend.

An accord lest it should be drawn in consequence.
It is assented and agreed by our Lord the King, and all the great men in full
Parliament, that however the said Peers as Judges of Parliament, did undertake
in the presence of our Lord the King to give and render the said Judgments by
assent of the King upon some of those who were not their Peers, and that by
reason of the murder of our liege Lord, and destruction of him who was so near
the Blood Royal, and son of a King. That notwithstanding the Peers that now
are or hereafter shall be may be never held nor charged to give judgment on
other then on their Peers, neither shall the Peers of the Land ever have
power to do it, but shall be for ever discharged and quitted from the doing of
it: And that the aforesaid judgments now rendered, shall not in the future be
drawn into example, or consequence, for the charging the said Peers hereafter
to judge other then their Peers against the Laws of the Land, if the like
case should happen, which God forbid.

9. I profess, for my part, I cannot imagine how it is possible for any thing
to be penned more fully, being a plain Declaration, what they had done was
against Law, and a provision for the future: But, because a learned Gentleman
has of late, made an artificial Discourse to blind the world, and take off
the force of this Act of Parliament (for such it was) it will be necessary to
examine what he opposes against it.

1. That this is no Act of Parliament, but a bare Protestation M. Prins Plea
for the Lords. page 35.
without the Kings, or Commons Assent.

And yet it is expressly said to be Assented to by our Lord the King, and all
the great Ones in full Parliament: I desire to know, whether any thing can
pass in full Parliament, to which the Commons are not Parties: For the being
but a bare Protestation, the Title shows the contrary, which calls it an
Accord, which is, a Compact, an Agreement, not of one party that dissents from
others, but of all parties concluding together what the Law is; such a Compact
or Agreement is a Law.

That the House of Commons, nor the Commoners then That the Commoners then
judged, did not demurre to their Jurisdiction argued their Ignorance, but the 4
Aldermen Sir I. Maynard, M. Lilburne, and Overton, better understanding their
ownright, are not to be concluded by their lachesse, and have demurred.
Judged, ever demurred or excepted against the Lords Jurisdiction, etc.

And yet it is plain it was Assented unto by the King and Lords, etc. I shall
desire to know of him, whether ever any Assented to that no man desired;
Certainly some excepted against what was then done, themselves could not, for
they agreed it should be so no more, it must therefore necessarily follow, the
House of Commons, or the Parties themselves did it: and this may serve, For
that he says a little after, that this Protestation was merely voluntary: it
should seem then the Judgment given by the Lords was not voluntarily, the
King over ruling them. And this Protest, (if it be no more) is an exception
against it somewhere.

2. The Lords, in that, do profess and justify their right of being Judges in
Parliament.

Which is not denied the King and them in some cases, but they do likewise
profess, that it extends not to a Commoner.

3. That this was, that they might not be constrained by the page 36.
Kings Command (against their wills) in his presence, to give Judgment in
ordinary cases of Treason or Felony in the High Court of Parliament, against
such that by Law might, and ought to be Tried in the Kings Court at
Westminster, etc. but only in such cases which could not well be Tried
elsewhere, etc. This is in effect what lie says.

To which I am forced to desire him to tell me, what those cases are, that now
cannot well be Tried elsewhere; And whether there are now in our Law, any such
cases as the Canonists and Casuists call casus reservati: That cannot be Tried
by the ordinary Judicatories of the Law, but must have recourse back to the
Legislative power to be ventilated there, ex post facto, our Law being now a
better disputed, and more complete and comprehensive Law then it was in Edw. 3.
Reign: This I should be glad to know, from some that understand the Fountain
and Reason of our Law as well as the Letter. It is certain, that for above
200. years there is no example of proceeding against any Commoner in the House
of Peers but by Act of Parliament, during which time, there was none of those
cases fell out, that could not well be Tried elsewhere, but by Judgment in the
Lords House: Whatsoever is an offense, is punishable by Law, and ought to be
Tried in His Majesty's ordinary Courts of Justice. The Statute of Marlebridge
provides, quod tam majores cap. 1.
quam minores, justiciam habeant and recipiant in Curia domini Regis: And to
think, that any one House, or both (which are not Dyer, so. 60.
a full Court without the King) has power Arbitrarily to punish one no Member
of their own, for that the Law takes not notice of to be a fault; I know not
how well it agrees with the rules of Justice, and how far distant from that
so much complained of Arbitrary Power, which I shall never think, a Court of
Parliament will ever desire to have, or exercise, whose jurisdiction the more
high and absolute it is, the more just and honorable ought the proceedings in
it to be, and to give example of Justice to other inferior Courts, for their
being not constrained to give Judgments against their wills, etc. That is
true, but it is likewise, that they should never have power to do it, and an
affirmance what they had done, was against the Law of the Land.

4. He affirms, this Protestation to have been made only against the Lords
giving Sentence in Felony and Treason, and in the Kings own presence, who
usually pronounced Sentence Himself, with the Lords assent, and did not charge
to give it as here He did; not against Sentencing, Fining, and Imprisoning any
Commoner, for railing and libelling against their Persons, Jurisdictions, and
Proceedings, etc.

All this has no color out of the Record, or practice of other times; and it
being certain, there was then Crime but only Treason mentioned in that Act or
Protestation, as he calls it, why is it not as well to bar their giving
Judgment against a Commoner in other Causes, as Felony? which himself
confesses it reaches to ubi lex non distinguit, nec nos debemus distinguere.
For the Kings giving Judgment in Parliament with the Lords Assent, I do
confess, Judgments there ought to be, properly and punctually entered as
given, Rot. Parl. apud Lecester, 2 H. 5. n. 16.
Par nostre Seignieur le Roy que est Sovereign Judge en toutz cas, and par les
Seignieurs spirituels and temporels avel' assent de les comes de laterre, ou a
lour petition, and nemy par les Seignieurs temporelx seulement. That is, [by
our Lord the King, who is Sovereign Judge in all Causes, and by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, with the Assent of the Commons, or at their
Petition.] But it does not follow, that if otherwise, they are invalid, it
being certain there be many Judgments generally entered as given in the Kings
presence by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and that not held to be any
cause of Exception. Compare Rot. Parl. apud Lecest. 2. H. 5. nu. 16. with Parl.
apud Westmin. nu. 13. See likewise the Judgments against the Spencers, 21 R.
2. nu. Rot Parl.

For Lilburnes and Overtons Railing and Libelling against the Persons and
Jurisdictions of the Lords; for my part I shall say nothing, having not taken
upon me to defend those men's Actions, whom I neither know, nor their carriages,
but their Cause, and that too, no farther then as it has reference to the
liberty of a Commoner of England, being judged by the Lords. Yet I cannot but
say, I have heard they have been great and long sufferers, and by the English
proverb, we may give Loosers leave to speak, such being the frailty of humane
nature, that laesa patientia fit furor. Neither are they alone involved in the
case, There is a noble Knight, and four grave Aldermen, who have been
Magistrates in one of the famous Cities of Europe, who all of them have put out
their Protestations in Print, which he found perhaps, more difficult to
confute, then to neglect.

But for their refusing to Answer, and contemning the Lords Authority to their
faces at the Bar.

To this I must needs say, that for my part, I did never hear that refusing to
Answer in a Court, and demurring to the excesses of any Court, was ever reputed
a Contempt of the lawful jurisdiction of that Court: we all remember, when
certain Gentlemen refused to Answer in the Star Chamber, and pleaded against
the Jurisdiction of that Court, Yet neither the King nor the Lords excepted
against their so doing; And in the end, their demurrer was allowed: It is no
contempt to affirm a Court has not Authority in an especial case, that is to
be determined by the Law, to which every man is to submit: And in a case of
Imprisonment, without any limitation of time, certainly the Law ought be very
clear that deprives a free-subject of that liberty, is so much to be prised:
And if a Subject may not demurre to the Jurisdiction of any Court, every Court
may enlarge it is Jurisdiction, and pretend what dormant Rules and Privileges
it pleases, upon all occasions, and become a faction of Tyrants over the
People, they being disabled to defend themselves from such encroachments, and
demurre to their Jurisdictions when they exceed their limits: A Demurrer is a
Dilatory plea, not a contempt.

10. For their appealing from their Judicature in case of breach of Privilege,
of which themselves alone, and no others are, or can be Judges.

I answer, the thing now in Question is, whether they have a Privilege to
Judge Commoners: It is said in Master Justice page 26.
Huttons Argument, that every Prerogative of the King, contains in it self,
matter of prescription, (and by consequence, is not against any established
Law;) So may I say of the Privileges of either House, that they are such as
are not against any Statute Law: And that the continual practice of all Ages
has made known to the world, but more to themselves, and therefore they are
the Judges of them: But if a question be of their Privileges, or it be
doubtful whether they can do a thing or not. Their Judgment is not to be
received, tanquam ex tripode, they delivering it not by Inspiration, but by
Inquisition; and therefore are bound to certify themselves by all humane
means whatsoever, of the truth of every circumstance, as by hearing the Kings
Learned Council; the opinion of Judges, Presidents of former Parliaments,
Practice of other Courts in the like cases, and such like.

And this was the manner of their proceedings, Parl. apud Reding, 32 H. 6. n.
27. etc.
32 H. 6. when, though the Justices after mature deliberation had among
themselves, resolved they ought not to determine the Privileges of the High
Court of Parliament; Yet the chief Justice showed, the example of other Courts,
on which they grounded their Sentence according to Law: And yet that case was
in the point of their Speaker, a principal Member of the Commons, and of a
difference between him and the Duke of York, one too of the House of Lords.
Neither may they extend their Privileges farther then the Law warrants; to
which purpose there is of late years a notable President, Iournall of the Lords
House, 14 El. June 30.
Henry Lord Cromwell having an Attachment served on him, out of the Chancery,
for not obeying an Injunction contrary to the ancient Privilege and Immunity
time out of memory to the Lords of Parliament, whereof the said Lord Cromwell
prayed remedy: The Lords having examined the case in Parliament, in the
presence of the Judges, and others the Queens learned Council; and upon
hearing of their opinions, it not appearing unto them that the said Attachment
was warranted by the Common Law, Custom of the Realm, or by any Statute or
President of the Chancery, they did order the said Lord Cromwell should be
discharged from the said Attachment: Yet with this proviso, That if at any time
during this Parliament, or hereafter in any other Parliament, there shall be
showed sufficient matter, That by the Queens Prerogative, or by the Common Law,
or Custume of the Realm, or by any Statute Law, or sufficient President the
person of any the Lords of Parliament in the like case is or ought to be
attached, or is attachable, then from thenceforth, that to take place which
shall be so showed or warranted, etc. by which it is manifest the privileges
of the Lords are and must be regulated by Law, and by the opinions of the
Judges and Lawyers, and the practice of other Courts are to be known before any
resolution taken. And it may be farther observed, that when any of the Houses
have concluded on a Privilege without that mature care, it has not continued;
of which, for the Lords House there is a strong President, Rot. Parl. 15 Ed 3.
n 7. n. 42.
15 Ed. 3. where the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, affirming with one consent
that the Peers of the land ne deivent estre aresnez in menez en jugement, si
non en Parliament and par lour Peers, etc. The Judges opposing, it lasted not
long, being taken away, as the printed Book shows the same year, or certainly
Rot. Parl. 17. Ed. 3. n. 23. 27.
the Parliament next following: And for the House of Commons to speak of later
times, that House having signified to my Lord Keeper, Iournal des Comes 27 Eli:
Feb. 10, 11.
That by the ancient Liberties of that House no Member of it ought to be
served with a Sub pena out of Chancery: The Lord Keeper did not only refuse to
recall his Sub pena, but told the Messengers sent unto him, he should not
submit to any opinion of that House touching their Privileges, unless they
could show the same to have been allowed likewise in Chancery. And of the same
opinion was Egerton, 39 Eliz. By all which it is evident the Law and perpetual
Custom must be the foundation of all their Privileges.

11. Neither the Voting in one or both Houses a right of doing a thing, or the
having sometimes exercised what they concluded upon, prove it justly done, or
that they have by Law a Privilege to do it if stood upon, or that it ought to
be. It is now generally held, No Member of either House can be Bail for any
before the Lords, without leave of the House, whereof they are Members: Rot.
Parl. 13 Ric. 2. n. 16, 17.
yet the 13 Rich. 2. the Bishops of Lincoln and Norwich, undoubtedly of the
Lords House, and John de Nevill, and Level, Members, as it seems of the
Commons, did Bail certain persons during the sitting of the Parliament.

There is no privilege more certain then that a Member of the House of Commons
may not on any occasion be molested by Suite: Yet it is clear by the Statute 23
H. 6. cap 15.
23 Hen. 6. any man may be sued even before the Judges of Assize, on a
supposition he was falsely returned, for that Statute limits him that shall be
injured to bring his action against the person returned within three months:
And it is certain some Parl. did then last above that time. And Rot. Parl. 16
Rich. 2. n. 6. 13, 14.
the Knight of Devon was proceeded against in the House of Peers, during his
being of the House of Commons. But to speak of later times, who would not
conclude it a certain privilege of the House of Commons, to have called any
one of their Members out of the Lords House, and especially the Solicitor; they
having done it both to Onslow and Popham, the 8 and 23 Eliz. Yet attempting it
Iournall of the Commons.
the 31 Eliz. the Lords refused to transmit the Solliciter unto them: The Rot
Parl. apud Glocest. 2 Rich. 2. n. 23.
2 of Rich. the 2. the Lords affirm, though what was desired by the Commons,
had been used in the three last Sessions, yet it was not the Custom of
Parliament. By all which it is manifest a thing stood upon, sometimes practiced
and allowed, is not certainly a Privilege of Parliament, or to have been
justly done, if opposed, and this goes very far in answering all M. Prins
Presidents, of which more hereafter.

Lastly, says he, This Protestation did not foreclose the page 36.
Lords in this, or future Parliaments to give Judgment against Commoners in
other Cases of Felony and Treason, even without Commons.

And yet the Act does expressly say, That as they should not be charged, So they
should not at all ever have power to give such Judgment; And their now doing
it should not be drawn into Example for the future.

And thus I have answered all his Exceptions against this Law. Only where he
makes in so few lines two Exclamations against such as hold this a Law, and
think to justify themselves by it, of showing their nonsense rather then
reason and Law, their injudiciousnesse and folly, rather then justification,
etc. I am forced to reply, a person of Integrity and Judgment, ought not with
such sharpness raise envyagainst any that defend themselves by Law. Nonsense,
Folly, and Injudiciousnesse are words of relation, and that which seems
Nonsense to him, may be of great weight in others Judgment. But if any should
make an Appeal, whether to affirm (with these men) this is a Law made in
pursuance of the Common right of the Realm, and in affirmation of Magna Charta
is nearer Nonsense then to call that a Protestation (which by its own nature
imports some disagreeing) is in plain words styled an Agreement or nigher
Folly, then the affirming that to have past without the Kings Concurrence, he
is expressly said to have assented unto: or more Injudicious then to think the
Commons not to have been parties to what was agreed in full Parliament, or
less Reason then to say, that Law not to bar the Lords in future, which
clearly provides they should never hereafter have power to judge a Commoner; I
do not know, I say, (if any should thus appeal) who could be met with, would
not think this Gentleman's Interpretation farther off reason, then the very
letter of the Law: Interpretari legem, est dare rationabilem intellectum sive
sensum praecipientis, and praecepti. Neither could he any way term Vide page
66.
this raising, murmuring, or playing the Bethlehem; thus to have his own words,
retorted on him: for my part, I am confident the Gentleman would never have
alleged this Record, and many other Authorities I have met with in his works,
had he thought any would have examined the truth of his sayings, or had he any
other way to weaken what must of necessity be inferred from them, but by such
viperine glosses. And now it will not be unfit to see this (as it is
undoubtedly a Law) how it has been practist on all occasions, in which he is
so confident there is hundreds of Presidents to the contrary of what is
pretended by it, viz. That no man (especially claiming that right, for if
otherwise they may be thought to have submitted to the Trial, vigilantibus and
non dormientibus jura subveniunt) being a Commoner ought ever to be tried
otherwise then by a Jury.

12. First, then in the same Rot. Parl. 4 Edw. 3. n. 16.
Parliament of Edw. 3. Wherein this Statute or Declaration of the Law was made,
Sir Thomas Berkley, Knight, in whose Castle Edw. 2. was destroyed; was
questioned for the said Murder, and pleaded not guilty, and put himself upon
his Country, whereupon there was a Jury summoned to appear, Coram domino rege
in Parliamento suo apud Westminster, in Octabis sancti Hillarii prox' futur.
Some two months after, who found him not guilty, The Record remembers all the
Jurors names, and gives the reasons of their Verdict; (and this is the only
Commoner I ever read of Tried by Jury in Parliament;) Which as it does enough
prove, the Lords cannot Try a Commoner, but that his Trial must be by men of
his own condition, per pares, so the never being on any occasion at any time
after exercised, shows it ought to have been there, it being certain the King
cannot (as here) sit personally to Judge any, in case of Felony and Treason.

In the case of the Genovesa, slain by one Kirkby, however the killing him,
was adjudged Treason in Parliament; Yet the proceedings against him that did
it, was in the Kings Bench, where Kirkby was Tried by Rot. Parl. 3. Rich. 2. n.
18. Term. S. Hill. 3 Ric. 2. Rot. 31^
a Jury, and found guilty.

So likewise in that himself Rot. Parl. 17 Rich. 2. n. 20.
alleages, 17 Rich. 2. in the case of Thomas Talbot, however the King and Lords
adjudged the case Treason; yet for his Trial, he was only to render himself
into the Kings Bench, there to remain till it should be ordained, par advis du
Roy and son conseil, how he should be further proceeded against, which was not
in Parliament.

In breach of Privilege, they have not heretofore took upon them to Judge a
Commoner, otherwise then to seek a Law for the punishing of him, Rot. Parl. 5
Hen. 4. n. 78. and cap. 6.
5 Hen. 4. Richard Cheddre, a meniall Servant of Sir Thomas Brook coming to
the Parliament, was wounded by one John Sallage or Savage, the Commons nor the
Lords never at all go about the punishing the said Savage, but petition the
King would be pleased to ordein such sufficient remedy as may terrify others,
viz. 1. That if any killed or murdered one so coming (as an additionall to
what he was by Law to suffer) he might lose his hand. 2. But if he wounded or
beat any, that he should be imprisoned a year, and sined to the King. 3 That
His Majesty would abstain from granting any Pardon without the agreement of
the Party. But to these the King does not consent, and allows the offender his
Trial in the Kings Bench, as is to be seen in the printed Book.

The gentleman Plea for the Lords, p. 48
cites this President, and I entreat him to peruse the Roll again, and tell me
if there can be possibly one more punctual against the Lords judging a
Commoner. A servant attending a Member coming to Parliament is wounded; The
Lords and Commons do not so much as attempt to Try and Censure the doer of it;
and the Judgment given, is by Act of Parliament, less then what both Lords
and Commons hold but sufficient: And the Party is allowed his Trial by Jury,
in an ordinary Court of Justice.

13. The 28. Hen. 6. The Commons impeached the Duke of Suffolk who waived his
Peers, and the King gave Judgment but during the sitting of that Parliament:
The Lords being assembled in the Star Chamber in Rot. Parl. 29 H. 6. n. 5. 6.
Council, the 28 of November. Will: Talboyes Esquire, and others arrayed with
Iacks, Salets, Swerds and Glaives, in manner of War attempted to have slain
one of the Lords of Parliament, and of His Majesty's privy Council there
Assembled, which being one of the most odious riots had been seen in the Kings
time. The Commons then sitting, declare their detestation of the fact, and
impeach the said Talboyes, and desire he may (being then imprisoned in the
Tower of London) remain there for 12 months, and to answer the same in His
Majesty's Court in presence of his Justice; but the thing desired, being not
altogether according to the course of the Common Law (the Subjects undoubted
birthright) was denied by the King, and stopped; and no proceedings against him
in Parliament ever thought on.

I should be tedious to repeat the Examples of Murders, Riots, Rapes, and
other misdemeanors complained of in Parliament; and yet the Lords not at all
attempting to Judge the offenders being a Commoner, but To be transmitted over,
and to have a fair Trial in the Kings Bench: was the continual desire of Sir
John Maynard, the 4 Aldermen, Lieut Colonel Lilburne, etc.
only to provide a fair Trial should be had in the Kings Bench, or other
ordinary Courts of Common Law against him, and sometimes by Statute, desire to
increase the punishment at the Common Law, which had been vain, had it been in
their power Arbitrarily to have censured the Offender. Such as would see them,
may amongst others, read Rot. Parl. 13 Rich. 2. nu. 11. 11 Hen. 4. nu. 37, 38.
11 Hen. 6. nu. 12. 43. 15 Hen. 6. nu. 13, 14, 15. 18 Hen. 6. nu. 28. 23 Hen. 6.
nu. 42. And here I thought to have ended the Presidents I have observed in this
case, but that of Cambridge comes so fit, that though it have been touched by
others, formerly, I cannot but set it down somewhat more fully.

Rot. Parl. in crastino Anim. n. 45.
Unto Rich. 2. There was a great complaint in Parliament against the Major,
Baylifs, and Cominaltee of Cambridge, for some compliance in a late commotion
against the University; the Commons of that Town in their defense, by their
Council plead against the Jurisdiction of the Court, Que ceste Court n'ent
doit avoir coniscance ne Jurisdiction: The Lords moved, number. 57.
affirm, if they will give no other Answer, they will proceed against them, as
men that know not what to say.

In the end a middle course is taken. The Major and Citizens submit themselves
to the Kings Ordinance, touching only their Franchises, by virtue of which
submission, the King, by the assent of the Lords, seized the Franchises of the
said Town: And in the end, committed to the Chancellor and Scholars, the
cognizance and punishment of defaults, in the Assize of Bread, Wine and Beer,
and of Flesh, Fish, etc. And the rest of all the Franchises bestowed on the
Major and Bayliffes again: This Ordinance gave no content to the Commonalty
there, who often molested the Scholars, indicting them on true, and sometimes
on feined pretenses. Whereupon the Chancellor and Scholars, about 7 years
after, Rot. Parl. 13 Rich. 2. n. 14.
framed a Petition to the Parliament against them, which was sent down to the
Major and Bayliffes of Cambridge, commanding them to appear before the King and
His Council, the next day after Candlemas, with sufficient instructions and
power to Answer all things, for the Cominalty there, under the Common-seal of
the Town; At which time the Major and Bayliffes came into Parliament, but the
Cominalty would not give them Authority to answer for them; whereupon nothing
was done, of which contempt there is no question but we should have found some
prosecution in that, or some following Parliament, but that not submitting the
Lords knew, they had no power to Try and Judge them being Commoners.

14. And to speak seriously, if the Lords may Try a Commoner, they may Judge
any man's title to his Lands, for no Law limiting the extent of their power, but
that being Arbitrary, it may reach to all causes whithersoever they will
stretch it, and so Westminster Hall sit quiet; And the Subject of England has
not desired an illimited power, no, not in the two Houses, and have therefore
moderated Parliaments, that they should not subvert the Laws of the Land. See
1 Hen. 4. cap. 14. 4 Hen. 4. cap. ^3. sometimes by express words, determining
that some things cannot be done in Parliament, as that any should be impeached
there, of that concerns his Franktenement or hereditament, etc. Rot. Parl. 10
Hen. 6. nu. 35.

And as there is no limit of their power, so being directed by nothing but
their will, either in judging what is an Offense, or punishing of it, they
alone, or with the Commons, may alter the Law, for ubi non est lex, non est
transgressio, Romans 4. 15.

And if they can question and punish a man at their wills, for that is neither
Malum in se, nor Malum prohibitum; that is, for that is no offense either by
the Common or Statute Law, a man may suffer by Fine, Imprisonment; or farther,
for that the Law takes no notice to be an Offense, which is contrary to Magna
Charta, cap. 29. and a plain change of the Law, which cannot be made but by the
King, and the three Estates in Fortescu cap. 9. fol. 25. b. Rot. Parl. 6 Hen.
6. nu. 22. The King that dead is in his life, ne might by his last will, nor
otherwise alter, change, or abrogue the Law, without the consent of the three
Estates, etc.
Parliament.

15. Having thus showed the Antiquity, continuance, inconvenience, if otherwise
of this Law, There remains only to answer some presidents the Gentleman has
alleged, as if the Practice had been always othrewise; of all which, though
I might affirm with my Lord Cook in Slades case, lib. 4. fol. 94. that being
never questioned, nor confirmed by Judgments given when the case was stood
upon, they ought not to be regarged, yet I shall show him, not one of them is
at all to purpose, every circumstance considered. His first then is, Plea for
the Lords, page, 36, 37.
that of John Hall, who killed the Duke of Gloucester at Calice, whose case yet
he confesses was not Tryable but in Parliament.

16. Whether the King and Lords had not cognizance of the fact of a Commoner so
heinous, not Tryable by the Common Law, as this was not, is a question I will
not now dispute; That being absolutely taken away by 1 H. 4. c. 14
Statut. Besides, I am not satisfied, this was not by Act of Parliament with
the Commons consent; for at the end of the Roll, they thank the King for his
just Judgment, who, yet never is read to have showed it unto them, (as indeed
it was not then usual.) But I shall ask the Gentleman whether he will
justify all the proceedings in that Cause, as standing with the Common Justice
of the Realm. Certainly it would be now by many thought very hard, for a
person in custody to be first examined privately upon his own Oath to accuse
himself, and then without being further proceeded with by Law, to have the
Judgment in effect, of a Traitor, for killing a Person apparently not within
the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. doubtless (so far as it appears to me) this may
be one of those Presidents, whereof Sir Edward Cook Instit. 4. page 37.
Cook aufereat oblivio si potest, si non, utcunque silentium tegat; Of which
opinion the Commons it seems were, who, however they let it then pass, (he
not pleading the privilege of a Commoner) yet took care it should not be so
any Rot Parl. 1 H. 4. n. 144.
more. And it is observable that they desire no such Accusation should be
received in Parliament, but in His Majesty's other Courts, Come ad este fait
and use anciennement en temps de vos tres nobles progenitors, etc. Which
affirmation is indeed, as much as is stood upon, viz. That it was not the use
to try a Commoner in Parliament.

17. His second proof, Rot. Parl. 1 H. 4. n. 79.
1 Hen. 4. nu. 79. Where the Commons affirm Judgments in Parliament pertain
only to the King and Lords, etc. You may see the record at large in his book,
page 37. and M. Lylburnes, called the Laws funeral, page 16. and sets in the
Margint nota, and page 38. That it is so full and punctual a Parliamentary
decision, as is uncapeble of any answer or evasion.

To this, if I should answer, that it was no Act of Parliament, and therefore
binds not in succession, nor is now by consequence of any force; I followed
no less Lawyer then Sir Edward Cook, but I confess, that passage Cook
Instit. 4. page 23.
seems to me a Declaration of what of right, did in any Parliament belong to
the Lords and Commons, and therefore to be more then temporary. I shall
therefore say, that this President must extend only to such things, which were
of the cogniscance of the Parliament, and proper for that Judicature, not of
things did no way at all appertain unto that Court, Rot. Parl. 13 Rich. 2. nu.
10. after hearing a very long case, the Record notes, Ysembla as Seignieurs du
Parliament que la dite petition n' estoit pas petition du Parliament einz que la
matiere enycelle compris dent este tryepar la come ley. Certainly they seem
not to have been Judges in that case, nor in another Petition, Rot. Parl. 16
Rich. 2. nu. 32. To which the Answer is, Suent a Roy purce que ceste petition
n' est pas petition del Parliament, Rot Parl. 10. Hen. 6. nu. 35. The Commons
affirm matters touching a man's Inheritance, are not examinable in Parliament,
and 32 Hen. 6. nu. 27. a President himself remembers, page 51. it is expressly
said, Actions at Common Law be not determined in the High Court of Parliament.
By all which it is manifest, those words that Judgments perteine to the King
and Lords, must be understood of such things whose decision is proper and
perteine legally only to the Parliament, such was that, 27 Hen. 6. nu. 18.
touching placing the Lords in Parliament, and that was given 1 Hen. 4. in
Parliament against the King himself, of which the Commons seem to have had no
knowledge, 1 Hen. 4. nu. 145. which, when the like came again in question, Rot.
Parl. 39 Hen. 6. nu. 12. in the case of the Title of the Duke of York; The
Lords in Parliament charge the Judges sadly to advise touching it, who the 20
of October Answer; That they were the Kings Justices to determine matters in
Law, between party and party; That this was above the Law, and passed their
Learning, that the decision of it perteined to the Lords of the Kings blood,
and the Peerage of the Land, and therefore they desired to be excused of giving
Council in that matter; Now indeed in such cases I shall not deny, but the
King and they may be Judges: Yet whatever that privilege is, in judging, when
they make a Law to bind the Subject, concerning any thing of that nature, to
that the Commons are parties, as well as the Lords. See 7 Hen. 4. cap. 2. 25
Hen. 8. cap. 22. 28 Hen. 8. cap. 7. 35 Hen. 8. cap. 1.

18. To his next president of 17 Rich. 2. nu. 20, 21. page 38.
touching Tho: Talbots conspiring the death's of the Dukes of Lancaster and
Gloucester, I have Answered before, nu. 12. That it was by the Lords only
referred to the Common Law.

19. His next president is that of the Earl of Northumberland, page 39.
5 Hen. 4. nu. 12. which being no Commoner, is nothing to the purpose, as
himself consesseth, page 29. and page 41. Only touching the Protestation of
the Lords, it is apparent, they then had an opinion, the King would have tried
him a Lord by the Judges, without them who were his Peers: And for the Kings
giving Judgment against Henry and Thomas Percy, he well knows there was no
person then Judged, or brought into Judgment, only an opinion of the King and
Lords delivered upon a desire of the Archbishop of Canterbury: who conceived
himself and the Duke of York in some suspicion of having adhered to Hotspur,
and the Earl of Worcester, whom the Earl of Northumberland (then newly cleared
by them) did free, from having had any compliance with them. Yet so as the King
and Lords did affirm the war formerly raised by them should be held Treason.
So indeed judgeing no man, but delivering an opinion, that a War raised by two,
whereof one was slain in Fight, the other beheaded the next day at
Shrewesbury, should be held Treason, of which there was little question.

His next President is that of Weston and Gomenis, to page 41. 42.
which, though I have answered before, nu. 15. in the case of Hall, their
offenses having been committed beyond the Seas, and therefore not Tryable by an
ordinary way in England, and now taken away by Statute: Yet it is apparent,
that Judgment was an Act of Parliament, passing at the request of the Commons,
by the assent of the Lords, and stopped till the King could be informed.

20. His next is, that of Alice Perers, against whom Judgment of Banishment,
and forfeiture of Land, was page 42.
given by the Lords without the King or Commons. This is the only President
that has most color of truth, and to his purpose in all his Book: And whether
she a person that labored then under the public hate, for her many lewd
carriages, might not have somewhat acted against her, not fit to be observed at
other times I cannot tell, it appearing Rot. Parl. 51 Edw. 3. n. 89
by record, the Law (on which that Judgment was grounded) Rot. Parl. 50 Edw.
3. n. 45
of the 50 Ed. 3. did pass without ever calling her to answer. But for my
part, I do affirm this was an act of Parliament, That the King was party to
the Judgment, is Rot. Parl. 1 Rich. 2. n. 43.
clear by nu. 43. Et est l' intention du Roy and des Seignieurs, and ore
ordeignez and assentuz en mesme le Parliament, etc. The Question then is, of the
Commons, of whom there appears nothing in the Roll; but if there be not, it
does not follow they did not assent unto it, and so made it a complete Act.
Many things doubtless, past formerly in Parliaments, which are not found
Recorded; And some Statutes to this day Laws, are no where enrolled, of which
see Sir Edward Cook, Instit. 4. page 51. But for the Commons being parties to
this Judgment, it is so certain as Walsingham, who then lived, relates, it
was expressly at their pursuit. Walsing. Histo. page 198. an. 1377. 1. R. 2.
nu. 43.
In eo Parlamento says he, fuere pene omnes milites cum Petro de la Mare, etc.
-- hii itaque resumentes petitiones suas eo loco quo prius dimiserant,
institerant pro bannitione illius Aliciae Peers, etc. -- quae quamvis plures ex
dominis and omnes legis peritos Angliae pecunia corrupisset. -- Diligentia
tamen and sapientia praedictorum militum ore suo convicta proscribitur, omnibus
bonis suis mobilibus and immobilibus, fisco Regio judicatis, which relation
agreeing with the Record in every thing, but where it is more full, there can
be no doubt of the truth of it, nor that this was other then an Act of
Parliament.

21. The next President is of some who delivered page 43.
Burbugh Casttle in Rich. 2. time, but this he insists not upon, as indeed it
makes not to the purpose, and may receive the same answer, Hall, Weston and
Gomenis before did.

But for Sir Thomas Mortimer and Sir John Cobham it is certain, the Commons
did not only Impeach them, but joined with the King and Lords in all things
concerned them. Insomuch as though the Lords had Accused in that Parliament
several Lords, Yet the Commons in Parliament Rot. pl^cit. Coro. 21 Rich. 2. n.
15. 17.
Impeached and joined in whatsoever was done against any Commoner; So that
nothing past but by the concurrence of the King and the three Estates, which is
an Act of Parliament.

22. For the Fining and Imprisoning of Walter Sibel page 43.
of London, for Rot. Parl. 8 Rich. 2. n. 12.
slandering the Earl of Oxford; that is true, but before they did so, the said
Sibel, gratiae domini Regis humiliter se submisit, and refused to prosecute his
accusation against the Earl, upon whose submission this Sentence passed, as
that before of Cambridge, nu. 13.

23. For that of John Cavendish Rot. Parl. post festum sancti marcae. 7 Rich. 2
nu. 13
accusing Michael de la Poole, Chancellor of England, whom the page 43.
Lords put over to the Judges. It is certain, if the Lords have power to Fine
and Imprison a Commoner, they cannot delegate it to the Judges; nor they, who
are the Kings Agents in administration of Justice, Fine any man as Deputies to
them, but in doing so, must proceed after an ordinary course of Law; and
therefore, either that Record of 7 Rich. 2. is imperfect, or it was done as the
former, upon Cavendishes submission, who did in part deny his first Accusation
of the Chancellor himself, turning it only on his Clark. And for the Lords
Fining a Commoner, I am confident, there never was any one penny paid, unless
voluntarily, of any sum so imposed by them, though perhaps they may at some
time have attempted the doing it, which I do the rather assure my self of,
because the House of Peers having an intent really to punish by Rot Parl. 32
H. 6. nu. 46.
Fine, certain Members of their own House, for negligently attending there, (a
Cook Instit. 4. p. 3 Edw. 3. Coro. 161.
thing certainly proper for their cogniscance) they attempted no means to lay
so small a sum as an 100l. on an Archbishop, and Duke an 100 marks, on
every Bishop and Earl, excepting three, and forty pounds on every Abbot and
Barron, but by Act of Parliament, nor to levy it but by expressly providing in
that Act, those sums should be raised on their lands, and goods by process
out of the Exchequer: From whence I cannot but infer that if they would not
venture (conceiving it would be stood upon) the Fining a Lord for a default
punishable by the Lords House, but by an Act, which expressly took care how it
should be come by, much less are they alone by Law left at large in their
Censure of a Commoner, or have any power to levy any sum they set on him.

But, where he says the Lords in this case had witnesses examined upon Oath
before them. I am not resolved, the Chancellours Clark protesting his Lords
innoceny, Rot. Parl. 7 Rich. 2. nu. 14 post ^est S. Marti.
Sur. non serment, and others examined, Sur lour liegeances a dire verite, does
necessarily infer the giving an Oath but if any think otherwise; I will not
contend. No more then for his last President, that the King and Lords (for so
is the Rot. Parl. 15 Rich. 2. n. 21.
Record, not the Lords alone, as by him Cited) might not commit a Commoner
perhaps for some small time, for slandring a Peer: The Question is not whether
they have done it, Malto facta sunt quae si in judicium vocentur fieri non
debent. Besides, I am not satisfied, but the King and His Council (which none
can deny the Lords to be) might by the Statute, 12 Rich. 2. cap. 11. on his
confession, as it seems this was, imprison a man for slandering a person of
that esteem the Arch-bishp was; and thus I have done with all his elder
Presidents.

24. For those of the 18 Iocobi and since: I will only say, that the course of
Trying men in the Lords House, having layen asleep (if ever practist) for about
two hundred years, then firfi renewed, many might be ignorant of their own
right, nor know how to plead to it: And it is certain some of those Presidents
he mentions, have never been executed, neither were they done without Kings
Concurrence; in so much as all was done by an united Vote if put in execution.

Another President I have met with, is, that it appears by Stat. 2. 6 Rich. 2.
cap. 1.
6 Rich. 2. cap. 1. Stat. 2. that certain men were Indicted, Arraigned, or
Appealed of High TREASON in Parliament next before: And therefore, that it is
plain Commoners may be Tried even for TREASON in Parliament. But it is clear,
there is no such thing can be gathered, either by the Printed Act here spoken
of Rot. Parl. in Octavis sancti Michael. n. 16. et en tierce semaine de
quaresme nu. 17.
or by the Roll of either Parliament, on any thing else, more then, that there
was a Pardon then granted to several persons, and these words in the Point, As
in the same Parliament is more fully contained, must have reference to the
pardon granted, which does appear in the Roll, not to the Arraigning, which is
no where found in it.

There may now be expected that I speak somewhat; If a Subject should be
oppressed by an illegal Sentence of the Lords, how he is to be rectified, for
non debet esse defectus Iusticia; and for any Court Spiritual or Temporal
exceeding their power against any Statute. In the like case a Prohibition or
Supersedeas out of the Kings Bench, lies; though the STATUTE provide not that
remedy. Compare Articulii super chartus chap. 3. 417. with the Register, fol
185. 187, etc. But this being a Superior Court, is a greater question, in
which there will fall out a great dispute, how far, and in what sense the two
Houses are, the High Court of Parliament, which I intend not at this time to
enter into, but will conclude, remembering that true advise of Master Prinne;
That who shall so suffer, shall have the comfort of a good Conscience to
support him; and God, no doubt, will in his good time find some means to
relieve him.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 2: line 2. r. a Commoner. ibid. l. 11. r. * Unusquisque. etc in marg.
add, * Leg. H. 1. c. 31. ibid. l. 28. r. per parts. p. 4. l. 4. r. Sir
Edward. ibid. l. 16. dele ipsum and de, read, oportebit judicare secundum ipsas
p. 11. l. penult. r. no crime. p. 15. l. 23. dele by. and lin. antepenult. r.
ni. p. 18. l. 22. r. railing. p. 19. l. 20. r. ought not. p. 21. l. penult. r.
has been. p. 22. l. 1. r. Quinto Rich. 2.


