TWO LETTERS From Two Gentlemen lately come from IRELAND, AND LANDED IN
SCOTLAND.
To a Person of Quality of Ireland now in London; Giving an Account of some
Affairs relating to the Present State of Ireland.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Glasgow, July 9. 1689.
Honored Sir,
I Have forborne writing to you, expecting to have been furnished with an Exact
Account of Affairs in and about Londonderry: but as yet no such thing is come
to our hands, neither can we be certainly informed, whether the Relief be got
in there, or not, because no Ships have of late come from thence. But by
Fishing-boats, and other shists, several of your Tenants are come to this
Place, who give this Account: That the Protestants all about the Seaside, are
commanded and forced to remove to the Mountains, for fear that if an Army from
England should land there, they would join with them. There is one Mr.
Montgomery come to this Town from Ireland, who had several Protections from the
late King James, and from all his Generals; notwithstanding which, he was
forced to leave the Country, and make his Escape, being warned by some of his
Friends (who are Roman Catholics) That a general Massacre of the Protestants
was intended; and that it would have been so before this time, but that the
Pope writ Letters to the Irish, to forbear till a more sit Opportunity. That
the Irish Clergy and Gentry being earnest to have it done out of hand, King
James was against it; but at last they had prevailed with him to consent to it;
and it had been put in Execution, had not the Pope's Order given a Respit to
it. You may guess what a miserable Condition the poor Protestants there are in:
God in his Infinite Mercy relieve them. I am,

Your most Humble Servant, W. S.
POSTSCRIPT.
Just as I was about to close this Letter, I received certain Intelligence,
That the Ships are not yet got into Londonderry; That on Friday last was
seven-night the Londonderry men sallied out, and killed 150 of the Enemy just
before the Walls; That Major General Kirk has supplied the People of
Iniskillin with Arms and Ammunition, who came out of their Hold as far as
Ballynefea, and drove the Irish before them; That Ballyshannon holds out, and
likewife Donegal; That Major General Kirk has put 700 Men into the Island of
Ince, who, together with the Protestants already there, will make up a handsome
Party; That the Enemy have burnt Letterkenny, and most of the Gentlemen's Houses
in Enishowen; That they have burnt Newtown, and many other Towns in the County
of Londonderry; which, tho it be to your great loss, and many other Gentlemen,
yet it looks as if they had not intention to stay long in that Country: which
I pray God grant.



IRWYN, July 8. 1689.
SIR,
THis Afternoon Captain Vaughan of Breneranagh, Mr. Humble, and Mr. Wray, and
several others, came to this place. They left the Fleet on Saturday last, which
at that time could not get up to Londonderry, by reason of a Boom laid cross
the River from Pennyburn-Mill. That Mr. Browning would have adventured to go
up, but Major General Kirk would not suffer him till a more convenient
opportunity, having some other Design in hand. The Gentlemen of Donegal, (with
the leave and order of the Major General) took two Men of War along with them,
with intent to land a good number of Men at the Island of Ince, and there to
entrench themselves: In the Logh they met Sir James Caldwall coming to the
Fleet, to give an Account, That the Men of Iniskillin hold out bravely, but
were straightened in Ammunition; whereupon the Major General sent them a large
and handsome Supply. Ballyshannon holds out, and so does Donegal, under the Care
of Sir Albert Coningham; and another place, of which I have forgot the Name. By
the encouragement of the Frigates lying in Logh-Foyl; Iniskillin, Donegal, and
the Fleet, hold a constant Correspondence. There are in Iniskillin Four
thousand Horse and Foot well armed, and Four thousand more good Men that wanted
Arms, but are now supplied from Major General Kirk. On Friday last was
seven-night there was a sharp Engagement between the Garrison of Londonderry and
the Irish; in which the Enemy lost a Hundred and fifty Men, some say more. The
People of Londonderry are Masters of the Wind-mill-Hill. The Sheriff of the
County of Donegal, with some Forces, is now burning all the Gentlemen's Houses
in that Country. Your House is also burnt to the ground, and all your Land
depopulated, and most part of all that County. The Protestants are driven like
Sheep to the slaughter. Brian O Cahan, the Titular Dean of Derry, is Commander
in Chief in that County, having a Guard of Rogues about him, and does what he
pleases there. The City of Londonderry received full Intelligence from the
Fleet, by a Man who swam over the River from about Alderman Tomkins his House.

Your Humble Servant, P. J.

The Answer of a Protestant Gentleman in Ireland, to a late Letter from N. N.
upon a late Discourse between them concerning the present Posture of that
Country, and the Part fit for those concerned there, to Act in it. An Apology
for the Protestants of Ireland, in a Brief Narrative of the late Revolutions in
that Kingdom, and an Account of the Present State thereof. The Interest of
England in the Preservation of Ireland; humbly Presented to the Parliament of
England. By J. P. Esquire
All Three Printed for Ric. Chiswell.

London: Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1689.


