MEMOIRES, OF THE LIFE and ACTIONS Of the most INVINCIBLE and TRIUMPHANT
PRINCE; IHON THE GREAT, Third of that Name, PRESENT KING of POLAND: CONTAINING
A Succinct Series of Affairs from his Craddle to this present Day; With a
particular RELATION of his many Great and Stupendous VICTORIES obtained
against the TVRKS and TARTARS, from the time he was first made CROWN GENERAL,
and afterward Elected KING of POLAND.

Done in Verse, (out of H. G's Historical Account of the said PRINCES LIFE and
ACTIONS) By a Lover of the PEACE and GLORY of CHRISTENDOM.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His IMPERIAL
MAJESTY of GREAT BRITAIN, Anno DOM. 1685.

TO THE MOST ANCIENT OF ALL CHRISTENDOMS, and the whole WORLDS MONARCHS, The
most Potent, the most Heroic, the most August, JAMES The Seventh, the Ornament
and Glory of all other PRINCES, KINGS, and EMPERORS, His Imperial MAJESTY of
GREAT BRITAIN, France and Ireland, etc.
GREATEST SIR,
AS an Essay whether or not this my obscurity dare approach the most Glorious
and August Theme in the World, and that is Your MAJESTY'S own: I have attempted
the MEMOIRES of the Heroic and Victorious KING of POLAND, which will become
yet the more Memorable. when Graced with Your PRINCELY EYE, and ROYAL
PROTECTION. The Subject being (in it self) so Noble, might very well have
become a much greater and finer Pen, than the many diss-advantages of so low an
Author could well afford it. However! Managed as it is by the unworthiest of a
thousand, being the Account of the Life of so great, so glorious a PRINCE,
Comprising some of the memorablest Actions, and Victories, which have yet
Adorned any other Age: It could not have been offered (withour diminution of
that Glory due to Sovereign MAJESTY'S) to any else, of whatsomever Sphere,
below GODS Prime MOVER of the WORLD; the Royal: Nay, nor yet of all those
Foundations, or that Firmament of the Universe, to any other Intelligence, or
power, save Your MAJESTY alone. For to whom else should the Heroic
Atchievments of this Valiant PRINCE have been Addressed; but to another KING,
the most Wise, the most Valiant, the most Enriched with all those
distinguishing Marks of Excellency, and transcendent WORTH, which ever yet
Dignified that highest Character. And, tho the alone Elective KING this day in
Europe, (if not in all the World) which is more the dissadvantage of His
Subjects, there being (for most part) a kind of Metempsychosed ROYAL GENIUS in
the continued Successions of an Ancient Race of Hereditary KINGS; The want of
which, with that wild Nemine Reclamante in their Diets (being the two great
Flaws in the Polish Government) have no doubt been ever yet the Grand
Obstacles, whereby that otherwise Magnanimous Nation has not long ere now born
a much greater Figure in the World. But this is none of our HERO'S fault; His
Loss it may be in several Instances, but especially in his being hereby, the
youngest Brother of all other KINGS. To whom else then should His Polish
MAJESTY repair, but to the Eldest of all these, and that is Your ROYAL SELF.
For Reckoning from KING FERGUS the First, of the longest Race of an hundred and
eleven KINGS, Your Royal PROGENITORS, in a Reign of two thousand and fifteen
years: The Primogeniture of the whole Worlds MONARCHS,, is the indisputable
Right of the Sacred Imperial MAJESTY of Great BRITAIN, whom, that Heaven may
still Protect! as it has ever yet done; with Miracles and Wonders: for the
Glory of God, and the Good of his Church, in this Queen of Islands, and all
other Your MAJESTY'S Dominions; for the great lasting Ornament of the eldest
ROYAL BROTHERHOOD of all other KINGS; for the Ballancing the Affairs of
CHRISTENDOM; for the glorious Defense of the true Christian Faith; and the
Encouragement of all other Christian KINGS and PRINCES, to a generous and just
Charity, and brave Resolution of uniting their joint and firmly Combined
Forces, against the Common, Sworn, Insidel ENEMIES of our most holy RELIGION:
shall be ever the constant, standing, or kneeling Prayer, of the least and
unworthiest of all other

Your MAJESTY'S Most Humble and most Obedient Servants and Subjects, ALEX.
TYLER.

A LETTER to his GRACE, WILLIAM DUKE OF QUEENSBERRY, MARQUIS of
Drumfreis-shire; EARL of Drumlanerick, and Sanqubar; VICE-COUNT of Nith,
Tortherwald, and Ross; LORD Douglas of Kinmonth, Middlebie, and Dornock; His
MAJESTY'S High COMMISSIONER for His Ancient KINGDOM of SCOTLAND; Lord High
THESAURER of the said KINGDOM; one of the MEMBERS of His MAJESTY'S PRIVY
COUNCIL of both KINGDOMS.
May it please your GRACE,
BEside the Succession of a great many Durkes, Regents, KINGS, (I range them in
the order of their own History) and the entire Reigns of the two preceding
KINGS of Poland, JOHN CASIMIR and MICHAEL KORIBVT WIESNOWITZKI, the voluntary
Resignation of the Polish Crown, by the former, and the great Hazard of its and
that fierce and undaunted Nations, being well near made Tributary to the
Ottoman Turbant by the timorous precipitation of the latter and a light touch
of the Government, Laws, Politys, and Customs of that great People, sprinkled
all along this little small Work; the manner of their Diets or Parliaments, the
Splendid and Pompous way of Election of their KINGS, where each Waywood,
Palatine, and Castellan, (for these are the Titles of their Peers and Senators)
appear equipped like as many EMPERORS, having every one a Retinue so August, so
Numerous, so High, and yet so Orderly, as tho they were all severally
Triumphant CAESAR'S, who, when once assembled to the number oftentimes of some
hundred thousands, all gallantly appointed, and richly and strongly Armed: The
Diet sits; or rather stands, in that Field (for most part near Warsaw their
Capital City) called Kolw; for no House in the World could suffice to contain!
And I doubt if many Cities could well accommodat, beside the own Inhabitants,
such prodigiously-vast Swarms of Men of all Ranks, all at once. I say, beside
all this, your GRACE has offered you in these Sheets, the Life and Actions
(from his Cradle, near to this day) of one of the Greatest and Bravest KINGS
(except the IMPERIAL MAJESTY of Great Britain alone, whom GOD still preserve
and bless) second to none else that CHRISTENDOM or the whole World dare
challenge this day, or peradventure yet ever could own. His Descent of the most
Illustrious and Noble Families of his Country; His Education; the stepps of
his Advancement; His being made Crown-General; His Exploits while in that
Trust, during the Reigns of two KINGS, His immediate Predecessors; His rare
Virtues, for which GOD has Anointed him with the Oil of Gladness above his
Fellows; His Election, and mounting up to Polands Throne; His many Battles
fought with all the disadvantages of Number, Strength, and oftentimes Place,
and other Circumstances; where Triumph still Pearch'd upon his victorious
Ensigns: and of all these the Place, the year of God, the day of the Month,
the very time of the day, wherein he has so oftentimes made Christendom
glorious and brave, and happy; while Infiaels fell in Piles, and fled in
Throngs, from the Lightning of his Brandished Sword, and the Thunder of his
Guns and Artillery. The whole Ottoman Force and Greatness trembling at his very
Name, being confounded, and cast into the Convulsion Fitts, and shrunk into the
cold Cramps of Terror, and Amazement, at the Storm and Tempest of so
Irresistible and Prodigious a Valor. I consess I had never attempted this
great Subject! if I had not had then a yet far more great and glorious and
nearer one in my Eye, and that is the Memoires of the present Imperial MAJESTY
of GREAT BRITAIN. I have therefore made this light Essay upon the youngest, to
prepare my self for the just and due Praises of the eldest, the greatest of
KINGS and to tone up this poor Pen into a Trumpet, whose shriller Echo may be
heard at once at Land and Sea, which can never be Theaters of that dimension,
as to suffice to determine the vast indefinite space of his boundless Glory.
BRITAIN being for the Great JAMES in all men's Opinion a lesser Spott, then
Macedon was for ALEXANDER. It is both the Interest, the Safety, the Happiness,
and the great Honor, and I hope the Joy of the whole Subjects of his
Dominions, that they serve the Wisest, the Valiantest, the most Just and
Generous, most Noble and Glorious PRINCE in the World. And its the great
Encouragment of all good Subjects in this his most Ancient Kingdom, that your
Grace is now here His MAJESTY's High COMMISSIONER for this present PARLIAMENT,
your being sprung from the great Ancient and Illustrious DOUGLAS, a NAME and
FAMILY which in Camp or Court, in the Trophies and Prowesses of Valor and
Loyalty, may justly vie Titles with any other (excepting KINGS) in the
Universe, as well as your GRACES own Signal Proofs of a Zealous Service to your
Royal Master, and a just Regard to the greatest Good and Honor of this
KINGDOM, fills all Expectations with so bigg a Confidence of the Welfare and
Happiness both of CHURCH and STATE, as in all Beliefs is past Doubt. That these
Thoughts and Wishes of all Honest and Loyal Hearts, and your GRACES pious and
noble Endeavors that way may be thus Answered, is the Humble and Hearty Prayer
of

Your GRACES Least, Lowest and Unworthiest Servant, ALEX. TYLER.

A LETTER To the Right HONORABLE JAMES EARL OF PERTH, LORD DRUMMOND, and
STOBHALL, etc. LORD High CHANCELLOR OF SCOTLAND.
My LORD,
WHile your admirable Progress in all the Parts of Universal Learning, beside
all the other great Excellencies, and rare Qualifications, whereof you are the
happy Possessor (near almost to the Adoration of all that know you,) Attracts
all Eyes to Behold and Gaze, all Hearts to Love and Admire, and all Pens (like
the Needle to the North) to point to your Lordship, as they had been
magnetically touched caught, or ho knight in, with the beautiful Charms of those
brave radiant Virtues, which at once Endears and Astonishes Mankind. And while
all those vast Cataracts of Knowledge, large Channels, deep Rivers, and fluent
Streams of others, run into that Sea of Wisdom and Worth, that they may be
absorpt in those its sweet Waters: It were unnatural! if my little half dry
purling Brook, should not endeavor to Glide on to the same O^ean. These are My
Lord (not to speak of your Honors) some of the Signalizing Marks, whereby you
make so distinguishing a Figure in the World. But your Lordship being so true
and zealous a Son of the CHURCH, is the Seal of all! and makes the whole Clergy
of BRITAIN your hearty Well-wishers and Admirers; And if the least and
unworthyest of all these may be named amongst the rest, So is

Your LORDSHIPS Humble and Entirely Devouted Servant. ALEX. TYLER.

TO THE READER.
WHen the Prodigious Valor and matchless Conduct, of the most August, Heroic,
and Mighty KING of Poland, had at once Astonished, Rejoiced, and obliged the
whole Christian World, in that so opportune a Relief of Besieged Vienna: Although
I had then seen no more but a Landscape of the City, and the Encampment of the
Turks, in an expanded Sheet Printed at Cullen, and Reprinted at London in
1683. Yet the desires of a very Noble Lord, whose undeserved favors to my self
(beside Assistances in Works of this Nature) which make all such import
Commands unto me; together with my own Native Inclinations, not to be
altogether wanting in those just Returns of Praise and Wonder, which all
Christians, if not all Mankind, ow so vast a Merit, prevailed so far with me,
as to write (but what was never meant for public view while alone) about some
dozen Stanza's to that purpose. Which, tho inconsiderable and little as it was,
bearing the name of the Siege and Battle of Vienna, with another no less short
then it, entitled the Tempest, meant only for the Remembrance of those with my
self, who had all of us together at that time run the same Hazard, most
unexpectedly, and beside my knowledge slipped into the Press: whence issuing with
mo Errata, then Lines, as is commonly incident to surreptitious Emissions, I
thereupon resolved (whenever I should obtain a more full Account of the Life
and Actions of this Invincible PRINCE) to pay His MAJESTY in mo Lines some
small part of those vast Acknowledgments, wherein the whole Christian World
stands so deeply indebted to his Glory. And having been still Restless in the
Inquest (tho in vain) ever since, until at last some seven Weeks hence (I mean
before my having first Writ those ensuing Sheets) by the Intervention of some
Persons of Honor, I had it under the name of SCANDERBEG Redivivus, done by
H.G. an Englishman, as I suppose, whose Historical Account in Prose this Song
(such as it is) has exactly followed, to which are annexed the forenamed small
Poems, without any other alteration, save the Estates of the Printer amended. I
can assure my Reader aforehand! there is nothing in all this Piece to recommend
it but the Excellency of a Noble and Mighty Subject, coarsely enough managed;
and a great many harsh Names scarcely Versify'd; And it may be not a few
Tri-crambiat Rolling Lines, (for expressing the Emphasis of a Conceit) not as
yet much used. The Truth is, the Picture of this great PRINCE in its own Native
Lineaments is so Radiant, so Dazzling a Beauty, that its Luster needs more
Shadow, then Enlight'ning: And methinks its genuine Charms and spakling Graces,
would have been either more hid, or marred, by any (at least the best of mine)
Artificial Colourishing. And therefore, the so Loud so Amazing Veri^ies of the
plain; but just Narration, has all along eased, because it so vastly
surmounted my low Fancy. Nevertheless, thou have it (if thou please) as well at
least as I ever have yet had it if thou can not have Liking of, nor at will
be Reconciled with it, I Am somewhat Indifferent; for it will Court thee but
just as much as thou did it! And is it cannot procure a Celtation of Arms, at
least let it plead a fair Quarter it such time as then shall find in thy Heart
to oblige the World, and it, and. me, with a better. But is nothing else may
prevent ae deadly Bite; or obtain a Minutes Reprieve from thy Ruthless Jaws; yet
ere thou entirely devour this poor Morsel! Respite but a little till we have
once more heard from above the POLES. Till when, Farewell.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have but one Word more, If thou please to carp at the se^eral Letters
directed to so many Persons of Quality, thou may say on, I Will regard it no
more, but by telling thee I could not in good manners, while I had written of
one great KING, accompanied with so many Armies, and as it were still in Camp,
have dedicated the same to a far greater, and placed his MAJESTY (who has been
so conversant with Camps, Battles, and Navies,) all alone, without supposing
some Retinue of a Court for his Attendants, and beside, thou needs not much
weary thy self in the Reading more of them then thou lists, or if all, not to
quarrel the length, while thou have often seen and read many single Dedications
of greater extent.

MEMOIRES, OF THE LIFE and ACTIONS of the most Invincible and Heroic IHON The
THIRD, present KING OF POLAND.
GReat God of Praise! Inspire this Song of Praise!
That with the loudest Ela's it may raise;
On massy Pillars of Immortal, Fame,
The 'ternal Eccho's of this Hero's Name:
That as his Sword's the glory of this Age;
Some Angel-pen of more seraphick Rage,
May Trumpet his Atchievments 'bove the Sky,
And Sing his Glory to an Extazy.
And as his Deeds might animat all Words,
Even so our Verse may more inflame his. Swords.
Kindle an Emulation, Lord inspire
His Sword, this Pen, with Counterbent Desire,
Who Fights most Battles, and who Writes most Praise,
Who freshest Trophies; who wears greenest Bays:
That he never cease to Fight, Rout, Conquer, Kill.
Nor I to Sing, while Insidels have Breath, or Blood to Spill.
Great SOBIETZKI cut their Graves, their Epitaphs this Quilla
Introduction to, and Seasonableness of these Memoires.
WHen the whole World of men in Christendom,
The Eastern Church of Greece, Western of Rome,
The Orthodox, Reformed, purer Church,
And all their several Sects lay at the Lurch:
(An't would not scandalize this reverend Throng,
To mention monstrous Mushroms in their Song,)
The Excrements of Christian Names and Things,
Who'd rather hang and damn, that Pray for Kings.
With Eyes that spoke suspense twixt Hope and Fear,
And Hearts that trembled, as if Doomsday were
At hand; with tingling Ears, as the last sound
Of the loud Trump of God did them confound.
With Faces stern'd to paleness, as a stone is,
Lest Turks like Hills and Mountains fall upon us.
When like some Torrent, or a Tempest pent,
Or Thunder pregnant Cloud without a vent,
Or blustering Winds, and vap'rous Breaths, and Fumes,
Might stretch Earths biggest Womb or burst its Gums,
All jointly met in some straight narrow Cavern:
Like Bottles burst in Coffee-House, or Tavern,
Or like the Legion lodged all in one Man.
So the vast Troops and swarms of the Ottoman
Empire, which might have bid the World one Day,
Invested Vien straight around it lay:
Big swollen with Expectation to obtain
All Germany beside in that Campaign.
Then like a mighty Angel sent from Heaven,
Or like those Cherubims to Eden given,
With Flaming Sword to fence the Tree of Life,
Great SOBIETZKIS Hand cuts off the Strife.
MOst Glorious Prince! no sooner was this done,
Then this poor Pen had paid thy Prowess On'e,
And vowed another larger Tribute Song.
If H. G's Memoires do thee no wrong;
I Will from thy Craddle Trace thy matchless Story,
And spread the Dazzling Wonders of thy Glory.
My distance from thy Court, Camp, Sight, defyes
The least Suspicion of Flatterys:
And thy Atchievments Which surmount the Poles
Impossibilitats all Hyperboles.
I Sing the Polar Star, whose Light out-shines
The Turkish Creseents in their highest Primes.
Except those fixed in Scriptures Zodiac Line,
This Northern Stars, great Light does far outshine,
All others in the Firmament of Fame;
As Candles do Gleams, or as the Sun a Flame.
Darkning with Dazzling Rays of brightest Glory,
Those lesser Twinklers set in former story.
Forcing the Crescent Moon into a Wane;
Nearest Divine stands this Immortal Man,
While Viens Walls, and Camien's Plains retain
Leopolds, Cochmi's Fields, and the Vkrain,
In purpling Die of slaughtered Turks red Gore,
Hang Glorious Trophies, never matched before.
SOme for their Prudence, some for Courage high,
Some's Wariness, and som's Celerity,
Some for their Conduct, some for Execution,
Some for their success, some for Resolution,
While singly but possessed; have cropped the Fame
Of Prowess, reaching them a Hero's Name.
What shall the World devise, for that vast Merit,
Which does all those in fullest strength inherit.
Prodigious Valor matched with equal Skill,
Council with Conduct, Arts to Save and Kill,
Command, Dispatch, and all at such a rate,
As Heaven still smiles him the victorious Fate.
When aftertimes shall Read his Period,
They Will cry Hosanna's to this Demi-god.
REproach of all the Worlds old Ancestry,
This present ages blessed Felicity:
All Mankinds Glory, Soldiers Admiration,
All Christians Joy, all Generals Imitation,
Illustrious Ornament of all that Reign,
Men's Christians, Soldiers, Captains, Generals King.
Great Wonder, Doubt, Envy, of times to come;
Of all which most he will share before the Doom,
Shall be a Riddle unresolved by all the World and Rome.
PRodigious Actions, admiration breeds,
Wonder breeds Doubt, Doubt with Suspicion Reads.
So that whoever this Hero's History
Shall undertake, but hence one Century,
Their Truths may hap to be suspect'd Romance, or flattery.
But against all such Pigmy Thoughts and Doubts
Of Dwars't beliefs, our answers short and stout.
We publish Wonders done in this same Age,
Scarce one year gone upon the public Stage,
And the loud Theater of Christendom;
Appealing all the World a live to come,
Or dare disprove one Ace of what we say,
We and what is ours, shall be their proofs just Prey.
WE here defy the trembling, Ottoman,
Whose Crescent Moon's Eclipsd, put in the wane,
By this bright Northern Star, whose just Renown,
Over Christendom and all the world is slown:
And cannot be lessened by malicious Mouths,
Without opposing clear notorious Truths,
Affording matter to all Tongues, all Pens,
Out-bidding Retricks Fumes, and Poems streams.
Talk, Love, and Wonder, and Astonishment,
From all that Ttust in Christ is but just Rent,
Not half the Tribute to the many Ties
Of Gratitude, wherewith he is more than thrice,
Obliged all Christian Hearts to's admiration:
In chasing from their Bounds the Barbrous Nation,
Whose stern Incursions like (Impetuous Floods,)
Had laid, the German Empire in the Suds,
If not Repelled by him; no Christian State,
Or Kingdom could have promised this days Date.
All which Deliverance (next to God alone)
All these do owe the Arms of Poles great IHON,
Third of that Name, in their long List of KINGS,
Who has achieved such wondrous, glorious things:
As may excite all owning Christian Name;
To pay just Praises to's Immortal Fame.
Which whosoever shall grudge in envys mood,
Is guilty of most base Ingratitude,
To God himself, and all men that are Good.
Heavens Powers to us are three ways notifi'd,
And in all these should God be glorified,
In's Word; in's Works; and in his mighty Wonders;
Which all not Fool, or Mad, or Atheist ponders
Or shuts their eyes to see no Sun; their ears to hear no Thunders.
IF God himself should not be honored than,
In all his Gifts instilled in this great MAN,
And's VVondrous Feats, achieved by Divine Aid:
'T might Atheism, and Blasphemy be said.
Twixt Non-confession, and denying Gods
Goodness and Power, there is but a slender-odds:
Be it then known to all the World abroad,
He that Lauds SOBIETZKI praifes God.
AND as all love to see that happy Hand;
Has Raped them from the Flames, or Sword, or Strand,
And as sweet fruits delicious Liquorish taste,
To know the Tree makes our Impatience haste.
Even so the shade of his most prosperous Arms,
Which next to God, from barbarous Turkish Harms,
Has given Repose to every Christian Nation;
Attracts all Ears to hear the just Relation
Of the great Actions of his former Story,
And's present dazzling, all the old Worlds Glory.
And as no Crabb-tree yields desired Fruits;
As goodly Branches grow from stronger Roots;
As Healine-streams never flow from Common-springs;
So each Parental-stock's not fit for KINGS.
To understand what blessed Heaven-born Pair,
Did yield to Christendom this Tutelar:
And trace the Progress of his younger Years;
Those signal Services; whereby he Wears,
And did deserve ere ever he wore a Crown;
As well by Sword, as by his Pen and Gown
That Sovereign Power which in all Kingdoms else,
By Natures Gift the firstborn Males befalls
Amongst the Poles it is much otherwise,
Or Virtues Guerdon, or Happs chance in Choice.
Transcendent Merit, here often bears the Van,
Where Hanours Temple's reached throw Viriues Fane.
Chap. I. Being an Account of his Descent, of the Noble Family of the
SOBIETZKI, and the Parents of this Illustrious Prince, with his Education.
THE ancient Poles old Mistress City gave,
Title to SOBIETZKIS, and the brave
James SOBIESK Castellan of Cracow,
Father of elder Mark, and this IHON too;
A person whose great parts were even and patt,
For Court, or Camp, or great Affairs of State;
Having often signalized his Noble Spirit,
In all Efforts distinguished by his Merit.
1621.
In twenty one he had the great, Employ,
Not of a Chiaux; or a less Envoy.
Unto the Port, but as Ambassador,
Plenipotentiar, with amplest Power
From the Poles Crown; to Treat upon a Peace,
Which by his Prudence, Wisdom, and Address,
Concluded on most honorable Terms
Of Peace, 'twixt Poles, and Sultan, osmans Arms.
Remarkable on many brave occasion,
And faithful Service, after done his Nation;
In 1646.
forty six, so far outgone the Poles
He, left his Body, went to dwell with Souls.
And she that bare Victorious SOBIETZKI,
Was Daughter of Stanzlaus ZOLTIEUSKI;
Grand Chanc'lor, and Grand General of the Crown,
Great by his Birth, Place, Prowess, and Renown.
Who gave the Turks Deaths Wounds, and Sorrow,
While he bravely Fought it at, Cicora.
It was upon the nineteenth of September,
A Day which all the Turks may yet Remember:
It Was done upon the Worlds great public Stage
The twenti'th year of this same present age.
And tho upon next Months second Day!
Five times attacqu't by fresh Recruits, they say;
Which he five times as gallantly Repelled,
And maugre their huge Number's stood the Field:
Till by redoubled Multitudes and Throngs,
And furious Crowds a-fresh, for five Days long;
The valiant Poles, being shrunk into a few
Handful, that handful, wounded weari'd too,
Gave way to Fate, the fifth Day of the Battle.
Whilst like, a mighty Bull, among Droves of Cattle,
Their General brave who knew not how to fly;
But stand, or chase, or conquer, kill, or die,
Having wrought Wonders with his single Hand;
And throw Red-seas of Blood, made shoals to Land:
Thick throngs of Horse still pressing on a-main,
Crowded him Dead with Infidels! not overcome, tho slain.
Thus fell Brave ZOLTIEUSKI, of his Age
Full sev'nty three? Poles joy, and Turkish rage.
LEaving this gallant Grandchild, by his Daughter,
of all has been, of all that shall come after,
Inheritor of greater, broader Glory,
The Illustrious Theme of this our present Story.
He was no elder! but a younger Brother;
And yet his greenest years could never smother,
The blooming Buds o's high Heroic growth.
To cultivat this Nobiy Toward Youth,
His joyful Parents spared no Cost nor Care,
Allowed him Education, suiting's fair
Both Birth and Hopes: and's brave Celerity,
Made quick Returns of great Proficiency.
An innat Magnanimity of Spirit,
Polisht with natural and acquired Merit,
Soon told his Fathers hopes the aboding Story,
He should surmount all is. Ancestors in Glory.
With all the Learned Languages acquainted,
(For Pole with Breath of Roman Ghost's so haunted,
That Latin Tongue the Lingue of old Romes Slaves,
'S as frequent there as Dutch, or Poles, or Sclaves.)
And having Mastered all the Learning, Skill;
Which Polands Education could instill:
And Read at home in Words all Foreign Places;
He longs to mark their Manners, see their Faces.
THat as the keen, brisk, forward, active Be,
Tho Garden, Orchard, where it dwells still be,
Enameled with a great variety,
Of Flowers, and Blossoms which Sight, Smell, and Taste,
And Touch, may n't's Eyes, Legs, and Proboscis Feast:
Flies on a-pace over Fields, among Woods does Roam,
And back from Weeds and barren Heath comes home,
Fraught with that matter that makes Bees, Honey, and wondrous Comb.
So our great SOBIETZKI does advance,
With His elder Brother Mark and comes to France.
(Which valiant Mark, the Turks thereafter flew,
At the unlucky Rout of wretch'd Betow.)
During his stay at Paris, he often plied
All manly exercise, and still outvy'd,
In the Academys fencing, and Menage,
His Equals and those 'bove his years in age.
And not withstanding of his younger years,
His manly mien and prudence him endears,
To all that Merit knew, and the highest sort
Of primest Quality in the French Court.
Eying his toward, stayed, high, Masc'line Spirit,
Did much Regard, esteem, admire his Merit.
Having acquired Wits, Valors, Courtships, Charms.
In this great School of Europes Arts and Arms;
Next went to Italy observed Rome;
And all the finest parts of Chrisiendom;
Their Manners, Interests, Laws, and Politys;
Where their great Strengths, Defects, and Weakness lys
Intanglements, Obligements, and in fine
Their Courts, their Camps, and Warlike Discipline.
The distance of strong Holds, their Situations,
Manner of March, Fights, and Fortifications.
All the Remark, to speak it in a word,
Which Travels unto Princes can afford.
ANd having all the while stored up a Treasure,
Of solid worth, which might with equal measure,
Of Stock, and Strength, become the lasting Base,
Of that huge Fame which does the World amaze:
Already formed in his great active Mind,
Which still his Countries Glory had designed;
With winged speed, to give those mighty parts
Nature gave him improv'n with Thought and Arts,
To's Kings and Countries Service posteth home;
Where when arrived, as soon employed as come.
At Court, and Camp, by then KING CASIMIR:
Who did his Wit and Valor so admire,
That for's great Specimens of Sword, and Gown,
He made him first August 24. 1665.
Grand Master of the Crown,
And next 1667.
Grand General of the force of Pole;
And then Grand-master of the Kings Household.
And to sum up his Honors in a Line,
Of ancient Cracow made great PALATINE.
GReat was, the worth, of this great Subjects Spirit,
As great his Princes Knowledge of his merit.
Which on the several turns of great affairs,
And Traverses of Providence appears,
Clear in the sequel of the ensuing Story,
No Honor's great like SOBIETZKIS Glory.
Yet for our Readers better apprehension,
Of these Preferments, which we will needs often mention;
And other Passages, which needs we must,
Often name, to make this Story clear, and just;
Its fit he should. succinctly hear the whole
Past Government, and History of Pole.
Where let him not expect our numbers Terse,
In Things and Names will scarcely fold to Verse;
And in all such here in the general,
Take naked Truth, for fancy, wit, and all.
Chap. II. The Kingdom of POLAND Described, with its Laws and Customs, with a
brief Deduction of the State thereof, for some hundreds of years past.
POLAND is said, from Pole to take its Name,
Or Poln, which in Sclaves Tongue is just the same:
And in that Di'lect which those Countries grace,
Does signify a Plain, or Field for Chase;
Because this Kingdom is a vast Campaign,
Composed of level Woods for Hunting Plain.
But Polish Orichovius denis,
This Derivation, and does thus advise:
That first Polachia this Land was Termed,
From Lachus their first King, or Leader armed.
Both may be true? because both may agree;
Natives and Readers take your Choice for me.
WHich e're of either of these two be true?
This mighty Kingdom in the bulk, its now,
Having great Litwan's Dukedom now annex't;
And other Provinces, may number next,
The largest Kingdoms Europe's Continent
Contains: for breadth, and length, of that extent
From forty eight, to fifty sev'nth degree,
Of Latitude. Its Longitude count we;
From thirty eight, to sixty, and perchance
A greater Continent by far then France.
Muscovie, and the petty Tartars east,
The Baltic Sea, and Germany the west,
Do bound it: but the great Carpathian Mountains,
And Ister Europes greatest Child of Fountains,
Divide it on the South from Hungary;
From Transylvania, and Moldavie.
Upon the North, Livonia of Sweden;
And some good part of Muscovie again.
Poland is blessed with a fruitful Soil,
And purest Air breathed from the Woods recoil.
Furs, Honey, Wax, Buff-hides, and other Skins,
Huge Masts for Ships, Timber, and other things
For Building: Flax, Potashes, and all Grain
In great abundance yields, which drives great gain
To Dantzick. Gentry with Nobility,
Are here Magnifick, bold, and brave, and free
And most Tenacious of their Liberty.
But all the Peasants, and the common Rout,
Are as mere slaves, as they were bought throughout:
Their Lives are valued as we prize a Neat,
The Tennent killed, his Lord receives the Rate,
No Inquest's for the Blood, this being pay't.
ANd not with standing that the Reformation,
Beamed here its Light, first from the German Nation;
Yet Ignorance, and want of public Care,
For Lopping, of wild Tenants, here not rare,
Extravagant Opinions did promote
Mong Citizens, and among the Rabble Rout
Socinus 'bove them all did here take foot.
The Catechism of Cracow proves this,
Their other Books being derived from this.
But that which here is established by the Laws,
Is the great daring Roman-Cath'lick-Cause.
Their Language is Sclavonian Dialect,
Tho most of them do, also Latin speak.
This only Kingdom's elective alone,
Of all that are this Day in Europe known.
Under which Term we mean not to include,
The Empire, which can never be understood
A Monarchy; but rath'r a Septarch-head.
And tho the Danish Crown Elective were,
For many ages, till, the sixtieth year
Of this same age! when Denmarks King thought fit,
To cause that Kingdoms Senate alter it.
His Majesty Hereditar Writes ay,
Himself of Denmark, as of Norway.
IT is the common undisputed Thought,
That the first people that to Poland sought,
Were Huns, and Slavons, ( Orichovius says)
Who came from Macedon and thereaways.
(Their vulgar Language which they daily speak
Retaining yet some Relish of the Greek.)
And that from thence they having driven the Swevi,
And other People, and Goths, a mighty Covey;
Possessed that huge vast Tract of champaign Land,
Even to the Elb: from River vistul's Strand.
When Lechus, or else Lachus, at the last
Became their Chief, and as their Leader past.
About our LORDS three hundred fiftieth year,
Commenced the Monarchy of Poland here.
From whom fourteen are reck'ned to Micislas
First Christian Duke, matched Daughter, of BOLESLAS
Duke of Bohem: the sev'nt day he was Wife't
Of March in year nine hundred sixty fifth.
Upon which Match Micislas Christian made,
His Son Boleslas for Successor had:
In year of Grace nine hundred ninety nine,
The sixteent Duke which came of Lachus Line;
Who while the Emperor OTHO, of that name
The Third, to visit Tomb of Albort came;
(Whom barbarous hands of Prussia had slain,)
Was creat KING by the Emperor amain.
To whom another Micislas succeed,
Father of Cazimir, the first we Read.
The second Boleslas succeed him,
Sirnam'd the cruel, like a Devils Limb,
He murdered Stanzlaw Bishop of Cracow:
For punishment Whereof, Pole losed now
Its title of a Kingdom, being swayed;
By several Princes Regents for long Tide.
Till under Primislaus, it again
The former Kingdoms Title did Regain.
Which was if Poles chranology belive't,
1295.
In year of God two hundred ninety fifth.
Next Primislaus, the third Ladislas,
Who after four years past expelled was;
And Vinceslaus chosen in his stead,
Ladislas five years re-established.
To whom succeeded Casimir the Great,
Of whom brave things their Histories relate.
The Hungarian Monarch LEWIS next chosen KING,
Two Daughters left after his Death and Reign:
The younger whereof being declared Queen,
Married Jagellon great Duke Litwin, Lithuania

Who tho a Pagan Prince before had been,
On this his Match Baptized turned Christian King.
And was accepted by the Polish State,
On this condition that his Duchy great,
He should to Polands Kingdom ever annex.
This was in year 1386.
three hundred eighty six,
At's Christ'ning took the name of Ladislas,
Two of which name his next Successors was.
Then Cazimir the fourth, then Ihon Albert,
Next Alexander, he dead, in his part,
Came Sigismunds, the first, and second too,
Which last left Crown and Life without Issue.
In year of Grace five hundred seventy two,
The Polanders chose Henry Duke Anjow;
The second son of Henry King of France,
Who after two years Reign did home advance:
(His Brother Charles the ninth then Childless dead)
This quit his Crown Elective, and in'ts stead,
Took up the Crown of fair and puissant France,
Now falling to him by Inheritance.
I write the just words of my Authors Text,
Puts this in year 1576.
five hundred seventy sixth.
AFter the Recess of this last named Prince,
The Poles next Diet were not of one sense.
One Party named for KING, Stephen Bathor,
The Transylvanian prince; as many more,
The Austrian Archduke Maximilian.
Which 'twixt those Princes open War began;
But Stephens Valor with the Victory,
Obtained the Crown who Issueless did dye.
In year of Christ 1586.
five hundred eighty sixth.
Then Sigismund the third succeeded next,
(Son to the King of Sweden, named Ihon,)
Being chose to fit on Polands mighty Throne.
Soon after which, the Father Ihon deceast,
Did Sigismund with his Native Crown, invest.
This Sigismund now King of Pole and Swed;
Had by his Mother secretly been bred,
In Popish Tenants: (And all this was done
Without least Inkling of his Father Ihon
As Zealous Protestant as any one.
On whose Election, unto Polands Crown,
He Protestant suspect'd! not Popish known;
And Romes Religion still obtaining there,
To satisfy the Poles he did declare:
That he for ever would maintain and own
The Roman Catholic Religion.
This made the wary Swedes, still Lutheran,
Desire conditions that he should maintain
Their Protestant Religion as't then was:
And let no Popish Innovations pass.
But some few Churches by his sufferance,
Or sloth not known; some Places of Defense,
Had Popish Priests, and Catholic Commanders.
Which made those stiff and jealous Swedenlanders,
Suspect this Sigismund of Male-intent;
And then Revolt; at last with joint consent,
Charles third son of Gustave Errickson,
His Uncl's lift up to the Swedish Throne.
HEnce came those Strifes and Fends, and Wars amain,
'Twixt Polands Kingdom, and the Crown of Sweden.
For Sigismund did prosecute his Claim,
And Charles maintaind's Election by the same.
Which Strise 'twixt Uncle, and Nephew did not die,
But did descend to both's Posterity.
Just in the year 1632
six hundred thirty two,
Died sigismund, succeeded Ladislow;
His eldest son, who died in 1648
forty eight:
Whose brother Cazimir had next that Right:
By Choice, who after twenty years of Reign;
The Polish Crown did willingly resign.
Michael Coribut Wiesnowitski
Came next; and now this glorious SOBIETSKI.
Who for his Countries Honor, Safety, Crown,
Has done, yet does; such deeds of loud Renown.
Made them so great and glorious in each thing,
As moved each Polish heart to choice him King.
REader! I hope thou'l pardon this Deduction,
Plain as it is, was meant for thy Instruction,
And understanding things expressed of Course,
Which needs we must recount in this Discourse.
Nor cannot be needless you should also hear,
That KINGS of POLAND still Elective are.
Marvel with me! how comes't their Sovereign power,
So much restrained; should yet so long endure.
Or how Poles Princes straight bound up with Fetters,
Their Royal Hands so Chained with Words and Letters,
Should sway a Scepter, or a Sword should shake;
To Rule, or ' Fend their People: while one Sneak,
Or Waspish Fellow in their Parliament,
Tho the least Nuntio? shall dissassent,
In any point of greatest Importance,
Be it the Kingdoms Ruin, or Defense:
The KING himself, and the whole Polish Diet,
Must leav't undone, and sculk away in quiet.
Some Authors talk; but whether lie or troth;
I shall not say, that Polands Kings take Oath;
Not only to Govern conform to the Laws,
And Constitutions, Statutes, Customs: Cause
OF the Kingdom, to maintain the several Rights
And Privilege of all their Orders right;
And not to mince the Kingdoms Revenue:
But that there is yet in the Oath a Clause more blew,
In case the King should rule in otherwise.
Absolving People from Obedience Ties.
I shall not here my doubts again renew,
Tho unto me this seems more strange than true.
That Fundamental Law of Germany,
Called Aurea Bulla, cannot compared be
With this: for not to name the many things,
Wherein the Emp'rors case is wide of Kings.
In Pole the Electors every one by one,
Are several pieces of a State that is one;
All private men, Subjects, at most, at best.
But in the Empire this may well be pressed?
Where each Elector's Prince of Sovereign State;
And cannot yoke his Power at other rate.
Its then a Fancy, or is it be ought true;
Its but of yesterday, and late, and new.
For in th'authentick form of the old Oath,
Of Polish KINGS, which Orichovius has!
There is not the least mention made of this.
HOw e're it be? without Oath, true it is
(That by their ancient Constitutions known,
Their KING can nothing great perform alone,
Without consent of the whole Estates in one.
In making War, or in contracting Peace,
Levying of Taxes, or in Crown Lands- Lease,
Nor any important affair of State:
But by the joint advice of full Senate.
Yet as the stern stout Poles Nobility,
Have such strong Holds of Soveraignity.
So they assume and still pretend each one,
At least presume, (or formerly have done)
Unto themselves a more transcendent Power,
Then they would allow to King or Emperor.
In all their Seigniories, as accords,
They do behave themselves like abs'lute Lords.
This Kingdoms Palatinats thirty four
Or Governments, each of whom all is over
His own Castellans, which of Cities are
Captains or Governors in Peace and War:
Of whom in Poland, if we have counted even:
There are in all much about eighty seven.
Of Grand Ecclesiastics, they have two
Archbishops GNESNA, and of Le'pold too:
Of old a third at RIGA also had,
Until that City sell unto the Swed.
This Gnesna is prime Senator of State,
Who when the KING shall die, without debate,
He has the chief manage of great Affairs,
During the Interreign though it were for Years;
And Issues Warrants for the States to come,
To the Election of a new Prince; whom
When Chose: the Oath administers to him,
And sets upon his Head, Poles Diadem.
All their most important Affairs are done,
Determined and advised, resolved on
In Diets or in Parliaments alone.
Which Parliaments or Diets thus are held,
Being summoned by the King, and thus they are called:
To Prelates, Palatines the KING does send,
By's Chanc'lor Letters of Instruction penned:
Which mentions all his Majesty thinks sitting,
To be proposed; then 'points their time of Meeting.
Which Letters had; each Senator alone,
Considers the Design they drive upon,
The Consequences, Qualities, and Natures
Of those Affairs proposed in the KINGS Letters:
The very same, and of that full extent,
The KING'S to offer to's next PARLIAMENT.
Concerning all, each Freeman of his Vote,
Has a full Liberty, o's yea; or not;
Just as he pleases, or he is in Mood,
For private Interest, or public good.
Beside all these! the KING does Letters send
Into each Pa'atinate, to be kend,
When the Nobility are all to meet.
That every Province then may have its Leet,
And Representatives they may be chose,
Who here are always called LAND-NUNTIOS.
For which effect Convention's held in all,
And every County, which they LANDT-JAG call:
Six Weeks before the Session of the Diet,
Here one Commissioned from the KING stands by it.
Who in each LANDT-JAG publicly declares,
All less and more the KINGS proposed Affairs,
To be debated, in next Parliament.
Which having thought upon with full intent,
They choice their Members, with Instructions clad,
(All which exactly must be followed)
In ref'rence to the Kings proposed Desires;
And freedom to propound what e're their Countries good requires.
THis distinct Body of LAND-NUNTIOS,
Although the Senat's greater men then those?
Tho lesser these, then those in Dignity;
Yet equal to them, in Authority;
Is Balance to the Senate, to control.
Those Grandees, if the KING should them cajole,
With Words, or Promises, or Bounteous Deeds,
To break their Arms, or bow their Hearts, or Heads,
Or with Corrupting Gold, to blind their Eyes,
And jeopard all their Countries Liberties.
Wherefore they always pick out for that Trust
Persons, sufficient, sober, wise, and just.
Of all which Qualities they have much need;
For in the Diet if on any head,
There happen but one single Dissentor
Whither't be Nuntio? or Senator?
Stiffly persisting; his alone Protest,
On that Point, makes that nothing can concluded by the rest.
Who tho they all should vote it over, and or'e't
Ones Nic-poz-waliam carrys all afore't.
Wherefore all their Determinations made,
In Vote unanimous, or as they have it,
Nemine Reclamante't may be said.
Besides these Palatinats spoke of now,
The Cities DANTZICK, VILNA, and CRACOW,
Each have the Priv'ledge of their Deputy:
Who have their Seats among the Nobility.
But common Matters are dispatched and sped,
By Judges in each Province stablished;
And Burgraves of each Town and City, where
The meanest Peasant if he lists may hear,
And know all done, for no Impediment,
's made there, where all sorts may themselves present.
From Salt Pits, Copper-Mines, and those of Lead,
And silver, the KINGS Revenues are had.
The KING all Prelates, and all Dignities,
All Officers of War, and of Justise,
Of the Exchequer, and of Policy,
Does nominat anew, when these do or transgress, or die.
The highest Honors in Poles Kingdom known,
Are the Grands Marshal, Genral of the Crown,
Grands Master of Kings Household, Chancellor,
These does the KING dispose, and several more.
A LETTER TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The EARL of STRATHMORE and KINGHORN,
Vice-Count LION, Lord GLAMES, etc. One of the Lords of His Imperial MAJESTY'S
most Honorable Privy COUNCIL and EXCHEQUER.
Upon his Lordships having been the Occasion of the Authors first Writing, and
then Supplying the Materials unto the little small Canto of the SIEGE of
VIENNA, which was also the Occasion of these MEMOIRES of the KING of Poland,
and his Lordships Encouragement of the Author to proceed, when he had the first
view of some of the ensaing Sheets then Imperfect.
MY LORD,
KINNETTLS, where I have now lived these Fifteen Years past, being in your
Lordships Vicinage, and in view of the Smoke of the Chimneys of your Ancient
and Magnifick House of GLAMES, having beside the many other Favors unworthily
enough cast away on me; obliged my not being unfrequently with your Lordship,
and your Noble Family there, when I was ofterr honored to be bid see your
Lordship at your other lesser, but pleasanter House of CASILE-LYON some Ten
Miles distant thence. I confess I was herein wanting to my Day and my Self,
that I had not seen your Lordship there before the beginning of October 1683,
when all the Earth rung the Praise of the Victorious KING of Pole. I remember
that after a very orderly Supper, (for further Entertainmet of your Lordships
Guests then and there,) we had a very fine and harmonious Consort of Vocal
Music, and of the great variety of melodious Airs, that of ARMIDA being
frequently called for, and still applauded by your Lordship, and all the
Hearers, your Lordship wished that the Relies of Besieged VIENNA might be
composed to that Tone, how soon soever its more exact Relation came to this
KINGDOM. Which upon that same condition I then underlook. And accordingly (in
less then a Month the reasrer) at my next having the honor to see your
Lordship at GLAMES, I was presented with a Description of the Encampment of the
Turks, and Relief of VIENNA, done at COLEN, and Reprinted at LONDON in the year
1683, all in one great Sheet. And being so put to it (especially to a Person of
so much Honor and Ingenuity) to make good a Promise, which at that time I
remembere'd much better then the forenamed Air. To perform what I had said, I
sent your Lordship timely next Morrow the said Description, done in such bad
Verse, as may be expected from a Man, thar because he thinks none of his best
Compasures worth the favor of another first sight, so he but seldom
vouchsafes himself the trouble, nor them the regard, of a second Thought, being
almost sick and weary of them ere ever they are well or ill done out. This
little song emituled the Siege and Battle of VIENNA, with some other Scriblings
of mine in several Copies, especially the Tempest, having fallen into the Hands
of some others of my Friends, and by frequent Tramsmissions, at last stolen
into the Press; whence they skip't so uggly with Errata, that returning again
to my view, tho a good time before as far out of my Thought as they had been
removed from my Custody. I was thereupon induced to resolve upon an entire
Account of that Great and Heroic MONAROH his LIFE, in a larger and longer
Paem, how soon I could come by any perfect. Notice thereof. I need not tell
your Loraship who it was that procured, me the first sight of the Memoris of
H.G. My Acknowledgements in that being indebted primarly to your SELF, and the
much Accomplished MASTER of KINAIRD. Your Noble eldest Son, my Lord GLAMES, who
may well Ornament a great Family, peradventure a Country, some short time
thereaster enquiring for the view of another Piece, supposed to have been once
in my Custady! That I might stave off his Importunity, I was enforced to show
him (and both your Lordship saw them first of all others) six or seven Sheets
of the yet imperfect Memoirs of the KING of Pole.The undeserved Approhation
which your Lordships then, and others afterward have been pleased to vouchsafe
them, have encouraged them to look out abroad into the World in such plain Garb
as they are: being destitute for most part of these loud and light flourishes
which are seen and expected in Poesy. Lest the Selidity and Imporiance of so
great so true a History, should have dwindled into the Fantastic Scenes and
Appearances of Romance. And now, My Lord, when these and other your accustomed
Kindnesses to me, and the usage of the World in such cases, require I should
expatiat in your downright, how much deserved soever Commendation to your
face: Tho the Antiquity of your Noble Family, the Honors, Offices, and Public
Trusts of severals of your brave Ancestry, as well as those in your own person,
those HERO's that have both Imbellish't and fully Answered the generous Name of
LION, those excellent Qualifications I know you to possess, having my self seen
and read several excellent Pieces (tho Modesty will not allow your Lordship
their Owning) and these on different Subjects, all of your own Composure. Your
excellent Contrivances in Architecture, in Gard'ning, Planting,
Houshold-furniture, nay hewing out Goodly Rooms out of Walls of a Rockie
Firmness and Massiness; The great 0rder in all these things, and the Decorum
both without and within your Houses, of your Table, in your Service, and every
where. Your Lordship has all these, and which is more then all this at once,
the Best of Noble Ladies, and the Hopefullest and most promising Posterity of
both Sexes, to make you Happy! and Wisdom and Virtue enough to make you Good.
All these do so praise themselves, that I cannot praise you for them: But I
very freely will do so, in allowing your Lordship the Justice of that
Testimony, that I think you Fear GOD, Honor the King, and Love the Church, and
area Friend of Good Men, and much more then he ever deserved: kind and
favorable unto

Your LORDSHIPS Most humble and obliged Servant, ALEX. TYLER

Chap. III. The Marriage of SOBIETSIKI, and his advancement to the Charges of
GrandMarshal, and General of the Crown: wherein occasionally is given an
account of the Reign of King Casimir, and the manner of his resigning the Crown.
Just like young Lion, newly sucked warm Gore,
Does Room, and Range, and for more Prey does roar.
Bristles his shaggy Mane, his horrid Eyes,
Sparkling fresh Beams of Courage, which defyes
All other Beasts to look him in the Face;
He frisks his Scepter-tail, and with a Grace
Moves through wild Woods; with pride sets down his Pan's;
Those Swords, which to his Underlings give Laws.
And while he Stops and stamps, and stares around,
Espyes a Lioness, some little slound
Of distance from him, by her Shape and Gate
He knows her: And his former Rage forget,
He Courts and Wooes this lovely Female Mate.
Even so great SOBIETZKI, who began,
His earliest Youth to Arms; ere he was Man!
Rustling in bristled Fields, Fights, Battles, Wars;
Wounds Dangers, Deaths, which hearts of Cowards scarrs,
Bellona's dearest Darling was, this greatest Son of Mars.
Yet tho his Eyes, all Fire; his Eyes, all Rays;
Of Generous Courage, which all Turks affrayes;
His March, all Terror; and his Name, all Fame;
His Fight, all Death; his Sword, all Wounds and Flame;
His Shock, all Lightning; and his Rour, all Thunder;
And least things he has, done, be all great Wonder;
Tho all his Hands, were Arms; his Breast, all steel;
It lodged a Heart which Capids Charms must feel.
And there was reason why it should be said
That SOBIETSKI did not live a Maid
Fate did foresee, he would been mistaken than,
For some great Mighty Angel! not a Man,
And lest some Critics in Chronology,
Should backward, forward, with a busy eye
Review the Periods of Destiny.
Turning each Page, each Leaf, of its great Book,
From the last Casar, to the first that took
The Assyrdan Empire: and among all those Names,
That vexed the World, to reap their hoarser Fames;
Scarce base enough, for his high raisd loud sound.
Then some inspired Prophet, forward bound,
Should pore and plodd; and having read still on;
All names of Importance, until the Doom;
Should amongst all that excelled, or shall excel,
See Love and Arms in all their Hearts to dwell.
Then looking back to his great Period,
Should take him for some Heaven-born Armed GOD,
For's Virtues, Valors, higher pitch, than, humane foot yet trod.
ANd searing aftertimes Idolatry,
Should raise this Polar Star 'bove Starry Sky
Beyond the Blessed Mother Maid next Holy Trinity.
Fate gave consent thus far to 'bate his Glory,
That Love and Arms should interweave his Story.
And that the World mi^^t know this Heroes mind,
Transcends all Hero's, in Degree, not Kind;
Those Nobler Passions in his Soul still rests,
Valor, Amor, Inmates to Generous Breasts.
Beside all these! Nature did supplicat,
And thus petitioned the Powers of Fate.
That seeing Poles great SUN should never Eclipse!
(While men have Eyes, Ears, Hands, Pens, Tongues, Mouths,
But Set; 'twere Blasphemy to say, should Die, Lips,
Lest Heaven should dark in that Obscurity.
And since stern Fate had doomed him but's one day,
That it is great Light leave some Illustrious Ray.
This was decreed. Nor was it our Hero's least
Part of his Prowess, that he made Conquest
Of that so rich, so fair, so high, a JEMM:
As the brave Heart of MADAM ARQUIEM.
For Beauty, Bounty, Birth, Wealth, highest sort:
Great Ornament of all the Polish Court.
His goodly Personsge, and graceful Mien,
And sparkling Variues, making these to shine,
Ten thousahd loving Beams, and Rays and Charms
Transfixed her Heart! shot from this SUN of ARMS.
But being Polands QUEEN'S chief Made of Honor,
Her Majesty had highest thought, and care, and eye upon HER,
And in the absence of great SOBIETZKI,
Proposed HER for a Match, to Prince ZOMOTSKI.
One of the greatest Palatines of Pole.
The LADY yet all young, sweet, bashful whole,
Blushing to own her former Preingagement,
Tho unto SOBIESK had Marriage meant.
So that while her first Lover was far thence,
Her QUEEN prevailed to match her to that PRINCE.
BUt He not living long! at liberty,
To choice her first, and best choice, SOBIETZKI
Brought him a Beauty, more advanced and blown,
A Dowry vast, beside what was her own.
Provision. Heaven this Blessed Couple gave
Fine hopeful Children, 'bove the rest the brave
PRINCE ALEXANDER, he of whom anon
We Will have occasion to make mention.
He having signalized himself for worth,
And told the World, he means to follow forth
The gallant footsteps of his Fathers Glory;
And prove's apparent Heir! in Wars loud Story.
THe twenty fourth of August sixty five,
KING CAS'MIR did to SOBIETZKI give,
The Office of Grand General of the Crown:
In the exiled Lubomirskis Room.
Discharged because of his Rebellion,
In heading those that were Confederats known
A wretched party which did much annoy
The Poles, and near that Kingdom did destroy.
Of which Rebellions progress, and foundation,
Its fit we here should give some brief Narration.
IN the AEras 1648
forty eight of this same Section;
Was CASMIRS to Polands Crowns Election.
Who by his HOLINESS great Dispensation,
Married a Lady of the fine French Nation:
But Widow of his Brother Ladislaus
And's Predecessor; who for Frances Cause
And Interest, was enterprizing ever;
Still meddling with the State; did much endeavor,
(A French Successor slily to promote,
Which amongst other Causes, yet is thought
Much of this Kingdoms sorrows to have wrought.
And yet its first Calamities arose,
From an Invasion made by foreign Foes.
Charles Gustavus, Warlike KING of Sweden,
About the fifth year after five times ten. 1655

And in the sev'nth of CASIMIRS own Reign,
As much excited by their Feuds old sting,
(of Polands KINGS pretentions to his Crown,
As by a martial temper of his own)
By Ragietzki's motion spurred on.
This Ragietzki, Poles Vice Chancellor
Had matched a Lady of all beauties Flower,
Whom CASIMIR did Court for his Amor.
Which Ragietzki smelling at the last,
Conveyed away his fairest Wife in haste:
(Dreading the KINGS Assaults might stormed the Fort)
TO a Manor House, and far from Courts resort.
The KING incensed! to be thus deprived,
Of her fair Sight, by which his pleasure lived,
Under Pretense of Services (in short)
His Office owed commands him back to Court.
Of Cabaling accused after soon,
Against the State with En'mys of the Crown.
And notwithstanding stiffest opposition
Made by the ARCHBISHOP GNESNA in's tuition,
Condemned to forefault both his Goods, and Place;
Exiled from his KINGS and Countries face.
Whereat the Kindred of this Nobteman,
Aloud to murmr presently began:
And thousand others did not stick to say,
That this Procedure was the readiest way,
To violate the Honor, Dignity,
And Priv'ledge of the whole Nobility,
All quite undone in this abused man.
From which day forward most of them were draw'n
To dis-affect the KING. Whilst not in vain,
Grieved Ragietzki shelter seeks in Sweden.
Where, he at length spreads out his Grievance Cause,
Unto its valiant KING, Charles Gustaus.
Who listens to it, with attentive ear,
Then which he could no sweeter Music hear;
Then Weaknesses of Pole discovered,
And Discontents amongst its Grandees spread.
This Exile, all that Wit, and Vengeance bears,
Recounts; then speaks the rest, in Sighs, and Tears.
JUst like late blustering Gale, on Sea, or Plain,
Puffed near a ( alm! but with new Drifts of Rain
Far more incensed, it rustleth yet the more,
With Gusts and Blasts more vi'lent then before
Grows Storm, then Tempest, which aloud does roar.
Straight fills the Sea with Waves, Deaths, Drownings, Wracks,
Tall Trees stocks up, and strongest Castles shakes.
It mingleth Heaven with Earth, and Night with Day,
And what stands loose, or light or weak, it cleanly sweeps away.
So Ragietskis plaintful Moans, Tales, Tears,
Such strong Impressions on the Swedes soul bears:
That notwithstanding a depending Peace,
'Twixt Swed, and Polish Crowns; whose signed Leace.
Had long to expire, with dreadful Armies came
Charles, entering Poland, like some Hurrican,
He forced his Passage, and with small ado,
Seizes their chiefest Cities, old Cracow,
And Warsaw: owned by most and best of the whole
Great Palatines and chiefest Lords of Pole.
And like some Whirlwind whisking all around,
Licking the very Dust from of the Ground:
Never stinted till he would overrun the whole,
Towns, Cities, Castles, Provinces of Pole.
Even as that man whose House is all on Flames,
Half sindg'd, scapes forth from Fury of its Gleams,
Being driven on with Fire, Sparks, Smoke, and Wind,
Never turns his face for fear nor looks behind:
Till got without its reach! he calmly spys,
That Smoke which did menace his Breath, those Sparks which dared his Eyes.
Sees Throngs, and Crowds, who made as if they meant,
To quench the fierce devouring Element.
But more attentive! knows those Enemies,
First laid the Train, feeding, the Flame when it dies:
And all his Neighbors busied with the toil,
For one poor drop of Water brought, rav'ning ten loads of spoil.
Till having recollect'd his Spirits, and Friends,
To quench the Fires fierce Rage, and quell those Fiends
The ravenous Harpys beats, and routs, and then home empty sends.
THe bold KING CASIMIR was forced to fly
To the utmost Borders of the Vkranie.
Just so pursued with Vengeance, Sword, and Fire,
His Friends forsake him and his Guards retire.
Being deserted left almost alone,
Even when his routed Hopes were almost gone,
And all that knew him, knew him for undone.
All the strong Holds, and Cities in his Land,
Came by prevailing Force, to Charles his Hand.
Only the City Dantzick still held out,
Persisting Loyal for its King most stout.
Which Gustave seeing he could not come by,
By Gold, nor open Force, nor Jeopardy:
Despairing therefore e're to conquer it,
His Soldiers bloody Cruelties commit,
And barbarous Spoils, and horrid Villanys.
Which made the Poles repent with watery eyes,
(Such unadvised rashness all bemoan,
That for a Foraign Master quits their own:)
Astonished at the Swedish Tyranny,
So soon commenced in 'ts early Infancy.
What Havoc, Massacre, what day of Doom?
Might Poles expect from Charles in CAS'MIRS Room.
On to other hand, Dantzicks brave constancy,
Does shame them to their wonted loyalty.
These forced the Poles Gustavus to forsake,
Who to their Duty, and their KING, come back.
THey seek him, in his utmost Frontiers fled,
Promising, if his MAJESTY'l make Head,
Against his own, and now their Enemy;
They Will expiat their late Disloyalty:
Renewed with Oaths, by all that Honor bounds,
To Seal their Faith, in Swedish blood and wounds.
LIke one new fred from Prison, loosed from Rack,
Pardoned for Life, or rescued from a Wrack:
Even so KING CASIMIR rejoiced to see,
Himself once more in some Capacity,
To Dispute's, Crown and Kingdom with that hand,
Had nearby left him, scarce one Pole of Land.
And lest their forwardness for fight should yield,
Or faint! Amidst their eagerness takes field.
Where in a trice! old Fortune turns her face,
And Poles stern Valor, puts the Sweds to chase.
Worsted! and Routed! quite in many a Battle,
They flee, and die, like droves of Sheep or Cattle.
And as one Mischief falls upon another,
Like Waves succeeding Waves, so ills together
Befall the Great, the Small, the Prince, the Beggar.
Whilst Sweds are routed! Poles have sacked their Leaguer;
Just at that very time, the Dane Invades
Gustavus Kingdom, routs and kills his Sweds:
So he that but just now for Conquest's come,
Must quit's new Victories, and hasten home,
Has much ado to hold, maintain his own,
While gaping, to have grasped his Neighbors Crown.
ANd as a Leech, new sucked a teeming fill,
of Blood, falls off, but does more grossly spill,
That swelling draught, which leisurly before
It sipp't and drunk, most quickly Spues that Gore
So CHARLES his Conquests great, and sudden, fast,
More so his losses. Nothing vi'lent lasts.
And Casimir, no sooner vanquished
The Swed, when quickly re-established,
In's own Dominions to chastize the CZAR.
Who'd given the Swed his Aid in this late War,
His valiant Poles march on successfully:
With Fire and Sword harrassing Muscovie,
Where Is Mighty Victories soon turned the Chess,
Obliged the Muscovites to sue for Peace.
WArs Tempest overblown succeeds calm Peace,
Which did renew both Courts and Countries face.
Yet like one from a Fever newly fred,
Fond of Recov'ry; and too grossly fed;
To please wild Appetite, (as't often haps)
The Patient's threatened with a worse Relapse.
Even so King CASIMIR, these grand Affairs
Having Composed so well, next bends his Cares,
To please a fondness in his French-born-Queen.
(Both He and She having yet Childless been,
And like to be so still) did move the State,
A Successor in's life to nominate.
The Queen most eagerly strove to advance,
Because born there the Interest of France:
Sparing no Cost, not Care, to have this done,
In favors of the only living Son.
(O'th Prince of Condee, who was Duke D'Engwin,
Designed to Match the Niece of the said Queen
Born of her Sister Princess Palatine.
NOr were French Pistols wanting to dispose,
The whole Court-Party to advance that choice.
Which much incensed other Noble Peers,
And near once more set Poland by the Ears,
In opposition to the Queens design,
Many great Persons jointly did combine
Of all whom Lubomirski was the Chief,
A mighty Party joined to their Relief:
In this Rebellicus Consorts and Commates,
Naming themselves Polands Confederates.
But after several Traverses of War,
Treaties of Peace, to heal this Rending Jarr
'Twixt both: The Rebels to their Homes are forced,
And Lubomirski's Party's put to worst.
Being deserted o's Confederats,
To Breslaw in Silesia retreats,
His place Grand Marshall was taken fro'm,
And SOBIETSKI 'stablish'd in that Room.
The Rebel Lubomirski hence was driven,
In Januar sixty six, or sixty seven.
And of a Palsy shortly after's dead,
Who with late Ague Pole's State shaken had.
SOon after this Crown-General Potoski,
Dying 't fell to the share of SOBIETZKI
As has been said ere while; tho most oppose,
Alleging two such mighty Trusts as those,
Of Marshal, General, to, and by one,
Could not be well conferred, nor rightly done.
And would have had the last of those we.name,
To Prince Demetrius, great by Worth and Fame.
But Casimir, Poles, wise and, generous Prince,
Foreseeing's late shook KINGDOMS Exigence:
Required no less then Peerless SOBIETSKI,
In Council prompt, in matchless Valor Brisk ay.
FOr as when Head or Heart of any Wight,
Affect'd with Malady grown to some hight:
The Eyes look pale, and dull, and languishing,
The Pulse beats saint, unev'n, like slack'ned String,
Of Lute, or Viol; Hands, Feet Fingers, Toes,
And the extreme parts which from the. Body grows,
Refuse that Duty, which of right to Head and Heart allows.
Even so the Cossacks, Poles remoter parts
Inhabiting, when hearing Jarrs and Thwarts
'Twixt Prince, and Peers; resolve to take their time,
Of Courts Vertigo's still Rebellions prime.
Joining the Tartars, promised Turks Aid,
Poles Frontiers with great Spoils forthwith invade.
And in their Insurrections furious Maza,
They seize the strong Town known by name PODHAYS.
And in the Month, which does preceed September,
Flocked up from all Resort the strong RUSS-LEMBER.
THese COSSACKS are a compound mingled Rout?
Of many Nations, hardy, fierce, and stout:
The gross whereof, are Polish Peasants, who
TO avoid the slavery of the Tyrant Po-
- lish Noblemen; forsaking Pole, as Cain
Did SETH withdrew so to the UKRAIN.
A Province near the Turks and Tartars placed,
With all things sit for Humane Life well graced.
Being all Greeks as to Religion,
Having a Select PATRIARCH of their own,
Residing at the great and strong, and mighty,
Fenced with Art and Nature KIOFF'S City.
Acknowledging themselves in gross and whole,
Liege-men and Subjects to the KING of Pole:
Serving his Majesty, in's Wars (they say)
Against the Infidels still without Pay,
In Arms are born, bred, live, and die these mighty men of Prey.
This Armed State for their Security,
Partly, and part for Poles Nobility,
They keep. These Nobles they do still despite,
And these with mutual hatred them requite:
They for their Freedom! against Poles Lords still Rage;
These would reduce them, to their Vassalage.
So that 'twixt mutual Fears, Hopes, Spoils, and Harms,
The one against the other frequently take Arms.
Against which Cossacks.with fierce Tartars joined,
Great General SOBIETZKI is enjoined
To march. Who by their dreadful numerous swarms
Reduced to greatest Straits this Son of Arms.
For while h' has scarce once seen, descried and found'em,
They with most thick Batallions quite surround him.
Amidst which pinching Push and Jeopardy,
No Council's left! save either do, or die.
THen like some Lion, roused from his Den,
With Noise of Hounds, and Huntsmens voice a main:
Great SOBIETZKI startled once! next animats his men.
'ANd thus Accosts them! Valiant Native Poles!
'My fellow Soldiers, Can your fearless Souls!
'Whose glorious Arms late quelled the Roaming Swed,
'And chased him from our Bounds, and home him sped;
'Can all those Trophies! numerous as your feet,
'Late trampling down the Marshie Muscovite,
'Giving that proud and mighty Knez the Chase,
'And bending back the War to Mosco's face,
'Forcing him to our KING to sue for Peace.
'Those dreadful Swords, which did at once give Laws,
'To the Great Czar, and Warlike stout Gusta'us.
'And Lubomirski, and's Confederates als ye!
'Fought, vanquished, routed, frighted in a Palsy.
'But those you will say were Strangers, or Piastis!
'And what is this Raff, and Mungrel Race of Mastives!
'But the vile Scumm of Polish Slaves; a Rabble
'Of coarsest Dregs of all God drove from Babel.
'Shall we who'd well near given! snatched back Poles Crowns!
'And of two crowned Heads, cropped such Renowns!
'Be faced; and crowded, to our Beards, with such Rafscalion Clowns.
'Up! up! March on! Charge! Fight! what needs more words:
'Let's force, and cut, this Victory, with our Swords.
THen, as a Flash of Lightning rends a Cloud!
Next killing Thunder comes, which roars aloud!
Then plump and suden Rain, like that which made No's Flood
Just so their Swords, Shout, Shot, and Shock, rains Seas of Cossacks Blood.
When in a trice, or twinkling of an Eye,
Thousands of Rebels bleed, full, spraul, and die;
By numerous Heaps, vast Swarms, and hideous Shoals,
With little loss, or none, to the Gallant Poles.
Thus having quit himself of pinching.strait,
He forced the Rebels first to Beg; then Treat
A Peace most Honorable for Polands Crown:
Whose terms are in the following Words set down.
1. ANd first, as to the Tartars there should be,
For all in this late War, an Amnestie,
Until that Casimir, great Polands KING,
The Purport of this Treaty should once Sign.
2. And next, if after Differences arise!
They should not Arm in any kind of ways
But strive to reconcile't by their Envoys.
3. The Sultan Galga, promised in the name,
Of his own Master Tartarys great Cham,
To be an Enemy to all and whole,
Such as should War against the Crown of Pole,
With all his Force to Aid, when e're required,
Being of Poles with yearly Pension hired.
And for so doing Hostages to give,
Until the States assembling them relieve,
By Moneys raised for their Redemption,
And Tartars present Satisfaction.
4. And in the fourth place, that the. Tartar Cham,
Nor any else of his, or in his Name,
In Vkrain should Quarter any Forces,
Neither of Infantry, Dragoons, nor Horses:
Nor any other part of Poles Dominion,
Without the KINGS consent, and full Opinion.
5. If any Forraigners in this Campaign
Who served the Cham, should pole invade again:
Of their own Head, or others Mal-direction;
That Cham give them no aid! nor yet Protections
6. That Prisoners on both sides be released.
And with restored Liberty be graced.
That Sultan Galgas Force, nor Spoil, Kill, Burn,
Nor least Disorders act, in their Return.
WIth Doroskensko General of the Coss-
- acks, SOBIETZKI's Treaty did run thus.
1. THat all the Rebels fighting in late War done,
Living, or, Dead, should have a.general Pardon.
2. That from the KING of Poland, and none other,
Cossacks protection seek. And as their Brother!
Each Pole amongst them's own Estate enjoy,
Quiet, as theirs among Poles, none should annoy.
3. Zaporaniski's Army straight may sen'd,
Their Deputs which on Polands States may tend.
No Forces from his Majesty be sent,
TO their Towns or Cities, but in Fields, or Tent.
4. Bialacieurkis Governor's commanded,
Not to disturb the Cossacks now disbanded.
It Is true! and none dare offer to deny,
That the Grand Marischal SOBIETSKY,
Had done ere now such store of mighty Deeds,
As any Pen e're wrote, or Story reads:
Rend'ring him worthy in the strictest Rigor,
Amongst greatest Hero's the most glorious Figure.
Yet this so eminent, as it alone,
Might have entitled him unto that Crown;
Which now with so much glory is his own.
For in this Juncture of the Poles Affairs;
Pond'ring his Conduct, Foresight, Prudent Cares,
Whereby he did prevent, divert, and crush,
These pressing ills, and dangers; and made hush
With glorious Trophies, advantageous Treaty,
The stern stout cossacks, and fierce Tartars petty.
Conserving still the Honor of the Crown.
And Kingdoms Peace restoring whole and sound.
Nothing could been more pait, deserved more prase,
Nor wreath triumphant Head with greener Bays.
But yet the wise, foreseeing GENERAL,
Knowing the Tartars in the General:
Of Carthaginian Faith, slaves to their Swords,
And Interests; but Masters of their words:
Had some no doubt, whose fingers itch'd (among 'em)
For Spoil and Booty, chiefly when they throng home.
To mark their Motions, and resist their force,
Himself does, head some gallant Troops of Horse.
And ere they lest the bounds of ground that is Polish,
O'retook them near the Town called Jarnipolis.
When finding of them there a strong Detachment,
Begun to plunder, all they could to catch meant:
Rambling abroad to Riffle, Spoil, and Pillage,
Heuses, and Manors, near the former Village.
WHen dreadful, sudden, like a Whirlwind;
Or GODS first wrath on Angels newly sinned;
Or like host running Metals newly molt,
Or like a falling Cloud, or Thunderbolt.
So SOBIETZKI falls on plundring Tartars,
Hewing by Heaps those Rissling Rogues, but Quarters.
Driving of those that sled, the nimblest Fellows,
Up to their fray'd main Body, or the Gallows.
MEan while the Polish Kingdoms general Diet,
On Februar twenty fourth to Cracow hyed.
Where the grand business of SUCCESSION,
Was sole Debate in States first session.
WHo published their thoughts, to this purport.
'That all those Diffrences which vexed the Court,
'Those Troubles which of late did Poland shake:
'Were only for soon meant Elections sake.
'Sprung from no other Cause, but an Endeavor,
'Of some would have Elections Rights to waver:
'In nominating, during's Life and Reign,
'A Successor to CASIMIR our KING.
'For which Abuses, quick, mature prevention!
'By these may all the World know our Intention,
'In this great Point. In case of Interreign,
'Should's Majesty (who long long live our KING)
'Depart the World! we all have Covenanted,
'And jointly greed, that nothing shall be wanted,
'In any Point, Order, or Right, or Custom,
'A Successsor with all those. Rites to Invest him,
'Us'd in Elections. Like as we will Resume,
'Of Sigismund the third, the old Diplome.
'Declaring, that in no wise we will.allow
'Any Election such as was meant now:
'Nor future, whilst his Majesty's on life.
'Declaring every Person, Man, or Wise,
'That. dares oppose this present. Declaration,
'The Enemies of Polands State and Nation.
'And further, its declared by the States,
'If Ministers of Foreign Potentates!
'Shall seek their Interests thus to advance,
'By such perverse Elections to enhance;
'That notwithstanding of all Nations Laws,
'We do declare! that then we shall have cause,
'To treat them as our Countries common Foes.
'And when so e're our King his life shall close,
'We shall according to that Obligation,
'We owe our selves, the State, the Crown, the Nation:
'Immediatly upon the news first inkling,
'Proceed forthwith to choice another KING.
'Without expecting universal Diet.
'Further declaring who so e're unquiet,
'Pragmatick.Man shall seek to force the Crown:
'As Poles chief enemy we will tread him down.
ANd thus that Party which designed Succession,
Was hushed by this Preceding Declaration.
And there was cause its thoughts be laid aside,
When in this Nick, its sole Engine, the Queen of Poland did.
WHich with the daily Cares. and Discontent,
Of that ill regulated Government:
And the perpetual Jarrs, and Wars, and Broils,
Court and State Factions, Tossings, and Turmoils,
Which CASIMIR so often had felt and found
Induced him for to resign the Crown.
That far from Noise, and Cares, and Griefs, and Strife,
He might solace himself with private life.
To which end, at next meeting of the State,
Presents this Paper of the following date.
'Twas by his Chanc'lor writ, given in, and done,
In year of sixty eight, the twelfth of June.
'MY Lords, you know, that it has long time been,
'During the life of his late Royal Queen,
'And Consort of most glorious Memory,
'But more since Death of her late Majesty;
'His Majesty's intenton to resign
'This Kingdoms Government. But for to bring
'His resolution into due effect,
'His Majesty did wait and still expect,
'The favor of a fit and due occasion,
'Enforced by the late Confederation;
'Those Wars and Battles which here, and abroad,
'Had with the Muscovite, and warlike Swede;
'As well as those Commotions at home,
'Pursu'd by many, tho stirred up by some.
'All which deferred his fixed Resolution,
'Until this time to have its Execution.
'Forasmuch as it was too much his fears,
'That during such dissorders of Affairs,
'The Commonwealth might been endangered,
'If then an Interregnum had been made.
'But now since by the goodness of great GOD,
'Peace dwells at home, and Truce is fixed abroad
'With Muscovite! his Majesty intends,
'With all convenient speed his Reign to end.
'To which intention several things disposed
'His Majesty; a Body indisposed,
'Dissabling him ought longer to support
'A Kingdoms burden, and a Courts Resort.
'His Conscience also craving some Retreat,
''Twixt's life's last end, and toytsome cares of State.
'But above all! regarding public peace,
'Which he prays still may Polands Kingdom grace.
'As well's to break the Malice of those men,
'Misrepresenting still what he does mean;
'Vexing the Commonwealth with Fears and Factions,
'And Jealousies of forcible Elections.
'He cannot but by his own most free dimissing,
'Give them this certain mark of Royal Blessing;
'By leaving the Republic to rejoice,
'In its full exercise of freest choice.
'For all which Reasons strong; his Majestys
'Fix'd Purpose is settled on good Advice,
'Into your hands My Lords for to Resign
'The Crown and be no more of Poland KING.
'And that without your Lordishps Counsel sought,
'And foreign Disswasives unto him brought;
'Without reflecting on what might be said!
'Of yours, or foreign Counsels, to dissuade
'His Majesty, from speediest execution,
'Of this so long, mature, firm Resolation.
'Nor has his Majesty together brought,
'Your Lordships, that your Counsels might be sought,
'Whither he should resign the Crown or not.
'Seing his meaning is not to submit,
'To the arbitriment of any Wit,
'His firm decreed Resolves! nor yet to hear
'Any Entreatys to the contrare.
'But only that your Lordships may advise,
'The manner, solemn Ceremony, guise
'O's Resignation, that it may be done
'With most advantage to the Polish Crown.
And greatest safety of the public Peace,
In the Inter-reigns or more or lesser space,
And that the greatest freedom may your next Election grace.
'ANd to the end his Majesty may do,
'What's requisite on his part unto you;
'For the attainment of the foresaid Ends,
'To put to shame those sly malicious Fiends:
'Whose lying Tongues put others in suspense,
'As tho the King ere while with foreign Prince,
'Transacted. He has shown himself inclined,
'So far to jump with the Republics mind,
'For free Election! he will not Recommend,
'Any one Candidat unto them kend.
'And to the end his Presence may not give,
'The least umbrage of doubt; he means to leave
'Warsaw! that next Election greater freedom have.
'Nor does his Majesty at all incline,
'To trouble the Republic at this time,
'On his own future Interests account:
'Not doubting the Republic will have don't,
'And that the States will see the same insert,
'Amidst Capitulations points apart;
'In their next Choice: for credit of the Nation,
'That their next KING after the RESIGNATION,
'Shall take due care, (without debate or strife)
'O's Maintenance, fixed to him during Life.
'And this is all, concerning's RESIGNATION,
'His MAJESTY to your Consideration,
'Was willing to propose: that you agree
'On such a way of it, as it may be
'As best becomes himself, safe unto all
' Concerns; fit for the States in general.
' Declaring he will Resign, next Diets meeting,
'Which he desires Your Lordships may think fitting,
'To be on first of August next to come,
'To the intent the Inter-reign be done,
'And next Election past ere Winter should come one.
PUrsuant to this Resolution fixed,
Upon the sixteenth of September next,
In Warsaws Castle met, Poles Commonweal:
To whom KING CASIMIR thus bids FAREWELL.
'Y Ou see My Lords at last that moment now,
'Wherein your KING, your Lord, your Father too,
'To consummat those dear affection't Cares,
'Which He and His, more then two hundred years
' By past, have had for this your Commonweal.
'Finding himself, his Strength of none avail,
'To undergo at once Age, Griess, and Cares,
'And the continual weight of great Affairs,
'Comes to Resign into your Hands the Crown,
'That Idol thing all Mortals doit upon.
'Behold the Pilogue of my public Story,
'This day you see the Fun'rals of my Glory.
'For henceforth to the World I am as Dead,
'And for a Royal Globe, shall in its sted!
'Choice a small Turff of Earth; wherein I may
'My last, but just, due Debts to Nature pay.
'Where, with the Publick-weals Benevolence!
'When this Soul leaves its Body without sense,
'My silent Dust may mingle it self with those,
'My Fathers Ashes, in a calm Repose.
'That in your future Annals't may be read
'Of Me, so often in your Armies Head
'Still seen the first! Retreating still last man;
'Am also first that voluntar'ly can,
'Deprive my self of all my former Grandeur,
'The glittering Ensigns of the Royal Power;
'Lo! from a Love toward my Country tender,
'Most cheerfully I here to you surrender.
'Your kindness, and free Votes, at my Election,
'I'le thus Requite with mutual affection:
'For as your Love advanced me on high,
'To the degree of Sovereign Majesty;
'So mine to you, dispoils my self of those!
'Leaving you free another King to choice.
'My Ancestors who long have been your Kings,
'When Natures last Law, Death, sealed up their Reigns.
'Left Sons, or Brethren, or some near of Blood,
'Whose Virtues, or Relation, you thought good
'To think upon at next Election.
'But I to testify my dear Affection,
'Unto the Public, all I Have got Resign!
'To whomsoever worthier to Reign.
'Unhappiest Times to tryst, it was my Fate!
'Which made the Sovereign Dignity, and State,
'(Wherewith you did lnvest me first.) Redouble,
'Not only to my self new endless Trouble,
'But given to others cause of jealous fear,
'Which for your sakes I struggled had to bear,
'I do desire you will pardon't to your KING,
'What e're was done amiss during my Reign.
'Impute my Errors (if a KING can faulty)
'Not to my malice, but to Humane frailty.
'And with my Successor, I's wished still well,
'More happy to himself, and the Common weal.
'Whereat! with much delight I shall rejoice,
'To see you blessed in most happy Choice.
'On which occasion, in my Solitude!
'I shall pray God the giver of all good,
'Your Votes with his enlightening Grace to lead.
'At present all the Thanks I can express,
'In kind Returns of all good offices,
'Of Love and Loyalty unto me shown,
'Those Counsels, Aids, you gave me of your own,
'All Subsidies, Tax, Levies, and Supply,
'You have so lib'rally afforded me.
'For these! my heartiest thanks are but your due,
'And thus, with all endearments, I take here my leave of you.
'Hoping! your kind Remembrances, my Story
'Will never fail to keep in memory.
'With which dear Sentiments, I give you all
'Paternal Benediction; great and small.
'Assuring you! how far so e're from Pole,
'This Body be removed! in Mind and Soul,
'Unto my dearest Country, it is be knitt,
'With all Affections that can Souls unite.
'And with extremest joy, shall hear it said,
'That Kingdom Flourish by another Swayed:
'Which under me, has sometimes more than once;
'Been at the Margin of Destructions.
'More I would said! But want of Memory;
'And this Assemblies grief, do hinder me:
'My Native Tenderness of Heart forbears,
'Further to speak the Rest but with my Tears.
THis most Pathetick Harrangue finished,
Whereat the whole Assembly Tears did shed.
King CASIMIR, did publicly Resign
Crown, Scepter, and all Ensigns of a King.
And in such private fashion, as effeirs,
A Nobleman, departed from the Peers.
How e're great SOBIETZKI General,
Under whose sole Command the men are all:
With all the other Nobles waited on him,
To his Apartment; as last-Honour done him.
Soon after which, the States in gratitude
His Honorable Maintenance conclude:
Whereof the States of Poland and of Life-
- land, gave this full Assurance o't for Life.
'WE, the Ecclesiastic States, and Civil,
'Inhabitants of Poland and of Lifl-
'-and met in Council! hereby Certify,
'All the whole World, and our Posterity;
'That by all means could be imagined,
'We have besought, and much endeavored,
'For to persuade IHON CASIMIR our KING,
'During his Lifetime to protract his Reign;
'And not Relinquish this our Polish Crown!
'Whereto himself, and his of great Renown,
''s long been our mighty Kings, called by Election,
'But seeing no Inducements could persuade
'His Majesty, to alter's purpose made,
'And that h' has freely rend'red to our Hand,
'Poles Kingdom, and great Dutchby of Lif-land.
'Together with their whole Dependencies,
'Crown Revenues, and Royal Dignities,
'The Royal Power, Prerogative, and Name,
'All which or He, or Polish Kings could claim.
'And we not knowing how to Let or Stint,
'Herein, his Majesty's most strong Intent.
'His Majesty, desiring we provide
'Convenient maintenance for his Life-tide:
'Which? Tho a Point, wherein we want the Advice,
'Of our whole Brethren in their Assemblies.
'Yet notwithstanding out of our Affection,
'To's Majesty, before the next Election:
'We have consented, and do all agree,
'That he have Thousands hundred and fifty
'Liv'res of yearly Pension, whereof,
'One hundred thousand to be paid off
'This Kingdom: and the fifty thousand more,
'For to be charged on the great Dutchys score.
'Forth of the Revenues of the Kings Table,
'These Sums at next Election fixed and stable,
'And then and there these Sums forementioned,
'Be in their minute payments specified.
'And that the Lords of Treasure of both Nation,
'Shall from the day o's Majesty's Resignation!
'Make an Allowance of the Pension said,
'Without the said specification had.
'And this we promise, having notifi'd
'In our Provincials, to get Ratified;
'And make provision to secure this Thing,
'By an Agreement with next following King.
'Further Agreeing! this Allowance from
'Dutchy of Lifland, and the same Kingdom,
'Shall during's Majesty's whole Life Remain,
'To be advanced wholly, fully, plain,
'Freely, entire, without Abatements, Fees,
'Or whatsomever else Gratuities.
Chap. IV. Of the Election of Prince Michael Koribut Wicksnowiski to the Crown
of Poland, and the Eminent Services of General SOBIETZKI, during his Reign.
KING CASIMIR, having as has been said,
The Government of Pole abandoned.
On sixteenth of September, sixty eight,
Gnesna's Archbishop, by his Office Right,
Applied himself during the Interreign,
To rule that State which now did want a KING.
And for a new Election, did think sitting,
Against next May to call the General Meeting.
To hold at Warsaw; whilst Poles Candidate
Each busied much to make his Party patt.
As namely the great Duke of Musco's Son,
Who had been bred in Poland, and was one
Who spoke that Language well, as prompt, as fast ay,
As any Noblest Polzki, or Piasti.
One whose behalf, the Duke his Father made
These Offers, which the others Power outbad!
That he should Change his Greek-Religion;
And take the Romanist Communion;
In's favors, to Renounce all Muscovie;
All Places taken from Pole, restored should be;
And that four Millions free-gift, this year,
He should advance for payment of the Arrear,
Of The Polish Army. Further promise made,
Poland against all its Enemies to Aid.
With Ready Force of Forty thousand men;
And enter in perpetual League with them.
The next was Newburgs Duke! To Duke Bavar
A Brother, whom the Emperor did favor.
The third Pretender was the Prince of Lorrain.
The fourth Duke D' Enguien Prince of Condees son:
Which last Gnesna, and General SOBIETZKAY
Were thought to favor, more then all the Restay.
THen as if many CAESAR'S, for the Nonce!
Had entered Rome, Triumphant all at once,
That She, the Worlds proud Mistress might display,
Her dazzling Grandeurs, at one Sight, one Day,
Even so Poles Grandees, Princes Palatine,
Each striving other to outstrip outshine,
(In Mays beginning of the sixty nine,)
In greatest Pomp, and Splendour did Resort,
To Warsaw, Poles chief Mistress Seat of Court:
In order to the proaching Election.
As Pole had meant to have it said and shown,
The least of all her Princes worth a Crown.
UPon the first of May, Duke Radzevil,
Great Litwanias General of the Field,
Did make his Entry with a stately Train,
Which in the following order marched amain.
Five Companies of Heyduques, first came on,
Consisting of an hundred in each one,
With flying Ensigns beating Drums each Fellow,
Clad in a large Blew Vest was lined with Yellow.
Next a Foot-Company of sixty men,
Clad so like Janizars that none could ken,
Their Yellow from the hue of Musslmen.
Next of Dragoons two Troops, whose Backs did grace,
Their fine- blew-Coats o're-laid with Silver-lace.
Then came a Troop of Gallant German Horse,
In richest Trappings neighing in their force.
As many Hussars after them, comes next
These! at some distance followed by sixth-
-y Gentlemen of primest Quality,
In Clothes so rich, that richer they defy;
And as their Horses scorned that Ground they trod,
Their Hands grasp't Lances of the Turkish mod.
Then came of Litwanias Field himsel
The General, Duke Michael Radzevel:
Followed by greatest Lords and primest Gentry,
Above two hundred of the Litwan Country.
All these equipped in splendidest Array,
In richest Harness their proud Horses bray:
Amongst whom were diverse of the Princes high,
Of the most ancient Nobility,
As Prince Slav'slans Lubomiriski,
The Lord Potoski. These were followed
At some good distance their Attendants made
A huge vast Number of brave Gentlemen.
In Richest Liv'ries, all their Servants then.
After whom marched of Tartarian Horse,
Two Troops, whose each, did count a hundreds force.
Then of Dragoons, five Troops marched on apace,
Clad in Blew Coats adorned with Silver Lace.
Of all which Train, like first, the last appear!
A Company of Heyduques brings the Rear.
THis Entry, tho the most Magnificent!
Those of the two Lords Pazzi far out-went;
In Afternoon of this same very day,
The one Grand Chanc'lour; the other, as they say,
Great General of Litwania.
Who entered Warsaw in most Royal wise,
Whose Numbers had Duke Radzevils told thrice,
ANd now more splendid far then both the same,
The Waywod of Cracovia also came,
Attended with a yet more numerous Train,
Which like some Armies made five thousand men.
ANd yet the more Illustrious third of May!
Eclipsed those Glories of its first seen day,
When General SOBIETZKIS numerous Train,
In goodliest Order covered all the Plain.
All Polands Princes, Waywoods, and each Peer,
Did him the honor, long ere he came near,
To meet him several Miles from Warsaws Gate;
Who as he Rode! he seemed to Sit in State;
And as he Sat! his Posture seemed to say;
He should ere long great Polands Scepter Snay:
And all those Palatines him Melt, should him obey.
He was by vastest Numbers followed,
Of Gentlemen and Officers that led.
And had a stately Band of Janizars,
Like those Grand Seignior uses in his Wars.
These for his Guard great SOBIETZKI had,
All in most sumptaous Habit Richly clad.
THe Diet set! the Nobles soon Elect,
Their Marshal; that is he who them should speak:
That is their Master Speaker, as we say!
This Marshal chosen was Lord Potoskay
Brother in Law to Prince Lubomirskay.
The Form of the Oath taken by the Senators, and Equestrian Order, before the
Election.
I Swear! that I am not at all already,
Nor yet hereafier shall! or will! or may be!
Engaged; or by Bond, or Writ, or Speaking,
To any Stranger in a Prince Electing.
That nor for Prejudice, nor for Affection,
I neither have nor will foment a Faction.
Nor enter into any Partys, Sides,
Nor be Corrupt by Gifts, Rewards, or Bribes,
Of any foreign Prince. And I will not
For any other Person give my Vote,
But such as I think fitt'st for Ministration,
And Government of this our State and Nation.
And if I ever formerly sithence!
Obliged my self to any foreign Prince,
Hereby I do Renunce every such Ty,
And Obligation, leaving his Party.
ANd then anon! to keep all persons quiet!
A Chamber was established by the Diet.
Or Justice Court! Composed of Senators,
Waywoods, and persons of selectest Honors;
Of all the several Provinces around,
Who should Cognosce Affairs concerned the Crown.
And with those great Dissorders should take Course,
Might daily happen by that great Concourse,
Of whch great Sovereign Court as its chief Head,
Grand General SOBIETZKI did Preside.
MEan while, the great Duchess of Muscovy,
Did much about this season chance to die.
Which seized that Duke with such Affliction,
As bred him thoughts of placing in his Room,
His Son: and so gave over all thohghts of Polands Crown.
SO that of all Poles Candidates before
There only now remained three of the four.
Namely that of the Prince of Condees Son,
The Duke of Newburgh, and the Prince Lorron.
Each busy for himself in huther puther,
Endeav'ring what they could to exclude the other.
Soon after which the Diet did exclude,
The Prince of Condees Name, and handled rude,
Archbishop Gnesna: calling him a Traitor,
Because they thought him Condees Sons Abettor;
And as he sat upon his lofty Bench,
Threatened him Death, for speaking for the French.
And some menaced the Marshal SOBIETZKI,
As being suspect'd of Favor for that party.
'Cause he the Marquis d' Arquiems Daughter had,
MARY La GRANGE a French Wife in his Bed.
Then twixt the Dukes of Newburg, and Lorrain,
Hot Competitions bandyed amain.
So that a Rupture was much feared, lest those
Contending Partys might have fallen to Blows.
Which to prevent! on the nineteenth of June.
The old Lord Opalinski Palatine
Calitz, did make an eloquent Oration!
Where in a long, and full, and true Narration
Recounted all the fatal Consequents,
Of such Contests in former Parliaments:
'WHere tends your Aims? my Lords, what is your pretenses;
'To be so passionat for two strange Princes:
'Either of which for ought that yet is known,
'May treat us ill when once he has got the Crown.
'Let Reason sway our Choice; passion's too hasty;
'Lay both aside for once! Name some Piasti.
'Of whose great Merits your Experience,
'Can tell you he deserves to be your Prince:
'And for my part! when I have thought upon it!
'I know none fitter Polands Throne to mount:
'Or more deserving Royal Dignity,
'Than Prince Michael Wiesnowisky.
WHich Name, with Acclamations was receiv't;
The whole Assembly Crying Vivat Vivat.
And the said Prince being then present there
Was forced to cover's Head, and take a Chair.
Which he with modesty did often deny;
Urging his utter Incapacity,
As Conscious to himself, he still had known,
Unfit to bear the weight of such a Crown.
But the Assembly to's Apologies,
Would yield no ear (tho Tears stood in his Eyes,
And much reluctance kyth'd in his Face)
Obliged him the Honor to embrace;
All giving in their Votes for this Piasti,
Except the alone forenam'd Grand Chanc'lour Patzi;
The primest person of all Litwanie,
Vowing he would not give his vote for any,
Save him alone whom once he named again,
Who's now the Emp'rors General Prince Lorrain.
BUt Patzis Brother, Palatine of Troski,
Thuston'd the Chanc'lors Note from of this Cross-key.
First showing him the Doubt, the Dread, the Dangers,
Of serving under Princes that are strangers.
And then Recounting all Convenients,
Of being, subject to a home-born Prince;
Persuaded him to lay all else aside,
And name some one Prince of his Countries side.
VVhereon he named, with voice both loud and shrill,
Another Prince Boguslaus Radzevill.
FOr whom! no sooner Named; the Name scarce heard!
When a strong Party for the Choice appeared.
Yet upon Competition, did prevail
Wiesnowitzki's Party! who did deal,
Some Blows, and Wounds, and Deaths, and in small space,
Killed two Gentlemen upon the place.
Here Blood, and Wounds, and Deaths, did drown their Noise,
Who spoke over boldly against Michaels Choice.
THings running thus, the Marshal SOBIETZKI,
Who with the Marshal of Nobility,
(Protesting against the Election) went aside.
Which the prevailing Party slighting, Cried
Unto the Primat Gnesna to Proclaim
The Election: who would fain delayed the same.
Pretending's Body was in bad Condition,
By reason of his Healths Indisposition.
But all in vain! They threaten by another,
The Bishop of Cajari Gnesna's Brother,
That Primates present Office to supply.
Which made the unwilling Gnesna forth with Hy,
With the two Marshals into Kolus Field,
Who for the Kingdoms Peace, at last did yield.
And then Archbishop Gnesna, as 'ts their Mode,
Demanded of them thrice with voice aloud:
That if they were agreed on the Election,
THey all should Jointly name the Chosen Person.
Which they as often with joined Shouts, each one,
Did Name with cheerful Acclamation.
And as an Echo of this hideous sound,
The Cannons all discharged did shake the ground.
This was about the Ev'nings eight a Clock,
The KING Proclaimed was. Ere nine was struck
They all to MARSAWS Castle him Conduct.
And next day, in the Church Christened, S. IHONS
Did take the Oath he should observe at once,
PACTA CONVENTA or ' Greements for the nonce
Concluded one. Then with the Primat Din't,
And after Dinner unto Kolu went,
That Field or Plain where late Election new,
Was held last day, some distance from Warsaw.
Returning's Thanks unto the several Princes,
The Palatines, and Nuntios, of Provinces.
Both Primat, and the Marshal SOBIETZKI
Were much displeased with such Election hasty,
They thought it Vi'lent, Headstrong, singular;
Extravagant, Wild, and Irregular.
Yet notwithstanding for the public Quiet,
Both held their peace! and both therewith complied.
THis spread a whispering Rumor in the Court,
Which Fame, News swiftest Post did soon Report,
To all the Army's Officers, and Rout;
That their brave General was turned out.
Which News at first, all with such Consternation
Received! as Soldiers, do a Decimation,
When the sad fatal Military Lots,
The Die, thrown on the Drum, cuts all tenth Throats;
Or a Stormed Town, or near sure Victory;
Snatched from their hands and hopes unluckily,
By Ambush laid; or succors sent from some new Enemy.
HOw much brave Armies prize their valiant Chiftain.
It straight appeared, by all their sudden Huff taken.
Yet as all Passion's strongest at Rebound.
So Rage succeeding Grief's most eager found;
Not those cold Griefs, which Sin brings! and save Crosses,
And Cares, and Tears, leaves nothing. But from Losses,
Not Irreparable; and a Frustration;
Of Hopes, which swelled the mind with expectation,
Defeated; fills the Soul with sharp vexation.
Commencing Rage, menaceth all those Harms,
Vengeance can breath; gives Soldiers Arms, new Arms.
Then as pure oil, which feeds a clear bright Lamp,
When wet does sparkle! so the Polish Camp
Dissolved in Tears; which nothing could assuage,
But vengeance wreckt on those wrought this Outrage.
These who had late but grumbled for Arrears
Now for their General turned all Mutineers.
Swearing, tho it should cost their Lives and Souls
They Would have their Chieftain maugre all the Poles.
And with loud Cries, mad Shouts, their voices Hoarse all;
Echoed around, lets on! lets on! to Warsaw.
Let Us Teach this new made KING, by whom he stands!
Which of his Scepter, or our Swords Commands.
WHen in good time, the General was sent,
Unto the Army: posted as he went.
And as the Sun, after impetuous Floods
Of Rain, when once winked up, dispels the Clouds
So the first fight of SOBIETZKI's Face,
Hushed all their Tumults into Joy and Peace.
Who as a most discreet and wise Physicion,
That Cures the sharpest Humors by diversion;
Takes first occasion, which did then present,
To give their itch of Fighting fullest vent.
THose Wretches without Faith to Man, or God,
The Tartars that are of Bialagrod,
Upon Podolia and the Vkrain:
In hideous Numbers having fallen in;
And made great Spoil and Havoc, and in Droves,
Led the poor People of those parts their Slaves.
Against whom SOBIETZKI marches straight,
Did in an instant put them all to Flight.
Whose Courteous Haste had made them all so kind
As leave their Prey and Prisoners behind.
Upon the twenty sev'nth of Februar,
In sixty nine, or sev'nty, in style newer:
Did KING Michael Match QVEEN Eleanor,
Sister unto the German EMPEROR.
By reason of which Match some Jealousy,
Was raised that his Royal Majesty;
Had thoughts himself Hereditar to make
And all the Polish Rights to quash and shake.
Insomuch at a Diet short while thence,
The Equestrian Order several suits Commence:
Amongst others openly the KING hear read,
PACTA CONVENTA, or agreements made,
Which they had finally concluded one
At's Majesty's own free Election.
All else their Suits the KING did freely grant,
But this with his greatest loathness scarce obtain't:
Until his Majesty perceiving that
Their Resolutions were obstinat;
Not to proceed in any State-affair,
Till that their Proposition granted were.
Unwillingly thereto he gave Assent,
And so next day the Knights together went,
Into the Honse of Senators! where sat
His Majesty under a Cloth of State:
On whose each side, were placed Poles greatest Peers,
Where the said PACTA read at full length hears.
At whose last Article which did Import,
That if the King o's Duty should fall short,
Of what he then and there had promised,
That they from their Allegiance quite were fred.
Which last words were no sooner full Read out!
When all the Knights did Seal them with a shout.
WHich passage reasonably may compone,
Some Authors differences hereupon:
Concerning Poles KINGS Oath spoke of before't,
Which some would stretch beyond its due Import!
Tho no such words at all are to be had,
In all the Oath, but in the Agreements made.
THe Prince Demetrius WIESNOWITZKI,
The same Kings Uncle, under SOBIETZKI,
Lieutenant General: now between these Lords,
There was no tender Friendship nor Accords.
To have which two some better understood,
The KING in's Royal Wisdom thought it good;
Having used sundry means; this Work to Crown,
He did think fit a Marriage to propound,
'Twixt Prince Demetrius, Princess Ostrogie,
Niece to the General SOBIETSKI:
Which Consummat with all Solemnities,
Did henceforth Stopp their Animosities.
IN sev'nty two the Cossacks with the Tartars,
Or weary of their Faith, or of their Quarters;
Having again fallen to their wonted Trade,
Of old Rebellions an In-rode made:
Whom General SOBIETSKI did Chastise,
Forcing their Leader now defeated twice,
('It Was Doroskensko mentioned before,
A Man enured to Robb'ries, Murders, Gore)
To leave's Rebellious Arts of Sword and Fire,
And with more Haste than good Speed to Retire.
FRom whence the great Turk takes occasion,
To pick a quarrel with the Polish Nation;
Upon pretense that he had taken on
The Cossacks into his Protection.
And with a quick Incursion in a trice,
Invests the City strong Caminiec:
Where having made Approaches slow, and soft,
Under the shelter of great Sacks, well stuff't
With Cotton, Wool, and raised a Battery,
Upon the which they plant twelve Cannons high:
Wherewith twelve days they furiously play;
While those within, having done all they may!
Were forced on Articles the Town to Morgage,
For Marching out alive with Bagg and Baggage.
The Garrison were not two thousand strong,
Of whom two hundred men were quite undone,
By their own Powders blowing up a Tower,
Which with their Courage less'ned much their Power.
And was amongst many others one great Cause,
Of so soon yielding to the Conqu'rors Laws.
Grand Seignior in Person present was,
At taking of this Town! and ent'red as,
Poles Garrison marched off, placing thereon
Eight thousand Janizars in Garrison.
His Army whole, had the prodigious Force,
Of hundred ninety thousand Foot and Horse.
AT Janowitz, this time Poles KING did ly,
Waiting Arrival o's Nobility:
Who now from all Parts unto him Resort,
While he to gain time sent unto the Port,
Ambassadors unto Grand Seignior,
Whose Peace or else Cessation might procure:
To whose Vice Chancellor the Grand Vizier
In Barbarous Style returned him this Answer,
Which as I had! you's have it; Just as Terse,
For It speaks it self better in Prose than Verse.
To the Vice Chancellor of Poland.
'THe Letters of the most Serene and Honorable KING of Poland, our great
Friend; to our most, Serene, most Glorious, and most Potent Emperor of the
World, and Monarch like to Alexander the Great, who is the Shield of the whole
World, was together with your Letter directed to me, brought to my Hands in our
Camp near Caminiec, some days before our taking that Place; I delivered the
Imperial Letters to his Majesty, and having caused mine to be Translated, I
understood what you Wrote. That which I Wrote to you from Andrianople, gave you
notice of what has since happened, and may serve for Answer to those Letters;
But you were wanting to do these things in time, which were necessary for the
preservation of your Country; And therefore have seen and heard things which
you would not, and whatis' to follow is known to GOD alone.

'WE always wrote both to your King and you, what has now come to pass, which
you might have prevented by sending Ambassadors to his Imperial Majesty, with
Royal Presents, as is usual, and Promise of Tribute, who thereby might have
appeased the burning Wrath of our great Lord, and obtained better Conditions
from you; Nay, had you ever since (for the Gate of Mercy of our Emperor is
open to all) sent Ambassadors to offer a Tribute, it was to be hoped they might
have obtained the good will of our Lord, and he permitted them to renew the
Ancient Friendship. If therefore after all you have any care for the quiet and
good Estate of your Armies, Kingdom, and Subjects, do what you intend very
suddenly, without any delay, and the sooner you do it, the more advantageous it
will be for you. That you have desired the most glorious Cham of Tartary to be
Mediator, at this Treaty, you do well, for he has offered his friendly
Persuasions on your Behalf. Peace be' to those that believe the Commandments of
GOD.


BY this time Winter with his Hoary Face,
And cold sharp Breath, was hastening on a-pace.
Which does not suit the warm venereous Turk,
And always stints in Field his further work.
When the bravevaliant General SOBIETSKAY,
Who still out-does what biggest Hopes expects ay,
At this time unawares had fallen upon
(Without's foresight or expectation)
A dreadful Body twenty thousand strong,
Of Tartars serving Turks for Right or Wrong.
'Twas at a place known by the name of Try,
Where all their Host he routed totally.
Streams of Tartarian Blood did soak this Field,
Where ten times thousands of their Breaths did yield
Their Ghosts to Fate. And from those bloody Knaves,
Rescued as many of poor Christian Slaves.
After which soon, within few days thereafter,
Defeats as many more with hugest Slaughter.
Whereby the Country near to Desolation,
He fred from Rapines further Devastation:
And in that Nick or Juncture of Affairs,
He wants Reason, Sense, and Eyes, and Ears,
Who will not readily own and confess't;
This the most Advantageous and Best
Service, which could be done to Polands Crown:
Which all that Kingdom to this day will own.
THe KING his ARRIER BAN had Summoned!
That is a General Convention had,
Of all his Princes and Nobility,
Throughout all Pole, and the great Litwanie,
All to appear in Feir of Weir and Arms
When Poland Kingdom takes most dreadful ' Larms.
As near Samosch he did encamped ly,
He did request his whole Nobility,
To take into their grave Consideration,
Those called Mal-contents within the Nation.
Whereof Arcb-Bishop Gnesna was called one,
As likewise was the General of the Crown,
And many others which were ordered,
As soon as could be to be summoned:
To make Appearance Oath, and Obligation,
And enter straight in this Confederation.
Which Oath aforesaid their and then framed was,
Upon their having taken the same to pass
An Act of general oblivton.
But if Recusant durst be any one!
Refusing to appear and enter Oath;
They were to be by King and Nobles both,
Declared Traitors, and their Office; Trust,
Disposed of to others held more Just;
And all their Movables, Lands, whole Estate
Unto the Public Treasury Escheat.
This Oath which would have cost Poles Crowns and Swords
Had it taken place run in these following words.
The FORM of the OATH of the, CONFEDERATION.
IN Of my own free will, none forcing me
Swear by the Holy and bliss't Trinity:
That for the Honor of great GOD Almighty;
And for the Welfare and the Dignity;
Of our Elected, Crowned KING and Lord,
And this Republics Safety and Accord;
Its Privileges and Immunities,
Its Franchises and freest Liberties,
Against all whatsoever its Haters, Foes,
My Life and Fortunes frankly I Will expose.
And that I Will never forsake, nor yet depart,
From this Confederation; but take Part
With this our Country, till the same be sped;
And from all Dangers Civil, Foreign, fred.
But will do all, as far as I am able,
To make this Treaty yet more firm and stable:
Ay while we have obtained the foresaid ends,
And when I know that any man intends!
To Counteract this joint Confederation,
And Brotherly Agreement of the Nation:
I Will stand engaged to Reveal the same,
Without regard to Friendship or to Fame.
And shall account, and prosecute that He,
As open Traitor public Enemy.
To be corrupted I have taken no Money.
Nor shall hereafter on that head take any.
'I shall not hold the least Intelligence,
Nor act one any whatsoever pretense,
To prejudice my Country, or my KING,
But truly, and sencerely in each thing,
Shall still observe this firm Confederation,
In Unity, without least Reservation,
Or any Hopes to be dispensed from this,
So help me GOD and bring me to his Bliss.
THings running thus, at such a high flow'n Tide!
The Mal-contents thought fit to step aside;
Retiring to Meaco in the Prusse.
While Primat Gnesna did not care a Rush
Keeping still at Livitz his Residence;
Nothing concerned with all this vehemence,
Of the Nobility; who off'red had,
A Thousand Ducats for his sev'red Head:
To any man should bring it to the Leaguer.
And in a madder Bravery, swear and swagger,
They will depose the Archbishop and degrade him.
But this the Popes own Nuncio there forbad 'em,
Such violation of the Liberty,
Of Holy-Church! for those the Laytie
Thus to proceed, against any one said Mass;
Without Leave ask't and given by's HOLINESS.
Meanwhile Commissioners from KING, to the port,
clap't up a Peace of following Purport.
The FORM of the DISHONORABLE PEACE, suddenly patcht up, betwixt MICHAEL
KORIBUT WIESNOWITZKI, and the GRAND SEIGNIOR, in the follwing ARTICLES; most
disadvantagious to the Interest, and unmortby the Name, of the Valiant
POLANDERS.
1. FIrst, That the People called Lipcee Tartars,
Which formerly had dwelt in Polish Quarters,
And who have since forsaken their Resort,
Having obtained Protection from the Port:
Yet so, as having left their Wives, and Young,
And all their Movables (not worth this Song)
Shall have free leave to come, return, and fetch,
Away this Baggage. And that such as itch,
To stay in Poland, shall have Liberty
Without Disturbance, or to Stay, or Hy.
2. That Polands KING, shall by's Ambassador,
Send twice ten thousand, and two thousand more,
Of Ducats to the Port; and yearly pay,
This Sum on Saint Demetrius's Day.
Which Day falls on the fifteenth of November,
On this Condition that the Turks remember,
To 'fend the Subjects of the Polish Crown,
From Turks and Tartars fierce Incursion.
And other People subject to the Port,
In case the Poles shall by their mad Resort
At any time be dammaged, then for it,
The King of Pole thereafter may demand,
Redress and Satisfaction from the Grand-
-Seignior, this Tribute may forbear to pay;
Until Amends be made one or another way.
3. Podolia shall, as in old time before,
Be Subject to the Port! And on that Score,
If any Difference hereafter rise!
Concerning Limits, or on otherwise,
It shall be amicably finished,
By Deputies from either Party sped.
4. The Polish Forces, now in any Fence,
Or Fortress of Podolia shall march thence:
Who with their Goods, shall have free Liberty.
To Return home in, all Security.
5. ON to other side! GRAND SEIGNIOR shall Restore,
All Strengths from Pole in Russia taken before.
Free Exercise of their Religion
Shall be secured unto every Person.
6. Such as desire with Goods, and Families,
Forthwith to part and leave Caminiec,
Shall have all freedom to Return to Pole,
Within the time of two full Months whole:
After this Treaty shall be Ratified,
They shall have Weleome or to go, or bide.
7. The ukrain, as't was in times of old,
Be left unto the Cossacks for free Hold!
And Poles shall quitt all Forts and Places there,
They have possessed, and with their Goods forth fare.
And when this Country they shall all abandon,
They's have all other Arms except their Cannon.
8. The Cossacks, that have with Hanensko been,
May if they please return to the V'krain.
And from the other Cossasks shall Be none
Damage or Injury unto them done!
Only excepting Hanensko himsel,
Who shall Remain and into Poland dwell.
9. All former Treaties, 'twixt the Port, and Pole,
Shall still Remain in force! in part and whole.
Besides all which, a distinct Paction was!
Which 'twixt the Poles and Tartars, thus did pass:
That Polands Crawn should twice eight thousand pay
Ducats a year to CHAM of Tartary.
This Sordid, Slavish, Ignominious Peace!
Which to each Christian ear, sounds vile and Base.
So far Beneath the Ancient Polish Glory,
As nothine such is read in all their Story.
Never to the Alcoran, did here the Evangel,
Stoop, till Michael came, sure no Archangel,
But some Inferior Sp'rit below Heavens Scroles,
Who never had looked so high as either Poles.
For as the Sun excels each lesser Star,
KINGS other Mortals do transcend as far:
He lack't that Genius to all Monarchs given,
To which all Mankind's low, as Earth's to Heaven.
Or else he would never crouch'd and stooped down,
To yield that ever Independent Crown,
To two its Heathen Neighbors Tributar,
And that when never Mightier for War.
Beside their Constant Army daily held,
Who were with SOBIETSKI in the Field!
The KING at Lublin at the same time had,
Armed Force, which more then hundred thousands made.
Was by the General, very ill Resented,
And many other, who themselves absented:
And looked upon it as some Sly Device
That these might be at leisure to advise,
How they might, have the best Convenience
To Crush the Party called Malcontents.
And therefore, tho two Senators were sped.
From this Convention, to the Army led,
To take the foresaid oath them to Invite,
Yet SOBIETZKI still declined quite
This Loathsome Peace, worse then Eternal Wars,
Basly enslaving Poles to Turks, Tartars.
THe Polish Grandees, whether for Sharp Air
Of Winter Weather! or for want of Fare!
That is of Forage or Provision,
Or else for Shame of having Slav'd their Crown.
Did in the Month of october's end,
Break up the Assembly, and did homewards tend,
Leaving two thousand and three hundred Men,
Armed for the KING'S Lifeguard. Agreeing then,
That their next general Diet should Conveen
Held of the Deputes of each Palatine;
In the first end of January next,
When this Confederation should be fixed.
Then should proceed to try each Malcontent,
And to Condemn all such, as should Absent
Themselves, or should Refuse the foresaid Oath:
With Forfeiture of Fortune, and Life both.
Wherein the Army quickly enters on
A Counterbent CONFEDERATION.
Wherein for to defend (they do declare')
The Liberties of their old Country dear,
And Privileges of Nobility.
Which they alleged were all most violently
Crushed! under shadow of a mere Pretense,
Of sticking to the KINGS design, and Sense,
Of the late Oath, Confederation, Peace,
Which to their lasting, shame had taken place.
And therefore they Resolved to Protect,
Those of the Nobles; who without Respect,
Of Duty, Dignity, or of Man-Rent,
Were stressed under name of Malcontent;
And prosecuted, for their more Disgrace,
As sole Disturbers of the Kingdoms Peace.
Titles! which did more properly belong
To their Accusers, doing them this wrong.
Pursuant to this Solemn Declaration!
It put the Court in horrid Consternation;
When the Recusant Army 'gan to draw,
With quick Advances nearer to Warsaw.
Yet General SOBIETZKI thought it fit'st
Not to Approach ought further then Lowitz.
Being desirous by a sweet Composure,
To make them Friends, that his and Poles sworn Foes were
To which end several Overtures were made,
Till this Accommodation was had:
In the end of Marches Mon'th in Sev'nty three.
Which in these following terms runs as you see,
1.
THat all offenses and Mistakes by past,
Should be forgiven, Forgott, Cancelled and Quashe.
2.
That the Confederation last year had
By the Nobility should void be made.
3.
That All, who during these late wild Mistakes,
Had born the Brand of Mal-contented Sneaks;
Should on all Turns, without Exception
Enjoy the Royal Favors; no Distinction
At all made now! nor should hereafter be!
'Twixt these and others the Nobility.
Which good Accord! yet more to firm the same!
With Numerous Train, great SOBIETZKI came,
To Warsaw; where solemnly entertained;
On KINGS Part! by's Vice chanc'lor, and the Senate!
By t's Deputy the Waywood of Posen;
And from the Lords! their Deputies two chosen.
And that the Diet more might, complement him!
With fifty thousand Dollers they present him;
As their Acknowledgment of his vast Merit.
But SOBIETZKI'S Noblest Generous Spirit,
Considering the Publicks present Straits,
One third part of the Sum freely abates.
THis done! his vigorous Speech in Council pressed,
That Polands ancient Glory be Redrest,
Which by last Summers Ignominious Peace,
Had damp't its blooming Honor with Disgrace.
And that it never be Writ in future Story,
That Poles free Crown was one day Tributarie,
To the Sworn Enemies of Christendom:
Opposing Payment of the agreed Sum;
Offering! with Army sixty thousand strong,
If that Poles State would see them paid! erelong,
He made no doubt! but that he should with gain,
Give such Account of this next years Campaign;
And Promise made, if Diet please may Book it!
He Would pay the Port a slaughtered Turk for every promised Ducat.
Which he hoped to perform without delay,
Before the Tributes Term, Demetrius Day.
THis said! the Diet's much encouraged,
To think upon a War, and so provide
Its Sinews, Money; And so hereunto
The Poles Crown Jewels, of a great Value,
(Which they before had ordered to lay down
For payment of the Tributes in a Pawn)
These were esteemed at sixty thousand Liv'res,
Which to secure the Army their Arrears:
Are in the Generals own Hands now Pledged.
And so his Excellence forthwith Dislodged,
To Sokal where the Army Rendezvouzed,
Whose gallant Conduct these War-men Rejoiced.
MEan while! soon after ending of this Strife,
Archbishop Gnesna did depart this Life,
In twelfth of April of year sixty three,
The King in's Room raised Bishop Cujavie.
WHen the GRAND SEIGNIOR heard and understood!
These glorious Changes made for Polands good:
And knowing of their Warlike Preparation
Does thus menace that brave undaunted Nation.
In following Letter by a Chiaux sped,
But not dilivered till Poles KING was dead:
And for my part! shall n'ere in Rithme, be either seen or read.
The GRAND SEIGNIORS LETTER to MICHAEL KING of POLAND.
THou the chief Prince of the Christian People, Administrator of the Nazaren
Kingdom of Poland, 'KING Michael our Friend, May your Administration have an
happy issue. By these Letters we give you to understand; that Achmet Bassa our
Grand Vizier, is the chief Administrator of our Dominions, the Dignity and
Authority of whose Ministry let GOD increase. We have not long since
understood, that you refuse to pay our most Serene Majesty the Tribute
stipulated by the late Treaty between us and you; And to remove the Garrisons
out of your places on the Frontiers, wherefore it appears clearer then the
Light, that you have broke the Peace that was concluded with me; And is it thus
lawful for you in so short a time to violate the Peace! The Governors and
Soldiers of our Frontier-places have not done your Subjects any Damage, nor
given you any cause of offense, wherefore then have you broke the Peace! and
why have you provoked me the Monarch of the World to anger? What? do your
Soldiers think to delude us? Send us quickly the Tribute and the Gifts, which
by virtue of the Treaty (tho by you violated) and the promise of your Envoy
ought to have been paid upon the day of St. Demetrius last past. Send them
quickly if you will, that the ancient Treaties between us be Preserved and
Re-established: Send the Gifts, Restore the Castles, Repair the Damages, and
do it sufficiently, unless you desire to be by my Arms compelled to it. If you
omit it, by the Help of GOD, I will with Innumerable Armies infest and destroy
thy Poland. Be therefore ready for War, and send back my Messengers quickly,
that' I may know thy Mind.


BUt all these proud Menaces were in vain!
While SOBIETZKI had advanced amain,
Unto the Banks of the great River Neister's.
And by Commanded Party, tall like Switzers,
Under Crown Standard Bearers valiant Conduct:
Who after strong Resists did soon Command, took
The strong Town (with its Castle) Miedzibos.
'Twas stormed, taken, plundered, sacked by these High Boys.
Taking beside this, many other place;
Amongst which was that Strong Hold Jaslowiec.
Great Shoals of Captives, driving back in Throng.
Who told! that Hussain Bassa lay along,
On to other side the Neister: being then,
A Body much 'bout forty thousand men.
Waiting great Reinforcements, to come up
To him from out of Asia, whereupon
General SOBIETZKI did intend,
With greatest Haste to pass the River: and
To fight them, turning down their Turbant Copes
Before Arrival of their fresher Troops.
ACcordingly, His Army once past over,
Himself Advances all the Host before,
Toward the Turks! whom he does soon espy,
Trench'd under Cochmi's Walls Commodiously.
And which might bred great Mars himself much Cumber,
Vastly exceeding all his Poles in Number.
November ninth six hundred seventy three,
Came up the valiant Polish Cavalry!
And never stopped their March still Brisk and Eager,
Till within Gannon Shot of Turkish Lea'gre.
When the Grand General in Person Hies
Within short Musket Shot of the Enemies,
That he might best observe where their strength lies.
Whence when Returned! he presently did call,
A Warlike Council; where it is Resolved by all:
That seeing scarce Provisions Poles now Pinches!
'Twere best Attacque the Turks within their Trenches.
Toward the Evening! all his Infantry,
Came up; and with them the Artillery.
Whilst several little Skirmishes! did pass!
'Twixt's foremost Troops, and the Enemies nearest was.
NExt Morning of the tenth Nov. 10.
as we have said,
His Excellence drew up, Ranged, and Arrayed
The Army in Battalio displayed.
And having placed, his Artillery,
So as't might most annoy the Enemy:
And serve them quickest, with Hott Iron anon
Shot from dread Mouths of Fifty Piece of Cannon.
In goodliest Order, all advanced on
Toward their Camp with Resolution.
Where when come pretty near! The Hospodars,
A People Born to deal in Arms and Wars,
In Provinces Wallach and Moldavie,
Belonging unto Poland formerly,
Immediately Revolted from the Turks:
Leaving the Treaches, soon comes over the Works
Five thousand of them to the Polish side,
And presently! all things were briskly plied,
For the Attacque; which in five several places,
And Posts, was to be made in equal Spaces.
Crown-Watch-Master, did next the Neister bide,
The Rivers Brink, hard by Czeczora's side.
Next him the valiant General SOBIETZKI,
And then Lievtenant-Gen'ral Wisnowitzki!
Assisted by the Waywood of Kiovie,
The other two, by Troops of Litwanie.
THus Marshaled! they the Enemy surround;
But the Army Ranged into this Posture's found,
To take much Time. That Night the Turks, who were
Not wanting in Defense, nor VVatch, nor Care:
Their utmost Trenches, yet remaining whole,
They seemed to have some advantage of the Pole.
Crown-Watch-Master, this night had in his Post,
A Brave Commander Col'nel Danemark lost:
Captain Jarozki also was cut off,
With many Soldiers of the common Raff.
Nor were the Turks with lesser Slaughters beat,
The En'my's Lost being every way as great.
All the whole Night! the Polish Troops in Arms,
Stood Ready within Musket Shot and Harms,
Of The Enemies Retrenchment: timely next Morrow,
November 'lev'nth; to bid them all Good morrow,
The General adventured once more,
On Foot their Posture better to disco're.
And tho most, of his Officers dissuade
Him from such Hazards, he continued,
In's most impregnable firm Resolution,
To fall upon them with quick Execution.
Ord'ring his Cannon all at once to Play,
Most furiously, by the first Break of Day
Upon the Enemy; And every where,
Having given Orders sit and necessar;
Did thus encourage all the Soldiery,
With full Assurances of Victory.
'FEllows in Arms! dear Pariners of this War!
'The Lawfullest, cause needfullest by far,
'That ever Polands Kingdom did Commence,
'Or any other Christian King or Prince,
'Against this wretched Infidel. For these!
'Have some, for Trade; some, Captives to Release;
'Some, to Prevent; some to Repair their Harms;
'Of this dire Tyrant: havetane up just Arms.
'Some, for to Lessen his, enlarge their own;
'More Vast already, then is Dominion.
'Some to Amaze the World with their loud Story;
'Have Fought for Prowess, Triumphs, Trophies, Glory,
'Time was when Pole fought for no more but these!
'But some new Accidents have wheeled the Chase.
'We fight for Liberty against these Knaves!
'That Poles be not their Tributary Slaves;
'And what is more worthy to be thought upon!
'Our Infinitely dear Religion.
'IF Poles lost Honor, danger'd Liberty,
'Religion, Conscience, Stern Necessity,
'All now at Stake! can move true Polish Hearts,
'To stir their Hands to Act Wars Valiant Parts,
'As needs they must; in each your Eyes I spy
'The Beams of Courage, bodding Victory.
'Let's on! till we our late vowed Tribute pay,
'You know it is near to St. Demetrius Day;
'And with our Scimitars, and Shables crooked,
'Let's shave a Turbant; for each promised Ducat.
THis said! He Marched up (without least stand)
On Foot, with his naked Shable in his Hand;
At Head of all the Armies foremost Troop,
Till to the Turks Retrenchments they came up.
Then mounteth Horse back! the like being done
By all the greatest Officers anon.
THe first Discharge was of the Cavalry,
Who in one Hours fourth part, or much thereby;
Had put the Enemy to utmost Pinches,
And will they, nill they, Mast'red all their Trenches:
With hideous Slaughter of the Enemy.
Whereon the Foremost of the Infantry!
Who should have Backed the Horse, in Pressing on;
Thinking the Battle been already won,
Did fall a Plund'ring; which the Turkish Horse
Espying! Rallied, with most dreadful Force;
And with great Execution fell upon them,
Had in few Minutes more beat and undone them;
Had not the valiant Hussars come in time,
(Succour's most seasonable in Hazards Prime)
To their Rescue! made the Enemy in a trice,
In much confused Disorder to give place.
So that Hussain Bassa. who Commanded
The Turkish Army, could no longer stand it,
Was needs enforced to Wheel, turn, give his Back,
From st ern Impressions of their vi'lent Shock;
Began with many thousands to Retreat,
Toward Czraozo in a Body great.
WHich Bleski's Waywood, and the Sieur Rionwski,
Observing through the Clouds of Dust, Smoke, Dusky:
Did just as Hunts-men 'twixt the Deer, and Park,
Soon Intercept his Passage, forced him Back,
Into the Battle! where a Party Brisk ay,
Led by Victorious General SOBIETSKI,
Received them with a Hot tho Hearty Welcome,
Who looked methinks like Souls from Death to Hell come.
But the stout Generals Troops, far short in Number,
Had much to do! Shock's at Rebound's like Thunder.
THe Turks like their Condition all fought then!
Like Dev'ls in Arms, or damned, or desp'rat men.
For tho the General performed Wonders!
By his own Hand and Steel the great Turks undocrs.
Where e're he Struck, or Pressed, or Charged amain,
Amongst thickest Troops of Turks he made a Lane,
And with their strewed Turbants paved the Plain.
Tho's brave Example, valiant Words, stout Cries
Heard by his followers Ears, seen by their Eyes!
Might have lent Cowards bravest Resolution;
Yet things had like to fallen in much Confusion,
Had not those happiest Hussars once more come!
And Charged Hussain Bassa roundly home.
ANd now the Battle seemed to every man,
As Fresh, as fierce, as when it first began.
Nor could the most attentive busy eye
Discern to whose side leaned the Victory.
So Bravely all behaved on either hands!
Where Blood gushed Out in Streams, and run in Strands.
Till after long, sore, bloody Dispute had!
And many thousand Bodies, Corpses made!
The Crescent now in Wane first felt the loss;
And left the Field and Triumph to the Cross.
THe Turks had long-time sternly stood the preass,
Till main Force made them bow; then run the chase.
Leaving full many thousands on the place,
Of their Companions slaughtered and dead.
So that the Field was more then covered,
With Plumps, and Piles of breathless Bodies; and
Of all that fled most drowned in Niesters Strand.
So that of all their forty thousand men!
Scarce did five thousand escaped alive remain.
ANd as while during all sharp fightings heat,
Few do ask quarter! as few quarter get
Their Prisoners in number were not great.
Amongst the Turks dead were found upon the plain,
Two great Commanders Heybegh, Solomon,
Both Bassas! but their General Hussain,
Had the misluck to make's escape unseen,
And save his Life by flight to Camien.
NOr had the Poles this glorious Victory!
So cheap! but several Grandees there did die.
As General Quartermaster, the Lord Rzeozki
Crown Hunter, and the Lord Rozmiarowski
Captain of Hussar's, and the Lord Wolbramski
And many other Officers were slain;
Whose names our Authors List does not contain;
Besides those wounded. Thus, this Fight being done!
The General gave his Soldiers leave anon,
Especially to those in fight most eager,
For to Ransack their Foes forsaken Leaguer.
Where the most valiant, busy, nimble, and Wilty,
Had always to his Share the largest Booty.
And to complete this Victory next morn,
They took the Castle of Cothim in by Storm.
THe joyful News of this grand Victory
All chiefly owing General SOBIETZKI
His gallant Conduct and his Courage high:
Found Poland at this time in general mourning.
Its Fates 'twixt Frowns and Smiles to t's good happ turning.
FOr that same Eve, gave Pole this Victory,
Removed their KING Michael! who did die
After some Weeks Indisposition,
(As it would seem of some Consumption)
At Lemburgh; whence his Corpse removed to Warsaw,
Where when embalmed (according unto Poles Law)
It was to stay unburi'd till once done
Of a new KING the next Election.
Chap. V.
General SOBIETZKI Elected KING; His MAJESTY'S sudden Conquest of the Ukrain,
in 1674. with 4000 men be ROVTS 60000 TARTARS near Leopold, August 75: and in
November following with 15000 CHASES before them 100000 of the ENEMY, etc.
THese different Tidings, which both joy'd and grieved,
All Pole at once! at once at Pole arrived.
Where, like an Ebbing, with a flowing Tide high;
Or like two Contrar Winds, which makes the Eddy;
Even so these turned their Hearts, and Heads, near Giddy.
With Mirth, and Sorrow, struggling in their Souls,
So trembling of their Spheres, does move the Poles.
Where shall those Passions find sufficient Vents!
While overwhelmed with two Astonishments.
Their KING new dead, in's strength and flower of Age;
Leaving the Kingdom, in a sad engage,
Of dreadful War abroad; (what is worse) at home,
Embroiled in Factions; and what e're should come,
To clashing Interests of, bold Pretenders
the Crown. All which sad thoughts, fresh griefs engenders.
ON to other Hand! late glorious Victory,
Just in the nick! Rejoiced their Memory,
With its good O men; and made all confess,
They hoped kind HEAVEN would grant its POLES success;
And that the Divine favor had designed
Unto this grieved Kingdom to be kind:
And not to leav't to enemies desolation,
Since newly graced with signal Preservation.
ANd more besides this! freedom from their fears,
This prosperous Battle brought to their Affairs.
Hali Bassa, ( who with a numerous Host,
The Hussain Bassa meant to have Reinforced)
Upon the News of this so grand Defeat,
Did to the River Danow soon Retreat.
The Terror 't struck in Hearts of Enemy;
The Courage 't gave the Polish Soldiery;
Its Influence one Revolted Provinces;
And wavering Friends; Repute among foreign Princes;
All vastly did Augment its high Import,
For States, and Kingdoms, to speak, sure, and short,
As well as Merchands ow much to Report.
Often subsisting more by Reputation,
Then their Intrinsic Strengths proper Foundation.
WHereof an Instance great, this same does show
For shortly after Turks had got this Blow;
The Envoy, from the Czar of Muscovie,
Did offer unto Poland presently.
In his great Masters Name, a mighty Aid
Of fifty thousand men against Turksled.
Tho afterward, this which he freely spoke,
And frankly promised! he as frankly broke.
ANd yet successful Battles not improv'n,
Are like some Arled Purchase not our own:
Till every Farthin of the sum he paid,
And State and Saisin on the Lands be had,
And what the full design of Rights does Crown,
And gives firm Hold! Use, and Possession.
Matches may hitt, by Hap, or Haste, Gaine's by Discretion.
SO SOBIETZKI, who amongst Turks did deal,
Dead Arles of Lead, of Iron, and Fire, and Steel,
Coined with the Wounds, and Blood, and parting Breaths;
In more then thirty thousand Turkish Deaths.
These were but Earnests, of his Valors Match,
With the Grand Seignior! 's wisdom next must patch
Its fullest Import! Wise and Valiant HE,
Knows how to gain; then use his Victory.
For with most quick dispatch, he ordered,
Some Troops to pass, under Crown Standard-led
Into Walachie! better to secure,
That Country whole in their Allegiance sure.
Sending with Breklaws Waywood, other Forces!
To Quarter round about Caminiec:
And so that place most strickly to blockad,
From all Provision, Commerce, Traffic, Trade.
THen having in fit Quarters Wintered,
His other Troops! himself to Lemburg sped.
Resolving there that Winter to abide,
To be at hand what ever should betide.
Nor could prevail the Noblemens Invite!
Nor yet Queen Dowagier persuade with writ,
His presence (tho they pressed with much affection)
In Warsaw, at next Diet of Election.
Which by the Primats Warrant had been fixed
To have their meeting January next.
So much his Countrey's Service weighed down,
All private Aims, or Interests of his own,
That he will not leave his Post, to gain a CROWN.
IN the fifteenth of Januar sev'nty four,
The Diet met for first time! did no more,
On its first day! But did their Marshal choice,
Or speaker to Collect the Diets Voice.
The most part of the Nobles were inclined,
To choice some Person, fittest to be joined
In Marriage with their Queen, and qualified,
To have an Emp'rours Sister for his Bride.
As well in kindness for her Majesty!
As for their public goods good Husbandry;
And all these Inconvenients to preveen;
That might accompany another Queen,
Especially the Charge! when, if one mo!
Then they must next provide Dowries for two.
Among all Poles Candidates, stood fairest for one,
The noble Prince and Duke Charles of Lorrain.
Beside the Interest of the Emperor,
And Queen her self engaged in his favor;
Most of the Senate, very much esteemed,
His Person! brisk in youthful vigor deemed;
And his experience had in many Wars,
Compleated' s skill in Militar, Affairs.
Whilst all his Opposites could only say,
They dread him too much friend to Austria.
THus much was only talked! But nothing done,
This Diet. So, for the Flection,
Another diet and new Time is fixed;
To meet the twentieth of April next.
WHich day once come! All came accordingly,
Save the indiff'rent noble SOBIETZKI;
Who least desired, tho most deserved that Crown;
Came late behind the last, to the Election:
Did not Arrive, as all confess and say,
At Warsaw till the second day of May.
And tho's true Glory sought no vanity!
His Entry was with great Solemnity.
Beside his Guards! which had two Troops of Horse,
And Reg'ment of Dragoons, which served in Course;
His Train was splendid, large, and vast, and high,
And numerous of men of quality.
Most of the Senators, and Noblemen,
At diet met, went forth to meet him then,
At Palace of Prince Radzevil; the high
Tho Vnder-Chanc'lor of great Litwanie.
Who (when Alighted) him with all his Train,
Did with most sumptuous Banquet entertain.
NExt day! his Excellence from Town was seen;
To pay his due Respect's unto the Queen.
And then the next! which was the fourth of May,
Was of the Diets seeing him, first day.
Where several following days continued
A long and brisk Contest, which happened:
'Twixt Polands Gentry, with t's Nobility;
And both those 'states of the great Litwanie.
The former did propose the General,
To public Choice! who'd best deserved of all
Persons; and Ranks, and the whole Commonweal.
By the most signal Services often done,
His Country; and late glorious Victory wonn;
By hissole Courage, in the last Campaign,
Over the Turks, on Cochmi's happy plain.
Which for his Conduct, next to Heavens best Aid!
Might SOBIETZKI's own be truly said.
Beside he would saved the State so vast a sum;
Of many thousand Ducats kept at home:
Twiceten, and two held from the Turk! twice eight had saved from Cham.
And more beside Charge saved of this great Tribute!
To his wise Head strong Hand they Attribute,
Poles full deliverance from Servitude.
So that all these are SOBIETZKI's own!
Poles People, Kingdom, Scepter, Sword, and Crown;
Give all these power to Speak, and Vote, they would shout's Election soon.
And yet beside late glorious preservation,
Of all these! These have more in expectation!
Our safety owed brave him, Soul of our Troops,
Is but the Earnest of those future Hopes;
Of the good Issue of that dreadful War,
Wherein all these are now engaged! (the Czar
His Aids may fail us from his Muscovie:
Whom tho he send at greatest needs they will fly.)
All Pole without this one, will find hard work
Against such a powerful Enemy the Turk.
One so well seen in Militar Affairs!
Whose very Name Appalls our Foes with Fears;
Whose Prowess is the stay of all our Cares.
If while but General he has done such things!
What shall be not perform how soon he Reigns.
Thus Polands Saf'ty, Freedom, Glory, Crown,
All in this horrid War now staked down,
Do in their utmost Hazard seem to cry!
Their Help, their Hope, in SOBIETZKI ly.
In fine! the fondness of a Foreign Choice,
May please those who in foreign Arms Rejoice,
And Interests; which they perchance may own,
More than the welfare of the Polish Crown.
But tho this should not hap, as often it fares;
And has not seldom much perplexed Affairs;
If we had all the World to choice upon!
Name him alive who can but match this ONE.
THe largest Empire's mean for his great Spirit!
And Polands Crown's no Gwerdon for's vast Merit.
Let Us at those Feet! whose glorious Hands have wonn,
Lay down that Kingdom, give him Thanks, to take and wear our Crown.
UPon the other side! the Litwaneers,
Urg d the strong Resolution of the Peers,
Of that great Duchy! never to admit
Piasti; That is native Pole, or Lit-
-uanian Born: for that they would more than once,
Found Troubles after such Elections.
Whereof they several Instances did bring,
Namely those Factions, during Micha'ls Reign,
Stirred up against him by's Nobility
Which had never been, had he been no Piasti.
Wherefore all Natives they would meant to Refuse,
Thinking it meet some Foreign Prince, to choose
And such a Prince! who even beside's Renown,
Rend'ring him worthy of the Polish Crown,
Might be such Husband, as their Queen might own.
And one made strong with powerful Alliance!
As might best Help the Kingdom to Advance;
And fairly carry on the present work
Of the great War, in hand against the Turk.
Upon all which mature Consideration!
They knew none fitter for their Nominations;
Nor for the Queen; nor worthier to Reign;
Then Charles Prince of Lorrain, were he KING.
THen some the Prince of Neuburg nominat!
Although their Votes in number was not great.
YEt after all these Disputes! SOBIETZKI
This Polar Starr, whose Light may overmate Sky;
As with one Vote or shout, was chosen KING:
On twenty first of May, begun his REIGN,
In sev'nty four; with greatest joy of all,
(Beyond what Pole e're saw) both great and small.
Poles Primat Gnesna, Bedridden at that time;
Who by his Office should the KING proclaim.
He absent! Ex Officio, it was due,
Unto the then Archbishop of Cracow:
Who did with wont Solemnities Proclaim,
Him KING! by IHON the Third of the same name.
Of Poland KING, great Duke of Litwanie etc
.
WHo forthwith (of himself) most graciously,
Was pleased to promise! that Queen Dowagier,
Should be provided as best suited her,
High quality; As also the Arrear
Of Polish Army he should forth with Clear;
And quite discharge from out's own Revenue,
Seeing the Public could scarce spare it now.
At which time also further did express,
His Inclinations, and great willingness,
To grant the Trust of the Grand Marshall,
Or (Which is here the same) Crown General:
One Prince Demetrius Wiesnowis-
- ki,Uncle to late KING. And also this
Of Crowns Lieutenant Generalship, thus void:
Should by Kiovies Palatine be joy'd.
BUt as he signified his strong intent,
To prosecute this present War full bent,
Against the Insidels with utmost vigor,
And with pursuits of dreadful Armies Rigor,
To Rout, and Kill, and put their Troops to chase,
Or force them to some honorable Peace.
And to that purpose! at's own proper Charge,
A thousand Foot, he would raise! and Discharge
Their Pay! enduring this same next Campaign;
For to Encourage all the Noblemen,
And other Polish Grandees every one,
To do the like in their Proportion.
So he desired, that he might Retain
The Trust of General, till this Campaign
Were ended; for the Kingdoms present State,
Urged the Delay o's Coronations date:
Till the Campaign be over. Whereanent,
The whole Nobility gave their Assent.
And that the Article they offered,
Into the Pacta, or Agreements made:
Obliging SOBIETZKI now their KING,
The Crown on no occasion to Resign,
Should be Cancelled, Expunged, or quite Omitted,
This at's Desire was also freely Quitted.
ARchbishop Gnesna, scarce warm in his Place.
On twenty fifth of May he did Decease:
The KING thought fit to raise into his ROOM
The much Esteemed Learned Bishop Culm.
Who did Succeed in that high Dignity
Of Metropolitan and Primacy.
Queen Dowagier, had by a full Consent,
Both of his Majesty and Parliament,
Two hundred thousand Guilders yearly Rent,
Assigned Her! with freedom to Reside,
In any place of Poles Dominion wide,
Except Cracow, and some more Fortified
Places, on Borders of Silesia side.
Her Majesty for her Convenience
Made choice of Thorn in Prusse for Residence.
Although the KING for carrying on the WAR,
Impatiently Solicitous by far!
Yet's Noblemen, and Senators in this;
Were all in general just as Remiss.
For tho at first they had him promise made!
Of sixty thousand Men Maintained and Paid:
He now desired but forty thousand strong!
Yet their Dissentions such, so sharp, so long,
And wretched Jealousies, to Factions bent,
As could not let them hereunto Consent.
MEan while! the Muscovite who did pretend,
Himself the Polish Kingdoms mighty friend;
And that with open force he would oppose,
The Cruel Turk, and all Poles common Foes.
Had on the contrar, only fallen upon
Doroskensko! Head of the Rebels strong,
The Cossacks: and had many Places taken,
Strong Holds, and Castles in the Vkrain!
That with this foul, and false (tho open) play,
He might enlarge his great Empire that way.
HOw e're! the Mighty Cham of Tartary,
And the Great Turk with Forces Hastily,
Rushed thither, to oppose the Muscovite!
And in short time had overrun as quite!
Another great part of that Countries Coast,
So that the whole was likely to be lost.
WHerefore to give what Aids his Haste prepa^^^
In such unlucky Posture of Affairs:
KING IHON by this time, seeing that in plain!
No Money, nor Recruits, he could obtain;
On August twenty second, he departs
From Warsaw toward Polands Frontier Parts.
Appointing Rendezvous of that small Army,
Was left him after Cochmis Victory,
To hold upon the fifteenth of September:
(A Month which Turks have been bid often Remember)
They being not, as t's told, and all believe!
In number sixteen thousand effective.
ITs true! that General Romadanowsko,
Led ' bove an hundred thousand men of Musco;
Encamped near unto the River Dniester:
With all which he did small or no Service there.
Being (they say) diverted by the Turk,
Who on their natural Jealousies did work:
Causing Reports and Rumors to be spread,
That all the Poles new Terms with them had made!
And with the Port were clapping up a Peace,
Without including them within its Lease.
THis Stratagem did serve both Turks, and Tartars,
With small Resistance to possess those Quarters,
So that (save two or three strong Holds) in fine
They Are Masters of the whole of Vkrain.
At last great City Haman they Invest!
Which, with Assaults they furiously pressed!
While Muscovites, who promised to Relieve it;
In stead thereof, over Neister were Retrived.
Whose sudden, base, and timorous Retreat,
Occasioned Hamans Towns entire defeat;
Which yielded on such Terms, as Victors gave it:
To have their Lives, Persons, and Goods all saved.
But this most Barbarous, faithless, cruel Nation,
Without Regard to their Capitulation,
Or any Promise made, by Write or Word:
Put Men, Wives, Children, to the Edge of Sword.
So that of hund'red thousand Souls, just now,
Remained alive, in few Hours, none, or few.
ABout beginning of next Month came up,
To the KINGS Camp the Litwanian Troops,
In all twelve thousand thence did come along,
Which made the KING near thirty thousand strong.
And now at Slotzow, on the Frontier far
From Warsaw, in a Council held of War!
Resolved to Head them to the Vkranie,
And quickly fall upon the Enemy:
Without least thoughts of further Treaty had;
Which now again the Grand-Vizier made,
(Since the Grand-Seignior's Master had repast
The Danube, on his March homewards in haste)
Fresh offers of! on purpose to Amnze,
The Poles and cred'lous Muscovites abuse;
And to foment their mutual jealousies;
And so Divide; then Rout them at more ease.
ACcordingly! his Martial MAJESTY,
To learn the Posture of the Enemy;
Did Russias Waywood send with some good Force,
Who did Surprise a thousand Turkish Horse:
Near Camien's Walls, and did them quite Defeat,
With Slaughter for their Number very great.
And that the KING might see they would won the day!
Thrice fifty Prisoners they brought away.
His Majesty, (thus recommenc'd the War)
Just then in Person quickly marched to Bar:
A fenced City in the ukranie:
Which when approacht! he stormed so furiously,
That it was his, in twinkling of an eye.
THe Turks, and Tartars, garrisoned therein.
Fled! when they saw the Poles the City win,
Unto the Castle, which was very strong,
And yet this proved not their Shelter long!
But forced upon the eighteenth of November,
Upon the KINGS discretion to surrender.
Who did the Turks most gen'rously dismiss,
With safe Convoy unto Caminiec.
But all the Lipher Tartars, quickly were
Each dealt a Slave unto each Litwaneer.
Next! his Victorious MAJESTY, no Rester
In Field, marched to Mohilow on the Neister.
A Place of great Import unto the Pole,
Because it is the only Pass to Mol-
- davie! who! when they knew the King in Field,
Did to's victorious Arms most quickly yield.
Thus did Sciana! Kalnick! Forty more
Podolian Holds of Strength the Turks gave over.
NO Force resists the Tempest of that Fame,
Which always conquered wheresoever he came,
Without Sword drawn! his Word these wild Beasts tame.
Just at this time! never more untimously,
Did all those Troops had come from Litwanie,
Leave him just in the nick of Hopes and Victory.
Pretending all, that none of them could bear
The rig'rous Season of that time of year.
It Was now December in the sev'nty four!
Yet's MAJESTY, tho weak'ned in his Power!
Resolved with his gallant Poles amain,
Still to Continue on in this Campaign,
And notwithstanding left almost alone!
His prosperous Fortune bravely to push on.
Scarce past one Week! wherein some fenced Place,
Or other's not surrendered to his Grace.
And tho the Turks were numerous in those Places!
Yet durst they not against him once show their Faces.
TO Hansel sev'nty five! New-Years-day saw,
His MAJESTY, by Storm take in Raskaw.
Upon the Niester, stood this strengthened Hold!
Where sixteen hundred of the Turks were told;
Of whom, while all their Foot were cut in pieces,
Their Cavalry, (being forced to mend their Paces)
Escaped. The Polish Horse so wearied,
With those continual Services late made,
That there was none of them in posture now,
On Foes fresh valiant Horses to pursue.
So that his MAJESTY had now subdued,
All that part of the Vkrain, which stood
Westward the Neiper, save the City Czebryn
The Residence of Dorokensk, had ay been
Head of all Vkrains Rebellion:
Whom he endeavored from his Perdwellion,
By Treaties, to reduce unto his Duty.
And this made Shows of promising his Feawty,
And readiness, to own the KINGS Commands:
If's Majesty'd vouchsafe these eight Demands.
1.
FIrst! That the Cossacks should continue free,
In Exercise of the Greek Liturgy.
And that without Disturbance they might own!
That Ancient Churches old Religion.
2.
That some Archbishop of their Church should have,
A Place, and sit amongst Poles Senate Grave.
3.
That of the Ukrain, some good fit part,
Be for the Cossacks Army set apart.
4.
That Polands KING, at's Coronation Oath,
Confirm these, and their Privileges both.
5.
That Poles Republic, ever shall make known,
When they have need of Cossacks service done,
And on what Terms, they do desire, 't be shown.
6.
That Cossacks Deputies sent to the Diet,
Shall be received, welcomed, and treated by it!
With equal Honor's any Deputy,
Sent from the Dukedom of great Litwanie,
Or from the Kingdom of old Polonie.
7.
That they have freedom to Trafficque and Trade,
With all their Neighbors, as before they have had.
8.
What still the Turks refused those Savage Fools
They may Erect Print Offices and Schools.
BUt all these Overtures to nothing came
Sly Doroskenko did but play his Game;
Between the Poles, and jealous Muscovite:
A Friend to neither, more then is Aims thought meet.
IN April sev'nty fifth! the Turks, and Tartars,
Having by this time left their Winter Quarters!
Weary of Rest, and Rust, did now take Arms;
And came to Field, in hideous Throngs, and Swarms.
KING IHON, had maugre all their Force held out.
This Winter, in those Parts without Recruit;
Whereby his Army small, so lessened,
That all believed, he should be hastened,
To quit the Vkrain foresake the Field.
But his great Sp'rit, which knew not how to yield,
To any Hazards! but Necessity;
And the utmost point of last Extremity.
Resolved, to the last to stand it out!
And from those Quarters not to stir a foot.
And therefore Reinforced the Garisouns,
Of these his following late Regained Towns:
Of Bracklaw, and Kalnick, and Nimirow,
Bialacierkew, and Mohilow.
Which being done he left not Force enough,
To have an Armies either name, or show.
Had not his Valor and his Conduct been!
Like a new Figure making Units ten;
Rend'ring their num'ral Hundreds, virtually
As many thousands by his Courage high,
IN following May! the KING to Slotzkow held,
Sited eight Leagues distant from Leopold;
Where with some Senators of Polands Nation,
He had a long and serious Consultation.
Laying before them, all his just Complaints
On their neglect of his sad pinching wants.
Since after sev'n Months time of this Campaign;
Wherein, with such an Handful of few Men.
So great Advantages performed and done,
And been procured unto Polands Crown!
Restoring to t's Obediense again.
The greatest part of all the Vkrain.
In which himself and his few Soldiery,
Had met with so much Pinch and Scarcity,
Of all Provisions! that their wants did force,
Their Food, from Flesh of Catts, and Dogs, and Horse;
And other Beasts; beside their endless Toils,
And dreadful Dangers, infinite Turmoils.
And yet no care was taken to supply
His Wants, which now looked stern as Destiny;
Nor to enable him, with fresh Recruits,
To store his Army; fewer then the Scouts
Of the GRAND SEIGNIORS; now become so Weak,
As't cannot keep the Field another Week.
His Majesty b'ing hitherto enforced,
This War to have maintained at his own Cost,
Which amidst all those sad Perplexities,
He yet Resolved, maugre Difficulties.
And yet for all these Instances he made!
Nothing to store his Needs was done or had.
BAck to the Army turns, which did hold
Near his Head Quarter City Leopold.
And in good Season! for it was high time,
He should assure the People of that Clime,
By's ROYAL presence; who were otherwise
To leave their Dwellings, ready to Advise;
In dreadure of those Swarms of Turks, and Tartars,
Which every day poured down too near those Quarters.
Whose vastest Numbers of two hundred thousand,
Did fill those Parts with Horror and Confusion.
ON the seventeenth of August sev'nty five!
Turks, Tartars Chief Commanders did contrive,
In the dread Presence of Himself great Cham,
And the Vizier Bassa Ibrahim
In Council met! first to attempt the Town
Of Slotzkow! which being once possessed and won,
Next to Attacque the City Leopol;
The present Quarter of the KING of Pole.
Who had in all scarce fourteen thousand men,
For's Litwanian Troops had not joined then.
PUrsuant-hereunto! some five days further,
Marched Sultan Nuradin, still breathing Murder,
Chief of his forty thousand Tartars led,
The Flower of all that Army, Cham there had:
Attended with the eldest Son of Cham,
Sultan
Aquigitary ( Water-tossers name,)
Their Troops, and many primest officers,
Who came along as gallant Volunteers.
So that their Body whole consisted then,
At least in number sixty thousand men.
With which dismaying Force, early was seen!
On twenty third of August, Nuradin;
And that some time ere day begun to daw,
Before the Town and Castle of Slotzkaw.
Just eight Leagues distant from strong Leopold.
Where as wee've said, the KING his Camp did hold,
Immediately a fierce Assault begun!
Continued till two in After noon,
With utmost Fury. Forward Nuradin
Bravely Repelled by Russes Palatine,
Commanding there; who did so well dispose
His Men and Cannon, that with little Loss
Destroyed huge Numbers of those Infidels.
Which Sight their Courage so extremely Quells,
That disappointed of their hoped Surprise;
They straight Surcease this dear bought Enterprise.
And as their Council ordered! as wee've told)
They leave Slotzkow, March on to Leopold,
OF all which, when his Majesty does know,
Their brave Repulse, great Slaughter at Slotskow;
And toward Leopold their quick Advance:
He presently ordered the Ordinance!
From off the Castle all day long to fire,
To Warn the several Garrisons lay nigher,
To be upon their Guard: and having given
Fit Orders for the saf'ty of his Queen,
And the young Princes; who at that timewere,
With both their Majesty's, all present there;
For he Resolved to venture all at once,
In's Countrey's Cause, and Christendoms defense,
Doing the like, on such occasions since.
ALL things thus settled! then his Majesty
Went forth his Camp to Visit and Survey.
Where, to a Hills high Top he does Advance,
From whence he could observe three Leagues Distance
Around! and about Noon, he does Descry,
By Clouds of Dust the approaching Enemy.
THe KINGS Camp much about a Mile did ly,
East Side from Le'pol in a low Valley,
Shut up by several Hills, somewhat beyond
The Camp! that way, the Enemy was Bound!
There was a strait Ascent, of Rising Ground,
Of some three hundred Paces, ora Stound.
Where, having Marched as far upon the Height!
Then your Descent again's a narrow Straight;
Amidst a Wood late-cut. And then again
At Bottom of Descent's an open Plain:
Where the Tartarian Troops of needs must pass,
T'engage the Poles! for this their best way was.
Another Pass, which lay on's Camps Right Hand,
The KING to Guard did Radzevil Command,
The Prince, his Brother in Law, Vice-Chanc'lor
Of Lithuania, (of whom before,
Wee've often spoke and mentioned already)
Who Posteth there with his Troops of hand most ready.
Then the Artill'rys General, Kariski,
On the Left Hand! by great KING SOBIESKI,
Commanded on a Hill to plant his Cannon:
From whence the Tartars, might be forced to abandon
The open-plain; throw which they were to pass.
Then lined the Wood, which newly cutted was,
On either hand the narrow way, which bears
Down Hill, with valiant Bands of Musketeers:
His Majesty, soon caused some Troops of Horse,
Advance into the Plain! to oppose the force
Of the Enemy, with all is brave Volunteers;
To stopp the galled Tartars mad Carriers.
WHo in such Numbers, entered after soon
The Plain, by four a Clock in the Afternoon:
That all the Field (in bristled Mantle clad)
With Horse, and Men, and Arms was covered.
Meanwhile! The KING did from a Hill espy,
The Countenance, of his numerous Enemy:
Then giving's last Commands, for what might chance!
He caused some other Troops of Horse advance
Before him; And behind him followed
Six Troops of Hussars, which he ordered.
To Post on Right, and Left Hand of the Way
Midst the Low Wood, so advantageous lay,
To make them dreadfuller! and to appear!
Far more in Number then indeed they were.
Where each high Stump! 'bove Root of rude hew'n Tree!
Did show as Horseman to the Enemy:
And all those Twiggs which near Stumps topps did stand
Seemed Swords, or Lances brandished in their Hand.
THen his Victorious Valiant MAJESTY,
With natural Air of innate Gallantry!
A kind of glorious Joy, and Satisfaction,
Still usual to him in the time of Action:
With brisk and cheerful Looks, beamed from his Eye;
Whose every Ray presaged Victory,
Ent'red himself within the open Plain,
Encouraging his Soldiers amain.
Telling them all! that now he was come there,
That day to act KING, CAPTAIN, SOLDIER;
Fully determined! or to do, or die;
And share with them in Death, or Victory.
THen having thrice aloud, the Name of JESUS
Invoc'd! as often o're's Army cried LORD bless us!
Without least stop, or stand, he briskly hy's!
Upon their Head, toward the Enemies.
And as if he, and they would immortal been!
Or had to deal with Rushes! not with Men;
He with his little handful, zeal'd with Ire!
Throw Clouds of Dust, and Smoke, and Skies of Fire,
And Stars of Lead, and Thunderbolts of Iron,
And shining Swords, bright Lightnings him environ.
And wheresoever he turns! pours down before
His Face, thick Showers of Tartars purpled Gore:
Behind lies Maims, and Wounds, and Groans, and Deaths;
And Heaps, and Swarms, all puffing their last Breaths.
HIs MAJESTY, was wanting in no part
Of Soldiers Courage, prudent Generals Art.
And by his brave Example, did inspire;
His Follow'rs with his high victorious Fire.
So that with this small Handful, toward Night!
He put these hideous Multitudes to Flight:
Who left hehind them! when they left the Plain,
In Plumps, and Piles, huge Numbers of them Slain.
And as undoubted Victories sure token!
Their great and only Standard there was taken.
HIs MAJESTY, would gladly have pursued
Them further! had not darkest Night ensued;
And more then that! great Cham himself was said,
With all is fresh Troops, a coming to their Aid.
IN this most great, most glorious Victory!
That this our Age, or any past did see:
The KING of Poland, had not with him then,
Above the number of four thousand men:
(The rest of all his Troops, being left in Hold,
For the Security of Leopold.)
And of those thousands four! there came some under
Unto the Execution, fifteen hunder;
ANd by plain down right Fighting, to defeat!
With such poor Handfuls, such an Army great!
Of threescore thousand Combatants may seem
A Miracle, a Prodigy, or Dream.
Yet so great was the Fright, Fray, Hurrying,
And Consternation, Tartars then were in:
That, that one Night, they fled those Leagues and more,
Which they had marched in three whole days before.
And for more speed, away they quickly cast
Their Arms and Baggage midst Confusions haste.
NOr was the Amazement less, in Camps of Cham!
And that of Vizier Bassa Ibrahim.
When seeing their Companions hard Condition,
Returning from such hopeful Expedition:
Wherein almost in spite of Destiny!
They Would promised themselves sure Victory.
BUt after some few days Consideration!
Allowed these routed Troops Refocillation;
And huge Recruits, new Forces daily made
Abashed ashamed to show themselves dismayed.
It was resolved! they all should march in whole,
With their joint Forces, against the KING of Pole.
To which Effect! two thousand, Janizars,
The Strength, and Hope, of all the Turkish Wars.
With a strong Body of selected Horse,
Were sent a little Castle to enforce:
Which had its site, near City Brzeziani,
Wherein were only sixty Poles! not many,
Who yet so gallantly behaved themsel's!
As with great Loss repulsed these Infidels,
Which so much damp't their Spirits, if they had any!
That they durst not proceed against Brzeziani.
Although they first came there with that Design!
But on the contrary, Poles Crown Ensign,
Who there Commanded! made a valiant Sally,
With Party of swift Horse; who did not dally!
But falling on the Rear-guard of the Tartars!
With Sword and Shot dealt lib'rally Deaths Quarters.
And killed so many of them, on the Place,
As made their whole great Body mend its pace.
TEn thousand Tartars, after soon appear
Advancing unto Leopol well near!
To whom, the KING sent forth Lord Karkownisky,
Who with some Troops of Horse, them charged so briskly!
As forced them to their Heels, to take their Wind,
Leaving great Numbers of them dead behind.
Nor was this Action lightly purchass'd gain!
Where some brave Polish Gentlemen lay slain.
ANd now at last! in Month of September,
Never lucky to the Turks, as I remember!
Unto the Royal Camp, were now come up;
The Gallant Litwanians in Troop.
The KING, no longer satisfied to hold!
Or to make good his Post at Leopold!
But with that little Army, which he would then,
In number not 'bove fifteen thousand Men;
Resolved to seek out the Enemy;
At least in Number sev'n times more then He.
And leaving's ROYAL CONSORT, Joy o's Soul,
With the young Princes still at Leopol!
Desiring they should stay still in those Parts;
To keep the People all in better hearts;
Who otherwise! for fear might run away,
And leave the Country to the Turks a Prey:
Who, by this means induced to tarry still
At their own Homes with far more Heart and Will,
Seeing the KING, the QUEEN, the PRINCES fair,
Should of their Hazards, have an equal share.
HIs MAJESTY, hearing the Enemy
Besieged Podhais! Resolved hastily,
(Having already come the length of Lembur)
To March, upon the fifteenth of September
For its Relief: but just one day before
'S intended March, he is told it is yielded over.
And twice six thousand persons, Captives led;
The Town quite Sacked, Rift'd and Plundered;
Then Burnt; although Surrend'red upon Terms!
Of saving Persons, Goods, from Hostile harms.
WHich, having heard! on sev'nteenth of September,
A Warlike Council's held at City Lembur.
Where several of the Senators advise!
Not to attempt such Mighty Enemies.
With so few Forces. But his MAJESTY,
Again Replied most Heroickly;
That He would never sit still, and tamely see
So many Christians led in Slavery;
And's Subjects thus Harrass'd at such a Rate,
That Is Territory's laid near Desolate;
But was Resolved this to Remedy!
Or Perish in the Attempt, and bravely die.
And so Marched forward, this same very day,
Toward the Enemy! who (as they say)
Were then before Buczaez all sat down!
And had Invested and Entrenched it round;
But upon Notice of the KINGS Advance!
They Raised their Siege; and soon Decamped thence,
With all their Forces. And tho sped so Blewly!
Yet they March on in haste to Trembowly;
Which they Invest. Turks General Ibrahim,
Summonds the Garrison to yield to him!
WHo boldly Answer; If the Turks were come,
In hopes of Plunder, thus far from their home;
They were much disappointed in their sense,
Here being none but Soldiers for defense;
Who'd nothing else except their Lives to lose!
Which they Resolved to sell dear to their Foes,
And make them know the Price when it comes to Blows.
THis stout Reply, did much incense the Turks!
Who in a Trice completing all their Works!
Raised several Batt'ries! Planting thereupon,
Many great Guns, and Bombs; still Thundering on,
For fourteen days; which they continued
The Siege. And all this while they Mined had!
Above two thousand Cannon Bullet's got;
Beside five hundred Fireballs, also Shot
Into the Town; and diverse Mines were Sprung,
Tho all without effect, did them no wrong;
And Storming several times, were still Repeli'd;
With greatest Loss, and yet remained unquell'd:
Stiffly persisting to maintain the Siege.
UNtil at last! a Letter from the LIEGE
Of Poland, to the Governor (by hap)
The Turks chanced with a Bowr to Intercept!
Wherein, his Majesty did him assure,
That he himself in Person (to be sure)
With his whole Army's coming to deliver
Them: and already'd passed such a River!
And that he was directly Marching on
Toward the Enemy. Which! whereupon,
Such was the dread of SOBIETZKIS Name!
(The Infidels great Terror, Scourge, and Shame)
That presently, the Turkish General,
Ord'red the Cannon be dislodged all,
From of the Batteries, both great and small.
Consisting of above an hundred Piece,
And to march on straight to Caminiec.
NExt Day, he did Decamp his Army whole,
So the pale Crescent does decline the Pole.
Marching full fifteen Leagues, in so much haste,
Confusion, Consternation, and Aghast!
That he Commands the Tartars to keep near
And be a Covert to his trembling Rear.
Just as in Battle he had got the Rout,
From some Victorious Enemy in's Pursuit:
Never thought himself secure in any place!
Till trench'd close to the Walls of Caminec;
Under Protection of its greater Guns,
In bosm of their own strong Garrisons.
A Thing almost Incredible, when told!
That fifteen thousand men had been so bold;
To force an Army hundred thousand strong,
To raise two Seiges in such Haste and Throngs.
Prodigious tho it seem! yet true it is;
Let all the Worlds old Worthies match me this.
NAy when Encamped near Camiens Counter scarf!
They could not yet imagine themselves safe;
For's MAJESTY Advancing after them
That Way! it so dismayed Ibrahim!
That in a Warlike Council, all Resolves!
Not to abide Engagement with the Poles;
But pass the Dniester soon; and March away,
Toward the Country of Walachia.
WHich Resolution presently was done!
But not so throwly out, nor yet so soon;
But that some Polish Troops, came up so near,
Led by Lord Lubomirski, that their Rear,
Being fallen upon, and beaten up amain!
Huge mighty Numbers of its Guards lay Slain.
HEreon! the KING forthwith did give Command,
For several Troops, on Niesters either hand,
To make advance! with such a Success huge;
That Lubomirski seized the Enemies Bridge.
Cutting in pieces those were left its Guard;
And the Night following others as wel-far'd.
Lord Konski, the Artill'rys General,
Did meet five hundred Wagons in a Stale,
By upwards of two thousand Oxen drawn,
Thinking to pass that Bridge before day dawn;
Come from Camien; took them! then did destroy;
With little Business, their strong Convoy:
Relieving thousands of poor Christian Slaves;
Led in sad Bondage by those Savage Knaves.
The Soldiers, then for their Encouragement,
Are 'low'd that plunder which the Wagons sent;
Possessing richest Spoil, of Goods, and Money:
Soldiers are Stout thereafter, this being done ay.
HIs MAJESTY commanded all the Boats,
Which did compose the Bridge, and made its Floats!
Should be bestowed, in some securest place
To be employed on any sudden Case,
And serve Occasions after the next Spring.
AT which time! Tidings came unto the KING;
That Turks in dread of any more Pursuit,
Had marched every Day and every Night;
And had again Repassed the Danow.
And that the Tartars hurled Homewards too;
Taking the nearest Cut, of shortest Road,
Onwards, the Way leads by Bialogrod.
THus being fred of Swarms of Turks, and Tartars!
The KING put's Army to their Winter Quarters.
Where, when his MAJESTY had caused them come!
Resolved to settle his Affairs at Home:
So as he might early next Spring take Field.
Accordingly! November twelfth, he held
To Zulkiew; three Leagues of from Leopold!
Where! as most welcome to his Royal QUEEN,
And the yonng Princes their dear Children;
So no less, almost, was the: Joy of all
The People crouding to behold and sal-
- ute, meet, shout, praise, extol, and bid welcome
Their common FATHER; and DELIVERER Home,
GREAT ANGEL GUARDIAN of all CHRIST'NDOM.
A LETTER To the Right HONORABLE, Sir GEORGE DRUMMOND OF MILN-NAB, LORD
PROVOST OF EDINBURGH.
My LORD,
HAving (as an ESSAY, of what I can, and peradventure may hereafter say both
better and more, of the Greatest and most Ancient MONARCH in the whole World,
the present KING of BRITAIN, and that I might (if possible) by these excite an
Emu'ation of the united Force and Brav'ry of all Christian KINGS and PRINCES,
against the proud and insatiable Cruelty of that Infidel Enemy of CHRIST'NDOM
the TURK) attempted in Verse, such as they are, the MEMOIRES of that Heroic
PRINCE the present KING of Poland. I cannot but think the pains I have already
been, and the whole Charge I am even now at, the better bestowed, when it shall
be presented to a Person of your Lordships Character here, and great Interest,
and Acquaintance in the whole Polish Dominions. You are so known to the whole
Frame and Methods of the Government; the Succession of the Dukes, and KINGS;
the History and Scene of the various Changes of Fortunes of that brave
Magnanimous People; the Topography of the Places of that vast Country; the
Situations of Leopol, Cochmi, and Caminiec, etc. and many other the Triumphant
Theaters of his brave prowesses, whose Names will be still consigned to the
Immortal Glories and Victories of JOHN the Third. I know your Lordship has seen
his two immediate Predecessors, CASIMIR, and MICHAEL! and knew, not only himself
before, but after his being Crown General; as well as that you have seen and
known his Illustrious PARENTS; with those Waywoods, Palatines, Castellans, and
other great and valiant Personages, who have accompanied, and born some share
in his happy and holy Victories, and by your intimat Correspondence with so
many Persons of great Interest and Fidelity in these Parts, have had the best
and truest Accounts of those signal and amazing Services done the whole
Christian World, by the Great SOBIETZKI. Seeing your Lordship in all these
Capacities may be the fittest Judge in this place of the World, to condemn or
correct the Lapses or Mistakes by Missinformations, or Distance of Place; or
where my Author has not swerved; the best Witness, to avouch the Fidelity and
Ingenuity of,

Your LORDSHIPS most humble and much devouted Servant, ALEX. TYLER.

Chap. VI.
The KING Crowned; OBTAINS another great VICTORY over the TVRKS and TARTARS;
The ARTICLES of PEACE; The Magnificent ENTERTAINMENT of his EXCELLENCY the
English AMBASSADOR.
It Was now high time! all things prepared be,
For Coronation of his MAJESTY
Since by the Constitutions of Poles Land!
Their ELECT PRINCE, somethings may not Command,
Nor yet perform, until once Passed be,
Their Coronations Solemnity.
WHerefore, on January the sev'nteenth!
Was KING MICHAELS Corpse, conveyed at length
From Warsaw! in a Chariot drawn by six
Horses! his Household officers marched next!
And Multitudes of men of Quality,
Tending their PRINCES last Solemnity:
Alongs the Way from Warsaw to Cracow;
Where both their present Majesty's were now;
Lately Arrived, and waited on by the
Whole Kingdoms Senators, Nobility.
THe Body of KING CASIMIR, which had
Been sent for out of France, was here conveyed
To Cracow! where on one, the self same day,
Were both KINGS Funerals performed! they say
With all the usual Solemnities,
And Honors, due to ROYAL Memories.
THis being once dispatched and Passed over!
Of sev'nty six second of Februar,
KING SOBIETZKI, and his QUEEN, were now,
Crowned within the Castle of Cracow:
With all the Pomp, Magnificence, and Show,
Which Art can fancy, or the Eye can view.
And the next day! his new Crowned MAJESTY,
Received the Hommage o's Nobility;
His Gentry; Senators; and of the whole
Orders and States, of Litwanic and Pole.
THe French Ambassader, did soon present
To's MAJESTY his Masters Complement;
Which was a solemn Declaration,
In favors of the QUEEN, French born by Nation.
That Is MAJESTY of FRANCE, adopted had,
The QUEEN of Poland! now his Daughter made.
Declaring further! that accordingly,
She should on all occasions Treated be,
And looked upon; what ever hap might chance:
Still as a Daughter of the Crown of France.
However! on eight of March next following,
Her Majesty, had one to Pole more owing,
When safe delivered of a Princess young.
THen did his MAJESTY himself apply!
The Vacant Trusts and Honors to supply.
Prince Lubomirski, (Polish Names sound harsh all)
Was made of Polands Kingdom, the Grand Marshal.
And Marshall of Court, Lord Sinawski.
Crown-General, Prince Demetrius Wisnowiski.
By whose Removal, one Jablownowski!
Who was the Prince and Palatine of Russie.
Vacant the Place Lieutenant General,
Given to the Last! these vacancies, the KING thus filled all.
June, seventy six! did Sultan Nuradin,
With Chams two Sons; all pass the Neister soon!
And like those Fishes, which do swim in Shoals;
Around great Whales! so these surround the Poles:
In vastest Bodies, sending out strong Bands,
To Ravage and harrass the Polish Lands.
And Ibrahim Bassa swarms of Turks does place
At several Posts about Caminiec.
MEan while! although good Resolutions were
Taken at last Polish Diet to prepare
For this Campaign! they would so neglectful been
Of this, throwout each several Palatine,
The Dicts purposes to execute;
That both of Men and Money destitute,
His MAJESTY was still remaining yet,
In's old Complained Straits, and most unfit
To make Resistance; yet he ordered,
Those few Remains of tattered Troops he had,
To March directly to his last years Hold,
And have their Rendezveuz at Leopold.
And being Destitute of all else than
Means of Supply! Convoc's the Arrierban.
That all might meet for Kingdoms joint Defense.
IN August seventy six! his Excellence
LAURENCE, Ambassador from Britains KING,
Unto his Polish Majesty, being
Arrived at Dantzick! And the Polish QUEEN
Came also to that City after soon,
Upon her Road for France, to Drink, at Wells
Of Burbon, which as t's said some Griefs soon heals:
Of whom, their being! he had Audience;
And thereupon the young Princess presents,
(To whom his MASTER of Great Britain was
Prayed to be God father at her Christ'ning Mass)
With a Rich noble Jewel, on the part
Of his said MAJESTY; and so does part,
For Poland! where he was received still
With all the Demonstrations of good will
Welcome, Respect, and Love, and Kindness meet
Which might his Character and Person suit.
MEan while! The Turks, and Tartars, as wee've told;
Although they seemed more Formidable and Bold!
Yet were so mindful of last years defeat;
And so afraid of the sole NAME of Great
KING SOBIETZK; they gap't for nothing more,
Then Peace. For which end the Grand Seignior,
Did by the Despot Prince of Moldavie,
Make Overtures and Offers of a Treaty.
Nor were the KING of Polands Camp, or Coffers,
In a Condition to resufe such Profers.
So on both sides, Commissioners were sent,
Who from both Potentates to Treaty went.
HOwbeit! that nothing might be left undone
For Public saf'ty! understanding soon
The Turks were on their March to Jaslowiec
About six Leagues beyond Caminiec.
The KING marched out the fixed day of September
From Javarow, and lest it should Surrender
Resolved to Reliev't. But whether by
Its Governors great Fear or Treachery!
It Was yielded up! tho little Harm was don't;
Then Sacked, and Plundered, Riffl'd, Fired, and Burnt.
AS likewise other two or three beside
Were just so Treated by them at that tide.
And having razed these three places foully
Were all straight Marching toward Trembowla.
Whereon his MAJESTY, with much ado now.
Leaving his Baggage all at Zorawno,
To make more haste, October twenty fourth
Like sudden stiff Stern Wind blown from the North,
Fell with such Rustling force on the Turks van;
That it blew breathless many thousand man.
Disord'ring all the rest! Tartars first dally'd!
But being thirty thousand, quickly Rallied;
And on the Polish Army coming down,
A Bloody Fight, of new was then begun,
Which did continue to the Night from noon.
This doubtful lasting Dispute! in Conclusion
The Infidels did fly in great Confusion.
BUt's Majesty vastly Inferior!
To Numbers of the Cham, and Seignior!
The KING scarce having fifteen thousand then,
To Rout an hundred fifty thousand men.
Had many gallant Persons, as t's often found
For Countries Honor, slain, maimed, bled, and wound,
Lets have the Account from all Historians Pens!
Where Units have been worthier then tens,
As these proved here, in downright Fight, withoutleast stratagems.
UPon the TVRKS part! these bad Successes,
Disposed them the rather to seek Peace:
Which in the following terms concluded one,
Thus advantageous to the Polish Crown.
1
FIrst that the Treaiys, with late KING concluded,
Should be abolished and quite exploded.
2
That as to what Podolia concerned!
Both partys were content thus to decern't.
That Turks should still retain Caminiec;
Round which a Circuit of certain space,
And as for what concerned the Vkrain!
The Poles its greatest part should still Retain;
As Pauloz, Galnick, and Bialacirkew,
And many other Towns with Memocrow.
So that whatever of it fell to Turks share,
Was small, and under Doroskenskos Care.
3
All Prisoners, and slaves, shall be made free;
And from this time no more Hostility.
4
The Christian Faith at freedom shall remain;
In all parts which by these the Turks Retain.
5
That Turks shall quite Renounce all their Pretensions,
To Moneys which MICHAELS Treaty mentions.
And that those Hostages given for that Sum
Should be Released, and safe conveyed home.
6
That Turks and Tartars, should in part and whole;
promise a strict Alliance to the Pole;
And that in all Poles Wars in any wise
They should assist them against their enemies.
7
That Custody of Holy SEPULCHER,
To the Franciscan Friars they should Restore,
That Christians being pleased in this point!
They might award mistakes on that Account.
PEACE being thus concluded happily!
And Infidels Retired as speedily.
His Majesty, back in November came,
To Zulkiew! where my Lord of HIDE, the same
BRITAINS AMBASSADOR, had Audience,
In a Most splendid manner. To presence
In the KINGS Richest Coach conveyed! and met
By Marshal of the Court, at the Stairs Gate:
Who, did Conduct him to the Presence Chamber,
WHere stood the KING, like Diamond set in Amber
(For nothing's fine for one so good, so great)
Under the Richest Canopy of State;
Clad in a large long Robe of Cloth of Gold
Which did a Vest of Silver round enfold.
AFter the Audience Ceremonys over!
And that the KING had some good time before,
Treated his EXCELLENCE Familiarly,
With the most smooth and sweetest Interparly,
Of kind Discourses! he was pleased to take,
His EXC'LENCE to the QVEENS Apartment Back.
Thus every where Received with great Esteem
From both their Majesty's of KING and QUEEN!
Who as a further Proof, were pleased to Invite
His EXCELLENCE to Supp with them that Night.
IT was prepared; in a large stately Room,
Where both their MAJESTY'S in Pomp did come.
His EXCELLENCE on the KINGS Right Hand sat!
And next him too! the QUEEN on's Left in State.
And underneath her MAJESTYs Left Hand!
Sat several primest Persons of the Land.
After some several Hours, this Supper done!
Which was with great Magnificence served in.
THe KINGS best Coaches brought his EXCELLENCE,
Back to the Place of his own Residence.
The next day! all the Senaiors straight came,
And other Persons of the highest Name
To make their Visits to his EXCELLENCE.
Which he Returned next day following hence.
THe thirteenth of November being come!
Had's Audience of Congee for coming home.
Then Hast'neth on to Nimiguen! where he,
As English Plenipotentiary,
Sat and Assisted all that Meetings space,
For Mediating of a General Peace.
ANd in the next September following!
His MAJESTY of France most Christian KING,
(In token of his lasting Amity
Unto his Royal Polish MAJESTY.)
Did give Commands to his Ambassador,
Resident in that Court, to Inaugure,
With the high order of the Holy Ghost,
KING SOBIETZKI, and Defray the Cost.
Which Ceremony, was in all men's Sense
Of extraordinar Magnificence.
At which same time! the said Ambassador,
In further Sign of KING his Masters favor;
To both their MAJESTY'S some Presents made
Which were at several Millions valued.
Chap. VII.
Of the ACTIONS of his MAJESTY, of Poland Afterward; and particularly in his
EXPEDITION for the RELIEF of the EMPIRE, at the Raising of the SIEGE of VIENNA,
and since to 84.
THE furious Tempests of late Wars o'reblow'n!
And Clouds of Turks, and Tartars, vanished, gone!
Left Calm, and Clear all Polands Horizon!
Great SOBIETSKI's Arms thus having once!
Restored sweet Peace to his Dominions;
Which after sad Confusions, Dangers, Toils,
Wounds, Deaths, and Slaughters, Batt'ls, Sieges, Broils,
Stormings, and Sackings, Plunders, Firings, Burnings,
Victors, loud Shouts of Joy, Vanquishd's sad Mournings,
Loud Roaring Voices of great Thundering Guns;
Cracklings of smaller Shot, Rumblings of Drums;
Shrill Nighs of Horses; Trumpets brisk Allarms;
And the dread Clashing Noise of Rustling Arms;
And all that Misery, and Desolation,
Which Fire, and Sword can bring upon a Nation;
All which endured what could be more Welcome
Unto his Poles, then Rest, Peace, Ease, and Home.
YEt notwithstanding, during this Repose.
Wherein his Subjects of all Ranks Rejoice!
His MAJESTY did not himself abandon
To sloathful Ease, Pleasures, or Rule at Random;
Nor in the least slack'ned his Royal Care,
For's People's future Safty, and Welfare.
But with great Diligence, himself applys
To heal those Wounds, and Scarrs; which Enemies
In their late In-roads and Incursions made!
And those Disasters home-born Factions bred
Within's Realm. And bends himself (because
Wars Noise, and Factions, drown the voice of Laws)
To see fair Justice duly Ministrat,
The firmest Base to fix a shaken State.
TO which effect, Choice Persons does advance!
In all the Offices of Importance.
Whose honest Faith, Judgment, and Prudent Cares,
Might Poise and Manage weightiest Affairs.
ANd then his Majesty does Reconcile,
And quash those Factions made both Poles to Reel.
Which by their secret Enemies first bred,
Was long time amongst their Grandees nourished.
Then Fortifies HIMSELF with such strong Allies,
To Back the State when t's Fortunes Current Rallies!
As might not only firm sev'n Hilled Rome,
But the joint Interests of CHRISTENDOM.
ANd in a word, accommodats his Cares,
And vigilant endeavors none forbears,
Of those Prudential Arts of Governing,
Rend'ring a People happy in their King.
ANd tho perhaps Fame sounds them not so far!
As the Atchievments of loud Rustling War,
And Glorious Prowesses of Victory;
Yet in all KINGS more needful are, as worthy Memory.
NOw! amongst these several Alliances he made,
With great Muscovia's Czar a Treaty had!
Which a long time continued and sat,
Adjusting sundry Points then in Debate.
For tho they importuned him to break
With the Grand Seignior! and large Offers make!
Of Huge Assistance; yet his MAJESTY,
(Reflecting, how much they had formerly,
Failed in their Promises of that same kind!
Could not by any Motives be Inclined,
In Wars new Tempects, Seas, of Blood to Imbarque,
(Wherein he would longer Swim'd then No' in's Ark.)
And from those Beasts, Clean, Foul, and Wild, and Tame,
Had nothing but their Numbers, Noise, and Name.
Without sufficient and full Sur'ty had,
That when most Need and Use was for their Aid!
Poles and all CHRIST'NDOMES, both STATE, and CHURCH
Might not be shrewdly then left in the Lurch.
BUt in beginning of year eighty third!
Fame which has swifter Wings than any Bird!
Gave daily Notice of huge Preparation,
The Turks then made for Hungaries Invasion:
And that they meant that Storm of Steel, and Fire
For other Neighboring parts of the Empire.
His MAJESTY, when this dread News was told!
Could not in Honor, any longer hold;
Nor Prudence, for's own safety at Home;
Nor Conscience, for the Cause of CHRISTENDOM;
Without endeav'ring what he could to oppose,
Those fierce designs of Christians sworn Foes.
WHerefore in Februar a Diet met!
Where't was concluded, after short Debate;
That twenty thousand men forthwith be raised:
Which Resolution (so the Diet pleased)
Should stand both good and firm; although by some
Dissenting Member 't should break up, march home.
Which too often happens (as wee've said before)
Where ones poor No, can all their Votes devour.
This was least Number, small in all Men's Sense,
The Diet then thought fit for Poles Defense.
MEan while! his Excellence Count Walastain,
Ambassador, sent from the Austrian
Imperial MAJESTY, to Polands KING!
Did second of April, Conclude and Sign
An Alliance! whereby the Emperor,
Obliged himself with sixty thousands Power:
Against the Turks to Act. In which Campaign
Poles great KING promised thirty thousand men,
To have in Field, whene're their Needs Require,
Next Summer for the Aid of the Empire.
Which League 'twixt BOTH, was forthwith Ratisy'd,
By all the Members of the Polish Diet.
Who, on the fourth of that Month having done,
Parted with, all Men's Satisfaction.
THere was at that time present at the Court,
A Turkish Chiaux new come from the Port,
Who did endeavor, all he could, to stay
From the Imperial Part his Majesty.
Declaring, that the great Tartarian Cham,
(And what he said, by MA'MET swore the same)
With dreadful Armies. Pole should Recompense;
If any Aids were sent the Emp'ror thence.
ANd if Suspicions, may be worth Report!
Its talked, a Christian-Kings-man in that Court,
Was no whitt wanting underhand, to ply
With Rubbs and Hindrances his Majesty.
Yet notwithstanding all the TURKS Grimaces!
And all the Hideous Cham his bigg Menaces!
And all the other's sly Insinuation;
Stuffed full with Motives of Disswasion:
His great Soul had no ear for such Allarms;
Being still Resolved! maugre Helps or Harms!
To stopp the Progress of the Ott'man Arms.
Which pious Inclinations. Heaven still Bless,
As't has Rewarded since with huge Success.
Which needs must Render his loud Memory
Both Joy and Wonder of posterity.
I Shall not wish my Reader wearied,
With any tedious Deduction made:
Of Cause, Original, and first Occasion,
Of Troubles bred in the Hungarian Nation.
Nor of their Progress; some say first began,
By several Grandees there, of the Roman
Communion: under alleged Pretense
Unto their Liberties of Violence.
And afterward, unhappily kept one,
By needless Mischiefs to the Prot'stants done.
Whereto still Listening, the wary Turk;
Makes fair Advantage, of, this foulest Work
Offering! but not unsought first; ( as its said)
To them his kind Protection and Aid.
Upon which Quarrel, sprung from this Division
The Infidels did ground, this Expedition.
How e're it was! I shall not here. devise,
Tho some relate the Story otherwise.
Nor shall I here attempt to undertake,
A full particular account to make,
Of that most memorable Siege of Vien:
Done long ere now by many other Pen.
Let it suffice among the Worlds Wits throng
Somewhat's appended in a shorter Song
I's only here sum up those Matters briskly,
Which do concern the Great, KING SOBIETZKI.
THe Turks vast Army's, numerous hideous Power
Advancing! much amazed the EMPEROR.
And so much more the rather, at that time,
Because he heard the French had passed the Rhine:
Drawing together in huge Companies
Too near the Confines that are Germanies.
So that he feared, they had taken this Tide!
And Juncture, to Invade him on that Side.
It Is hard to make Conjecture of the Thing,
Why it was ommitted by most Christian KING.
Whither, from innate Brav'ry in Breast!
Or on his HOLINESS express Request:
Who did ( its known) at that same very Season
Writ to his MAJESTY on that Occasion;
Or if Resolved to take his first Allarms,
From Success of the Ottomans fierce Arms.
What e're his Reasons were! or how Inclined!
Sure he Attempted nothing of that kind.
THE Imperial Army, under Duke Lorrain,
Besieged Newhawz'l a strong Town which was taken,
Some years ago, from Empire, by the Turks:
Where with good Hopes, they had advanced their Works!
In fair Condition to have quickly won,
And made it once more yet a Christian Town.
When strait Commands came from the Emperor,
To raise that Siege; and quickly put new Power,
In Presburg, Ra'b, Comorra, deemed by some,
The Walls and Bulwarks of all Christ'ndome.
Which all conceived the Turks would first Attacque,
And not leave such strong Holds behind their Back.
Wherefore it was the Emperors great Care
To Reinforce those Garrisons were there,
And with the quickest speed he does provide
To have those Places strongly fortified.
And thinking Vien far from this ado!
And out of Danger, was not so looked to.
THe Prince and Duke of Lorrain, used all
Endeavors, of a prudent General;
In his Decamp to safeguard his Retreat.
But Haste does all his Forces so amate,
That when the Garrison from Town fell on!
His Reer-guard made small Opposition:
Who with quick March, to save themselves did by;
And so exposed all the Infantry.
Which, he (to Flank the Enemy designed)
Had placed in certain Houses them behind!
To certain Death, like Criminals to Axes.
Amongst whom was there the Spanish Count de Taxis,
Who tho descended of the best of Spain
By Savage Hands of Insidels lay Slain.
The Duke with all the Rest did safely put
Themselves and Army in the Isle of Schut.
MEanwhile, the Troops which then entrusted was,
To guard the Vaags most important Pass,
Revolted! being Knaves before, its likely!
To that vile Shame of Christ'ndom Count Tekley;
Head of the Mal-contents in Hungary,
And with the Turks in strict Confederacy.
THese turning (as wee've said) to this ARCH-ROGUE
Opened their Way and so they Past the Vaag.
Advancing to the Danow! which to Pass,
They built a Bridge, some Miles above Papas:
Their Cavalry, and Baggage marching round.
Came over the Bridge which is at Papas Town.
And presently! to show their Force, and Number,
Sent out great Parties to Harass and Plunder.
Which having done! they kindled Fires around,
And burn and raze the Country to the Ground.
WHen of their great Detatchments one Pursues
The Imperial Army, now in others Views,
Falls with a strong Impression on their Rcer
Whose sudden coming, made them quake for fear,
And so amazed at their hideous Numbers
As guiltiest Conscience can be when it Thunders.
That, notwithstanding all the Duke could do!
His Cavalry again the Foot forgo,
And at a full Carrier, passing the Wien
Retired in a Body toward Vien.
ANd tho the Chevalier of Savoy ( Son,
Of the late Count and Lord of Soisson)
And the Count Taaf made a brave Resistance,
Wherein the former fell in that is Assistance.
Yet notwithstanding all Endeavors made!
The Turks the Christians Baggage quickly had
Three hundred thousand Crowns which valued.
ANd now once more the Infantry do putt
Themselves securely in the Isle of Schutt.
And were in dreadful Hazard of the worst,
Had not the Duke quickly brought back his Horse
And for their safe Relief a Passage forced.
And then put Part, as ordered before
In these Towns, Presburg, Raab, and Comorre.
THen with the Rest, and's Cavalry withdrew,
Within the Imperial City Viens view.
For which Vienna's sake, this, first Mishapp,
May well be counted a most Lucky Happ.
For if these Forces had not been thus driven
Thither! it could not for nine Weeks have striv'n
Against the Ott'man Force, so fierce, so huge,
During that time, o't's unexpected Siege.
THe Turks vast Swarms advancing still more near,
Put their Imperial MAJESTY'S in fear,
And all the Court! who July sev'nth went thence
And in good Plight and Safty come to Lintz;
Thence to Passaw; but scarce gone from the City,
They had a Prospect moved their Grief and Pity!
Each House, Town, Village, to other side the Danow,
Kindled, Fired, Flaming all in one bright Glow.
For wheresoever these Hellish Locusts came,
They left their Footsteps marked with Smoke and Flame.
THe Court Removed! Duke Lorain next thought fit,
With what small Force, he could best spare, to Flitt:
Leaving Count Starberg, to govern Vien,
And under his Command twelve thousand men;
Which with old standing Garrison made out,
Some fifteen thousand or much thereabout.
Beside the Scholars, Burgers, and Tradesmen,
Who all bore. Arms, and still did Duty then.
JVly fourteenth, the City was Invested,
By Turks huge Army; which at least consisted,
About one hundred fifty thousand men,
Beside Count Tekleys thousands five times ten.
AGainst which dreadful Force, and all t's Attacques!
Wherein no Art's forborne, no Courage slacks;
Although its true they did more mischief thrice!
By unseen Mines, then open Batteries.
The Garrison, tho very ill provided!
Did with the bravest Manhood, still abide it,
Encouraged by their Matchless Governor
To Feats and Wonders thought beyond their Power.
Their brave Defenses was with Resolution,
In valiant Sallys did huge Execution.
The Fields with thousands slaughtered Turks still strowing,
Those Infidels by Regiments down Mowing.
Until September twelfth day following.
Entirely Routed by the Imperials whole
Force, with this great Victorious KING of Pole.
BUt more at large! no sooner News were come,
To Pole; that Turks had entered Christendom;
But his great Majesty with utmost speed,
Together draws his Forces to a Head.
And tho (some say) that some about him were,
Suspected to the French bribed Pensioner!
That were not wanting to Insinuat,
How Hazardous unto the Polish State,
'T might be for these its Forces to March out
To others Aid! while others Arms (no doubt)
Might mean while Polands Kingdom overrun!
Which thus disarmed, might quickly be undone;
Being thus exposed to the deadly Blows,
Of Turks and Tartars its invet'rat Foes.
YEt notwithstanding, this Great HERO found
Himself in Justice, Honor, Conscience, bound:
Quite to neglect such base Misprision,
And put his Army, with all Expedition,
In Marching Posture! having first Dispatched
Sieur Lubomirski, with a brave Detach,
Of three full Reg'ments, of as gallant Horse,
As ever Pranc'd, or Nigh'd, or Charged Foes Force.
Who notwithstanding Tekleys base Endeavor,
To Intercept them! or at least Dissever!
Yet maugre this vile Atheist Rebels Gutts,
They joined entire with Troops of General Schutts,
And did thereafter many brave Exploits.
HIs Majesty went first to Crenstochow,
To does Devotions! then came to Cracow
On twenty ninth of July, and next day,
Or shortly after through Silesia,
Advancing with his whole Army, causing't tread
Three different Ways, and in three Bodies Led,
For more Convenient March, and greater Speed.
THe Schaf gats from the Imperial Court appears
To Complement HIM first on the Frontiers.
On August twenty third, the Emp'ror comes
From Passaws City, unto that of Krembs.
Which he for common RENDEZVOUS ordains!
For Forces of the KING and Duke Lorains.
SEptember second, August being done,
His MAJESTY of pole came to Holbron!
Heading, the stoutest bravest Cavalry,
The Earth e're Bore, or Sun did ever see.
(Tho with a tedious Journey much Harassed!
Being sore fatigued, with March so long so fast.)
Horses nine thousand twice, numbered this Host!
Who were all Polish Gentlemen for most;
Each of whom had stout Servants, one or more,
Armed at all Points against the Common Foe.
His Infantry, were fifteen thousand men!
Who came not up till three days after then.
These wearied Forces had some days Refection,
Erethey adventured on any Action.
For which Lorain had wisely stored great Force
Of all provisions both for Men and Horse.
THis time, which was allowed for the Repose,
Of Poles long marched Troops! Duke Lorain, chose,
To wait upon's Victorious MAJESTY:
Like as both Highnesses of Bavary,
And Saxony, came all to visit than,
And pay their Duty to this greatest MAN.
Who did receive them with those sweetest Graces,
Seen in all Demi gods or Hero's Faces.
HE who'f all Christians Wars might be Commander,
Against Infidels; presents young ALEXANDER,
To their Acquaintance and their Amity.
Aged fifteen! tho for Humanity,
Prudence, and Courage, much out-script these Years.
Which in an Antedate, his FATHER bears;
Whom he attended during this Campaign
In Rudiments of War himself to train,
Under this greatest MARTIAL MASTERS Reyn.
AFter once past the first Civility!
'Twixt such Illustrious men of Quality.
Knowing their Errand was not Complement,
While CHRIST'NDOMS SECURITY was meant,
From the most dreadful Danger, fraught with Fears,
Of all had threatened it these thousand years.
They forthwith held a Council of the War,
For the Adjusting each particular,
Fit to be thought upon by these great men
In that great Work the Rescue of Vien.
And having thought one every proper Measure!
They send the whole Scheme to the EMPEROR:
Who now had changed his late Intention!
Up to the Armies, of his coming on;
Because he meant to leave the Chief Command
As fittest for it unto the KING of Poland;
He much approving all their Resolution,
Which they Advance to put in Execution.
This was indeed for Vien in good time,
It being brought unto the last Extreme!
In humane Probability, (no doubt)
It could for few Hours' longer have held out.
SEptember lev'nth, the Christian Army whole,
(Now Headed by the great VICTORIOUS POLE)
Advanced almost within the Turkish ken!
Being well near some four score thousand men.
Then all things were prepared for stern Essay
Of awful Battle to be fought next day.
BY joint Consent, their Highnesses inclined,
The Right Wing to his MAJESTY be 'ssign'd.
Because his Horse was fittest for the Plain;
And on that side the Country lay Champain.
The Left Wing, lying end-long the Danow,
To Bavary and Lorrain they allow.
And with the Circles Troops, the main Body!
Unto the Princes; Waldeck, Saxony.
SEptember twelfth, timely by break of day;
The Generals all met on an Hill! (they say)
To give the last Commands; scarce well come there!
When from Beneath, unto their Sight appear;
A Body of ten thousand, or thereby,
Of Flower of all the Turkish Cavalry.
Whereon a strong Battalion's ordered hard,
To put themselves all close in a Vineyard:
That was upon another Hill near by.
THis by three more Battalions hastily
Seconded! quickly stopp't the Turks Carrierings:
Who could not brook the Christians fierce Firings.
And being Horse, and in a Ground ill cut,
For Cavalrys Attacquing of the Foot!
They did content themselves with one Discharge;
Each Infidel opening a Mouth so large,
And gap't so wide, as Ma'mets Tomb might swallow;
(Retiring) raised a hideous Noise, or Hollow.
WHereon; the KING and all the Generals,
Drew the Army in three Lines! much like three Walls,
All closely set without least Intervals.
Charging each man to keep his Vaward Place!
And March toward the En'my with slow Pace.
And when the Turks should Charge! they are charged to stand!
And keep them Close! as each joined hand to hand.
And till the En'my first had Fired at large!
They Are all commanded not to make Discharge.
ALL which they did observe accordingly.
The Turks advanced, with a dreadful Cry!
As if they meant, to break, throw their Array!
Hoping thereby to make them soon give Way,
Or put them in Disorder! but perceiving,
The Christians all stood firm; without least giving,
And did expect them in the closest Order;
They made a Halt! and durft not push them further:
But all Discharging! all of them wheeled back.
Immediately, upon the Turks last Crack!
The first Line of the Christians fired apace;
And the whole Host advanced with a slow pace;
Still gaining Ground upon the Enemy.
Who did return again as formerly,
Whereon the Christians make another stand!
Expecting them! The Turks discharged! and
Again, (as t's said before) quickly Retire.
Whereon the Christians, just as quickly Fire.
And thus they several times! while these Advance!
Unable to break in of the Christians,
Who gaining Ground still more and more before them!
Did drive the Turks like Droves of Beasts before them.
Whose Body shrinking, as if it had some Cramp!
The Christians thus got near the En'mys Camp.
Detached a Band of Foot with stout Dragoons
For to Attacque the Enemies great Guns.
WHereof (Without encount'ring great Disasters
From Turkish opposition) they are soon Masters.
Their greatest Bodies being distant thence
Had left small Force of Foot, for their Defense.
On the Right Wing! the Turkish Horse essayed;
To Charge the Christians Flank; which being eyed;
By Polands KING, mistrasting their Design:
He caused some part o'th Armies second Line,
Advance; and make a Front on that same side,
And with first Line, in Person at that Tide!
Charging with hideous; Force, their Cavalry,
His Shock like Thunder made them all give Way.
Whilst this was doing, by the Christians Lines!
The Grand Vizier had newly sprung two Mines;
And as if Hell's dread Mouth, had belched to shake!
The Walls to Flatness, and to Rubbish rake;
Such was the Ruin, such the hideous Crack.
Laying the Ramparts of the City flat,
Some little stound aside from the Scots-Gate.
Whereby a horrid Breach was made! atleast
Wide to receive some forty men a Breast.
Intending to have taken the Town by Storm:
And while's Detachments kept the Christians warm!
To Have quickly drawn within the Walls his Men;
And under'ts Guns his Baggage, Tents, and Train.
BUt tho that Force whereby he meant to effect't!
Left nothing undone that could be expected;
And fought like mad, and desp'rat, more then valiant.
Yet brave Count STAREMBERG, the Wise and Gallant,
Vienna's Governor, instantly Clapped
Ten greatest Guns upon the Breaches Lapp!
Load with Chain Ball, and lesser Musket Shotts;
Nails, pieces of Horse shoes, and brok'n Potts;
Cut off those mad Assailants in vast Numbers.
And still-fresh Throngs renewed Crowds him Cumbers:
Which the Besieged Repelled as Valiantly.
So that for half an hour, or much thereby!
The Ground full soakt with Gore, and Crimson died,
Was warmly disputed on either side.
Till Seas of Blood the Turkish fury Stenches,
And forced their Retreat back to their Trenches.
ON whom Count STAR'BERG bravely Sallying out,
Did make their slow Retreat a sudden Rout.
And a strong Party come just in the Nick!
From Lorrain, Rushing on the Enemies Neck,
Knocked out their Garlic Breaths with Deaths last Scarrs.
Of some four or five thousand Janizars.
AFter the setting of the evening Sun;
Which with some blushing Smiles, that night went down
To let the Christians see the Eclipsed Moon;
First waxing Pale, then Ruddy, then all Blood,
Then Dimm, Black, Dark, last vanished under Cloud.
So in Conclusion, when it was toward Night,
The Turks whole Body 'gan to take the Flight:
Beyond whose Camp the Christians them pursue!
But their fresh Horse soon bid them all Adieu.
Whose Horse o'reweary'd could not thus stand to it ay,
Having been eight and forty hours on Duty.
THe Soldier's charged, under pain of Death,
Not to stir from their Ranks one Inch of Path.
And to prevent all Hazards of Surprise!
The Army stood all Night in Battle wise,
Until next Jovial Morning did appear,
Telling them all the Turks were Marched clear.
When by first Sight of Heavens bright glorious Lamp?
The Soldiers had first leave to Spoil their Camp.
By Course still going out half Company,
And the other half standing the while on Duty.
And when the first half Company Returned!
The second half then to the Plunder Journey'd;
This being done! till all the Spoil was come,
Which did amount unto the following Sum.
HEre their whole Baggage, and Provision,
And a vast Store of Ammunition;
Above one hundred pieces of great Cannon.
And which (as Wars Denuncement,) Turks still hang on,
Two large Horse Tails at every Expedition.
The Grand Visurs own Tent, Horse, Gold, Provision,
And thirty thousand other Tents beside;
GRAND SEIGNIORS own great STANDARD rich to Pride:
Whose exact Figure, and Inscriptions;
Arabic! with t's Interpretations;
Which bear this Wars false Prophecys and Bage
Our Author has before his Title Page.
ALL these being taken, this mighty victory,
(In whose obtainment scarce one thousand d^^
And amongst those few Men of Quality,
On Christians Part) all next to GOD impute,
And needs to Poles brave PRINCE must Attribute
Whose gallant Conduct, matched with Courage high,
So often employed for Christians Liberty.
This day his Royal Person long Engaged,
Amongst En'mys thickest Throngs, and most Enraged,
And with him still, the gallant PRINCE his Son;
Thus early Signalized in this Action.
Nor ought their Highnesses to want their share,
Of Glory; since they all behaved there
So bravely well! and gained so great Renown,
Which shall be Famed till the last Trump sound.
ON thirteenth of September! Polands KING,
His Son PRINCE ALEXANDER following,
With the other Princes, Grandees, Noblemen,
Over Piles of mangled Corpse entered Vien:
Yielding sad Prospect of past Desolation,
Which more enhanc'd the present Joys occasion.
HIs MAJESTY, in's Circled Arms soon took
The Gallant star'berg! whose alone Conduct
And Valiant Courage had held out late Siege,
Against such vast Numbers, Deaths, and Dangers Huge.
Speaking his high Esteem o's Worthy Person,
And Prudent Conduct in most large Expression.
NExt day the EMPEROR Arrived there!
And quickly met the KING of Poland, where
He Marched on the Head of his brave Army!
Who were that time drawn up all in Battalzie:
To whom in most endearing terms he made
's Acknowledgments of late great Victory had.
WHo did receive them, with a Modesty,
Equal unto his Magnanimity:
Professing! he had only used at large
His just and best Endeavors, to Discharge
Those Obligations, Christian KINGS all owes,
To Christ'ndomes dear Saf'ty and Repose.
And that his prosperous Arms late good Success,
Was only owing the Divine Goodness!
And Brav'ry of those PRINCES! who had done
Him the Honor that their Troops to his should join.
'TWas ordered by the Imperial MAJESTY!
PRINCE ALEXANDER should presented be,
With Sword, with massy Diamonds richly Set,
And so (thus past this Interviers short Date)
Departed. And so likewise Polands KING
Decamp't his Army! that night following,
They March to Wiscke! where Bridge, of Boats, and Wood,
Below Presburg, take them over Danows Flood.
This was upon September twenty fifth,
The Imperial Army, which next day did lift!
Advancing after him, with equal Pace;
On twenty sev'nth, past over at this same place.
OCtober ninth! how soon they heard it told,
That a great Body of the Turks, did hold;
Near Barkan: being fourteen thousand strong,
The choice of all those Troops scop't here along,
After their Rout at Vien; under the hand,
Of several Bassas of the best Command.
The KING with some few of the Imperials Troop,
Advanced thither! all scarce yet come up.
NO sooner did the Turks perceive them come!
But with a hideous Shout came briskly one;
And charged with most desp'rat Resolution
Being received with as warm Execution.
After a sharp Dispute! the Turks all fly;
Where one of their great Bassas, there did die:
Another Bassa also Prisoner taken.
The rest fled hurrying over the Bridge at Gran:
Which breaking with the Crowd! the Stream then drowned,
Near half as many as the Sword did wound.
SO that of all that Body of the Turks,
Scarce twice two thousand did escape this Lurch.
In this ENGAGEMENT one thing's worthy Note!
PRINCE ALEXANDERS Horse under him Shot.
Here! a young English Lord, who Landsdown hight!
Did gallantly behave himself in Fight;
Commanding then a Regiment or Squad,
Of Soldiers in Count Taasts strong Brigad.
For which his Valor! when he did Retire,
Homewards! by Patent made COUNT of the EMPIRE.
And as sure mark, of gallant Service done well
By The Emperor declared was COUNT GREENVILE!
THe next Exploit, did Polands TRIUMPHS grace,
Was taking in of Zytchin a strong Place.
For having parted with the Duke of Lorrain!
And understanding that the Turks had therein,
A Garrison, which might as them best lists,
Incommod's Commerce with the Imperialists.
The KING did send the PRINCE, as young as keen,
Accompanied with Lublins Palatine.
To view it! while some Troops of Horse, them backed.
At whose Return gave Order to Attacque't.
WHere quickly marching to the Place (from hence)
They find the Turks in posture of Defense;
Who having notice, that the KING had given
Orders, unto the Cossacks; to lay even
Their Suburbs! they prevent the KINGS desire
The Night before setting them all on Fire.
WHich notwithstanding, Cossacks did not le^t!
From being soon possessed of a Gate
And breaking down its Palisados straight.
The Turks fought stoutly, made a brave Defense,
And after sharpest Dispute, forced thence
The much enraged Cossacks to Retire:
Till b'ing seconded with fresh Troops! like Fire
Getting new Vent, they do renew the Charge,
With such a forward, furious, vi'lent Rage;
Which soon to quit the Town, the Turks compells
And take them to the Castle and their Heels
Which presently his MAJESTY Assails.
ANd those within! desiring, to part fairly,
Hung out a Flagg of white! for Peace, and Party,
Their Chief Commander, with two others mo,
Came out, and prayed the KING to let them go,
To Buda! which once granted! they came out,
In all five hundred Horse, eight hundred Foot.
THey took within the Place, store of Provision;
With a great Quantity of Ammunition;
And twenty Cannon on the City Walls;
And many Field-Piece in the Castle alse.
HIs MAJESTY put this Town afterward.
Under Imperials Garrisons and Guards.
Next day he Summoned with Trumpets Hola,
Other two Castles, called Brigh and Holach.
Who yielded at Discretion, without Combat,
And thence he marched on to Kimasonbat.
Upon the sixteenth of November! where,
The Litwanian General met him there.
DVring the while, his MAJESTY did tarry,
Within those upper parts of Hungary!
By all fair means he could, he endeavored,
To gain Count Tekly to's IMPERIAL LORD.
Giving him all the sweetest Terms, best Offers;
HIMSELF for their Performance SUR'TY Profers;
But finding all Fssays to none effect,
With one who did his GOD, his PRINCE neglect.
And that it would not be expedient,
Nor yet for all his HOST convenient;
To Winter all together in those Parts:
Left only's Litwans there; and then departs,
With all the rest! b'ing now much weak'ned
With great continual Services they would made.
Marched home to Poland while with Journeys slow
December twenty first comes to Cracow.
WHere with most joyful Sloutings of Applause!
Loud Blessings on that Hand whose Sword gives Laws,
To the Arms and Empire of the furious Turks;
And rescued CHRIST'NDOM from late sad Lurch.
All Is Subjects JOY, LOVE, ADMIRATION, ring
Just Praises to their brave, great, glorious KING.
And Shoals of Polish Poems fly abroad!
To welcome CHRISTENDOMES dear MORTAL GOD.
MOre yet to inhance these Joys of SOBIETZKI!
News then arrived, that the Sieur Kiniski
The Cossacks General, being lately sent
Against the Turks, and Tartars! had obtain't
Over them both a mighty Victory;
Tho to their Numbers much inferior he.
THese were 'bove forty thousand Canibals!
In Arms, led by two Tartar Generals;
And Haley Bey a Turkish officer,
Who had a select Band of Spahis there;
And the firm Hope and Help of Turkish Wars,
Some other choicest Troops of Janizars;
Had with most sudden March, come speedily!
Designing for the Poles in Podolie,
Making great Progress in a little space,
For Rescue of block't up Caminiec.
Whereon the foresaid Cossacks General drew,
Some thirty thousand men, but Mustered new!
And marching on with swiftest Diligence,
To Intercept them ere they should Commence;
Upon December fourth, before they got in!
Bravely Attacqu't them, all near to Tilgrotin.
And with such hideous Slaughters them Defeat!
That in some three, or four, or five Hours date,
Most part in Battle, many in the Chase
They Killed some thirty thousand on the Place.
The two Tartarian Generals, in vain
Striving to Rally! were at once both Slain.
THere was taken Prisoner, Stout Haley Bey!
Who for's Life's Ransom offered to Pay,
No less in Gold than hundred thousand Crowns.
But Cossacks needy, greedy, bloody Hounds!
Into whose Hands the wealthy Haley fell,
For sharing of the Money did quarrel
And for to end the Dispute Killed himsell
WHich Victory won! the Cossacks did advance,
Into the Country of Tartarians
Of Budziack; where with Havoc, and Confusion,
Its said they flew at least an hundred thousand.
And having made all Budziack bloody Stage,
And Theater of Deaths, stints their Ravage.
Then they took in Bialogrod, and Ketin,
And placed strongest Garrisons therein.
ALL which good Haps made such Impression
On the Walachians! that to Polands Crown,
No less then thirty thousand, or thereby,
Have sworn Allegiance and Fidelity.
And with the Cossacks ever to Combine,
Against the Turks, and Tartars, when they Ioyn.
And t's said! Moldavians with Prosessions ample
Have Vowed to follow Walachies Example.
MEanwhile his MAJESTY has called a Diet,
Who being met! their universal Fiat,
May order Methods (if none chance to jarr)
For Prosecution of this happy War.
Resolved to be again in Field next Spring,
With greater Army, than e're Polish KING.
THus length wee've' tended this Triumphant PRINCE!
Throw several Actions of his Lise, e're since
His most Auspicious BIRTH! as well for Pole;
As the Empire; and CHRIST'NDOME in whole.
And now must leave him (for this present time)
Unto the Conduct of that Power Divine,
Which as yet hitherto! so may't still bless,
Him with all Constant, Wonderful Success.
WEE've used no Art in Painting this great KING;
Steel may need Varnish! Gold enamelling.
Pure Truth, high Virtue, like the Suns bright shine,
Need no more but be told, and heard, or seen.
HIs CHARACTER! who ever shall attempt!
May be the Muses MASTER; and EXEMPT,
In Rhet'ricks Trops, and Arts; and fluent strains
Of VERSES MEASURES beat to POEMS Veins.
May be MARS FATHER; or BELLONAS DAME;
And have engrost alls WORDS, all CONQVESTSF ame
And bear all ancient HEROES BVLK and NAME.
Let him be CYRUS, mixed with Aloxander!
Or POMPEY, knit with CAESAR, Romcs Commander!
Or ANNIBAL, agreed with SCIPIO!
Or BELIZARIUS with STILICO!
Let him be CHARLES the Great! or CHARLES the fifi!
Or if he can some third great CHARLES, more shift!
TAMBERLANE, SCANDERBEG, HUNIALES,
And all bcth named, and un-nam'd in this place.
Let him have all the WORLDS great SOULS in one!
This may of SOBIETSKI write, he cannot be done.
Give him for PAPER, CHRISTENDOM fair spree!
For INK, all CHRISTIAN En'mys BLOOD yet shed!
For PEN, that Prosperous SWORD drawn in his Hand!
Which save's own HEAD, HEART, ARM, none can Weila! and
Seeing none can PEN'T! then let HIM speak HIM^EL
GODS, for all CHRISTIANS GOOD, CREAT MIRACLE.
DEO, REGI, and ECCLESIAE.

