Holy Living.

In which are described The Means and Instruments of obtaining every Virtue,
and the Remedies against every Vice, and Considerations serving to the
resisting all Temptations.

Together with PRAYERS containing the whole duty of a Christian, and the parts
of Devotion fitted to all Occasians, and furnished for all Necessities.

By JER: TAILOR, D. D.

The 5th Edition corrected: With Additionals.

LONDON. Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1656.

TO THE Right Honorable and truly Noble RICHARD Lord VAUGHAN, Earl of Carbery,
Knight of the honorable Order of the Bath.
My Lord,
I Have lived to see Religion painted upon Banners, and thrust out of Churches,
and the Temple turned into a Tabernacle, and that Tabernacle made ambulatory,
and covered with skins of Beasts and torn Curtains, and God to be worshipped
not as he is the Father of our Lord Jesus (an afflicted Prince, the King of
sufferings) nor, as the God of peace (which two appellatives God newly took
upon him in the New Testament, and glories in for ever:) but he is owned now
rather as the Lord of Hosts, which title he was pleased to lay aside when the
Kingdom of the Gospel was preached by the Prince of peace. But when Religion
puts on Armor, and God is not acknowledged by his New Testament titles,
Religion may have in it the power of the Sword, but not the power of Godliness;
and we may complain of this to God, and amongst them that are afflicted, but we
have no remedy, but what we must expect from the fellowship of ^hrists
sufferings, and the returns of the God of peace. In the mean time, and now that
Religion pretends to stranger actions upon new principles; and men are apt to
prefer a prosperous error before an afflicted truth; and some will think
they are religious enough if their worshipings have in them the prevailing
ingredient; and the Ministers of Religion are so scattered that they cannot
unite to stop the inundation, and from Chairs or Pulpi^s, from their Synods or
Tribunals, chastise the iniquity of the error and the ambition of evil Guides,
and the infidelity of the willingly seduced multitude; and that those few good
people who have no other plot in their religion but to serve God and save their
souls, do want such assistances of ghostly counsel as may serve their emergent
needs* and assist their endeavors in the acquist of virtues, and relieve their
dangers when they are tempted to sin and death. I thought I had reasons
enough inviting me to draw into one body those advices which the several
necessities of many men must use at some time or other, and many of them daily:
that by a collection of holy precepts they might less feel the want of
personal and attending Guides and that the Rules for conduct of souls might be
committed to a Book which they might always have; since they could not always
have a Prophet at their needs, nor be suffered to go up to the house of the
Lord to inquire of the appointed Oracles.

I know, my Lord, that there are some interested persons who add scorn to the
afflictions of the Church of England, and because she is afflicted by Men, call
her forsaken of the Lord; and because her solemn Assemblies are scattered,
think that the Religion is lost, and the Church divorced from God; supposing
Christ (who was a Man of sorrows) to be angry with his Spouse when she is like
him, [for that is the true state of the Errour] and that he who promised his
Spirit to assist his servants in their troubles, will, because they are in
trouble, take away the Comforter from them, who cannot be a comforter, but
while he cures our sadnesses, and relieves our sorrows, and turns our
persecutions into joys, and Crowns, and Scepters. But concerning the present
state of the Church of England, I consider, that because we now want the
blessings of external communion in many degrees, and the circumstances of a
prosperous and unafflicted people, we are to take estimate of our selves with
single judgments, and every man is to give sentence concerning the state of his
own soul by the precepts and rules of our Lawgiver, not by the after-decrees
and usages of the Church; that is, by the essential parts of Religion rather
then by the uncertain significations of any exterior adherencies: for though
it be uncertain, when a Man is the Member of a Church, whether he be a Member
to Christ or no, because in the Churches Net there are fishes good and bad; yet
we may be sure that if we be members of Christ, we are of a Church of all
purposes of spiritual religion and salvation, and in order to this give me
leave to speak this great truth.

That Man does certainly belong to God, who, 1 Believes and is baptized into
all the Articles of the Christian faith, and studies to improve his knowledge
in the matters of God, so as may best make him to live a holy life2 He* that in
obedience to Christ worships God diligently, frequently, and constantly with
natural Religion, that is, of prayer, praises, and thanksgiving. 3 He that
takes all opportunities to remember Christ's death by a frequent Sacrament (as
it can be had) or else by inward acts of understanding, will, and memory (which
is the spiritual communion) supplies the want of the external rite. 4 He that
lives chastely.5 And is merciful. 6 And despises the World, using it as a Man,
but never suffering it to rifle a duty. 7 And is just in his dealing, and
diligent in his calling. 8 He that is humble in his spirit. 9 And obedient to
Government. 10 And content in his fortune and employment. 11 He that does his
duty because he loves God. 12 And especially if after all this he be afflicted,
and patient, or prepared to suffer affliction for the cause of God. The Man
that have these twelve signs of grace and predestination, does as certainly
belong to God, and is his Son, as surely as he is his creature.

And if my brethren in persecution, and in the bands of the Lord Jesus, can
truly show these marks, they shall not need be troubled that others can show a
prosperous outside, great revenues, public assembly, uninterrupted
successions of Bishops, prevailing Armies, or any arm of flesh, or less
certain circumstance. These are the marks of the Lord Jesus, and the characters
of a Christian: This is a good Religion: and these things Gods grace has put
into our powers, and Gods Laws have made to be our duty, and the nature of Men,
and the needs of Commonwealths have made to be necessary: the other accidents
and pomps of a Church are things without our power, and are not in our choice;
they are good to be used when they may be had, and they help to illustrate or
advantage it: but if any of them constitute a Church in the being of a society
and a Government, yet they are not of its constitution as it is Christian, and
hopes to be saved.

And now the case is so with us that we are reduced to that Religion which no
man can forbid; which we can keep in the midst of a persecution; by which the
Martyrs in the days of our Fathers went to Heaven; that by which we can be
servants of God, and receive the Spirit of Christ, and make use of his
comforts, and live in his love and in charity with all men; and they that do
so cannot perish.

My Lord, I have now described some general lines and features of that Religion
which I have more particularly set down in the following pages: in which I have
neither served nor desserved the interest of any party of Christians as they
are divided by uncharitable names from the rest of their brethren and no man
will have reason to be angry with me for refusing to mingle in his unnecessary
or vicious quarrels: especially while I study to do him good by conducting him
in the narrow way to Heaven, without intricating him in the Labyrinths and
wild turnings of Questions, and uncertain talkings. I have told what men ought
to do; and by what means they may be assisted; and in most cases I have also
told them why; and yet with as much quickness as I could think necessary to
establish a Rule, and not to engage in Homily or Discourse. In the use of which
Rules (although they are plain* useful, and fitted for the best and worst
understandings, and for the needs of all men, yet) I shall desire the Reader to
proceed with the following advises.

1. They that will with profit make use of the proper instruments of virtue,
must so live, as if they were always under the Physicians hand. For the
Counsels of Religion are not to be applied to the distempers of the soul, as
men use to take Hellebore; but they must dwell together with the Spirit of a
man, and be twisted about his understanding for ever: They must be used like
nourishment; that is, by a daily care and meditation; not like a single
medicine, and upon the actual pressure of a present necessity: For counsels and
wise discourses applied to an actual distemper, at the best are but like
strong smells to an Epileptick person, sometimes they may raise him, but they
never cure him. The following rules if they be made familiar to our natures,
and the thoughts of every day, may make Virtue and Religion become easy and
habitual: but when the temptation is present, and has already seized upon some
portions of our consent, we are not so apt to be counseled, and we find no
gust or relish in the Precept: the Lessons are the same, but the Instrument is
unstrung, or out of tune.

2. In using the instruments of virtue we must be curious to distinguish
instruments from duties; and prudent advices from necessary injunctions; and if
by any other means the duty can be secured, let there be no scruples stirred
concerning any other helps; only, if they can in that case strengthen and
secure the duty, or help toward perseverance, let them serve in that station
in which they can be placed. For there are some persons in whom the Spirit of
God has breathed so bright a flame of love, that they do all their acts of
virtue by perfect choice, and without objection; and their zeal is warmer then
that it will be allayed by temptation: and to such persons mortification by
Philosophical instruments, as fasting, sackcloth, and other rudenesses to the
body is wholly useless; It is always a more uncertain means to acquire any
virtue, or secure any duty; and if love has filled all the corners of our
soul, it alone is able to do all the work of God.

3. Be not nice in stating the obligations of Religion; but where the duty is
necessary and the means very reasonable in it self, dispute not too busily
whether in all Circumstances it can fit thy particular; but super totam
materiam, upon the whole, make use of it. For it is a good sign of a great
Religion, and no imprudence, when we have sufficiently considered the substance
of affairs, then to be easy, humble, obedient, apt and credulous in the
circumstances which are appointed to us in particular by our spiritual Guides,
or in general, by all wise men in cases not unlike. He that gives Alms, does
best, not always to consider the minutes and strict measures of his ability,
but to give freely, incuriously and abundantly. A man must not weigh grains in
the accounts of his repentance; but for a great sin have a great sorrow, and a
great severity* and in this take the ordinary advices; though it may be, a
less rigor might not be insufficient: (...), or Arithmetical measures,
especially of our own proportioning, are but arguments of want of Love, and of
forwardness in Religion; or else are instruments of scruple, and then become
dangerous. Use the rule heartily and enough, and there will be no harm in thy
error, if any should happen.

4. If thou intendest heartily to serve God, and avoid sin in any one instance,
refuse not the hardest and most severe advice that is prescribed in order to
it, though possibly it be a stranger to thee; for whatsoever it be, custom
will make it easy.

5. When many instruments for the obtaining any virtue or restraining any vice
are propounded, observe which of them fits thy person, or the circumstances of
thy need, and use it rather then the other; that by this means thou may be
engaged to watch and use spiritual arts and observation about thy soul.
Concerning the managing of which as the interest is greater, so the necessities
are more, and the cases more intricate, and the accidents and dangers greater
and more importunate; and there is greater skill required then in the securing
an estate, or restoring health to an infirm body. I wish all men in the world
did heartily believe so much of this as is true; it would very much help to do
the work of God.

Thus My Lord) I have made bold by your hand to reach out this little scroll of
cautions to all those who by seeing your honored name set before my Book,
shall by the faireness of such a Frontispice be invited to look into it. I must
confess it cannot but look like a design in me, to borrow your name and beg
your Patronage to my book, that if there be no other worth in it, yet at least
it may have the splendour and warmth of a burning-glasse, with borrowing a flame
from the Eye of Heaven, shines and burns by the rays of the Sun its patron* I
will not quit my self from the suspicion: for I cannot pretend it to be a
present either of it self fit to be offered to such a personage, or any part of
a just return, (but I humbly desire you would own it for an acknowledgment) of
those great endearments, and noblest usages you have past upon me: But so, men
in their Religion, give a piece of Gum or the fat of a cheap Lamb in Sacrifice
to him that gives them all that they have or need: and unless He who was
pleased to employ your Lordship as a great Minister of his Providence in making
a Promise of his good to me, the meanest of his servants [ that he would never
leave me nor forsake me] shall enable me by greater services of Religion to pay
my great Debt to your Honor, I must still increase my score, since I shall now
spend as much in my needs of pardon for this boldness as in the reception of
those favors by which I stand accountable to your Lordship in all the bands of
service and gratitude; though I am in the deepest sense of duty and affection

My most Honored Lord, Your Honors most obliged and Most Humble Servant. IER:
TAILOR.

The Table.
CHAP. I
COnsideration of the general instruments, and means serving to a holy life: by
way introduction. Page 1. Sect. 1.
Care of time, and the manner of spending it. 4 23 Rules for employing our
time. 7 The 5 benefits of this exercise. 17
Sect. 2.
Purity of intention or purpose in all our actions, etc. 17 10 Rules for our
intentions. 20 8 Signs of purity of intention. 23 3 Appendant Considerations.
27
Sect. 3.
The consideration and practice of the presence of God. 29 6 Several manners of
the divine presence. 30 10 Rules of exercising this consideration. 35 The 5
benefits of this exercise. 38 Prayers and Devotion according to the Religion
and purposes of the foregoing considerations. 41 Devotions for ordinary days.
42
CHAP. II.
Of Christian sobriety. 64 Sect. 1.
Of sobriety in the general sense. 64 5 Evil consequents of voluptuousness or
sensuality. 65 3 Degrees of sobriety. 67 6 Rules for suppressing
voluptuousness. 68
Sect. 2.
Of Temperance in eating and drinking. 71 4 Measures of Temperance in eating.
73 8 Signs and effects of Temperance, 75 Of Drunkenness. 76 7 Evil consequents
to Drunkenness. 78 8 Signs of Drunkenness. 80 11 Rules for the obtaining
temperance. 81
Sect. 3.
Of Chastity. 84 The 10 evil consequents of uncleanness. 88 7 Acts of Chastity
in general. 93 5 Acts of Virginal or Maiden Chastity. 95 5 Rules for Widows or
Vidual Chastity. 96 6 Rules for Married persons, or Matrimonial Chastity. 97 10
Remedies against uncleanness. 101
Sect. 4.
Of Humility. 106 9 Arguments against Pride by way of consideration. 107 19
Acts or offices of Humility. 110 14 Means and exercises of obtaining and
increasing the grace of Humility. 117 17 Signs of Humility. 124
Sect. 5.
Of Modesty. 126 4 Acts and duties of Modesty as it is opposed to Curiosity.
ibid. 6 Acts of Modesty as it is opposed to boldness. 130 10 Acts of Modesty as
it is opposed to Indecency. 132
Sect. 6.
Of Contentedness in all estates, etc. 135 2 General arguments for Content. 137
8 Instruments or exercises to procure contentedness. 142 8 Means to obtain
Content by way of consideration. 157 The Consid. applied to particular cases.
ibid. Of Poverty. 164 The charge of many Children. 173 Violent Necessities. 174
Death of Children, Friends, etc. 176 Untimely Death. 177 Death unseasonable.
180 Sudden Deaths or violent. 182 Being Childlesse, ibid. Evil, or unfortunate
Children. ibid. Our own Death. 183 Prayers for the several graces and parts of
Christian sobriety, fitted to the necessity of several persons 184

CHAP. III.
Of Christian Justice. 191 Sect. 1.
Of Obedience to our Superiors. 192 15 Acts and duties of obedience to all our
Superiors. 193 12 Remedies against disobedience by way of consideration. 198 3
Degrees of obedience. 203
Sect. 8.
Of Provision of that part of justice which is due from Superiors to
inferiors. 205 12 Duties of Kings and all the supreme power, as Lawgivers.
ibid. 2 Duties of Superiors as they are Judges. 209 5 Duties of Parents to
their Children. 210 Duty of Husbands and Wives reciprocally. 213 7 Duties of
Masters of Families. 215 Duty of Guardians or Tutors. 216
Sect. 3.
Of Negotiation or civil Contracts. 217 13 Rules and measures of Justice in
bargaining. ibid.
Sect. 4.
Of Restitution. 222 7 Rules of making Restitution as it concerns the persons
obliged. 224 9 As it concerns other circumstances. 227 Prayers to be said in
relation to the several obligations and offices of Justice. 232
CHAP. IV.
Of Christian religion. 241 1. Of the internal actions of religion. 242
Sect. 1.
Of Faith. 243 The 7 acts and offices of Faith. ibid. 8 Signs of true Faith.
245 8 Means and instruments to obtain Faith. 248
Sect. 2.
Of Christian Hope. 250 The 5 acts of Hope. 251 5 Rules to govern our Hope. 252
12 Means of Hope, and Remedies against Despair. 254
Sect. 3.
Of Charity or the Love of God. 261 The 8 acts of Love to God. 263 The 3
measures and rules of Divine Love. 266 6 Helps to increase our Love to God, by
way of exercise. The 2 several states of Love to God. 271 viz. The state of
Obedience. ibid. The state of Zeal. 272 8 Cautions and rules concerning zeal.
ibid. 2 Of the external actions of Religion. 275
Sect 4.
Of Reading or Hearing the Word of God. 276 5 General considerations concerning
it. 278 5 Rules for hearing or reading the Word. 279 4 Rules for reading
spiritual Books or hearing Sermons. 280
Sect. 5.
Of Fasting. 282 15 Rules for Christian fasting. ibid. Benefits of Fasting. 289
Sect. 6.
Of keeping Festivals and days holy to the Lord, particularly the Lords day.
ibid. 10 Rules for keeping the Lords day and other Christian Festivals. 292 3.
Of the mixed actions of Religion. 297
Sect 7.
Of Prayer. 297 (...) 1 Motives to Prayer. 298 16 Rules for the practice of
Prayer. 300 6 Cautions for making vows. 309 7 Remed. against wandering thoughts
etc. 311 10 Signs of tediousness of Spirit in our prayers, and all actions of
Religion. 313 11 Remedies against tediousness of Spirit. 314
Sect. 8.
Of Alms. 319 The 18 several kinds of corporal Alms. 321 The 14 several kinds
of spiritual Alms. 322 The 5 several kinds of mixed Alms. ibid. 16 Rules for
giving Alms. 323 13 Motives to Charity. 332 Remedies against the parents of
unmercifulness. 335 1.9 Against Envy by way of consideration. ib. 3.12 Remedies
against anger by way of exercise. 13 Remed. against anger by way of consid. 341
7 Remedies against Covetousness. 344
Sect. 9.
Of Repentance. 352 11 Acts and parts of Repentance. 355 4 Motives to
Repentance. 364
Sect. 10.
Of Preparation to, and the manner how to receive the Sacram. of the Lords
Supper. 367 14 Rules for preparation and worthy Communicating. 370 The effects
and benefits of worthy etc. 375 Prayers for all sorts of men, etc. 381


The Rule and Exercises of HOLY LIVING, etc.
CHAP. I. Consideration of the general instruments and means serving to a holy
Life: by way of Introduction.
IT is necessary that every Man should consider, that since God has given him
an excellent nature, wisdom and choice an understanding soul, and an immortal
spirit, having made him Lord over the Beasts, and but a little lower then the
Angels; he has also appointed for him a work and a service great enough to
employ those abilities, and has also designed him to a state of life after
this to which he can only arrive by that service and obedience. And therefore
as every man is wholly Gods own portion by the title of creation: so all our
labors and care, all our powers and faculties must be wholly employed in the
service of God, even all the days of our life, that this life being ended, we
may live with him for ever.

Neither is it sufficient that we think of the service of God as a work of the
least necessity, or of small employment, but that it be done by us as God
intended it; that it be done with great earnestness and passion, with much zeal
and desire: that we refuse no labor, that we bestow upon it much time, that we
use the best guides, and arrive at the end of glory by all the ways of grace,
of prudence and religion,

And indeed if we consider how much of our lives is taken up by the needs of
nature, how many years are wholly spent before we come to any use o^ reason,
how many years more before that reason is useful to us to any great purposes,
how imperfect our discourse is made by our evil education, false principles,
ill company, bad examples, and want of experience; how many parts of our wisest
and best years are spent in eating and sleeping in necessary businesses, and
unnecessary vanities, in wordly civilities, and less useful circumstances, in
the learning arts and sciences, languages or trades; that little portion of
hours that is left for the practices of piety, and religious walking with God,
is so short and trifling, that were not the goodness of God infinitely great,
it might seem unreasonable or impossible for us to expect of him eternal joys
in heaven, even after the well spending those few minutes which are left for
God, and Gods service, after we have served our selves, and our own occasions.

And yet it is considerable, that the fruit which comes from the many days of
recreation and vanity is very little, and although we scatter much, yet we
gather but little profit: but from the few hours we spend in prayer, and the
exercises of a pious life, the return is great and profitable; and what we
sow in the minutes and spare portions of a few years, grows up to crowns and
scepters in a happy and a glorious eternity.

1. Therefore, although it cannot be enjoined, that the greatest part of our
time be spent in the direct actions of devotion and religion, yet it will
become, not only a duty, but also a great providence to lay aside for the
services of God and the businesses of the Spirit as much as we can: because God
rewards our minutes with long and eternal happiness; and the greater portion of
our time we give to God, the more we treasure up for our selves; and No man is
a better Merchant then be that lays out his time upon God, and his money upon
the Poor.

2. Only it becomes us to remember and to adore Gods goodness for it, that God
has not only permitted us to serve the necessities of our nature, but has
made them to become parts of our duty; that if we by directing these actions to
the glory of God intend them as instruments to continue our persons in his
service, he by adopting them into religion may turn our nature into grace,
(...): Arria^n. Epict. l. 1. c. 13.
and accept our natural actions, as actions of religion God is pleased to
esteem it for a part of his service, if we eat or drink; so it be done done
temperately, and as may best preserve our health, that our health may enable
our services toward him: And there is no one minute of our lives (after we are
come to the use of reason) but we are, or may be doing the work of God; even
then when we most of all serve our selves.

3. To which if we add, that in these and all other actions of our lives we
always stand before God, acting, and speaking, and thinking in his presence,
and that it matters not that our conscience is sealed with secrecy, since it
lies open to God, it will concern us to behave our selves carefully, as in the
presence of our Judge.

These three considerations rightly managed, and applied to the several parts
and instances of our lives will be like Elisha stretched upon the child, apt
to put life and quickness into every part of it, and to make us live the life
of grace, and do the work of God.

I shall therefore by way of introduction reduce these three to practice, and
show how every Christian may improve all and each of these to the advantage of
piety, in the whole course of his life: that if he please to bear but one of
them upon his spirit, he may feel the benefit, like an universal instrument
helpful in all spiritual and temporal actions.

SECT. I. The first general instrument of holy living: Care of our time.
HE that is choice of his time will also be choice of his company, and choice
of his actions, lest the first engage him in vanity and losle, and the latter
by being criminal be a throwing his time and himself away, and a going back in
the accounts of eternity.

God has given to man a short time here upon earth, and yet upon this short
time eternity depends: but so, that for every hour of our life (after we are
persons capable of laws, and know good from evil) we must give account to the
great Judge of Men and Angels. And this is it which our blessed Savior told
us, that we must account for every idle word; not meaning, that every word
which is not designed to edification, or is less prudent, shall be reckoned
for a sin, but that the time which we spend in our idle talking and
unprofitable discoursings, that time which might and ought to have been
employed to spiritual and useful purposes, that is to be accounted for.

For we must remember, that we have a great work to do, many enemies to
conquer, many evils to prevent, much danger to run through, many difficulties
to be mastered, many necessities to serve, and much good to do many children
to provide for, or many friends to support, o^ many poor to relieve, or many
diseases to cure, besides the needs of nature, and of relation, our private and
our public cares, and duties of the world, which necessity and the providence
of God has adopted into the family of Religion.

And that we need not fear this instrument to be a snare to us, or that the
duty must end in scruple, vexation, and eternal fears, we must remember, that
the life of every man may be so ordered (and indeed must) that it may be a
perpetual serving of God: The greatest trouble and most busy trade, and wordly
encumbrances, when they are necessary or charitable, or profitable in order to
any of those ends, which we are bound to serve, whether public or private,
being a doing Gods work. For God provides the good things of the world to serve
the needs of nature, by the labors of the Plowman, the skill and pains of the
Artisan, and the dangers and traffic of the Merchant: These men are in their
callings the Ministers of the Divine providence, and the stewards of the
creation, and servants of a great family of God, the world, in the employment
of procuring necessaries for food and clothing, ornament and Physic. In their
proportions also, a King and a Priest, and a Prophet, a Judge and an Advocate,
doing the works of their employment according to their proper rules, are doing
the work of God, because they serve those necessities which God has made, and
yet made no provisions for them but by their Ministry. So that no man can
complain, that his calling takes him off from religion, his calling it self
and his very wordly employment in honest trades and offices, is a serving of
God, and if it be moderately pursued, and according to the rules of Christian
prudence, will leave void spaces enough for prayers and retirements of a more
spiritual religion.

God has given every man work enough to do, that there shall be no room for
idleness, and yet has so ordered the world, that there shall be space for
devotion. He that has the fewest businesses of the world, is called upon to
spend more time in the dressing of his soul, and he that has the most
affiairs, may so order them, that they shall be a service of God; whilst at
certain periods they are blessed with prayers and actions of religion, and all
day long are hallowed by a holy intention,

However, so long as Idleness is quite shut out from our lives, all the sins
of wantonness, softness and effeminacy are prevented, and there is but little
room left for temptation: and therefore to a busy man temptation is fain to
climb up together with his businesses, and sins creep upon him only by
accidents and occasions; whereas to an idle person they come in a full body,
and with open violence, and the impudence of a restless importunity, Ezekiel
16.49. Senec.


Idleness is called the Sin of Sodom and her daughters, and indeed is the
burial of a living man, an idle person being so useless to any purposes of God
and man, that he is like one that is dead, unconcerned in the changes and
necessities of the world: and he only lives to spend his time, and eat the
fruits of the earth, like a vermin or a wolf, when their time comes they die
and perish, and in the mean time do no good; they neither plow nor carry
burdens: all that they do, either is unprofitable, or mischievous,

Idleness is the greatest prodigality in the world: it throws away that, which
is unvaluable in respect of its present use, and irreparable when it is past,
being to be recovered by no power of art or nature. But the way to secure and
improve our time we may practice in the following Rules,

Rules for employing our Time.
1. In the morning, when you awake, accustom your self to think first upon
God, or something in order to his service; and at night also, let him close
thine eyes; and let your sleep be necessary and healthful, not idle and
expensive of time, beyond the needs and conveniences of nature; and sometimes
be curious to see the preparation which the sun makes, when he is coming forth
from his chambers of the East.

2. Let every man that has a calling, be diligent in pursuance of its
employment, so as not lightly, or without reasonable occasion to neglect it in
any of those times, which are usually and by the custom of prudent persons and
good husbands employed in it.

3. Let all the intervals, or void spaces of time be employed in prayers,
reading, meditating, works of nature, recreation, charity, friendliness and
neighborhood, and means of spiritual and corporal health: ever remembering, so
to work in our calling, as not to neglect the work of our high calling; but to
begin and end the day with God, with such forms of devotion, as shall be proper
to our necessities.

4. The resting days of Christians, and Festivals of the Church, must in no
sense be days of idleness, for it is better to plow upon holy days, then to
do nothing, or to do vitiously; but let them be spent in the works of the
day, that is, of Religion and Charity, according to the rules appointed.

See Chap. 4. Sect. 6.
5. Avoid the company of Drunkards and busybodies, and all such as are apt to
talk much to little purpose: for no man can be provident of his time, that is
not prudent in the choice of his company: and if one of the Speakers be vain,
tedious and trifling, he that hears, and he that answers in the discourse are
equal losers of their time.

6. Never talk with any man, or undertake any trifling employment merely to
pass the time away: for every day well spent may become a day of salvation,
and time rightly employed is an acceptable time. S Bern de tripli^^ ^ustedia,
And remember, that the time thou triflest away was given thee to repent in, to
pray for pardon of sins, to work out thy salvation, to do the work of grace,
to lay up against the day of Judgment, a treasure of good works, that thy time
may be crowned with Eternity.

7. In the midst of the works of thy calling often retire to God in short
prayers and ejaculations, Laudatur Augustes C^sar apud Lucanum media inter
praelia semper.

S^ellarum coel^que plagi^, inperisque vacabar.


and those may make up the want of those larger portions of time, which it may
be thou desire for devotion, and in which thou think other persons have
advantage of thee: for so thou reconcilest the outward work, and thy inward
calling, the Church and the Common wealth, the employment of the body and the
interest of thy soul; for be sure, that God is present at thy breathings and
hearty sighings of prayer as soon, as at the longer offices of less busied
persons; and thy time is as truly sanctified by a trade, and devout, though
shorter prayers, as by the longer offices of those whose time is not filled up
with labor and useful business.

8. Let your employment be such as may become a reasonable person; and not be a
business fit for children or distracted people; but fit for your age and
understanding. For a man may be very idly busy, and take great pains to so
little purpose, that in his labors and expense of time he shall serve no end
but of folly, and vanity. There are some Trades, that wholly serve the ends of
idle persons and fools; and such as are fit to be seized upon by the severity
of laws, and banished from under the sun: and there are some people who are
busy, but it is as Domitian was, in catching flies.

9. Let your employment be fitted to your person and calling. Some there are
that employ their time in affairs infinitely below the dignity of their person,
and being called by God, or by the Republic to help to bear great burdens, and
to judge a people, do enfeeble their understandings, and disable their persons
by fordid and brutish business. Thus Nero went up and down Greece* and
challenged the fiddlers at their trade. Aeropus a Macedonian King made Lanterns.
Harcatius the King of Parthia was a Mole-catcher: and Biantes the Lydian filed
needles. He that is appointed to minister in holy things, must not suffer
secular affairs and sordid arts to eat up great portions of his employment: a
Clergy man must not keep a Tavern, nor a Judge be an Inne-keeper; and it was a
great idleness in Theophylact the Patriarch of C P. to spend his time in his
stable of horses, when he should have been in his study, or the Pulpit, or
saying his holy offices. Such employments are the diseases of labor, and the
rust of time which it contracts, not by lying still, but by dirty employment.

10. Let our employment be such as becomes a Christian, that is, in no sense
mingled with sin; for he that takes pains to serve the ends of covetousness, or
ministers to another others lust, or keeps a shop of impurities or
intemperance, is idle in the worst sense, for every hour so spent runs him
backward, and must be spent again in the remaining and shorter part of his
life, and spent better.

11. Persons of great quality, and of no trade, are to be most prudent and
curious in their employment and traffic of time. They are miserable, if their
education has been so loose and undisciplined, as to leave them unfurnished of
skill to spend their time: but most miserable are they, if such misgovernment
and unskilfulness make them fall into vicious and baser company, and drive on
their time by the sad minutes and periods of sin and death. * They that are
learned know the worth of time, and the manner how well to improve a day; and
they are to prepare themselves for such purposes, in which they may be most
useful in order to arts or arms: to counsel in public, or government in their
Country: But for others of them that are unlearned, let them choose good
company, such as may not tempt them to a vice, or join with them in any: but
that may supply their defects by counsel and discourse, by way of conduct and
conversation. Let them learn easy and useful things, read history, and the
laws of the Land, learn the customs of their country, the condition of their
own estate, profitable and charitable contrivances of it: let them study
prudently to govern their families, learn the burdens of their Tenants, the
necessities of their neighbors, and in their proportion supply them, and
reconcile their enmities, and prevent their Lawsuits, or quickly end them, and
in this glut of leisure and disemployment, let them set apart greater portions
of their time for religion, and the necessities of their Souls.

12. Let the women of noble birth and great fortunes do the same things in
their proportions and capacities, nurse their children, look to the affairs
of the house, visit poor cottages, and relieve their necessities, be courteous
to the neighborhood, learn in silence of their husbands, or their spiritual
Guides, read good books, pray often, and speak little, and learn to do good
works for necessary uses; for by that phrase S. Paul expresses the obligation
of Christian women to good houswifery, and charitable provisions for their
family and neighborhood.

13. Let all persons of all conditions avoid all delicacy and niceness in their
clothing or diet, because such softness engages them upon great mispendings of
their time, while they dress and comb out all their opportunities of their
morning devotion, and half the days severity, and sleep out the care and
provision for their souls.

14. Let every one of every condition avoid curiosity, and all enquiry into
things that concern them not. For all business in things that concern us not,
is an employing our time to no good of ours, and therefore not in order to a
happy Eternity. In this account our neighbors necessities are not to be
reckoned; for they concern us as one member is concerned in the grief of
another; but going from house to house, tatlers, and busybodies, which are
the canker and rust of idleness, as idleness is the rust of time, are reproved
by the Apostle in severe language, and forbidden in order to this exercise.

15. As much as may be, cut off all impertinent and useless employments of
your life, unnecessary and fantastic visits, long waittings upon great
personages, where neither duty, nor necessity, nor charity obliges us, all vain
meetings, all laborious trifles, and whatsoever spends much time to no real,
civil, religious, or charitable purpose.

16. Let not your recreations be lavish spenders of your time, but choose such
which are healthful, short, transient, recreative, and apt to refresh you; but
at no hand dwell upon them, or make them your great employment: for he that
spends his time in sports, and calls it recreation, is like him, whose garment
is all made of fringes, and his meat nothing but sawces, they are healthless,
chargeable and useless. And therefore avoid such games which require much time
or long attendance; or which are apt to steal thy affections from more severe
employments. For to whatsoever thou have given thy affections, thou will not
grudge to give thy time. Natural necessity and the example of S. John (who
recreated himself with sporting with a tame Partridge) teach us that it is
lawful to relax and unbend our bow, Cassian Collat. 24. c. 21.
but not to suffer it to be unready or unstrung.

17. Set apart some portions of every day for more solemn devotion and
religious employment, which be severe in observing: and if variety of
employment, or prudent affairs, or civil society press upon you, yet so order
thy rule, that the necessary parts of it be not omitted; and though just
occasions may make our prayers shorter, yet let nothing but a violent, sudden
and impatient necessity make thee upon any one day wholly to omit thy morning
and evening devotions; which if you be forced to make very short, you may
supply and lengthen with ejaculations and short retirements in the day time in
the midst of your employment, or of your company.

Ie^ 48.10.
18. Do not the work of God negligently and idly: let not thy heart be upon
the world, when thy hand is lift up in prayer: and be sure to prefer an action
of religion in its place and proper season before al worldly pleasure, letting
secular things (that may be dispensed within themselves) in these circumstances
wait upon the other; not like the Patriarch who ran from the Altar in S. Sophia
to his stable in all his Pontificals, and in the midst of his office, to see a
Colt newly fallen from his beloved and much valued mare Phorbante. Plutarch. de
Curiosit.
More prudent and severe was that of Sir Thomas More, who being sent for by the
King when he was at his prayers in public, returned answer, he would attend
him when he had first performed his service to the KING of Kings. And it did
honor to Rusticus, that when Letters from Caesar were given to him, he refused
to open them, till the Philosopher had done his Lecture: In honoring God and
doing his work, put forth all thy strength, for of that time only thou may
be most confident that it is gained, which is prudently and zealously spent in
Gods service.

19. When the Clock strikes, or however else you shall measure the day, it is
good to say a short ejaculation every hour, that the parts and returns of
devotion may be the measure of your time: and do so also in all the breaches
of thy sleep, that those spaces which have in them no direct business of the
world may be filled with religion.

20, If by thus doing you have not secured your time by an early and forehanded
care, (...). Procop. 2. Vandal.
yet be sure by a timely diligence to redeem the time, that is, to be pious and
religious in such instances in which formerly you have sinned, and to bestow
your time especially upon such graces, the contrary whereof you have formerly
practiced, doing actions of chastity and temperance with as great a zeal and
earnestness as you did once act your uncleanness: and then, by all arts to
watch against your present and future dangers, from day to day securing your
standing; this is properly to redeem your time, that is to buy your security of
it at the rate of any labor and ^^nest arts.

1 Cor. 7.5.
21. Let him that is most busied set apart some solemn time every year, in
which, for the time quitting all wordly business, he may attend wholly to
fasting and prayer, and the dressing of his soul by confessions, meditations
and attendances upon God; that he may make up his accounts, renew his vows,
make amends for his carelessenesse, and retire back again from whence levity
and the vanities of the world, or the opportunity of temptations, or the
distraction of secular affairs have carried him.

22. In this we shall be much assisted, and we shall find the work more easy,
if before we sleep every night (...). Pythag Came.
we examine the actions of the past day with a particular scrutiny, if there
have been any accident extraordinary: as, long discourse, a Feast, much
business, variety of company: If nothing but common has happened, the less
examination will suffice: only let us take care that we sleep not without such
a recollection of the actions of the day, as may represent any thing that is
remarkable, and great either to be the matter of sorrow or thanksgiving: for
other things, a general care is proportionable.

23. Let all these things be done prudently and moderately; not with scruple
and vexation. For these are good advantages, but the particulars are not divine
commandments; and therefore are to be used as shall be found expedient to
every ones condition. For, provided that our du^^ be secured; for the degrees
and for the instruments, every man is permitted to himself and the conduct of
such who shall be appointed to him. He is happy, that can secure every hour to
a sober or a pious employment: but the duty consists not scrupulously in
minutes and half hours, but in greater portions of time; provided, that no
minute be employed in sin, and the great portions of our time be spent in sober
employment; and all the appointed days and some portions of every day be
allowed for Religion. In all the lesser parts of time we are left to our own
elections and prudent management, and to the consideration of the great degrees
and differences of glory that are laid up in Heaven for us, according to the
degrees of our care and piety and diligence,

The benefits of this exercise.
This exercise, besides that it has influence upon our whole lives, it has a
special efficacy for the preventing of 1. Beggarly sins; doing good, as the
proper sudden changes, that we shall not

SECT. II. The second general instrument of holy Living: Purity of intention
THat we should intend and design Gods glory in every action we do, whether
it be natural or chosen, is expressed by S. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether ye eat or drink, do all to the glory of God: Which rule, when we
observe every action of nature becomes religious, and every meal is an act of
worship, and shall have its reward in its proportion, as well as an act of
prayer. Blessed be that goodness and grace of God, which out of infinite desire
to glorify and save mankind, would make the very works of nature capable of
becoming acts of virtue, that all our life time we may do him service.

This grace is so excellent, that it sanctifies the most common action of our
life and yet so necessary, that without it the very best actions of our
devotion are imperfect and vicious. For he that prays out of custom, or gives
alms for praise, or fasts to be accounted religious, is but a Pharisee in his
devotion, and a beggar in his alms, and an hypocrite in his fast. But a holy
end sanctifies all these, and all other actions which can be made holy, and
gives distinction to them and procures acceptance.

For, as to know the end, distinguishes a Man from a Beast: so to choose a good
end, distinguishes him from an evil man. Hezekiah repeated his good deeds upon
his sick bed, and obtained favor of God; but the Pharisee was accounted
insolent for doing the same thing; because this man did it to upbraid his
brother, the other to obtain a mercy of God. Atticus eximie si coenat, lautus
habetur,
Si Rutilus, demens --
Iuven: Sat: 11.
Zacharias questioned with the Angel about his message, and was made
speechless for his incredulity; but the blessed Virgin Mary questioned too,
and was blameless; for she did it to enquire after the manner of the thing;
but he did not believe the thing it self: He doubted of Gods power, or the
truth of the messenger; but she only of her own in capacity. This was it which
distinguished the mourning of David from the exclamation of Saul: Seneca.
the confession of Pharaoh from that of Manasses: the tears of Peter from the
repentance of Judas: For the praise is not in the deed done, but in the manner
of its doing. If a man visits his sick friend, and watches at his pillow for
charity sake, and because of his old affection, we approve it: but if he does
it in hope of legacy, he is a Vulture, and only watches for the carcass. The
same things are honest and dishonest: the manner of doing them, and the end of
the design makes the separation.

Holy intention is to the actions of a man that which the soul is to the body,
or form to its matter, or the root to the tree, or the Sun to the World, or the
Fountain to a River, or the Base to a Pillar: for without these the body is a
dead trunk, the matter is sluggish, the tree is a block, the world is darkness,
the river is quickly dry, the pillar rushes into flatness and a ruin; and the
action is sinful, or unprofitable and vain. The poor Farmer that gave a dish of
cold water to Artaxerxes was rewarded with a golden goblet; and he that gives
the same present to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple shall have a Crown:
but if he gives water in despite when the Disciple needs wine or a Cordial, his
reward shall be to want that water to cool his tongue. * But this Duty must be
reduced to Rules.

Rules for our intentions.
1. In every action reflect upon the end; and in your undertaking it, consider
why you do it, and what you propound to your self for a reward, and to your
action as its end,

2. Begin every action in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: the meaning of which is, that we be careful, that we do not the action
without the permission or warrant of God. 2. That we design it to the glory of
God, if not in the direct action, yet at least in its consequence; if not in
the particular, yet at least in the whole order of things and accidents. 3.
That it may be so blessed, that what you intend for innocent and holy purposes,
may not by any chance or abuse, or misunderstanding of men be turned into evil,
or made the occasion of sin.

3. Let every action of concernment be begun with prayer, that God would not
only bless the action, but sanctify your purpose; and make an oblation of the
action to God: holy and well intended actions being the best oblations and
presents we can make to God; and when God is entitled to them, he will the
rather keep the fire upon the Altar bright and shining.

4. In the prosecution of the action, renew and reinkindle your purpose by
short ejaculations to these purposes: [ Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy Name let all praise be given:] and consider, [ Now I am working the
work of God: I am his servant, I am in a happy employment, I am doing my
Masters business I am not at my own dispose, I am using his talents, and all
the gain must be his:] for then be sure, as the glory is his, so the reward
shall be thine. If thou bring his goods home with increase, he will make
thee ruler over Cities.

5. Have a ca^e that while the Altar thus sends up a holy fume, thou do not
suffer the birds to come and carry away the Sacrifice: that is, let not that
which began well, and was intended for Gods glory, decline and end in thy own
praise, or temporal satisfaction, or a sin. A story told to represent the
vileness of unchastity is well begun; but if thy female auditor be pleased with
thy language, and begins rather to like thy person for thy story, then to
dislike the crime: Qui su^atur ut mae^he^t^r, maechas est magis quam su^ Arist.
Eth.
be watchful, lest this goodly head of gold descend in silver and brass, and
end in iron and clay, like Nebuchadnezzars image, for from the end it shall
have its name and reward.

6. If any accidental event which was not first intended by thee can come to
pass, let it not be taken into thy purposes, nor at all be made use of; as if
by telling a true story you can do an ill turn to your enemy, by no means do
it; but when the temptation is found out, turn all thine enmity upon that.

7. In every more solemn action of Religion, join together many good ends, that
the consideration of them may entertain all your affections, and that when any
one ceases, the purity of your intention may be supported by another supply. He
that fasts only to tame a rebellious body, when he is provided of a remedy
either in Grace or Nature, may be tempted to leave off his fasting. But he that
in his fast intends the mortification of every unruly appetite, an accustoming
himself to bear the yoke of the Lord a contempt of the pleasures of meat and
drink, humiliation of all wilder thoughts, obedience and humility, austerity
and charity, and the convenience and assistance to devotion, and to do an act
of repentance; whatever happens, will have reason enough to make him to
continue his purpose, and to sanctify it. And certain it is, the more good
ends are designed in an action, the more degrees of excellency the man obtains.

8. If any temptation to spoil your purpose happens in a religious duty, do
not presently omit the action, but rather strive to rectify your intention and
to mortify the temptation. S. Bernard taught us this rule: For when the Devil
observing him to preach excellently, and to do much benefit to his hearers,
tempted him to vain glory, hoping that the good man to avoid that, would cease
preaching, he gave his answer only. I neither began for thee, neither for thee
will I make an end.

9. In all actions which are of long continuance, deliberation and abode, let
your holy and pious intention be actual, that is, that it be by a special
prayer, or action, by a peculiar act of resignation or oblation given to God:
but in smaller actions, and little things, and indifferent, fail not to secure
a pious habitual intention, that is, that it be included within your general
care, that no action have an ill end; and that it be comprehended in your
general prayers, whereby you offer your self and all you do to Gods glory.

10. Call not every temporal end, a defiling of thy intention, but only, 1.
When it contradicts any of the ends of God, or 2. When it is principally
intended in an action of religion. For sometimes a temporal end is part of our
duty: and such are all the actions of our calling, whether our employment be
religious or civil: we are commanded to provide for our family: but if the
Minister of Divine offices shall take upon him that holy calling for covetous
or ambitious ends, or shall not design the glory of God principally and
especially, he has polluted his hands and his heart; and the fire of the Altar
is quenched, or it sends forth nothing but the smoke of mushroms, or unpleasant
gums. And it is a great unworthiness to prefer the interest of a creature
before the ends of God the Almighty Creator.

But because many cases may happen in which a man's heart may deceive him, and
he may not well know what is in his own spirit; therefore by these following
signs we shall best make a judgment whether our intentions be pure, and our
purposes holy.

Signs of purity of intention.
1. It is probable our hearts are right with God, and our intentions innocent
and pious, See Sect ^ of this (...) Chap ^ ^^^^le 18.
if we set upon actions of religion or civil life with an affection
proportioned to the quality of the work; that we act our temporal affairs with
a desire no greater then our necessity; and that in actions of religion we be
zealous, active, and operative, so far as prudence will permit; but in all
cases, that we value a religious design before a temporal; when otherwise they
are in equal order to their several ends: that is, that whatsoever is necessary
in order to our souls health be higher esteemed then what is for bodily; and
the necessities, the indispensable necessities of the spirit be served before
the needs of nature, when they are required in their several circumstances: Or
plainer yet, when we choose any temporal inconvenience, rather then commit a
sin, and when we choose to do a duty rather then to get gain. But he that does
his recreation, or his merchandise cheerfully, promptly, readily and busily,
and the works of religion slowly, flatly, and without appetite, and the spirit
moves like Pharaohs chariots when the wheels were off, it is a sign that his
heart is not right with God, but it cleaves too much to the world.

2. It is likely our hearts are pure, and our intentions spotless, when we are
not solicitous of the opinion and censures of men; but only that we do our
duty, and be accepted of God. For our eyes will certainly be fixed there from
whence we expect our reward: and if we desire that god should approve us, it is
a sign we do his work, and expect him our Play Master.

3. He that does as well in private between God and his own soul as in public,
in Pulpits, in Theaters, and Marketplaces, has given himself a good testimony
that his purposes are full of honesty, nobleness and integrity. For what
Helkanah said to the Mother of Samuel, Am not I better to thee then ten sons?
is most certainly verified concerning God: that he, who is to be our Judge, is
better then ten thousand witnesses. But he, that would have his virtue
published, studies not virtue, but glory. He is not just, Seneca Ep. 115.
that will not be just without praise: but he is a righteousman that does
justice, when to do so, is made infamous: and he is a wise man who is
delighted with an ill name that is well gotten. S Chrysostom. li. de cempun. cordis.
And indeed that man has a strange covetousness, or folly, that is not
contented with this reward, that, he has pleased God. And see what he gets by
it? S Greg. Moral 8. cap. 25.
He that does good works for praise, or secular ends, sells an inestimable
jewel for a trifle; and that which would purchase Heaven for him, he parts with
for the breath of the people, which at the best is but air, and that not often
wholesome.

4. It is well also when we are not sollicitous or troubled concerning the
effect and event of all our actions; but that being first by Prayer recommended
to him, is lest at his dispose: for then in case the event be not answerable to
our desires, or to the efficacy of the instrument, we have nothing left to rest
in, but the honesty of our purposes; which it is the more likely we have
secured, by how much more we are indifferent concerning the success. S. James
converted but eight persons, when he preached in Spain; and our blessed Savior
converted fewer, then his own Disciples did: And if thy labors prove
unprosperous, if thou be much troubled at that, it is certain thou did not
think thy self secure of a reward for your intention, which you might have
done if it had been pure and just.

5. He loves virtue for Gods sake and its own, that loves and honors it
wherever it is to be seen; but he that is envious or angry at a virtue that is
not his own, at the perfection or excellency of his Neighbor, is not covetous
of the virtue, but of its reward and reputation, and then his intentions are
polluted. It was a great ingenuity in Moses, that wished all the people might
be prophets; but if he had designed his own honor, he would have prophesied
alone. But he that desires only that the work of God and religion shall go on,
is pleased with it, who ever is the instrument.

6. He that despises the world and all its appendent vanities is the best
Judge, and the most secured of his intentions, because he is the furthest
removed from a temptation. Every degree of mortification is a testimony of the
purity of our purposes, and in what degree we despise sensual pleasure, or
secular honors, or wordly reputation, in the same degree we shall conclude our
heart, right to religion and spiritual designs.

7. When we are not solicitous concerning the instruments and means of our
actions, but use those means which God has laid before us, with resignation,
indifferency and thankfulness, it is a good sign that we are rather intent
upon the end of Gods glory, then our own convenience or temporal satisfaction.
He that is indifferent whether he serve God in riches or in poverty, is rather
a seeker of God, then of himself; and he that will throw away a good book,
because it is not curiously gilded, is more desirous to please his eye, then
to inform his understanding.

8. When a temporal end consisting with a spiritual, and pretended to be
subordinate to it, happens to fail and be defeated, if we can rejoice in that,
so Gods glory may be secured, and the interests of religion; it is a great
sign our hearts are right, and our ends prudently designed and ordered.

When our intentions are thus balanced, regulated and discerned, we may
consider, 1. That this exercise is of so universal efficacy in the whole course
of a holy life, that it is like the soul to every holy action, and must be
provided for in every undertaking; and is of it self alone sufficient to make
all natural and indifferent actions to be adopted into the family of religion.

2. That there are some actions, which are usually reckoned as parts of our
religion, which yet of themselves are so relative and imperfect, that without
the purity of intention they degenerate: and unless they be directed and
proceed on to those purposes which God designed them to, they return into the
family of common, secular, or sinful actions. Thus alms are for charity:
fasting for temperance: prayer is for religion: humiliation is for humility:
austerity or sufferance is in order to the virtue of patience: and when these
actions fail of their several ends, or are not directed to their own purposes,
alms are misspent; fasting is an impertinent trouble; prayer is but lip-labor
humiliation is but hypocrisy; sufferance is but vexation; for such were the
alms of the Pharisee, the fast of Jezabel, the prayer of Judah reproved by the
Prophet Isaiah the humiliation of Ahab, the martyrdom of Haereticks; in which
nothing is given to God but the body, or the forms of Religion, but the soul,
and the power of godliness is wholly wanting.

3. We are to consider that no intention can sanctify an unholy or unlawful
action: Saul the King disobeyed Gods commandment, and spared the cattle of
Amalek to reserve the best for sacrifice: And Saul the Pharisee persecuted the
Church of God with a design to do God service: and they that killed the
Apostles had also good purposes, but they had unhallowed actions: S. Be^n lib.
de praecept.
When there is both truth in election and charity in the intention; when we go
to God in ways of his own choosing, or approving, then our eye is single, and
our hands are clean, and our hearts are pure. But when a man does evil that
good may come of it, or good to an evil purpose, that man does like him that
rowles himself in thorns that he may sleep easily: he rosts himself in the
fire, that he may quench his thirst with his own sweat; he turns his face to
the East, that he may go to bed with the Sun. I end this with the saying of a
wise Heathen. Publiu^ Mimus.
He is to be called evil that is good only for his own sake: Regard not how
full hands you bring to God, but how pure: Many cease from sin out of fear
alone, not out of innocence or love of virtue, and they (as yet) are not to be
called innocent, but timorous.

SECT. III. The third general instrument of holy living: or the practice of the
presence of God.
THat God is present in all places, the he sees every action, hears all
discourses, and understands every thought, is no strange thing to a Christian
ear, who has been taught this doctrine, not only by right reason, and the
consent of all the wise men in the world, but also by God himself in holy
Scripture. [ Am I a God at hand (says the Lord) and not a God afar off? Ier.
23 24.
Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him? Heb. 4.13.
says the Lord Do not I fill heaven and earth? Neither is there any creature
that is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and open to the
eyes of him with whom we have to do; Acts 17.28.
for in him we live and move and have our being.] God is wholly in every place,
included in no place, not bound with cords, except those of love) not divided
into parts, not changeable into several shapes, filling heaven and earth with
his present power, and with his never absent nature. Lib 7 de Cavit. cap. 30
So S. Augustine expresses this article. So that we may imagine GOD to be as
the Air and the Sea, and we all enclosed in his circle, wrapped up in the lap of
his infinite nature, or as infants in the wombs of their pregnant Mothers: and
we can no more be removed from the presence of God, then from our own being.

Several manners of the divine presence.
The presence of God is understood by us in several manners and to several
purposes.

1. God is present by his essence, which because it is infinite cannot be
contained within the limits of any place: and because he is of an essential
purity, and spiritual nature he cannot be undervalued by being supposed present
in the places of unnatural uncleanness: because as the sun reflecting upon the
mud of strands and shores is unpolluted in its beams: so is God not dishonored
when we suppose him in every of his Creatures, and in every part of every one
of them, and is still as unmixt with any unhandsome adherance, as is the soul
in the bowels of the body.

(...) Resp. ad Orthod.
2. God is every where present by his power. He rouls the Orbs of Heaven with
his hand, he fixes the Earth with his Foot, he guides all the Creatures with
his Eye, and refreshes them with his influence: He makes the powers of Hell to
shake with his terrors, and binds the Devils with his Word, and throws them
out with his command; and sends the Angels on Embassies with his decrees: He
hardens the joints of Infants, and confirms the bones when they are fashioned
beneath secretly in the earth: He it is that assists at the numerous
productions of fishes, and there is not one hollowness in the bottom of the
sea, but he shows himself to be Lord of it, by sustaining there the Creatures
that come to dwell in it: And in the wilderness, the Bittern and the Stork, the
Dragon and the Satyr, the Unicorn and the Elk live upon his provisions, and
severe his power, and feel the force of his Almightinesse.

3. God is more specially present in some places by the several and more
special manifestations of himself to extraordinary purposes: 1. By glory: Thus
his seat is in Heaven; because there he sits incircled with all the outward
demonstrations of his glory, which he is pleased to show to all the inhabitants
of those his inward and secret Courts. And t^u^ they that die in the Lord may
be properly said to be go^e to God; with whom although they were before, yet
now they enter into his Courts, into the secret of his Tabernacle, into the
retinue and splendour of his glory. That is called walking with God, but this is
dwelling or being with him I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, so
said S. Paul. But this manner of the Divine presence is reserved for the elect
people of God, and for their portion in their country.

4. God is by grace and benediction specially present in holy places, Mat. 18
20. Heb. 10.25
and in the solemn assemblies of his servants. If holy people meet in grots and
dens of the earth, when persecution or a public necessity disturbs the public
order, circumstance, and convenience, God fails not to come thither to them:
but God is also by the same or a greater reason present there where they meet
ordinarily, by order and public authority: There God is present ordinarily,
that is, at every such meeting. God will go out of his way to meet his Saints,
when themselves are forced out of their way of order by a sad necessity: but
else, 1 King. 5 9. Psalm 138.1, 2.
Gods usual way is to be present in those places where his servants are
appointed ordinarily, to meet. But his presence there signifies nothing but in
readiness to hear their prayers to bless their persons, to accept their
offices, and to like even the circumstance of orderly and public meeting. For
thither, the prayers of consecration, the public authority separating it, and
Gods love of order, and the reasonable customs of Religion, have in ordinary,
and in a certain degree fixed this manner of his presence; and he loves to have
it so.

5. God is especially present in the hearts of his people by his holy Spirit:
and indeed the hearts of holy men are Temples in the truth of things, and in
type and shadow they are Heaven it self. For God reigns in the hearts of his
servants: There is his Kingdom. The power of grace has subdued all his
enemies: There is his power. They serve him night and day, and give him thanks
and praise; that is his glory: This is the religion and worship of God in the
Temple. The Temple it self is the heart of man; Christ is the High Priest, who
from thence sends up the incense of prayers, and joins them to his own
intercession, and presents all together to his Father; and the Holy Ghost by
his dwelling there, has also consecrated it into a Temple; 1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor.
6.16.
and God dwells in our hearts by faith, and Christ by his Spirit, and the Spirit
by his purities; so that we are also Cabinets of the Mysterious Trinity; and
and what is this short of Heaven it self, but as infancy is short of manhood,
and letters of words? The same state of life it is, but not the same age. It is
Heaven in a Looking glass (dark, but yet true) representing the beauties of
the soul, and the graces of God, and the images of his eternal glory by the
reality of a special presence.

6. God is especially present in the consciences of all persons, good and bad,
by way of testimony and ^udgment: that is, he is there a remembrancer to call
our actions to mind, a witness to bring them to judgment, and a Judge to
acquit or to condemn. And although this manner of presence is in this life
after the manner of this life, that is, imperfect, and we forget many actions
of our lives; yet the greatest changes of our state of grace or sin, our most
considerable actions are always present, like Capital Letters to an aged and
dim eye: and at the day of judgment God shall draw aside the cloud, and
manifest this manner of his presence more notoriously, and make it appear, that
he was an observer of our very thoughts; and that he only laid those things
by, which because we covered with dust and negligence they were not then
discerned. But when we are risen from our dust and imperfection, they all
appear plain, and legible.

Now the consideration of this great truth: is of a very universal use in the
whole course of the life of a Christian. All the consequents and effects of it
are universal. He that remembers that God stands a witness and a judge,
beholding every secrecy; besides his impiety, must have put on impudence if he
be not much restrained in his temptation to sin. For the greatest part of sins
is taken away, if a man have a witness of his conversation: And he is a great
despiser of God who sends a Boy away when he is going to commit fornication,
and yet will dare to do it, though he knows God is present, and cannot be sent
off: as if the eye of a little Boy were more awful, then the all seeing eye of
God. S. Aug. de verbis Dom. c. 3.
He is to be feared in public, he is to be feared in private: if you go forth,
he spies you: if you go in, he sees you: when you light the candle, he observes
you: when you put it out, then also God marks you: Be sure that while you are
in his sight you behave your self as becomes so holy a presence. But if you
will sin, retire your self wisely, and go where God cannot see: For no where
else can you be safe. And certainly, if men would always actually consider,
and really esteem this truth, that God is the great Eye of the World, always
watching over our actions, and an ever open Ear to hear all our words, and an
unwearied Arm ever lifted up to crush a sinner into ruin, it would be the
readiest way in the world to make sin to cease from amongst the children of
men, and for men to approach to the blessed estate of the Saints in Heaven, who
cannot sin, for they always walk in the presence, and behold the face of God.
* This instrument is to be reduced to practice according to the following Rules.

Rules of exercising this consideration.
1. Let this actual thought often return, that God is omnipresent filling every
place, and say with David, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, Psalm. 13.7, 8.
or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou
art there. If I make my bed in hell, thou art there, etc. This thought by being
frequent will make an habitual dread and reverence toward God, and fear in all
thy actions: For it is a great necessity and engagement to do unblameably,
when we act before the Judge, Boeth 15. de consel.
who is infallible in his sentence all knowing in his information severe in his
anger powerful in his providence, and intolerable in his wrath and indignation.

2. In the beginning of actions of religion, make an act of adoration, that is,
solemnly worship God, and place thy self in Gods presence, and behold him with
the eye of faith, and let thy desires actually fix on him as the object of thy
worship, and the reason of thy hope, and the fountain of thy blessing. For when
thou have placed thy self before him and kneelest in his presence, it is most
likely, all the following parts of thy devotion will be answerable to the
wisdom of such an apprehension, and the glory of such a presence.

3. Let every thing you see, represent to your spirit the presence, the
excellency and the power of God, and let your conversation with the creatures
lead you unto the Creator; for so shall your actions be done more frequently
with an actual eye to Gods presence, by your often seeing him in the glass of
the creation. In the face of the Sun you may see Gods beauty: in the fire you
may feel his heat warming: in the water his gentleness to refresh you: he it is
that comforts your spirit when you have taken Cordials: it is the dew of Heaven
that makes your field give you bread; and the breasts of God are the bottles
that ministers drink to your necessities. This Philosophy which is obvious to
every man's experience, is a good advantage to our piety, and by this act of
understanding, our wills are checked from violence and misdemeanour.

4. In your retirement make frequent Colloquies or short discoursings between
GOD and thy own soul. Seven times a day do I praise thee and in the night
season also I thought upon thee when I was waking. So did David: and every act
of complaint or thanksgiving, every act of rejoicing or of mourning, every
petition and every return of the heart in these entercourses, is a going to
GOD, an appearing in his presence, and a representing him present to thy spirit
and to thy necessity. And this was long since by a spiritual person called, a
building to GOD a Chapel in our heart. It reconciles Martha's employment with
Mary's Devotion; Charity, and Religion, the necessities of our calling, and the
employments of devotion. For thus in the midst of the works of your Trade, you
may retire into your Chapel [your Heart] and converse with GOD by frequent
addresses and returns.

5. Represent and offer to GOD, acts of love and fear, which are the proper
effects of this apprehension, and the proper exercise of this consideration.
For as GOD is every where present by his power, he calls for reverence and
godly fear: As he is present to thee in all thy needs, and relieves them, he
deserves thy love; and since in every accident of our lives we find one or
other of these apparent, and in most things we see both, it is a proper and
proportionate return, that to every such demonstration of GOD, we express our
selves sensible of it by admiring the divine goodness, or trembling at his
presence, ever obeying him because we love him, and ever obeying him because we
fear to offend him. This is that which Enoch did, who thus walked with God.

6. Let us remember that God is in us, and that we are in him: we are his
workmanship, let us not deface it: we are in his presence, let us not pollute
it by unholy and impure actions. Isa 26.12.
God has also wrought all our works in us: and because he rejoices in his own
works, if we defile them, and make them unpleasant to him, we walk perversely
with God, and he will walk crookedly toward us.

7. God is in the bowels of thy brother, refresh them when he needs it, and
then you give your alms in the presence of God, and to God, and he feels the
relief which thou prouidest for thy brother.

8. God is in every place; suppose it therefore to be a Church: and that
decency of deportment and piety of carriage, which you are taught by religion
or by custom, or by civility and public manners to use in Churches, the same
use in all places: with this difference only, that in churches let your
deportment be religious in external forms and circumstances also; but there and
every where let it be religious in abstaining from spiritual undecencies, and
in readiness to do good actions: Jer. 11.15. secund vulg. Edit.
that it may not be said of us, as God once complained of his people; Why has
my beloved done wickedness in my house?

9. God is in every creature: be cruel toward none, neither abuse any by
intemperance. Remember that the creatures and every member of thy own body is
one of the lesser cabinets and receptacles of God. They are such which God has
blessed with his presence, hallowed by his touch, and separated from unholy use
by making them to belong to his dwelling.

10. He walks as in the presence of God, that converses with him in frequent
prayer and frequent communion, that runs to him in all his necessities, that
asks counsel of him in all his doubtings, that opens all his wants to him, that
weeps before him for his sins, that asks remedy and support for his weakness,
that fears him as a Judge, reverences him as a Lord, obeys him as a Father, and
loves him as a Patron.

The Benefits of this exercise.
The benefit of this consideration and exercise being universal upon all the
parts of piety, I shall less need to specify any particulars; but yet most
properly this exercise of considering the divine presence is, 1. an excellent
help to prayer, producing in us reverence and awfulness to the divine Majesty
of God, and actual devotion in our offices. 2. It confidence in God, and
fearlesness of our enemies, patience in trouble, and hope of remedy, since God
is so nigh in all our sad accidents, he is a disposer of the hearts of men, and
the events of things, he proportions out our trials, and supplies us with
remedy, and where his rod strikes us, his staf supports us: To which we may
add this, that God who is always with us, is especially by promise with us in
tribulation, to turn the misery into a mercy, and that our greatest trouble may
become our advantage by intitling us to a new manner of the Divine presence. 3.
It is apt to produce joy and rejoicing; we being more apt to delight in the
partners and witnesses of our conversation; every degree of mutual abiding and
conversing being a relation and an endearment: we are of the same household with
God; he is with us in our natural actions to preserve us, in our recreations to
restrain us, in our public actions to applaud or reprove us, in our private to
observe us, in our sleeps to watch by us, in our watchings to refresh us: and
if we walk with God in all his ways as he walks with us in all ours, we shall
find perpetual reasons to enable us to keep that rule of God, Rejoice in the
Lord always, and again I say rejoice. And this puts me in mind of a saying of
an old religious person, In vitam S. Antho.
[There is one way of overcoming our ghostly enemies, spiritual mirth, and a
perpetual bearing of GOD in our minds.] This effectively resists the Devil and
suffers us to receive no hurt from him. enkindle holy desires of the enjoyment
of God, because it produces joy when we do enjoy him; The same desires that a
weak man has for a Defender, the sick man for a Physician, the poor for a
Patron, the child for his Father, the espoused humility of spirit,
apprehensions of our great distance and our great needs, our daily wants, and
hou^ly supplies, admiration of Gods unspeakable mercies: It is the cause of
great modesty and decency in our actions; it helps to recollection of mind,
and restrains the scatterings and looseness of wandering thoughts; it establishes
the heart in good purposes, and leads on to perseverance; it gains purity and
perfection, (according to the saying of God to Abraham, Walk before me and be
perfect) holy fear, and holy love, and indeed every thing that pertains to holy
living: when we see our selves placed in the Eye of God, who sets us on work
and will reward us plentiously, to serve him with an Eye service i^ ^ery
pleasing; for he also sees the heart: and the want of this consideration was
declared to be the cause why Israel sinned so grievously, [ For they say the
Lord has forsaken the earth, and the Lord sees not: Ezekiel. 9 9. Psalm. 10.11
therefore the land is full of blood, and the city full of perverseness.] What a
child would do in the eye of his Father, and a Pupil before his Tutor, and a
Wife in the presence of her Husband, and a Servant in the sight of his master,
let us always do the same: for we are made a spectacle to God, to Angels, and
to men; we are always in the sight and presence of the All-seeing and Almighty
God, who also is to us a Father, and a Guardian, a Husband, and a Lord.

Prayers and Devotions according to the religion and purposes of the foregoing
Considerations.
I. For grace to spend our time well.
O Eternal God who from all eternity do behold and love thy own glories and
perfections infinite, and have created me to do the work of God, after the
manner of men, and to serve thee in this generation, and according to my
capacities; give me thy grace, that I may be a curious and prudent spender of
my time, so as I may best prevent or resist all temptation, and be profitable
to the Christian Commonwealth, and by discharging all my duty may glorify thy
Name. Take from me all slothfulness, and give me a diligent and an active
spirit, and wisdom to choose my employment, that I may do works proportionable
to my person, and to the dignity of a Christian, and may fill up all the spaces
of my time with actions of religion and charity, that when the Devil assaults
me, he may not find me idle; and my dearest Lord, at his sudden coming may
find me busy in lawful, necessary, and pious actions, improving my talent
entrusted to me by thee my Lord, that I may enter into the joy of my Lord to
partake of his eternal felicities, even for thy mercy sake, and for my dearest
Saviors sake. Amen.

Here follows the devotion of ordinary days; for the right imploiment of those
portions of time which every day must allow for religion. The first prayers in
the Morning as s^^n as we are dressed.
Humbly and reverently compose your self, with heart lift up to God and your
head bowed, and meekely kneeling upon your knees, say the Lords Prayer: after
which use the following Collects, or as many of them as you shall choose. Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc.
I. An act of adoration being the song that the Angels sing in Heaven.
HOly, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty* which was, and is, and is to come: Heaven
and Earth, Angels and Men, the Air and the Sea give glory, and honor, and
thanks to him that sits on the throne, who lives for ever and ever. Rev.
11.17.
All the blessed spirits and souls of the righteous cast their crowns before
the throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever. and 5.10.13.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor, and power, for thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. Rev 15.3.
Great and mavelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty: Just and true are thy
ways, thou King of Saints. Thy wisdom is infinite, thy mercies are glorious;
and I am not worthy O Lord to appear in thy presence before whom the Angels
hide their faces. O Holy and eternal Jesus, Lamb of God, who were slain from
the beginning of the world, thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood out of
every nation, and have made us unto our GOD Kings and priests, and we shall
reign with thee for ever. Blessing, honor, glory and power be unto him that
sits on the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever. Amen.

II. An act of thanksgiving being the song of David for the Morning.
S^ng praises unto the Lord O ye saints of his, and give thanks to him for a
remembrance of his holiness. For his wrath indureth but the twinkling of an
eye, and in his pleasure is life: heaviness may endure for a night, but joy
comes in the morning. Thou Lord have preserved me this night from the violence
of the spirits of darkness, from all sad casualties, and evil accidents, from
the wrath which I have every day deserved: thou have brought my soul out of
hell, thou have kept my life from them that go down into the pit: thou have
showed me mavelous great kindness and have blessed me for ever: the greatness
of thy glory reaches unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds.
Therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise without ceasing. O my God I
will give thanks unto thee for ever. Allelu^ah.

III. An act of oblation or presenting our selves to God for the day.
MOst Holy and Eternal God, Lord and Sovereign of all the creatures, I humbly
present to thy divine Majesty, my self, my soul and body, my thoughts and my
words, my actions and intentions, my passions and my sufferings to be disposed
by thee to thy glory, to be blessed by thy providence, to be guided by thy
counsel, to be sanctified by thy Spirit, and afterward that my body and soul
may be received into glory: for nothing can perish which is under thy custody;
and the enemy of souls cannot devour what is thy portion, nor take it out of
thy hands. This day, O Lord, and all the days of my life I dedicate to thy
honor; and the actions of my calling to the uses of grace, and the religion of
all my days to be united (...) the merits and intercession of my holy Savior
Jesus, that in him and for him I may be pardoned and accepted. Amen.

IV. An act of repentance or contrition.
FOr as for me, I am not worthy to be called thy servant, much less am I
worthy to be thy son, for I am the vilest of sinners and the worst of men, a
lover of the things of the world, and a despiser of the things of God, [proud
and envious, lustful^ and intemperate] greedy of sin, and impatient of reproof,
desirou^ to seem holy, and negligent of being so, transported with interest,
fooled with presumption and false principles, disturbed with anger, with a
peevish and unmortified spirit, and disordered by a whole body of sin and
death. Lord pardon all my sins for my sweetest Saviors sake; thou who did
die for me, Holy Jesus, save me and deliver me, reserve not my sins to be
punished in the day of wrath and eternal vengeance; but wash away my sins, and
blot them out of thy remembrance, and purify my soul with the waters of
repentance and the blood of the cross, that for what is past thy wrath may not
come out against me, and for the time to come I may never, provoke thee to
anger or to jealousy. O just and dear God be pitiful and gracious to thy
servant. Amen.

V. The Prayer or Petition.
Bless me gracious God in my calling to such purposes as thou shall choose for
me, or employ me in: Relieve me in all my sadnesses, make my bed in my
sickness, give me patience in my sorrows, confidence in thee, and grace to
call upon thee in all temptations. O be thou my guide in all my actions, my
Protector in all dangers: give me a healthful body, and a clear understanding,
a sanctified and just, a charitable and humble, a religious and a contented
spirit; let not my life be miserable and wretched, nor my name stained with sin
and shame, nor my condition lifted up to a tempting and dangerous fortune; but
let my condition be blessed, my conversation useful to my Neighbors and
pleasing to thee, that when my body shall lie down in its bed of darkness, my
soul may pass into the Regions of light, and live with thee for ever through
Jesus Christ. Amen.

VI. An act of intercession or prayer for others to be added to this, or any
other office, as our devotion, or duty, or their needs shall determine us.
O GOD of infinite mercy, who have compassion on all men, and relievest the
necessities of all that call to thee for help, hear the prayers of thy servant
who is unworthy to ask any petition for himself, yet in humility and duty is
bound to pray for others.

For the Church.
O let thy mercy descend upon the whole Church, preserve her in truth and peace,
in unity and safety, in all storms, and against ^ll temptations and enemies,
that she offering to thy glory the never ceasing sacrifice of prayer and
thanksgiving may advance the honor of her Lord, and be filled with his Spirit,
and partake of his glory. Amen.

For the King,
In mercy remember the King preserve his person in health and honor, his crown
in wealth and dignity, his kingdoms in peace and plenty, and Churches under his
protection in piety and knowledge, and a strict and holy religion: keep him
perpetually in thy fear and favor, and crown him with glory and immortality.
Amen.

For the Clergy.
Remember them that minister about holy things, let them be clothed with
righteousness, and sing with joyfulness. Amen.

For Wife or Husband.
Bless thy servant [my Wife or Husband] with health of body and of spirit. O
let the hand of thy blessing be upon his [or her] head night and day, and
support him in all necessities, strengthen him in all temptations, comfort him
in all his sorrows, and let him be thy servant in all changes, and make us both
to dwell with thee for ever in thy favor, in the light of thy countenance, and
in thy glories. Amen.

For our Children.
Bless my children with healthful bodies, with good understandings, with the
graces and gifts of thy Spirit, with sweet dispositions and holy habits, and
sanctify them throughout in their bodies and souls and spirits, and keep them
unblameable to the coming of the lord Jesus. Amen.

For Friends and Benefactors.
Be pleased, O Lord, to remember my friends, all that have prayed for me, and
all that have done me good [ here name such whom you would specially recommend]
Do thou good to them and return all their kindness double into their own
bosom, rewarding them with blessings, and sanctifying them with thy graces,
and bringing them to glory.

For our Family.
Let all my family and kindred, my neighbors and acquaintance [ here name what
other relation you please] receive the benefit of my prayers, and the blessings
of God; the comforts and supports of thy providence, and the sanctification of
thy spirit.

For all in misery.
Relieve and comfort all the persecuted and afflicted: speak peace to troubled
consciences: strengthen the weak: confirm the strong: i^ (...) the ignorant:
deliver the oppressed 1. (...) that spoileth him, and relieve the needy that
has no helper, and brings us all by the waters of comfort, and in the ways of
righteousness to the kingdom of rest and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.

To God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, To the eternal Son that was
incarnate and born of a Virgin, To the Spirit of the Father and the Son, be all
honor and glory, worship and thanksgiving now and for ever. Amen.

Another form of prayer for the Morning.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Our Father,
etc. I
MOst glorious and eternal God, Father of mercy, and God of all comfort, I
worship and adore thee with the lowest humility of my soul and body, and give
thee all thanks and praise for thy infinite and essential g^^ries and
perfections, and for the continual demonstration of thy mercies upon me, upon
all mine, and upon thy holy Catholic Church.

II.
I Acknowledge, dear God, that I have deserved the greatest of thy wrath and
indignation; and that if thou had dealt with me according to my deserving, I
had now at this instant been desperately bewailing my miseries in the sorrows
and horrors of a sad eternity. But thy mercy triumphing over thy justice and my
sins, thou have still continued to me life and time of repentance; thou have
opened to me the gates of grace and mercy, and perpetually call upon me to
enter in and to walk in the paths of a holy life, that I might glorify thee
and be glorified of thee eternally.

III.
BEhold, O God, for this thy great and unspeakable goodness; for the
preservation of me this night, and for all other thy graces and blessings I
offer up my soul and body, all that I am, and all that I have, as a Sacrifice
to thee and thy service; humbly begging of thee to pardon all my sins, to
defend me from all evil, to lead me into all good, and let my portion be
amongst thy redeemed ones in the gathering together of the Saints, in the
Kingdom of grace and glory.

IV.
GUide me, O Lord, in all the changes and varities of the world, that in all
things that shall happen, I may have an evenness (...) ^^anquility of spirit;
that my soul may be wholly resigned to thy Divinest will and pleasure, never
murmuring at thy gentle chastisements and fatherly correction, never waxing
proud and insolent though I feel a torrent of comforts and prosperous successes.

V.
FIx my thoughts, my hopes and my desires upon Heaven and heavenly things;
teach me to despise the world, to repent me deeply for my sins; give me holy
purposes of amendment, and ghostly strength and assistances to perform
faithfully whatsoever I shall intend piously. Enrich my understanding with an
eternal treasure of Divine truths, that I may know thy will; and thou who
workest in us to will and to do of thy good pleasure, teach me to obey all thy
Commandments, to believe all thy Revelations, and make me partaker of all thy
gracious promises.

VI.
TEach me to watch over all my ways, that I may never be surprised by sudden
temtations or a careless spirit, nor ever return to folly and vanity. Set a
watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips, that I offend not
in my tongue neither against piety nor charity. Teach me to think of nothing
but thee, and what is in order to thy glory and service; to speak nothing but
thee and thy glories; and to do nothing but what becomes thy servant whom thy
infinite mercy by the graces of thy holy Spirit has sealed up to the day of
Redemption.

VII.
LEt all my passions and affections be so mortified and brought under the
dominion of grace, that I may never by deliberation and purpose, nor yet by
levity, rashness, or inconsideration offend thy Divine Majesty. Make me such as
thou would have me to be: strengthen my faith, confirm my hope, and give me a
daily increase of charity, that this day and ever I may serve thee according to
all my opportunities and capacities: growing from grace to grace, till at last
by thy mercies I shall receive the consummation and perfection of grace, even
the glories of thy Kingdom in the full fruition of the face and excellencies of
God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: to whom be glory and praise,
honor and adoration given by all Angels, and all Men, and all creatures. now
and to all eternity. Amen.

To this may be added the prayer of intercession for others whom we are bound
to remember; which is at the end of the foregoing Prayer: or else you may take
such special Prayers which follow at the end of the fourth Chapter [for
Parents, for children, etc.] After which conclude with this e^aculation,
Now and in all tribulation and anguish of spirit, in all dangers of soul and
body, in prosperity and adversity, in the hour of death, and in the day of
judgment, holy, and most blessed Savior Jesus, have mercy upon me. save me and
deliver me and all faithful people. Amen.

Between this and Noon usually are said the public prayers appointe by
^uthority: to which all the Clergy are obliged, and other devout persons that
have leisure to accompany them. Afternoon or at any time of the day, when a
devout person retires into his close^ for private Prayer, or spiritual
exercises, he may say the following devotions. An exercise to be used at
anytime of the day.
IN the name of the Father, and of the Son, etc. Our Father, etc.

The Hymn collected out of the Psalms, recounting the excellencies and
greatness of God.
O be joyful in God all ye lands: sing praises unto the honor of his Name,
make his Name to be glorious. * O come hither and behold the works of God, how
wonderful he is in his doings toward the children of men.

He rules with his power for ever: He is the Father of the fatherless, and
defends the cause of the widow, even God in his holy habitation.

He is the God that makes men to be of one mind in a house, and brings the
prisoners out of captivity: but lets the runnagates continue in scarceness.

It is the Lord that commands the waters; it is the glorious God that makes
the thunder. * It is the Lord that rules the sea; the voice of the Lord is
mighty in operation, the voice of the Lord is a glorious voice.

Let all the Earth fear the Lord, stand in awe of him all ye that dwell in the
world: Thou shall show us wonderful things in thy righteousness. O God of our
salvation, thou that art the hope of all the ends of the Earth, and of them
that remain in the broad Sea.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Or this.

O Lord, thou art my God, I will exalt thee: I will praise thy Name, for thou
have done wonderful things: thy counsels of old are faithfulness and truth,
Isa. 25.1.

Thou in thy strength setst fast the Mountains, and art girded about with
power. Thou stillest the raging of the Sea, and the noise of his waves, and the
madness of his people.

They also that remain in the uttermost parts of the Earth shall be afraid at
thy tokens: thou that make the out goings of the morning and evening to
praise thee.

O Lord God of Hosts, who is like unto thee: thy truth most mighty Lord is on
every side. Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord, there is none
that can do as thou d^est. For thou art great and do wondrous things: thou
art God alone.

God is very greatly to be feared in the council of the Saints: and to be had
in reverence o^ all them that are round about him.

Righteousness and equity is in the habitation of thy seat: mercy and truth
shall go before thy face. Glory and worship are before him: power and honor
are in his Sanctuary

Thou Lord art the thing that I long for: thou art my hope even from my youth:
through thee have I been holden up ever since I was born: thou art he that took
me out of my mothers womb: my praise shall be always of thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc

After this may be read some portion of holy Scripture out of the New
Testament, or out of the sapiential books of the Old. viz: Proverbs
Ecclesiastes. etc. because these are of great use to piety and to civil
conversation. Upon which when you have a while meditated; humbly composing your
self upon your knees, say as follows:

Eiaculations.
My help stands in the name of the Lord, who has made Heaven and Earth.

Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant: and I shall be safe.

Do well, O Lord, to them that be true of heart: and evermore mightily defend
them.

Direct me in thy truth and teach me: for thou art my Savior and my great
Master.

Keep me from sin and death eternal: and from my enemies visible and invisible.

Give me grace to live a holy life: and thy favor that I may die a godly and
happy death.

Lord hear the prayer of thy servant: and give me thy holy spirit.

The Prayer.
O Eternal God, merciful and gracious, vouchsafe thy favor and thy blessing to
thy servant: let the love of thy mercies, and the dread and fear of thy
Majesty, make me careful and inquisitive to search thy will, and diligent to
perform it, and to persevere in the practices of a holy life, even till the
last of my days.

II.
KEep me, O Lord, for I am thine by creation; guide me, for I am thine by
purchase, thou have redeemed me by the blood of thy Son: and love me with the
love of a Father; for I am thy child by adoption and grace: let thy mercy
pardon my sins, thy providence secure me from the punishments and evils I have
deserved, and thy care watch over me: that I may never any more offend thee:
make me in malice to be a child; but in understanding, piety, and the fear of
God, let me be a perfect man in Christ, innocent and prudent, readily furnished
and instructed to every good work.

III.
KEep me, O Lord, from the destroying Angel, and from the wrath of God: let thy
anger never rise against me, but thy rod gently correct my follies, and guide
me in thy ways, and thy staff support me in all sufferings and changes.
Preserve me from fracture of bones, from nois^me, infectious, and sharp
sicknesses, from great violences of Fortune and sudden surprises: keep all my
senses entire till the day of my death, and let my death be neither sudden,
untimely, nor unprovided: let it be after the common manner of men, having in
it nothing extraordinary, but an extraordinary piety, and the manifestation of
thy great and miraculous mercy.

IV.
LEt no riches make me ever forget my self, no poverty ever make me to forget
thee: Let no hope or fear, no pleasure or pain, no accident without, no
weakness within, hinder or discompose my duty, or turn me from the ways of thy
Commandments. O let thy spirit dwell with me for ever, and make my soul just
and charitable, full o^ honesty, full of religion, resolute and constant in
holy purposes, but inflexible to evil, Make me humble and obedient, peaceable
and pious, let me never envy any man's good, nor deserve to be despised my self:
and if I be, teach me to bear it with meekness and charity.

V.
GIve me a tender conscience; a conversation discreet, and affable, modest and
patient, liberal and obliging; a body chaste and healthful, compitency of
living according to my condition, contentedness in all estates, a resigned will
and mortified affections, that I may be as thou would have me, and my
portion may be in the lot of the righteous, in the brightness of thy
countenance, and the glories of eternity. Amen.

Holy is our God. Holy is the Almighty. * Holy is the immortal. Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God of Sabbath, have mercy upon me.

A form of Prayer for the Evening, to be said by such who have not time, or
opportunity to say the public Prayers appointed for this office.
I.
Evening Prayer.
O Eternal God, Great Father of Men and Angels, who have established the Heavens
and the Earth in a wonderful order, making day and night to exceed each other:
I make my humble address to thy Divine Majesty, begging of thee mercy and
protection this night and ever. O Lord pardon all my sins, my light and rash
words, the vanity and impiety of my thoughts, my unjust and uncharitable
actions, and whatsoever I have transgressed against thee this day, or at any
time before. Behold, O God, my soul is troubled in the remembrance of my sins,
in the frailty and sinfulness of my flesh exposed to every temptation, and of
it self not able to resist any: Lord God of mercy I earnestly beg of thee to
give me a great portion of thy grace; such as may be sufficient, and effectual
for the mortification of all my sins and vanities and disorders; that as I have
formerly served my lust, and unworthy desires, so now I may give my self up
wholly to thy service, and the studies of a holy life.

II.
BLessed Lord, teach me frequently and sadly to remember my sins; and be thou
pleased to remember them no more: let me never forget thy mercies, and do thou
still remember to do me good. Teach me to walk always as in thy presence:
Ennoble my soul with great degrees of love to thee, and consigne my spirit
with great fear, religion and veneration of thy holy Name and laws; that it may
become the great employment of my whole life to serve thee, to advance thy
glory, to root out all the accursed habits of sin, that in holiness of life, in
humility, in charity, in chastity, and all the ornaments of grace, I may by
patience wait for the coming of our Lord Jesus. Amen.

III.
TEach me, O Lord, to number my days that I may apply my heart unto wisdom,
ever to remember my last end, that I may not dare to sin against thee: Let thy
holy Angels be ever present with me to keep me in all my ways from the malice
and violence of the spirits of darkness; from evil company, and the occasions
and opportunities of evil, from perishing in popular judgments, from all the
ways of sinful shame, from the hands of all mine enemies; from a sinful life,
and from despair in the day of my death: Then, O brightest Jesu shine
gloriously upon me, let thy mercies and the light of thy countenance sustain me
in all my agonies, weaknesses and temptations. Give me opportunity of a prudent
and spiritual Guide, and of receiving the holy Sacrament; and let thy loving
Spirit so guide me in the ways of peace and safety, that with the testimony of
a good conscience and the sense of thy mercies and refreshment, I may depart
this life in the unity of the Church, in the love of God, and a certain hope of
salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord and most blessed Savior. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

Another form of Evening Prayer, which may also be used at bedtime.
Our Father, etc.

Psalm. 121.
I Will lift up my eyes unto the hills, from whence comes my help.

My help comes of the Lord, which made heaven and earth.

He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: he that keeps thee will not slumber.

Behold, he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep.

The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.

The sun shall not smite thee by day: neither the moon by night.

The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul.

The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in from this time forth
for evermore.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

I.
VIsit, I beseech thee O Lord, this habitation with thy mercy, and me with thy
grace and salvation, Let thy holy Angels pitch their tents round about and dwell
here, that no illusion of the night may abuse me, the spirits of darkness may
not come near to hurt me, no evil or sad accident oppress me, and let the
eternal spirit of the father dwell in my soul and body, filling every corner
of my heart with light and grace. Let no deed of darkness overtake me; and thy
blessing most blessed GOD be upon me for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

II.
INto thy hands, most blessed Jesu, I commend my soul and body, for thou have
redeemed both with thy most precious blood. So bless and sanctify my sleep
unto me, that it may be temperate, holy and safe, a refreshment to my wearied
body to enable it so to serve my soul, that both may serve thee with a never
failing duty. O let me never sleep in sin or death eternal, but give me a
watchful and a prudent spirit, that I may omit no opportunity of serving thee,
that whether I sleep or wake live or die, I may be thy servant and thy child:
that when the work of my life is done, I may rest in the bosom of my Lord,
till by the voice of the Archangel, the t^ump of God, I shall be awakened and
called to sit down and feast in the eternal supper of the Lamb. Grant this O
Lamb of God for the honor of thy mercies and the glory of thy name, O most
merciful Savior and Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

III.
BLessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, who has sent his Angels, and
kept me this day from the destruction that walks at noon, and the arrow that
flies by dry: and has given me his Spirit to restrain me from those evils to
which my own weaknesses, and my evil habits, and my unquie^ enemies would
easily betray me. Blessed and for ever hallowed be thy name for that never
ceasing shower of blessing by which I live, and am content, and blessed, and
provided for in all necessities, and set forward in my duty and way to heaven.
* Blessing, honor, glory and power, be unto him that sits on the throne,
and to the Lamb for ever and ever. Amen.

Holy is our God, Holy is the Almighty, Holy is the Immortal. Holy, holy, holy,
Lord God of Sabbath, have mercy upon me.

Ejaculations and short meditations to be used in the Night when we wake.
Stand in awe and sin not: commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be
still. I will lay me down in peace and sleep: for thou Lord only make me to
dwell in safety.

O Father of Spirits and the God of all flesh, have mercy and pity upon all
sick and dying Christians, and receive the souls which thou have redeemed
returning unto thee.

Blessed are they that dwell in the heavenly Jerusalem: where there is no need
of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it: for the glory of God does
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. And there shall be no night
there, and they need no candle, for the Lord God gives them light, and they
shall reign for ever and ever. Rev. 21.23.

Meditate on Jacobs wrestling with the Angel all night: be thou also
importunate with God for a blessing, and give not over till he has blessed
thee.

Meditate on the Angel passing over the children of Israel, and destroying the
Egyptians, for disobedience and opression. Pray for the grace of obedience and
charity, and for the divine protection.

Meditate on the Angel who destroyed in a night the whole army of the Assyrians
for fornication. Call to mind the sins of thy youth, the sins of thy bed; and
say with David, My reins chasten me in the night season, and my soul refuses
comfort. Pray for pardon and the grace of chastity.

Meditate on the agonies of Christ in the garden, his sadness and affliction all
that night; and thank and adore him for his love that made him suffer so much
for thee: and hate thy sins which made it necessary for the Son of God to
suffer so much.

Meditate on the four last things. 1. The certainty of death. 2. The terrors of
the day of Judgment. 3. The joys of Heaven 4. The pains of Hell: and the
eternity of both.

Think upon all thy friends which are gone before thee, and pray that God
would grant to thee to meet them in a joyful resurrection.

The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up.
Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness, looking for and hastening
unto the coming of the day of God? 2 Pet. 3.10, 11.

Lord in mercy remember thy servant in the day of judgment.

Thou shall answer for me, O Lord my, God. In thee, O Lord have I trusted: let
me never be confounded. Amen.

I Desire the Christian Reader to observe that all these offices or forms of
Prayer if they should be used every day, would not spend above an hour and a
half: but because some of them are double (and so but one of them to be used in
one day) it is much less: and by affording to God one hour in 24, thou may
have the comforts and rewards of devotion. But he that thinks this is too much,
either is very busy in the world, or very careless of heaven. However, I have
parted the Prayers into smaller portions that he may use which, and how many he
please in any one of the forms.

Ad Sect. 2^ A Prayer for holy intention in the beginning and pursuit of any
considerable action, as Study, Preaching, etc.
O Eternal God, who have made all things for man, and man for thy glory,
sanctify my body and soul, my thoughts and my intentions, my words and
actions, that whatsoever I shall think, or speak, or do, may be by me designed
to the glorification of thy Name, and by thy blessing it may be effective and
successful in the work of God, according as it can be capable. Lord turn my
necessities into virtue, the works of nature into the works of grace, by making
them orderly, regular, temperate, subordinate and profitable to ends beyond
their own proper efficacy: and let no pride or self-seeking, no covetousness or
revenge, no impure mixture or unhandsome purposes, no little ends and low
imaginations pollute my spirit, and unhallow any of my words and actions: but
let my body be a servant of my spirit, and both body and spirit servants of
Jesus, that doing all things for thy glory here, I may be partaker of thy glory
hereafter through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Ad Sect. 3. A Prayer meditating and referring to the Divine presence.
This Prayer is specially to be used in temptation to private sins.
O Almighty God infinite and eternal, thou fillest all things with my presence;
thou art every where by thy essence and by thy power, in heaven by Glory, in
holy places by thy grace and favor, in the hearts of thy servants by thy
Spirit, in the consciences of all men by thy testimony and observation of us:
Teach me to walk always as in thy presence, to fear thy Majesty, to reverence
thy wisdom and omniscience, that I may never dare to commit any undecency in
the eye of my Lord and my Judge, but that I may with so much care and reverence
demean my self, that my Judge may not be my accuser, but my advocate: that I
expressing the belief of thy presence here by careful walking, may feel the
effects of it in the participation of eternal glory through Jesus Christ. Amen.

CHAP. II. Of Christian Sobriety.
Sect. I. Of sobriety in the general sense.
CHristian Religion in all its moral parts is nothing else but the Law of
Nature and great Reason, complying with the great necessities of all the world,
and promoting the great profit of all relations, and carrying us through all
accidents of variety of chances to that end which God has from eternal ages
purposed for all that live according to it, and which he has revealed in Jesus
Christ: and according to the Apostles Arithmetic has but these three parts of
it: 1. Sobriety. 2. Justice. 3. Religion. For the grace of God bringing
salvation has appeared to all men; Tit 2.11, 12.
teaching us that denying ungodlyness and wordly lusts, we should live 1.
Soberly, 2. Righteously, and 3. Godly in this present world, looking for that
blessed hope and glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ. The first contains all our deportment in our personal and private
capacities, the fair treating of our bodies, and our spirits. The second
enlarges our du^y in all relations to our Neighbor. The third contains the
offices of direct Religion, and intercourse with God.

Christian sobriety is all that duty that concerns our selves in the matter of
meat and drink and pleasures and thoughts, and it has within it, the duties of
1. Temperance. 2. Chastity. 3. Humility. 4. Modesty. 5. Content.

It is a using severity, denial, and frustration of our appetite when it grows
unreasonable in any of these instances: the necessity of which we shall to best
purpose understand, by considering the evil consequences of sensuality,
effeminacy or fondness after carnal pleasures.

Evil consequents of voluptuousness or Sensuality.
1. A longing after sensual pleasures is a dissolution of the spirit of a man,
and makes it loose, soft, and wandering unapt for noble, wise, or spiritual
employments; because the principles upon which pleasure is chosen and pursued,
are sottish, weak, and unlearned, Tu si animum v^^isti p^tius quam animus te
est quod gaudea^:
Qui animum vin^unt quam quo^ animus, s^mper probiores cluent.
^^num.
such as prefer the body before the soul, the appetite before reason, sense
before the spirit, the pleasures of a short abode, before the pleasures of
eternity.

2. The nature of sensual pleasure is vain, empty, and unsatisfying, biggest
always in expectation, and a mere vanity in the enjoying, and leaves a sting
and tho^n behind it, when it goes off. Our laughing if it be loud and high
commonly ends in a deep sigh, and all the instances of pleasure have a sting in
the tail, though they carry beauty on the face and sweetness on the lip.

3. Sensual pleasure is a great abuse to the Spirit of a man being a kind of
fascination or witchcraft blinding the understanding and enslaving the will.
And he that knows he is freeborn or redeemed with the blood of the Son of God,
(...), Arrian. c 2 l. 1.
will not easily suffer the freedom of his soul to be entangled and rifled.

4. It is most contrary to the state of a Christian whose life is a perpetual,
exercise, (...), etc. Epist. cap 34.
a wrestling and warfare, to which, sensual pleasure disables him, by yielding
to that enemy with whom he must strive if ever he will be crowned. And this
argument the Apostle intimated: 1 Cor 9 ^5.
He that striveth for masteries is temperate in all things: Now they do it to
obtain a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible.

5. It is by a certain consequence the greatest impediment in the world to
martyrdom: that being a fondness, this being a cruelty to the flesh: to which a
Christian man arriving by degrees must first have crucified the lesser
affections: for he that is overcome by little arguments of pain, will hardly
consent to lose his life with torments.

Degrees of Sobriety.
Against this voluptuousness, sobriety is opposed in three degrees:

1. A despite or disaffection to pleasures, or a resolving against all
entertainment of the instances and temptations of sensuality, and it consists
in the internal faculties of will and understanding, decreeing and declaring
against them, disapproving and disliking them upon good reason and strong
resolution.

2. A sight and actual war against all the temptations and offers of sensual
pleasure in all evil instances and degrees: and it consists in prayer, in
fasting, in cheap diet, and hard lodging, and laborious exercises, and avoiding
occasions, and using all arts and industry of fortifying the Spirit, and making
it severe, manly and Christian.

3. Spiritual pleasure is the highest degree of Sobriety, and in the same
degree in which we relish and are in love with spiritual delights, the hidden
Manna, Apoc. 2.17.
with the sweetnesses of devotion, with the joys of thanksgiving, with
rejoicings in the Lord with the comforts of hope, with the deliciousness of
charity, and alms-deeds, with the sweetness of a good conscience, with the
peace of meekness and the felicities of a contented spirit: in the same degree
we disrelish and loath the husks of swinish lusts, and the parings of the
apples of Sodom: and the taste of sinful pleasures is unsavory as the Drunkards
vomit.

Rules for suppressing voluptuousness.
The precepts and advices which are of best and of general use in the curing of
sensuality are these:

1. Accustom thy self to cut off all superfluity in thy provisions of thy life:
for our desires will enlarge beyond the present possession so long as all the
things of this world are unsatisfying: if therefore you suffer them to extend
beyond the measures of necessity or moderated convenience, they will still
swell: but you reduce them to a little compass, when you make nature to be
your limit. Desideria tua parvo redime, hoc n. tantum cura^e d^bes u^ d^sinant.
Senec.
We must more take care that our desires should cease, then that they should be
satisfied: and therefore reducing them to narrow scantlings and small
proportions, is the best instrument to redeem their trouble and prevent the
dropsy, because that is next to an universal denying them: it is certainly a
paring off from them all unreasonableness and irregularity. L. 3. Eth: c. 12.
For whatsoever covets unseemely things, and is apt to swell to an inconvenient
bulk is to be chastened and tempered: and such are sensuality, Facilius est
initia affectuum p^ohibere quam impetum ^eg^re Senec cp: 86.
and a Boy* said the Philosopher.

2. Suppress your sensual desires in their first approach: for then they are
least, and thy faculties and election are stronger; but if they in their
weakness prevail upon thy strengths, there will be no resisting them when they
are increased, and thy abilities lessened: you shall scarce obtain of them to
end, if you suffer them to begin.

3. Divert them with some laudable employment, and take off their edge by
inadvertency, or a not attending to them. For since the faculties of a man
cannot at the same time with any sharpness attend to two objects, if you employ
your spirit upon a book or a bodily labor, or any innocent and indifferent
employment, you have no room left for the present trouble of a sensual
temptation* For to this sense it was that Alexander told the Queen of Caria,
(...)
that his Tutor Leonidas had provided two Cooks for him [Hard marches all
night, and a small dinner the next day:] these tamed his youthful aptnesses to
dissolution, so long as he eat of their provisions.

4. Look upon pleasures not upon that side that is next to the Sun, or where
they look beauteously, that is, as they come toward you to be enjoyed; for
then they paint, and smile, and dress themselves up in tinsel and glass, gems
and counterfeit imagery: Voluptates abeuntes ^esses and p^nit^uita plenas
animis n^stru natura subjecit, quo minus cupide repetantur. Senec.
but when thou have rifled and discomposed them with enjoying their false
beauties, and that they begin to go off, Laeta venire Venus, tristis abi^e
solet.
then behold them in their nakedness and weariness: See what a sigh and sorrow,
what naked unhansome proportions and a filthy carcass they discover; and the
next time they counterfeit, remember what you have already discovered, and be
no more abused. And I have known some wise persons have advised to cure the
passions and longings of their children by letting rhem taste of every thing
they passionately fancied: for they should be sure to find less in it then
they looked for, and the impatience of their being denied would be loosened and
made slack: and when our wishings are no bigger then the thing deserves, and
our usages of them according to our needs (which may be obtained by trying what
they are, and what good they can do us we shall find in all pleasures so
little entertainment, that the vanity of the possession will soon reprove the
violence of the appetite, And if this permission be in innocent instances, it
may be of good use: But Solomon tried it in all things, taking his fill of all
pleasures: and soon grew weary of them all. The same thing we may do by reason
which we do by experience, if either we will look upon pleasures as we are
sure they look when they go off, after their enjoyment, or if we will credit
the experience of those men who have tasted them and loathed them.

5. Often consider, and contemplate the joys of heaven, that when they have
filled thy desires which are the sails of the soul, thou may steer only
thither, and never more look back to Sodom. And when thy soul dwells above, and
looks down upon the pleasures of the World they seem like things at distance,
little and contemptible, and m^n running after the satisfaction of their
sot^^sh appetites seem foolish as fishes, thousands of them running after a
rotten worm that covers a deadly hook; or at the best b^t like children with
great nois pursuing a bubble rising from a wallnut-shel, which ends sooner then
the noise.

6. To this, the example of Christ and his Apostles, of Moses and all the Wise
men of all ages of the world will much help: who understanding how to
distinguish good from evil, did choose a sad and melancholy way to felicity,
rather then the broad, pleasant and easy path to folly and misery.

But this is but the general. Its first particular is temperance.

SECT. I^. Of Temperance in Eating and Drinking.
SObriety is the bridle of the passions of desire, (...).
and Temperance is the bit and cu^b of that bridle, a restraint put into a man's
mouth, a moderate use of meat and drink, so as may best consist with our
health, and may not hinder but help the works of the soul by its necessary
supporting us, and ministering cheerfulness and refreshment.

Temperance consists in the actions of the soul principally: for it is a grace
that chooses natural means in order to proper and natural and holy ends: it is
exercised about eating and drinking because they are necessary: but therefore
it permits the use of them only as they minister to lawful ends, it does not
eat and drink for pleasure, but for need, and for refreshment, which is a part
or a degree of need. I deny not but eating and drinking may be, and in
healthful bodies always is with pleasure: because there is in nature no
greater pleasure, then that all the appetites which God has made should be
satisfied: and a man may choose a morsel that is pleasant, the less pleasant
being rejected as being less useful, less apt to nourish, or more agreeing
with an infirm stomach or when the day is festival, by order, or by private
joy. In all these cases it is permitted to receive a more free delight, and to
design it too, as the less principal: that is, that the chief reason why we
choose the more delicious, be the serving that end for which such refreshments
and choices are permitted. But when delight is the only end and rests it self,
and dwells there long, then eating and drinking is not a serving of God, but an
inordinate action; because it is not in the way to that end whither God
directed it. But the choosing of a delicate before a more ordinary dish is to
be done as other humane actions are, in which there are no degrees and precise
natural limits described, but a latitude is indulged: it must be done
moderately, prudently, and according to the accounts of wise, religious, and
sober men; and then God who gave us such variety of creatures, and our choice
to use which we will, may receive glory from our temperate use, and
thanksgiving, and we may use them indifferently without scruple, and a making
them to become snares to us, either by too licentious and studied use of them,
or too restrained and scrupulous fear of using them at all, but in such certain
circumstances in which no man can be sure he is not mistaken.

But temperance in meat and drink is to be estimated by the following measures.

Measures of temperance in Eating.
1. Eat not before the time, unless necessity, or charity, or any intervening
accident, which may make it reasonable and prudent should happen. Remember it
had almost cost Jonathan his life because he tasted a little honey before the
sun went down, contrary to the Kings commandment, and although a great need
which he had, excused him from the sin of gluttony, yet it is inexcusable when
thou eatest before the usual time, and thrustest thy hand into the dish
unseasonabely, out of greediness of the pleasure, and impatience of the delay.

2. Eat not hastily and impatiently, but with such decent and timely action,
that your eating be a humane act, subject to deliberation and choice, and that
you may consider in the eating: whereas he that eats hastily, cannot consider
particularly of the circumstances, degrees, and little accidents and chances
that happen in his meal; but may contract many little undecencies, and be
suddenly surprised.

3. Eat not delicately, or nicely, that is, be not troublesome to thy self or
others in the choice of thy meats, or the delicacy of thy sauces. It was
imputed as a sin to the sons of Israel, that they loathed Manna and longed for
flesh: the quails stuck in their nostrils, and the wrath of God fell upon them.
And for the manner of dressing, the so^s of Eli were noted of indiscreet
curiosity: they would not have the flesh boiled, but raw, that they might roast
it with fire. Not that it was a sin to eat it, or desire meat roasted; but that
when it was appointed to be boiled, they refused it; which declared an
intemperate and a nice palate. It is lawful in all senses to comply with a weak
and a nice stomach: but not with a nice and curious palate. When our health
requires it, that ought to be provided for; but not so, our sensuality and
intemperate longings. Whatsoever is set before you, eat; if it be provided for
you* you may eat it, be it never so delicate, and be it plain and common, so
it be wholesome and fit for you, it must not be refused upon curiosity; for
every degree of that, Foelix initium prior aetas conteina dulcibus arvis,
Facite ^ue sera solebat jejunia (...),.
Boeth: l 1. de consol. Arbuteos faeius, m^nian^que fragra legebam.

is a degree of intemperance. Happy and innocent were the ages of our
forefathers, who eat herbs and parched corn, and drank the pure stream, and
broke their fast with nuts and roots; and when they were permitted flesh, eat
it only dressed with hunger end fire; and the fiirst sauce they had was bitter
herbs, and sometimes bread dipped in vinegar. But in this circumstance moderation
is to be reckoned in proportion to the present customs, to the company, to
education, and the judstment of honest and wise persons, and the necessities of
nature.

4. Eat not too much: load neither thy stomach nor thy understanding. If thou
sit at ^ bountiful table be not greedy upon it, and say not there is much meat
on it Remember that a wicked Eye is an evil thing: and what is crea^ed more
wicked then an eye? Therefore it weepeth upon every occasion. Strech not thy
hand whithersoever it looks, and thrust i^ not with him into the dish. A very
little is sufficient for a man well nurtured and (...) fetches not his wind
short upon his bed.

Signs and effects of Temperance.
We shall best know that we have the grace of Temperance by the following
signs, which are as so many arguments to engage us also upon its study and
practice.

1. A temperate man is modest; greediness is unmannerly and rude. And this is
intimated in the advice of the son o^ Sirach. When thou sit amongst many
reach not thy hand out first of all. Leave off first for manners sake and be
not unsatiable least thou offend. Cu^^^ v^^at temperantiar^ ornatum ^ita, in
qu^ dec^^um illua and hon^stum si^um ^st.
* 2. Temperance is accompanied with gravity of deportment: greediness is
garish and rejoices loosly at the sight of dainties * 3. Sound. but moderate
sleep is its sign and its effect. Sound sleep comes of moderate eating he
rises early and his wits are with him * 4. A spiritual joy and a devout
prayer. * 6 A suppressed and seldom anger. 6 *. A command of our thoughts and
passions. 7. A seldo^ returning and a never prevailing temptation. * 8 To which
add, that a temperate person is not curious of fancies and deliciousness. He
thinks not much, and speaks not often of meat and drink; has a haelthful
body, and long life unless it be hinderd by some other accident, whereas to
glu^tony the pain of watching and choler the pangs of the belly are continual
company: And therefore stratonicus said handsomely concerning the luxury of the
Rhodians, They built houses as if they were immortal, but they feasted as if
they meant to live but a little while. Plutarch: de cupid divit.
And Antipater by his reproach of the old glutton Demades well expressed the
baseness of this sin, saying, that Demades now old and always a glutton, was
like a spent sacrifice, nothing left of him but his belly and his tongue, all
the man besides, is gone.

Of drunkenness.
But I desire that it be observed; that because intemperance in eating is not
so soon perceived by others as immoderate drinking, and the outward visible
effects of it are not either so notorious or so ridiculous, therefore gluttony
is not of so great disreputation amongst men as drunkenness: yet according to
its degree it puts on the greatness of the sin before God, and is most
strictly to be attended to, least we be surprised by our security and want of
diligence; and the intemperance is alike criminal in both, according as the
affections are either to the meat or drink. Gluttony is more uncharitable to
the body, and drunkenness to the soul, or the understanding part of man; and
therefore in Scripture is more frequently forbidden and declaimed against, then
the other: and Sobriety has by use obtained to signify Temperance in drinking,

Drunkenness is an immoderate affection, and use of drink. That I call
immoderate, that is besides or beyond that order of good things, for which God
has given us the use of drink. The ends are; digestion of our meat,
cheerfulness and refreshment of our spirits, or any end of health; besides
which, if we go, or at any time beyond it, it is inordinate and criminal, it is
the vice of drunkenness. It is forbidden by our blessed Savior in these words:
Luk 21.^4.
[ Take heed to your selves least at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkennesse] Surfeiting] that is the evil effects, the
s^ttishness and remaining stupidity of habitual, or of the last nights
drunkenness. For Christ forbids both the actual and the habitual intemperance;
not only the effect of it, b^t also the affection to it: for in both there is
sin. He that drinks but little, (...) aut (...) S^ol ^n Aristoph:
if that little make him drunk, and if he know beforehand his own inf^irmity,
is guilty of surfeiting not of drunkenness. But he that drinks much and is
strong to bear it, Idem fere apud Plutar^h vin^lentia animi qua^d^m r^mi^^onem
and levitatem. ci^ ^^^^as su^ilitatem significa^. ^lut^^ch. de ga^^ul-
and is not deprived of his reason violently, is guilty of the sin of
drunkenness. It is a sin not to prevent such uncharitable effects upon the
body and understanding: And therefore a man that loves not the drink is guilty
of surfeiting if he does not watch to prevent the evil ^ffect: and it is a sin,
and the greater of the two, inordinately to love or to use the drink, though
the surfieting, or violence do not follow. Good therefore is the counsel of
the son of Syrach: Show not thy valiantness in wine; for wine has destroyed
many.

Evil consequents to drunkenness.
Prove 23 29. Ecclu^. ^1, 20.
The evils and sad consequents of drunkenness (the consideration of which are
as so many arguments to avoid the sin) are to this sense reckoned by the
writers of holy Scripture, and other wise personages of the world. 1. It
causes woes and mischief, wounds and sorrow, sin and shame Malta f^cium ^^i
cua p^st^a fal^ios p^udet. Senec.
; it makes bitterness of spirit, brawling and quarrelling, it increases rage
and lesseneth strength, it makes red eyes, and a loose and babbling tongue. 2.
It particularly ministers to lust, and yet disables the body; so that in effect
it makes man wanton as a Satyr, and impotent as age: And Solomon in enumerating
the evils of this vice adds this to the account: Thine eyes shall behold
strange women; Prove 23.33
and thy heart shall utter perverse things: as if the drunkard were only
desire, and then impatient, muttering and enjoying like an Eunuch embracing a
woman. 3. It besots and hinders the actions of the understanding, making a man
brutish in his passions, Insanioe comes est i^a^^ont^le^nelis eb^iuas.
Plutarch Co^pus onustum
Heste^^is vi^^s animum queque praeg^avat
H^^at. Ebrie^as est v^lunta^ia insania. Senec.

and a fool in his reason; and differs nothing from madness, but that it is
voluntary, and so is an equal evil in nature, and a worse in manners. 4. It
takes off all the guards, and lets loose the reins of all those evils to which
a man is by his nature, or by his evil customs inclined; and from which he is
restrained by reason and severe principles. Drunkenness calls off the
Watchmen from their towers, and then all the evils that can proceed from a
loose heart, and an untied tongue, and a dissolute spirit, and an unguarded,
unlimited will, all that we may put upon the accounts of drunkenness. 5. It
extinguisheth and quenches the Spirit of God, for no man can be filled with the
Spirit of God and with wine at the same time; Ephesians. ^ 18.
And therefore aint Paul makes them exclusive of each other. (...):
(...)
Homer.
Be not drunk with wine wherein is excess but be filled with the Spirit: And
since Joseph's ^up was put into Ben^amins sack, no man had a divining goblet. 6.
It opens all the Sanctuaries of Nature, and discovers the nakednsse of the
soul, all its weaknesses and follies; it multiplies sins and discovers them;
Prove 31 4. (...) ph^iem
it makes a man incapable of being a private friend, or a public Couns^ller.
7. it takes a man's soul into slavery and imprisonment more than any vice
whatsoever, because it disa^mes a man of all his reason and his wisdom, whereby
he might be cared, and therefore commonly grows it upon him with age: a
drunkard being still more a fool and less a man. I need not add any sad
examples, since all story and all ages have too many of them. Amnon was slain
by hih brother Absalom when he was warm and high with wine. Simon the High
Priest and two of his sons were slain by their brother at a drunken feast.
Holofernes was drunk when Judith slew him: Alexadi^^ in^emperatia ^^bendi and
ille Herculanus ac fatalis seybus perdedit.
and all the great things that Daniel spoke of Alexander were drowned with a
surfeit of one nights intemperance: and the drunkenness of Noah and Lot are
upon record to eternal ages, that in those early instances, and righteous
persons, and less criminal drunkenness then is that of Christians in this
period of the world, God might show that very great evils are prepared to
punish this vice; no less then shame, and slavery, and incest, the first upon
Noah, the second upon one of his sons, and the third in the person of Lot.

Signs of drunkenness,
But if it be enquired concerning the periods and distinct significations of
this crime, and when a man is said to be drunk? To this I answer, That
drunkenness is in the same mannner to be judged as sickness. As every illness
or violence done to health in every part of its continuance is a part or degree
of sickness: so is every going off from our natural and common temper and our
usual severity of behavior, a degree of drunkenness. He is not only drunk that
can drink no more; for few are so; but he has sinned in a degree of
drunkennese who has done any thing toward it beyond his proper measure. But
its parts and periods are usually thus reckoned: 1. Apish gestures. 2. Much
talking. 3. Immoderate laughing. 4. Dullness of sense. 5. Scurrility, that is,
wanton, or jeering, or abusive language, 6. An useless understanding. 7.
Stupid sleep. 8. Epilepsies, or fallings, and reelings and beastly vomitings.
The least of these, even when the tongue begins to be untied, is a degree of
drunkenness.

But that we may avoid the sin of intemperance in meats and drinks, besides the
former rules of measures, these councels also may be useful.

Rules for obtaining Temperance.
1. Be not often present at feasts, nor at all in dissolute company, when it
may be avoided; for variety of pleasing objects steals away the heart of man:
and company is either violent or enticing; and we are weak or complying, or
perhaps desirous enough to be abused. But if you be unavoidably or indiscreetly
engaged, let not mistaken civility or good nature engage thee, either to the
temptation of staying, if thou understandest thy weakness) or the sin of
drinking inordinately.

2. Be severe in your judgment concerning your proportions and let no occasion
make you enlarge far beyond your ordinary. For a man is surprised by parts;
and while he thinks one glass more will not make him drunk, that one glass
has disabled him from well discerning his present condition and neighbor
danger: While men think themselves wise they become fools: they think they
shall taste the aconite and not die, or crown their heads with juice of poppie
and not be drowsy; and if they drink off the whole vintage, still they think
they can swallow another goblet. Seneca p. 33. chi (...) maia puo ^^^^che (...).
But remember this, when ever you begin to consider whether you may safely take
one draught more, it is then high time to give over, let that be accounted a
sign late enough to break off: for every reason to doubt, is a sufficient
reason to part the company.

3. Come not to table but when thy need invites thee: and if thou be in
health, leave something of thy appetite unfilled, something of thy natural heat
unimployed, that it may secure thy digestion, and serve other needs of nature
or the spirit

4. Propound to thy self (if thou be in a capacity) a constant rule of
living, of eating and drinking, which though it may not be fit to observe
scrupulously, lest it become a snare to thy conscience, or endanger thy health
upon every accidental violence: yet let not thy rule be broken often nor much,
but upon great necessity and in small degrees.

Nil interest fuxeas sceleri, ^u illud facias. (...) Senec:
5. Never urge any man to eat or drink beyond his own limits, and his own
desires. He that does otherwise is drunk with his brothers surfeit, and reels
and falls with his intemperance, that is, the sin of drunkeness is upon both
their scores, they both lie wallowing in the guilt.

6. Use S. Paul's instruments of Sobriety. Let us who are of the day be sober,
putting on the brestplate of faith and love, and for an helmet the hope of
salvation. Faith, Hope and Charity are the best weapons in the world to fight
against intemperance. The faith of the Mahometans forbids them to drink wine,
and they abstain religiously, as the sons of Rechab: and the faith of Christ
forbids drunkenness to us; and therefore is infinitely more powerful to
suppress this vice, when we remember that we are Christians, and to abstain
from drunkenness and gluttony is part of the Faith and Discipline of Jesus,
and that with these vices, neither our love to God, nor our hopes of heaven can
possibly consist; and therefore when these enter the heart, the others go out
at the mouth: for this is the Devil that is cast out by fasting and prayer,
which are the proper actions of these graces.

7. As a pursuance of this Rule, it is a good advice, that as we begin and end
all our times of eating with prayer and thanksgiving: so at the meal we remove
and carry up our mind and spirit to the Celestial table, often thinking of it,
and often desiring it; that by enkindling thy desire to Heavenly banquets, thou
may be indifferent and less passionate for the Earthly.

8. Mingle discourses pious, or in some sense profitable, and in all senses
charitable and innocent, with thy meal, as occasion is ministered.

9. Let your drink so serve your meat, as your meat does your health; that it
be apt to convey and digest it, and refresh the spirits; but let it never go
beyond such a refreshment as may a little lighten the present load of a sad or
troubled spirit; never to inconvenience, lightness, sottishness, vanity, or
intemperance: and know that the loosing the bands of the tongue, and the very
first dissolution of its duty, is one degree of the intemperance.

10. In all cases be careful that you be not brought under the power of such
things which otherwise are lawful enough in the use. All things are lawful for
me but I will not be brought under the power of any thing, said S. Paul. And to
be perpetually longing, and impatiently desirous of any thing, so that a man
cannot abstain from it, is to lose a man's liberty, and to become a servant of
meat and drink, or smoke: And I wish this last instance were more considered by
persons who little suspect themselves guilty of intemperance, though their
desires are strong and impatient, and the use of it perpetual and unreasonable
to all purposes, but that they have made it habitual, and necessary as
intemperance it self is made to some men.

11. Use those advices which are prescribed as instruments to suppress
voluptuousness in the foregoing section.

SECT. III. Of Chastity.
REader stay, and read not the advices of the following Section, unless thou
have a chaste spirit, or desire to be chaste, or at least art apt to consider
whether thou ought or no. For there are some spirits so Atheistical, and some
so wholly possessed with a spirit of uncleanness, that they turn the most
prudent and chaste discourses into dirt and filthy apprehensions: like choleric
stomachs changing their very Cordials and medicines into bitterness: and a in
literal sense turning the grace of God into wantonness: They study cases of
conscience in the matter of carnal sins, not to avoid, but to learn ways how
to offend God and pollute their own spirits: and search their houses with a Sun
beam that they may be instructed in all the corners of nastiness. I have used
all the care I could, in the following periods, that I might neither be wanting
to assist those that need it, nor yet minister any occasion of fancy or vainer
thoughts to those that need them not. If any man will snatch the pure taper
from my hand, and hold it to the Devil, he will only burn his own fingers, but
shall not rob me of the reward of my care and good intention since I have taken
heed how to express the following duties, and given him caution how to read
them.

CHastity is that duty which was mystically intended by GOD in the law of
Circumcision. It is the circumcision of the heart, the cutting off all
superfluity of naughtiness* and a supression of all irregular desires in the
matter of sensual or carnal pleasure. I call all desires irregular and sinful
that are not sanctified; 1. By the holy institution, or by being within the
protection of marriage. 2. By being within the order of nature. 3. By being
within the moderation of Christian modesty. Against the first are, fornication,
adultery, and all voluntary pollutions of either sex. Against the second are
all unnatural lusts, and incestuous mixtures. Against the third is all
immoderate use of permitted beds; concerning which, judgment is to be made as
concerning meats and drinks; there being no certain degree of frequency or
intension prescribed to all persons, but it is to be ruled as the other actions
of a man by proportion to the end, by the dignity of the person in the honor
and severity of being a Christian, and by other circumstances, of which I am to
give account.

Chastity is that grace which forbids and restrains all these, keeping the body
and soul pure in that state in which it is placed by God, whether of the single
or of the married life. Concerning which our duty is thus described by S. Paul.
[For this is the will of God even our sanctification, 5. These. 3.4, 5.
that ye should abstain from fornication: that every one of you should know how
to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor: Not in the lust of
concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not God.

Chastity is either abstinence or continence. Abstinence is that of Virgins or
Widows: Continence of married persons. Chaste marriages are honorable and
pleasing to God: Widowhood is pitiable in its solitariness and loss, but
amiable and comely when it is adorned with gravity and purity, and not fullied
with remembrances of the passed license, nor with present desires of returning
to a second bed. But Virginity is a life of Angels, Virgini^as est in cae. ne
corrupiteth incorruptionis perpetua meditatio S Aug. I Would Virg c. 13.
the enamel of the soul, the huge advantage of religion, the great opportunity
for the retirements of devotion: and being empty of cares it is full of
prayers: being unmingled with the world, it is apt to converse with God: and by
not feeling the warmth of a too forward and indulgent nature, flames out with
holy fires, till it be burning like the Cherubim and the most extasied order of
holy and unpolluted Spirits.

Natural virginity of it self is not a state more acceptable to God: but that
which is chosen and voluntary in order to the conveniences of Religion and
separation from worldly incombrances, is therefore better then the married
life; not that it is more holy, but that it is a freedom from cares, an
opportunity to spend more time in spiritual employments; it is not allayed with
businesses and attendances upon lower affairs: and if it be a chosen condition
to these ends; it contains in it a victory over lusts, and greater desires of
Religion, and self-denial, and therefore is more excellent then the married
life, in that degree in which it has greater religion and a greater
mortification, a less satisfaction of natural desires, and a greater fullness
of the spiritual: and just so is to expect that little coronet or special
reward which God has prepared (extraordinary and besides the great Crown of
all faithful souls) for those who have not defiled themselves with women, Apoc.
144. Isa. 56.45
but follow the Virgin Lamb for ever.

But some married persons even in their marriage do better please God then
some Virgins in their state of virginity: They by giving great example of
conjugal affection, by preserving their faith unbroken, by educating children
in the fear Of God, by patience and contentedness, and holy thoughts and the
exercise of virtues proper to that state, do not only please God, but do in a
higher degree then those Virgins whose piety is not answerable to their great
opportunities and advantages,

However, married persons, and Widows, and Virgins are all servants of God and
coheirs in the inheritance of Jesus, if they live within the restraints and
laws of their particular estate, chastely, temperately, justly, and religiously.

The evil consequents of Uncleanness.
The blessings and proper effects of chastity we shall best understand by
reckoning the evils of uncleanness and carnality.

1. Uncleanness of all vices is the most shameful. prove. 6.23.
The eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight saying, No eye shall see me
and disguiseth his face. Job 24.15.
In tha dark they dig through houses which they have marked for themselves in
the day time: they know not the light: for the morning is to them as the shadow
of death, he is swift as the waters; their portion is cursed in the earth, he
beholds not the way of the vineyards. (...)
Shame is the eldest daughter of Uncleanness.

2. The appetites of uncleanness are full of cares and trouble, and its
fruition is sorrow and repentance. 2 Hos 6.
The way of the adulterer is hedged with thorns: full of fears and jealousies,
Appetitus fornicationis anxietas est fatieras vt o poenitentia. S. Hieron
burning desires and impatient waitings, tediousness of delay, and sufferance
of affronts, and amazements of discovery.

3. Most of its kinds are of that conditon, that they involve the ruin of two
souls: and he that is a fornicatour or adulterous, steals the soul as well as
dishonours the body of his Neighbor: and so it becomes like the sin of falling
Lucifer, who brought a part of the stars with his tail from Heaven.

4. Of all carnal sins it is that alone which the Devil takes delight to
imitate and counterfeit; communicating with Witches and impure persons in the
corporal act, but in this only.

5. Uncleanness with all its kinds is a vice which has a professed enmity
against the body. 1 Cor. 6.1^.
Every sin which a man does is without the body, but he that commits
fornication sins against his own body.

6 Uncleanness is hugely contrary to the spirit of Government by embasing the
spirit of a man, making it effeminate, (...).
sneaking, soft, and foolish, without courage, without confidence. David felt
this after his folly with Bathsheba, he fell to unkingly arts and stratagems to
hide the crime, and he did nothing but increase it; and remained timorous and
poor-spirited, till he prayed to GOD once more to establish him with a free and
a Princely spirit. Spiritu principali me confirma, Ps. 51.
And no superior dare strictly observe discipline upon his charge, if he has
let himself loose to the shame of incontinence.

7. The Gospel has added two arguments against uncleanness which were never
before used, nor indeed could be, since GOD has given the holy Spirit to them
that are baptized, and rightly confirmed, and entered into covenant with him,
our bodies are made temples of the holy Ghost in which he dwells: and therefore
uncleanness is Sacrilege and defiles a Temple. 1 Cor 6.19
It is S. Paul's argument [ Know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy
Ghost?] and [ He that defiles a Temple, 1 Cor. 3.17.^
him will God destroy.] Therefore gloryfie God in your bodies that is, flee
Fornication.] To which for the likeness of the argument add, that our bodies
are members of Christ, and therefore God forbid that we should take the members
of Christ and make them members of a harlot. So that uncleanness dishonours
Christ, and dishonours the holy Spirit: it is a sin against God, and in this
sense a sin against the Holy Ghost.

8. The next special argument which the Gospel ministers especially against
adultery, Ephesians. 5.32.
and for the preservation of the purity of marriage, is that [Marriage is by
Christ hallowed into a mystery to signify the Sacramental and mystical union
of Christ and his Church. He therefore that breaks this knot which the Church
and their mutual faith has tied, and Christ has knit up into a mystery,
dishonours a great rite of christianity, of high, spiritual and excellent
signification.

Moral:
9. S. Gregory reckons uncleaneness to be the parent of these monsters:
Blindness of mind, inconsideration, precipitancy or giddiness in actions,
self-love, hatred of God, love of the present pleasures, a dispite or despair
of the joys of religion here, and of heaven hereafter. Whereas a pure mind in
a chaste body is the mother of wisdom and deliberation, sober counsels and
ingenuous actions, open deportment and sweet carriage, sincere principles and
unprejudicate understanding, love of God and self denial, peace and confidence,
holy prayers and spiritual comfort, S Cyprian de bono pudicitiae.
and a pleasure of Spirit infinitely greater then the sottish and beastely
pleasures of unchastity. For to overcome pleasure is the greatest pleasure and
no victory is greater then that which is gotten over our lusts and filthy
inclinations.

10. Add to all these, the public dishonesty and disreputation that all the
Nations of the world have cast upon adulterous and unhallowed embraces.
Abimelech to the men of Gerar made it death to meddle with the wife of Isaac:
and Judah condemned Thamar to be burnt for her adulterous conception: and God,
besides the Law made to put the adulterous person to death, did constitute a
settled and constant miracle to discover the adultery of a suspected Woman, Number
5.14.
that her bowels should burst with drinking the waters of Jealousy. The
Egyptian Law was to cut off the nose of the adulteress, and the offending part
of the adulterer. The Locrians put out the adulterers both eyes. The Germans
(as Tacitus reports) placed the adulteress amidst her kindred naked, and
shaved her head, and caused her husband to beat her with clubs through the
city. The Gortinaeans crowned the man with wool to shame him for his
effeminacy: and the Cumani caused the woman to ride upon an ass naked and
hooted at: (...)
and for ever after called her by an appellative of scorn [A rider upon the
asse] All nations barbarous and civil agreeing in their general design of
rooting so dishonest and shameful vice from under heaven. Council Tribur c 49.
Council Aurel 1. sub Clodovaeo.


The middle ages of the Church were not pleased that the adulteress should be
put to death: but in the primitive ages the Cod. de aldulteciiis, ad legem
J^^eam. l. 1. and Cod. Theod. de adulteriis c. placuit.
civil Laws by which Christians were then governed, gave leave to the wronged
husband to kill his adulterous wife, if he took her in the fact: but because it
was a privilege indulged to men, rather then a direct detestation of the crime,
a consideration of the injury rather then of the uncleanness, therefore it was
soon altered: but yet has caused an inquiry, Whether is worse, the Adultery of
the man or the woman.

The resolution of which case in order to our present affair, is thus: In
respect of the person, the fault is greater in a man then in a woman, who is of
a more plyant and easy spirit, and weaker understanding, and has nothing to
supply the unequal strengths of men, but the defensative of a passive nature
and armor of modesty, which is the natural ornament of that sex. Apud Aug: de
adulter. conjug.

Plut^ conjug. praecept.


And it is unjust that the man should demand chastity and severity from his
wife, which himself will not observe toward her, said the good Emperor
Antoninus: it is as if the man should persuade his wife to fight against those
enemies to which he had yielded himself a prisoner. 2. In respect of the
effects and evil consequents, the adultery of the woman is worse, as bringing
bastardy into a family, and disinherisons or great injuries to the Lawful
children, and infinite violations of peace, and murders and divorces, and all
the effects of rage and madness. 3. But in respect of the crime, and as
relating to God, they are equal intolerable, and damnable: and since it is no
more permitted to men to have many wives, then to women to have many husbands,
and that in this respect their privilege is equal, their sin is so too. And
this is the case of the question in Christianity. And the Church anciently
refused to admit such persons to the holy Communion, until they had done seven
years penances in fasting, in sackcloth, in severe inflictions and instruments
of chastity and sorrow, according to the discipline of those ages.

Acts of chastity in general.
The actions and proper offices of the grace of chastity in general are these:

1. To resist all unchaste thoughts: at no hand entertaining pleasure in the
unfruitful fancies and remembrances of uncleanness; although no definite desire
or resolution be entertained.

2. At no hand to entertain any desire, or any fantastic, imaginative loves,
-- Casso saltem delectamine, amar^ qu^d potiri non licet

Poeta. Patellas luxuriae oculos,

dixit Isidorus. (...)

alius quidam.
though by shame, or disability, or other circumstance they be restrained from
act.

3. To have a chaste eye and hand: for it is all one with what part of the body
we commit adultery: Time videre u^de possis cadere, and noli fieri perversa^
simplicitate securus S. Aug.
and if a man lets his eye loose, and enjoyes the lust of that, he is an
adulterer. Look not upon a woman to lust after her. And supposing all the other
members restrained, yet if the eye be permitted to lust, the man can no
otherwise be called chaste then he can be called severe and mortified, that sits
all day long seeing plays and revellings, and out of greediness to fill his
eye, neglects his belly: There are some vessels which if you offer to lift by
the belly or bottom you cannot stir them, but are soon removed if you take
them by the ears. It matters not with which of your members you are taken and
carried off from your duty and severity.

4. To have a heart and mind chaste and pure: that is, detesting all
uncleanness; disliking all its motions, past actions, circumstances,
likenesses, discourses: and this ought to be the chastity of Virgins and
Widows, of old persons and Eunuchs especially, and generally of all men
according to their several necessities.

Sp Minucius Pontifex Posthumium monuit ne verbis vitae ast^ms niem anon
aequantibus uteretur. Plutare: de cap ex inim. utilit.
5. To Discourse chastely and purely, with great care declining all undecencies
of language, chastening the tongue, and restraining it with grace; as vapors
of wine are restrained with a bunch of myrrh.

6. To disapprove by an after act all involuntary and natural pollutions: for
if a man delights in having suffered any natural pollution, and with pleasure
remember it, he chooses that which was in it self involu^tary: and that which
being natural was innocent, becoming voluntary is made sinful.

7. They that have performed these duties and parts of Chastity, will certainly
abstain from all exterior actions of uncleanness: those noon day and mid night
Devils, these lawless and ungodly worshippings of shame and uncleanness, whose
birth is in trouble, whose growth is in folly, and whose end is in shame.

But besides these general acts of Chastity which are common to all states of
men and women, there are some few things propero the severals.

Acta of Virginal Chastity.
1. Virgins must remember that the Virginity of the body is only excellent in
order to the purity of the soul: who therefore must consider that since they
are in some measure in a condition like that of Angels, it is their duty to
spend much of their time in Angelical employment: for in the same degree that
Virgins live more spiritually then other persons, in the same degree is their
Virginity a more excellent state: But else it is no better then that of
involuntary or constrained Eunuchs; a misery and trouble, or else a mere
privation, as much without excellency as without mixture.

2. Virgins must contend for a singular modesty; whose first part must be an
ignorance in the distinction of sexes, or their proper instruments: or if they
accidentally be instruct in that, it must be supplied with an inadvertency or
neglect of all thoughts and remembrances of such difference: and the following
parts of it, must be pious and chaste thoughts, holy language and modest
carriage.

3. Virgins must be retired and unpublick: for all freedom and looseness of
society is a violence done to virginity; not in its natural, but in its moral
capacity: that is, it looses part of its severity, strictness and opportunity
of advantages by publishing that person, whose work is religion, whose company
is Angels whose thoughts must dwell in heaven, and separate from all mixtures
of the world.

4. Virgins have a peculiar obligation to charity: for this is the virginity of
the soul; as purity, integrity, and separation is of the body, which doctrine
we are taught by S. Peter: 1 Pet. 1.22.
Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit
unto unfeigned love of the brethren: see that ye love one another with a pure
heart fervently. For a Virgin that consecrates her body to God, and pollutes
her spirit with rage, or impatience, or inordinate anger, gives him what he
most hates, a most foul and defiled soul.

5. These Rules are necessary for Virgins that offer that state to God, and
mean not to enter into the state of marriage: for they that only wait the
opportunity of a convenient change, are to steer themselves by the general
Rules of Chastity.

Rules for Widows or vidual Chastity.
For Widows, the fontinel of whose desires has been opened by the former
permissions of the marriage bed, they must remember:

1, That God has now restrained the former license, bound up their eyes, and
shut up their heart into a narrower compass, and has given them sorrow to be
a bridle to their desires. A Widow must be a mourner; and she that is not,
cannot so well secure the chastity of her proper state.

2. It is against pulick honesty to marry another man so long as she is with
child by her former Husband: and of the same fame it is in a lesser
proportion, to marry within the year of mourning: but anciently it was infamous
for her to marry, till by common account the body was dissolved into its first
principle of earth.

3. A Widow must restrain her memory and her fancy: not recalling or recounting
her former permissions and freer licenses with any present delight: for then
she opens that sluice which her Husbands death and her own sorrow have shut up.

4. A Widow that desires her widowhood should be a state pleasing to God, must
spend her time as devoted Virgins should, in fastings, and prayers, and charity.

5. A Widow must forbid her self to use those temporal solaces, which in her
former estate were innocent, but now are dangerous.

Rules for married persons, or matrimonial chastity.
Concerning married persons; Nisi fundamenta stirpis jucta sint probe, miseros
necesse est esse deinceps pesteros. Eurip.
besides the keeping of their mutual faith and contract with each other, these
particulars are useful to be observed.

1. Although their mutual endearments are safe within the protection of
marriage, yet they that have Wives or Husbands must be as though they had them
not; that is, they must have an affection greater to each other then they have
to any person in the world, but not greater then they have to God: but that
they be ready to part with all interest in each others person rather then sin
against God.

2. In their permissions and license they must be sure to observe the order of
Nature, and the ends of God. Non debentus eodem amico uti and (...) ato^e: nec
eadem ut uxor and s^o^t^

Plut conjug. praecept.


He is an ill Husband that uses his Wife as a man treats ^ Harlot, having no
other end but pleasure. Concerning which, our best rule is, that although in
this, as in eating and drinking, there is an appetite to be satisfied, which
cannot be done without pleasing that desire, yet since that desire and
satisfaction was intended by Nature for other ends, they should never be
separate from those ends, but always be joined with all or one of these ends;
with a desire of children, or to avoid fornication, or to lighten and ease the
cares and sadnesses of household affairs, or to endear each other: but never
with a purpose either in act or desire to separate the sensuality from these
ends which hallow it. Onan did separate his act from its proper end, and so
ordered his embraces that his Wife should not conceive, and God punished him.

Non recte est ab Herodoto dictum simul cum tunica multerem verecundiam exuere.
Quae n^ casta est, posita^ vest, verecundiam ejus loco induit, ma^i^rtaue
verecioidia conjuge tassera maximi invicen^. moris uttentur.

Plut: conjug. praecept.


3. Married persons must keep such modesty and decency of treating each other,
that they never force themselves into high and violent lusts, with arts and
misbecoming devices: always remembering that those mixtures are most innocent
which are most simple, and most natural, most orderly and most safe.

4. It is a duty of matrimonial chastity to be restrained and temperate in the
use of their lawful pleasures: concerning which although no universal Rule can
antecedently be given to all persons, any more then to all bodies one
proportion of meat and drink: yet married persons are to estimate the degree of
their license according to the following proportions. * 1. That it be moderate
so as to consist with health. * 2. That it be so ordered as not to be too
expensive of time, that precious opportunity of working out our salvation. * 3.
That when duty is demanded it be always paid (so far as is in our powers
and election) according to the foregoing measures. * That it be with a
temperate affection, without violent transporting desires, or too sensual
applications. Concerning which a man is to make judgment by proportion to other
actions, and the severities of his religion, and the sentences of sober and
wise persons, always remembering that marriage is a provision for supply of the
natural necessities of the body; not for the artificial and procured appetites
of the mind. And it is a sad truth, that many married persons thinking that
the floodgates of liberty are set wide open without measures or restraints (so
they sail in that channel) have felt the final rewards of intemperance and
lust, by their unlawful using of lawful permissions. Only let each of them be
temperate, and both of them be modest. Socrates was wont to say, that those
women to whom Nature had not been indulgent in good features and colors,
should make it up themselves with excellent manners; and those who were
beautiful and comely, should be careful that so fair a body be not polluted
with unhandsome usages. De conjug. precept.
To which Plutarch adds; that a Wife if she be unhandsome, should consider, how
extremely ugly she should be, if she wanted modesty: but if she be handsome,
let her think how gracious that beauty would be if she superadds chastity.

5. Married persons by consent are to abstain from their mutual entertainments
at solemn times of devotion: not as a duty of it self necessary, but as being
the most proper act of purity which in their condition they can present to God:
and being a good advantage for attending their preparation to the solemn duty
and their demeanor in it. It is Saint Paul's counsel, 1 Cor 7 5.
that by consent for a time they should abstain, that they may give themselves
to fasting and prayer. And though when Christians did receive the holy
Communion every day, it is certain they did not abstain, Hoc etiam ^x more
Christianorum. Te^tu^. S^ad^ns foemi^^ Ch^isti^nis ne Pa^anis n^^ant. ais Q^is
den^qu^ s^l^nni^us Pas^hae ab nectantem secu^us susten^bit? Tertul. ad uxor. 2.
l. Et ex more etiam Gentilium. Plu sym^os. 3 q. 6. Nobis autem si leges
civitatis recte colimus cavendum est, ne ad ^empla and sacrificia accedamus,
paulo ante re vener^a usi. Itaque expedit nocte and semno interjecto, just^que
inte vallo ad^ibito, ^undos rursum quasi de int^^ro, and ad novum diem nova
cogitantes (ut ait Demecritus) surgere.
but had children: yet when the Communion was more seldom, they did with
religion abstain from the marriage bed during the time of their solemn
preparatory devotions, as anciently they did, from eating and drinking till the
solemnity of the day was past.

6. It were well if married persons would in their penitential prayers, and in
their general confessions suspect themselves, and accordingly ask a general
pardon for all their undecencies and more passionate applications of themselves
in the offices of marriage: that what is lawful and honorable in its kind may
not be sullied with imperfect circumstances; or if it be, it may be made clean
again by the interruption and recallings of such a repentance of which such
uncertain parts of action are capable.

But because of all the dangers of a Christian, none more pressing and
troublesome then the temptations to lust, no enemy m^re dangerous then that of
the flesh, no accounts greater then what we have to reckon for at the Audit of
Concupiscence, therefore it concerns all that would be safe from this death to
arm themselves by the following Rules to prevent, or to cure all the wounds of
our flesh made by the poisoned arrows of Lust.

Remedies against uncleanness.
1. When a temptation of lust assaults thee do not resist it by heaping up
arguments against it, (...) a l^bidinis (...) app^ci^^ le fugam, si vis
obtinere victo^iam. S. Aug.

Nella gueria d' amor chi fuge vinc^


and disputing with it, considering its offers and its danger, but fly from
it, that is, think not at all of it; lay aside all consideration concerning
it, and turn away from it, by any severe and laudable thought or business.
Saint Hierome very wittily reproves the Gentile superstition, who pictured the
Virgin Deities armed with a shield and lance, as if chastity could not be
defended without war and direct contention. No; this enemy is to be treated
otherwise. If you hear it speak, though but to dispute with it, it ruins you;
and the very arguments you go about to answer, leave a relish upon the tongue.
A man may be burned if he goes near the fire, though but to quench his house;
and by handling pitch, though but to draw it from your cloths, you defile your
fingers.

2. Avoid idleness, and fill up all the spaces of thy time with severe and
useful employment: for lust usually creeps in at those emptinesses, where the
soul is unimployed and the body is at ease. For no easy, healthful, and idle
person was ever chaste, if he could be tempted. But of all employments, bodily
labor is most useful and of greatest benefit for the driving away the Devil.

3. Give no entertainment to the beginnings, -- Quisquis in primo obstitit
Repulitque ^morem, tutus ac victor fuit:
Qui blandi^ndo dulce nat^ivit malum,
Suo recusat far quod subiit jugunt.
Senec: Hipp^l:
the first motions and secret whispers of the spirit of impurity. For if you
totally suppress it, it dies: if you permit the furnace to breathe its smoke
and flame out at any vent, it will rage to the consumption of the whole. This
cockatrice is soonest crushed in the shell, but if it grows, it turns to a
serpent, and a Dragon, and a Devil.

4. Corporal mortification and hard usages of our body has by all ages of the
Church been accounted a good instrument and of some profit against the spirit
of fornication. A spare diet, and a thin course table, seldom refreshment,
frequent fasts, not violent and interrupted with returns to ordinary feeding,
but constantly little, unpleasant, of wholesome but sparing nourishment: For by
such cutting off the provisions of victual we shall weaken the strengths of our
Enemy. To which if we add, lyings upon the ground, painful postures in prayer,
reciting our devotions with our arms extended at full length, like Moses
praying against Amalek, or our blessed SAVIOR hanging upon his painful bed of
sorrows, the Cross; and (if the lust be upon us and sharply tempting) by
inflicting any smart to overthrow the strongest passion by the most violent
pain, we shall find great ease for the present, and the resolution and apt
sufferance against the future danger. And this was S. Paul's remedy, I bring my
body under; In vi^a S. Paul.
he used some rudenesses toward it. But it was a great nobleness of of
chastity which S. Hie^ome reports of a Son of the King of Nicodemia, who being
tempted upon flowers and a perfumed bed with a soft violence, but yet tied down
to the temptation; and solicited with circumstances of Asian Luxury by an
impure Curtesan; lest the easiness of his posture should abuse him, spi^ out
his tongue into her face: to represent that no virtue has cost the Saints
B^n^dictus in sp^tis se ^o ^^tavit. S. Ma^tinianus faci^m and manus. S.
Johannes cognom^nto Bonus, eal^^a^s a^utos inter ungue^ and ca^nem digi^orum
mir^^^it S. Theoctisius i^ stivis more ferarum vixit ne inter A^abe^
pol^u^retur.
so much, as this of Chastity.

5. Elie from all occasions, temptations, loosnesses of company, Balls and
Revellings, undecent mixtures of wanton dancings, idle talk, private society
with strange women, starings upon a beauteous face, the company of women that
are singers, amorous gestures, garish and wanton dressings, feasts and liberty,
banquets and persumes, (...). Julian.
wine and strong drinks, which are made to persecute chastity; Venus resam am at
p^opter sabellam quam recitat. Libanius.
some of these being the very Prologues to lust, Venture mero aestuans cito
despuntatur in libidines. S. Hieron.
and the most innocent of them being but like condired or pickled Mushroms,
which if carefully corrected, (...) che n^nn^^ s^ae^da non vrg^^^ ^^e mi^ec^^i
and seldom tasted, may be harmless, but can never do good: Ever remembering
that it is easier to die for chastity, then to live with it; and the Hangman
could not extort a consent from some persons, from whom a Lover would have
entreated it. For the glory of chastity will easily overcome the rudeness of
fear and violence; but easiness and softness, and smooth temptations creep in,
and like the Sun make a maiden lay by her vail and robe, which persecution like
the Northern wind, made her hold fast and clap close about her.

6. He that will secure his chastity, must first cure his pride and his rage.
For oftentimes lust is the punishment of a proud man, to tame the vanity of his
pride by the shame and affronts of unchastity: and the same intemperate heat
that makes anger, does enkindle lust. -- nun^ quid ego a te
Magno p^ugnatant d^pose^ conside --
V^^^ a su^ (...) mea cum confe^b^^^ i^a. Ho^at. se^m l. Sat 2.



7. If thou be assaulted with an unclean Spirit trust not thy self alone,
but run forth into company, whose reverence and modesty may suppress, or whose
society may divert thy thoughts: and a perpetual witness of thy conversation is
of especial use against this vice, which evaporates in the open air like
Camphire, being impatient of light and wiitnesses.

8. Use frequent and earnest-prayer to the King of Purities, the first of
Virgins, the eternal GOD, who is of an essential purity; that he would be
pleased to reprove and cast out the unclean Spirit. For besides the blessings
of prayer by way of reward, it has a natural virtue to restrain this vice:
because a prayer against it, is an unwillingness to act it; and so long as we
heartily pray against it, our desires are secured; and then this Devil has no
power. This was Saint Paul's other remedy: [ For this cause I besought the Lord
thrice,] And there is much reason and much advantage in the use of this
instrument; because the main thing that in this affair is to be secured is a
man's mind. He that goes about to cure lust by bodily exercises alone (as Saint
Paul's phrase is) or mortifications, Men's impudicam f^ce^^, non corpus s^le^.
shall find them sometimes instrumental to it, and incitations of sudden
desires, but always insufficient and of little profit: but he that has a
chaste mind shall find his body apt enough to take laws; and let it do its
worst, it cannot make a sin; and in its greatest violence can but produce a
little natural uneasiness, not so much trouble as a severe fasting day, or a
hard nights lodging upon boords. If a man be hungry he must eat, and if he be
thirsty he must drink in some convenient time, or else ^e dies: but if the body
be rebellions, so the mind be chaste, let it do its worst, if you resolve
perfectly not to satisfy it, you can receive no great evil by it. Therefore
the proper cure is by applications to the Spirit, and securities of the mind;
which can no way so well be secured as by frequent and servent prayers, and
sober resolutions, and severe discourses. Therefore,

9. Hither bring in succor from consideration of the Divine presence, and of
his holy Angels, meditation of Death, and the passions of CHRIST upon the
Cross, imitation of his purities, and of the Virgin Mary his unspotted and
holy Mother, and of such eminent Saints who in their generations were burning
and shining lights, unmingled with such uncleanness which defile the soul,
and who now follow the Lamb whithersoev^r he goes.

Danda est opera ut matrimonio devi^ciantur, quod est tutissimum ju^entutis
vinculum. Plut: de educ. lib.
10. These remedies are of universal efficacy in all cases extraordinary and
violent: but in ordinary and common, the remedy which GOD has provided, that
is, Honorable marriage, has a natural efficacy, besides a virtue by Divine
blessing, to cure the inconveniences which otherwise might afflict persons
temperate and sober.

SECT. IV. Of Humility.
HUmility is the great Ornament and Jewel of Christian Religion; that whereby
it is distinguished from all the wisdom of the world; it not having been
taught by the wise men of the Gentiles; but first put into a discipline, and
made part of a religion by our Lord Jesus Christ, who propounded himself
imitable by his Disciples so signally in nothing, as in the twinne sisters of
Meekness and Humility. Learn of me for I am meek and humble, and ye shall find
rest unto your souls.

For all the World, all that we are, and all that we have; our bodies and our
souls, our actions and our sufferings, our conditions at home, our accidents
abroad, our many sins, and our seldom virtues, are as so many arguments to
make our souls dwell low in the deep valleys of Humility.

Arguments against Pride by way of Consideration.
1. Our Body is weak and impure, sending out more uncleanness from its
several sinks then could be endured if they were not necessary and natural: and
we are forced to pass that through our mouths, which as soon as we see upon
the ground, we loathe like rottenness and vomiting.

2. Our strength is inferior to that of many Beasts, and our infirmities so
many that we are forced to dress and tend Horses and Asses, that they may help
our needs, and relieve our wants.

3. Our beauty is in color inferior to many flowers, and in proportion of
parts it is better then nothing. For even a Dog has parts as well proportioned
and fitted to his purposes, and the designs of his nature, as we have: and when
it is most florid and gay, three sits of an ague can change it into yellowness
and leanness, and the hollowness and wrinkles of deformity.

4. Our learning is then best when it teaches most humility: but to be proud of
Learning is the greatest ignorance in the World. For our learning is so long in
getting, and so very imperfect, that the greatest Clerk knows not the thousand
part of what he is ignorant; and knows so uncertainly what he seems to know,
and knows no otherwise then a Fool, or a Child, even what is told him, or what
he guesses at, that except those things which concern his duty, and which God
has revealed to him, which also every Woman knows so far as is necessary;
the most Learned Man has nothing to be proud of, unless this be a sufficient
argument to exalt him, that he uncertainly guesses at some more unnecessary
things then many others, who yet know all that concerns them, and mind other
things more necessary for the needs of life and Commonwealths.

6. He that is proud of riches is a fool. For if he be exalted above his
Neighbors because he has more gold, how much inferior is he to a Gold Mine?
How much is he to give place to a chain of Pearl, or a knot of Diamonds? For
certainly that has the greatest excellence from whence he derives all his
gallantry and pre-eminence over his Neighbors.

5 If a man be exalted by reason of any excellence in his soul, he may please
to remember, that all souls are equal; and their differing operations are
because their instrument is in better tune, their body is more healthful, or
better tempered: which is no more praise to him, then it is that he was born in
Italy.

7. He that is proud of his birth is proud of the blessings of others, not of
himself: for if his parents were more eminent in any circumstance then their
Neighbors, he is to thank God, and to rejoice in them; but still he may be a
Fool or unfortunate, or deformed; and when himself was born, it was indifferent
to him whether his Father were a King or a Peasant; for he knew not any thing,
nor chose any thing: and most commonly it is true, that he that bosts of his
Ancestors, who were the founders and raisers of a Noble Family, does confess
that he has in himself a less virtue and a less honor, and therefore that
he is degenerated.

8. Whatsoever other difference there is between thee and thy Neighbor, if it
be bad, it is thine own, but thou have no reason to boast of thy misery and
shame: if it be good, thou have received it from God; and then thou art more
obliged to pay duty and tribute, use and principle to him: and it were a
strange folly for a man to be proud of being more in debt then another.

9. Remember what thou were before thou were begotten? Nothing. What were thou
in the first regions of thy dwelling, before thy birth? Uncleanness. What were
thou for many years after? Weakness. What in all thy life? A great sinner. What
in all thy excellencies? A mere debtor to God, to thy parents to the earth, to
all the creatures. Apulei^is de Demon. So^cratis.
But we may if we please use the method of the Platonists, who reduce all the
causes and arguments for humility which we can take from our selves, to these
seven heads: 1. The spirit of a man is light and troublesome. 2. His body is
brutish and sickly. 3. He is constant in his folly and error, and inconstant
in his manners and good purposes. 4. His labors are vain, intricate, and
endless. 5. His fortune is changeable, but seldom pleasing, never perfect. 6.
His wisdom comes not till he be ready to die, that is, till he be past using
it. 7. His death is certain, always ready at the door, but never far off *.
Upon these or the like meditations if we dwell, or frequently retire to them,
we shall see nothing more reasonable then to be humble; and nothing more
foolish then to be proud.

Acts or offices of humility.
The grace of humility is exercised by these following Rules:

1. Think not thy self better for any thing that happens to thee from without.
For although thou may by gifts bestowed upon thee be better then another, as
one horse is better then another, that is, of more use to others; yet as thou
art a man; thou have nothing to commend thee to thy self, but that only by
which thou art a man; that is, by what thou choosest and refusest.

2. Humility consists not in railing against thy self, or wearing mean clothes,
or going softly and submisly; but in a hearty and real evil or mean opinion of
thy self. Believe thy self an unworthy person* heartily, as thou believe thy
self to be hungry, or poor, or sick, when thou art so.

3. Whatsoever evil thou say of thy self be content that others should think
to be true: and if thou call thy self fool, be not angry if another say so
of thee; For if thou think so truly, all men in the world desire other men
to be of their opinion; and he is an hypocrite that accuses himself before
others, with an intent not to be believed. But he, that calls himself
intemperate, foolish, lustful, and is angry when his neighbors call him so, is
both a false and a proud person.

4. Love to be concealed, Ama nesci^i and pro nibilo reputari. Gerson.
and little esteemed: be content to want praise, never being troubled when thou
art slighted or undervalued: for thou can not undervalue thy self, and if
thou think so meanly as there is reason, no contempt will seem unreasonable,
and therefore it will be very tolerable.

5. Never be ashamed of thy birth, or thy parents, or thy trade Chi del art
sua se vergogna sempre vive con vergogna.
, Ill villan nobilitado non c^gnosce parentado
or thy present employment, for the meanness or poverty of any of them: and
when there is an occasion to speak of them, such an occasion as would invite
you to speak of any thing that pleases you, omit it not; but speak as readily
and indifferently of thy meanness, as of thy greatness. Primislaus the first
King of Bohemia kept his countrey-shooes always by him, to remember from
whence he was raised: And Agathocles by the furniture of his Table confessed,
that from a Potter he was raised to be the King of Sicily.

6. Never speak any thing directly tending to thy praise or glory: that is,
with a purpose to be commended, and for no other end. If other ends be mingled
with thy honor, as if the glory of God, or charity, or necessity, or any thing
of prudence by the end, you are not tied to omit your discourse, or your
design that you may avoid praise, but pursue your end, though praise come
along in the company. Only let not praise be the design.

7. When thou have said or done any thing for which thou receivest praise or
estimation, take it indifferently, and return it to GOD; reflecting upon him as
the Giver of the gift, or the Blesser of the action, or the Aid of the design:
and give God thanks for making thee an instrument of his glory, or the benefit
of others.

8, Secure a good name to thy self by living virtuously and humbly: but let
this good name be nursed abroad, and never be brought home to look upon it: let
others use it for their own advantage: let them speak of it if they please, but
do not thou at all use it, but as an instrument to do God glory, and thy
neighbor more advantage: Let thy face like Moses shine to others, but make no
looking glasses for thy self.

9, Take no content in praise when it is offered thee: but let thy rejoicing in
Gods gift be allayed with fear, least this good bring thee to evil. Use the
praise as you use your pleasure in eating and drinking: if it comes, make it
do drugery, let it serve other ends, and minister to necessities, and to
caution, lest by pride you lose your just praise which you have deserved; or
else by being praised unjustly, you receive shame into your self, with God and
wise men.

(...). Epist, c. 21 l. 1.
10. Use no stratagems and devices to get praise. Some use to enquire into the
faults of their own actions or discourses on purpose to hear that it was well
done or spoken, and without fault: others bring the matter into talk, or
thrust themselves into company, and intimate and give occasion to be thought or
spoke of. These men make a bait to persuade themselves to swallow the hook,
till by drinking the waters of vanity they swell and burst.

11. Make no suppletories to thy self, Alter alteri satis am^^um theatrum
sumus. Satis unus, s^tis nullus. Senec.
when thou art disgraced or slighted, by pleasing thy self with supposing thou
did deserve praise, though they understood thee not, or enviously detracted
from thee: neither do thou get to thy self a private theater and flatterers,
in whose vain noises, and fantastic praises thou may keep up thy own good
opinion of thy self.

12. Entertain no fancies of vanity and private whispers of this Devil of
pride: such as was that of Nebuchodonos or; Is not this great Babylon which I
have built for the honor of my name, and the might of my majesty, and the
power of my kingdom? Some fantastic spirits will walk alone, and dream waking,
of greatnesses, of palaces, of excellent orations, full theaters, loud
applauses, sudden advancement, great fortunes: and so will spend an hour with
imaginative pleasure, all their employment being nothing but fames of pride,
and secret indefinite desires, and significations of what their heart wishes.
In this, although there is nothing of its own nature directly vicious, yet it
is either an ill mother, or an ill daughter, an ill sign, or an ill effect;
and therefore at no hand consisting with the safety and interests of humility.

13. Suffer others to be praised in thy presence: and entertain their good and
glory with delight: but at no hand disparage them or lessen the report, or make
an objection: and think not the advancement of thy brother is a lessening of
thy worth. * But this act is also to extend further.

14. Be content that he should be employed, and thou laid by as unprofitable;
his sentence approved, thine rejected; he be preferred, and thou fixed in a low
employment.

15. Never compare thy self with others, unless it be to advance them and to
depresse thy self. To which purpose we must be sure in some sense or other to
think our selves the worst in every company where we come: one is more learned
then I am; another is more prudent; a third, honorable; a fourth more chaste;
or he is more charitable, or less proud. For the humble man observes their
good, and reflects only upon his own vileness; or considers the many evils of
himself certainly known to himself, and the ill of others but by uncertain
report: or he considers that the evils done by another are out of much
infirmity, or ignorance, but his own sins are against a clearer light; and if
the other had so great helps, he would have done more good and less evil; or
he remembers that his old sins before his conversion were greater in the nature
of the thing, or in certain circumstances, then the sins of other men (So S.
Paul reckoned himself the chiefest of sinners, because formerly he had acted
the chiefest sin of persecuting the Church of God.) But this rule is to be
used with this caution: That though it be good always to think meanest of our
selves, yet it is not ever safe to speak it, because those circumstances and
considerations which determine thy thoughts, are not known to others as to thy
self; and it may concern others that they hear thee give God thanks for the
graces he has given thee. But if thou preservest thy thoughts and opinions of
thy self truly humble, you may with more safety give God thanks in public for
that good which cannot, or ought not to be concealed.

16. Be not always ready to excuse every oversight, or indiscretion, or ill
action: but if thou be guilty of it, confess it plainly; for virtue scorns
a lie for its cover; but to hide a sin with it, is like a crust of leprosy
drawn upon an ulcer: if thou be not guilty (unless it be scandalous) be not
over-earnest to remove it: but rather use it as an argument to chastise all
greatness of fancy and opinion in thy self; and accustom thy self to bear
reproof patiently and contentedly, and the harsh words of thy enemies, as
knowing that the anger of an enemy is a better Monitor, and represents our
faults or admonishes us of our duty with more heartiness, then the kindness
does, or precious balms of a friend.

17. Give God thanks for every weakness, deformity, and imperfection, and
accept it as a favor and grace of God, and an instrument to resist pride and
nurse humility; ever remembering that when God by giving thee a crooked back,
has also made thy spirit stoop or less vain, thou art more ready to enter the
narrow gate of Heaven, then by being straight, and standing upright, and
thinking highly. Thus the Apostles rejoiced in their infirmities, not moral,
but natural, and accidental, in their being beaten and whipped like slaves, in
their nakedness and poverty.

18. Upbraid no man's weakness to him to discomfort him; neither report it to
disparage him; neither delight to remember it to lessen him, or to set thy self
above him. Be sure never to praise thy self, or to dispraise any man else,
unless GODS glory, or some holy end do hallow it. And it was noted to the
praise of Cyrus, that amongst his equals in age he would never play at any
sport, or use any exercise in which he knew himself more excellent then they:
Ama Pamico^uo con il d^ffe^to suo In colloquiis pueri invisi alris non sient si
non omnino in disputationibus vitlo^iam semper obtinere laborent. Non tantum
egregiu^ est scire vincere, sed etiam p^sse vinci pulchrum ^st ubi victoria est
damnosa. Plu^: de edus. liber.
but in such in which he was unskilful he would make his challenges, lest he
should shame them by his victory, and that himself might learn something of
their skill, and do them civilities.

19. Besides the foregoing parts and actions, humility teaches us to submit our
selves and all our faculties to GOD: To believe all things, to do all things,
to suffer all things which his will enjoins us; to be content in every estate
or change, knowing we have deserved worse then the worst we feel: And (as
Anytus said to Alcibiades) he has taken but half, when he might have taken
all: to adore his goodness, Nihilita dignum est odio ut eo^um mores qui
compellantibus se diffic^les praebent. Plutarch;
to fear his greatness, to worship his eternal and infinite excellencies, and
to submit our selves to all our superiors in all things according to
Godliness: and to be meek and gentle in our conversation toward others.

Now although according to the nature of every grace, this begins as a gift,
and is increased like a habit, that is, best by its own acts, yet besides the
former acts and offices of humility, there are certain other exercises and
considerations, which are good helps and instruments for the procuring and
increasing this grace, and the curing of pride.

Means and exercises of obtaining and increasing the grace of Humility.
1. Make confession of thy sins often to God; and consider what all that evil
amounts to, which you then charge upon your self. Look not upon them as
scattered in the course of a long life: now, an intemperate anger, then, too
full a meal: now, idle talking, and another time impatience: but unite them
into one continued representation, and remember, that he whose life seems fair,
by reason that his faults are scattered at large distances, in the several
parts of his life, yet if all his errors and follies were articled against him;
the man would seem vicious and miserable: and possibly this exercise, really
applied upon thy spirit, may be useful.

2. Remember that we usually disparage others upon slight grounds, and little
instances; and toward them one fly is enough to spoil a whole box of
ointment: and if a man be highly commended, we think him sufficiently lessened,
if we clap one sin or solly, or infirmity into this account: Let us therefore
be just to our selves, since we are so severe to others, and consider, that
whatsoever good any one can think or say of us, we can tell him of hundreds of
base and unworthy and foolish actions, any one of which were enough (we hope)
to destroy another reputation: Therefore let so many be sufficient to destroy
our over-high thoughts of our selves.

3. When thy Neighbor is cried up by public fame, and popular noises; that we
may disparage and lessen him, we cry out that the people is a Heard of
unlearned and ignorant persons, (...); Arrian: l, 4. c 23.
ill judges, loud trumpets, but which never give certain sound: let us use the
same art to humble our selves, and never take delight and pleasure in public
reports, and acclamations of assemblies, and please our selves with their
judgment, of whom in other the like cases we affirm that they are mad.

4. We change our opinion of others by their kindness or unkindness toward us.
If he be my Patron and bounteous, he is wise, he is noble, his faults are but
warts, his virtues are mountanous: but if he proves unkind or rejects our
importunate suit, then he is ill-natured, covetous, and his free meal is called
gluttony; that which before we called civility, is now very drunkenness, and
all he speaks is flat and dull, and ignorant as a swine: This indeed is unjust
toward others, but a good instrument, if we turn the edge of it upon our
selves: we use our selves ill, abusing our selves with false principles,
cheating our selves with lies and pretenses, stealing the choice and election
from our wills, placing voluntary ignorance in our understandings, denying the
desires of the Spirit, setting up a faction against every noble and just
desire; the lest of which because we should resent up to reviling the injurious
person, it is but reason we should at least not flatter our selves with fond
and too kind opinions.

5. Every day call to mind some one of thy foulest sins, or the most shameful
of thy disgraces, or the indiscreetest of thy actions, or any thing that did
then most trouble thee, and apply it to the present swelling of thy spirit and
opinion, and it may help to allay it.

6. Pray often for his grace with all humility of gesture and passion of
desire, and in thy devotion interpose many acts of humility by way of
confession and address to God, and reflection upon thy self.

7. Avoid great Offices and employments, and the noises of wordly honor. For
in those states many times, so many ceremonies and circumstances will seem
necessary, as will destroy the sobriety of thy thoughts. If the number of thy
servants be fewer, and their observances less, and their reverences less
solemn, possibly they will seem less then thy dignity: and if they be so much
and so many it is likely they will be too big for thy spirit. Fabis abstine]
dixit Pythagoras. Olim^n Magistratus per suffragia fabis lata creabantur. Plut.
And here be thou very careful, lest thou be abused by a pretense that thou
would use thy great Dignity as an opportunity of doing great good. For
supposing it might be good for others, yet it is not good for thee: they may
have encouragement in noble things from thee, and by the same instrument thou
may thy self be tempted to pride and vanity: And certain it is, GOD is as
much glorified by thy example of humility in a low or temperate condition, as
by thy bounty in a great and dangerous.

8. Make no reflex acts upon thy own humility, nor upon any other grace with
which GOD has enriched thy soul. For since GOD oftentimes hides from his
Saints and Servants the sight of those excellent things by which they shine to
others (though the dark side of the Lantern be toward themselves) that he may
secure the grace of humility, it is good that thou do so thy self: and if thou
beholdest a grace of GOD in thee, remember to give him thanks for it, that thou
may not boast in that which is none of thy own: and consider how thou have
sullied it, by handling it with dirty fingers, with thy own imperfections, and
with mixture of unhandsome circumstances. Spiritual pride is very dangerous,
not only by reason it spoils so many graces by which we drew nigh unto the
Kingdom of GOD, but also because it so frequently creeps upon the spirit of
holy persons. For it is no wonder for a Beggar to call himself poor; or a
drunkard to confess that he is no sober person: But for a holy person to be
humble; for one whom all men esteem a Saint, to fear l^st himself become a
Devil, and to observe his own danger, and to discern his own infirmities, and
make discovery of his bad adherencies, is as hard as for a Prince to submit
himself to be guided by Tutors, and make himself subject to discipline like the
meanest of his servants.

9. Often meditate upon the effects of Pride on one side, and Humility on the
other. 1. That Pride is like a Canker, and destroys the beauty of the fairest
flowers, the most excellent gifts and graces: but Humility crowns them all.
Secondly, Mat. 11.25
That Pride is a great hindrance to the perceiving the things of GOD and
Humility is an excellent preparative and instrument of spiritual wisdom.
Thirdly, That Pride hinders the acceptance of our prayers, but Humility
pier^eth the clouds, and will not depart till the most High shall regard.
Fourthly, That Humility is but a speaking truth, and all Pride is a lie.
Fifthly, That Humility is the most certain way to real honor, and Pride is
ever affronted or despised. Sixthly, That Pride turned Lucifer into a Devil,
and Humility exalted the Son of God above every Name, and placed him eternally
at the right hand of his Father. Seventhly, That GOD resists the proud,
professing open defiance and hostility against such persons, James 4.6.
but gives grace to the humble, * Grace and pardon, * remedy and relief
against misery and oppression, * content in all conditions, * tranquillity of
spirit, * patience in afflictions, * love abroad, * peace at home, * and utter
freedom from contention and * the sin of censuring others, * and the trouble
of being censured themselves. For the humble man will not judge his brother for
the mo^e in his eye, being more troubled at the beam in his own eye; and is
patient and glad to be reproved, because himself has cast the first stone at
himself, and therefore wonders not that others are of his mind.

10. Remember that the blessed Savior of the world has done more to
prescribe, and transmit, John 13.15.
and secure this grace then any other: his whole life being a great continued
example of humility: a vast descent from the glorious bosom of his Father to
the womb of a poor maiden, to the form of a servant, to the miseries of a
sinner, to a life of labor, to a state of poverty, to a death of malefactors,
to the grave of death, and the intolerable calamities which we deserved: and it
were a good design and yet but reasonable, that we should be as humble in the
midst of our greatest imperfections and basest sins, as Christ was in the midst
of his fullness of the Spirit, great wisdom, perfect life, and most admirable
virtues.

11. Drive away all flatterers from thy company, and at no hand endure them;
for he that endures himself so to be abused by another is not only a fool for
entertaining the mockery, but loves to have his own opinion of himself to be
heightened and cherished.

12. Never change thy employment for the sudden coming of another to thee: But
if modesty permits or discretion, appear to him that visits thee the same that
thou were to God and thy self in thy privacy. But if thou were walking or
sleeping, or in any other innocent employment or retirement, snatch not up a
book to seem studious, nor fall on thy knees to seem devout, nor alter any
thing to make him believe thee better employed then thou were.

13. To the same purpose it is of great use that he who would preserve his
humility, should choose some spiritual person to whom he shall oblige himself
to discover his very thoughts, and fancies; every act of his and all his
intercourse with others in which there may be danger; that by such an openness
of spirit, he may expose every bl^st of vainglory, every idle thought to be
chastened and lessened by the rod of spiritual discipline: and he that shall
find himself tied to confess every proud thought, every vanity of his spirit,
will also perceive they must not dwell with him, nor find any kindness from
him: and besides this, the nature of pride is so shameful, and unhandsome, that
the very discovery of it is a huge mortification and means of suppressing it. A
man would be ashamed to be told that he enquires after the faults of his last
Oration or action on purpose to be commended: and therefore when the man shall
tell his spiritual Guide the same shameful story of himself, it is very likely
he will be humbled, and heartily ashamed of it.

14. Let every man suppose what opinion he should have of one that should spend
his time in playing with drumsticks and cockleshels, and that should wrangle
all day long with a little boy for pins, or should study hard and labor to
cosen a child of his gauds, and who would run into a river deep and dangerous
with a great burden upon his back, even then when he were told of the danger
and earnestly importuned not to do it: and let him but change the Instances
and the person, and he shall find that he has the same reason to think as bad
of himself, who pursues trifles with earnestness, spending his time in vanity,
and his labor for tha^ which profits not; who knowing the laws of God, the
rewards of virtue, the cursed consequents of sin, that it is an evil spirit
that tempts him to it, a Devil, one that hates him, that longs extremely to
ruin him, that it is his own destruction that he is then working, that the
pleasures of his sin are base and brutish, unsatisfying in the enjoyment,
soon over, shameful in their story, bitter in the memory, painful in the effect
here, and intolerable hereafter, and for ever: yet in despite of all this, he
runs foolishly into his sin and his ruin, merely because he is a fool, and
winks hard, and rushes violently like a horse into the battle, or like a mad
man to his death. He that can think great and good things of such a person, the
next step may court the rack for an instrument of pleasure, and admire a swine
for wisdom, and go for counsel to the prodigal and trifling grasshopper.

After the use of these and such like instruments and considerations, if you
would try how your soul is grown; you shall know that humility like the root
of a goodly tree is thrust very far into the ground by these goodly fruits
which appear above ground.

Signs of Humility.
1. The humble man trusts not to his own discretion, but in matters of
concernment relies rather upon the judgment of his friends counselors, or
spiritual guides. 2. He does not pertinaciously pursue the choice of his own
will, but in all things lets God choose for him, and his Superiors in those
things which concern them. 3. He does not murmur against commands. Assai
comman^a chi ub bidis^ al saggi^.
4. He is not inquisitive into the reasonableness of indifferent and innocent
commands, but believes their command to be reason enough in such cases to exact
his obedience. 5. He lives according to a rule, and with compliance to public
customs, without any affectation or singularity. 6. He is meek and indifferent
in all accidents and chances. Verum hum^lem patien^^^ ost^ndet. S. ^^^er.
7. He patiently bears injuries. 8. He is always unsatisfied in his own
conduct, resolutions, and counsels. 9. He is a great lover of good men, and a
praiser of wise men, and a censurer of no man. 10. H^ is modest in his speech,
and reserved in his laughter. 11 He fears when he hears himself commended, lest
God make another judgment concerning his actions then men do. 12. He gives no
p^rt or saucy answers when he is reproved, whether justly or unjustly. 13. He
loves to sit down in private, and if he may, he refuses the temptation of
offices and new honors. 14. He is ingenuous, free and open in his actions and
discourses. 15. He mends his fault, and gives thanks when he is admonished. 16.
He is ready to do good offices to the murderers of his fame, to his
sl^nderers, backbiters and detractors, as Christ washed the feet of Judas. 17.
And is contented to be suspected of Indiscretion, so, before God he may be
really innocent and not offensive to his neighbor, nor wanting to his just and
prudent interest.

SECT V. Of Modesty
MOdesty is the appendage of Sobriety, and is to Chastity, to temperance and to
Humility as the fringes are to a garment. It is a grace of God that moderates
the over-activeness and curiosity of the mind, and orders the passions of the
body, and external actions, and is directly opposed to Curiosity, to Boldness,
to Undecency. The practice of Modesty consists in these following Rules:

(...).
Acts and duties of Modesty as it is opposed to Curiosity.
1. Inquire not into the secrets of God, but be content to learn thy duty
according to the quality of thy person or employment: that is plainly, Eccl^^
3.21, 22, 23.
if thou be not concerned in the conduct of others: but if thou be a
teacher, learn it so as may best enable thee to discharge thy office. Qui
scruta^^r ^st Maje^i^ opp^imetur a glo^ia. Prove. 25.
Gods commandments were proclaimed to all the world, but Gods counsels are to
himself and to his secret ones, when they are admitted within the veil.

2. Inquire not into the things which are too hard for thee, but learn modestly
to know thy infirmities and abilities, and raise not thy mind up to enquire
into mysteries of State, (...). A^^ian: lib. 1. c. 26.

Et plus sape^e interdum vulgus quod quantum opus est sa^iat. Lactan^.


or the secrets of government, or difficulties Theological, if thy employment
really be, or thy understanding be judged to be of a lower rank.

3. Let us not enquire into the affairs of others that concern us not, but be
busied within our selves and our own spheres; ever remembering that to pry into
the actions or interests of other men not under our charge, may minister to
pride, to tyranny, to uncharitableness, to trouble, but can never consist with
modesty, unless where duty or the mere intentions of charity and relation do
warrant it.

4. Never listen at the doors or windows: Ecclu^ 7 21. Ne occl^^ in lette^^, ne
mano in ^asc^, ne ^r^ch^ in sec^e^^ altrus.
for besides that it contains in it danger and a snare, it is also an invading
my neighbors privacy, and a laying that open which he therefore enclosed, that
it might not be open. Never ask what he carries covered so curiously; for it is
enough that it is covered curiously. Hither also is reducible that we never
open letters without public authority, or reasonably presumed leave, or great
necessity, or charity.

Every man has in his own life sins enough, in his own mind trouble enough,
in his own fortune evils enough, and in performance of his offices failings
more then enough to entertain his own enquiry: so that curiosity after the
affairs of others, cannot be without envy and an evil mind. What is it to me
if my Neighbors Grandfather were a Syrian, or his Grandmother illegitimate, or
that another is indebted five thousand pounds, or whether his wife be
expensive? But commonly curious persons (or as the Apostles phrase is)
busybodies are not sollicitous, or inquisitive into the beauty and order of a
well-governed family, or after the virtues of an excellent person; but if there
be any thing for which men keep locks and bars and porters, things that blush
to see the light, and either are shameful in manners, or private in nature,
these things are their care and their business. * But if great things will
satisfy our enquiry, the course of the Sun and Moon, the spots in their faces,
the Firmament of Heaven, and the supposed Orbs, the ebbing and flowing of the
Sea are work enough for us: or if this be not, let him tell me, whether the
number of the stars be even or odd, and when they began to be so? since some
ages have discovered new stars which the former knew not, but might have
seen, if they had been where now they are fixed. * If these be too troublesome,
search lower, and tell me, why this turf this year brings forth a Daisie, and
the next year a Plantane: why the apple bears his seed in his heart, and wheat
bears it in his head: let him tell, why a graff taking nourishment from a crab
stock shall have a fruit more noble then its nurse and parent: let him say, why
the best of oil is at the top, the best of wine in the middle, and the best of
honey at the bottom, otherwise then it is in some liquors that are thinner, and
in some that are thicker? But these things are not such as please busybodies;
They must feed upon Tragedies, and stories of misfortunes and crimes; and yet
tell them ancient stories of the ravishment of chaste maidens, or the
debauchment of nations, or the extreme poverty of learned persons, or the
persecutions of the old Saints, or the changes of government, and sad accidents
happening in Royal families amongst the Arsacidae, the Caesar's, the Ptolemies,
these were enough to scratch the itch of knowing sad stories. But unless you
tell them something sad and new, something that is done within the bounds of
their own knowledge or relation, it seems tedious and unsatisfying; which
shows plainly it is an evil spirit: envy and idleness married together* and
begot curiosity. Therefore Plutarch rarely well compares curious and
inquisitive ears to the execrable gates of cities, out of which only
Malefactors, and Hangmen and Tragedies pass, nothing that is chaste or holy. *
If a Physician should go from house to house unsent for, and enquire what woman
has a cancer in her bowels, or what man has a fistula in his colic gut,
though he could pretend to cure it, he would be almost as unwelcome as the
disease it self: and therefore it is inhumane to enquire after crimes and
dysasters without pretense of amending them, but only to discover them. We are
not angry with Searchers and Publicans when they look only on public
merchandise; but when they break open trunks, and pierce vessels, and unrip
packs, and open sealed letters.

Curiosity is the direct incontinency of the spirit: and adultery it self in
its principle is many times nothing but a curious inquisition after, and
envying of another man's enclosed pleasures: and there have been many who
refused fairer objects that they might ravish an enclosed woman, from her
retirement and single possessour. But these inquisitions are seldom without
danger, never without baseness; they are neither just, nor honest, nor
delightful, and very often useless to the curious inquirer. For men stand upon
their guards against them, as they secure their meat against Harpyes and Cats,
laying all their counsels and secrets out of their way; or as men clap their
garments close about them when the searching and saucy winds would discover
their nakedness: as knowing that what men willingly hear, they do willingly
speak of. Knock therefore at the door before you enter upon your neighbors
privacy; and remember that there is no difference between entering into his
house, and looking into it.

(...)
Acts of modesty as it is opposed to boldness.
1. Let us always bear about us such impressions of reverence and fear of God
as to tremble at his voice, to express our apprehensions of his greatness in
all great accidents, in popular judgments, loud thunders, tempests,
earthquakes, not only for fear of being smitten our selves, or that we are
concerned in the accident, but also that we may humble our selves before his
Almightiness, and express that infinite distance between his infiniteness and
our weaknesses, at such times especially when he gives such visible arguments
of it. He that is merry and airie at shore when he sees a sad and a loud
tempest on the sea, or dances briskly when God thunders from heaven, regards
not when God speaks to all the world, but is possessed with a firm immodesty.

2. Be reverent, modest and reserved in the presence of thy betters, giving to
all according to their quality their titles of honor, keeping distance,
speaking little, answering pertinently, not interposing without leave or
reason, not answering to a question propounded to another; and ever present to
thy superiors the fairest side of thy dicourse, of thy temper, of thy ceremony,
as being ashamed to serve excellent persons with unhandsome intercourse.

3. Never lie before a King, or a great person, nor stand in a lie when thou
art accused, Quem Deus t^git v^^cundia pallio, huj^^ maculas ho^n^bas non
ostend^t. Maimon Can Eth.

(...). Melus,


nor offer to justify what is indeed a fault, but modestly be ashamed of it,
ask pardon and make amends

4. Never boast of thy sin, Obstare primum est velle, n^c labi via:
Pudor est s^cundus nosse peccandi modum.
Senec. Hip. A Chione altem vel ab Helide dise^ pudo^om,
Abscondunt spurcas haec mo^um^n^a lup^s.
Matt. l. epist. 35.
but at last lay a vail upon thy nakedness and shame, and put thy hand before
theine eyes, that thou may have this beginning of repentance, to believe thy
sin to be thy shame. For he that blushes not at his crime, but adds
shamelesness to his shame, has no instrument left to restore him to the hopes
of virtue.

5. Be not confident and affirmative in an uncertain matter, but report things
modestly, and temperately according to the degree of that persuasion, which is
or ought to be begotten in thee by the efficacy of the authority, or the reason
inducing thee.

6. Pretend not to more knowledge: then thou have, but be content to seem
ignorant where thou art so, lest thou be either brought to shame, or
retirest into shamelesness. Ecclus. 3 25.


(...).
Acts of Modesty as it is opposed to undecency.
1. In your prayers, in Churches, and places of religion use reverent postures,
great attention, grave ceremony, the lowest gestures of humility, remembering
that we speak to God, in our reverence to whom we cannot possibly exceed; but
that the expression of this reverence be according to law or custom, and the
example of the most prudent and pious persons: that is, let it be the best in
its kind to the best of essences.

2. In all public meetings, private addresses, in discourses, in journeys use
those forms of salutation, reverence and decency, which the custom prescribes,
and is usual amongst the most sober persons; giving honor to whom honor
belongs, taking place of none of thy betters, and in all cases of question
concerning civil precedence, giving it to any one that will take it, if it be
only thy own right that is in question.

3. Observe the proportion of affections in all meetings and to all persons: be
not merry at a funeral, nor sad upon a festival, but rejoice with them that
rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

4. Abstain from wanton and dissolute laughter, petulant and uncomely jests,
loud talking, jeering, and all such actions, which in civil account are called
undecencies, and incivilities.

3. Toward your parents use all modesty of duty and humble carriage: toward
them and all your kindred be severe in the modesties of chastely: ever fearing,
lest the freedoms of natural kindness should enlarge into any neighborhood of
unhandsomness. For all incestuous mixtures, and all circumstances and degrees
toward it, are the highest violations of modesty in the world: for therefore
incest is grown to be so high a crime, especially in the last periods of the
world, because it breaks that reverence which the consent of all nations and
the severity of humane laws has enjoined toward our parents and nearest
kindred, in imitation of that law which God gave to the Jews in prosecution of
Modesty in this instance.

6. Be a curious observer of all those things which are of good report, and are
parts of public honesty. For public fame, Philip. 4.1.
and the sentence of prudent and public persons, is the measure of good and
evil in things indifferent: and charity requires us to comply with those
fancies and affections which are agreeable to nature, or the analogy of
virtue, or public laws, or old customs. It is against Modesty for a woman to
marry a second husband as long as she bears a burden by the first, or to admit
a second love while her funeral tears are not wiped from her cheeks. Et
meretri^ abigit restem vel^que, s^r^^ que; Raraque si memini, fornice rima
patet. Matt.
It is against public honesty to do some lawful actions of privacy in public
theaters, and therefore in such cases retirement is a duty of modesty.

7. Be grave, decent and modest in thy clothing and ornament: never let it be
above thy condition, not always equal to it, never light or amorous, never
discovering a nakedness through a thin vail, which thou pretendest to hide:
never to lay a snare for a soul, but remember what becomes a Christian,
professing holiness, chastity, and the discipline of the holy Jesus: Tuta sit
ornatrix: odi quae saueiat ora
Vngu^bus, and rap^a brachia figi^ acu.
dev^^et, and tangit Dominae caput illa simulque
Plorat ad invis^s sanguin^l^ma c^mas. Ovid.

and the first effect of this let your servants feel by your gentleness and
aptness to be pleased with their usual diligence, and ordinary conduct: For the
man or woman that is dressed with anger and impatience, wears pride under their
robes, and immodesty above.

8. Hither also is to be reduced singular and affected walking, proud, nice and
ridiculous gestures of body, painting and lascivious dressings, all which
together God reproves by the Prophet: Naiah 3.15.
The Lord says, because the daughters of Sion are haughty, and walk with
stretched* forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mineing as they go, and
make a tinkling with their feet, therefore the lord will smite her with a scab
of the crown of the head and will take away the bravery of their tinkling
ornaments. Prove 6.13.
And this duty of modesty in this instance is expressly enjoined to all
Christian women by Saint Paul, ^ Tim. 2 5,
That women adorn themselves in modest apparel with shamefastness and sobriety,
not with broidered hair, or gold or pearl, or costly array, but (which becomes
women professing godliness) with good works.

9. As those meats are to be avoided which tempt our stomachs beyond our
hunger, so also should prudent persons decline all such spectacles, relations,
Theaters, loud noises and outcries which concern us not, and are besides our
natural or moral interest. Our senses should not like petulant and wanton
Girls wander into Markets and Theaters without just employment; Oedipam
curiositas in extremas cojecit calamitate^: Plat:
but when they are sent abroad by reason, return quickly with their errand, and
remain modestly at home under their guide, till they be sent again.

10. Let all persons be curious in observing modesty toward themselves in the
handsome treating their own body, and such as are in their power, whether
living or dead. Against this rule they offend who expose to others their own,
or pry into others nakedness beyond the limits of necessity; where a leave is
not made holy by a permission from God. It is also said that God was pleased to
work a miracle about the body of Epiphanius to reprove the immodest curiosity
of an unconcerned person, who pryed too near when charitable people were
composing it to the grave. In all these cases and particulars, although they
seem little, yet our duty and concernment is not little. Concerning which, I
use the words of the Son of Sirach, He that despises little things shall
perish by little and little.

SECT. VI. Of contentedness in all estates and accidents.
Virtues and Discourses are like Friends, necessary in all fortunes; but those
are the best which are Friends in our sadnesses, and support us in our sorrows,
and sad accidents: and in this sense, no man that is virtuous can be
friendlesse; nor has any man reason to complain of the Divine Providence, or
accuse the public disorder of things, or his own infelicity, since God has
appointed one remedy for all the evils in the World, and that is, a contented
spirit: For this alone makes a man pass through fire, and not be scorched;
through Seas, and not be drowned, through hunger and nakedness, and want
nothing. For since all the evil in the world consists in the disagreeing
between the object and the appetite, as when a man has what he desires not, or
desires what he has not, or desires amiss; he that composes his spirit to the
present accident, has variety of instances for his virtue, but none to trouble
him, because his desires enlarge not beyond his present fortune: and a wise man
is placed in the variety of chances like the Nave or Center of a wheel, in the
midst of all the circumvolutions and changes of posture, without violence or
change, save that it turns gently in compliance with its changed parts, and is
indifferent which part is up and which is down; for there is some virtue or
other to be exercised what ever happens, either patience or thanksgiving, love
or fear, moderation or humility, charity or contentedness, and they are every
one of them equally in order to his great end, and immortal felicity: and
beauty is not made by white or red, by black eyes and a round face by a
straight body and a smooth skin; but by a proportion to the fancy: No rules can
make amability, our minds and apprehensions make that; and so is our felicity;
and we may be reconciled to poverty and a low fortune, if we suffer
contentedness and the grace of God to make the proportions. For no man is poor
that does not think himself so: But if in a full fortune, with impatience he
desires more, he proclaims his wants and his beggarly condition. Nam facta tibi
est, si dissimules, injuria.
But because this grace of contentedness was the sum of all the old moral
Philosophy, and a great duty in Christianity, and of most universal use in the
whole course of our lives, and the only instrument to ease the burdens of the
world and the enmities of sad chances, it will not be amiss to press it by
the proper arguments by which God has bound it upon our spirits, it being
fastened by Reason and Religion, by duty and interest, by necessity and
convenience, by example, and by the proposition of excellent rewards, no less
then peace and felicity.

1. Contentedness in all estates is a duty of Religion: it is the great
reasonableness of complying with the Divine providence which governs all the
World, and has so ordered us in the administration of his great Family. He
were a strange fool that should be angry because Dogs and sheep need no shoes,
and yet himself is full of care to get some: God has supplied those needs to
them by natural provisions; and to thee by an artificial: for he has given
thee reason to learn a trade, or some means to make or buy them, so that it
only differs in the manner of our provision; and which had you rather want,
shoes or reason? And my Patron that has given me a Farm is freer to me then if
he gives a loaf ready baked. But however, all these gifts come from him, and
therefore it is fit he should dispense them as he please; and if we murmr
here, we may at the next melancholy be troubled that God did not make us to be
Angels, or Stars. For if that which we are or have, do not content us, we may
be troubled for every thing in the World, which is besides our being, or our
possessions.

God is the Master of the Scenes, we must not choose which part we shall act;
it concerns us only to be careful that we do it well, (...)
always saying, If this please God let it be as it is: and we who pray that
Gods will may be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, must remember that the
Angels do whatsoever is commanded them, and go where ever they are sent, and
refuse no circumstances: and if their employment be crossed by a higher decree,
^an. 14.13,
they sit down in peace and rejoice in the event; and when the Angel of Judea
could not prevail in behalf of the people committed to his charge, because the
Angel of Persia opposed it, he only told the story at the command of God, and
was as content, and worshipped with as great an ecstasy in his proportion, as
the prevailing Spirit. Do^ thou so likewise: keep the station where God has
placed you, and you shall never long for things without, but sit at home
feasting upon the Divine Providence and thy own reason, by which we are taught
that it is necessary and reasonable to submit to God.

For, is not all the World Gods family? Are not we his creatures? Are we not as
clay in the hand of the Potter? Do we not live upon his meat, and move by his
strength, and do our work by his light? Are we any thing but what we are from
him, and shall there be a mutiny among the flocks and herds, because their Lord
or their Shepherd chooses their pastures, and suffers them not to wander into
Deserts and unknown ways? If we choose, we do it so foolishly that we cannot
like it long, and most commonly not at all: but God who can do what he please,
is wise to choose safely for us, affectionate to comply with our needs, and
powerful to execute all his wise decrees. Here therefore is the wisdom of the
contented man, to let God choose for him: for when we have given up our wills
to him, and stand in that station of the battle where our great General has
placed us, our spirits must needs rest while our conditions have for their
security the power, the wisdom, and the charity of God.

2. Contentedness in all accidents brings great peace of spirit: and is the
great and only instrument of temporal felicity. It removes the sting from the
accident, and makes a man not to depend upon chance, and the uncertain
dispositions of men for his well-being, but only on GOD and his own Spirit. We
our selves make our fortunes good or bad, (...) Arria^: Ep*
and when God lets loose a Tyrant upon us or a sickness, or scorn, or a
lessened fortune, if we fear to die, or know not to be patient, or are proud,
or covetous, then the calamity sits heavy on us. But if we know how to manage a
noble principle, and fear not Death so much as a dishonest action, and think
impatience a worse evil then a Fever, and Pride to be the biggest disgrace,
and poverty to be infinitely desirable before the torments of covetousness;
then we who now think vice to be so easy, and make it so familiar, and think
the cure so impossible, shall quickly be of another mind, and reckon these
accidents amongst things eligible.

But no man can be happy that has great hopes and great fears of things
without, and events depending upon other men, or upon the chances of Fortune.
The rewards of virtue are certain, and our provisions for our natural support
are certain, or if we want meat till we die, then we die of that disease, and
there are many worse then to die with an atropby or Consumption, or unapt and
courser nourishment: But he that suffers a transporting passion concerning
things within the power of others, is free from sorrow and amazement no longer
then his enemy shall give him leave; and it is ten to one but he shall be
smitten then, and there where it shall most trouble him: for so the Adder
teaches us where to strike, by her curious and fearful defending of her head.
The old Stoics when you told them of a sad story would still answer (...);
What is that to me? Yes, for the Tyrant has sentenced you also to prison.
Well! what is that? He will put a chain upon my leg, but he cannot bind my
soul. No: but he will kill you. Then I Will die. If presently, let me go that I
may presently be freer then himself: but if not till anon or to morrow, I will
dine first, or sleep, or do what reason and nature calls for, as at other
times. This in Gentile Philosophy is the same with the discourse of Saint Paul,
Phil. 4.11.12. 1 Timothy 6.8. Hebr. 13.5. Chi been mal non puo soffrir, a grand
honor non p^^ venir.
I have learned in whatsoever state I am therewith to be content. I know both
how to be abased, and I know how to abound; every where and in all things I am
instructed, both how to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and suffer
need.

We are in the world like men playing at Tables, the chance is not in our
power, but to play it, is; and when it is fallen we must manage it as we can,
and let nothing trouble us, but when we do a base action, or speak like a
fool, or think wickedly: these things God has put into our powers: but
concerning those things which are wholly in the choice of another, they cannot
fall under our deliberation, and therefore neither are they fit for our
passions. My fear may make me miserable but it cannot prevent what another has
in his power and purpose: and prosperities can only enjoyed by them who fear
not at all to lose them, since the amazement and passion concerning the future
takes off all the pleasure of the present possession. Therefore if thou have
lost thy land, do not also lose thy constancy: and if thou must die a little
sooner, yet do not die impatiently. For no chance is evil to him that is
content, (...).
and to a man nothing is miserable, unless it be unreasonable. No man can make
another man to be his slave, unless he has first enslaved himself to life and
death, to pleasure or pain, to hope or fear; command these passions, and you
are freer then the Parthian Kings.

Instruments or exercises to procure contentedness.

Upon the strength of these premises we may reduce this virtue to practice by
its proper instruments first, and then by some more special considerations or
arguments of content.

1. When any thing happens to our displeasure, let us endeavor to take off its
trouble by turning it into spiritual or artificial advantage, and handle it on
that side, in which it may be useful to the designs of reason. For there is
nothing but has a double handle, or at least we have two hands to apprehend
it. When an enemy reproaches us, let us look on him as an impartial relator of
our faults, for he will tell thee truer then thy fondest friend will, and thou
may call them precious balms, though they break thy head, and forgive his
anger while thou make use of the plainness of his declamation. The Ox when he
is weary treads surest, and if there be nothing else in the disgrace but that
it makes us to walk warily, and tread sure for fear of our enemies, that is
better then to be flattered into pride and carelessness. This is the charity of
Christian Philosophy, which expounds the sense of the Divine providence fairly,
and reconciles us to it by a charitable construction: and we may as well refuse
all physic if we consider it only as unpleasant in the taste, and we may find
fault with the rich valleys of Thasus, because they are circled with sharp
mountains: but so also we may be in charity with every unpleasant accident,
because though it taste bitter it is intended for health and medicine.

If therefore thou fallest from thy employment in public, take sanctuary in an
honest retirement, being indifferent to thy gain abroad, or thy safety at home:
If thou art out of favor with thy Prince, secure the favor of the King of
kings, and then there is no harm come to thee: and when Zeno Citiensis lost all
his goods in a storm, he retired to the studies of Philosophy, to his short
cloak, and a severe life, and gave thanks to fortune for his prosperous
mischance. When the North-winde blows hard, and it rains sadly, none but fools
sit down in it and cry: wise people defend themselves against it with a warm
garment, or a good fire, and a dry roof: when a storm of a sad mischance beats
upon our spirits, turn it into some advantage by observing where it can serve
another end, either of religion or prudence, of more safety or less envy: it
will turn into something that is good, if we list to make it so: at least it
may make us weary of the worlds vanity, and take off our confidence from
uncertain riches, and make our spirits to dwell in those regions, where content
dwells essentially: if it does any good to our souls, it has made more then
sufficient recompense for all the temporal affliction. He that threw a stone at
a dog, and hit his cruel stepmother, said, that although he intended it
otherwise, yet the stone was not quite lost: and if we fail in the first
design, if we bring it home to another equally to content us, or more to
profit us, then we have put our conditions past the power of chance; and this
was called in the old Greek Comedy a being revenged on fortune by becoming
Philosophers, and turning the chance into reason or religion: for so a wise man
shall overrule his stars, and have a greater influence upon his own content,
then all the constellations and planets of the firmament.

2. Never compare thy condition with those above thee; but to secure thy
content, look upon those thousands with whom thou would not for any interest
change thy fortune and condition. A soldier must not think himself
unprosperous, if he be not successful as the son of Philip, or cannot grasp a
fortune as big as the Roman Empire: Be content that thou art not lessened as
was Pyrrbus: or if thou be, that thou art not routed like Crassus: and when
that comes to thee, it is a great prosperity, that thou art not cag'd and made
a spectacle like Ba^azet: or thy eyes were not pulled out like Zedekiahs: or
that thou were not flead alive like Valentinian. If thou admirest the greatness
of Xerxes, look also on those that dug the mountain Atho, or whose ears and
noses were cut off, because the Hellespont carried a way the bridge. It is a
fine thing (thou think) to be carried on men's shoulders: but give God thanks
that thou art not forced to carry a rich fool upon thy shoulders: as those poor
men do whom thou beholdest. There are but few Kings in mankind, but many
thousands who are very miserable, if compared to thee. However it is a huge
folly rather to grieve for the good of others, then to rejoice for that good
which God has given us of our own.

And yet there is no wise or good man that would change persons or conditions
entirely with any man in the world. It may be he would have one man's wealth
added to himself, or the power of a second, or the learning of a third, but
still he would receive these into his own person, because he loves that best,
and therefore esteems it best, and therefore over values all that which he is,
before all that which any other man in the world can be. Would any man be Dives
to have his wealth, or Judas for his office, or Saul for his kingdom, or
Absolon for his beauty, or Achitophel for his policy? It is likely he would
with all these, and yet he would be the same person still. For every man has
desires of his own, and objects just fitted to them, without which he cannot
be, unless he were not himself. And let every man that loves himself so well
as to love himself before all the world, consider if he have not something, for
which in the whole he values himself fair more then he can value any man else.
There is therefore no reason to take the finest feathers from all the winged
nation to deck that bird, that thinks already she is more valuable then any the
inhabitants of the air. Either change all or none. Cease to love your self
best, or be content with that portion of being and blessing for which you love
your self so well.

3. It conduces much to our content, if we pass by those things which happen
to our trouble, and consider that which is pleasing and prosperous, that by the
representation of the better, the worse may be blotted out: and at the worst
you have enough to keep you alive, and to keep up, and to improve your hopes of
Heaven. If I be overthrown in my suit at Law, yet my house is left me still and
my land: or I have a virtuous wife, or hopeful children, or kind friends, or
good hopes: If I have lost one child, it may be I have two or three still left
me; or else reckon the blessings which already you have received, and therefore
be pleased in the change and variety of affairs to receive evil from the hand
of God as well as good. Antipater of Tarsus used this art to support his
sorrows on his deathbed, and reckoned the good things of his past life, not
forgetting to recount it as a blessing, an argument that God took care of him,
that he had a prosperous journey from Cilicia to Athens. La sperenza ^ll pen de
p^t^e^^.
Non si mare nunc, and olim sic erit.

Or else please thy self with hopes of the future: for we were born with this
sadness upon us; and it was a change that brought us into it, and a change may
bring us out again. Harvest will come, (...)
and then every farmer is rich, at least for a month or two. It may be thou
art entered into the cloud which will bring a gentle shower to refresh thy
sorrows.

Now suppose thy self in as great a sadness, as ever did load thy spirit,
would thou not bear it cheerfully and nobly, if thou were sure that within a
certain space some strange excellent fortune would relieve thee, and enrich
thee, and recompense thee so as to overflow all thy hopes and thy desires, and
capacities? Now then, when a sadness lies heavy upon thee, remember that thou
art a Christian designed to the inheritance of Jesus: and what do thou think
concerning thy great fortune, thy lot and portion of eternity? Do thou think
thou shall be saved or damned? Indeed if thou think thou shall perish, I
cannot blame thee to be sad, sad till thy heart strings crack: but then why art
thou troubled at the loss of thy money? what should a damned man do with
money, which in so great a sadness it is impossible for him to enjoy? Did ever
any man upon the rack, afflict himself because he had received a cross answer
from his Mistress? or call for the particulars of a purchase upon the gallows?
It thou do really believe thou shall be damned, I do not say it will cure
the sadness of thy poverty, but it will swallow it up. * But if thou believe
thou shall be saved, consider how great is that joy, how infinite is that
change, how unspeakable is the glory, how excellent is the recompense for all
the sufferings in the world, if they were all laden upon the spirit? So that
let thy condition be what it will, if thou considerest thy own present
condition, and compare it to thy future possibility, thou can not feel the
present smart of a cross fortune to any great degree, either because thou have
a far bigger sorrow, or a far bigger joy. Here thou art but a stranger
traveling to thy Country, where the glories of a kingdom are prepared for
thee, it is therefore a huge folly to be much afflicted because thou have a
less convenient Inn to lodge in by the way.

But these arts of looking forwards and backwards are more then enough to
support the spirit of a Christian: there is no man but has blessings enough in
present possession to outweigh the evils of a great affliction. Tell the joints
of thy body, and do not accuse the universal providence for a lame leg, or the
want of a finger, when all the rest is perfect: and you have a noble soul, a
particle of Divinity, the image of GOD himself: and by the want of a finger you
may the better know how to estimate the remaining parts. and to account for
every degree of the surviving blessings. Aristippus in a great suit at Law lest
a Farm, and to a gentleman who in civility pitied and deplored his loss, He
answered, I have two Farms left still, and that is more then I have lost, and
more then you have by one. If you miss an Office for which you stood
Candidate, then besides that you are quit of the cares and the envy of it, you
still have all those excellencies which rendered you capable to receive it, and
they are better then the best Office in the Commonwealth. If your estate be
lessened, you need the less to care who governs the Province, whether he be
rude or gentle. I am crossed in my journey, and yet I escaped robbers; and I
consider, that if I had been set upon by Villains, I would have redeemed that
evil by this which I now suffer, and have counted it a deliverance: or if I did
fall into the hands of thieves, yet they did not steal my land: or I am fallen
into the hands of Publicans and Sequestrators, and they have taken all from me,
what now? let me look about me. They, have left me the Sun and the Moon, Fire
and Water, a loving wife, and many friends to pity me, and some to relieve me,
and I can still discourse, and unless I list they have not taken away my merry
countenance, and my cheerful spirit, and a good conscience: they still have
left me the providence of God, and all the promises of the Gospel, and my
Religion, and my hopes of Heaven, and my cha^^ity to them too: and still I
sleep, and digest, I eat and drink, I read and meditate, I can walk in my
neighbors pleasant fields, and see the varieties of natural beauties, and
delight in all that in which God delights, that is in virtue and wisdom, in the
whole creation, and in God himself: and he that has so many causes of joy,
and so great, is very much in love with sorrow and peevishnes, who loses all
these pleasures, and chooses to sit down upon his little handful of thorns:
such a person were fit to bear Nero company in his funeral sorrow for the loss
of one of Poppea's hairs, or help to mourn for Lesbia's sparrow: and because he
loves it, he deserves to starve in the midst of plenty, and to want comfort
while he is encircled with blessings.

4. Enjoy the present whatsoever it be, and be not solicitous for the future:
Quid sit futurum cras f^ge quaerere, and
Quem fo^i dictum (...) dal^t, luc^
Appone. Ho: l 1. Od. 4

for if you take your foot from the present standing, and thrust it forward
toward to morrows event, you are in a restless condition: it is like refusing
to quench your present thirst by fearing you shall want drink the next day. If
it be well to day, it is madness to make the present miserable by fearing it
may be ill to morrow, when your belly is full of to days dinner to fear you
shall want the next days supper: for it may be you shall not, and then to what
purpose was this days affliction? Prudens futuri temporis exitum
Caliginosa nocte premit Deus;
Ridetque, si mortalis ultra
Fas trepidet: quod adest memento
Componere aequus. Hor l 3. Od 29
(...);

But if to morrow you shall want, your sorrow will come time enough, though you
do not hasten it, let your trouble tarry till its own day comes. But if it
chance to be ill to day, do not increase it by the care of to morrow. Enjoy
the blessings of this day, if God sends them, and the evils of it bear
patiently and sweetly: for this day is only ou^s, we are dead to yesterday, and
we are not yet born to the morrow. He therefore that enjoyes the present, if it
be good, enjoyes as much as is possible: and if only that days trouble leans
upon him, it is singular and finite. Sufficient to the day (said Christ) is the
evil thereof. Sufficient but not intolerable: but if we look abroad and bring
into one days thoughts the evil of many, certain and uncertain, what will be
and what will never be, our load will be as intolerable as it is unreasonable.
To reprove this instrument of discontent, the Ancients feigned that in Hell
stood a man twisting a rope of Hay, and still he twisted on, suffering an Ass
to eat up all that was finished: so miserable is he who thrusts his passions
forwards toward future events, and suffers all that he may enjoy to be lost
and devoured by folly and inconsideration, thinking nothing fit to be enjoyed,
but that which is not, or cannot be had. Just so, many young persons are loath
to die, and therefore desire to live to old age, and when they are come
thither, are troubled that they are come to that state of, life to which before
they were come, they were hugely afraid they should never come.

5. Let us prepare our minds against changes, always expecting them, that we
be not surprised when they come: For nothing is so great an enemy to
tranquillity and a contented spirit, as the amazement and confusions of
unreadiness and inconsideration: and when our fortunes are violently changed,
our spirits are unchanged, if they always stood in the Suburbs and ^xp^^^^tion
of sorrows. O Death, how bitter art thou to a man that is at rest in his
possessions: and to the rich Man who had promised to himself ease and fullness
for many years, it was a sad arrest, that his soul was surprised the first
night: but the Apostles who every day knocked at the gate of death, and looked
upon it continually, went to their Martyrdom in peace and evenness.

6. Let us often frame to our selves and represent to our considerations the
images of those blessings we have, just as we usually understand them when we
want them. Consider how desirable health is to a sick man, or liberty to a
prisoner; and if but a sit of the toothache seises us with violence, all those
troubles which in our health afflicted us, disband instantly and seem
inconsiderable. He that in his health is troubled that he is in debt, and
spends sleeplesse nights, and refuses meat because of his infelicity, let him
fall into a fit of the Stone or a high Fever, despises the arrest of all his
first troubles, and is as a man unconcerned. Remember then that God has given
thee a blessing, the want of which is infinitely more trouble then thy present
debt or poverty, or loss; and therefore is now more to be valued in the
possession, and ought to outweigh thy trouble. The very privative blessings,
the blessings of immunity, safeguard, liberty and integrity which we commonly
enjoy, deserve the thanksgiving of a whole life. If God should send a Cancer
upon thy face, or a Wolf into thy side, if he should spread a crust of Leprosy
upon thy skin, what would thou give to be but as now thou art? Would thou
not on that condition be as poor as I am? or as the meanest of thy brethren?
Would you not choose your present loss or affliction as a thing extremely
eligible, and a redemption to thee if thou might exchange the other for
this? Thou art quit from a thousand calamities, every one of which if it were
upon thee would make thee insensible of thy present sorrow: and therefore let
thy joy (which should be as great for thy freedom from them, as in thy sadness
when thou feel any of them) do the same cure upon thy discontent. For if we
be not extremely folish or vain, thanklesse or senseless, a great joy is more
apt to cure sorrow and discontent, then a great trouble is. I have known an
affectionate Wife when she he has been in fear of parting with her beloved
Husband, heartily desire of God his life or society upon any conditions that
were not sinful; and choose to beg with him, rather then to feast without him:
and the same person has upon that consideration born poverty nobly, when God
has heard her prayer in the other matter: What wise man in the world is there
who does not prefer a small fortune with peace before a great one with
contention, and war and violence? and then he is no longer wise if he alters
his opinion when he has his wish.

7. If you will secure a contented spirit you must measure your desires by your
fortune and condition, not your fortunes by your desires: That is, be governed
by your needs, not by your fancy; by Nature, Assai basta per chi non eme^rdo.
not by evil customs and ambitious principles. He that would shoot an arrow out
of a Plow, or hunt a Hare with an Elephant, is not unfortunate for missing the
mark or prey; but he is foolish for choosing such unapt instruments: and so is
he that runs after his content with appetites not springing from natural needs,
but from artificial, fantastical and violent necessities: These are not to be
satisfied; or if they were, a man has chosen an evil instrument toward his
content: Nature did not intend rest to a Man by filling of such desires. Is
that Beast better that has two or three Mountains to graze on, then a little
Be that feeds on Dew or Manna, and lives upon what falls every morning from
the Storehouses of Heaven, Clouds and Providence? Can a Man quench his thirst
better out of a River then a full Urn, -- quanto praestantius esset
Numena aquae, viridi si margin cla^ deret undas
He^ba ne^ ingenutum violarent marmo^a ^oplu^.
-- me pascunt olivae
Me^ichecrae, leves^^e malvae;
Fru^ patatis and valido mihi
Lat^edenes Horat; l. 1. Od. 31.
(...) cupressum
Om^^p^^ (...) pascuis
Te^^^ mihi datum est parum,
Caret. interim dole^^i^^s. pindar:

or drink better from the Fountain when it is finely paved with Marble, then
when it swells over the green Turf? Pride and artificial gluttonies do but
adulterate Nature, making our diet healthlesse, our appetites impatient and
unsatisfiable, and the taste mixed, fantastical, and m^retricious. But that
which we miscall poverty, is indeed Nature: and its proportions are the just
measures of a Man, and the best instruments of content: But when we create
needs that God or Nature never made, we have erected to our selves an infinite
stock of trouble that can have no period. Sempronius complained of want of
clothes, and was much troubled for a new suit, being ashamed to appear in the
Theater with his Gown a little threadbare: but when he got it and gave his old
clothes to Codrus, the poor man was ravished with joy, and went and gave God
thanks for his new purchase: and Codrus was made richly fine and cheerfully
warm by that which Sempronius was ashamed to wear; and yet their natural needs
were both alike, the difference only was, that Sempronius had some artificial
and fantastical necessities superinduced, which Codrus had not; and was harder
to be releived, and could not have joy at so cheap a rate; because he only
lived according to Nature, the other by Pride and ill customs, and measures
taken by other men's eyes and tongues, and artificial needs. He that propounds
to his fancy things greater then himself, or his needs, and is discontent and
troubled when he fails of such purchases, ought not to accuse Providence, or
blame his fortune, but his folly. God and Nature made no more needs then they
mean to satisfy: and he that will make more must look for satisfaction where
he can.

8. In all troubles and sadder accidents, let us take sanctuary in Religion,
and by innocence cast out anchors for our souls to keep them from shipwreck,
though they be not kept from storm. Vit^a^^ culpa in calamitatibus ma^imum
sola^ium.
For what Philosophy shall comfort a Villain that is haled to the rack for
murdering his Prince; or that is broken upon the wheel for Sacrilege? His cup
is full of pure and unmingled sorrow: His body is rent with torment, his name
with ignominy, his soul with shame and sorrow which are to last eternally: but
when a man suffers in a good cause, or is afflicted and yet walls not
perversely with his God, then, 2 Cor. 1.8.
Anytus and Melitus may kill me, but they cannot hurt me, then Saint Paul's
character is engraved in the forehead of our fortune: We are troubled on every
side, but not in di^^resled; 1 Pet. 3.13 and 4 15, 16.
perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted but not forsaken; cast down, but
not destroyed: and who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that
which is good? For indeed every thing in the world is indifferent, but sin: and
all the scorchings of the Sun are very tolerable in respect of the burnings of
a Fever or a Calenture. The greatest evils are from within us: and from our
selves also we must look for our greatest good; for God is the Fountain of it,
but reaches it to us by our own hands; and when all things look sadly round
about us, then only we shall find how excellent a fortune it is to have GOD to
our friend; and of all friendships that only is created to support us in our
needs. For it is sin that turns an Ague into a Fever, and a Fever to the
Plague, fear into despair, anger into rage, and loss into madness, and sorrow
to amazement and confusion: but if either we were innocent, or else by the
sadness are made penitent, we are put to school, or into the Theater, either to
learn how, or else actually to combat for a Crown; the accident may serve an
end of mercy, but is not a messenger of wrath.

Let us not therefore be governed by external, and present, and seeming things;
nor let us make the same judgment of things, that common and weak
understandings do; nor make other men, and they not the wisest, to be judges
of our felicity, so that we be happy or miserable as they please to think us,
but let reason, and experience, and religion, and hope relying upon the Divine
promises be the measure of our judgment. No wise man did ever describe felicity
without virtue: Beatitudo pendet a rectis confitis in offectionem animi
constantem definentibus Plut.
and no good man did ever think virtue could depend upon the variety of a good
or bad fortune. It is no evil to be poor, but to be vicious and impatient.

Means to obtain content by way of consideration.
To these exercises and spiritual instruments if we add the following
considerations concerning the nature and circumstances of humane chance, we may
better secure our peace. For as to children who are afraid of vain Images, we
use to persuade confidence by making them to handle and look nearer such things
that when in such a familiarity they perceive them innocent, they may overcome
their fears: so must timorous, fantastical, sad and discontented persons be
treated; they must be made to consider and on all sides to look upon the
accident, and to take all its dimensions, and consider its consequences, and to
behold the purpose of God, and the common mistakes of men, and their evil
sentences they usually pass upon them; For then we shall perceive that like
Colts of unmanaged Horses we start at dead bones and livelesse blocks, things
that are unactive as they are innocent. But if we secure our hopes and our
fears, and make them moderate and within government, we may the sooner overcome
the evil of the accident; For nothing that we feel is so bad as what we fear.
Non te ad omnia loca genuit

O Agamininon, Atreus. Opus est te gaudere and me eret Mortalis n. natus es,
and ut haud velis Superi sic constitu^^




1. Consider that the universal providence of God has so ordered it that the
good things of Nature and Fortune are divided, that we may know how to bear our
own and relieve each others wants and imperfections. It is not for a Man, but
for a God to have all excellencies and all felicities. He supports my poverty
with his wealth, I counsel and instruct him with my learning and experience. He
has many friends, I many children: He has no heir, I have no inheritance: and
any one great blessing together with the common portions of Nature and
necessity is a fair fortune, if it be but health or strength, or the swiftness
of abimaaz. For it is an unreasonable discontent to be troubled that I have not
so good Cokes, or Dogs, or Horses as my Neighbor, being more troubled that I
want one thing that I need not, then thankful for having received all that I
need. Nero had this disease, that he was not content with the fortune of the
whole Empire, but put the Fiddlers to death for being more skilful in the trade
then he was: and Dionysius the elder, was so angry at Philoxenus for singing,
and with Plato for disputing better then he did, that he sold Plato a Slave
into Aegina, and condemned the other to the Quarries.

This consideration is to be enlarged by adding to it that there are some
instances of fortune and a fair condition that cannot stand with some others,
but if you desire this, you must lose that, and unless you be content with
one, you lose the comfort of both. If you covet Learning, you must have leisure
and a retired life: if to be a Politician, you must go abroad and get
experience and do all businesses, and keep all company, and have no leisure at
all. If you will be rich, you must be frugal: if you will be popular, you must
be bountiful: If a Philosopher, you must despise riches. The Greek that
designed to make the most exquisite picture that could be imagined, fancied the
eye of Chione, and the hair of Paegnium, and Tarsia's lip, Philenium's chin,
and the forehead of Delphia, and set all these upon Milphidippa's neck, and
thought that he should out do both Art and Nature. But when he came to view
the proportions, he found that what was excellent in Tarsia did not agree with
the other excellency of Philenium; and although singly they were rare pieces,
yet in the whole they made a most ugly face. The dispersed excellencies and
blessings of many men, if given to one, would not make a handsome, but a
monstrous fortune. Use therefore that faculty which Nature has given thee, and
thy education has made actual, and thy calling has made a duty: but if thou
desire to be a Saint, refuse not his persecution: If thou would be famous
as Epaminondas or Fabricius, accept also of their poverty, for that added
luster to their persons and envy to their fortune, and their virtue without it
coul not have been so excellent, Let Eushorion sleep quietly with his old rich
Wife: and let Medius drink on with Alexander: and remember thou can not have
the riches of the first, unless you have the old Wife too; nor the favor
which the second had with his Prince, unless you buy it at his price, that is,
lay thy sobriety down at first, P^audet Aristoteles quando Philippo lubet,
Diogenes quando Diogens.
and thy health a little after; and then their condition though it look
splendidly, yet when you handle it on all sides, it will prick your fingers.

2. Consider how many excellent persoges in all Ages have suffered as great or
greater calamities then this which now tempts thee to impatience. Agis was the
most noble of the Greeks, and yet his Wife bore a Child by Alcibiades: and
Philip was Prince of Iturea, and yet his wise ran away with his Brother Herod
in to Galilee: and certainly in a great fortune that was a great calamity. But
these are but single instances. Almost all the ages of the world have noted
that their most eminent Schol^rs were m^st eminently poor, some by choice, but
most by chance, and an inevitable decree of providence: And in the whole sex of
women God has decreed the sharpest pains of child birth to show that there is
no state exempt from sorrow, and yet that the weakest persons have strength
more than enough to bear the greatest evil: and the greatest Queens, and the
Mothers of Saints and Apostles, have no charter of exemption from this sad
sentence. But the Lord of men and Angels was also the King of sufferings; and
if thy course robe trouble thee, remember the swaddling clothes of Jesus: i^
thy bed be uneasy, yet i^ is not worse then his Ma^ger; and it is no sadness
to have a thin table, if thou call to mind that the King of heaven and
earth was fed with a little breast-milk; and yet besides this he suffered all
the sorrows which we deserved. We therefore have great reason to sit down upon
our own hearths, and warm our selves at our own fires, and feed upon content at
home: for it were a strange pride to expect to be more gently treated by the
Divine providence then the best and wisest men, then Apostles and Saints, nay,
the son of the Eternal God, the heir of both the worlds.

This Consideration may be enlarged by surveying all the states and families of
the world: Se^vius Sulplum.
and he that at once saw Aegina and Megara, Pyraeus and Corinth lie gasping in
their ruins, and almost buried in their own heaps, had reason to blame Cicero
for mourning impatiently the death of one woman. In the most beauteous and
splendid fortune there are many cares and proper interruptions and allayes; In
the fortune of a Prince there is not the course to be of beggary; but there are
infinite cares: H^^^n so^o beatus esse c^editu*
(...) ^o ^^us a^e^^^s (...) suis mis^^^inus
Impo^at mulie^, jubet omni^ sempe^ letig^t,
Mu^^a adferuni illi dolorem, nihil nube,
Fure quam so^ten^ patiuntu^ omnes
-- ^emo rec^sat.

and the Judge sits upon the Tribunal with great ceremony and ostentation of
fortune, and yet at his house, or in his breast there is something that causes
him to sigh deeply. Pittacus was a wise and valiant man, but his Wife overthrew
the Table when he had invited his friends: upon which the good man to excuse
her incivility and his own misfortune, said, That every man had one evil, and
he was most happy that had but that alone; And if nothing else happens, yet
sicknesses so often do imbitter the fortune and content of a family, that a
Physician in a few years, and with the practice upon a very few families, gets
experience enough to administer to almost all diseases. And when thy little
misfortu^e troubles thee, remember that thou have kown the best of Kings, and
the best of Men put to death publicly by his own subjects.

3. There are many accidents which are esteemed great calamities, and yet we
have reason enough to bear them well and unconcernedly; for they neither touch
our bodies nor our souls: our health and our virtue remains entire, our life
and our reputation. It may be I am slighted, or I have received ill language,
but my head aches not for it, neither has it broke my thigh, nor taken away my
virtue, unless I lose my charity or my patience. Inquire therefore what you
are the worse either in your soul or in your body, for what has happened: for
upon this very stock many evils will disappear, since the body and the soul
make up the whole man: Si natus es Trophime solus omnium hael^ge,
Vt semper eant t^bi ^es arbitcio tuc,
Fel^citatem hanc si quit promi^it Deus,
Irascere^is ure, non mala is side
Et imprebej egiff^t. Menan:

and when the daughter of S^ilp^ proved a wanton, he said it was none of his
sin, and therefore there was no reason it should be his misery: And if an enemy
has taken all that from a Prince whereby he was a king; he may refresh himself
by considering all that is left him, whereby he is a Man.

4. Consider that sad accidents and a state of affliction is a School of
virtue: it reduces our spirits to soberness, and our counsels to moderation; it
corrects levity* and interrupts the confidence of sini^ng. It is good for me
(said David) that I have been afflicted, for thereby I have learned thy law.
Psalm 119 part 10. ver 3
And, I know (O ^o^d that thou of very faithfulness have caused me to be
troubled. For God, who in mercy and wisdom governes the world, would never
have suffered so many sadnesses, and have sent them especially to the most
virtuous and the wisest men, but that he intends they should be the seminary of
comfort, the nursery of virtue, the exercise of wisdom, the trial of patience,
the venturing for a crown, and the gate of glory.

5. Consider that afflictions are oftentimes the occasions of great temporal
advantages: and we must not look upon them as they sit down heavily upon us,
but as they serve some of Gods ends, and the purposes of universal Providence:
And when a Prince sights justly, and yet unprosperously, if he could see all
those reasons for which God has so ordered it, he would think it the most
reasonable thing in the world, and that it would be very ill to have it
otherwise. If a man could have opened one of the pages of the Divine counsel,
and could have seen the event of Joseph's being sold to the Merchants of Amaleck
he might with much reason have dried up the young man's tears: and when Gods
purposes are opened in the events of things, as it was in the case of Joseph,
when he sustained his Fathers family and became Lord of Egypt, then we see what
ill judgment we made of things, and that we were passionate as children and
transported with sense and mistaken interests. The case of Themitocles was
almost like that o^ Joseph, for being banished into Egypt, he also grew in
favor with the King, and told his wife He had been undone, unless he had been
undone. For God esteems it one of his glories that he brings good out of evil,
and therefore it were but reason we should trust God to govern his own world
as he pleases: and that he should patiently wait till the change comes, or the
reason be discovered.

And this consideration is also of great use to them who envy at the prosperity
of the wicked, and the success of Persecutors, and the baits of fishes, and
the bread of dogs. God fails not to sow blessings in the long furrows which the
plowers plow upon the back of the Church: and this success which troubles us
will be a great glory to God, and a great benefit to his Saints and servants,
and a great ruin to the Persecutors, who shall have but the fortune of
Theramenes one of the thirty Tyrants of Athens, who escaped when his house fell
upon him, and was shortly after put to death with torments by his Colleagues in
the Tyranny.

To which also may be added that the great evils which happen to the best and
wisest men are one of the great arguments, upon the strength of which we can
expect felicity to our souls, and the joys of another world. And certainly
they are then very tolerable and eligible, when with so great advantages they
minister to the faith and hope of a Christian. But if we consider what
unspeakable tortures are provided for the wicked to all eternity, we should not
be troubled to see them prosperous here, but rather wonder that their portion
in this life is not bigger, and that ever they should be sick or crossed, or
affronted, or troubled with the contradiction and disease of their own vices,
since if they were fortunate beyond their own ambition it could not make them
recompense for one hours torment in Hell, which yet they shall have for their
eternal portion.

After all these considerations deriving from sense and experience, grace and
reason, there are two remedies still remaining, and they are Necessity and Time.

6. For it is but reasonable to bear that accident patiently which God sends,
since impatience does but entangle us like the fluttering of a bird in a net,
but cannot at all ease our trouble, or prevent the accident: it must be run
through, Nemo (...) ferr^ quod ^^o^sse est pa^^.
and therefore it were better we compose our selves to a patient, then to a
troubled and miserable suffering.

7. But however, if you will not otherwise be cured, time at last will do it
alone; and then consider, do you mean to m^^ur^ always, or but for a time? If
always, you are miserable and foolish. If for a time, then why will you not
apply those reasons to your grief at first, with which you will cure it at
last: or if you will not cure it with reason, see how little of a man there is
in you, that you suffer time to do more with you then reason or religion: you
suffer your selves to be cured just as a beast or a tree is; let it alone and
the thing will heal it self; but this is neither honorable to thy person, nor
of reputation to thy religion. However be content to bear thy calamity, because
thou art sure in a little time it will sit down gentle and easy: For to a
mortal man no evil is immortal: And here let the worst thing happen that can,
it will end in death, and we commonly think that to be near enough.

8. Lastly, of those things which are reckoned amongst evils, some are better
then their contraries; and to a good man the very worst is tolerable.

Poverty or a low Fortune.
1 Poverty is better then riches, and a mean fortune to be chosen before a
great and splendid one. It is indeed despised and makes men contemtible: it
exposes a man to the insolence of evil persons, and leaves a man defencelesse:
it is always suspected: its stories are accounted lies, and all its counsels
follies: it puts a man from all employment: it makes a man's discourses tedious,
and his society troublesome. This is the worst of it: and yet all this, and for
worse then this, the Apostles suffered for being Christians; and Christianity
it self may be esteemed an affliction as well as poverty, if this be all that
can be said against it; for the Apostles and the most eminent Christians were
really poor, and were used contemptuously: Alta fortuna alta travaglio apporta.
and yet, that poverty is despised may be an argument to commend it, if it be
despised by none but persons vicious and ignorant. However, certain it is that
a great fortune is a great vanity, and riches is nothing but danger, trouble,
and temptation; like a garment that is too long, and bears a train; not so
useful to one, but it is troublesome to two; to him that bears the one part
upon his shoulders, and to him that bears the other part in his hands: But
poverty is the sister of a good mind, the parent of sober counsels, and the
nurse of all virtue.

For, what is it that you admire in the fortune of a great King: Is it that he
always goes in a great company? You may thrust your self into the same crowd,
or go often to Church, and then you have as great a company as he has, and
that may upon as good ground please you as him, that is, justly neither: for so
impertinent and useless pomp, and the other circumstances of his distance, are
not made for him, but for his subjects, that they may learn to separate him
from common usages, and be taught to be governed. But if you look upon them as
sine things in themselves, Da au^orita la ceremonia al atto.
you may quickly alter your opinion when you shall consider that they cannot
cure the toothach, nor make one wise, or fill the b^lly, or give one nights
sleep, (though they help to break many) nor satisfying any appetite of Nature,
or Reason, or Religion: but they are states of greatness which only makes it
possible for a Man to be made extremely miserable. And it was long ago
observed by the Greek Tragedians, and from them by Arianus, (...), el (...).
Bis ser d^erum mensura consero ego ag^os Be^ecynthia a^va.
Ani^^^^; me^os sensim usque evectus ad polum
De^^elit ^umi, and me sic videtur alioqui,
D^sce haud nemia magn^facere mortalia.
Tantal^m Traged.
saying, That all our Tragedies are of Kings and Princes, and rich or ambitious
personages, but you never see a poor man have a part, unless it be as a
Chorus, or to fill up the Scenes, to dance or to be derided: but the Kings and
the great Generals; First (says he) they begin with joy (...) crown the
houses: but about the third or fourth Act, they cry out, O Citheron! why did
thou spare my life to reserve me for this more sad calamity? And this is really
true in the great accidents of the world: for a great estate has great
crosses, and a mean fortune has but small ones. It may be the poor man loses a
Cow (for if his Child dies he is quit of his biggest care) but such an
accident in a rich and splendid Family doubles upon the spirits of the parents:
Or it may be the poor man is troubled to pay his rent, and that is his biggest
trouble: but it is a bigger care to secure a great fortune in a troubled
estate, or with equal greatness, or with the circumstances of honor, and the
m^^ness of reputation to defend a Lawsuit: and that which will secure a common
man's whole estate, is not enough to defend a great man's honor.

And therefore it was not without mystery observed among the Ancients, --
sun^sta pecunia Templo
No^ du^ habitas, nulla^ ^^mmo^u^ creximas aras,
Vt ^^litur pax atque fides --

that they who made Gods of gold and silver, of hope and fear, peace and
fortune, Garlic and Onions, Beasts and Serpents, and a quartan ague, yet never
deified money: meaning, that however wealth was admired by common or abused
understandings: yet from riches, that is from that proportion of good things
which is beyond the necessities of Nature, H^rat. od. 31. lib. 1.
no moment could be added to a man's real content or happiness. Co^n from
Sardinia, herds of Calabrian cattle, meadows through which pleasant Liris
glides, silks from Tyrus, and golden Chalices to drown my health in, are
nothing but instruments of vanity or sin, and suppose a disease in the soul of
him that longs for them or admires them: Chap. 4. S^. 1. 8 ^itle of
Coveto^^ness.
And this I have otherwhere represented more largely; to which I here add, that
riches have very great dangers to their souls, not only who covet them, but to
all that have them. For if a great personage undertakes an action passionately,
and upon great interest, let him manage it indiscreetly, let the whole design
be unjust, let it be acted with all the malice and impotency in the World, he
shall have enough to flatter him, but not enough to reprove him. He had need be
a bold man that shall tell his Patron, he is going to Hell; and that Prince had
need be a good man that shall suffer such a Monitor: And though it be a strange
kind of civility and an evil dutifulness in Friends and Relatives to suffer
him to perish without reproof or medicine, rather then to seem unmannerly to a
great sinner; yet it is no^e of their least infelicities, that their wealth and
greatness shall put them into sin, and yet put them past reproof. I need not
instance in the habitual intemperance of rich Tables, nor the evil accidents
and effects of fullness; pride and lust, wantonness and softness of disposition,
huge talking, and an imperious spirit, despite of Religion, and contempt of
poor persons: At the best, Iam. ^ 5, 6, 7.
it is a great temptation for a man to have in his power whatsoever he can have
him in his sensual desires; and therefore riches is a blessing like to a
present made of a whole Vintage to a Man in a Hectic Fever; he will be much
tempted to drink of it, and if he does he is inflamed, and may chance to die
with the kindness.

Now besides what has been already noted in the state of poverty there is
nothing to be accounted for, but the fear of wanting necessaries, of which if a
man could be secured, that he might live free from care, all the other parts of
it might be reckoned amongst the advantages of wise and sober persons, rather
then objections against that state of fortune.

But concerning this I consider, that there must needs be great security to all
Christians, since Christ not only made express promises that we should have
sufficient for this life; but also took great pains and used many arguments to
create confidence in us: and such they were which by their own strength were
sufficient, though you abate the authority of the Speaker. The Son of God told
us, his Father takes care of us: He that knew all his Fathers counsels and his
whole kindness toward mankind, told us so. How great is the truth, how
certain, how necessary, which Christ himself proved by arguments. The excellent
words and most comfortable sentences which are our Bills of Exchange, upon the
credit of which we lay our cares down, and receive provisions for our need,
Mat. 6 ^5.
are these. Take no thought for your life what ye shall eat or what ye ^^all
drink nor yet for your body what ye shall put on. Is not the life more then
meat, and the body then raiment? Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow
not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns, yet your heavenly Father
feeds them. Are ye not much better then they? Which of you by taking thought
can add one cubit to his stature? And why take ye thought for raiment?
Consider the Lillies of the field, how they grow: They toil not, neither do
they spin, and yet I say unto you that even Solomon in all his glory, was not
arrayed like one of these. Therefore if God so clothe the grass of the field
which to day is, and to morrow is ca^^ into the oven, shall he not much more
clothe you, O ye of little faith? Therefore take no thought saying, what shall
we eat, or what shall we drink ^^ wherewith all shall we be clothed? (for after
all these things do the gentiles seek For your heavenly Father knows that ye
have need of all these things. But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. Take therefore no
thought for the morrow: for the m^rrow shall take though: for the things ^f it
self: sufficient to the day is the evil thereof. The same discourse is repeated
by Saint Luke: ^uke 12.22. to ver. 31.
and accordingly our duty is urged and our confidence abetted by the Disciples
of our Lord, in diverse places of holy Scripture. So Saint Paul, ^^il. 4.6
Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving, let your request be made known unto God: And again, ^ Tim 6.17
Charge them that are rich in this world that they be not high-minded, nor
trust in uncertain riches, but in the living GOD, who gives us ^ichly all
things to enjoy. And yet again, Let your conversation be without covetousness,
and be content with such things as ye have; for he has said, I will never
leave thee, nor forsake thee: So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper.
And all this is by S. Peter summed up in our duty, thus: Cast all your care
upon him for he cares for you: Which words he seems to have borrowed out of
the 55 Psalm, verse 23. where David says the same thing almost in the same
words; To which I only add the observation made by him, and the argument of
experience; I have been young and now am old, and yet saw I never the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. And now after all this, a fearless
confidence in God, and concerning a provision of necessaries, is so reasonable
that it is become a duty; and he is scarce a Christian whose faith is so little
as to be jealous in God and suspicious concerning meat and clothes: that man
has nothing in him of the nobleness or confidence of Charity.

Does not God provide for all the birds and beasts and fishes? Do not the
sparrows fly from their bush, and every morning find meat where they laid it
not? Do not the young ravens call to God and he feeds them? and were it
reasonable that the sons of the family should fear the Father would give meat
to the chickens and the servants, his sheep and his dogs, but give none to
them? He were a very ill Father that should do so: or he were a very foolish
son that should think so of a good Father. * But besides the reasonableness of
this faith and this hope; we have infinite experience of it. How innocent, how
careless, how secure is Infancy? and yet how certainly provided for? we have
lived at Gods charges all the days of our life, and have (as the Italian
Proverb says) set down to meat at the sound of a bell; and hitherto he has
not failed us: we have no reason to suspect him for the future; we do not use
to serve men so; and less time of trial creates great confidences in us
toward them who for twenty years together never broke their word with us: and
God has so ordered i^, that a man shall have had the experience of many years
provision, before he shall understand how to doubt: that he may be provided for
an answer against the temptation shall come, and the mercies felt in his
childehood, may make him fear less when he is a man. * Add to this that God
has given us his holy Spirit; he has promised Heaven to us; he has given us
his Son; and we are taught from Scripture to make this inference from hence.
How should not he with him give us all things else?

The Charge of many Children.
We have a title to be provided for as we are Gods creatures: another title as
we are his Children: another because God has promised: and every of our
children has the same title; and therefore it is a huge folly and infidelity
to be troubled and full of care because we have many children. Every child we
have to feed is a new revenue, a new title to Gods care and providence; so that
many children are a great wealth: and if it be said they are chargeable, it is
no more then all wealth and great revenues are. For what difference is it?
Titius keeps ten ploughs, Cornelia has ten children: He has land enough to
employ, and to feed all his hindes; she blessings, and promises, and the
provisions* and the truth of God to maintain all her children. His hindes and
horses eat up all his corn, and her children are sufficiently maintained with
her little. They bring in and eat up; and she indeed eats up, but they also
bring in from the storehouses of heaven, and the granaries of God: and my
children are not so much mine as they are Gods: he feeds them in the womb by
ways secret and insensible; and would not work a perpetual miracle to bring
them forth, and then to starve them.

Violent necessities.
But some men are highly tempted, and are brought to a straight, that without a
miracle they cannot be relieved, what shall they do? It may be their pride or
vanity has brought the necessity upon them, and it is not a need of Gods
making; and if it be not, they must cure it themselves by lessening their
desires, and moderating their appetites; and yet if it be innocent though
unnecessary, God does usually relieve such necessities; and he does not only
upon our prayers grant us more then he promised of temporal things: but also
he gives many times more then we ask. This is no object for our faith, but
ground enough for a temporal and prudent hope: and if we fail in the
particular, God will turn it to a bigger mercy, if we submit to his
dispensation, and adore him in the denial. But if it be a matter of necessity,
let not any man by way of impatience cry out, that God will not work a
miracle; for God by miracle did give meat and drink to his people in the
wilderness, of which he had made no particular promise in any Covenant: and if
all natural means fail, it is certain that God will rather work a miracle then
break his word: He can do that, He cannot do this. Only we must remember that
our portion of temporal things is but food and ralment: God has not promised
us coaches and horses, rich houses and jewels, Tyrian silks and Persian
carpets; neither has he promised to minister to our needs in such
circumstances as we shall appoint, but such as himself shall choose. God will
enable either thee to pay thy debt (if thou beggest it of him) or else he will
pay it for thee, that is, take thy desire as a discharge of thy duty, and Pay
it to thy Creditor in blessings, or in some secret of his providence. It may be
he has laid up in the corn that shall feed thee in the granary of thy Brother;
or will clothe thee with his wool; he enabled Saint Peter to pay his Gabel, by
the ministry of a fish; and Elias to be waited on by a crow, who has both his
minister, and his steward for provisions: and his Holy Son rode in triumph upon
an ass that grazed in another man's postures. And if God gives to him the
dominion and reserves the use to thee, thou have the better half of the two;
but the charitable man serves God and serves thy need; and both join to provide
for thee, and God blesses both. But if he takes away the fleshpots from thee,
he can also alter the appetite, and he has given thee power and commandment to
restrain it: and if he lessens the revenue, he will also shrink the necessity;
or if he gives but a very little, he will make it go a great way: or if he
sends thee but course diet, he will bless it and make it healthful, and can
cure all the anguish of thy poverty by giving thee patience, and the grace of
contentedness. For the grace of God secures you of provisions, and yet the
grace of God feeds and supports the spirit in the want of provisions: and if a
thin table be apt to enfeeble the spirits of one used to feed better, yet the
cheerfulness of a spirit that is blessed will make a thin table become a
delicacy, if the man was as well taught as he was fed, and learned his duty
when he received the blessing. Poverty therefore is in some senses eligible and
to be preferred before riches, but in all senses it is very tolerable.

Death of Children, or nearest Relatives and Friends.
There are some persons who have been noted for excellent in their lives and
passions, rarely innocent, and yet hugely penitent for indiscretions and
harmless infirmities, such as was Paulina one of the ghostly children of S.
Hierom, and yet when any of her children died she was arrested with a sorrow so
great as brought her to the margent of her grave. And the more tender our
spirts are made by Religion, the more easy we are to let in grief, if the
cause be innocent, and be but in any sense twisted with piety and due
affections. * To cure which we may consider that all the world must die, and
therefore to be impatient at the death of a person concerning whom it was
certain and known that he must die, is to mourn because thy friend or child
was not born an Angel, and when thou have a while made thy self miserable by an
importunate and useless grief, it may be thou shall die thy self, and leave
others to their choice whether they will mourn for thee or no: but by that time
it will appear how impertinent that grief was which served no end of life, and
ended in thy own funeral. But what great matter is it, if sparks fly upward,
or a stone falls into a pit, if that which was combustible be burned, or that
which was liquid be melted, or that which is mortal do die? It is no more then
a man does every day; for every night death has gotten possession of that day,
and we shall never live that day over again; and when the last day is come,
there are no more days left for us to die. And what is sleeping and waking,
but living and dying? what is Spring and Autumn, youth and old age, morning and
evening, but real images of life and death, and really the same to many
considerable effects and changes?

Untimely death.
But it is not mere dying that is pretended by some as the cause of their
impatient mourning; but that the child died young, before he knew good and
evil, his right hand from his le^t, and so lost all his portion of this world:
and they know not of what excellency his portion in the next shall be. * If he
died young, he left but little, for he understood but little, and had not
capacities of great pleasures, or great cares: but yet be died innocent, and
before the sweetness of his soul was defloured and ravishd from him by the
flames and follies of a froward age: he went out from the dining-rooms before
he had fallen into error by the intemperance of his meat, or the deluge of
drink: and he has obtained this favor of God, that his soul has suffered a
less imprisonment, and her load was sooner taken off, that he might with
lesser delays go and converse with immortal spirits: and the babe is taken
into Paradise before he knows good and evil, (For that knowledge threw our
great Father out) and this ignorance returns the child thither. * But (as
concerning thy own particular) remove thy thoughts back to those days in which
thy child was not born, and you are now but as then you was, and there is no
difference but that you had a son born, and if you reckon that for evil, you
are unthankful for the blessing; if it be good, it is better that you had the
blessing for a while then not at all, and yet if he had never been born, Itide^
si pu^r parvulus oc^^dat aequ^ae nimo ferendum pu^ant: si vero in cunis, ne
querendum quidem: atqui h^c aoerbius exegis natura quod deed it. At id quidem
in c^et^t^s rebus inclius putatur, aliqu^m partem quam nullum a^^ingere, Senec.
this sorrow had not been at all: but be no more displeased at God for giving
you a blessing for a while, then you would have been if he had not given it at
all; and reckon that intervening blessing for a gain, but account it not an
evil; and if it be a good, turn not into sorrow and sadness. * But if we have
great reason to complain of the calamities and evils of our life, then we have
the less reason to grieve that those whom we loved, have so small a portion of
evil assigned to them. And it is no small advantage, that our children dying
young receive: For their condition of a blessed immortality is rendered to them
secure by being snatched from the dangers of an evil choice, and carired to
their little cells of felicity, where they can weep no more, And this the
wisest of the Gentiles understood well, when they forbade any offerings or
libations to be made for dead Infants as was usual for their other dead; as
believing they were entered into a secure possession, to which they went with no
other condition, but that they passed into it through the way of mortality, and
for a few months wore an uneasy garment. And let weeping parents say, if they
do not think that the evils their little babes have suffered, are sufficient.
If they be, why are they troubled that they were taken from those many and
greater, which in succeeding years are great enough to try all the reason and
religion which art and nature, and the grace of God has produced in us, to
enable us for such sad contentions. And possibly we may doubt concerning men
and women, but we cannot suspect that to Infants death can be such an evil, but
that it brings to them much more good then it takes from them in this life.

Death unseasonable.
But others can well bear the death of Infants: but when they have spent some
years of childehood or youth, and are entered into arts and society, when they
are hopeful and provided for, when the parents are to reap the comfort of all
their fears and cares, then it breaks the spirit to lose them. This is true in
many; but this is not love to the dead, but to themselves: for they miss what
they had flattered themselves into by hope and opinion: and if it were kindness
to the dead, they may consider, that since we hope he is gone to God and to
rest, it is an ill expression of our love to them, that we weep for their good
fortune. For that life is not best which is longest: and when they are
descended into the grave, it shall not be inquired how long they have lived,
but how well: and yet this shortening of their days is an evil wholly
depending upon opinion. Juvenis ^eu^v^ia ^inbui^ quem Di^ diligant. Men^ud:
For if men did naturally live but twenty years, then we should be satisfied if
they died about sixteen, or eighteen: and yet eighteen years now are as long as
eighteen years would be then; and if a man were but of a days life, it is well
if he lasts till Even song, and then says his Compline an hour before the
time: and we are pleased and call not that death immature if he lives till
seventy: and yet this age is as short of the old periods, before and since the
flood, as this yout^s age (for whom you mourn) is of the present fullness.
Suppose therefore a decree passed upon this person (as there have been many
upon all mankind) and God has set him a shorter period; and then we may as
well bear the immature death of the young man, as the death of the oldest man:
for they also are immature and unseasonable in respect of the old periods of
many generations. * And why are we troubled that he had arts and sciences
before he died? or are we troubled that he does not live to make use of them?
the first is cause of joy, for they are excellent in order to certain ends: And
the second cannot be cause of sorrow, because he has no need to use them as
the case now stands, being provided for with the provisions of an Angel, and
the manner of Eternity. However, the sons and the parents, friends and
relatives are in the world, like hours and minutes to a day. The hour comes and
must pass; and some stay but minutes, and they also pass, and shall never
return again. But let it be considered, that from the time in which a man is
conceived, from that time forward to Eternity he shall never cease to be: and
let him die young or old, still he has an immortal soul, and has laid down
his body only for a time, as that which was the instrument of his trouble and
sorrow, and the scene of sicknesses and disease. But he is in a more noble
manner of being, after death, then he can be here: and the child may with more
reason be allowed to cry for leaving his mothers womb for this world, then a
man can for changing this world for another.

Sudden death or violent.
Others are yet troubled at the manner of their childs or friends death. He
was drowned, or lost his head, or died of the plague, and this is a new spring
of sorrow: but no man can give a sensible account, how it shall be worse for a
child to die with drowning in half an hour, then to endure a fever of one and
twenty days. And if my friend lost his head, so he did not lose his constancy,
and his religion, he died with huge advantage.

Being Childelesse.
But by this means I am left without an Heir: Well, suppose that: Thou have no
Heir, and I have no inheritance; and there are many Kings and Emperors that
have died childlesse: many Royal lines are extinguished: And Augustus Caesar
was forced to adopt his wives son to inherit all the Roman greatness. And there
are many wise persons that never married; and we read no where that any of the
children of the Apostles did survive their Fathers: and all that inherit any
thing of Christ's kingdom come to it by Adoption, not by natural inheritance:
and to die without a natural heir is no intolerable evil, since it was
sanctified in the person of Jesus who died a Virgin.

Evil or unfortunate Children.
And by this means we are freed from the greater sorrows of having a fool, a
swine, or a goat to rule after us in our families: and yet even this condition
admits of comfort. For all the wild ^mericans are supposed to be the sons of
Dodanim; (...). Epict.
and the sons of Jacob are now the most scattered and despised people in the
whole world. The son of Solomon was but a silly weak man; and the son of
H^zekiah was wicked: and all the fools and barbarous people, all the thieves
and pirates, all the slaves and miserable men and women of the world are the
sons and daughters of Noah; and we must not look to be exempted from that
portion of sorrow which God gave to Noah, and Adam, to Abraham, to Isaac and to
Jacob: I pray God send us into the lot of Abraham. But if any thing happens
worse to us, it is enough for us that we bear it evenly. (...).


Our own death.
And how if you were to die your self? you know you must. Only be ready for it,
Ad sines cum pervan^re^ ne reve^tilo. Pythag:
by the preparations of a good life; and then it is the greatest good that ever
happened to thee: else there is nothing that can comfort you. But if you have
served God in a holy life, send away the women and the weepers, tell them it is
as much intemperance to weep too much, as to laugh too much: and when thou art
alone, or with fitting company, die as thou should; but do not die
impatiently, and like a fox catched in a trap. For if you fear death you shall
never the more avoid it, but you make it miserable. Faunius that killed himself
for fear of death died as certainly, as Portia that eat burning coals, or Cato
that cut his own throat. (...).
To die is necessary and natural, and it may be honorable: but to die poorly,
and basely, and sinfully, that alone is it that can make a man unfortunate. No
man can be a slave, but he that fears pain, or fears to die. To such a man
nothing but chance and peaceable times can secure his duty, and he depends upon
things without, for his felicity; and so is well but during the pleasure of his
enemy, or a Thief or a Tyrant, or it may be of a dog, or a wild bull.

Prayers for the several Graces and parts of Christian Sobriety.
A prayer against sensuality.
O Eternal Father, thou that sit in Heaven invested with essential Glories
and Divine perfections, fill my soul with so deep a sense of the excellencies
of spiritual and heavenly things, that my affections being weaned from the
pleasures of the world, and the false allurements of sin, I may with great
severity and the prudence of a holy discipline and strict desires, with clear
resolutions and a free spirit, have my conversation in Heaven and heavenly
employments; that being in affections as in my condition a Pilgrim and a
stranger here, I may covet after and labor for an abiding city, and at last
may enter into and for ever dwell in the Celestial Jerusalem which is the
mother of us all, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen

For Temperance.
O Almighty God and gracious Father of men and Angels, who openest thy hand and
fillest all things with plenty, and have provided for thy servant sufficient to
satisfy all my needs: teach me to use thy creatures soberly and temperately,
that I may not with loads of meat or drink make the temptations of my enemy to
prevail upon me, or my spirit unapt for the performance of my duty, or my body
healthless, or my affections sensual and unholy. O my God, never suffer that
the blessings which thou give me may either minister to sin or sickness, but
to health and holiness, and thanksgiving, that in the strength of thy
provisions I may cheerfully and actively, and diligently serve thee: that I may
worthily feast at thy table here, and be accounted worthy through thy grace to
be admitted to thy table hereafter at the Eternal supper of the Lamb, to sing
an Allelujah to God the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost for ever and ever.
Amen.

For Chastity: to be said especially by unmarried persons.
ALmighty God, our most holy and eternal Father, who art of pure eyes, and
can behold no uncleanness; let thy gracious and holy Spirit descend upon thy
servant, and reprove the spirit of Fornication and Uncleanness, and cast him
out, that my body may be a holy Temple, and my soul a Sanctuary to entertain
the PRINCE of purities, the holy and eternal Spirit of God. O let no impure
thoughts pollute that soul which God has sanctified; no unclean words pollute
that tongue which God has commanded to be an Organ of his praises* no unholy
and unchaste action rend the vail of that Temple where the holy JESUS has been
pleased to enter, and has chosen for his habitation: but seal up all my senses
from all vain objects, and let them be entirely possessed with Religion, and
fortified with prudence, watchfulness and mortification: that I possessing my
vessel in holiness, may lay it down with a holy hope, and receive it again in a
joyful resurrection through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the love of God, to be said by Virgins and Widows professed or
resolved so to live: and may be used by any one.
O Holy and purest Jesus who were pleased to espouse every holy soul and join
it to thee with a holy union, and mysterious instruments of religious society
and communications; O fill my soul with Religion and desires, holy as the
thoughts of Cherubim, passionate beyond the love of women, that I may love thee
as much as ever any creature loved thee, even with all my soul, and all my
faculties, and all the degrees of every faculty; let me know no loves but those
of duty and charity, obedience and devotion that I may for ever run after thee
who art the King of Virgins, and with whom whole kingdoms are in love, and for
whose sake Queens have died; and at whose feet Kings with joy have laid their
Crowns and Scepters: My soul is thine O dearest Jesu, thou art my Lord, and
have bound up my eyes and heart from all strange affections; give me for my
dowry purity and humility, modesty and devotion, charity and patience, and at
last bring me into the Bride-chamber to partake of the felicities, and to lie
in the bosom of the Bridegroom to eternal ages, O holy and sweetest Savior
Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer to be said by married persons in behalf of themselves and each other.
O Eternal and gracious Father who have consecrated the holy estate of marriage
to become mysterious, and to represent the union of Christ and his church, let
thy holy Spirit so guide me in the doing the duties of this state, that it may
not became a sin unto me; nor that liberty which thou have hallowed by the holy
Jesus, become an occasion of licentiousness by my own weakness and sensuality:
and do thou forgive all those irregularities and too sensual applications
which may have in any degree discomposed my spirit and the severity of a
Christian. Let me in all accidents and circumstances be severe in my duty
toward thee, affectionate and dear to my Wife [or Husband] a guide and good
example to my family, and in all quietness, sobriety, prudence and peace, a
follower of those holy pairs who have served thee with godliness and a good
testimony: and the blessings of the eternal God, blessings of the right hand
and of the left, be upon the body and soul of thy servant my Wife [or Husband]
and abide upon her [or him] till the end of a holy and happy life; and grant
that both of us may live together for ever in the embraces of the holy and
eternal Jesus, our Lord and savior. Amen.

A prayer for the grace of Humility.
O Holy and most gracious Master and Savior Jesus, who by thy example and by
thy precept, by the practice of a whole life and frequent discourses did
command us to be meek and humble in imitation of thy incomparable sweetness and
great humility: be pleased to give me the grace as thou have given me the
commandment: enable me to do whatsoever thou command, and command
whatsoever thou please: O mortify in me all proud thoughts, and vain
opinions of my self: let me return to thee acknowledgment and the fruits of all
those good things thou have given me, that by confessing I am wholly in debt to
thee for them, I may not boast my self for what I have received, and for what I
am highly accountable: and for what is my own, teach me to be ashamed and
humbled, it being nothing but sin and misery, weakness and uncleanness. Let me
go before my brethren in nothing but in striving to do them honor and thee
glory; never to seek my own praise; never to delight in it when it is offered;
that despising my self I may be accepted by thee in the honors with which thou
shall crown thy humble and despised servants for Jesus his sake in the kingdom
of eternal glory. Amen.

Acts of Humility and Modesty by way of prayer and meditation.
I.
Lord I know that my spirit is light and thorny, my body is brutish and exposed
to sickness; I am constant to folly, and inconstant in holy purposes: My
labors are vain and fruitless; my fortune full of change and trouble, seldom
pleasing, never perfect: My wisdom is holly; being ignorant even of the parts
and passions of my own body: and what am I, O Lord, before thee, but a
miserable person, hugely in debt, not able to pay?

II.
Lord I am nothing, and I have nothing of my self, I am less then the least of
all thy mercies.

III.
What was I before my birth? First nothing, and then uncleanness. What during
my childehood? weakness and folly. What in my youth? folly still and passion,
lust and wildness. What in my whole life? a great sinner, a deceived and an
abused person. Lord pity me, for it is thy goodness that I am kept from
confusion and amazement, when I consider the misery and shame of my person, and
the defilements of my nature.

IV.
Lord what am I, and Lord what art thou? What is man that thou art mindful of
him, and the son of man that thou so regardest him?

V.
How can Man be justified with God? or how can he be clean that is born of a
Woman? Behold even to the Moon and it shines not, yea the Stars are not pure
in his sight. How much less Man that is a Worm, and the son of Man which is a
Worm? Job 25.

A Prayer for a contented spirit, and the grace of moderation and patience.
O Almighty God, Father and Lord of all the creatures, who have disposed al
things and all chances so as may best glorify thy wisdom, and serve the ends
of thy justice, and magnify thy mercy, by secret and undiscernible ways
bringing good out of evil; I most humbly beseech thee to give me wisdom from
above, that I may adore thee and admire thy ways, and footsteps which are in
the great Deep and not to be searched out; teach me to submit to thy providence
in all things, to be content in all changes of person and condition, to be
temperate in prosperity, and to read my duty in the lines of thy mercy, and in
adversity to be meek, patient and resigned, and to look through the cloud, that
I may wait for the consolation of the Lord, and the day of redemption; in the
mean time doing my duty with an unwearied diligence, and an undisturbed
resolution, having no fondness for the vanities or possessions of this World,
but laying up my hopes in Heaven and the rewards of holy living, and being
strengthened with the Spirit in the inner man, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

CHAP. III. Of Christian Justice.
Justice is by the Christian Religion enjoyed in all its parts by these two
propositions in Scripture: [ Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you
even so do to them.] This is the measure of communicative justice, or of that
justice which supposes exchange of things profitable for things profitable:
that is, I supply your need, you may supply mine; as I do a benefit to you, I
may receive one by you: and because every man may be injured by another,
therefore his security shall depend upon mine: if he will not not let me be
safe, he shall not be safe himself (only the manner of his being punished, is
upon great reason both by God and all the World taken from particulars, and
committed to a public dis-interested person, who will do justice without
passion, both to him and to me.) If he refuses to do me advantage, he shall
receive none when his needs require it. And thus God gave necessities to men,
that all men might need; and several abilities to several persons that each m^n
might help to supply the public needs, and by joining to fill up all wants,
they may be knit together by justice as the parts of the world are by nature:
and he has made us all obnoxious to injuries, and made every little thing
strong enough to do us hurt by some instrument or other; and has given us all
a sufficient stock of self-love, and desire of self preservation, to be as the
chain to tie together all the parts of society, and to restrain us from doing
violence, lest we be violently dealt withal our selves.

The other part of justice is commonly called distributive, and is commanded in
this rule, Romans 13.7.
[ Render to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor. Owe no man any thing, but to
love one another] This justice is distinguished from the first, because the
obligation depends not upon contract or express bargain, but passes upon us by
virtue of some command of God, or our Superior, by nature or by grace, by
piety or religion, by trust or by office, 2 Pet. 4.10.
according to that Commandment [ As every man has received the gift, so let
him minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of
God. And as the first considers an equality of persons in respect of the
contract or particular necessity: this supposes a difference of persons, and no
particular bargains, but such necessary entercourses, as by the Laws of God or
man are introduced. But I shall reduce all the particulars of both kinds to
these four heads: 1. Obedience, 2. Provision. 3. Negotiation. 4. Restitution.

SECT. I. Of Obedience to our Superiors.
OUr Superiors are set over us in affairs of the World, or the affairs of the
Soul, and things pertaining to Religion, and are called accordingly,
Ecclesiastical or Civil* Toward whom our duty is t^u^ generally described in
the New Testament: ^or Temporal or Civil Governors the Commands are these:
Romans 13.8.
[ Render to Caesar the things that are Caesars] and [ Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers: For there is no power but of God: (...) 3.^.
The powers that be are obtained of God: whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God; Pet. ^.13.
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation] and Put them in
mind to be subject to principalities and powers and to obey Magistrates^ and [
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake; whether it be
to the King, as supreme, or unto Governors as unto them that are sent by him
for the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well.

For Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Governors thus we are commanded: Heb. ^3.17.
[ Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they
watch for your souls, P^^^l 2 29.
as they that must give an account and Hold such in reputation] and [ To this
end did I write that I might know the proof of you, whether ye be obedient in
all things* said S. Paul to the Church of Corinth. 2 Cor. 2.2.
Our duty is reducible to practice by the following Rules.

Acts and duties of Obedience to all our Superiors.
1. We must obey all humane laws appointed and constituted by lawful Authority,
that is, of the supreme power; according to the constitution of the place in
which we live: all laws I mean, which are not against the law of God.

2. In obedience to humane laws we must observe the letter of the Law where we
can without doing violence to the reason of the Law, and the intention of the
Lawgiver: but where they cross each other, the charity of the Law is to be
preferred before its discipline, and the reason of it before the letter.

3. If the general reason of the Law ceases in our particular, and a contrary
reason rises upon us, we are to procure dispensation, or leave to omit the
observation of it in such circumstances; if there be any persons or office
appointed for granting it: but if there be none, or if it is not easily to be
had, or not without an inconvenience greater then the good of the observation
of the Law in our particular, we are despensed withal in the nature of the
thing, without further process or trouble.

4. As long as the Law is obligatory, so long our obedience is due; and he that
begins a contrary custom without reason, sins: but he that breaks the Law when
the custom is entered and fixed, is excused; because it is supposed, Mo^^ (...)
od^o^^run^^ir pot^sta^^m suam.
L^g^^ m^^^ s^ v^^n^ Plaut. (...).

the legislative power consents, when by not punishing, it suffers disobedience
to grow up to a custom.

5. Obedience to humane laws must be for conscience sake that is, because in
such obedience public order and charity, and benefit is concerned: and because
the Law of God commands us, therefore we must make a conscience in keeping the
just Laws of Superiors: (...) 5. c^ap 7.
and although the matter before the making of the Law was indifferent, yet now
the obedience is not indifferent, but next to the Laws of God, we are to obey
the laws of all our Superiors, who the more public they are, the first they
are to be in the order of obedience.

6. Submit to the punishment and censure of the Laws, and seek not to reverse
their judgment by opposing, but by submitting, or flying, or silence to pass
through it, or by it as we can: and although from inferior Judges we may
appeal where the Law permits us, yet we must sit down and rest in the judgment
of the Supreme: and if we be wronged, let us complain to God of the injury, not
of the persons, and ^e will deliver thy soul from unrighteous Judges.

7. Do not believe thou have kept the Law, when thou have suffered the
punishment. For although patiently to submit to the power of the sword, be a
part of obedience, yet this is such a part as supposes another left undone: and
the Law punishes, not because she is as well pleased in taking vengeance, as in
being obeyed, but because she is displeased, she uses punishment as a means to
secure obedience for the future, or in others. Therefore although in such cases
the Law is satisfied, and the injury, and the injustice is paid for, yet the
sins of irreligion, and scandal, and disobedience to God must still be so
accounted for, as to crave pardon, and be washed off by repentance.

8. Humane Laws are not to be broken with scandal, nor at all without reason;
for ^e that does it causlesly is a despiser of the Law, and undervalues the
Authority. For humane Laws differ from divine Laws principally in this: 1. That
the positive commands of a man may be broken upon smaller, and more reasons
then the positive commands of God: we may upon a smaller reason omit to keep
any of the fasting days of the Church, then omit to give alms to the poor:
only this, the reason must bear weight according to the gravity and concernment
of the Law; a Law in a small matter may be omitted for a small reason, in a
great matter not without a greater reason. And 2. The negative precepts of men
may cease by many instruments, by contrary customs, by public disre^lish, by
long omission: but the negative precepts of God never can cease, but when they
are expressly abrogated by the same Authority. But what those reasons are that
can dispense with the command of a man, a man may be his own Judge, and
sometimes take his proportions from his own reason and necessity, sometimes
from public fame, and the practice of pious and severe persons, and from
popular customs, in which a man shall walk most safely, when he does not walk
alone, but a spiritual man takes him by the hand.

9. We must not be too forward in procuring dispensations: nor use them any
longer then the reason continues for which we first procured them: for to be
dispensed withal is an argument of natural infirmity, if it be necessary* but
if it be not, it signifies an indisciplined and unmortified spirit.

10. We must not be too busy in examining the prudence and unreasonableness of
humane Laws: for although we are not bound to believe them all to be the
wi^est, ^et if by e^q^i^ing into the lawfulness of them, or by any other
instrument we find them to fail of that wisdom with which some others are
ordained, yet we must never make use of it to desparage the person of the
Lawgiver, or to countenance any man's disobedience, much less our own.

11. Pay that reverence to the person of thy Prince, of his Ministers, of thy
Parents and spiritual Guides, which by the customs of the place thou live in
are usually paid to such persons in their several degrees: that is, that the
highest reverence be paid to the highest person, and so still in proportion:
and that this reverence be expressed in all the circumstances and manners of
the City and Nation.

12. Lift not up thy hand against thy Prince or Parent upon what pretense
soever: but bear all personal affronts and inconveniences at their hands, and
seek no remedy but by patience and piety, yiedling and praying, or absenting
thy self.

13. Speak not evil of the Ruler of thy people, neither Curse thy Father or
Mother, nor revile thy spiritual Guides, nor discover and lay naked their
infirmities: but treat them with reverence and religion, and preserve their
Authority sacred by esteeming their persons venerable.

14. Pay tribute and customs to Princes according to the Laws: and maintenance
to thy Parents according to their necessity: and honorable support to the
Clergy according to the dignity of the work, and the customs of the place.

15. Remember always that duty to our Superiors is not an act of commutative
justice, but of distributive: That is, although Kings and Parents and spiritual
Guides are to pay a great duty to their Inferiors, the duty of their several
charges and government: yet the good government of a King and of Parents are
actions of Religion as they relate to God, and of Piety as they relate to their
people and families. And although we usually call them just Princes who
administer their Laws exactly to the people, because the actions are in the
matter of justice, yet in propriety of speech, they are rather to be called
Pious, and Religious. For as he is not called a just Father that educates his
children well, but Pious; so that Prince who defends and well rules his people,
is Religious, and does that duty for which alone he is answerable to God. The
consequence of which is this, so far as concerns our duty: If the Prince or
Parent fail of their duty, we must not fail of ours: for we are answerable to
them and to God too; as being accountable to all our Superiors, and so are
they to theirs: they are above us, and God is above them.

Remedies against disobedience: and means to endear our obedience, by way of
consideration.
1. Consider that all authority descends from God, and our Superiors bear the
image of the Divine Power, which God imprints on them as on an image of clay,
or a coin upon a less perfect metal, which who so defaces, shall not be
answerable for the loss or spoil of the materials, but the defacing the Kings
Image: and in the same measure will God require it at our hands, if we despise
his authority upon whomsoever he has imprinted it. He that despises you,
despises me. And Dathan and Abiram were said to be gathered together against
the Lord. And this was S. Paul's argument for our obedience: [ The powers that
be, are ordained of God.]

2 There is very great peace and immunity from sin in resigning our wills up to
the command of others: for provided that our duty to God be secured, their
commands are warrants to us in all things else; and the case of conscience is
determined, if the command be evident and pressing: and it is certain, the
a^^^on that is but indifferent, and without reward, if done only upon our own
choice, is an act of duty and of religion, and rewardable by the grace and
savor of God, if done in obedience to the command of our Superiors. For since
naturally we desire what is forbidden us, and (sometimes there is no other evil
in the thing but that it is forbidden us) God has in grace enjoined and
proportionably accepts obedience, as being directly opposed to the former
irregularity, and it is acceptable, although there be no other good in the
thing that is commanded us, but that it is commanded.

3. By obedience we are made a society and a republic, and distinguished from
herds of Beasts, and heaps of Flies, who do what they list, and are incapable
of Laws, and obey none, and therefore are killed and destroyed, though never
punished, and they never can have a reward.

4. By obedience we are rendered capable of all the blessings of government,
signified by S. Paul in these words [ He is the Minister of God to thee for
good] and by S. Peter in these [ Governors are sent by him for the punishment
of evil doers, Rom 1^.4.
1 Pet. 2.14
and for the praise of them that do well.] And he that ever felt, or saw, or
can understand the miseries of confusion in public affairs, or amazement in a
heap of sad, tumultuous, and indefinite thoughts, may from thence judge of the
admirable effects of order, and the beauty of Government. What health is to the
body, and peace is to the Spirit, that is Government to the societies of Men,
the greatest blessing which they can receive in that temporal capacity.

5. No man shall ever be fit to govern others that knows not first how to obey.
For if the spirit of a Subject be rebellious, in a Prince it will be tyrannical
and intolerable, and of so ill example, that as it will encourage the
disobedience of others, so it will render it unreasonable for him to exact of
others, what in the like case he refused to pay.

6. There is no sin in the World which God has punished with so great severity
and high detestation as this of disobedience. For the crime of Idolatry God
sent the Sword amongst his people, but it was never heard that the Earth opened
and swallowed up any but rebels against their Prince.

7. Obedience is better then the particular actions of Religion, and he serves
GOD better that follows his Prince in lawful services, then he that refuses
his command upon pretense he must go say his prayers. But Rebellion is
compared to that sin which of all sins seems the most unnatural and damned
impiety. Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft.

8. Obedience is a complicated act of virtue, and many (...) are exercised in
one act of obedience. It is an act of humility, of mortification and
self-denial, of charity to God, of care (...) public, of order and charity to
our selves and all our society, and a great instance of a victory over the most
refractory and u^^^ly passions.

9. To be a subject is a greater temporal felicity then to be a King: for all
eminent Governments according to their heights have a great burden, huge care,
infinite business, little rest, (...),
(...).
Ho^e^. I^. ^
innumerable fears, and all that he enjoyes above another is, that he does
enjoy the things of the World with other circumstances, and a bigger noise; and
if others go at his single command, it is also certain he must suffer
inconvenience at the needs and disturbances of all his people: and the evils of
one man, and of one family are not enough for him to bear, unless also he be
almost crushed with the evils of mankind. He therefore is an ungrateful person
that will press the scales down with a voluntary load, and by disobedience put
more thorns into the Crown or Mitre of his Superior. Much better is the advice
of Saint Paul, Obey them that have the rule over you, as they that must give an
account for your souls, that they may do it with joy and not with grief: for
(besides that it is unpleasant to them) it is unprofitable for you.

10. The Angels are ministering spirits and perpetually execute the will and
commandment of God: and all the wise men and all the good men of the world are
obedient to their Governors: and the eternal Son of God esteemed it his Meat
and drink to do the will of his Father, and for his obedience alone obtained
the greatest glory: and no man ever came to perfection but by obedience: and
thousands of Saints have chosen such institutions and manners of living, in
which they might not choose their own work, nor follow their own will, nor
please themselves, but be accountable to others, and subject to discipline, and
obedient to command, as knowing this to be the lightway of the Cross, the way
that the King of Sufferings and humility did choose, and so became the King of
Glory.

11. No man ever perished who followed first the will of God, and then the will
of his Superiors: but thousands have been damned merely for following their
own will, and relying upon their own judgments, and choosing their own work,
and doing their own fancies: ^or if we begin with our selves, whatsoever seems
good in our eyes, is most commonly displeasing in the eyes of God.

12. The sin of rebellion, though it be a spiritual sin and imitable by Devils,
yet it is of that disorder, unreasonableness and impossibility amongst
intelligent spirits, that they never murmured or mutined in their low:
stations against their Superiors. Nay, the good angels of an inferior Order
durst not revile a Devil of a higher Order. This consideration which I reckon
to be most pressing in the discourses of reason, and obliging next to the
necessity of a divine precept, we learn from Saint Jude, [Likewise also these
filthy dreamers despise dominion and speak evil of dignities: Jude 8.^.
And yet Michael the archangel when contending with the Devil he disputed about
the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation.

But because our Superiors rule by their example, by their word or law, and by
the rod, therefore in proportion there are several degrees and parts of
obedience, of several excellencies and degrees toward perfection.

Degrees of Obedience.
1. The first is the obedience of the outward work: and this is all that Humane
Laws of themselves regard; for because Man cannot judge the heart, therefore it
prescribes nothing to it: the public end is served not by good wishes, but by
real and actual performances; and if a Man obeys against his will he is not
punishable by the Laws.

2. The obedience of the will, and this is also necessary in our obedience to
Humane Laws, not because man requires it for himself, but because God commands
it toward Man; and of it (although Man cannot, yet) God will demand account.
For we are to do it as to the Lord, and not to men; and therefore we must do
it willingly. But by this means our obedience in private is secured against
secret arts and subterfuges; and when we can avoid the punishment, yet we shall
not decline our duty, but serve Man for Gods sake, that is, cheerfully
promptly, vigorously, for these are the proper parts of willingness and choice.

3. The understanding must yield obedience in general, though not in the
particular instance; that is, we must be firmly persuaded of the excellency of
the obedience, though we be not bound in all cases to think the particular Law
to be most prudent. But in this, our rule is plain enough. Our understanding
ought to be inquisitive whether the civil constitution agree with our duty to
God; but we are bound to inquire no further; And therefore beyond this,
although he, who having no obligation to it, (as Counselors have) inquires
not at all into the wisdom or reasonableness of the Law, be not always the
wisest Man, yet he is ever the best subject. For when he has given up his
understanding to his Prince and Prelate, provided that his duty to God be
secured by a precedent search, has also with the best, and with all the
instruments in the world secured his obedience to Man.

SECT. II. Of Provision, or that part of Justice which is due from Superiors
to Inferiors.
AS God has imprinted his authority in several parts upon several estates of
Men, as Princes, Parents, Spiritual Guides; so he has also delegated and
committed parts of his care and providence unto them, that they may be
instrumental in the conveying such blessings which God knows we need, and which
he intends should be the effects of Government. For since GOD governs all the
World as a King, provides for us as a Father, and is the great Guide and
Conductor of our spirits as the Head of the Church, and the great Shepherd and
Bishop of our souls, they who have portions of these dignities, have also their
share of the administration: the sum of all which is usually signified in
these two words [ Governing] and Feeding] and is particularly recited in the
following rules.

Duties of Kings and all the Supreme power, as, Lawgivers.
1. Princes of the people and all that have Legislative power must provide
useful and good Laws for the defense of propriety, for the encouragement of
labor, for the safeguard of their persons, for determining controversies, for
reward of noble actions, and excellent arts and rare inventions, for promoting
trade, and enriching their people.

Omittenda potius praevalida and adulta vitia, quam hoc adsequi ut palam fiat
quibus flagi^us impares f^mus. Tacit.
2. In the making Laws Princes must have regard to the public dispositions, to
the affections and disaffections of the people; and must not introduce a Law
with public scandal and displeasure: but consider the public benefit, and the
present capacity of affairs and general inclinations of men's minds. For he
that enforces a Law upon a people against their first and public apprehensions
tempts them to disobedience, and makes Laws to become snares and hooks to catch
the people, and to enrich the treasury with the spoil and tears and curses of
the Communalty, and to multiply their mutiny and their sin.

3. Princes must provide that the Laws be duly executed: for a good Law without
execution is like an unperformed promise: and therefore they must be severe
exactors of accounts from their Delegates and Ministers of Justice.

4. The severity of Laws must be tempered with dispensations, pardons, and
remissions according as the case shall alter, and new necessities be
introduced, or some singular accident shall happen, (...). E^h. 5. c. 19.
in which the Law would be unreasonable or intolerable as to that particular.
And thus the people with their importunity prevailed against Saul in the case
of Jonathan, and obtained his pardon for breaking the Law which his Father
made, because his necessity forced him to taste honey, and his breaking the Law
in that case did promote that service whose promotion was intended by the Law.

5. Princes must be Fathers of the people, and provide such instances of
gentleness, ease, wealth, and advantages, as may make mutual confidence between
them; and must fix their security under God in the love of the people, which
therefore they must with all arts of sweetness, remission, popularity,
nobleness and sincerity endeavor to secure to themselves.

6. Princes must not multiply public Oaths without great, eminent, and violent
necessity, lest the security of the King become a snare to the people, and they
become false when they see themselves suspected, or impatient when they are
violently held fast: but the greater and more useful caution is upon things
then upon persons; and if security of Kings can be obtained otherwise, it is
better that Oaths should be the last refuge, and when nothing else can be
sufficient.

7. Let not the people be tempted with arguments to disobey, (...).
by the imposition of great and unnecessary taxes: for that lost to the son of
Solomon the dominion of the ten Tribes of Israel.

8. Princes must in a special manner be Guardians of Pupils and Widows, not
suffering their persons to be oppressed, or their states imbez^ll'd* or in any
sense be exposed to the rapine of covetous persons, but be provided for by just
Laws, and provident Judges, and good Guardians* ever having an ear ready open
to their just complaints, and a heart full of pity, and one hand to support
them, and the other to aveng them.

9. Princes must provide that the Laws may be so administered, that they be
truly and really and ease to the people, not an instrument of vexation: and
therefore must be careful that the shortest and most equal ways of trials be
appointed, fees moderated, and intricacies and windings as much cut off as may
be, lest injured persons be forced to perish under the oppression, or under the
Law, in the injury, or in the suit. Laws are like Princes, the best and most
beloved, who are most easy of access.

Chi compra il magistrato fo^za e ^he venda ^a g^usto^ia.
13. Places of judicature ought at no hand to be sold by pious Princes, who
remember themselves to be Fathers of the people. For they that buy the Office
will sell the act, and they that at any rate will be Judges, will not at an
easy rate do justice; and their bribery is less punishable, when bribery
opened the door by which they entered.

14. Ancient privileges, favors, customs, and Acts of grace indulged by
former Kings to their people, must not without high reason and great
necessities be revoked by their successors; nor forfeitures be exacted
violently, nor penal Laws urged rigorously, nor in light cases, nor Laws be
multiplied without great need, nor virious persons which are publicly and
deservedly hated, be kept in defiance of popular desires, nor any thing that
may unnecessarily make the yoke heavy and the affection light, that may
increase murmures and lessen charity; always remembering, that the interest of
the Prince and the People is so infolded in a mutual embrace, that they cannot
be untwisted without pulling a limb off, or dissolving the bands and
conjunction of the whole body.

12. All Princes must esteem themselves as much bound by their word, by their
grants, Nulla lex [civil^^] sibi so^^ conscienti^m ju^t^ie s^ae debet, sed eis
a quibus obsequium expecta^. Tertull. Apologe^.
and by their promises, as the meanest of their Subjects are by the restraint
and penalty of Laws: and although they are superior to the people, yet they
are not superior to their own voluntary concessions and engagements, their
promises and Oaths, when once they are passed from them.

The duty of Superiors as they are Judges.
1. Princes in judgment, and their Delegate Judges must judge the causes of all
persons uprightly and impartially, without any personal consideration of the
power of the mighty, or the bribe of the rich, or the needs of the poor. For
although the poor must fare no worse for his poverty, yet in justice he must
fare no better for it: And although the rich must be no more regarded, yet he
must not be less. And to this purpose the Tutor of Cyrus instructed him, when
in a controversy where a great Boy would have taken a large Coat from a little
Boy, because his own was too little for him, and the others was too big, he
adjudged the great Coat to the great Boy: his Tutor answered, Sir, If you were
made a Judge of decency or witness, you had judged well in giving the biggest
to the biggest: but when you were appointed Judge, not whom the Coat did fit,
but whose it was, you should have considered the title, and the possession, who
did the violence, and who made it, or who bought it. And so it must be in
judgments between the Rich and the Poor: it is not to be considered what the
poor Man needs, but what is his own.

2. A Prince may not, much less may inferior Judges deny justice when it is
legally and competently demanded: and if the Prince will use his Prerogative in
pardoning an offender against whom justice is required, he must be careful to
give satisfaction to the injured person, or his Relatives, by some other
instrument; and be watchful to take away the scandal, that is, lest such
indulgence might make persons more bold to do injury: and if he spares the
life, let him change the punishment into that which may make the offender (if
not suffer justice, yet) do justice, and more real advantage to the injured
person.

These Rules concern Princes and their Delegates in the making or administering
Laws, in the appointing rules of justice and doing acts of judgment. The duty
of parents to their Children and Nephews is briefly described by S. Paul.

The duty of Parents to their Children.
Ephesians. 6.4.
1. Fathers provoke not your Children to wrath, that is, be tender boweld,
pitiful and gentle, complying with all the infirmities of the Children; and in
their several ages proportioning to them several usages according to their
needs and their capacities.

2. Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, that is, secure
their religion, season their younger years with prudent and pious principles,
make them in love with virtue, and make them habitually so, before they come to
choose or to discern good from evil, that their choice may be with less
difficulty and danger. For while they are under discipline, they suck in all
that they are first taught, and believe it infinitely. Provide for them, wise,
learned and virtuous Tutors, P^ti^r mihi ratio viven^^ honest, quam ut optime
dicendi vider^tu^. Quintil. lib. 1. cap. 2.
and good company and discipline. Heb. 1^ 9. Crates apud Plutarch: de libe^.
educand.

1 Timothy 5.4.


seasonable baptism, catechism and confirmation. For it is a great folly to
heap up much wealth for our Children, and not to take care concerning the
Children for whom we get it. It is as if a man should take more care about his
shoe then about his foot.

3. Parents must show piety at home, that is, they must give good example and
reverent deportment, in the face of their children; and all those instances of
charity, which usually endear each other; sweetness of conversation,
affability, frequent admonition, all significations of love and tenderness,
care and watchfulness, must be expressed toward Children, that they may look
upon their Parents as their friends and patrons, their defense and sanctuary,
their treasure and their Guide. Hither is to be reduced the nursing of
Children, which is the first and most natural and necessary instance of piety,
which Mothers can show to their Babes; a duty from which nothing will excuse,
but a disability, sickness, danger, or public necessity, 1 Timothy 5.^.


4. Parents must provide for their own according to their condition, education,
and employment; called by S. Paul, a laying up for the Children, that is, an
enabling them by competent portions, or good trades, arts or learning to,
defend themselves against the chances of the world, that they may not be
exposed to temptation, to beggary, or unworthy arts: and although this must be
done without covetousness, without impatient and greedy desires of making them
rich, yet it must be done with much care, and great affection, with all
reasonable provision, and according to our power: and if we can without sin
improve our estates for them, that also is part of the duty we owe to God for
them: and this rule is to extend to all that descend from us, although we have
been overtaken in a fault, and have unlawful issue; they also become part of
our care, yet so as not to injure the production of the lawful bed.

5. This duty is to extend to a provision of conditions and an estate of life.
(...)
(...)
Eurip. E^ectr. Me tibi Tyndareus, vita graevis auctor and annis
Tradidit: arbitrium n^p^^s habei^t avus.
Ovid in ^pist pro Hermione.
Parents must according to their power and reason provide Husbands or Wives for
their Children Li^^ri sine consensu parentum contrahe^e n^n debent. A^dremacha
apud Euripidem cia^ pe^^ta f^^t ad nuptias, respondi^, pat^is su^ esse
sponsal^um suc^um curam habere: and Achilles apud Homerum Regis fil^^m sine
patris su^ consensu noluit d^ cere H. ^. H, (...). Et Justinianus Imp. ait,
naturali simul and civili ratione congruere, ne filii ducant u^o. es citra
Parentum authoritatem Simo Teren^^anus parat abdicati^nem q^^a Pamphilus c^am
ipso duxisset uxorem. Is^ ^^smodi sponsalia fiunt i^rita nisi velint parents;
At si sid s^quuta est copula, ne temere rescindantur connubia multae suadent
ca^tiones and pericula. L^beri autem quamdiu secundum leges patrias su^ ^u is
non sunt, clandestinas nuptias si meant peccant centra quin^um praeceptum, and
jus natura^e Secundarium. Proprie n^ loquendo Parents n^n habent (...), fi^e
potestat^m, sed authoritatem: g. hab^nt jus jubendi aut prehi^endi, sed non
irrit^m faciendi. Atque etiam isla authoritas e^ ercenda est secundum aequ^m
and bonum; seil. ut ne moro^us and diffic^^^ sit Pater. Ma^er^n vix habet
aliquod Ju^is praeter suasi^nes and amoris, and g^atitudinis. Si c. Pater
filiam non collocasset ante ^5 annos, ^^^ta nube ^poterat cu^ voluerat, ex Ju^e
Rom^norum* Patrum n. authoritas maj^r aut m^n^r est ex legibus p^tru^, and
sole^ extendi ad c^^tam aetatem, and t^m expir^t qu^^d Ma^^^moni^m; and est
major in filias quam filios. Number 30 34.
. In which they must secure piety and Eosdem qu^^ maritus nesse deos and col^re
selos uxor debet: supervacan^i^ a. re^igionibus, and ali^nis supersi^i^^nibu^
f^^es ^ccludere. Nulli enim D^i^m g^ata sunt sacra quae multer ^^an^u um and
furtim ^acit. Plutarch. Conjug praecept. Genesis 24. Vecemu^ pu^dam and quaeramu^
a^ ej^^.
Religion, and the affection and love of the interested persons; and after
these, let them make what provisions they can for other conveniences or
advantages: Ever remembering that they can do no injury more afflictive to the
children then to join them with cords of a disagreeing affection: it is like
tying a Wolf and a Lamb, or planting the vine in a Garden of Coleworts. Let
them be persuaded with reasonable inducements to make them willing and to
choose according to the parents wish, but at no hand let them be forced. Better
to sit up all night, then to go to bed with a Dragon.

The duty of Husbands, etc.
See Chap. 2. Sect. 3. Rules for married persons.
1. Husbands must give to their Wives love, maintenance, duty, and the
sweetnesses (...) --
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
Odyss. ^ of conversation [and Wives (...). Menand.

(...). Homer.


must pay to them all they have, or can with the interest of obedience and
reverence] and they must be complicated in affections and interest, that there
be no distinction between them of Mine and thine: And if the title be the man's,
or the woman's, yet the use must be common, only the wisdom of the man is to
regulate all extravaga^cies and indiscretions: in other things, no question is
to be made; and their goods should be as their children; not to be divided, but
of one possession and provision: whatsoever is otherwise is not marriage but
merchandise. And upon this ground I suppose it was, that S. Basil commended
that woman, (...).
who took part of her Husbands goods to do good works withal: for supposing
him to be unwilling, and that the work was his duty, or hers alone, or both
theirs in conjunction, or of great advantage to either of their souls, and no
violence to the support of their families, she has right to all that: And
Abigail of her own right made a costly present to David, when her husband Nabal
had refused it. The Husband must Laetum esse debet and officiosum mariti
imperium. Plut.

Namque es ei Paeter and frater, venerandaque Matter: nec minus sacit ad
dignitatem viri si mulier eum suum Praeceptorem, Philosophum, Magistrumque
appellet. Plutarch.


rule over his Wife, as the soul does over the body, obnoxious to the same
sufferings, and bound by the same affections, and doing or suffering by the
permissions and interest of each other: that (as the old Philosopher said) as
the humors of the body are mingled with each other in the whole substances: so
marriage may be a mixture of interests, of bodies, of minds, of friends, a
conjunction Convillio est quasi quaedam intentio benevolentiae
of the whole life, and the noblest of friendships. But if after all the fair
deportments, and innocent chaste complyances the Husbands be morose and
ungentle, let the (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
Inferior Matrona suo sit, Sexte Marito;
Non al^ter fiunt fae^^^a, ^irque pares.
Matt.
Wife discourse thus: If while I do my duty my Husband neglects me, what will
he do if I neglect him? And if she thinks to be separated by reason of her
Husbands unchaste life, let her consider, that, then the man will be uncurably
ruined, and her Rivals could wish nothing more then that they might possess
him alone.

The duty of Masters of Families.
1. The same care is to extend to all of our family in their proportions as to
our Children: for as by S. Paul's oeconomie the Heir differs nothing from a
servant while he is in minority: so a servant should differ nothing from a
child in the substantial part of the care: and the difference is only in
degrees: Servants and Masters are of the same kindered, of the same nature, and
heirs of the same promises, and therefore * 1. must be provided of necessaries
for their support and maintenance. 2. They must be used with mercy. 3. Their
work must be tolerable and merciful. 4. Their restraints must be (...) can, so
it be without violence, and 2. when you contract on equal terms, with persons
in all senses (as to the matter and skill of bargaining) equal to your self,
that is, Merchants with Merchants, wise men with wise men, rich with rich: and
3, when there is no deceit, and no necessity, and no Monopoly: For in these
cases, viz: when the contractors are equal, and no advantage on either side,
both parties are voluntary, and therefore there can be no injustice or wrong to
either. But then add also this consideration, that the public be not oppressed
by unreasonable and unjust rates: for which the following rules are the best
measure.

4. Let your prices be according to that measure of good and evil which is
established in the fame and common accounts of the wisest and most merciful Men
skilled in that manufacture or commodity; and the gain such which without
scandal is allowed to persons in all the same circumstances.

5. Let no prices be heightened by the necessity or unskilfulness of the
Contractor; for the first is direct uncharitableness to the person, and
injustice in the thing (because the Man's necessity could not naturally enter
into the consideration of the value of the commodity) and the other is deceit
and oppression: much less must any Man make necessities; as by engrossing a
commodity, by monopoly, by det^ining corn, or the like indirect arts: for such
persons are unjust to all single persons with whom in such cases they contract,
and oppressors of the public.

6. In intercourse with others do not do all which you may lawfully do; but
keep something within thy power: and because there is a latitude of gain in
buying and selling, take not thou the utmost penny that is lawful, or which
thou think so: for although it be lawful, yet it is not safe; and he that
gains all that he can gain lawfully this year, possibly next year will be
tempted to gain something unlawfully.

7. He that sels dearer by reason he sells not for ready money, must increase
his price no higher then to make himself recompense for the loss which
according to the Rules of trade he sustained by his forbearance, according to
common computation, reckoning in also the hazard, which he is prudently, warily
and charitably to estimate: But although this be the measure of his justice yet
because it happens either to their friends, or to necessitous and poor persons,
they are in these cases to consider the rules of friendship and ne^g^bourhood,
and the obligations of charity, lest justice turn into unmercifulness.
Mercanti^ non vi^c^ ne ami^i ne parent.


8. No Man is to be raised in his price or rents in regard of any accident,
advantage or disadvantage of his person. A Prince must be used conscionably as
well as a common person, and a Beggar be treated justly as well as a Prince;
with this only diffe^ence, that to poor persons the utmost measure and extent
of justice is unmercifull, which to a rich person is innocent, because it is
just, and he needs not thy mercy and remission.

9. Let no Man for his own poverty become more oppressing and cruel in his
bargain, but quietly, modestly, diligently and patiently recommend his estate
to God, and follow its interest and leave the success to him: for such courses
will more probably advance his trade, they will certainly procure him a
blessing, and a recompense, and if they cure not his poverty, they will take
away the evil of it: and there is nothing else in it that can trouble him.

10. Detain not the wages of the hireling: for every degree of detention of it
beyond the time is injustice, and uncharitableness, and grindes his face till
tears and blood come out: but pay him exactly according to Covenant, or
according to his needs.

11. Religiously keep all promises and Covenants, though made to your
disadvantage, though afterward you perceive you might have been better: and
let not any precedent act of yours be altered by any after-accident. Let
nothing make you break your promise, unless it be unlawful or impossible, that
is, either out of your natural, or out of your civil power, your self being
under the power of another; or that it be intolerably inconvenient to your
self, and of no Surgam ad spons lia quia promisi quarivis non conce^erimised
non si sebricitavero: subest n^tacita exceptio, si pote^o si debeo. Senec.

E^^^ce ut idem status sit cum erigitur, qui fuit cum promaterem Destitue^e
revitas non erit si aliquid intervenem: nevi. Eadem mihi omnia praesta and idem
sum. lib 4. cap. 39. de benefic.


advantage to another; or that you have leave expressed, or reasonably presumed.

12 Let no man take wages or fees for a work that he cannot do, or cannot with
probability undertake, or in some sense profitably, and with ease, or with
advantage manage: Physicians must not meddle with desperate diseases, and known
to be incurable, without declaring their sense beforehand; that if the patient
please he may entertain him at adventure, or to do him some little ease.
Advocates must deal plainly with their Clients, and tell them the true state
and danger of their case; and must not pretend confidence in an evil cause: but
when he has so cleared his own innocence; if the Client will have collateral
and legal advantages obtained by his industry, he may engage his endeavor,
provided lie d^e no injury to the right cause, or any Man's person. ^ ^^sa v^^in
^s^am simpl.


13. Let no Man appropriate to his own use what GOD by a special mercy, or the
Republic has made common; for that is both against Justice and Charity too:
and by miraculous accidents GOD has declared his displeasure against such
enclosure. When the Kings of Naples enclosed the Guardens of Oenotria, where
the best Manna of Calabria descends, that no man might gather it without paying
tribute; the Manna ceased, till the tribute was taken off; and then it came
again, and so, till after the third trial the Princes found they could not have
that in proper which GOD made to be common, they left it as free as GOD gave
it. The like happened in Epire when Lysimachus laid an impost upon the Tragasaean
Salt, Caelius Rhod. l. 9. c. 12. A^benae deipnit. l. 3.
it vanished, till Lysimachus left it public. And when the Procurators of King
Antigonus imposed a rate upon the sick people that came to Edepsum to drink the
waters which were lately sprung and were very healthful, instantly the waters
dried up, and the hope of gain perished.

The sum of all is in these words of S. Paul, [Let no man go beyond and
defraud his brother in any matter; 1 Thessalonians 4.6.
because the Lord is the avenger of all such] and our blessed Savior in the
enumerating the duties of justice, ^ev. 19.13 1 Cor. 6 8. Mar. 10.19.
besides the Commandment of [ Do not steal] adds [ Defraud not] forbidding
(as a distinct explication of the old Law) the tacit and secret theft of
abusing our Brother in Civil Contracts. And it needs no other arguments to
enforce this caution, but only, that the Lord has under^aken to avenge all
such persons. And as he always does it in the great day of recompenses: so
very often he does it here, by making the unclean portion of unjustice to be as
a Cankerworm eating up all the other increase: it procures beggary, and a
declining estate, or a caitiffe, cursed spirit, and ill name, the curse of the
injured and oppressed person, and a Fool or a prodigal to be his heir.

SECT. IV. Of Restitution.
Chin^n v^t^l rendere famala p^ende^e.
REstitution is that part of Justice to which a man is obliged by a precedent
contract or a foregoing fault, by his own act, or another man's, either with, or
without his will. He that borrows is bound to pay, and much more he that steals
or cheats. For if he that borrows and paies not when he is able be an unjust
person, and a robber, because he possesses another man's goods to the right
owners prejudice: then, he that took them at first without leave is the same
thing in every instant of his possession, which the Debtor is after the time in
which he should and could have made payment. For in all sins we are to
distinguish the transient or passing act from the remaining effect or evil. The
act of stealing was soon over, and cannot be undone, and for it the sinner is
only answerable to God, or his Vicegerent, and he is in a par^icular manner
appointed to expiate it, by suffering punishment, and repenting and asking
pardon, and judging and condemning himself, doing acts of justice and charity
in opposition and contradiction to that evil action. But because in the case of
stealing there is an injury done to our neighbor, and the evil still remains
after the action is past, therefore for this we are accountable to our
neighbor, and we are to take the evil off from him which we brought upon him,
or else he is an injured person, a sufferer all the while: and that any man
should be the worse for me and my direct act, and by my intention, is against
the rule of equity, of justice and of charity; Si tuo culpa datum est damnum,
jure super bis satis facere te oportet
I do not that to others which I would have done to my self, for I grow rich
upon the ruins of his fortune. Upon this ground, it is a determined rule in
Divinity, Our sin can never be pardoned till we have restored what we unjustly
took, or wrongfully detain: restored it (I mean) actually, or in purpose and
desire, which we must really perform when we can: and this doctrine besides its
evident and apparent reasonableness, is derived from the express words of
Scripture reckoning Restitution to be a part of Repentance, necessary in order
to the remission of our sins. [ If the wicked restore the pledge, give again
that he had robbed, etc. he shall surely live, he shall not die.] Ezekiel 33.15.
The practice of this part of justice is to be directed by the following Rules.

Rules of making Restitution.
1. Whosoever is an effective, real cause of doing his Neighbor wrong, by what
instrument soever he does it (whether by commanding or encouraging it, by
counselling or commending (...). T^tilas apud Procop. Goth. 3. Qui laudat
servum fugitivu^ tenetur, Non ^n oportet laudando augeri malu^. Ulpian. in lib.
1. cap. de servo corrupto.
it, by acting it, or not (...). Nicer. Choniat. in Michael. Comnen. Sic Syri
ab Amphycti onibus judicio damnari quia per atica^ non p^ehibuerunt (...)
por^rant.
hindering it when he might and ought, by conceeling it or receiving it, is
bound to make restitution to his Neighbor; if without him the injury had not
been done, but by him, or his assistance it was. For by the same reason that
every one of these is guilty of the sin, and is cause of the injury, by the
same they are bound to make reparation; because by him his Neighbor is made
worse, and therefore is to be put into that state from whence he was forced.
And suppose that thou have persuaded an injury to be done to thy Neighbor
which others would have persuaded if thou have not, yet thou art still obliged,
because thou really did cause the injury just as they had been obliged if
they had done it; and thou art not at all the less bound by having persons as
ill inclined as thou were.

2. He that commanded the injury to be done, is first bound: then, he that did
it; and after these they also are obliged who did so assist, as without them
the thing would not have been done. If satisfaction be made by any of the
former, the latter is tied to repentance, but no restitution: But if the
injured person be not righted, every one of them is wholly guilty of the
injustice, and therefore bound to restitution singly and entirely.

3. Whosoever intends a little injury to his Neighbor, and acts it, and by it
a greater evil accidentally comes, he is obliged to make an entire reparation
of all the injury, Etiamsi partent damni dare noluisti, in totu^, quasi p^udens
dedeas, tenendus es. Ex tot^^. niluisse debet qui imprudentia d^f^nditur.
Senec. Controv.
of that which he intended, and of that which he intended not, but yet acted by
his own instrument, going further then he at first purposed it. He that set
fire on a plane Tree to spite his Neighbor, and the plane Tree set fire upon
his Neighbors House, is bound to pay for all the loss, because it did all
arise from his own ill intention. It is like murder committed by a drunken
person, involuntary in some of the effect, but voluntary in the other parts of
it, and in all the cause, Involunta^iu^ o tum ex voluntario censetur
provoluntario.
and therefore the guilty person is answerable for all of it. And when
Ariarathes the Cappadocian King had but in wantonness stopped the mouth of the
river Melanus, although he intended no evil, yet Euphrates being swelled by
that means, and bearing away some of the strand of Cappadocia, Strato.
did great spoil to the Phrygians and Galathians, and therefore by the Roman
Senate was condemned in three hundred talents toward reparation of the
damage. Much rather therefore when the lesser part of the evil was directly
intended.

4. He that hinders a charitable person from giving alms to a poor man is tied
to restitution, if he hindered him by fraud or violence, Because it was a right
which the poor man had when the good man had designed and resolved it; and the
fraud or violence hinders the effect, but not the purpose, and therefore he who
used the deceit or the force is inju^ious, and did damage to the poor man. But
if the alms were hindered only by entreaty, the hinderer is not tied to
restitution, because entreaty took not liberty away from the giver, (...). Eth.
l. 5. c. 4.
but left him still Master of his own act, and he had power to alter his
purpose, and so long there was no injustice done. The same is the case of a
Testator giving a legacy either by kindness, or by promise and common right. He
that hinders the charitable Legacy by fraud or violence, or the due Legacy by
entreaty, is equally obliged to restitution. The reason of the latter part of
this case is, because he that entreats or persuades to a sin is as guilty as he
that acts it: and if without his persuasion the sin and the injury would not be
acted, he is in his kind the entire cause, and therefore obliged to repair the
injury as much as the person that does the wrong immediately.

5. He that refuses to do any part of his duty (to which he is otherwise
obliged) without a bribe, is bound to restore that money, bcause he took it in
his Neighbors wrong, and not as a salary for his labor, or a reward of his
wisdom; for his stipend has paid all that, or he has obliged himself to do
it by his voluntary undertaking.

6. He that takes any thing from his Neighbor which was justly forfeited, but
yet takes it not as a Minister of justice, but to satisfy his own revenge or
avarice, is tied to repentance, but not to restitution. For my Neighbor is not
the worse for my act, for thither the Law and his own demerits bore him, but
because I took the forfeiture indirectly I am answerable to God, for my
unhandsome, unjust, or uncharitable circumstances. Thus Philip of Macedon was
reproved by Aristides for destroying the Phocenses; because although they
deserved it, yet he did it not in prosecution of the Law of Nations, but to
enlarge his own dominions.

7. The Heir of an obliged person is not bound to make restitution, if the
obligation pass^d only by a personal act: but if it passed from his person to
his estate, then the estate passes wi^h all its burden. If the Father by
persuading his neighbor to do justice be bound to restore, the action is
extinguished by the death of the Father; because it was only the Fathers sin
that bound him, which cannot directly bind the son; therefore the son is free.
And this is so in all personal actions, unless where the civil Law interposes
and alters the case.

These Rules concern the persons that are obliged to make restitution: the
other circumstances of it are thus described.
8. He that by fact, or word, or sign, either fraudulently, or violently does
hurt to his Neighbors b^dy, life goods, good name, friends, or soul, is bound
to make restitution in the several instances, according as they are capable to
be made. In all these instances we must separate entreaty and inticements from
deceit or violence. If I persuade my Neighbor to commit adultery, I still
leave him or her in their own power: and though I am answerable to God for my
sin, yet not to my Neighbor. For I made her to be willing; yet she was willing
(...). Epict
, that is, the same at last as I was at first: but if I have used fraud, and
made her to believe a lie (...). Plato.

Non licet suffurare mentem vel Samaritani. R. Maimon, Can. Eth.


, upon which confidence she did the act, and without it she would not (as if I
tell a woman her Husband is dead, or intended to kill her, or is himself an
adulterous man) or if I use violence, that is, either force her or threaten her
with death, or a grievous wound, or any thing that takes her from the liberty
of her choice, I am bound to restitution, that is, to restore her to a right
understanding of things and to a full liberty, by taking from her the deceit or
the violence.

9. An adulterous person is tied to restitution of the injury, so far as it
is reparable, and can be made to the wronged person; that is, to make provision
for the children begotten in unlawful embraces, that they may do no injury to
the legitimate by receiving a common portion: and if the injured person do
account of it, he must satisfy him with money for the wrong done to his bed.
He is not tied to offer this, because it is no proper exchange, but he is bound
to pay it, if it be reasonably demanded: for every man has justice done him,
when himself is satisfied, though by a word, or an action, or a penny.

10. He that has killed a man is bound to restitution by allowing such a
maintenance to the children and near relatives of the deceased as they have
lost by his death, (...). ^ Mich. Ephesians ad 5 Eth.
considering and allowing for all circumstances of the man's age, and health,
and probability of living. And thus Hercules is said to have made expiation for
the death of Iphitus whom he slew, by paying a mulct to his children.

11. He that has really lessened the fame of his neighbor by fraud or violence
is bound to restore it by its proper instruments: Sic Vivanus resipuit de
inf^sta accusatione: apud Cassidor 1.^1.
such as are confession of his fault, giving testimony of his innocence or
wroth, doing him honor, or (if that will do it, and both parties agree) by
money which answers all things.

12. He that has wounded his neighbor is tied to the expenses of the Surgeon
and other incidences, and to repair what ever loss he sustaines by his
disability to work or trade: and the same is in the case of false imprisonment,
in which cases only the real effect and remaining detriment are to be mended
and repaired: for the action it self is to be punished or repented of, and
enters not into the question of restitution, But in these and all other cases
the injured person is to be restored to that perfect and good condition from
which he was removed by my fraud or violence, so far as is possible. Thus a
ravisher must repair the temporal detriment or injury done to the maid, and
give her a dowry, or marry her if she desire it. For this restores her into
that capacity of being a good wife, which by the injury was lost, as far as it
can be done.

13 He that robs his Neighbor of his goods, or detains any thing violently
or fraudulently, is bound not only to restore the principal, but all its fruits
and emoluments which would have accrued to the right owner during the time of
their being detained. * By proportion to these rules, we may judge of the
obligation that lies upon all sorts of injurious persons: the sacrilegious, the
detainers of tithes, cheaters of men's inheritances, unjust Judges, false
witnesses and accusers, those that do fraudulently or violently bring men to
sin, that force men to drink, that laugh at and disgrace virtue, that persuade
servants to run away, or comm^nd such purposes, violent persecutors of religion
in any instance; and all of the same nature.

14. He that has wronged so many, or in that manner (as in the way of daily
trade) that he knows not in what measure he has done it, or who they are; must
redeem his fault by alms and largesses to the poor, according to the value of
his wrongful dealing as near as he can proportion it. Better it is to go
begging to Heaven, then to go to Hell laden with the spoils of rapine and
injustice.

15. The order of paying the debts of contract, or restitution are in some
instances set down by the civil Laws of a kingdom, in which cases their rule is
to be observed: In destitution or want of such rules, we are 1. to observe the
necessity of the Creditor, 2. Then the time of the delay: and 3. The special
obligations of friendship or kindness: and according to these in their several
degrees, make our restitution, if we be not able to do all that we should: but
if we be, the best rule is to do it so soon as we can, taking our accounts in
this as in our humane actions, according to prudence, and civil or natural
conveniences or possibilities; only securing these two things: 1. That the duty
be not wholly omitted: and 2. That it be not deferred at all out of
covetousness, or any other principle that is vicious. Remember, that the same
day in which Zacheus made restitution to all whom he had injured, the same day
Christ himself pronounced that salvation was come to his house. Luke 19.9.
. Gratitude


16. But besides the obligation arising from contract or default, * there is
one of another sort which comes from kindness, and the acts of charity and
friendship. He that does me a favor has bound me to make him a return of
thankfulness. The obligation comes not by covenant, not by his own express
intention, but by the nature of the thing; and is a duty springing up within
the spirit of the obliged person, to whom it is more natural to love his
friend, and to do good for good, then to return evil for evil: because a man
may forgive an injury, but he must never forget a good turn. For every thing
that is excellent, and every thing that is profitable, whatsoever is good in it
self or good to me, cannot but be beloved; and what we love we naturally
cherish and do good to. He therefore that re^uses to do good to them whom he
is bound to love, or to love that which did him good, is unnatural and
monstrous in his affections, and thinks all the world born to minister to him,
with a greediness worse then that of the sea, which although it receives all
rivers into it self, yet it furnishes the clouds and springs with a return of
all thy need.

Our duty of benefactors is to esteem and love their persons: to make them
proportionable returns of service, or duty, or profit, according as we can, or
as they need, or as opportunity presents it self, and according to the
greatnesses of their kindnesses: and to pray to God to make them recompense for
all the good they have done to us; which last office is also requisite to be
done for our Creditors, who in charity have releiv'd our wants.

Prayers to be said in relation to the several Obligations and Offices of
Justice. A Prayer for the Grace of Obedience: to be said by all persons under
Command,
O Ete^nal GOD, Great Ruler of Men and Angels, who have constituted all things
in a wonderful order, making all the creatures subject to man, and one man to
another, and all to thee, the last link of this admirable chain being fastened
to the foot of thy throne: teach me to obey all those whom thou have set over
me, reverencing their persons, submitting indifferently to all their lawful
commands, cheerfully undergoing those burdens which the public wisdom and
necessity shall impose upon me; at no hand murmuring against government; lest
the Spirit of pride and mutiny, of murmur and disorder enter into me, and
consigne me to the portion of the disobedient and rebellious, of the despisers
of dominion, and revilers of dignity. Grant this O holy God for his sake, who
for his obedience to the Father has obtained the glorification of eternal
ages, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Prayers for Kings and all Magistrates, for our Parents spiritual and natural,
are in the following Letanies at the end of the fourth Chapter. A prayer to be
said by Sub^ects, when their Land is invaded and overran by barbarous or wicked
people, enemies of the Religion, or the Government. I.
O Eternal God, thou alone rulest in the Kingdoms of men, thou (...) the great
God of battles and recompenses, and by thy glorious wisdom, by thy Almighty
power, and by thy secret providence, do determine the events of war and
the issues of humane counsels, and the returns of peace and victory, now at
last be pleased to let the light of thy countenance, and the effects of a
glorious mercy* and a gracious pardon return to this Land. Thou see how great
evils we suffer under the power and tyranny of war, and although we submit
to, and adore thy justice in our sufferings, yet be pleased to pity our misery,
to hear our complaints, and to provide us of remedy against our present
calamities: let not the defendors of a righteous cause go away ashamed, nor our
counsels be for ever confounded, nor our parties de^eated, nor religion
suppressed, nor learning discountenanced, and we be spoiled of all the
exterior ornaments, instruments and advantages of piety, which thou have been
pleased formerly to minister to our infirmities, for the interests of learning
and religion, Amen.

II.
WE confess dear God, that we have deserved to be totally extinct and separate
from the Communion of Saints, and the comforts of Religion, to be made servants
to ignorant, unjust and inferior persons, or to suffer any other calamity
which thou shall allot us as the instrument of thy anger, whom we have so often
provoked to wrath and jealousy. Lord we humbly lie down under the burden of
thy rod, begging of thee to remember our infirmities, and no more to remember
our sins, to support us with thy staff, to lift us up with thy hand, to refresh
us with thy gracious eye; and if a sad cloud of temporal infelicities must
still encircle us, open unto us the window of Heaven, that with an eye of faith
and hope we may see beyond the cloud, looking upon those mercies which in thy
secret providence and admirable wisdom thou designest to all thy servants, from
such unlikely and sad beginnings. Teach us diligently to do all our duty, and
cheerfully to submit to all thy will; and at last be gracious to thy people
that call upon thee, that put their trust in thee, that have laid up all their
hopes in the bosom of God, that besides thee have no helper. Amen.

III.
PLace a Guard of Angels about the person of the KING, and immure him with the
defense of thy right hand, that no unhallowed arm may do violence to him.
Support him with aids from Heaven in all his battles, trials and dangers, that
he may in every instant of his temptation become dearer to thee, and do then
return to him with mercy and deliverance. Give unto him the hearts of all his
people, and put into his hand a prevailing rod of iron, a scepter of power, and
a sword of justice; and enable him to defend and comfort the Churches under his
protection.

IV.
Bless all his Friends, Relatives, Confederates and Leiges; direct their
Counsels, unite their hearts, strengthen their hands, bless their actions:
Give unto them holiness of intention, that they may with much candor and
ingenuity pursue the cause of God and the King: Sanctify all the means and
instruments of their purposes, that they may not with cruelty, injustice, or
oppression proceed toward the end of their just desires; and do thou crown
all their endeavors with a prosperous event, that all may cooperate to, and
actua^ly produce those great mercies which we beg of thee; Honor and safety to
our Sovereign, defense of his just rights, peace to his people establishment
and promotion to religion, advantages and encouragement to learning and holy
living, deliverance to all the oppressed, comfort to all thy faithful people;
and from all these, glory to thy holy Name. Grant this O KING of Kings, for his
sake, by whom thou have consigned us to all thy mercies and promises, and to
whom thou have given all power in Heaven and Earth, our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Amen.

A Prayer to be said by Kings or Magistrates, for themselves and their People.
O My God and King, thou rulest in the Kingdoms of men; by thee Kings reign and
Princes dec^ee justice; thou have appointed me under thy self These words to be
added by a Delegate or inferior.
[ and under my Prince] to govern this portion of thy Church according to the
Laws of Religion and the Commonwealth. O Lord, I am but an infirm man, and
know not how to decree certain sentences without erring in judgment: but do
thou give to thy servant an understanding heart to judge this people, that I
may discern between good and evil. Cause me to walk before thee and all the
people in truth and righteousness, and in sincerity of heart, that I may not
regard the person of the mighty, nor be afraid of his terror, nor despise the
person of the poor, and reject his petition; but that doing justice to all men,
I and my people may receive mercy of thee, peace and plenty in our days, and
mutual love, duty and correspondence, that there be no leading into captivity,
no complaining in our streets; but we may see the Church in prosperity all our
days, and religion established and increasing. Do thou establish the house of
thy servant, and bring me to a participation of the glories of thy kingdom, for
his sake who is my Lord and King, the holy and ever blessed Savior of the
world, our Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer to be said by Parents for their Children.
O Almighty and most merciful Father, who have p^omised children as a reward to
the righteous, (...) have given them to me as a testimony of thy mercy, and an
engagement of my duty; be pleased to be a Father unto them, and give them
healthful bodies, understanding souls, and sanctified spirits, that they may be
thy servants, and thy children all their days. Let a great mercy and
providence lead them through the dangers and temptations and ignorances of
their youth that they may never run into folly, and the evils of an unbridled
appetite. So order the accidents of their liv^s, that by good education,
careful Tutors, holy example, innocent company, prudent counsel, and thy
restraining grace, their duty to thee may be secured in the midst of a crooked
and untoward generation: and if it seem good in thy eyes, let me be enabled to
provide conveniently for the support of their persons, that they may not be
destitute and miserable in my death; or if thou shall call me off from this
World by a more timely summons, let their portion be, thy care, mercy, and
providence over their bodies and souls: and may they never live vicious lives,
nor die violent or untimely deaths; but let them glorify thee here with a free
obedience, and the duties of a whole life, that when they have served thee in
their generations, and have profited the Christian Commonwealth, they may be
coheirs with Jesus in the glories of thy eternal Kingdom, through the same our
Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

A prayer to be said by Masters of Families, Curats, Tutors, or other obliged
persons, for their charger.
O Almighty God, merciful and gracious, have mercy upon my Family [or Pupils or
Parishioners, etc.] and all committed to my charge: sanctify them with thy
grace, preserve them with thy providence, guard them from all evil by the
custody of Angels, direct them in the ways of peace and holy Religion by my
Ministry and the conduct of thy most holy Spirit, and consigne them all with
the participation of thy blessings and graces in this World, with healthful
bodies, with good understandings, and sanctified spirits to a full fruition of
thy glories hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Prayer to be said by Merchants, Tradesmen, and Handicrafts men.
O Eternal God, thou Fountain of justice, mercy and benediction, who by my
education and other effects of thy Providence have called me to this
profession, that by my industry I may in my small proportion work together for
the good of my self and others: I humbly beg thy grace to gu^de me in my
intention, and in the transaction of my affairs that I may be diligent, just,
and faithful: and give me thy favor, that this my labor may be accepted by
thee as a part of my necessary duty, and give me thy blessing, to assist and
prosper me in my Calling, to such measures as thou shall in mercy choose for
me; and be pleased to let thy holy Spirit be for ever present with me, that I
may never be given to covetousness and sordid appetites, to lying and falsehood,
or any other base indirect and beggarly arts, but give me prudence, honesty and
Christian since^ity, that my trade may be sanctified by my Religion, my labor
by my intention and thy blessing, that when I have done my portion of work thou
have ^llotted me, and improved the talent thou have instrusted to me, and
served the Commonwealth in my capacity, I may receive the mighty price of my
high calling, which I expect and beg, in the portion and inheritance of the
ever blessed Savior and Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer to be said by Debtors, and all persons obliged whether by crime or
contract.
O Almighty God, who art rich unto all, the treasury and fountain of all good,
of all justice, and all mercy, and all bounty, to whom we owe all that we are*
and all that we have, being thy Debtors by reason of our sins, and by thy own
gracious contract made with us in Jesus Christ: teach me in the first place to
perform all my Obligations to thee, both of duty and thankfulness; and next
enable me to pay my duty to all my friends, and my debts to all my Creditors,
that none be made miserable, or lessened in his estate by his kindness to me,
or traffic with me. Forgive me all those sins and irregular actions by which I
entered into debt further then my necessity required, or by which such necessity
was brought upon me: but let not them suffer by occasion of my sin. Lord reward
all their kindness into their bosoms and make them recompense where I cannot,
and make me very willing in all that I can, and able for all that I am obliged
to, or if it seem good in thine eyes to afflict me by the continuance of this
condition, yet make it up by some means to them, that the prayer of thy servant
may obtain of thee, at least to pay my debt in blessings. Amen.

V.
LOrd sanctify and forgive all that I have tempted to evil by my discourse or
my example: instruct them in the right way whom I have led to error, and let
me never run further on the score of sin; but do thou blot out all the evils I
have done, by the sponge of thy passion, and the blood of thy Cross; and give
me a deep and an excellent repentance, and a free and a gracious pardon, that
thou may est answer for me, O Lord, and enable me to stand upright in judgment;
for in thee, O Lord, have I trusted, let me never be confounded. Pity me, and
instruct me; guide me and support me, pardon me and save me, for my sweet
Savior Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Prayer for Patron and Benefactors.
O Almighty GOD thou Fountain of all good, of all excell^ncy both to Men and
A^gels, ex^end thine abundant favor and loving kindness to my Patron, to all
my friends and Benefactors: Reward them, and make them plentiful recompense for
all the good which from t^y merciful providence they have conveyed unto me: Let
the light of thy countenance shine upon them, and let them never come into any
affliction or sadness, but such as may be an instrument of thy (...) and their
eternal comfort. Forgive them all (...) sins; let thy Divined Spirit preserve
them from all deeds of Darkness. Let thy ministering Angels guard their persons
from the violence of ^hy spirits of Darkness: And thou w^o know every degree
of their necessity by thy infinite wisdom, give supply to all t^ei^ needs by
^he glorious mercy, preserving (...) persons, sanctifying their hearts, and
leading them in the ways of righteousness, by the waters of comfort, to the
land of et^r^al ^e^t and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. IV. Of Christian Religion.
REligion ^n a large sense does signify the whole duty of Man, comprehending
in it Justice, Charity, and Sobriety: because all these being commanded by God
they become a part of that honor and worship which we are bound to pay to him.
And thus the word is used in S. James, Pure Religion and undefiled before God
and the Father is this, Iam. 1.27.
To visit the fatherless and Widows in their ^ffliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world. But in a more restrained sense it is taken for that
part of duty which particularly relates to God in our worshippings and
adoration of him, in confessing his excellencies, loving his person, admitting
his goodness, believing his Word, and doing all that which may in a proper and
direct manner do him honor. It contains the duties of the first Table only,
and so it is called Godliness, Tit. 2.12.
and is by S. Paul, distinguished from Justice and Sobriety. In this sense I am
now to explicate the parts of it.

Of the internal actions of Religion.
Those I call the internal actions of Religion, in which the soul only is
employed, and ministers to God in the special actions of Faith, Hope, and
Charity. Faith believes the rev^lations of God: Hope expects his promises: and
Charity loves his excellencies and mercies. Faith gives our understanding to
God: Hope gives up all the passions and affections to Heaven and heavenly
things: and Charity gives the will to the service of God. Faith is opposed to
infidelity: Hope to Despair: Charity to Enmity and Hostility; and these three
sanctify the whole Man, and make our duty to God and obedience to his
Commandments to be chosen, reasonable, and delightful, and therefore to be
entire, persevering, and universal.

SECT. IV. Of Faith.
The Acts and Offices of Faith, are
1. TO believe every thing which God has revealed to us: Demus Deie aliqu^d
posse quod no^ fateamu^ invest^gare no^ poss^. S. Aug. l. 21. c 7. de Civitat.
and when once we are convinced that God has spoken it, to make no further
enquiry, but humbly to submit, ever remembering that there are some things which
ou^ understanding cannot fathom nor search out their depth.

2. To believe nothing concerning God but what is honorable and excellent, as
knowing that belief to be no honoring of God which entertains of him any
dishonorable thoughts. Faith is the parent of Charity, and whatsoever Faith
entertains must be apt to produce love to God: but he that believes God to be
cruel or unmerciful, or a rejoicer in the unavoidable damnation of the greatest
part of mankind, or that he speaks one thing and privately means another;
thinks evil thoughts concerning God, and such, as for which we should hate a
man, and therefore are great enemies of Faith, being apt to destroy Charity.
Our Faith concerning God must be as himself has revealed and described his own
excellencies: and in our discourses we must remove from him all imperfection;
and attribute to him all excellence.

3. To give our selves wholly up to Christ in heart and desire to become
Disciples of his doctrine with choice (besides conviction) being in the
presence of God, but as Idiots, that is, without any principles of our own to
hinder the truth of God; but sucking in greedily all that God has taught us,
believing it infinitely, and loving to believe it. For this is an act of Love
reflected upon Faith, or an act of Faith leaning upon Love.

4. To believe all Gods promises, and that whatsoever is promised in Scripture
shall on Gods part be as surely performed as if we had it in possession. This
act makes us to rely upon God with the same confidence as we did on our
Parents when we were children, when we made no doubt, but whatsoever we needed
we should have it if it were in their power.

5. To believe also the conditions of the promise, or that part of the
revelation which concerns our duty. Many are apt to believe the Article of
remission of sins, but they believe it without the condition of repentance, of
the fruits of holy life: and that is to believe the Article otherwise then God
intended it. For the Covenant of the Gospel is the great object of Faith, and
that supposes our duty to answer his grace; that God will be our God, so long
as we are his people: The other is not Faith, but Flattery.

6. To profess publicly the doctrine of Jesus Christ, openly owning
whatsoever he has revealed and commanded, not being ashamed of the Word of
God, or of any practices enjoined by it; and this, without complying with any
man's interest, not regarding favor, nor being moved with good words, not
fearing disgrace, or loss, or inconvenience, or death it self.

7. To pray without doubting, without weariness, without faintness,
entertaining no jealousies, or suspicions of God, but being confident of Gods
hearing us, and of his returns to us, whatsoever the manner or the instance be,
that if we do our duty, it will be gracious and merciful.

These acts of Faith are in several degrees in the servants of Jesus: some have
it but as a grain of mustard seed, some grow up to a plant, some have the
fullness of faith: but the least faith that is must be a persuasion so strong as
to make us undertake the doing of all that duty which Christ built upon the
foundation of believing: but we shall best discern the truth of our faith by
these following signs. S. Hierome reckons three. D^a^^ adver: Lucif.


Signs of true Faith.
1. An earnest and vehement prayer: for it is impossible we should heartily
believe the things of God and the glories of the Gospel, and not most
importunately desire them. For every thing is desired according to our belief
of its excellency and possibility.

2. To do nothing for vainglory, but wholly for the interests of religion,
and these Articles we believe; valuing not at all the rumors of men, but the
praise of God, to whom by faith, we have given up all our intellectual
faculties.

3. To be content with God for our Judge, for our Patron for our Lord, for our
friend, desiring God to be all in all to us, as we are in our understanding and
affections wholly his,

Add to these:

4. To be a stranger upon earth in our affections, and to have all our thoughts
and principal desires fixed upon the matters of Faith, the things of Heaven.
For if a man were adopted heir to Caesar, he would (if he believed it real and
effective) despise the present, and wholly be at court in his Fathers eye; and
his desires would outrun his swiftest speed, and all his thoughts would spend
themselves in creating Idea's, and little fantastic images of his future
condition. Now God has made us Heirs of his Kingdom, and Coheirs with Jesus:
if we believed this, we would think and affect, and study accordingly. But he
that rejoices in gain, and his ^eart dwells in the world, and is espoused to a
fair estate, and transported with a light momentany joy, and is afflicted with
losses, and amazed with temporal persequutions, and esteems disgrace, or
poverty in a good cause to be intolerable, this man either has no inheritance
in Heaven, or believes none; and believes not that he is adopted to be the Son
of God, the Heir of eternal Glory.

5. S James's sign is the best: [ Show me thy faith by thy works] Faith makes
(...) Merchant diligent and venturous, and that makes him rich. Ferdinando of
Ar^agon believed the story told him by Columbus, and therefore he furnished him
with ships, and got the west Indies by his Faith in the undertaker. But Henry
the seventh of England believed him not, and therefore trusted him not with
shipping, and lost all the purchase of that Faith. It is told us by Christ [ He
that forgives shall be forgiven] if we believe this, it is certain we shall
forgive our enemies; for none of us all but need and desire to be forgiven. No
man can possibly despise or ref^se to desire such excellent glories as are
revealed to them that are servants of Christ: and yet we do nothing that is
commanded us as a condition to obtain them. No man could work a days labor
without ^aith: but because he believes he shall have his wages at the days or
weeks end, he does his duty. But he only believes who does that thing which
other men in the like cases do, when they do believe. He that believes, money
gotten with danger is better then poverty with safety, will venture for it in
unknown lands or seas: and so will he that believes it better to get Heaven
with labor, then to go to Hell with pleasure.

6. He that believes does not make haste, but waits patiently till the times of
refreshment come, and dares trust God for the morrow, and is no more
s^llicitous for next year, then he is for that which is past: and it is
certain, that man wants faith who dares be more confident of being supplied
when he has money in his purse, then when he has it only in bills of exchange
from God: or that relies more upon his own industry then upon Gods providence,
when his own industry fails him. If you dare trust to God when the case to
humane reason seems impossible, and trust to God then also out of choice, not
because you have nothing else to trust to, but because he is the only support
of a just confidence, then you give a good testimony of your faith.

7. True Faith is confident, and will venture all the world upon the strength
of its persuasion. Will you lay your life on it, your esta^e your reputation,
that the doctrine of JESUS CHRIST is true in every Article? Then you have true
Faith. But he t^a^ fears men more then God, believes men more then he believes
in God.

8. Faith if it be true, living and justifying, cannot be separated from a good
life: it w^^ks miracles, makes a drunkard become sober, a lascivious person
bec^me chaste, a covetous man become liberal: it overcomes the world, it works
righteousness, and makes us diligently to do, 2 Cor. 13 5. ^om. 8 10.
and cheerfully to suffer whatsoever God has placed in our way to Heaven.

The Means and Instruments to obtain Faith, are
1. An humble, willing, and docible mind, or desire t^ be instructed in the
way of God: for persuasion enters like a sunbeam, gently, and without
violence, and open but the window, and draw the curtain, and the Sun of
righteousness will enlighten your darkness.

2. Remove all prejudice and love to every thing which may be contradicted by
Faith: How can ye believe, (said Christ) that receive praise one of another? An
uncha^te man cannot easily be brought to believe that without purity he shall
never see God. He that loves riches can hardly believe the doctrine of poverty
and renunciation of the world: and alms and Martyrdom, and the doctrine of the
cross is folly to him that loves his ease and pleasures. He that has within
him any principle contrary to the doctrines of Faith, cannot easily become a
Disciple.

3. Prayer which is instrumental to every thing has a particular promise in
this thing. He that lacks wisdom let him ask it of God: and, if you give good
things to your children, how much more shall your Heavenly Father give his
Spirit to them that ask him?

4. The consideration of the Divine omnipotence, and infinite wisdom, and our
own ignorance, are great instruments of curing all doubting, and silencing the
murmures of infidelity.

5. Avoid all curiosity of inquiry into particulars, In rebus miris summa ^
^dendi ratio est omnipotentia creato^is S. Aug.
and circumstances and myste^i^s: for true faith is full (...) ing^nuity, and
^e^rty simplicity, free from suspicion, wise and confident, trusting upon
generals without watching and pry^ng into unnecessary or undi^cernible
particulars. No Man carries his bed into his fi^ld to watch how his corn grows;
but believes upon the general order of Providence and Nature; and at Harvest
finds himself not deceived.

6. In time of temptation be not busy to dispute, but relic upon the
conclusion, and throw your self upon God, and contend nor with him but in
prayer, and in the presence and with the help of a prudent untempted guide: and
be sure to esteem all changes of belief which offer themselves in the time of
your greatest weakness (contrary to the persuasions of your best understanding)
to be temptations, and reject them accordingly.

7. It is a prudent course that in our health and best advantages we lay up
particular arguments and instruments of persuasion and confidence, to be
brought forth and used in the great day of expense; and that especially in such
things in which we use to be most tempted, and in which we are least confident,
and which are most necessary, and which commonly the Devil uses to assault us
withal in the days of our visitation.

8. The wisdom of the Church of God is very remarkable in appointing Festivals
or Holidaies, whose solemnity and Offices have no other special business but to
record the Article of the day; such as, Trinity Sunday, Ascension, Easter,
Christmas Day: and to those persons who can only believe, not prove or dispute,
there is no better instrument to cause the remembrance, and plain notion, and
to endear the affection and hearty assent to the Article, then the proclaiming
and recommending it by the festivity and joy of a Holy Day.

SECT. II. Of the Hope of a Christian.
FAith differs from Hope in the extension of its object, and in the intension
of degree. S Austin thus accounts their differences: (...) 8.
Faith is of all things revealed, good and bad, rewards and punishments, of
things past, present, and to come, of things that concern us, and of things
that concern us not: But Hope has for its Object things only that are good and
fit to be hoped for, future, and concerning our selves: and because these
things are offered to us upon conditions of which we may so fail as we may
change our will; therefore our certainty is less then the adherences of faith;
which (because Faith relies only upon one proposition, that is, the truth of
the Word of God) cannot be made uncertain in themselves, though the object of
ou^ H^pe may become uncertain to ^s, and to our possession: for it is
infallibly certain (...) there is Heaven for all the godly, and (...) amongst
them all, it (...) my (...). But that I shall enter into Heaven is the object
of my Hope, not of my Faith, and is to (...) as it is certain I shall persevere
in the ways of God.

The Acts of Hope, are
1. To rely upon God with a confident expectation of his promises; ever
esteeming that every promise of God is a magazine of all the grace and relief
which we can need in that instance for which the promise is made. Every degree
of hope is a degree of confidence.

2. To esteem all the danger of an action and the possibilities of
miscarriage, and every cross accident that can intervene, to be no detect on
gods part but, either a mercy on his part, or a fault on ^u^s: for then we
shall be sure to trust in God when we see him to be our confidence, and our
selves the cause of all mischances. The hope of a Christian is prudent and
religious.

3. To rejoice in the midst of a misfortune or seeming sadness, knowing that
this may work for good and will, if we be not wanting to our souls. This is a
direct act of Hope to look through the cloud, and look for a beam of the light
from God, and this is called in Scripture, Rejoicing in tribulation, when the
God of Hope fills us with all joy in believing. Every degree if hope brings a
degree of ^oy.

4. To desire, to pray, and to long for the great object o^ our hope, the
mighty price of our (...) calling; and to desir^ the other things of this life,
as ^^ey are promised, that is, so fa^^e as they are made necessary and useful
to us ^n (...) to Gods glory, and the (...) of souls. Hope and Fasting are said
to be the two wings of Prayer. Fasting is but as the wing of a Bird, but Hope
is like the wing of an Angel soring up to Heaven, and bears our prayers to the
throne of Grace. Without Hope it is impossible to pray; but Hope makes our
prayers reasonable, passionate, and religious; for it relies upon Gods promise,
or experience, or providence, and story. Prayer is always in proportion to our
Hope, zealous and Affectionate.

5. Perseverance is the perfection of the duty of Hope, and its last act: and
so long as our hope continues, so long we go on in duty and diligence: but he
that is to raise a Castle in an h^ur, sits down and does nothing toward it:
and Herod the Sophister left off to teach his son, when he saw 24 Pages
appointed to wait on him, and called by the several Letters of the Alphabet,
could never make him to understand his letters perfectly.

Rules to govern our Hope.
1. Let your Hope be moderate, proportioned to your state, person and condition
whether it be for gifts or graces, or temporal favors. It is an ambitious hope
for a person whose diligence is like them that are least in the Kingdom of
Heaven, to believe themselves endeared to God as the greatest Saints, or that
they shall have a throne equal to S. Paul, or the blessed Virgin Mary. A
Stammerer cannot with moderation hope for the gift of Tongues, or a Peasant to
become learned as Origin: or if a Beggar desires or hopes to become a King, or
asks for a thousand pound a year, we call him impudent, not passionate, much
less ^easonable. Hope that God will crown your endeavors with equal measures
of that reward which he indeed ^^eely gives, but yet gives according to our
proportions. Hope for good success according to, or not much beyond the
efficacy of the causes and the instrument, and let the Husbandman hope for a
good Harvest not for a rich Kingdom, or a victorious Army.

2. Let your hope be well founded, relying up must confidences, that is, upon
God according to his revelations and promises. For it is possible for a Man to
have a vain hope upon God: and in matters of Religion it is presumption to hope
that Gods mercies will be powered forth upon lazy persons that do nothing
toward holy and strict walking nothing (I say) but trust, and long for an
event besides and against all disposition of the mean^. Every false principle
in Religion is a Read o^ Egypt, false and dangerous. * Rely not in temporal
things upon uncertain prophecies, and Astrology not upon our own wit or
industry, not upon gold or friends, not upon Armies and Princes, expect not
health from Physicians that cannot cure their own breath, much less their
mortality: use all lawful instruments, but expect nothing from them above
their natural or ordinary efficacy, and in the use of them from God expect a
blessing. A hope that is easy and credulous is an arm of flesh, an ill
supporter without a bone. Ier. 17.5.


3. Let your hope be without vanity, or garishness of spirit, but sober, grave
and silent, fixed in the heart, not born upon the lip, apt to support our
spirits within, but not to provoke envy abroad.

4. Let your hope be of things possible, safe and useful. Di cose fuo^i di
credenza non voler far s^eranza.
He that hopes for an opportunity of acting his revenge, or lust, or rapine,
watches to do himself a mischief. All evils of our selves or brethren are
objects of our fear, not hope: and when it is truly understood, things useless
and unsafe can no more be wished for, then things impossible can be obtained.

5. Let your Hope be patient, without tediousness of spirit, or hastiness of
prefixing time. Make no limits or prescriptions to God, but let your prayers
and endeavors go on still with a constant attendance on the periods of Gods
providence. The men of Bethulia resolved to wait upon God but five days
longer. But deliverance stayed seven days, and yet came at last: and take not
every accident for an argument of despair* but go on still in hoping, and begin
again to work if any ill accident have interrupted you.

Means of Hope, and remedies against Despair.
The means to cu^e Despair, and to continue or increase Hope, are partly by
consideration, partly by exercise.,

1. Apply your mind to the cure of all the proper causes of Despair: and they
are weakness of Spirit, or violence of passion. (...)
He that greedily covets, is impatient of delay, and desperate in contrary
accidents; and he that is little of heart, is also little of hope, and apt to
sorrow and suspicion.

2. Despise the things of the World, and be indifferent to all changes and
events of providence; and for the things of God the promises are certain to be
performed in kind; and where there is less variety of chance, there is less
possibility of being (...) Homer.
mocked: but he that creates to himself thousands of little hopes, uncertain in
the promise, fallible in the event and depending upon ten thousand
circumstances (as are all his things of this World) shall often fail in the
expectations, and be used to arguments of distrust in such hopes.

3. So long as your hopes are regular and reasonable, though in temporal
affairs, such as are deliverance from enemies, escaping a storm or ship wrak,
recovery from a sickness, ability to pay your debts, etc. remember that there
are some things ordinary, and some things extraordinary to prevent despair. In
ordinary, Remember that the very hoping in God is an endearment of him and a
mea^s to obtain the blessing [ I will deliver him because he has put his trust
in me.] 2. There are in GOD all those glorious Attributes and excellencies
which in the nature of things can possibly create or confirm Hope. GOD is 1.
Strong. 2. Wise. 3. True. 4. Loving. There cannot be added another capacity to
create a confidence, for upon these premises we cannot fail of receiving what
is fit for us. 3. GOD has oblig^d himself by promise that we shall have the
good of every thing we desire: or even l^sses and denials shall work for the
good of them that fear God. And if we will trust the truth of GOD for
performance of the gene^al* we may well trust his wisdom to choose for us the
particular. * But the extraordinaries of GOD are apt to supply the de^ect of
all natural and humane possibilities. 1. GOD has in many instances give
extraordinary virtue to the active causes and instruments: to a jawbone to kill
a multitude; to 300 Men to destroy a great Army; to Jonathan and his
Armor-bearer to rout a w^ole Garrison. 2. He has given excellent sufferance
and vigorousness to the sufferers, arming them with strange courage, heroical
fortitude, invincible resolution, and glorious patience: and thus, he lays no
more upon us then we are able to bear: for when he increases our sufferings, he
lessens them by increasing our patience. 3. His providence is extraregular and
produces strange things beyond common rules: and he that lead Israel through a
^ea, and made a Rock power forth waters, and the Heavens to give them bread and
flesh, and whole Armies to be destroyed with fantastic noi^^s, and the
fortune of all France to ^e recovered and entirely revolved by the arms and
conduct of a Girl against the ^orrent of the English fortune and Ch^val^y; can
do what ^e please, and still retains the same affections to his people, and
the same providence over mankind as ever: and it is impossible for that Man to
despair, Heb. 2.18.
who remembers that his Helper is Omnipotent, and can do what he please: let
us rest th^^e a while* he can if he please: And ^e is infinitely loving;
willing enough: and he is infinitely wise, choosing better for us then we can
do for our selves. This in all ages and chances has supported the afflicted
people of GOD, and carried them on dry ground through the Red Sea. GOD invites
and cherishes the hopes of Men by all the variety of his providence.

4. If your case be brought to the last extremity, and that you are at the pits
brink, even the very Margent of the Grave, yet then despair not; at least put
it off a little longer: and remember that whatsoever final accident takes away
all hope from you, if you stay a little longer, and in the mean while bear it
sweetly, it will also take away all despair too. For when you enter into the
regions of death, you rest from all your labors and your fears.

5. Let them who are tempted to despair of their salvation, consider how much
Christ suffered to redeem us from sin and its eternal punishment: and he that
considers this must needs believe, that the desires which God had to save us
were not less then infinite, and therefore not easily to be satisfied without
it.

6. Let no man despair of Gods mercies to forgive him, unless he be sure that
his sins are greater then Gods mercies. If they be not, we have much reason to
hope that the stronger ingredient will prevail so long as we are in the time
and state of repentance, and within the possibilities and latitute of the
Covenant; and as long as any promise can but reflect upon him with an oblique
beam of comfort. Possibly the Man may e^re in his judgment of circumstances,
and therefore let him fear: but because it is not certain he is mistaken, let
him not despair.

7. Consider that God who knows all the events of Men, and what their final
condition shall be, who shall be saved, and who will perish, yet he treats
them as his own, calls them to be his own, offers fair conditions as to his
own, gives them blessings, arguments of mercy, and instances of fear to call
them off from death, and to call them home to life, and in all this shows no
despair of happiness to them, and therefore much less should any Man despair
for himself, since he never was able to read the Scroles of the eternal
predestination.

8. Remember that despair belongs only to passionate Fools or Villains, (such
as were Achitophel and ^udas) or else to Devils and damned persons: and as the
hope of salvation is a good disposition toward it; so is despair a certain
consignation to eternal ruin. A Man may be damned for despairing to be saved.
Despair is the proper passion of damnation. God has placed truth and felicity
in Heaven: V. ^ea^
Curiosity and repentance upon Faith: but misery and despair are the portions
of Hell.

9. Gather together into your spirit, and its treasure-house [the Memory] not
only all the promises of GOD but also the remembrances of experience, and the
former senses of the Divine favors* that from thence you may argue from times
past to the present, and enl^^g^ to the (...), and to greater blessings. For
although the co^j^ct^^^^ and expectations of Hope are not like the conclusions
of Faith, yet they are a Helmet against the scorchings of Despair in temporal
things, and an anchor of the soul sure and steadfast against the fluctuations of
the Spirit in matters of the soul. S. Bernard reckons diverse principles of Hope
by enumerating the instances of the Divine Mercy; and we may by them reduce
this rule to practice in the following manner: 1. GOD has preserved me from
many sins; his mercies are infinite; I hope he will still preserve me from
more, and for ever. * 2. I have sinned and GOD smote me not: his mercies are
still over the penitent; I hope he will deliver me from all the evils I have
deserved. He has forgiven me many sins of malice, and therefore surely he will
pity my infirmities. * 3. God visited my heart and changed it: he loves the
work of his own hands, and so my heart is now become: I hope he will love this
t^o. * 4. When I repented he received me graciously; and therefore I Hope if I
do my endeavor he will totally forgive me. * 5. He helped my slow and
beginning endeavors, and therefore I hope he will lead me to perfection. * 6.
When he had given me something first, then he gave me more. I hope therefore he
will keep me from falling, and give me the grace of perseverance. * 7. He has
chosen me to be a Disciple of Christ's institution; he has elected me to his
Kingdom of grace, and therefore I hope also to the Kingdom of his glory. * 8.
He died for me when I was his enemy, and therefore I hope he will save me when
he has reconciled me to him, and is become my friend. * 9. God has given us
his Son, how should not he with him give us all things else? All these S.
Bernard reduces to these three Heads, as the instruments of all our hopes: 1.
The charity of GOD adopting us. 2. The truth of his promises. 3. The power of
his performance: which if any truly weighs, no infirmity or accident can break
his ^^pes into undiscernible fragments, but some good pl^^ks will remain after
the greatest storm and shipwreck. This was Saint Paul's instrument: Experience
begets hope, and hope makes not ashamed.

10. Do thou take care only of thy duty, of the means and proper instruments
of thy purpose, and leave the end to GOD: lay that up with him, and he will
take care of all that is entrusted to him: and this being an act of confidence
in God, is also a means of security to thee.

11. By special arts of spiritual prudence and arguments secure the confident
belief of the Resurrection, and thou can not but hope for every thing the
which you may reasonably expect, or lawfully desire upon the stock of the
Divine mercies and promises.

12. If ^ despair seises you in a particular temporal instance, let it not
defile thy spirit with impute mixture, or mingle in spiritual considerations;
but rather let it make thee fortify thy soul in matters of Religion, that by
being thrown out of your Earthly dwelling and confidence, you may retire into
the strengths of grace, and hope the more strongly in that, by how much you are
the more defeated in this, that despair of a fortune or a success, may become
the necessity of all virtue.

SECT. III. Of Charity or the love of God.
LOve is the greatest thing that God can give us, for himself is love; and it
is the greatest thing we can give to God, for it will also give our selves, and
carry with it all that is ours. The Apostle calls it the band of perfection; it
is the Old, and it is the New, and it is the great Commandment, and it is all
the Commandments, for it is the fulfilling of the Law. It does the work of all
other graces, without any instrument but its own immediate virtue. For is the
love to sin makes a Man sin against all his own reason, and all the discourses
of wisdom, and all the advices of his friends, and without temptation, and
without opportunity: so does the love of God; it makes a man chaste without the
laborious arts of fasting and exterior disciplines, temperate in the midst of
feasts, and is active enough to choose it without any intermedial appetites,
and reaches at Glory through the very heart of Grace, without any other arms
but those of Love. It is a grace that loves God for himself, and our Neighbors
for God. The consideration of Gods goodness and bounty, the experience of those
profitable and excellent emanations from him, may be, and most commonly are the
first motive of our love: but when we are once entered, and have tasted the
goodness of God, we love the spring for its own excellency, passing from
passion to reason from thanking to adoring, from sense to spirit, from
considering our selves to an union with God and this is the image and little
representation of Heaven; it is beatitude in picture, or rather the infancy and
beginnings of glory.

We need no incentives by way of special enumeration to move us to the love of
God, for we cannot love any thing for any reason real or imaginary, but that
excellence is infinitely more eminent in God. There can but two things create
love, Perfection and Usefulness: to which answer on our part, 1. admiration,
and 2. Desire: and both these are centred in love. For the entertainment of the
first, there is in God an infinite nature, immensity or vastness without
extension or limit, Immutability, Eternity, Omnipotence, Omniscience, Holiness,
Dominion, Providence, Bounty, Mercy, Justice, Perfection in himself, and the
end to which all things and all actions must be directed, and will at last
arrive. The consideration of which may be heightened, if we consider our
distance from all these glories. Our smallness and limited nature, our nothing,
our inconstancy, our age like a span, our weakness and ignorance, our poverty,
our inadvertency and inconsideration, our disabilities and disaffections to do
good our harsh natures and unmerciful inclinations, our universal iniquity, and
our necessities and dependencies, not only on God originally, and essentially,
but even our need of the meanest of Gods creatures, and our being obnoxious to
the weakest and the most contemptible. But for the entertainment of the second
we may consider that in him is a torrent of pleasure for the voluptuous, he is
the fountain of honor for the ambitious, an inexhaustible treasure for the
covetous: our vices are in love with fantastic pleasures and images of
perfection, which are truly and really to be found no where but in God. And
therefore our virtues have such proper objects, that it is but reasonable they
should all turn into love: for certain it is that this love will turn all into
virtue. S. Aug l. 2. Confess. ^.6
For in the scrutinies for righteousness and judgment, when it is inquired
whether such a person be a good man or no, the meaning is not, what does he
believe, or what does he hope, but what he loves?

The acts of Love to God, are
1. Love does all things which may please the beloved person; it performs all
his commandments: and this is one of the greatest instances and arguments of
our love that God requires of us. [This is love that we keep his commandments.]
Love is obedient.

2. It does all the intimations and secret significations of his pleasure whom
we love; and this is an argument of a great degree of it. The first instance is
it that makes the love accepted: but this gives a greatness and singularity to
it. The first is the least, and less then it cannot do our duty; but without
this second, we cannot come to perfection. Great love is also plyant and
inquisitive in the instances of its expression.

3. Love gives away all things that so he may advance the interest of the
beloved person: it relieves all that he would have relieved, and spends it self
in such real significations as it is enabled withal. He never loved God that
will quit any thing of his Religion, to save his money. Love is always liberal
and communicative.

4. It suffers all things that are imposed by its beloved, or that can happen
for his sake, or that intervenes in his service, cheerfully, sweetly,
willingly, expecting that God should turn them into good, and instruments of
felicity. 1 Cor. 13.
Charity hops all things, endures all things. Love is patient and content
with any thing so it be together with its beloved.

5. Love is also impatient of any thing that may displease the beloved person,
hating all sin as the enemy of its friend; for love contracts all the same
relations and marries the same friendships, and the same hatreds; and all
affection to a sin is perfectly inconsistent with the love of God. Love is not
divided between God and Gods enemy: we must love God with all our heart, that
is, give him a whole and undivided affection, having love for nothing else but
such things which he allows, and which he commands, or loves himself.

6. Love endeavors for ever to be present, to converse with, to enjoy, to be
united with its object, loves to be talking of him, reciting his praises,
telling his stories, repeating his words, imitating his gestures, transcribing
his copy in every thing; and every degree of union and every degree of
likeness is a degree of love; and it can endure any thing but the displeasure
and the absence of its beloved. For we are not to use God and Religion, as men
use perfumes, with which they are delighted when they have them, but can very
well be without them. True charity is restless till it enjoyes God in such
instances in which it wants him: it is like hunger and thirst, it must be fed
or it cannot be answered, Amoris in m^rsunt qui esse suit.
and nothing can supply the presence, or make recompense for the absence of
God, or of the effects of his favor, and the light of his countenance.

7. True love in all accidents looks upon the beloved person, and observes his
countenance, and how he approves or disproves it, and accordingly looks sad or
cheerful. He that loves God is not displeased at those accidents which God
chooses, nor murmures at those changes which he makes in his family, nor envies
at those gifts he bestows, but chooses as he likes, and is ruled by his
judgment, and is perfectly of his persuasion, loving to learn where God is the
Teacher, and being content to be ignorant or silent where he is not pleased to
open himself.

8. Love is curious of little things: of circumstances and measures, and little
accidents, not allowing to it self any infirmity, which it strives not to
master: aiming at what it cannot yet reach at, Plutarchus citans carmen de suo
Apolline, adjicit ex Herodoto quasi de suo, de eo os meu^ continens esto.
desiring to be of an Angelical purity and of a perfect innocence, and a
Seraphical fervor, and fears every image of offense, is as much afflicted at
an idle word, as some at an act of adultery, and will not allow to it self so
much anger as will disturb a child; nor endure the impurity of a dream; and
this is the curiosity and niceness of divine Love; this is the fear of God, and
is the daughter and production of Love.

The Measures and Rules of Divine Love.
But because this passion is pure as the brightest and smoothest mirror, and
therefore is apt to be sullyed with every impurer breath, we must be careful
that our love to God be governed by these measures.

1. That our love be sweet, even, and full of tranquillity, having in it no
violences or transportations, but going on in a course of holy actions and
duties which are proportionable to our condition, and present state; not to
satisfy all the desire, but all the probabilities and measures of our strength.
A new beginner in religion has passionate and violent desires, but they must
not be the measure of his actions: But he must consider his strength, his late
sickness and state of death, the proper temptations of his condition, and stand
at first upon his defense, not go to storm a strong Fort, or attaque a potent
enemy, or do heroical actions and fitter for giants in Religion. Indiscreet
violences, and untimely forwardness are the rocks of religion, against which
tender spirits often suffer shipwreck.

2. Let our love be prudent and without illusion: that is, that it express it
self in such instances which God has chosen, or which we choose our selves by
proportion to his rules and measures. Love turns into doting when religion
turns into superstition. No degree of love can be imprudent, but the
expressions may: we cannot love God too much, but we may proclaim it in
undecent manners.

3. Let our love be firm, constant and inseparable, not coming and returning
like the tide, but descending like a never failing river, ever running into the
Ocean of Divine excellency, passing on in the channels of duty and a constant
obedience, and never ceasing to be what it is, till it comes to be what it
desires to be; still being a river till it be turned into sea and vastness,
even the immensity of a blessed Eternity.

Although the consideration of the Divine excellencies and mercies be
infinitely sufficient to produce in us love to God (who is invisible and yet
not distant from us, but we feel him in his blessings, he dwells in our hearts
by faith, we feed on him in the Sacrament, and are made all one with him in
the incarnation and glorifications of Jesus) yet that we may the better
enkindle and increase our love to God, the following advices are not useless.

Helps to increase our love to God; by way of exercise.
1. Cut off all earthly and sensual loves, for they pollute and unhallow the
pure and Spiritual love. Every degree of inordinate affection to the things of
this world, and every act of love to a sin is a perfect enemy to the love of
God: and it is a great shame to take any part of our affection from the eternal
God to bestow it upon his creature in defiance of the Creator, or to give it to
the Devil, our open enemy, in disparagement of him who is the fountain of all
excellencies and Celestial amities.

2. Lay fetters and restraints upon the imaginative and fantastic part:
because our fancy being an imperfect and higher faculty is usually pleased
with the entertainment of shadows and gauds; and because the things of the
world fill it with such beauties and fantastic imagery, the fancy presents
such objects as amiable to the affections, and elective powers. Persons of
fancy, such as are women and children, have always the most violent loves; but
therefore if we be careful with what representments we fill our fancy, we may
the sooner rectify our loves. To this purpose, it is good that we transplant
the instruments of fancy into religion: and for this reason music was brought
into Churches, and ornaments, and perfumes, and comely garments, and
solemnities, and decent ceremonies, that the busy and less discerning fancy
being bribed with its proper objects may be isntrumental to a more celestial
and spiritual love.

3. Remove solicitude or wordly cares, and multitudes of secular businesses;
for if these take up the intention and actual application of our thoughts and
our employments, they will also possess our passions; which if they be filled
with one object though ignoble, cannot attend another though more excellent. We
always contract a friendship and relation with those with whom we converse:
our very Country is dear to us for our being in it: and the Neighbors of the
same Village, and those that buy and sell with us have seized upon some
portions of our love, and therefore if we dwell in the affairs of the World, we
shall also grow in love with them; and all our love, or all our hatred, all our
hopes, or all our fears, which the eternal God would willingly secure to
himself, and esteem amongst his treasures and precious things, shall be spent
upon trifles and vanities.

4. Do not only choose the things of God, but secure your inclinations and
aptnesses for God and for Religion. For it will be a hard thing for a Man to
do such a personal violence to his first desires, as to choose whatsoever he
has no mind to. A Man will many times satisfy the importunity and daily
solicitations of his first longings: and therefore there is nothing can secure
our loves to God, but stopping the natural Fountains, and making Religion to
grow near the first desires of the soul.

5. Converse with God by frequent prayer. In particular desire that your
desires may be right, and love to have your affections regular and holy: To
which purpose make very frequent addresses to God by ejaculations and
communions, and an assiduous daily devotion: Discover to him all your wants,
complain to him of all your affronts, do as Hezekiah did, lay your misfortunes
and your ill news before him, spread them before the Lord, call to him for
health, run to him for counsel, beg of him for pardon: and it is as natural to
love him to whom we make such addresses, and of whom we have such dependencies,
as it is for children to love their parents.

6. Consider the immensity and vastness of the Divine love to us, expressed in
all the emanations of his providence. 1. In his Creation. 2. In his
conservation of us. For it is not my Prince, or my Patron, or my Friend that
supports me, or relieves my needs, but God, who made the Corn that my friend
sends me, who created the Grapes, and supported him, who has as many
dependences, and as many natural necessities, and as perfect disabilities as my
self. God indeed made him the instrument of his providence to me, as he has
made his own Land or his own Cattle to him: with this only difference, that God
by his ministration to me intends to do him a favor and a reward, which to
natural instruments he does not. 3. In giving his Son. 4. In forgiving our
sins. 5. In adopting us to glory: and ten thousand times ten thousand little
accidents and instances happening in the doing every of these; and it is not
possible but for so great love we should give love again, for God we should
give Man, for felicity we should part with our misery. Nay, so great is the
love of the holy Jesus, Sic Jesus divit S. Carpo apud Dionysium epist. ad
Demiphi^m.
God incarnate, that he would leave all his triumphant glories, and die once
more for Man, if it were necessary for procuring felicity to him.

In the use of these instruments love will grow in several knots and steps like
the Sugarcanes of India according to a thousand varieties in the person
loving, and it will be great or less in several persons, and in the same,
according to his growth in Christianity: but in general discoursing there are
but two states of love, and those are Labor of love, and the Zeal of love: the
first is duty, the second is perfection.

The two states of love to God.
The least love that is must be obedient, pure, simple, and communicative: that
is, it must exclude all affection to sin, and all inordinate affection to the
World; and must be expressive according to our power, in the instances of duty,
and must be love for loves sake; and of this love Martyrdom is the highest
instance; that is, a readiness of mind rather to suffer any evil then to do
any. Of this our blessed Savior affirmed, That no man had greater love then
this: that is, this is the highest point of duty, the greatest love that God
requires of Man. And yet he that is the most imperfect must have this love also
in preparation of mind, and must differ from another in nothing, except in the
degrees of promptness and alacrity. And in this sense, he that loves God truly
(though but with a beginning and tender love) yet he loves God with all his
heart, that is, with that degree of love which is the highest point of duty,
and of Gods charge upon us; and he that loves God with all his heart, may yet
increase with the increase of God, just as there are degrees of love to God
among the Saints, and yet each of them love him with all their powers and
capacities.

2. But the greater state of love is the zeal of love, which runs out into
excrescencies, and suckers like a fruitful and pleasant tree, or bursting into
gums, and producing fruits, not of a monstrous, but of an extraordinary and
heroical greatness. Concerning which, these cautions are to be observed.

Cautions and Rules concerning. zeal.
(...). Gal. 4.18.
1. If zeal be in the beginnings of our spiritual birth, or be short, sudden and
transient, or be a consequent of a man's natural temper, or come upon any cause,
but after a long growth of a temperate and well regulated love, it is to be
suspected for passion, and forwardness, rather then the vertical point of love.

2. That zeal only is good which in a fervent love has temperate expressions.
For let the affection boil as high as it can, yet if it boil over into
irregular and strange actions, it will have but few, but will need many
excuses. Elijah was zealous for the Lord of Hosts, and yet he was so
transported with it, that he could not receive answer from God, till by music
he was recomposed and tamed: and Moses broke both the Tables of the Law by
being passionately zealous against them that brake the first.

3. Zeal must spend its greatest heat principally in those things that concern
our selves; but with great care and restraint in those that concern others.

4. Remember that zeal being an excrescence of Divine love, must in no sense
contradict any action of love: Love to God includes love to our Neighbor, and
therefore no pretense of zeal for Gods glory must make us uncharitable to our
brother, Phil. 3 6
for that is just so pleasing to God, as hatred is an act of love.

5. That Zeal that concerns others, can spend it self in nothing but arts, and
actions and charitable instruments for their good: and when it concerns the
good of many that one should suffer, it must be done by persons of a competent
authority, and in great necessity, in seldom instances, according to the Law of
God or Man; but never by private right, or for trifling accidents, of in
mistaken propositions. The Zealots in the Old Law had authority to transfix and
stab some certain persons; but God gave them warrant; it was in the case of
Idolatry, or such notorious huge crimes; the danger of which was insupportable,
and the cognizance of which was infallible: and yet that warrant expired with
the Synagogue.

6. Zeal in the instances of our own duty, and personal deportment is more safe
then in matters of counsel, and actions besides our just duty, and tending
toward perfection, Though in these instances there is not a direct sin, even
where the zeal is less wary, yet there is much trouble and some danger: (as,
if it be spent in the too forward vows of Chastity, and restraints of natural
and innocent liberties.)

7. Zeal may be let loose in the instances of internal, personal, and spiritual
actions, that are matters of direct duty: as in prayers, and acts of adoration,
and thanksgiving, and frequent addresses: provided that no indirect act pass
upon them to defile them; such as complacency, and opinions of sanctity,
censuring others, scruples and opinions of necessity, unnecessary fears,
superstitious numbrings of times and hours; but let the zeal be as forward as
it will, as devout as it will, as Seraphicall as it will, in the direct
address and intercourse with God, there is no danger, Lavora cente (...)
^avesti a compar^ ogni horat adora come

(...) tu havesii ^ mo^ir al^ore.


no transgression. Do all the parts of your duty as earnestly as if the
salvation of all the world, and the whole glory of God, and the confusion of
all Devils, and all that you hope or desire did depend upon every one action.

8. Let zeal be seated in the will and choice, and regulated with prudence and
a sober understanding, not in the fancies and affections; for these will make
it full of noise and empty of profit, Romans 10.2.
but that will make it deep and smooth, material and devout.

The sum is this: That, Zeal is not a direct duty, no where commanded for it
self, and is nothing but a forwardness and circumstance of another duty, Tit.
2.14. Rev 3.16.
and therefore is then only acceptable when it advances the love of God and our
Neighbors, whose circumstance it is: That zeal is only safe, only acceptable
which increases charity directly; and because love to our Neighbor, and
obedience to God are the two great portions of charity, we must never account
our zeal to be good, but as it advances both these, if it be in a matter that
relates to both; or severally, if it relates severally. S. Paul's zeal was
expressed in preaching without any offerings or stipend, in traveling, in
spending and being spent for his flock, in suffering, in being willing to be
accursed for love of the people of God and his countrymen: Let our Zeal be as
great as his was, so it be in affections to others, but not at all in angers
against them: In the first then is no danger; in the second there is no safety.
In brief; let your zeal (if it must be expressed in anger) be always more
severe against thy self, 2 Cor. 7.11.
then against others.

The other part of Love to God is Love to our Neighbor, for which I have
reserved the Paragraph of Alms. Of the external actions of Religion.
Religion teaches us to present to God our bodies as well as our souls; for God
is the Lord of both; and if the body serves the soul in actions natural and
civil, and intellectual, It must not be eased in the only offices of Religion,
unless the body shall expect no portion of the rewards of Religion, such as
are resurrection, Romans 12.1.
reunion, and glorification. Our bodies are to God a living sacrifice, and to
present them to God is holy and acceptable.

The actions of the body as it serves to Religion, and as it is distinguished
from Sobriety and Justice; either relate to the word of God, or to prayer, or
to repentance, and make these kinds of external actions of Religion. 1 Reading
and hearing the Word of God; 2. Fasting and corporal austerities, called by S
Paul, bodily exercise; 3. Feasting or keeping days of public joy and
thanksgiving.

SECT. IV. Of Reading, or Hearing the Word of God.
REading and Hearing the Word of God are but the several circumstances of the
same duty; instrumental especially to faith, but consequently to all other
graces of the Spirit. It is all one to us whether by the eye or by the ear the
Spirit conveys his precepts to us. If we hear Saint Paul saying to us, that [
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge:] or read it in one of his Epistles;
in either of them we are equally and sufficiently instructed. The Scriptures
read are the same thing to us, which the same doctrine was, when it was
preached by the Disciples of our blessed Lord; and we are to learn of either
with the same dispositions. There are many that cannot read the Word, and they
must take it in by the ear; and they that can read, find the same Word of God
by the eye. It is necessary that all men learn it in some way or other, and it
is sufficient in order to their practice that they learn it any way. The Word
of God is all those Commandments and Revelations, those promises and
threatenings, the stories and sermons recorded in the Bible: nothing else is the
Word of God, that we know of, by any certain instrument. The good books and
spiritual discourses, the sermons or homilies written or spoken by men are but
the Word of men, or rather explications of, and exhortations according to the
Word of God: but of themselves they are not the Word of God. In a sermon, the
Text only is in a proper sense to be called Gods Word: and yet good Sermons are
of great use and convenience for the advantages of Religion. He that preaches
an hour together against drunkenness with the tongue of men or Angels, has
spoke no other word of God but this [ Be not drunk with wine wherein there is
excess:] and he that writes that Sermon in a book, and publishes that book,
has preached to all that read it, a louder Sermon then could be spoken in a
Church. This I say to this purpose, that we may separate truth from error,
popular opinions from substantial Truths. For God preaches to us in the
Scripture, and by his secret assistances and spiritual thoughts and holy
motions: Good men preach to us when they by popular arguments, and humane arts
and complyances expound and press any of those doctrines which God has
preached unto us in his holy Word. But

1. The Holy Ghost is certainly the best Preacher in the world, and the worst
of Scripture the best Sermons.

2. All the doctrine of salvation is plainly set down there, that the most
unlearned person by hearing it read, may understand all his duty. What can be
plainer spoken then this [ Thou shall not kill. Be not drunk with wine.
Husbands love your Wives. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do
ye so to them?] The wit of man cannot more plainly tell us our duty, or more
fully, then the Holy Ghost has done already.

3. Good Sermons, and good books are of excellent use: but yet they can serve
no other end but that we practice the plain doctrines of Scripture.

4. What Abraham in the parable said concerning the brethren of the rich man,
is here very proper: They have Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16 29, 31.
let them hear them: But if they refuse to hear these, neither will they
believe though one should arise from the dead to preach unto them.

5. Reading the holy Scriptures is a duty expressly Deuteronomy. 31.13. Luke 24 45. Mat
22.29. Acts 15.21. Rev 1.3. 2 Timothy 3.16.
commanded us, and is called in Scripture [ Preaching:] all other preaching is
the effect of humane skill and industry, and although of great benefit, yet it
is but an Ecclesiastical ordinance; the Law of God concerning Preaching, being
expressed in the matter of reading the Scriptures, and hearing that Word of
God, which is, and as it is there described.

But this duty is reduced to practice in the following Rules.

Rules for Hearing or Reading the Word of God.
1. Set apart some portion of thy time according to the opportunities of thy
calling and necessary employment, for the reading of holy Scripture; and if it
be possible, every day read or hear some of it read: you are sure that book
teaches all truth, commands all holiness, and promises all happiness.

2. When it is in your power to choose, accustom your self to such portions
which are most plain and certain duty, and which contain the story of the Life
and Death of our blessed Savior. Read the Gospels, the Psalms of David; and
especially those portions of Scripture which by the wisdom of the Church are
appointed to be publicly read upon Sundaies and holy days, viz: the Epistles
and Gospels, in the choice of any other portions, you may advise with a
Spiritual Guide, that you may spend your time with most profit.

3. Fail not diligently to attend to the reading of the holy Scriptures upon
those days wherein it is most publicly and solemnly read in Churches: for at
such times, besides the learning our duty, we obtain a blessing along with it,
it becoming to us upon those days a part of solemn Divine worship.

4. When the Word of God is read or preached to you, be sure you be of a ready
heart and mind, free from worldly cares and thoughts, diligent to hear,
careful to mark, studious to remember, and desirous to practice all that is
commanded, and to live according to it: Do not hear for any other end but to
become better in your life, and to be instructed in every good work, and to
increase in the love and service of God.

5. Beg of God by prayer that he would give you the spirit of obedience and
profit, and that he would by his Spirit write the Word in your heart, and that
you describe it in your life. To which purpose serve your self of some
affectionate ejaculations to that purpose, before and after this duty.

Concerning spiritual books and ordinary Sermons take in these advices also.
6. Let not a prejudice to any man's person hinder thee from receiving good by
his doctrine, if it be according to godliness: but (if occasion offer it, or
espcially if duty present it to thee; that is, if it be preached in that
assembly where thou art bound to be present) accept the word preached as a
message from God, and the Minister as his Angel in that ministration.

7. Consider and remark the doctrine that is represented to thee in any
discourse; and if the Preacher adds any accidental advantages, any thing to
comply with thy weakness, or to put thy spirit into action, or holy
resolution, remember it, and make use of it; but if the Preacher be a weak
person, yet the Text is the doctrine thou art to remember; that contains all
thy duty, it is worth thy attendance to hear that spoken often, and renewed
upon thy thoughts, and though thou be a learned man, yet the same thing
which thou know already, if spoken by another may be made active by that
application. I can better be comforted by my own considerations, if another
hand applies them, then if I do it my self; because the word of God does not
work as a natural agent, but as a Divine instrument: it does not prevail by the
force of deduction, and artificial discoursings only, but chiefly by way of
blessing in the ordinance, and in the ministry of an appointed person. At
least obey the public order, and reverence the constitution, and give good
example of humility, charity and obedience.

8. When scriptures are read, you are only to enquire with diligence and
modesty into the meaning of the Spirit: but if Homilies or Sermons be made upon
the words of Scripture, you are to consider, whether all that be spoken be
conformable to the Scriptures. For although you may practice for humane
reasons, and humane arguments ministered from the Preachers art, yet you must
practice nothing but the command of God, nothing but the Doctrine of Scripture,
that is, the Text.

9. Use the advice of some spiritual or other prudent man for the choice of
such spiritual books which may be of use and benefit for the edification of thy
spirit in the ways of holy living; and esteem that time well accounted for,
that is prudently and affectionately employed, in hearing or reading good books
and pious discourses: ever remembering that God by hearing us speak to him in
prayer, obliges us to hear him speak to us in his word, by what instrument
soever it be conveyed.

SECT. V. Of Fasting.
FAsting, if it be considered in it self without relation to spiritual ends, is
a duty no where enjoined, or counseled. But Christianity has to do with it,
as it may be made an instrument of the Spirit by subduing the lusts of the
flesh, or removing any hindrances of religion; And it has been practiced by
all ages of the Church, and advised in order to three ministeries: 1. To
Prayer; 2. To Mortification of bodily lusts; 3. To Repentance: and is to be
practiced according to the following measures.

Rules for Christian Fasting.
1. Fasting in order to prayer is to be measured by the proportions of the
times of prayer: that is, it ought to be a total fast from all things during
the solemnity (unless a probable necessity intervene.) Thus the Jews eat
nothing upon the Sabbath-daies till their great offices were performed, that
is, about the sixth hour: and S. Peter used it as an argument that the Apostles
in Pentecost were not drunk, because it was but the third hour of the day, of
such a day, in which it was not lawful to eat or drink till the sixth hour: and
the Jews were offended at the Disciples for plucking the ears of corn upon the
Sabbath early in the morning, because it was before the time in which by their
customs they esteemed it lawful to break their fast. In imitation of this
custom, and in prosecution of the reason of it, the Christian Church has
religiously observed fasting before the holy Communion: and the more devout
persons (though without any obligation at all) refused to eat or drink till
they had finished their morning devotions: and further yet upon days of
public humiliation, which are designed to be spent wholly in Devotion, and for
the averting Gods judgments (if they were imminent) fasting is commanded
together with prayer, commanded (I say) by the Church to this end, that the
Spirit might be clearer and more Angelical when it is quitted in some
proportions from the loads of flesh.

2. Fasting, when it is in order to Prayer, must be a total abstinence from all
meat, or else an abatement of the quantity: for the help which fasting does to
prayer cannot be served by changing flesh into flesh, or milk-meats into dry
diet, but by turning much into little, or little into none at all during the
time of solemn and extraordinary prayer.

3. Fasting as it is instrumental to Prayer, must be attended with other aids
of the like virtue and efficacy, such as are removing for the time all worldly
care and secular businesses; and therefore our blessed Savior enfolds these
parts within the same caution: [ Take heed lest your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness and the cares of this world, and that day overtake
you unawares.] To which add alms; Je^unium sine eleem^syna, lampas sine oleo.
S. August.
for upon the wings of fasting and alms, holy prayer infallibly mounts up to
Heaven.

4. When Fasting is intended to serve the duty of Repentance, it is then best
chosen when it is short, sharp and afflictive; that is, either a total
abstinence from all nourishment (according as we shall appoint, or be
appointed) during such a time as is separate for the solemnity and attendance
upon the employment: or if we shall extend our feverity beyond the solemn
days, and keep our anger against our sin as we are to keep our sorrow, that
is, always in a readiness, and often to be called upon; then, to refuse a
pleasant morsel, to abstain from the bread of our desires, and only to take
wholesome and less pleasing nourishment, vexing our appetite by the refusing a
lawful satisfaction, since in its petulancy and luxury it preyed upon an
unlawful.

5. Fasting designed for repentance must be ever joined with an extreme care
that we fast from sin: for there is no greater folly or undecency in the world,
then to commit that for which I am now judging and condemning my self. This is
the best fast, and the other may serve to promote the interest of this, by
increasing the disaffection to it, and multiplying arguments against it.

6. He that fasts for repentance, must, during that solemnity, abstain from all
bodily delights, and the sensuality of all his senses, and his appetites; for a
man must not when he mourns in his fast, be merry in his sport; weep at dinner,
and laugh all day after; have a silence in his kitchen, and music in his
chamber; judge the stomach, and feast the other senses. I deny not but a man
may in a single instance punish a particular sin with a proper instrument: If a
man have offended in his palate, he may choose to fast only; if he have sinned
in so^tness and in his touch, he may choose to lie hard, or work hard, and use
sharp inflictions: but although this Discipline be proper and particular, yet
because the sorrow is of the whole man, no sense must rejoice, or be with any
study or purpose feasted and entertained softly. This rule is intended to
relate to the solemn days appointed for repentance publicly or privately:
besides which in the whole course of our life, even in the midst of our most
festival and freer joys we may sprincle some single instances, and acts of
self-condemning, or punishing: as to refuse a pleasant morsel, or a delicious
draught with a tacit remembrance of the sin that now returns to displease my
spirit: and though these actions be single, there is no undecency in them,
because a man may abate of his ordinary liberty and bold freedom with great
prudence, so he does it without singularity in himself, or trouble to others:
but he may not abate of his solemn sorrow: that may be caution; but this would
be softness, effeminacy, and undecency.

7. When fasting is an act of mortification, that is, is intended to subdue a
bodily lust; as the spirit of fornication, or the fondness of strong and
impatient appetites, it must not be a sudden, sharp, and violent fast, but a
state of fasting, a diet of fasting, a daily lessening our portion of meat and
drink, and a choosing such a course diet which may make the least preparation
for the lusts of the body. He that fasts three days without food, Digiuna
assat chi mal mangia.
will weaken other parts more then the ministers of fornication: and when the
meals return as usually, they also will be served as soon as any. In the mean
time they will be supplied and made active by the accidental heat that comes
with such violent fastings: for this is a kind of aerial Devil; the Prince that
rules in the air is the Devil of fornication; and he will be as tempting with
the windiness of a violent fast, as with the flesh of an ordinary meal. But a
daily substraction of the nourishment will introduce a less busy habit of
body, and that will prove the more effectual remedy.

Chi digiuna and altro ben non fa^ sp^ragna il pane, and al infernova. See
Chap. 2. Sect. 2, and 3.
8. fasting alone will not cure this Devil, though it helps much toward it; but
it must not therefore be neglected, but assisted by all the proper instruments
of remedy against this unclean spirit; and what it is unable to do alone, in
company with other instruments, and Gods blessing upon them it may effect.

9. All fasting for whatsoever end it be undertaken, must be done without any
opinion of the necessity of the thing it self, without censuring others, with
all humility, in order to the proper end; and just as a man takes physic, of
which no man has reason to be proud, and no man thinks it necessary, but
because he is in sickness, or in danger and disposition to it.

10. All fasts ordained by lawful authority are to be observed in order to the
same purposes to which they are enjoined; and to be accompanied with actions of
the same nature, just as it is in private fasts; for there is no other
difference, but that in public our Superiors choose for us, what in private
we do for our selves.

11. Fasts ordained by lawful authority are not to be neglected because alone
they cannot do the thing in order to which they were enjoined. It may be one
day of Humiliation will not obtain the blessing, or alone kill the lust, yet it
must not be despised if it can do any thing toward it. An act of Fasting is
an act of self-denial, and though it do not produce the habi^, yet it is a
good act.

12. When a principal end why a Fast is publicly prescribed, is obtained by
some other instrument in a particular person; as if the spirit of Fornication
be cured by the rite of Marriage, or by a gift of chastity, yet that person so
eased is not freed from the Fasts of the Church by that alone, if those fasts
can prudently serve any other end of Religion, as that of prayer, or
repentance, or mortification of some other appetite: for when it is
instrumental to any and of the Spirit, it is freed from superstition, and then
we must have some other reason to quit us from the Obligation, or that alone
will not do it.

13. When the Fast publicly commanded by reason of some indisposition in the
particular person cannot operate to the end of the Commandment, yet the
avoiding offense, and the complying with public order is reason enough to make
the obedience to be necessary. For he that is otherwise disobliged (as when the
reason of the Law ceases, as to his particular, yet) remains still obliged if
he cannot do otherwise without scandal: but this is an obligation of charity,
not of justice.

14. All fasting is to be used with prudence and charity: for there is no end
to which fasting serves, but may be obtained by other instruments, and
therefore it must at no hand be made an instrument of scruple, or become an
enemy to our health, or be imposed upon persons that are sick or aged, or to
whom it is in any sense uncharitable; such as are wearied Travelers; or to
whom in the wh^le kind of it, it is useless, such as are Women with child,
poor people, and little children. But in these cases the Church has made
provision, and inserted caution into her Laws, and they are to be reduced to
practice according to custom, and the sentence of prudent persons, with great
latitude, and without niceness and curiosity: having this in our first care,
that we secure our virtue, and next that we secure our health, that we may the
beter exercise the labors of virtue, lest out of too much austerity we bring
our selves to that condition, S. Basil: Monast: Constit. cap. 5. Cassian: coll.
21. cap. 22

Ne per causa^ necessitatis eo imping^mus, ut voluptatibus serviamus.


that it be necessary to be indulgent to softness, ease and extreme
tenderness.

15. Let not intemperance be the Prologue or the Epilogue to your fast, lest
the fast be so far from taking off any thing of the sin, that it be an
occasion to increase it; and therefore when the fast is done, (...). Na^,
be careful that no supervening act of gluttony, or excessive drinking
unhallow the religion of the passed day; but eat temperately according to the
proportion of other meals, lest gluttony keep either of the gates to abstinence.

The benefits of Fasting.
He that undertakes to enumerate the benefits of fasting, may in the next page
also reckon all the benefits of physic: for fasting is not to be commended as
a duty, b^t as an instrument; and in that sense no Man can reprove it, or
undervalue it; but he that knows neither spiritual arts, nor spiritual
necessities: but by the doctors of the Church it is called, the nourishment of
prayer, the restraint of lust, the wings of the soul, the diet of Angels, the
instrument of humility, and self-denial, the purification of the Spirit: and
the paleness and maig^enesse of visage which is consequent to the daily fast of
great mortifiers, is by Saint Basil said to be the mark in the Forehead which
the Angel observed, when he signed the Saint^ in the forehead to escape the
wrath of God. [ The soul that is greatly vexed, which goes stooping and
feeble, and the eyes that fail, Baruch ^. v. 18.
and the hungry soul shall give thee praise and righteousness, O Lord.

SECT. VI. O keeping Festivals, and days holy to the Lord: particularly, the
Lords day.
TRue natural Religion, that which was common to all Nations and Ages did
principally rely upon four great propositions: 1. That there is one God. 2.
That God is nothing of those things which we see. 3. That God takes care of all
things below and governs all the World. 4. That he is the Great Creator of all
things without himself: and according to these were framed the four first
precepts of the Decalogue. In the first, the Unity of the Godhead is expressly
affirmed. In the second, his invisibility and immate^iality. In the third is
affirmed God's government and providence, by avenging them that swear falsely by
his Name, by which also his Omniscience is declared. In the fourth
Commandment, he proclaims himself the Maker of Heaven and Earth: for in
memory of God's rest from the work of six days, the seventh was hallowed into
a Sabbath: and the keeping it was a confessing GOD to be the great Maker of
Heaven and Earth; and consequently to this, it al^o was a conf^ssion of his
goodness, his Omnipotence and his Wisdom, all which were written with a
Sunbeam in the great book of the Creature.

So long as the Law of the Sabbath was bound upon God's people, so long GOD
would have that to be the solemn manner of confessing these attributes; but
when the Priesthood being changed there was a change also of the Law, the great
duty remained unalterable in changed circumstances. We are eternally bound to
confess God Almighty to be the Maker of Heaven and Earth; but the manner of
confessing it is changed from a rest or a doing nothing, to a speaking
something, from a day to a symbol, from a ceremony to a substance, from a
Jewish rite to a Christian duty: we profess it in our Creed, we confess it
in our lives, we describe it by every line of our life, by every action of
duty, by faith, and trust, and obedience: and we do also upon great reason
complie with the Jewish manner of c^nfessing the Creation, so far as it is
instrumental to a real duty. We keep one day in seven, and so confess the
manner and circumstance of the Creation: and we rest also that we may tend
holy duties; so imitating God's rest better then the Jew in Synesius, who lay
upon his face from evening to evening, and could not by stripes or wounds be
raised up to steer the ship in a great storm: God's rest was not a natural
cessation: he who could not labor could not be said to rest; but God's rest
is to be understood to be a beholding and a rejoicing in his work finished:
and therefore we truly represent God's rest, when we confess and rejoice in
God's Works and God's glory.

This the Christian Church does upon every day, but especially upon the Lord's
day which she has set apart for this and all other Offices of Religion, being
determined to this day, by the Resurrection of her dearest Lord, it being the
first day of joy the Church ever had. And now upon the Lord's day we are not
tied to the rest of the Sabbath, but to all the work of the Sabbath: and we
are to abstain from bodily labor, not because it is a direct duty to us as it
was to the Jews, but because it is necessary in order to our duty, that we
attend to the Offices of Religion.

The observatio^ of the Lord's day differs nothing from the observation of the
Sabbath in the matter of Religion, but in the manner. They differ in the
ceremony and external rite. Rest with them was the principal: with us it is the
accessory. They differ in the office or forms of worship: For they were then to
worship God as a Creator and a gentle Father: we are to add to that, Our
Redeemer, and all his other excellencies and mercies: and though we have more
natural and proper reason to keep the Lords day then the Sabbath, yet the Jews
had a divine Commandment for their day, which we have not for ours: but we
have many Commandments to do all that honor to GOD which was intended in the
fourth Commandment: and the Apostles appointed the first day of the week for
doing it in solemn Assemblies; and the manner of worshipping God, and doing him
solemn honor and service upon this day, we may best observe in the following
measures.

Rules for keeping the Lords day and other Christian festivals.
1. When you go about to distinguish Festival days from common, do it not by
lessening the devotions of ordinary days, that the common devotion may seem
bigger upon Festivals, but on every day keep your ordinary devotions entire,
and enlarge upon the Holy day.

2. Upon the Lords day we must abstain from all servile and laborous works,
except such which are matters of necessity, of common life, or of great
charity: for these are permitted by that authority which has separated the
day for holy uses. The Sabbath of the Jews though consisting principally in
rest, and established by God, did yield to these. The labor of Love and the
labors of Religion were not against the reason and the spirit of the
Commandment, for which the Letter was decreed, and to which it ought to
minister: And therefore much more is it so on the Lords day, where the Letter
is wholly turned into Spirit, and there is no Commandment of God, but of
spiritual and holy actions The Priests might kill their beasts and dress them
for sacrifice: and Christ though born under the Law, might heal a sick man, and
the sick man might carry his bed to witness his recovery, and confess the
mercy, and leap and dance to God for joy: and an Ox might be led to water, and
an Ass be haled out of a ditch, and a man may take physic, and he may eat
meat, and therefore there were of necessity some to prepare and minister it:
and the performing these labors did not consist in minutes, and just
determined stages, but they had, even then, a reasonable latitude: so only as
to exclude unnecessary labor, or such as did not minister to charity or
religion. And therefore this is to be enlarged in the Gospel, whose Sabbath or
rest is but a circumstance, and accessory to the principal and spiritual
duties: Upon the Christian Sabbath, necessity is to be served first, then
charity, and then religion; for this is to give place to charity in great
instances; and the second to the first in all; and in all cases God is to be
worshipped in spirit and in truth.

3. The Lords day being the rememb^ance of a great blessing, must be a day of
joy, festivitie, spiritual ^ej^icing and thanksgiving, and therefore it is a
proper work of the day to let your devotions spend themselves in singing or
reading Psalms, in recounting the great works of God, in remembering his mercies
in worshipping his excellenc^es* in celebrating his attributes, in admi^ing his
person, in sending portions of pleasant meat to them for whom nothing is
provided, and in all the arts and instruments of advancing God's glory, and
the reputation of Religion: in which it were a great decency that a memorial
of the resurrection should be inserted, that the particular religion of the day
be not swallowed up in the general: And of this we may the more easily serve
our selves by rising seasonably in the morning to private devotion, and by
retiring at the leisures and spaces of the day not employed in public offices.

4. Fail not to be present at the public hours and places of prayer, entering
early and cheerfully, attending reverently and devoutly, abiding patiently
during the whole office, piously assisting at the prayers, and gladly also
hearing the Sermon, and at no hand omitting to receive the holy Communion when
it is offered (unless some great reason excuse it) this being the great
solemnity of thanksgiving, and a proper work of the day.

5. After the solemnities are past, and in the intervalls between the morning
and evening devotion (as you shall find opportunity) visit sick persons,
reconcile differences, do offices of neighb^u^h^od, ^nquire into the needs of
the poor, especially house keepers, relieve them as they shall need, and as you
are able: for then we truly rejoice in God, when we make our neighbors, the
poor members of Christ, rejoice together with us.

6. Whatsoever you are to do your self as necessary, you are to take care that
others also, who are under your charge, do in their sta^ion and manner. Let
your servants be called to Church, and all your family that can be spared
from necessary and great household ministeries: those that cannot, let them go
by turns, and be supplied otherwise as well as they may: and provide on these
days especially that they be instructed in the articles of faith, and
necessary parts of their duty.

7. Those who labor hard in the week, must be eased upon the Lord's day; such
ease being a great charity and alms: but at no hand must they be permitted to
use any unlawful games, any thing forbidden by the Laws, any thing that is
scandalous, or any thing that is dangerous, and apt to mingle sin with it; no
games prompting to wantonness, to drunkenness to quarrelling, to ridiculous and
superstitious customs; but let their refreshments be innocent, and charitable,
and of good report, and not exclusive of the duties of Religion.

8. Beyond these bounds because neither God nor man has passed any obligation
upon us, we must preserv our Christian liberty, and not suffer our selves to
be entangled with a yoke of bondage: for even a good action may become a ^^are
to us, if we make it an occasion of scruple by a pretense of necessity binding
loads upon the conscience not with the bands of God, but of men, and of fancy,
or of opinion, or of tyranny. Whatsoever is laid upon us by the hands of man,
must be acted and accounted of by the measures of a man; but our best measure
is this: He keeps the Lords day best that keeps it with most religion, and with
most charity.

9. What the Church has done in the article of the resurrection, she has in
some measure done in the other articles of the Nativity, of the Ascension, and
of the Descent of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost: and so great blessings deserve
an anniversary solemnity, since he is a very unthankful person that does not
often record them in the whole year, and esteem them the ground of his hopes,
the object of his faith, the comfort of his troubles, and the great effluxes of
the divine mercy, greater then all the victories over our temporal enemies, for
which all glad persons usually give thanks. And if with great reason the memory
of the resurrection does return solemnly every week, it is but reason the other
should return once a year. * To which I add, that the commemoration of the
articles of our Creed in solemn days and offices is a very excellent
instrument to convey and imprint the sense and memory of it upon the spirits of
the most ignorant person. For as a picture may with more fancy convey a story
to a man, then a plain narrative either in word or writing: so a real
representment, and an office of remembrance, and a day to declare it, is far
more impressive then a picture, or any other art of making and fixing imagery.

10. The memories of the Saints are precious to God, and therefore they ought
also to be so to us; and such persons who served God by holy living,
industrious preaching, and religiou^ dying, ought to have their names preserved
in honor, and God be glorified in them, and their holy doctrines and lives
published and imitated; and we by so doing give testimony to the article of the
communion of Saints. But in these cases as every Church is to be sparing in the
number of days, so also should she be temperate in her injunctions, not
imposing them but upon voluntary and unbusied persons, without snare or burden.
But the Holy day is best kept by giving God thanks for the excellent persons,
Apostles or Martyrs we then remember, and by imitating their lives: this all
may do: and they that can also keep the solemnity, must do that too when it is
publikly enjoined.

The mixed actions of Religion are, 1. Prayer. 2. Alms. 3. Repentance. 4.
Receiving the blessed Sacrament.

SECT. VII. Of Prayer.
THere is no greater argument in the world of our spiritual danger and
unwillingness to religion, then the backwardness which most men have always,
and all men have sometimes to say their prayers: so weary of their length, so
glad when they are done, so witty to ^xcuse and frustrate an opportunity: and
yet all is nothing but a desiring of God to give us the greatest and the best
things we can need, and which can make us happy: it is a work so easy, so
honorable, and to so great purpose, that in all the instances of religion and
providence except only the incarnation of his Son) God has not given us a
greater argument of his willingness to have us saved, and of our unwillingness
to accept it, his goodness and our gracelesness, his infinite condescension,
and our carelessness and folly, then by rewarding so easy a duty with so great
blessings.

Motives t^ Prayer.
I cannot say any thing beyond this very consideration and its appendages to
invite Christian people to pray often. But we may consider: That first it is a
duty commanded by God and his holy Son. 2. It is an act of grace and highest
honor that we dust and ashes are admitted to speak to the Eternal God, to run
to him as to a Father, to lay open our wants, to complain of our burdens, to
explicate our scruples, to beg remedy and ease, support and counsel, health
and safety, deliverance and salvation: and 3. God has invited us to it by many
gracious promises of hearing us. 4. He has appointed his most glorious Son to
be the President of Prayer, and to make continual intercession for us to the
throne of Grace. 5. He has appointed an Angel to present the Prayers of his
servants: and 6. Christ unites them to his own, and sanctifies them and makes
them effective and prevalent: and 7. Has put it into the hands of men to
rescind or alter all the decrees of God, which are of one kind (that is,
conditional, and concerning our selves and our final estate, and many instances
of our intermedial or temporal) by the power of prayers. 8. And the prayers of
m^n have saved c^ties and kingdoms from ruin; prayer has raise^ dead men to
life, has stopped the violence of fire, shut the mouths of wild beasts, has
altered the course of nature, caused rain in Egypt, and drought in the sea, it
made the Sun to go from West to East, and the Moon to stand still, and rocks
and mountains to walk, and it cures diseases without physic, and makes physic
to do the work of nature, and nature to do the work of grace, and grace to do
the work of God, and it does miracles of accident and event: and yet prayer
that does all this, is of it self nothing but an ascent of the mind to God, a
desiring things fit to be desired, and an expression of this desire to God as
we can, and as becomes us: And our unwillingness to pray, is nothing else but
a not desiring what we ought passionately to long for; or if we do desire it,
it is a choosing rather to miss our satisfaction and felicity, then to ask for
it.

There is no more to be said in this affair, but that we reduce it to practice
according to the following Rules.

Rules for the practice of Prayer.
1. We must be careful that we never ask any thing of God that is sinful, or
that directly ministers to sin: for that is to ask of God to dishonor himself,
and to undo us: we had need consider what we pray* for before it returns in
blessing it must be joined with Christ's intercession, and presented to God: Let
us principally ask of God power and assistances to do our duty, to glorify
God, to do good works, to live a good life, to die in the fear and favor of
God, and eternal life: these things God delights to g^ve, and commands that we
shall ask, and we may with confidence exspect to be answered graciously; for
these things are promised without any reservation of a secret condition: if we
ask them, and do our duty toward the obtaining them, we are sure never to miss
them.

2. We may lawfully pray to God for the gifts of the Spirit that minister to
holy ends, such as are the gift of preaching, the spirit of prayer, good
expression, a ready and unloosed tongue* good understanding, learning,
opportunities to publish them, etc. with these only restraints. 1. That we
cannot be so confident of the event of those prayers, as of the former. 2. That
we must be curious to secure our intention in these desires, that we may not
ask them to serve our own ends, but only for Gods glory, and then we shall
have them, or a blessing for desiring them. In order to such purposes our
intentions in the first desires cannot be amiss; because they are able to
sanctify other things, and therefore cannot be unhallowed themselves. 3. We
must submit to Gods Will, desiring him to choose our employment, and to furnish
our persons as he shall see expedient.

3. Whatsoever we may lawfully desire of temporal things, we may lawfully ask
of God in prayer, and we may expect them as they are promised. 1. Whatsoever is
necessary to our life and being is promised to us; and therefore we may with
certainty expect food and raiment; food to keep us alive; clothing to keep us
from nakedness and shame; so long as our life is permitted to us, so long all
things necessary to our life shall be ministered: we may be secure of
maintenance, but not secure of life, for that is promised, not this: only
concerning food and raiment we are not to make accounts by the measure of our
desires, but by the measure of our needs. 2. Whatsoever is convenient for us,
pleasant, and modestly delectable, we may pray for; so we do it. 1. with
submission to Gods will. 2. Without impatient desires. 3. That it be not a
trifle and inconsiderable, but a matter so grave and concerning, as to be a
fit matter to be treated on between God and our souls. 4. That we ask it not
to spend upon our lusts, but for ends of justice, or charity, or religion, and
that they be employed with sobriety.

4. He that would pray with effect must live with care and piety. For although
God gives to sinners and evil persons the common blessings of life and chance,
1 John. 3.31 John 9.31. Isa 1.15. and 58.7. Mal. 3 10. 1 Timothy 2 8. Psalm ^ 16.
and 66 8.
yet either they want the comfort and blessing of those blessings, or they
become occasions of sadder accidents to them, or serve to upbraid them in their
ingratitude or irreligion: and in all cases, they are not the effects of
prayer, or the fruits of promise, or instances of a fathers love; for they
cannot be expected with confidence, or received without danger, or used
without a cu^se and mischief in their company. * But as all sin is an
impediment to prayer, so some have a special indisposition toward acceptance;
such are Uncharitableness and wrath, Hypocrisy in the present action, Pride
and Lust: because these by defiling the body or the spirit, or by
contradicting some necessary ingredient in prayer (such as are Mercy,
Humility, Purity, and Sincerity) do defile the prayer, and make it a direct
sin in the circumstances, or formalitie of the action.

5. All prayer must be made with Faith and Hope: that is, we must certainly
believe we shall receive the grace which GOD has commanded us to ask: and we
must hope for such things which he has permitted us to ask; Mark 11.24. Iam.
5.6, 7.
and our Hope shall not be vain, though we miss what is not absolutely
promised, because we shall at least have an equal blessing in the denial, as
in the grant. And therefore the former conditions must first be secured; that
is, that we ask things necessary, or at least good and innocent and
profitable; and that our persons be gracious in the eyes of God; or else what
God has promised to our natural need^, he may in many degrees deny to our
personal incapacitie; but the thing bring secured, and the person disposed,
th^^e can be no fault at all: for whatsoever (...) ^emains is on God's part,
and that cannot possibly f^^l. But because the things which are not commanded
cannot possibly be secured (for we are not sure they are good in all
circumstances) we can but hope for such things even after we have secured our
good intentions. We are sure of a blessing, but in what instance we are not
yet assured.

6. Our prayers must be fervent, intense, earnest and importunate when we
pray for things of high concernment and necessity. Rom 12.18 and 15.30. Col.
4.12. 1 ^he^. 3.10 Ephesians 6 18. ^am 5.16. 1 Pet. 1.7.
[ Continuing instant in prayer: striving in prayer: laboring fervently in
prayer: night and day praying exceedingly: praying always with all praier] ^o
S. Paul calls it [ watching unto praier] so S. Peter: praying earnestly] so S.
James: and this is not at all to be abated in matters spiritual, and of duty:
for according as our desires are, so are our prayers; and as our prayers are,
so shall be the grace; and as that is, so shall be the measure of glory. But
this admitts of degrees according to the perfection or imperfection of our
state of life: but it has no other measures, but ought to be as great as it
can, the bigger the better; we must make no positive restraints upon it our
selves. In other things we are to use a bridle: and as we must limit our
desires with submission to Gods will: so also we must limit the importunity of
our prayers by the moderation and term of our desires. Pray for it as earnestly
as you may desire it.

7. Our desires must be lasting, and our prayers frequent, assiduous and
continual: not asking for a blessing once and then leaving it; but daily
renewing our snits, and exercising our hope, and faith, and patience, and
long-suffering, and Religion, and resignation, and self-denial in all the
degrees we shall be put to. This circumstance of duty our blessed Savior
taught, saying, [ That men ought always to pray and not to faint] Always to
pray signifies the frequent doing of the duty in general: Luke 18 1.22.1, 36.
but because we cannot always ask several things, and we also have frequent
need of the same things, and those are such as concern our great interest, the
precept comes home to this very circumstance; and S. Paul calls it, [ praying
without ceasing] and himself in his own case gave a precedent: 1 ^hes. 5.17.
[ For this cause I besought the Lord thrice.] And so did our blessed Lord, he
went thrice to God on the same errand, with the same words in a short space,
about half a night; for his time to solicit his suit was but short: ^^il. 1.4.
and the Philippians were remembered by the Apostle, their spiritual Father
always in every prayer of his. And thus we must always pray for the pardon of
our sins, for the assistance of Gods grace, for charity, for life eternal,
never giving over till we dye: and thus also we pray for supply of great
temporal needs in their several proportions: in all cases being curious we do
not give over out of weariness, or impatience: For God oftentimes defers to
grant our suit, because he loves to hear us beg it, and has a design to give
us more then we ask, even a satisfaction of our desires, and a blessing for the
very importunity.

8. Let the words of our prayers be pertinent, grave, material, not studiously
many, but according to our need, sufficient to express our wants, and to
signify our importunity. God hears us not the sooner for our many words, but
much the sooner for an earnest desire, to which let apt and sufficient words
minister, be they few, or many, according as it happens. A long prayer and a
short, differ not in their capacities of being accepted; for both of them take
their value according to the fervency of spirit, and the charity of the prayer.
That prayer which is short by reason of an impatient spirit, or dullness, or
despite of holy things, or in differency of desires, is very often criminal,
always imperfect; and that prayer which is long out of ostentation, or
superstition, or a trifling spirit, is as criminal and imperfect as the other
in their several instances. This rule relates to private prayer. In public,
our devotion is to be measured by the appointed office, and we are to support
our spirit with spiritual arts, that our private spirit may be a part of the
public spirit, and be adopted into the society and blessings of the communion
of Saints.

9. In all forms of prayer mingle petition with thanksgiving, that you may
endear the present prayer, and the future blessing by returning praise and
thanks for what we have already received. This is Saint Paul's advice, [ Be
careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God.]

10. Whatever we beg of God, let us also work for it; if the thing be matter of
duty, or a consequent to industry. For God loves to bless labor and to reward
it, (...). Arrian l. 2. c. 36.
but not to support idleness. And therefore our blessed Savior in his Sermons
joins watchfulness with prayer: for Gods graces are but assistances, not new
creations of the whole habit in every instant, or period of our life. Read
Scriptures, and then pray to GOD for understanding: pray against temptation,
but you must also resist the Devil, and then he will flee from you. Ask of GOD
competency of living, but you must also work with your hands, the things that
are honest, that ye may have to supply in time of need: We can but do our
endeavor, and pray for blessing, and then leave the success with GOD: and
beyond this we cannot deliberate, we cannot take care; but so far we must.

To this purpose let every man study his prayers, and read his duty in his
petitions. For the body of our prayer is the sum of our duty; and as we
ask of God whatsoever we need; so we must labor for all that we ask. Because
it is our duty, therefore we must pray for Gods grace: but because Gods grace
is necessary, and without it we can do nothing, we are sufficiently taught,
that in the proper matter of our religious prayers, is the just matter of our
duty: and if we shall turn our prayers into precepts, we shall ^he easier turn
our hearty desires into effective practices.

12. In all our prayers we must be careful to attend our present work, Inter
sac^a and v^t^ ve^^is etiam profanis a^ stiner^ me. Tacit.
having a present mind, not wandering upon impertinent things, not distant from
our words, much less contrary to them: and if our thoughts do at any time
wander, and divert upon other objects, bring them back again with prudent and
severe a^ts; by all means striving to obtain a diligent, a sober, an untroubled
and a composed spirit.

13. Let your posture and gesture of body in prayers be reverent, grave, and
humble; according to public order, or the best examples, if it be in public;
if it be in private, either stand or kneel, or lie flat upon the ground on your
face, in your ordinary and more solemn prayers; but in extraordinary, casual,
and ejaculatory prayers, the reverence and devotion of the soul, and the
lifting up the eyes and hands to God with any other posture not undecent, is
usual and commendable; for we may pray in bed, on horseback, every where and at
all times, 1 Timothy 2.8.
and in all circumstances: and it is well if we do so; and some servants have
not opportunity to pray so often as they would, unless they supply the
appetites of Religion by such accidental devotions.

14. [ Let prayers and supplications* 1 Timothy 1.^.
and giving of thanks be made for all men: for Kings and all that are in
authority: For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.]
We who must love our Neighbors as our selves, must also pray for them as for
our selves: with this only difference; that we may enlarge in our temporal
desires for Kings, and pray for secular prosperity to them with more
importunity then for our selves; because they need more to enable their duty
and government, and for the interests of Religion and Justice. This part of
prayer is by the Apostle called [ Intercession] in which with special care we
are to remember our Relatives, our Family, our Charge, our Benefactours, our
creditours; not forgetting to beg pardon and charity for our Enemies, and
protection against them.

14. Rely not on a single prayer in matters of great concernment: but make it
as public as you can by obtaining of others to pray for you: this being the
great blessing of the communion of Saints, that a prayer united is strong, like
a well ordered Army; and God loves to be tied fast with such cords of love, and
constrained by a holy violence.

15. Every time that is not seaz'd upon by some other duty, is seasonable
enough for prayer; but let it be performed as a solemn duty morning and
evening, that God may begin and end all our business, and the outgoings of the
morning and evening may praise him; for so we bless God, and God blesses us.
And yet sail not to find or make opportunities to worship God at some other
times of the day; at least by ejaculations and short addresses: more or less,
longer or shorter, solemnly or without solemnity, privately or publicly, as
you can, or are permitted: always remembering, that as every sin is a degree of
danger and unsafety; so every pious prayer and well-imploied opportunity is a
degree of return to hope and pardon.

Cautions for making Vows.
16. A vow to God is an act of prayer, and a great degree and instance of
opportunity, and an increase of du^y by some new uncommanded instance, or some
more eminent degree of duty or frequency of action, or earnestness of spirit in
the same. And because it has pleased God in all Ages of the World to admit of
intercourse with his servants in the matter of vows, it is not ill advice, that
we make vows to God in such cases in which we have great need, or great danger.
But let it be done according to these rules and by these cautions.

1. That the matter of the Vow be lawful. 2. That it be useful in order to
Religion or Charity. 3. That it be grave, not trifling and impertinent, but
great in our proportion of duty toward the blessing. 4. That it be in an
uncommanded instance, that is, that it be of something, or in some manner, or
in some degree to which formerly we were not formerly obliged, or which we
might have omitted without sin. 5. That it be done with prudence, that is,
that it be safe in all the circumstances of person, lest we beg a blessing and
fall into a snare. 6. That every vow of a new action be also accompanied with
a new degree and enforcement of our essential and unalterable duty: such as was
Jacobs vow; that (besides the payment of a tithe) God should be his God: that
so he might strengthen his duty to him first in essentials and precepts; and
then in additionals and accidentals. For it is but an ill Tree that spends more
in leaves and ^^ckers and gummes then in fruit: and that thankfulness and
Religion is best, that first secures duty, and then enlarges in counsels.
Therefore let every great prayer, and great need, and great danger draw us to
GOD nearer by the approach of a pious purpose to live more strictly, and let
every mercy of GOD answering that prayer, Augustum annulum non g^sta: dixit
Pythag. id est, vitaegenus liberum sectare nec vinculo temetipsum ^bstringe.
Plutarch.
produce a real performance of it. 7. Let not young beginners in Religion
enlarge their hearts and straighten their liberty by vows of long continuance:
nor (indeed) any one else, without a great experience of himself, and of all
accidental dangers. Vows of single actions are safest and proportionable to
those single blessings ever begged in such cases of sudden and transient
importunities. Sic Novatus ^^vitios suos compulit ad jurandum n^ ^nquam ad
Catholicos Episcopos redirent: Eusebius l. 2. Eccl hist.
8. Let no action which is matter of question and dispute in Religion, ever
become the matter of a vow. He vows foolishly that promises to God to live and
die in such an opinion, in an article not necessary, nor certain; or that upon
confidence of his present guide, binds himself for ever to the profession of
what he may afterward more reasonably contradict, or may find not to be
useful, or not profitable, but of some danger, or of no necessity.

If we observe the former rules, we shall pray piously and effectually; but
because even this duty has in it some especial temptations, it is necessary
that we be armed by special remedies against them. The dangers are 1. Wandering
thoughts. 2. Tediousness of spirit. Against the first these advices are
profitable.

Remedies against wandering thoughts in Prayer.
If we feel our spirits apt to wander in our prayers, and to retire into the
World, or to things unprofitable, or vain and impertinent;

1. Use prayer to be assisted in prayer: pray for the spirit of supplication,
for a sober, fixed, and recollected spirit: and when to this you add a moral
industry to be steady in your thoughts, whatsoever wanderings after this do
return irremediably, are a misery of Nature and an imperfection, but no sin
while it is not ch^rished and indulged to.

2. In private it is not amiss to attempt the cure by reducing your prayers
into Collects and short forms of prayer, making voluntary interruptions, and
beginning again, that the want of spirit and breath may be supplied by the
short stages and periods.

3. When you have observed any considerable wandering of your thoughts, bind
your self to repeat that prayer again with actual attention, or else revolve
the full sense of it in your spirit, and repeat it in all the effect and
desires of it: and possibly the tempter may be driven away with his own art,
and may cease to interpose his trifles, when he perceives they do but vex the
person into carefulness, and piety: and yet he loses nothing of his devotion,
but doubles the earnestness of his care.

4. If this be not seasonable or opportune, or apt to any Man's circumstances,
yet be sure with actual attention to say a hearty Amen to the whole prayer,
with one united desire, earnestly begging the graces mentioned in the prayer:
for that desire does the great work of the prayer, and secures the blessing, if
the wandering thoughts were against our will, and disclaimed by contending
against them.

5. Avoid multiplicity of businesses of the World; and in those that are
unavoydable, labor for an evennesse and tranquillity of spirit, that you may
be untroubled and smooth in all tempests of fortune: for so we shall better
tend Religion, when we are not torn in pieces with the cares of the World, and
seized upon with low affections, passions and interest.

6. It helps much to attention and actual advertisement in our prayers, if w^
say our prayers silently without the voice, only by the spirit. For in mental
prayer, if our thoughts wander, we only stand still; when our mind returns, we
go on again, there is none of the prayer lost, as it is, if our mouths speak
and our hearts wander.

7. To incite you to the use of these or any other counsels you shall meet
with, remember that it is a great und^c^ncy to desire of God to hear those
prayers, a great part whereof we do not hear our selves. If they be not worthy
of our attention, they are far more unworthy of Gods.

Signs of tediousness of spirit in our prayers and all actions of religion.
The second temptation in our prayer is a tediousness of spirit, or a weariness
of the employment: like that of the Jews, who complained that they were weary
of the new moons, and their souls loathed the frequent return of their
Sabbaths: so do very many Christians, who first pray without servour and
earnestness of spirit: and secondly meditate but seldom, and that without
fruit, or sense, or affection: or thirdly who seldom examine their consciences,
and when they do it, they do i^ but sleepily, slightly, without compunction,
or hearty purpose, or fruits of amendment. 4. They enlarge themselves in the
thoughts and fruition of temporal things, running for comfort to them only in
any sadness and misfortune. 5. They love not to frequent the Sacraments, nor
any the instruments of religion, as sermons, confessions, prayers in public
fastings, but love ease, and a loose undiscipli'nd life. 6. They obey not their
superiors, but follow their own judgment, when their judgment follows their
affections, and their affections follow sense and worldly pleasures. 7. They
neglect or dissemble, or defer, or do not attend to the motions and
inclinations to virtue which the Spirit of God puts into their soul. 8. They
repent them of their vows and holy purposes, not because they discover any
indiscretion in them, or intolerable inconvenience, but because they have
within them labor, (as the case now stands to them) displeasure. 9. They
content themselves, with the first degrees and necessary parts of virtue, and
when they are arrived thither, they sit down, as if they were come to the
mountain of the Lord, and ca^e not to proceed on toward perfection. 10. They
enquire into all cases in which it may be lawful to omit a duty, and though
they will not do less then they are bound to, yet they will do no more then
needs must; for they do out of fear, and self-love, not out of the love of God,
or the spirit of holiness and zeal. The event of which will be this. He that
will do no more then needs must, will soon be brought to omit something of his
duty, and will be apt to believe less to be necessary then is.

Remedies against tediousness of spirit.
The Remedies against this temptation are these.

1. Order your private devotions so, that they become not arguments and causes
of tediousness by their indiscreet length; but reduce your words into a
narrower compass, still keeping all the matter, and what is cut off in the
length of your prayers, supply in the earnestness of your spirit; for so
nothing is lost while the words are changed into matter, and length of time
into servencie of devotion. The forms are made not the less perfect, and the
spirit is more, and the scruple is removed.

2. It is not imprudent if we provide variety of forms of Prayer to the same
purposes, that the change by consulting with the appetites of fancy, may better
entertain the Spirit: and possibly we may be pleased to recite a hymn, when a
collect seems flat to us and unpleasant, and we are willing to sing rather then
to say, or to sing this rather then that: we are certain that variety is
delightful, and whether that be natural to us, or an imperfection, yet if it be
complied with, it may remove some part of the temptation.

3. Break your office and devotion into fragments, and make frequent returnings
by ejaculations and abrupt entercourses with God; for so, no length can oppress
your tenderness and sickliness of spirit; and by often praying in such manner
and in all circumstances, we shall habituate our souls to prayer, by making it
the business of many lesser portions of our time: and by thrusting in between
all our other imploiments, it will make every thing relish of religion, and by
degrees tu^n all into its nature.

4. Learn to abstract your thoughts and desires from pleasures and things of
the world. For nothing is a direct cure to this evil, but cutting off all
others loves and adherences. Order your affairs so, that religion may be
propounded to you as a reward, and prayer as your defense, and holy actions as
your security, and charity and good works as your treasure: consider that all
things else are satisfactions but to the brutish part of a man, and that these
are the refreshments and relishes of that noble part of us by which we are
better then beasts: and whatsoever other instrument, exercise or consideration
is of use to take our loves from the world, the same is apt to place them upon
God.

5. Do not seek for deliciousness and sensible consolations in the actions of
religion, but only regard the duty and the conscience of it. For although in
the beginning of religion most frequently, and at ^^me other tim's irregularly,
God complies with our infirmity, and encourages our duty with little
overflowings of spiritual joy, and sensible pleasure, and delicacies in prayer,
so as we seem to feel some little beam of Heaven and great refreshments from
the Spirit of consolation; yet this is not always safe for us to have, neither
safe for us to expect and look for: and when we do, it is apt to make us cool
in our enquiries and waitings upon Christ when we want them: It is a running
after him, nor for the miracles, but for the loaves; not for the wonderful
things of God, and the desires of pleasing him, but for the pleasures of
pleasing our selves. And as we must not judge our devotion to be barren or
unfruitful when we want the overflowings of joy running over: so neither must
we cease for want of them. If our spirits can serve God choosingly and greedily
out of pure conscience of our duty, it is better in it self, and more safe to
us.

6. Let him use to soften his spirit with frequent meditation upon s^d and
dolorous objects, as of death, the terrors of the day of judgment; fearful
judgments upon sinners, strange horrid accidents, fear of Gods wrath, the pains
of Hell, the unspeakable amazements of the damned, the intolerable load of a
sad eternity. For whatsoever crea^es fear, or makes the spirit to dwell in a
religious sadness, is apt to entender the spirit, and make it devout and plyant
to any part of duty. For a great fear, when it is ill managed, is the parent of
superstition; but a discreet and well guided fear produces religion.

7. Pray often and you shall pray oftener, and when you are accustomed to a
frequent devotion, it will so insensibly unite to your nature and affections,
that it will become trouble to omit your usual or appointed prayers: and what
you obtain at first by doing violence to your inclinations, at last will not be
le^t without as great unwillingness as that by which at first it entered. This
rule relies not only upon reason derived from the nature of habits, which turn
into a second nature, and make their actions easy, frequent and delightful:
but it relies upon a reason depending upon the nature and constitution of
grace, whose productions are of the same nature with the p^^ent, and increases
it self, naturally growing from g^anes to huge trees, from minutes to vast
proportions, and from moments to Eternity. But be sure not to omit your usual
prayers without great reason, though without sin it may be done; because after
you have omitted something, in a little while you will be past the scruple of
that, and begin to be tempted to leave out more: keep your self up to your
usu^l forms; you may enlarge when you will; but do not contract or lessen them
without a very probable reason.

8 Let a man frequently and seriously by imagination place himself upon his
deathbed and consider what great joys he shall have for the remembrance of
every day well spent: and what then he would give that he had so spent all his
days: He may g^esse at it by proportions: for it is certain he shall have a
joyful and prosperous night, who has spent his day ^olily: and he resignes
his soul with peace into the hands of God, who has lived in the peace of God,
and the works of religion in his life time. This consideration is of a real
event, it is of a thing that will certainly come to pass. It is appointed for
all men once to die, and after death comes ^udgment; the apprehension of which
is dreadful, and the presence of it is intolerable, unless by religion and
sanctity we are disposed for so venerable an appearance.

9. To this may be useful that we consider the easiness of Christ's yoke, See
the Great Exemplar, Part. 3. Disc. 14. of the ea^iness of Christian Religion.
the excellences and sweetnesses that are in religion, the peace of conscience,
the joy of the Holy Ghost, the rejoicing in God, the simplicity and pleasure of
virtue, the intricacy, trouble and business of sin; the blessings and health
and reward of that, the cu^s^s, the sicknesses and sad consequences of this;
and that, if we are weary of the labors of religion, we must eternally sit
still and do nothing: for whatsoever we do contrary to it, is infinitely more
full of labor, care, difficulty, and vexation.

10. Consider this also, that tediousness of spirit, is the beginning of the
most dangerous condition and estate in the whole World. For it is a great
disposition to the sin against the holy Ghost: it is apt to bring a man to
backsliding, and the state of unregeneration, to make him return to his vomit
and his sink, and either to make the man impatient, or his condition
scrupulous, unsatisfied, ^^k^ome and ^^sper^t^: and it is better that he had
never known the way of godliness, then after the knowledge of it that he should
fall away. The (...) no^ in the world a greater sign that the spirit of
Reprobation is beginning upon a man, then when he is habitually and constantly,
or very frequently, weary, and slights, or loathes holy Offices.

11. The last remedy that preservs the hope of such a man, and can reduce him
to the state of zeal and the love of God, is a pungent, sad, and a heavy
affliction; not desperate, but recreated with some intervals of kindness, or
little comforts, or entertained with hopes of deliverance: which condition, if
a man shall fall into, by the grace of God he is likely to recover: but if this
help him not it is infinite odds but he will quench the Spirit.

SECT. VIII. Of Alms.
LOve is as communicative as fire, as busy, and as active, and it has four
twin Daughters, extreme like each other; and but that the Docters of the School
have done as Thamars Midwife did, who bound a Scarlet thread, something to
distinguish them, it would be very hard to call them asunder. Their names are:
1. Mercy. 2. Beneficence, or well-doing. 3. Liberality. And 4. Alms; which by
a special privilege has obtained to be called after the Mothers name, and is
commonly called, Charity. The first or eldest is seated in the affection, and
it is that which all the other must attend. For mercy without Alms is
acceptable, when the person is disabled to express outwardly, what he heartily
desires. But Alms without Mercy, are like prayers without devotion, or
Religion without Humility. 2. Beneficence, or well-doing, is a promptness and
nobleness of mind, making us to do offices of curtefie, and humanity to all
sorts of persons in their need, or out of their need. 3. Liberality is a
disposition of mind opposite to covetousness, and consists in the despite and
neglect of money upon just occasions, and relates to our friends, children,
kindred, servants and other relatives. 4. But Alms is a relieving the poor and
needy. The first and the last only are duties of Christianity. The second and
third are circumstances and adjuncts of these duties: for Liberality increases
the degree of Alms, making our gift greater; and Beneficence extends it to
more persons and orders of Men, spreading it wider. The former makes us
sometimes to give more then we are able; and the latter gives to more then need
by the necessity of Beggars, and serves the needs and conveniences of persons,
and supplies circumstances: whereas properly. Alms are doles and largesses to
the necessitous, and calamitous people; supplying the necessities of Nature,
and giving remedies to their miseries.

Me^cy and Alms are the body and soul of that charity which we must pay to our
Neighbors need: and it is a precept which God therefore enjoined to the World,
that the great inequality which he was pleased to suffer in the possessions and
accidents of Men, might be reduced to some temper and evenness; and the most
miserable person might be reconciled to some sense and participation of
felicity.

Works of mercy, or the several kinds of corporal Alms.
The works of Mercy are so many as the affections of Mercy have objects, or as
the World has kinds of misery. Men want meat or drink, or clothes, or a
house, or liberty, or attendance, or a grave. In proportion to these, seven
works are usually assigned to Mercy; and there are seven kinds of corporal
alms reckoned. Mat. 25.35.
1. To feed the hungry. 2. To give drink to the thirsty. 3. Or clothes to the
naked. 4. To redeem Captives. 5. To visit the sick. 6. To entertain strangers.
7. To bury the dead. Mat. 25. 2 S^m. 2.
But many more may be added. Such as are. 8. To give physic to sick persons.
9. To bring cold and starved people to warm^h and to the fire: for sometimes
clothing will not do it: or this may be done when we cannot do the other. 10.
To lead the blind in right ways. 11. To lend money. 12. To forgive debts. 13.
To remit forfeitures. 14. To mend highways and bridges. 15. To reduce or
guide wandering travelers. 16. To ease th^^r labors by acco^modating their work
with a^t instruments; or their j^urney with beast^ of carriage. 17. To deliver
the poor from their oppressors. 18. To dye for my b^other^. 19. To pay maidens
dowries, and to procure for them honest and chaste marriages. N^bi^is hae^ esset
^^^tatis rir^ du^^us,
Q^^d pro ^^atre m^r^ ve^. (...).
Matt.


1 These. 5.14. H^b. 10.24.
Works of spiritual A^mes and mercy, are
1. To teach the ignorant. 2. To counsel doubting persons 3. To admon^sh
sinners diligently, prudently, seasonably, and charitably: To which also may be
reduced, provoking and encouraging to good works. 4. To comfort the afflicted.
5. To pardon offenders. 6. To suffer and support the weak. 7. To pray for all
estates of men, and for relief to all their necessities. To which may be added.
8. To punish or correct re^ractorin^sse. 9. To be gentle and charitable in
censuring the actions of others. 1^. To establish the scrupulous wave^ing, and
inconstant spirits. 11. To confirm the strong. 12. Not to give scandal. 13. To
quit a man of his fear. 14. (...).
To ^edeem maidens from prostitution and publication of their bodies.

To both these kinds, a third also may be added of a mixed nature, partly
corporal, and partly spr^ritual: such are. 1. Reconciling enemies. (...). (...).
2. E^ecting public Schools of Learning. 3. Maintaining Lectures of Divinity.
4. Erecting Colleges for Religion, and retirement from the noyses and more
frequent temptations of the World. 5. ^inding employment for unbusied persons,
and putting children to hone^t Trad^s. For the particulars of Mercy or Alms
cannot be na^^ower then Men's needs are: and the old method of Alms is too
narrow to comprize them all; and yet the kinds are too many to be discoursed of
particularly: only ou^ ^ l^st^d Savior in the precept of Alms, use^ the
instances of relieving the poor, and forgiveness of injuri^^* and by
pr^portion to these, ^he rest whose duty is plain simple easi^ and necessary,
may be determined But Alms in general are to be disposed of according to the
following Rules.

Rules for giving Alms.
1. Let no man do ^lmes of that which is none of his own (...) of that he is to
make ^estitu^^^n; that is due to the owners, (...)
not to the poor: for ev^ry m^n has need of his own, and this is first to be
provided for* and then you must (...) of the needs of the poor. He that giv^s
the poor what is not his own, makes himself a ^^^ef, and the poo^ to be the
r^c^ive^s. This is not to be understood as if it were unlawful for a man that
is not able to pay his debts, to giv^ smaller alms to the poor. He may not
give such portions as can in any sense more disable him to do justice: but
such, which if they were saved could not advance the other duty, may ^e^ire to
this, and do here what they may, Praebe^u^ (...) lia^ (...) S Aug. Prove. 3 ^
since in the other duty they cannot do what they should. But g^nera^ly
Cheaters and Robbers cannot give alms of what they have cheated and robbed,
unless they cannot tell the persons whom they have injured, or the
proportions; and in such cases they are to give those unknown portions to the
poor by way of restitution, for it is no alms: only God is the supreme Lord to
whom those escheats devolve, and the poor are his Receivers.

2. Of mon^y unjustly taken and yet voluntarily parted with, we may and are
bound to give alms: such as is money given and taken for false witness,
bribes, simoniacall contracts, because the Receiver has no right to keep it,
nor the Giver any right to recall it, it is unjust money, and yet payable to
none but the supreme Lord (who is the person injured) and to his Delegates,
that is, the poor. To which I insert these cautions. 1. If the person in^^red
by the unjust sentence of a bribed Judge, or by false witness, be poor, he is
the proper object and bosom to whom the resti^ution is to be made. 2. In case
of ^imony, D^c^^t: ep. tit de Simonia.
the Church to whom the Simony was injurious, is the lap into which the
restitution is to be powered; and if it be poor and out of repair, the Alms or,
Restitution (shall I call it) are to be paid to it.

3. There is some sort of gain that has in it no injustice properly so called;
but it is unlawful and filthy l^cre: such as is money taken for work done
unlawfully upon the Lords day, hire taken for disfiguring ones self, and for
being professed jesters, the wages of such as make unjust bargains, and of
harlots: of this money there is some preparation to be made before it be given
in Alms. The money is infected with the plague, and must pass through the
fire or the water before it be fit for Alms: the person must repent and leave
the crime, and then minister to the poor.

4. He that gives Alms must do it in mercy, that is, Donu^ nudum est n^si
c^ns^nsu vestiatu^. ^^. C. de pactis.
out of a true sense of the calamity of his brother, first feeling it in
himself in some proportion, and then endeavoring to ease himself and the other
of their common calamity. Against this rule they offend who give Alms out of
custom, or to upbraid the poverty of the ^ther, or to make him mercenary and
obliged, or with any unhandsome circumstances.

5. He that gives Alms must do it with a single eye and he^rt; that is, Q^i
dedit be^^^^ um ^ace (...) qui accepit. Senec.
without designs to get the praise of men: and if he secures that, he may
either give them publicly, or privately: for Christ intended only to provide
against pride and hypocrisy, when he bade Alms to be g^ven in secret; it
b^ing otherwise one of hi^ commandments, that our light should shine before
men: this is more ex^ellent, that is more safe.

6. To this also appertains, that he who has done a good turn should so
forget it as not to speak o^ it: but he that b^asts it or upbraids it, hai^h
paid himself, and lost the nobleness of the charity.

7. Give Alms with a cheerful heart and countenance, 2 Cor. 9.7.
not grudgingly or of necessity, for God loves the cheerful giver; and
therefore give quickly when the power is in thy hand, and the need is in thy
Neighbor, and thy Neighbor at thy door. He gives twice that relieves speedily.

Luke 6.30.
8. According to thy ability give to all men that need; and in equal needs give
first to good men, rather then to bad men; and if the needs be unequal do so
too; provided that the need of the poorest be not violent or extreme: Galat.
6.10.
but if an evil man be in extreme necessity, he is to be releived rather then a
good man who can tarry longer, and may subsist without it; and if he be a good
man, he will desire it should be so: because himself is bound to save the life
of his brother with doing some inconvenience to himself: and no difference of
virtue or vice, can make the ease of one beggar equal with the li^e of another.

9. Give no Alms to vicious persons, if such Alms will support their sin: as
if they will continue in idleness [ if they will not work, 2 These. 3.10. A Ca^
allchi^n^n ^^ia sella ^iada non si cr^vella.
neither let them eat] or if they w^ll spend it in De Mendico ma^e me^etur, qui
ei dat quod edat, aut (...)
N^m and illud quod dat perdit, and illi prodite^i vitam ad mis^^tam.
T^^n.
drunkenness, or wantonness: such persons when they are reduced to very great
want, must be releived in such proportions, as may not relieve their dying
lust, but may refresh their faint or dying bodies.

10. The best objects of charity are poor hous-keepers that labor hard, and
are burdened with many children; or Gentlemen fallen into sad poverty,
especially if by innocent mi^fo^tune (and if their crimes b^ought them i^to it,
yet they not be relived according to the former rule), pe^^ecuted p^^sons,
(...), and father (...) chi^^^en, put^ing them to ^on^^t trades or sc^^ols of
learning: (...).
and (...) and (...) into the needs of (...) and me^^er families: (...) t^ere
are in ^y (...) that h^ve nothing left (...) and (...) and toward such (...)
add two c^^cumsta^ces of charity. 1. To enq^ire them out. A d^na (...) ^ing
g^^ (...).
2. ^o convey our relief unto them so as we do not make them ashamed.

11. Give, looking for nothing against at is, without consideration of future
advantages: give to children, to old men, to the unthankful, and the dying, and
to those you shall never see again: for else your Alms or cu^t^sy is ^ot
charity, but traffi^k and merchandise: and be sure that you omit not to (...)
the n^eds ^f your en^mie and the inju^^^^ is for to p^ssibly you may wi^ hi^ to
your se^f; but do you intend the winning him to God.

12. Trust not your Alms to in^^rmedial, u^^^^tain and under disp^nsers: by
which (...) not only intended the securing your Alms in the right channel; but
the humili^y of your person, and that which the Ap^stle calls the labor of
love: and if you converse in Hospitals, and Almshouses, and minister with your
own hand what your heart has first decreed, you will find your hearts endeared
and made familiar with the needs and with the persons of the poor, those
excellent images of Christ.

13. Whatsoever is superflous in thy estate is to be dispensed in Alms. --
Praemonst^^ tibi
Vt itae te aliorum mis^rescat, ne tui alio^ miser^at.
Trinummus.
He that has two coats must give to him that has none; that is, he that has
beyond his need must give that which is beyond it: Only among needs we are to
reckon not only what will support our life, but also what will maintain the
decency of our estate and person; not only in present needs, but in all future
necessities, and very probable contingences, but no further: we are not obliged
beyond this, unless we see very great, public and calamitous necessities: but
yet, if we do extend beyond our measures, and give more then we are able, we
have the Philippians and many holy persons for our precedent, we have S. Paul
for our encouragement, we have Christ for our Counselor, we have God for our
rewarder, and a great treasure in Heaven for our recompense and restitution.
B^t I propound it to the consideration of all Christian people, that they be
not nice and curious, fond and indulgent to themselves in taking accounts of
their personal conveniences, and that they make their p^oportions moderate and
easy, according to the order and manner of Christianity; and the consequent
will be this, that the poor will more plentifully be relieved, themselves will
be more able to do it, and the duty will be less chargeable, and the owners of
estates charged with fewer accounts in the spending them. It cannot be denied,
but in the expenses of all liberal and great personages many things might be
spared: some superfluous servants, some idle meetings, some unnecessary and
imprudent feasts, some garments too costly, some unnecessary Lawsuits, some
vain journeys: and when we are tempted to such needless expenses, if we shall
descend to moderation, and lay aside the surplusage, we shall find it with
more profit to be laid out upon the poor members of Christ, then upon our own
with vanity. But this is only intended to be an advice in the manner of doing
Alms: for I am not ignorant that great variety of clothes always have been
permitted to Princes and Nobility, and others in their proportion; and they
usually give those clothes as rewards to servants, and other persons needful
enough, and then they may serve their own fancy and their duty too: but it is
but reason and religion to be careful, that they be given to such only where
duty, or prudent liberality, or alms determine them: but in no sense let them
do it so as to minister to vanity, to luxury, to prodigality. The like also is
to be observed in other instances. And if we once give our minds to the study
and arts of Alms, we shall find ways enough to make this duty easy*
p^ofitable, and useful.

1. He that plays at any game must resolve before hand to be indifferent to
win or lose: but if he gives to the poor all that he wins it is better then to
keep it to himself: but it were better yet, that he lay by so much as he is
wil^i^g to lose, and let the game alone, and by giving so much Alms, traffic
for eternity. That is one way.

2. Another is, keeping the fasting days of the Church^* which if our
condition be such as to be able to cast our accounts* and make abatements for
our wanting so many meals in the whole year, (which by the old appointment did
amount to (...) and since most of them are fallen into de^u^tude, we may make
up as many of them as we please by voluntary fasts) we may from hence find a
considerable relief for the poor. But if we be not willing sometimes to fast
that our brother may e^t, we should ill die for him. S. Martin had given all
that he had in the world to the poor, save one coat* and that also he divided
between two beggars. A Father in the mount of Nitria was reduced at last to the
Inventory of one Testament, and that book also was tempted from him by the
needs of one whom he thought poorer then himself. Greater yet: S. Paulinus sold
himself to slavery to redeem a young man for whose captivity his Mother wept
sadly; and it is said that S. Katherine sucked the envenomed wounds of a
villain who had injured her most impudently: And I shall tell you of a greater
charity then all these put together: Christ gave himself to shame and death to
redeem his enemies from bondage, and death, and Hell.

3. Learn of the frugal man, and only avoid sordid actions, and turn good
husband and change your arts of getting into providence for the poor, and we
shall soon become rich in good works: and why should we not do ^s much for
charity, as for covetousness; for Heaven, as for the fading world; for God and
the Holy Jesus, as for the needless superfluities of back and belly?

14. In giving (...) to beggars and persons of that low ^ank, it is better to
give little to each that we may give to the more, so extending our alms to
many persons: but in charities of religion, as building Hospitals, Colleges,
and houses for devotion, and in supplying the accidental wants of decayed
persons, fallen from great plenty to great necessity, it is better to u^ite our
alms then to dis^erse them, to make a noble relief or maintenance to one, and
to restore him to comfort, then to support only his natural needs, and keep him
alive only, unrescued from sad discomforts.

15. The Precept of alms or charity binds not indefinitely to all the
instances and kinds of charity: for he that delights to feed the poor, and
spends all his portion that way, is not bound to enter into prisons and redeem
captives: but we are obliged by the presence of circumstances, and the special
disposition of providence, and the pityablenesse of an object, to this or that
particular act of charity. The eye is the sense of mercy, and the bowels are
its organ, and that enkindles pity, and pity produces alms: when the eye sees
what it never saw, the heart will think what it never thought: but when we have
an object present to our eye, then we must ^i^y, for the^e the providence of
God has fi^ted our charity with circumstances. He that is in thy sight or in
thy Neit^^^ who (...) is fallen into the lot of thy charity.

Luk ^1.2. Acts. 3.6 Chi ti da un ossa non ti vorrebbe mort^

2 Cor 8 12 1 P. 1.1, 22.


16. If thou have no money yet thou must have mercy, and art bound to pity the
poor, and pray for them, and throw thy holy desires and devotions into the
treasure of the Church: and if thou do what thou art able, be it little or
great, corporal or spiritual, the charity of alms, or the charity of prayers,
a cup of wine or a cup of water, if it be but love to the brethren, or a desire
to help all, or any of Christ's poor, it shall be accepted according to what a
man has, not according to what he has not. For Love is all this, and all the
other Commandments: and it will express it self where it can, and where it
cannot, yet it is love still, and it is also sorrow that it cannot.

Motives to Charity.
Math. 6.4. and Math. 13.12.33. and ^5.30. Luke 11.41,
The motives to this duty are such as holy Scripture has propounded to us by
way of consideration and proposition of its excellencies, and consequent
reward. 1. There is no one duty which our blessed Savior did recommend to his
Disciples with so repeated an injunction as this of charity and Alms. 1 Timothy 1.
To which add the words spoken by our Lord, It is better to give then to
receive; and when we consider how great a blessing it is that we beg not from
door to door, it is a ready instance of our thankfulness to God, for his sake
to relieve them that do. 2. This duty is that alone whereby the future day of
judgment shall be transacted. For nothing but charity and alms is that whereby
Christ shall declare the justice and mercy of the eternal sentence. Martyrdom
it self is not there expressed, and no otherwise involved, but as it is the
greatest charity. 3. Christ made himself the greatest and daily example of
alms or charity. He went up and down doing good, preaching the Gospel, and
healing all diseases: and God the Father is imitable by us in nothing but in
pu^i^y and in mercy. ^hilip. ^.17.
4. Alms given to the poor redound to the emolument of the Giver both temporal
and eternal. Acts. 10.4. Heb. 13.6. Eccles. 3.1. Dan 4.27.
5. They are instrumental to the remission of si^s. Our forgiveness and mercy
to others being made the very rule and proportion (...) ^ur confidence and
hope, and our prayer to be forgive^ our selves. 6. It is a treasure in Heaven,
it procures friends when we dye. It is reckoned a^ done to Christ whatsoever we
do to our poor brother; and therefore when a poor man begs for Christ his
sake, if he have reas^n to ask for Christ his sake, give it him if thou can.
Now every man has title to ask for Christ's sake, whose need is great, and
himself unable to cure it, and if the man be a Christian. Whatsoever charity
Christ will reward, all that is given for Christ's sake, and therefore it may be
asked in his name: but every man that uses that sacred name for an endearment,
has not a title to it, either he nor his need. 7. It is one of the wings of
prayer, by which it flies to the throne of grace. 8. It crowns all the works of
piety. 9. It causes thanksgiving to God on our behalf. 10. And the bowels of
the poor bless us, and they pray for us. 11. And that portion of our estate,
out of which a tenth, or a fifth or a twentieth, or some offering to God for
religion and the poor goes forth, certainly returns with a greater blessing
upon all the rest. It is like the effusion of oil by the Sidonian woman; as
long as she poures into empty vessels, Nunquam memini me l^gisse ma a morte
mort^um qui libenter ^yera charita^^^ exercuit. S. Hieron. Ep. ad Nepot.
it could never cease running: or like the Widows barrel of meal, it consumes
not as long as she fed the Prophet. 12. The sum of all is contained in the
words of our blessed Savior: Give alms of such things as you have, and behold
all things are clean unto you. 13. To which may be added, that charity or mercy
is the peculiar character of Gods Elect, and a sign of predestination; which
advantage we are taught by S. Paul: [Put on therefore as the elect of God,
Coloss 3 12.
holy and beloved, bowels of mercy, kindness etc. forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another; if any man have a quarrel against any. The result of all
which we may read in the words of S. Chrysostom: To know the art of alms, is
greater then to be crowned with the Diadem of Kings. And yet to convert one
soul is greater then to pour out ten thousand talents into the baskets of the
poor.

But because giving alms is an act of the virtue of mercifulness, our
endeavor must be by proper arts to mortify the parents of unmercifulness,
which are 1. Envy, 2. Anger, 3. Covetousness, in which we may be helped by the
following rules or instruments.

Remedies against unmercifulness, and uncharitableness.
1. Against Envy: by way of consideration.
Against Envy I shall use the same argument I would use to persuade a man from
the Fever or the dropsy. 1. Because it is a disease, it is so far from having
pleasure in it, or a temptation to it, that it is full of pain, a great
instrument of vexation; it eats the flesh, and d^^es up the marrow, and makes
hollow eyes, and lean cheeks, and a paleface. 2. It is nothing but a direct
resolution never to enter into Heaven by the way of noble pleasure taken in the
good of others. 3. It is most contrary to God. 4. And a just contrary state to
the felicities and actions of Heaven, where every star increases the light of
the other, and the multitude of guests at the supper of the Lamb makes the
eternal meal more festival. 5. It is perfectly the state of Hell, and the
passion of Devils: for they do nothing but desp^ire in themselves, Nem^ alien^e
vt ^^ti m^^d^t qui sat^^ c^nfidit suae. C^c. co^t^a M. Anth.
and envy others quiet or safety, and yet cannot rejoice either in their good,
or in their evil, although they endeavor to hinder that, and procure this,
with all the devices and arts of malice and of a great understanding. 6. Envy
can serve no end in the world; it cannot please any thing, nor do any thing,
nor hinder any thing, but the content and felicity of him that has it. 7. Envy
can never pretend to justice, as hatred and uncharitableness sometimes may:
for there may be causes of hatred, and I may have wrong done me, and then
hatred has some pretense, though no just argument: But no man is unjust or
injurious* for being prosperous or wise. 8. And therefore many men profess to
hate another, but no man owns envy, as being an enmity and displeasure for no
cause but goodness or felilicity: Hemerus Thersitis m^les mores descrilens,
malitiae summam apposuit.

P^lidae imp^intis e^at atque immicus V^ys^i


Envious men being like Cantharides and Caterpillars, that delight most to
devour ripe and most excellent fruits. 9. It is of all crimes the basest: for
malice and anger are appeased with benefits, but envy is exasperated, as
envying too fortunate persons both their power and their will to do good: and
never leaves murmuring till the envied person be levelled, and then only the
Vultur leaves to eat the liver: for if his Neighbor be made miserable the
envious man is apt to be troubled: like him that is so long unbuilding the
turrets till all the roof is low or flat, or that the stones fall upon the
lower buildings, and do a mischief that the man repents of.

2. Remedies against anger by way of exercise.
The next enemy to mercifulness and the grace of Alms is anger, against which
there are proper instruments both in prudence and religion.

1. Prayer is the great remedy against anger: for it must suppose it in some
degree removed before we pray, and then it is the more likely it will be
finished when the prayer is done: We must lay aside the act of anger, as a
preparatory to prayer, and the curing the habit will be the effect and blessing
of prayer: so that if a man to cure his anger, resolves to address himself to
God by prayer, it is first necessary that by his own observation and diligence
he lay the anger aside, before his prayer can be fit to be presented; and when
we so pray, and so endeavor, we have all the blessings of prayer which God has
promised to it, to be our security for success.

2. If Anger arises in thy breast, instantly seal up thy lips, Ira cum pectus
rapid^ occ^pit it
Fu^iles linguae ju^eo cavere
Vana latratus jaculantit-
Sappl^o. Tu^batus sum and non sum l^cutus. Psalm 7^.

and let it not go forth: for like fire when it wants vent, it will suppress
it self. It is good in a fever to have a tender and a smooth tongue; but it is
better that it be so in anger; for if it be tough and distempered, there it is
an ill sign, but here it is an ill cause. Angry passion is a fire, and angry
words are like breath to fan them; together they are like steel and flint
sending out fire by mutual collision: some men will discourse themselves into
passion, and if their neighbor be enkindled too, together they flame with rage
and violence.

3. Humility is the most excellent natural cure for anger in the world: for he
that by daily considering his own infirmites and failings makes the error of
his neighbor or servant to be his own case, and remembers that he daily needs
Gods pardon and his brothers charity, will not be apt to rage at the levities,
or misfortunes, or indiscretions of another; greater then which he considers
that he is very frequently, and more inexcusably guilty of.

4 Consider the example of the ever blessed Jesus, who suffered all the
contradictions of sinners, and received all affronts and reproaches of
malicious, rash and foolish persons, and yet in all them was as dispassionate
and gentle as the morning Sun in Autumn: and in this also he propounded himself
imitable by us. For if innocence it self did suffer so great injuries and
disgraces, it is no great matter for us quietly to receive all the calamities
of fortune and indiscretion of servants, and mistakes of friends, and
unkindnesses of kindred, and rudenesses of enemies, since we have deserved
those and worse, even Hell it self.

5. If we be tempted to anger in the actions of Government and Discipline to
our inferiors (in which case anger is permitted so far as it is prudently
isntrumental to Government, and only is a sin when it is excessive and
unreasonable, and apt to disturb our own discourse, or to express it self in
imprudent words or violent actions) let us propound to our selves the example
of God the Father, who at the same time, and with the same tranquillity decreed
Heaven and Hell, the joys of blessed Angels and souls, and the torments of
devils and accursed spirits: and at the day of judgment when all the World
shall burn under his feet, God shall not be at all inflamed, or shaken in his
essential seat and center of tranquillity and joy. And if at first the cause
seems reasonable, yet defer to execute thy anger till thou may better judge.
For as Phocion told the Athenians, who upon the first news of the death of
Alexander were ready to revolt, Stay a while, for if the King be not dead, your
haste will ruin you; but if he be dead, your stay cannot prejudice your
affairs, for he will be dead to morrow as well as to day: so if thy servant or
inferior deserve punishment, staying till to morrow will not make him
innocent; but it may possibly preserve thee so, by preventing thy striking a
guiltless person, or being furious for a trifle.

6. Remove from thy self all provocations and incentives to anger; especially
1. Games of chance, and great wager. (...). Iliad. ^.
Patroclus killed his friend, the son of Amphidamas in his rage and sudden
fury, rising upon a cross game at tables. Such also are petty curiosities and
wordly business and carfulness about it; but manage thy self with
indifferency, or contempt of those external things, and do not spend a passion
upon them; for it is more then they are worth. But they that desire but few
things can be crossed but in a few. Qui paue^ requi^unt, non multis excidunt.
Plut.
2. In not heaping up with an ambitious or curious prodigality, any very
curious or choice Utensils, Seals, Jewels, Glasses, precious stones, because
those very many accidents which happen in the spoiling or loss of these
rarities, is in event, an irresistible cause of violent anger. 3. Do not
entertain nor suffer talebearers: for they abuse our ears first, and then our
credulity* and then steal our patience, and it may be for a lie, and if it be
true, the matter is not considerable; or if it be, yet it is pardonable: and we
may always escape with patience at one of these out-lets: either. 1 By not
hearing slanders or. 2. By not believing them, or; By not regarding the thing,
or 4 By forgiving the person. 4. To this purpose also it may serve well if we
choose (as much as we can) to live with peaceable persons, for that prevents
the occasions of confusion: and if we live with prudent persons, that will not
easily occasion our disturbance. But because these things are not in many men's
power, therefore I propound this rather as a felicity then a remedy or a duty;
and an art of prevention rather then of cure.

7. Be not inquisitive into the affairs of other men, nor the faults of thy
servants, nor the mistakes of thy friends; but what is offered to you, use
according to the former rules, but do thou not go out to gather sticks to
kindle a fire to burn thine own house. And add this; if my friend said or did
well in that for which I am angry, I am in the fault, not he: But if he did
amiss, he is in the misery, not I: for either he was deceived, or he was
malicious, and either of them both is all one with a miserable person; and that
is an object of pity, not of anger.

8. Use all reasonable discourses to excuse the faults of others, considering
that there are many circumstances of time, of person, of accident, of
inadvertency, of infrequency, of aptness to amend, of sorrow for doing it; and
it is well that we take any good in exchange for the evil is done or suffered.

9. Upon the arising of anger instantly enter into a deep consideration of the
joys of Heaven, or the pains of Hell: for fear and joy are naturally apt to
appease this violence. ^omer.


10. In contentions be always passive, never active, upon the defensive, not
the assaulting part; and then also give a gentle answer, receiving the furies
and indiscretions of the other like a stone into a bed of Moss and soft
compliance; and you shall find it sit down quietly; whereas anger and violence
makes the contention loud and long and injurious to both the parties.

11. In the actions of Religion be careful to temper all thy instances with
meekness, and the proper instruments of it: and if thou be apt to be angry,
neither fast violently, nor entertain the too forward heats of zeal: but secure
thy duty, with constant and regular actions, and a good temper of body with
convenient refreshments and recreations.

12. If anger rises suddenly and violently, first restrain it with
consideration, and then let it end in a hearty prayer for him that did the real
or seeming injury: The former of the two stops its growth, and the latter quite
kills it? and makes amends for its monstrous and involuntary birth.

Remedies against Angel by way of consideration.
1. Consider that Anger is a professed enemy to Counsel, it is a direct storm,
in which no man can be heard to speak, or call from without: for if you counsel
gently, you are despised, if you urge it and be vehement, you provoke it more:
(...)
(...)

be careful therefore to lay up beforehand a great stock of reason and
prudent consideration that like a besieged Town you may be provided for, and be
defensible from within, since you are not likely to be relieved from without.
Anger is not to be suppressed but by something that is as inward as it self,
and more habitual: To which purpose add, that 2. Of all passions it endeavors
most to make reason useless. 3. That it is an universal poison, of an infinite
object; for no man was ever so amorous as to love a Toad, none so envious as to
repine at the condition of the miserable, no Man so timorous as to fear a dead
Be, but anger is troubled at every thing and every Man, and every accident,
and therefore unless it be suppressed it will make a Man's condition restless.
4. If it proceeds from a great cause, (...). Aristot.
it turns to fury; if from a small cause, it is peevishness, and so is always
either terrible or ridiculous. 5. It makes a Man's body monstrous, deformed, and
contemptible, the voice horrid, the eyes cruel, the face pale or fiery, the
gate fierce, the speech clamorous and loud. 6. It is neither manly nor
ingenuous. 7. It proceeds from softness of spirit and pusillanimity, which
makes that Women are more angry then Men, sick persons more then the
healthful, old Men more then young, unprosperous and calamitous people then the
blessed and fortunate. 8. It is a passion fitter for Flies and Insects then for
persons professing nobleness and bounty. 9. It is troublesome not only to
those that suffer it, but to them that behold it; there being no greater
incivility Discere quid coena posses ingratius ista.
of entertainment then for the Cooks fault, or the negligence of the servants,
to be cruel, or outrageous, or unpleasant in the presence of the guests. 10. It
makes marriage to be a necessary and unavoidable trouble, friendships, and
societies, and familiarities to be intolerable. 11. It multiplies the evils of
drunkenness and makes the levities of Wine to run into madness. 12. It makes
innocent jesting to be the beginning of Tragedies. 13. It turns friendship into
hatreds; * it makes a Man lose himself, and his reason and his argument in
disputation. It turns the desires of knowledge into an itch of wrangling. It
adds insolency to power. * It turns justice into cruelty, and judgment into
oppression. * It changes discipline into tediousness and hatred of liberal
institution. * It makes a prosperous Man to be envyed, and the unfortunate to
be unpitied. * It is a confluence of all the irregular passions: there is in it
envy and sorrow, fear and scorn, pride and prejudice, rashness and
inconsideration, rejoicing in evil and a desire to inflict it, self-love,
impatience and curiosity. * And lastly, though it be very troublesome to
others, yet it is most troublesome to him that has it.

In the use of these arguments and the former exercises be diligent to observe,
Ama^a ^a^ amaro li^em pha^mac. qu^. c^ani.
lest in your desires to suppress anger you be passionate and angry at your
self for being angry; like Physicians who give a bitter potion when they intend
to eject the bitterness of choler; for this will provoke the person and
increase the passion: But placidly and quietly set upon the mortification of
it; and attempt it first for a day; resolving that day not at all to be angry;
and to be watchful and observant, for a day is no great trouble: but then,
after one days watchfulness it will be as easy to watch two days, as at
first it was to watch one day; and so you may increase till it becomes easy
and habitual.

Only observe that such an anger alone is criminal which is against charity to
my self or my neighbor; but anger against sin is a holy zeal, and an effect of
love to God and my brother, for whose interest I am passionate, like a
concerned person: and if I take care that my anger makes no reflection of scorn
or cruelty upon the offender, or of pride and violence and transportation to my
self, anger becomes charity and duty: And when one commended Charilaus the King
of Sparta, for a gentle, a Good and a meek Prince, his colleague said well,
Plutari de odio and invidia.
How can he be good who is not an enemy even to vicious persons?

3. Remedies against Covetousness, the third enemy of mercy.
Covetousness is also an enemy to Alms, though not to all the effects of
mercifulness: but this is to be cured by the proper motives to charity before
mentioned, and by the proper rules of justice; which being secured, the arts of
getting money are not easily made criminal. To which also we may add.

1. Covetousness makes a man miserable; because riches are not means to make a
man happy: and unless felicity were to be bought with money, he is a vain
person who admires heaps of gold and rich possessions; for what Hippomachus
said to some person, who commended a tall man as fit to be a Champion in the
Olympic games: Quid refert igitur quami^ samenta fatiget
Perticibus, quanta nem^rum vectetur in u^^bra,
Jigua quot vie^na fere, quas emerit aedes?
Ne^o malu^ saelo.
Iur. Sat. ^.
it is true (said he) if the crown hang so high that the longest arm could
reach it: The same we may say concerning riches, they were excellent things, if
the richest man were certainly the wisest and the best: but as they are, they
are nothing to be wondered at, because they contribute nothing toward
felicity: which appears because some men choose to be miserable that they may
be rich, rather then be happy with the expense of money and doing noble things.

2. Riches are useless and unprofitable; for beyond our needs and conveniences
nature knows no use of riches; and they say that the Princes of Italy when they
slip alone, eat out of a single dish, and drink in a plain glass, and the wise
eats without purple: for nothing is more frugal then the back and belly* if
they be used as they should; but when they would entertain the eyes of
strangers, when they are vain and would make a noise, then riches come forth to
set forth the spectacle, and furnish out the Comedy of wealth of vanity. Her.
No man can withal the wealth in the world buy so much skill as to be a good
Lutenist; he must go the same way that poor people do, he must learn and take
pains; much less can he buy constancy, or chastity, or courage: nay not so
much as the contempt of riches: and by possessing more then we need, we cannot
obtain so much power over our souls, as not to require more: And certainly
riches must deliver me from no evil, if the possession of them cannot take
away the longing for them. If any man be thirsty, drink cools him. If he be
hungry, eating meat satisfies him; and when a man is cold and calls for a warm
cloak, he is pleased if you give it him; but you trouble him, if you load him
with six or eight cloaks. Nature rests and sits still when she has her
portion; but that which exceeds it, is a trouble and a burden: and therefore in
true Philosophy, No man is rich but he that is poor according to the common
account: for when God has satisfied those needs which he made; that is, all
that is natural, whatsoever is beyond it is thirst and a disease, and unless
it be sent back again in charity or religion, can serve no end but vice or
vanity; it can increase the appetite to represent the man poorer, and full of a
new and artificial, unnatural need; but it never satisfies the need it makes,
or makes the man richer. No wealth can satisfy the covetous desire of wealth.

3. Riches are troublesome: but the satisfaction of those appetites which God
and Nature has made are cheap and easy: P^ge (...) tu causa penia vitae ^s,
^er. te (...)
^^opert.
for who ever paid use money for bread and onions and water to keep him alive?
but when we covet after house of the frame and design of Italy, or long for
jewels, or for my next neighbors field, or horses from Barbary, or the richest
perfumes of Arabia, or Galatian mules, or fat Eunuchs for our slaves from
Tunis, or rich coaches from Naples, then we can never be satisfied till we have
the best thing that is fancied, and all that can be had and all that can be
desired, and that we can lust no more: but before we come to the one half of
our first wild desires, we are the bond men of Usurers, and of our worse
tyrant appetites, and the tortures of envy and impatience. But I consider that
those who drink on still when their thirst is quenched, or eat after they well
dined are forced to vomit, not only their superfluity, but even that which at
first was necessary: so those that covet more then they can temperately use,
are oftentimes forced to part even with that patrimony which would have
supported their persons in freedom and honor, and have satisfied all their
reasonable desire.

4. Contentedness is therefore health because covetousness is a direct
sickness: and it was well said of Aristippus (as Plutarch reports him) if any
man after much eating and drinking be full u^satsfied, he has no need of more
meat or more drink, but of a Physician; he more needs to be purged then to be
filled; and therefore since covetousness cannot be satisfied, it must be cured
by emptiness, and evacuation; The man is without remedy, unless he be reduced
to the scantling of nature, and the measures of his personal necessity. Give
to a poor man a house, and a few cowes, pay his little debt, and set him on
work, and he is provided for, and quiet; but when a man enlarges beyond a fair
possession and desires another Lordship, you spite him if you let him have it;
for by that he is one degree the further off from rest in his desires and
satisfaction: and now he sees himself in a bigger capacity to a larger fortune;
and he shall never find his period, till you begin to take away something of
what he has: for then he will begin to be glad to keep that which is left; but
reduce him to natures measures, and there he shall be sure to find rest: for
there noman can desire beyond his belly full, and when he wants that, any one
friend or charitable man can cure his poverty; but all the world cannot
satisfy his covetousness.

5. Covetousness is the most fantastical and contradictory disease in the
whole world, and it must therefore be incurable, because it strives against its
own cure. Noman therefore abstains from meat because he is hungry, nor from
wine because he loves it and needs it: but the covetous man does so: for he
desires it passionately because he says he needs it, and when he has it, he
will need it still, because he dares not use it. He gets clothes because he
cannot be without them; but when he has them, then he can^: as if he needed
corn for his granary, and clothes for his wardrobe, more then for his back and
belly. For covetousness pretends to heap much together for fear of want, and
yet after all his pains and purchase, he suffers that really which at first he
feared vainly; and by not using what he gets he makes that suffering to be
actual, present, and necessary, which in his lowest condition was but future,
contingent and possible. It stirs up the desire, and takes away the pleasure of
being satisfied. It increases the appetite and will not content it, it swells
the principal to no purpose, and lessens the use to all purposes; desturbing
the order of nature, and the designs of God; making money not to be the
instrument of exchange or charity, nor corn to feed himself or the poor, nor
wool to cloth himself or his brother, nor wine to refresh the sadness of the
afflicted, nor his oil* to make his own countenance cheerful: but all these to
look upon, and to tell over, and to take accounts by and make himself
considerable, and wondered at by fools, that while he lives he may be called
Rich, and when he dies may be accounted Miserable, and like the Dish-makers of
China, may leave a greater heap of dirt for his Nephews, while he himself has
a new lot fallen to him in the portion of Dives: But thus the Ass carried wood
and sweet herbs to the Baths, but was never washed or perfumed himself the
heaped up sweets for others, while himself was filthy with smoke and ashes. And
yet it is considerable; If the man can be content to feed hardly, and labor
extremely, and watch carefully, and suffer affronts and disgrace, that he may
get money more then he uses in his temperate and just needs, with how much ease
might this man be happy? and with how great uneasinesse and trouble does he
make himself miserable? For he takes pains to get content, and when he might
have it, he lets it go. He might better be content with a virtuous and quiet
poverty, then with an artificial, troublesome and vicious: The same diet and a
less labor would at first make him happy, and for ever after rewardable.

6. The sum of all is that which the Apostle says; Covetousness is Idolatry;
that is, it is an admiring money for it self, not for its use; it relyes upon
money, and loves it more then it loves God and religion: and it is the root of
all evil: it teaches men to be cruel and crafty, industrious in evil, full of
care and malice: it devours young heirs, and grindes the face of the poor, and
undoes those who specially belong to Gods protection, helpless, craftlesse and
innocent people; it inquires into our parents age, and longs for the death of
our friends: it makes friendship an art of rapine, and changes a partner into a
Vultur, and a companion into a thief; and after all this it is for no good to
it self, for it dare not spend those heaps of treasure which it snatched: and
men hate Serpents and Basilisks worse then Lions and Bears; for these kill
because they need the prey, but they sting to death and eat not. (...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...)
Phocylid.
And if they pretend all this care and heap for their Heirs, (like the Mice of
Africa hiding the golden ore in their bowels and refusing to give back the
indigested gold till their guts be out) they may remember, that what was
u^necessary for themselves, is as unnecessary for their sons; and why cannot
they be without it as well as their Fathers who did not use it? and it often
happens, that to the sons it becomes an instrument to serve some lust or other;
that as the gold was useless to their Fathers, so may the sons be to the
public; fools or prodigals, loads to their Country, and the curse and
punishment of their fathers avarice; and yet all that wealth is short of one
blessing; but it is a load coming with a curse, and descending from the same of
a long derived sin. However the rather transmits it to the son, and it may be
the son to one more, till a Tyrant, or an Oppressor, or a War, or change of
government, or the Usurer, or folly, or an expensive vice makes holes in the
bottom of the bag, and the wealth runs out like water, and flies away like a
Bird from the hand of a child.

7. Add to these the consideration of the advantages of poverty; that it is a
state freer from temptation; secure in dangers: but of one trouble; Provocat ut
segnes animos rerumque remotas
Ingeniesa vias paulatum ex^l^^^t egestas.
Claudian.
safe under the Divine Providence: cared for in Heaven by a daily ministration,
and for whose support God makes every day a new decree: a state of which Christ
was pleased to make open profession, and many wise Men daily make vows: that a
rich Man is but like a pool to whom the poor run, and first trouble it, and
then draw it dry: that he enjoyes no more of it then according to the few and
limited needs of a man; he cannot eat like a Wolf or an Elephant: that variety
of dainty fare ministers but to sin and sicknesses: that the poor Man feasts
oftener then the rich, because every little enlargment is a feast to the poor;
-- sed (...)
(...) est in noluit (...) Sen^ct^^,
(...) brevis nec (...) m^vendas;
In (...) facili d^^funditur ^austu
(...) amans and culti villicus h^^i,
^^de (...) p^s^t^ (...) Pythago^as.
Est aliquid puecunque lico, quocunque necessu,
Vnius dominum sese fecisse lace^tae,
Iuven. Sat. 3. but he that feasts every day fea^^^ no day, there being nothing
left to which he may beyond his Ordinary extend his appetite that the rich man
sleeps not so soundly as the poor labourer; that his fears are more, and his
needs are greater (for who is poorer; he that needs 5 l or he that needs 5000?)
the poor man has enough to fill his belly, and the rich has not enough to
fill his eye: that the poor man's wants are easy to be relieved by a common
charity, but the needs of rich men cannot be supplied but by Princes; and they
are left to the temptation of great vices to make reparation of their needs:
and the ambitious labors of men to get great estates is but like the selling
of a Fountian to buy a Fever, a parting with content to buy necessity, a
purchase of an unhandsome condition at the price of infelicity: that Princes
and they that enjoy most of the world, have most of it but in title and supreme
rights and reserved privileges, pepper corns, homages, trifling services and
acknowledgements, the real use descending to others to more substantial
purposes: These considerations may be useful to the curing of covetousness,
that the grace of mercifulness enlarging the heart of a man, his hand may not
be contracted, but reached out to the poor in alms.

SECT. IX. Of Repentance.
Repentance of all things in the World makes the greatest change: it changes
things in Heaven and Earth; for it changes the whole man from sin to grace,
from vicious habits to holy customs, from unchaste bodies to Angelical souls,
from Swine to Philosophers, from drunkenness to sober counsels; and God
himself, with whom is no variableness or shadow of change, is pleased by
descending to our weak understandings, to say, that he changes also upon man's
repentance, that he alters his decrees, revokes his sentence, cancels the bills
of accusation, throws the Records of shame and sorrow from the Court of
Heaven, and lifts up the sinner from the grave to life, from his prison to a
throne, from Hell and the guilt of eternal torture, to Heaven and to a title to
never ceasing felicities. If we be bound on earth, we shall be bound in Heaven;
if we be absolved here, we shall be loosed there; if we repent, God will
repent, and not send the evil upon us which we have deserved.

But repentance is a conjugation and society of many duties; and it contains in
it all the parts of a holy life, from the time of our return to the day of our
death inclusively; and it has in it some things specially relating to the sins
of our former days, which are now to be abolished by special arts, and have
obliged us to special labors, and brought in many new necessities, and put us
into a very great deal of danger; and because it is a duty consisting of so
many parts and so much employment, it also requires much time, and leaves a man
in the same degree of hope of pardon, as is his restitution to the state of
righteousness and holy living, for which we covenanted in Baptism.

For we must know that there is but one repentance in a man's whole life, if
repentance be taken in the proper, and strict Evangelicall Covenant sense, and
not after the ordinary understanding of the word: That is, we are but once to
change our whole state of life, from the power of the Devil and his entire
possession, from the state of sin and death, from the body of corruption, to
the life of grace, to the possession of Jesus, to the kingdom of the Gospel;
and this is done in the baptism of water, or in the baptism, of the spirit
when the first right comes to be verified by Gods grace coming upon us, and by
our obedience to the heavenly calling, we working together with God. After this
change, if ever we fall into the contrary state, and be wholly estranged from
God and Religion, and profess our selves servants of unrighteousness, God has
made no more covenant of restitution to us, there is no place left for any more
repentance, or entire change of condition, or new birth: a man can be
regenerated but once: and such are voluntary, malicious Apostates, Witches,
obstinate impenitent persons, and the like: But if we be overtaken by
infirmity, or enter into the marches or borders of this estate, and commit a
grievous sin, or ten, or twenty, so we be not in the entire possession of the
Devil, we are for the present in a damnable condition, if we dye; but if we
live we are in a recoverable condition; for so we may repent often: we repent
or rise from death but once, but from sickness many times; and by the grace of
God we shall be pardoned if so we repent. But our hopes of pardon are just as
is the repentance, which if it be timely, hearty, industrious and effective,
God accepts: not by weighing graves or scruples, but by estimating the great
proportions of our life; a hearty endeavor and an effectual general change
shall get the pardon; the unavoidable infirmities, and past evils, and present
imperfections, and short interruptions, against which we watch, and pray, and
strive, being put upon the accounts of the cross, and paid for by the holy
Jesus. This is the state and condition of repentance; its parts and actions
must be valued according to the following rules.

Acts and parts of Repentance.
1. He that repents truly is greatly sorrowful for his past sins; not with a
superficial sigh or tear, but a pungent afflictive sorrow; such a sorrow as
hates the sin so much, that the man would choose to dye rather then act it any
more: This sorrow is called in Scripture [ a weeping sorely, Ier. 13 17. Joel
2.13. Ezekiel. 27 31. James 4.9.
a weeping with bitterness of heart, a weeping day and night, a sorrow of
heart, a breaking of the spirit, mourning like a dove, and chattering like a
swallow:] and we may read the degree and manner of it by the lamentations and
sad accents of the Prophet Jeremy, when he wept for the sins of the nation; by
the heart breaking of David, when he mourned for his murder and adultery: and
the bitter weeping of S. Peter, after the shameful denying of his Master. * The
expression of this sorrow differs according to the temper of the body, the sex,
the age, and circumstance of action, and the motive of sorrow, and by many
accidental tendernesses, or masculine hardnesses; and the repentance is not to
be estimated by the tears, but by the grief; and the grief is to be valued not
by the sensitive trouble, but by the cordial hatred of the sin and ready actual
dereliction of it, and a resolution and real resisting its consequent
temptations. Some people can shed tears for nothing, some for any thing; but
the proper and true effects of a godly sorrow are; fear of the divine
judgments, apprehension of Gods displeasure, watchings amd strivings against
sin, patiently enduring the cross of sorrow (which God sends as their
punishment) in accusation of our selves in perpetually begging pardon, in mean
and base opinions of our selves, and in all the natural productions from these
according to our temper and constitution: for if we be apt to weep in other
accidents, it is ill if we weep not also in the sorrows of repentance: not,
that weeping is of it self a duty, but that sorrow, if it be as great, will be
still expressed in as great a manner.

2. Our sorrow for sins must retain the proportion of our sins, though not the
equality; we have no particular measures of sins: we know not which is greater,
of sacrilege or Superstition, Idolatry or Covetousness, Rebellion or
Witchcraft; and therefore God ties us not to nice measures of sorrow, but only
that we keep the general Rules of proportion; that is, that a great sin have a
great grief; a smaller crime being to be washed off with a lesser shower.

3. Our sorrow for sins is then best accounted of for its degree, Hugo de S.
Victor.
when it together with all the penal and afflictive duties of repentance, shall
have equalled or exceeded the pleasure we had in commission of the sin.

4. True repentance is a punishing duty, and acts its sorrow, and judges and
condemns the sin by voluntary submitting to such sadnesses as God sends on us,
or (to prevent the judgment of God) by judging our selves, and punishing our
bodies and our spirits by such instruments of piety as are troublesome to the
body: such as are, fasting, watching, long prayers, troublesome postures in our
prayers, expensive alms, and all outward acts of humiliation. For he that must
judge himself, must condemn himself if he be guilty; and if he be condemned he
must be punished; and if he be so judged, it will help to prevent the judgment
of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.31.
S. Paul instructing us in this particular. But I before intimated that the
punishing actions of repentance are only actions of sorrow, and therefore are
to make up the proportions of it. For our grief may be so full of trouble as to
outweigh all the burdens of fasts and bodily afflictions, and then the other
are the less necessary; and when they are used, the benefit of them is to
obtain of God a remission or a lessening of such temporal judgments which God
has decreed against the sins, as it was in the case of Ahab: but the sinner is
not by any thing of this reconciled to the eternal favor of God; for as yet,
this is but the Introduction to Repentance.

5. Every true penitent is obliged to confess his sins, and to humble himself
before God for ever: Confession of sins has a special promise. If we confess
our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins: meaning that God has
bound himself to forgive us if we duly confess our sins, 1 John 1.9.
and do all that for which confession was appointed; that is, be ashamed of
them, and own them no more. For, confession of our sins to God can signify
nothing of it self in its direct nature: He sees us when we act them, and keeps
a record of them; and we forget them unless he reminds us of them by his grace:
so that to confess them to God does not funish us, or make us ashamed, but
confession to him, if it proceeds from shame and sorrow, and is an act of
humility and self condemnation, and is a laying open our wounds for cure, then
it is a duty God delights in: in all which circumstances, because we may very
much be helped if we take in the assistance of a spiritual Guide; therefore the
church of God in all ages has commended, and in most ages enjoined (...). S.
Basil. reg brev. 228. Council. La^d c. 2. Council. Quinise^t. c. 102. Tertul. de
poenit.
that we confess our sins, and discover the state and condition of our souls to
such a person whom we or our superiors judge fit to help us in such needs. For
so [ if we confess our sins one to another] as S. James advises, we shall
obtain the prayers of the holy man whom God and the Church has appointed
solemnly to pray for us: and when he knows our needs he can best minister
comfort, or reproof, oil, or Causticks, he can more opportunely recommend your
particular state to God, he can determine your cases of conscience, and judge
better for you then you do for your self; and the shame of opening such Ulcers
may restrain your forwardness to contract them; and all these circumstances of
advantage will do very much toward the forgiveness. And this course was taken
by the new Converts in the days of the Apostles [ For many that believed,
Acts. 1^.28.
came and confessed and showed their deeds.] And it were well if this duty were
practiced prudently and innocently in order to public discipline; or private
comfort and instruction: but that it be done to God is a duty, not directly for
it self, but for its adjuncts, and the duties that go with it, or before it,
or after it: which duties because they are all to be helped and guided by our
Pastors and Curates of souls, he is careful of his eternal interest that will
not lose the advantage of using a private guide and judge. He that bideth his
sins shall not prosper [Non dirigetur, Prove. 28.13.
says the Vulgar Latin] he shall want a guide but who confesses and forsakes
them shall have mercy. And to this purpose Climacus reports that diverse holy
persons in that age did use to carry Table-books with them, and in them
described an account of all their determinate thoughts, purposes, words and
actions, in which they had suffered infirmity, that by communicating the estate
of their souls they might be instructed and guided, and corrected, or
encouraged.

6. True repentance must reduce to act all its holy purposes, and enter into
and run through the state of holy Romans 6 3.4.7. verses 8. 10. 13. 13.14. 11.
22.27.
Gal 5. 6.24. 6. 15.
1 Cor 7. 19. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Colos. 1 21.22.23. Heb. 12. 1.14.16. 10 16.22.
1 Pet. 1 15. 2 Pet. 1 4.9.10. 3. 11.
1 John. 1. 6. 3. 3.9. 5. 16.




living, which is contrary to that state of darkness in which in times past we
walked. Nequam illud verbum, been vult, nisi qui been facit Trinummus.
For to resolve to do it, and yet not to do it, is to break our resolution and
our faith, to mock God, to falsify and evacuate all the preceding acts of
repentance, and to make our pardon hopeles, and our hope fruitles He that
resolves to live well when a danger is upon him, or a violent fear, or when the
appetites of Lust are newly satisfied, or newly served, and yet when the
temptation comes again, sins again, and then is sorrowful, and resolves once
more against it, and yet falls when the temptation returns, is a vain man, but
no true penitent, nor in the state of grace; and if he chance to dye in one of
these good moods, is very far from salvation: for if it be necessary that we
resolve to live well, it is necessary we should do so. For resolution is an
imperfect act, a term of relation, and signifies nothing but in order to the
actions: it is as a faculty is to the act, as Spring is to the Harvest, as
Eggs are to Birds, as a Relative to its Correspondent, nothing without it. No
man therefore can be in the state of grace and actual favor by resolutions and
holy purposes; these are but the gate and portal toward pardon: a holy life is
the only perfection of Repentance, and the firm ground upon which we can cast
the anchor of hope in the mercies of God through Jesus Christ.

7. No man is to reckon his pardon immediately upon his returns from sin to the
beginnings of good life, but is to begin hi^ hopes and degrees of confidence
according as sin dies in him, and grace lives; as the habits of sin lessen, and
righteousness grows; according as sin returns but seldom in smaller instances
and without choice, and by surprise without deliberation, and is highly
disrelished and presently dashed against the Rock Christ Jesus by a holy sorrow
and renewed care, and more strict watchfulness. For a holy life being the
condition of the Covenant on our part, as we return to God, so God returns to
us, and our state returns to the probabilities of pardon.

8. Every man is to work out his salvation with fear and trembling; and after
the commission of sins his fears must multiply, because every new sin, and
every great declining from the ways of God is still a degree of new danger,
and has increased Gods anger, and has made him more uneasy to grant pardon:
and when he does grant it, it is upon harder terms both for doing and
suffering; that is, we must do more for pardon, and it may be, suffer much
more. For we must know that God pardons our sins by parts: as our duty
increases, and our care is more prudent and active, so Gods anger decreases:
and yet it may be the last sin you committed, made God unalterably resolved to
send upon you some sad judgment. Of the particulars in all cases we are
uncertain; and therefore we have reason always to mourn for our sins that have
so provoked GOD, and made our condition so full of danger, that it may be, no
prayers or tears or duty can alter his sentence concerning some sad judgment
upon us. Thus GOD irrevocably decreed to punish the Israelites for Idolatry,
although Moses prayed for them, and God forgave them in some degree; that is,
so that he would not cut them off from being a people; yet he would not forgive
them so, but he would visit that their sin upon them: and he did so.

D^ndam interstitium poenitentiae. Tacit.
9. A true penitent must all the days of his life pray for pardon, and never
think the work completed till he dies; not by any act of his own, by no act of
the Church, by no forgiveness by the party injured, by no restitution: these
are all instruments of great use and efficacy, and the means by which it is to
be done at length; but still the sin lies at the door ready to return upon us
in judgment, and damnation, if we return to it in choice or action: And whether
God has forgiven us or no, we know not, I ^ec^ati (...) debiti s^u sempre ^in
di qu^l ^^e fi^^^de.
and how far, we know not; and all that we have done is not of sufficient work
to obtain pardon: therefore still pray, and still be sorrowful for ever having
done it, and for ever watch against it; and then those beginnings of pardon
which are working all the way, will at last be perfected in the day of the Lord.

10. Defer not at all to repent; much less may thou out it off to thy
deathbed: It is not an easy thing to root out the habits (...) sin, (...)
(...). Arria.
which a man's whole life has gathered and confirmed. We find work enough to
mortify one beloved lust, in our very best advantage of strength and time, and
before it is so deeply rooted as it must needs be supposed to be at the end of
a wicked life: and therefore it will prove impossible when the work is so
great, and the strength's so little, when sin is so strong and grace so weak:
for they always keep the same proportion of increase and decrease, and as sin
grows grace decays: so that the more need we have of grace, the less at that
time we shall have: because the greatness of our sins which makes the need,
has lessened the grace of GOD (which should help us) into nothing. To which
add this consideration; that on a Man's death bed, the day of repentance is
past; for repentance being the renewing of a holy life, a living the life of
grace, Mortem (...) nemo (...) excip^^ (...) qui ad (...) s^ d^ (...) postitas
(...).
it is a contradiction to say, that a man can live a holy life upon his
deathbed: especially, if we consider, that for a sinner to live a holy life
must first suppose him to have overcome all his evil habits, and then to have
made a purchase of the contrary graces, by the labors of great prudence,
watchfulness, self-denial and severity. Nothing that is excellent can be
wrought suddenly.

11. After the beginnings of thy recovery, be infinitely fearful of a relapse,
and therefore upon the stock of thy sad experience, observe where thy failings
were, and by especial arts fortify that faculty, and arm against that
temptation. For if all those argum^^^ which God uses to us to preserve out
innocence, and thy late danger, and thy fears, and the goodness of God making
thee once to escape, and the shame of thy fall, and the sense of thy own
weaknesses will not make thee watchful against a fall, especially knowing how
much it costs a man to be restored, it will be infinitely more dangerous if
ever thou fallest again, not only for fear God should no more accept thee to
pardon; but even thy own hopes will be made more desperate, and thy impatience
greater; and thy shame turn to impudence, and thy own will be ^ore estranged,
violent, and refractory, and t^y latter end will be worse then thy beginning.
To which add this consideration: That thy sin which was formerly in a good way
of being pardoned, will not only return upon thee with all its own loads, but
with the baseness of unthankfulness, and thou will be set as far back from
Heaven as ever; and all thy former labors and fears, and watchings and agonies
will be reckoned for nothing, but as arguments to upbraid thy folly, who when
thou had set one foot in Heaven, did pull that back and carry both to Hell.

Motives to Repentance.
I shall use no other arguments to move a sinner to repentance, but to tell him
unless he does he shall certainly perish; and if he does repent timely and
entirely, that is, live a holy life, he shall be forgiven and be saved: But yet
I desire that this consideration be enlarged with some great circumstances; and
let us remember;

1. That to admit mankind to repentance and pardon was a favor greater then
ever God gave to the angels and devils: for they were never admitted to the
condition of second thoughts: Christ never groaned one groan for them; He never
suffered one stripe, nor one affront, nor shed one drop of blood to restore
them to hopes of blessedness after their first failings. But this he did for
us, he paid the score of our sins, only that we might be admitted to repent,
and that this repentance might be effectual to the great purposes of felicity
and salvation.

2. Consider that as it cost Christ many milions of prayers and groans, and
sighs, so he is now at this instant and has been for these 1600 years night
and day incessantly praying for grace to us that we may repent, and for pardon
when we do, and for degrees of pardon beyond the capacities of our
infirmities, and the merit of our sorrows and amendment, and this prayer he
will continue till his second coming; Hebr. 7.25.
for he ever lives to make intercession for us, and that we may know what it
is in behalf of which he intercedes, 2 Cor. 5.20.
S. Paul tells us his design [ we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though he did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God; and
what Christ prays us to do, he prays to God that we may do; that which he
desires of us as his servants, he desires of God who is the fountain of the
grace and powers unto us, and without whose assistance we can do nothing.

3. That ever we should repent, was so costly a purchase, and so great a
concernment, and so high a favor, and the event is esteemed by God himself so
great an excellency, that our blessed Savior tells us, there shall be joy in
Heaven over one sinner that repents: Luke 15.7.
meaning that when Christ shall be glorified, and at the right hand of his
Father make intercession for us, praying for our repentance; the conversion and
repentance of every sinner is part of Christ's glorification; it is the
answering of his prayers, it is a portion of his reward in which he does
essentially glory by the joys of his glorified humanity. This is the joy of
our Lord himself directly, not of the Angels, save only by reflection: The joy
(said our blessed Savior) shall be in the presence of the Angels; they shall
see the glory of the Lord, the answering of his prayers, the satisfaction of
his desires, and the reward of his sufferings, in the repentance and consequent
pardon of a sinner. For therefore he once suffered, and for that reason he
rejoices for ever: and therefore when a penitent sinner comes to receive the
effect and full consummation of his pardon, it is called [ an entering into the
joy of our Lord] that is, a partaking of that joy which Christ received at our
conversion and enjoined ever since.

4. Add to this that the rewards of Heaven are so great and glorious, and
Christ's burden is so light, his yoke is so easy, that it is a shameless
impudence to expect so great glories at a less rate then so little a service;
at a lower rate then a holy life. It cost the heart-blood of the Son of God to
obtain Heaven for us upon that condition; and who shall dye again to get Heaven
for us upon easier terms? what would you do, if God should command you to kill
your eldest son, or to work in the mines for a thousand years together, or to
fast all thy life time with bread and water; were not Heaven a very great
bargain even after all this? And when God requires nothing of us, but to live
soberly, justly and godly which things in themselves are to a man a very great
felicity, and necessary to our present well being) shall we think this to be an
intolerable burden, and that Heaven is too little a purchase a^ that price? and
that God in mere justice will take a deathbed sigh or groan, and a few
unprofitable tears and promises in exchange for all our duty?

If these motives joined together with our own interest, even as much as
felicity, and the sight of God, and the avoiding the intolerable pains of Hell,
and many intermedial judgments comes to, will not move us to ^o (...) 1. The
filthiness, and 2. The trouble, and 3. The uneasiness, and 4. The
unreasonableness of sin, and turn to God, there is no more to be said, we must
perish in our folly.

SECT. X. Of Preparation to, and the manner how to receive the holy Sacrament
of the Lords Supper.
THe celebration of the holy Sacrament is the great mysteriousness of the
Christian religion, and succeeds to the most solemn rite of natural and
Judaicall religion, the Law of sacrificing. For God spared mankind, and took
the sacrifice of beasts together with our solemn prayers for an instrument of
expiation But these could not purify the soul from sin, but were typical of
the sacrifice of something that could. But nothing could do this, but either
the offering of all that sinned, that every man should be the anathema or
devoted thing, or else by some one of the same capacity, who by some super
added excellency might in his own personal sufferings have a value great enough
to satisfy for all the whole kind of sinning persons. This the Son of God
JESUS CHRIST, God and man undertook, and finished by a Sacrifice of himself
upon the Altar of the Cross.

2. This Sacrifice, because it was perfect, could be but one, and that once;
but because the needs of the world should last as long as the world it self, it
was necessary that there should be a perpetual ministry established, whereby
this one sufficient sacrifice should (...) eternally effectual to the several
new arising needs of all the world who should desire it, or in any sense be
capable of it.

3. To this end Christ was made a Priest for ever: he was initiated or
consecrated on the cross, and there began his Priesthood, which was to last
till his coming to judgment. It began on earth, but was to last and be
officiated in Heaven, where he sits perpetually, representing and exhibiting to
the Father that great effective sacrifice (which he offered on the cross) to
eternal and never failing purposes.

4. As Christ is pleased to represent to his Father that great Sacrifice as a
means of atonement and expiation for all mankind, and with special purposes
and intendment for all the elect, all that serve him in holiness: so he has
appointed that the same ministry shall be done upon earth too, in our manner,
and according to our proportion; and therefore has constituted and separated
an order of men who by showing forth the Lords death by Sacramental
representation may pray unto God after the same manner that our Lord and
High Priest does, that is, offer to God and represent in this solemn prayer ad
Sacrament, Christ as already offered, so sending up a gracious instrument
whereby our prayers may for his sake and in the same manner of intercession be
offered up to God in our behalf, and for all them for whom we pray to all these
purposes for which Christ dyed.

5. As the ministers of the Sacrament do in a Sacramental manner present to God
the sacrifice of the cross, by being imitators of Christ's intercession; so the
people are sacrificers too in their manner; for besides that, by saying Amen,
they join in the act of him that ministers, and make it also to be their own:
so when they eat and drink the consecrated and blessed Elements worthily, they
receive Christ within them, and therefore may also offer him to God, while in
their sacrifice of obedience and thanksgiving they present themselves to God
with Christ whom they have spiritually received, that is, themselves with that
which will make them gracious and acceptable. The offering their bodies and
souls and services to God in him, and by him, and with him, who is his Fathers
wel-beloved, and in whom he is well pleased, cannot but be accepted to all the
purposes of blessing, grace, and glory. Nosti tempora tu Jovis sereni.
Cum sulget placidus, s^eque vultu
Quo nil supplicibus sole^ negare.
Martial: Ep: l, 5 6.


6. This is the sum of the greatest mystery of our Religion: it is the copy of
the passion and the ministration of the great mystery of our Redemption; and
therefore whatsoever intitles ^s to the general privileges of Christ's passion
all this is necessary by way of disposition to the celebration of the Sacrament
of his passion: because this celebration is our manner of applying or using it.
The particulars of which preparation are represented in the following rules.

Vasa pura ad rem Divin^m. Plaut. in cap. Act. 4. ^c. 1.
1. No man must dare to approach to the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper if he
be in a state of any one sin, that is, unless he have entered into the state of
repentance, that is, of sorrow and amendment; least it be said concerning him,
as it was concerning Judas, the hand of him that betrayed me is with me on the
Table: and he that receives Christ into an impure soul or body, first turns
his most excellent nourishment into poison, and then feeds upon it.

2. Every communicant must first have examined himself, that is, tried the
condition and state of his soul, searched out the secret ulcers, enquired out
its weaknesses and indiscretions, and all those aptnesses where it is exposed
to temptation, that by finding out its diseases he may find a cure, and by
discovering its aptnesses he may secure his present purposes of future
amendment, and may be armed against dangers and temptations.

3. This examination must be a man's own act, and inquisition into his life; but
then also it should lead a man on to ^un to those whom the Great Physician of
our souls Christ Jesus has appointed to minister physic to our diseases; ^^at
in all dangers and great accidents we may be assisted for comfort and remedy,
for medicine and caution,

4. In this affair let no man deceive himself and against such a time which
public Authority has appointed for us to receive the Sacrament, weep for his
sins by way of solemnity and ceremony, and still retain the affection: but he
that comes to this feast must have on the wedding garment, that is, he must
have, put on Jesus Christ, and he must have* put off the old man with his
affections and lusts; and he must be wholly conformed to Christ in the image of
his mind: For then we have put on Christ, when our souls are clothed with his
righteousness, when every faculty of our soul is proportioned and vested
according to the pattern of Christ's life. And therefore a man must not leap
from his last nights Su^fet, and Bath, and then communicate: but when he has
begun the work of God effectually, and made some progress in repentance, and
has walked some stages and periods in the ways of godliness, then let him
come to him that is to minister it, and having made known the state of his
soul, he is to be admitted: but to receive it into an unhallowed soul and body,
is to receive the dust of the Tabernacle in the waters of jealousy; it will
make the belly to swell, and the thigh to rot: it will not convey Christ to us,
but the Devil will enter and dwell there, till with it he returns to his
dwelling of torment. Remember always that after a great sin or after a habit
of sins, a man is not soon made clean; and no unclean thing must come to this
Feast. It is not the preparation of two or three days that can render a person
capable of this banquet: For in this feast, all Christ, and Christ's passion,
and all his graces, the blessings and effects of his sufferings are conveyed:
nothing can fit us for this, but what can unite us to Christ, and obtain of him
to present our needs to his heavenly Father: this Sacrament can no otherwise be
celebrated but upon the same terms on which we may hope for pardon and Heaven
it self.

5. When we have this general and indispensably necessary preparation, we are
to make our souls more adorned and trimmed up with circumstances of pious
actions, and special devotions, setting apart some portion of our time
immediately before the day of solemnity according as our great occasions will
permit; and this time is specially to be spent in actions of repentance,
confession of our sins, renewing our purposes of holy living, praying for
pardon of our failings, and for those graces which may prevent the like
sadnesses for the time to come; meditation upon the passion, upon the infinite
love of God expressed in so great mysterious manners of redemption; and
indefifinitely in all acts of virtue which may build our souls up into a Temple
fit for the reception of Christ himself and the inhabitation of the holy Spirit.

6. The celebration of the holy Sacrament being the most solemn prayer, joined
with the most effectual instrument of its acceptance, must suppose us in the
love of God and in charity with all the World: and therefore we must before
every Communion especially, remember what differences or jealousies are between
us and any one else; and recompose all disunions, and cause right
understandings between each other; offering to satisfy whom we have injured
and to forgive them who have injured us, without thoughts of resuming the
quarrel when the solemnity is over; for that is but to rake the embers in light
and fantastic ashes: it must be quenched, and a holy flame enkindled: no
fires must be at all, but the fires of love and zeal: and the altar of incense
will send up a sweet perfume, and make atonement for us.

7. When the day of the feast is come, lay aside all cares and impertinencies
of the World, and remember that this is thy Souls day; a day of traffic and
intercourse with Heaven. Arise early in the morning. 1. Give God thanks for the
approach of so great a blessing. 2. Confess thy own unworthiness to admit so
Divine a Guest. 3 Then remember and deplore thy sins which have made thee so
unworthy. 4. Then confess Gods goodness and take sanctuary there, and upon him
place thy hopes, 5. And invite him to thee with renewed acts of love, of holy
desire, of hatred of his enemy, sin. 6. Make oblation of thy self wholly to be
disposed by him, to the obedience of him, to his providence and possession, and
pray him to enter, and dwell there for ever: And after this with joy and holy
fear, and the forwardness of love, address thy self to the receiving of him, to
whom and by whom, and for whom, all faiths and all hope, and all love in the
whole Catholic Church, both in Heaven and Earth is designed; him, whom Kings
and Queens, and whole Kingdoms are inlove with, and count it the greatest
honor in the World, that their Crowns and Scepters are laid at his holy feet.

8. When the holy man stands at the Table of blessing and ministers the rite of
consecration, then do as the Angels do, who behold and love, and wonder, that
the Son of God should become food to the souls of his servants; that he who
cannot suffer any change of ^essening, should be broken into pieces, and enter
into the body to support and nourish the spirit, and yet at the same time
remain in Heaven while he descends to thee upon Earth; that he who has
essential felicity should become miserable and dye for thee and then give
himself to thee for ever to redeem thee from sin and misery; that by his wounds
he should procure health to thee, by his affronts he should entitle thee to
glory, by his death he should bring thee to life, and by becoming a man he
should make thee partaker of the Divine nature. These are such glories that
although they are made so obvious that each eye may behold them, yet they are
also so deep, that no thought can fathom them: But so it has pleased him to
make these mysteries to be sensible, because the excellency and depth of the
mercy is not intelligible; that while we are ravished and comprehended within
the infiniteness of so vast and mysterious a mercy, yet we may be as sure of
it, as of that thing we see and feel, and smell and taste; but yet is so great,
that we cannot understand it.

9. These holy mysteries are offered to our senses, but not to be placed under
our feet; they are sensible, but not common: and therefore as the weakness of
the Elements adds wonder to the excellency of the Sacrament: so let our
reverence and venerable usages of them add honor to the Elements, and
acknowledge the glory of he mystery, and the Divinity of the mercy. Let us
receive the consecrated Elements with all devotion, and humility of body and
spirits; and do this honor to it, that it be the first food we eat, and the
first beverage we drink that day, unless it be in case of sickness, or other
great necessity: and that your body and soul both be prepared to its reception
with abstinence from secular pleasures, Dis^^di^e alia is, Qums tuli^ h^stema^
gaudia nec^e Venu^.
that you may better have attended fastings and preparatory prayers. For if
ever it be seasonable to observe the counsel of Saint Paul, that married
person by consent should abstain for a time that they may attend to solemn
Religion, it is now. It was not by Saint Paul nor the after ages of the Church
called a duty so to do, but it is most reasonable, that the more solemn actions
of Religion should be attended to without the mixture of any thing that may
discompose the mind, and make it more secular, or less religious.

10. In the act of receiving, exercise acts of Faith with much confidence and
resignation, believing it not to be common bread and wine, but holy in their
use, holy in their signification, holy in their change, and holy in their
effect, and believe if thou art a worthy Communicant thou do as verily
receive Christ's body and blood to all effects and purposes of the spirit, Cruci
haremus, sanguinem sugimus, and in^er ipsa Redemptori^ nostri vulnera figimus
linguam. Cyprian. de caena Dom.
as thou do receive the blessed elements into thy mouth; that thou put
thy finger to his hand, and thy hand into his side, and thy lips into his
fontinel of blood, sucking life from his heart: and yet if thou do
communicate unworthily, thou eatest and drinkest Christ to thy danger, and
death and destruction. Dispute not concerning the secret of the mystery, and
the nicety of the manner of Christ's presence: it is sufficient to thee that
Christ shall be present to thy soul, as an instrument of grace, a pledge of the
resurrection, as the earnest of glory and immortality, and a means of many
intermediall blessings, even all such as are necessary for thee, and are in
order to thy salvation: and to make all this good to thee, there is nothing
necessary on thy part but a holy life, and a true belief of all the sayings of
Christ; amongst which, indefinitely assent to the words of institution, and
believe that Christ in the holy Sacrament gives thee his body and his blood. He
that believes not this is not a Christian; He that believes so much, needs not
to enquire further, nor to entangle his faith by disbelieving his sense.

11. Fail not this solemnity according to the custom of pious and devout people
to make an offering to God for the uses of religion and the poor, according to
thy ability. For when Christ feasts his body, let us also feast our fellow
members who have right to the same promises, and are partakers of the same
Sacrament, and partners of the same hope, and cared for under the same
providence, and descended from the same common parents, and whose Father God
is, and Christ is their Elder brother. If thou chancest to communicate where
this holy custom is not observed publicly, supply that want by thy private
charity, but offer it to God at his holy Table, at least by thy private
designing it there.

11. When you have received, pray and give thanks. Pray for all estates of men:
for they also have an interest in the body of Christ whereof they are members:
and you in conjunction with Christ (whom then you have received) are more fit
to pray for them in that advantage, and in the celebration of that holy
sacrifice which then is Sacramentally represented to GOD, * Give thanks for the
passion of our dearest Lord: remember all its parts, and all the instruments of
your Redemption; and beg of GOD that by a holy perseverance in well doing you
(...) from shadows pass on to substances, from eating his body to seeing his
face, from the Typical, Sacramental, and Transient, to the Real, and
Eternal Supper of the Lamb.

13. After the solemnity is done, let Christ dwell in your hearts by faith, and
love, and obedience, and conformity to his life and death; as you have taken
CHRIST into you, so put CHRIST on you, and conform every faculty of your soul
and body to his holy image and perfection. Remember that now Christ is all one
with you; and therefore when you are to do an action, consider how Christ did,
or would do the like, and do you imitate his example, and transcribe his copy,
and understand all his commandments, and choose all that he propounded, and
desire his promises, and fear his threatenings, and marry his loves and hatreds,
and contract all friendships; for then you do every day communicate; especially
when Christ thus dwells in you, and you in Christ, growing up toward a perfect
man in Christ Jesus.

14. Do not instantly upon your return from Church, return also to the world,
and secular thoughts and employments; but let the remaining parts of that day
be like a post-Communion or an after-office, entertaining your blessed Lord
with all the caresses and sweetness of love and colloquies, and entercourses of
duty and affection, acquainting him with all your needs, and revealing to him
all your secrets, and opening all your infirmities; and as the affairs of your
person or employment call you off, so retire again with often ejaculations and
acts of entertainment to your beloved Guest.

The effects and benefits of worthy communicating.
When I said that the sacrifice of the cross which Christ offered for all the
sins and all the needs of the world is represented to God by the minister in
the Sacrament, and offered up in prayer and Sacramental memory, after the manner
that Christ himself intercedes for us in Heaven (so far as his glorious
Priesthood is imitable by his Ministers on earth) I must of necessity also
mean, that all the benefits of that sacrifice are then conveyed to all that
communicate worthily: But if we descend to particulars; Then and there the
Church is nourished in her faith, strengthened in her hope, enlarged in her
bowels with an increasing charity: there all the members of Christ are joined
with each other, and all to Christ their head; and we again renew the covenant
with God in Jesus Christ, and God seals his part, and we promise for ours, and
Christ unites both, and the holy Ghost signs both in the collation of those
graces which we then pray for, and exercise and receive all at once: there our
bodies are nourished with the signs, and our souls with the mystery: our
bodies receive into them the seed of an immortal nature, and our souls are
joined with him who is the first fruits of the resurrection and never can dye:
and if we desire any thing else and need it, here it is to be prayed for, here
to be hoped for, here to be received: Long life and health, and recovery from
sickness, and competent support and maintenance, and peace, and deliverance
from our enemies, and content, and patience, and joy, and sanctified riches, or
a cheerful poverty and liberty, and whatsoever else is a blessing, was
purchased for us by Christ in his death and resurrection, and in his
intercession in Heaven: and this Sacrament being that to our particulars, which
the great mysteries are in themselves, and by design to all the world, if we
receive worthily we shall receive any of those blessings, according as God
shall choose for us; and he will not only choose with more wisdom, but also
with more affection then we can for our selves.

After all this, it is advised by the Guides of souls wise men and pious, that
all persons should commu^icate very often, even as often as they can without
excuses or delays: Every thing that puts us from so holy an employment when we
are moved to it, being either a sin or an imperfection; an infirmity or
indevotion, and an unactiveness of Spirit. All Christian people must come: They
indeed that are in the state of sin must not come so, but yet they must come:
First they must quit their state of death, and then partake of the bread of
life. They that are at enmity with their neighbors must come, that is no
excuse for their not coming; only they must not bring their enmity along with
them, but leave it* and then come. They that have variety of secular
employments must come; only they must leave their secular thoughts and
affections behind them, L'Evesque de Geneve introd: a la vie d^vote.
and then come and converse with God. If any man be well grown in grace he must
needs come, because he is excellently disposed to so holy a feast: but he that
is but in the infancy of piety had need to come that so he may g^ow in grace.
The strong must come lest they become weak, and the weak that they may become
strong. The sick must come to be cured; the healthful to be preserved. They
that have leisure must come because they have no excuse: They that have no
leisure must come ^ither, that by so excellent religion they may sanctify
their business. The penitent sinners must come, that they may be justified: and
they that are justified, that they may be justified still. They that have fears
and great reverence to these mysteries, and think no preparation to be
sufficient must receive, that they may learn how to receive thee more worthily:
and they that have a less degree of reverence, must come often to have it
heightened: that as those Creatures that live amongst the snowes of the
Mountains turn white with their food and conversation with such perpetual
whitenesses: so our souls may be transformed into the similitude and union with
Christ by our perpetual feeding on him, and conversation, not only in his
Courts, but in his very heart, and most secret affections, and incomparable
purities.

Prayers for all sorts of Men and all necessities; relating to the several
parts of the virtue of Religion.
A Prayer for the Graces of Faith, Hope, Charity.
O Lord God of infinite mercy, of infinite excellency, who have sent thy holy
Son into the world to redeem us from an intolerable misery, and to teach us a
holy religion, and to forgive us an infinite debt: give me thy holy Spirit,
that my understanding and all my faculties may be so resigned to the discipline
and doctrine of my Lord, that I may be prepared in mind and will to dye for the
testimony of Jesus, and to suffer any affliction or calamity that shall offer
to hinder my duty, or tempt me to shame or sin, or apostasy: and let my faith
be the parent of a good life, a strong shield to repel the fiery darts of the
Devil, and the Author of a holy hope, of modest desires, of confidence in God,
and of a never failing charity to thee my God, and to all the world, that I may
never have my portion with the unbelievers, or uncharitable, and desperate
persons; but may be supported by the strengths of faith in all temptations, and
may be refreshed with the comforts of a holy hope in all my sorrows, and may
bear the burden of the Lord, and the infirmities of my neighbor by the support
of charity, that the yoke of Jesus may become easy to me, and my love may do
all the miracles of grace, till from grace it swell to glory, from earth to
heaven, from duty to reward, from the imperfections of a beginning and little
growing love, it may arrive to the consummation of an enternall and never
ceasing charity, through Jesus Christ the Son of thy love, the Anchor of our
hope, and the Author and finisher of our faith, to whom with thee, O Lord God,
Father of Heaven and Earth, and with thy holy Spirit be all glory, and love,
and obedience, and dominion now and for ever. Amen.

Acts of love by way of prayer and ejaculation: to be used in private.
O God thou art my God, ea^ly will I seek Psalm. 63.

I am ready not only to be bound, but to Acts. 23. How amiable are thy
tabernacles thou Lord Psalm. 84.

O blessed Jesu, thou art worthy of all adoration, thee: Kings lay their Crowns
and Scepters at thy feet, and Queens are thy handmaids, and wash the feet of
thy servants.

A Prayer to be said in any affliction, as death of children, of husband or
wife, in great poverty, in imprisonment, in a sad and disconsolate spirit and
in temptations to despair.
O Eternal God, Father of Mercies and God of all comfort, with much mercy look
upon the sadnesses and sorrows of thy servant. My sins lie heavy upon me, and
press me sore, and there is no health in my bones by reason of thy displeasure
and my sin. The waters are gone over me, and I stick fast in the deep mire, and
my miseries are without comfort, because they are punishments of my sin: and I
am so evil and unworthy a person, that though I have great desires, yet I have
no dispositions or worthiness toward receiving comfort. My sins have caused my
sorrow, and my sorrow does not cure my sins: and unless for thy own sake, and
merely because thou art good, thou shall pity me and relieve me, I am as much
without remedy, as now I am without comfort. Lord pity me; Lord let thy grace
refresh my spirit. Let thy comforts support me, thy mercy pardon me, and never
let my portion be amongst hopeless and accursed spirits; for thou art good and
gracious; and I throw my self upon thy mercy. Let me never let my hold go, and
do thou with me what seems good in thy own eyes: I cannot suffer more then I
have deserved: and yet I can need no relief so great as thy mercy is: for thou
art infinitely more merciful then I can be miserable: and thy mercy which is
above all thy own works must needs be far above all my sin and al my misery.
Dearest Jesus, let me trust in thee for ever, and let me never be confounded,
Amen.

Ejaculations and ^ort meditations to be used in time of sickness and sorrow,
or danger of Death.
HEar my Prayer, O Lord, and let my crying come unto thee. * Hide not thy face
from me in the time of my trouble, incline thine ear unto me when I call: O
^e^r me and that right soon. For my days are consumed like smoke, and my bones
are burnt up as it were a fire brand. My heart is smitten down and withered
like grass; so that I forget to eat my bread: and that because of t^ine
indignation and wrath: for thou have taken me up and cast me down. * Thine
arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore. There is ^o health in
my flesh because of thy displeasure: neither is there any rest in my bon^s by
reason of my sin. * My wicked esses are gone over my head, and are a sore
burden too heavy for me to bear. But I will confess my wickedness, and be sorry
for my sin. O Lord rebuke me not in thy indignation, neither chasten me in thy
displeasure.

Lord be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.

Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses. O remember not the sins and
offenses of my youth: but according to thy mercy think thou upon me, O Lord for
thy goodness. * Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness: and cleanse me from my
sin. * Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. * Cast
me not away from thy presence, from thy all-hallowing and life-giving presence:
and take not thy holy Spirit, thy sanctifying, thy guiding, thy comforting, thy
supporting, and confirming Spirit from me.

O God, thou art my God for ever and ever: thou shall be my guide unto death.
about: let not the pains of hell take hold upon me.

An Act of Faith concerning resurrection and the day of judgment, to be said by
sick persons or meditated.
I Know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon
the earth: and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God: whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold,
though my reins be consumed within me. Job. 19.

God shall come and shall not keep silence: there shall go before him a
consuming fire, and a mighty tempest shall be stirred up round about him: he
shall call the heaven from above, and the earth, that he may judge his people.
* O blessed Jesu, thou art my judge and thou art my Advocate: have mercy upon
me in the hour of my death, and in the day of judgment.

See John 5.28. and 1 Thessal. 4.15.

Short Prayers to be said by sick persons.
O Holy Jesus, thou art a merciful High Priest and touched with the sense of
our infirmities; thou know the sharpness of my sickness, and the weakness of
my person. The clouds are gathered about me, and thou have covered me with thy
storm: My understanding has not such apprehension of things as formerly: Lord
let thy mercy support me, thy spirit guide me, and lead me through the valley
of this death safely; that I may pass it patiently, holily, with perfect
resignation, and let me rejoice in the Lord, in the hopes of pardon, in the
expectation of glory, in the sense of thy mercies, in the refreshments of thy
spirit, in a victory over all temptations.

Thou have promised to be with us in tribulation. Lord, my soul is troubled,
and my body is weak, and my hope is in thee, and my enemies are busy and
mighty, now make good thy holy promise. Now O holy Jesus, now let thy hand of
grace be upon me: restrain my ghostly enemies, and give me all sorts of
spiritual assistances: Lord remember thy servant in the day when thou bindest
up thy Jewels.

O take from me all tediousness of Spirit, all impatience and unquietness: let
me possess my soul in patience, and resign my soul and body into thy hands, as
into the hands of a faithful Creator, and a blessed Redeemer.

O holy Jesus, thou did dye for us; by thy sad, pungent and intolerable
pains which thou enduredst for me, have pity on me, and ease my pain, or
increase my patience. Lay on me no more then thou shall enable me to bear. I
have deserved it all and more, and infinitely more. Lord I am weak and
ignorant, timorous and inconstant, and I fear lest something should happen that
may discompose the state of my soul, that may displease thee: Do what thou will
with me, so thou do but preserve me in thy fear and favor. Thou know
that it is my great fear, but let thy spirit secure, that nothing may be able
to separate me from the love of God in Jesus Christ; ^hen smite me here, that
thou may spare me for ever: and yet O Lord smite me friendly: for thou
know my infirmities. Into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have
redeemed me, O Lord, thou God of truth. * Come holy Spirit, help me in this
conflict. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Let the Sick man often meditate upon these following promises and gracious
words of God.
My help ^^meth of the Lord who preserves them that are true of heart. Psalm
7.11.

And all they that know thy Name will put their trust in thee: for thou Lord
have never failed them that seek thee, Psalm. 9.10.

O how plentiful is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee, and that thou have prepared for them that put their trust in thee, even
before the sons of men! Psalm. 31.

Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that
put their trust in his mercy, to deliver their souls from death, Psalm. 33.

The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart; and will save such as
are of an humble spirit, Psalm. 34.17.

Thou Lord shall save both man and beast: how excellent is thy mercy, O God!
and the children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of thy wings,
Psalm. 36.7.

They shall be satisfied with the plenteousness of thy house: and thou shall
give them to drink of thy pleasures as out of the rivers. v. 8.

For with thee is the well of life: and in thy light we shall see light, v. 9.

Commit thy way unto the Lord, and put thy trust in him, and he shall bring it
to pass, Ps. 37.5.

But the salvation of the righteous comes of the Lord: who is also their
strength in the time of trouble, v. 40

So that a man shall say, verily there is a reward for the righteous: doubtless
there is a God that judges the earth, Psalm. 58.10.

Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and receivest unto thee: he shall dwell
in thy court, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house, even of
thy holy temple, Psalm. 65.4.

They that sow in tears shall reap in joy, Psa^. 126.6.

It is written, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5.

The Prayer of faith shall save the sick: and the Lord shall raise him up: and
if he have committed sins they shall be forgiven, Jam. 5.15.

Come and let us return unto the Lord: for he has torn, and he will heal us,
he has smitten, and he will bind us up, Hos. 6.1.

If we sin we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and
he is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.2.

If we confess our sins he is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. He that forgives shall
be forgiven, Luke 6.37.

And this is the confidence that we have in him* that if we ask any thing
according to his will he hears us, 1 John 5.14. And ye know that he was
manifested to take away our sins, 1 John 3.5.

If ye being evil know to give good things to your children, how much more
shall your Father which is in Heaven give good things to them that ask him?
Matthew. 7.11.

This is a faithful saying and worthy of ^ll accep^ation, that Jesus Christ
came into the World to save sinners. He that has given us his ^on, how should
not he with him give us all things else?

Acts of hope to be used by sick persons, after a pious life.
I Am persuaded that neither death nor life, Romans 8.38.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished Tim. 4.7.

Blessed be the God, even the Father of our Cor. 1.3.

A prayer to be said in behalf of a sick or dying person.
O Lord God, there is no number of thy days, nor of thy mercies; and the sins
and sorrows of thy servant also are multiplied. Lord look upon him with much
mercy and pity, forgive him all his sins, comfort his sorrows, ease his pain,
satisfy his doubts, relieve his fears, instruct his ignorances, strengthen his
understanding, take from him all disorders of spirit^, weakness and abuse of
fancy: Restrain the malice and power of the spirits of darkness; and suffer him
to be injured neither by his ghostly enemies, no^ his own infirmities, and let
a holy and a just peace, the peace of God, be within his conscience.

Lord preserve his senses till the last of his time, strengthen his faith,
confirm his hope, and give him a never ceasing charity to thee our God, and to
all the world: stir up in him a great and proportionable contrition for all the
evils he has done, and give him a just measure of patience for all he
suffers: give him prudence memory, and consideration, rightly to state the
accounts of his soul, and do thou reminde him of all his duty, that when it
shall please thee that his soul goes out from the prison of his body, it may be
received by Angels, and preserved from the surprise of evil spirits, and from
the horrors and amazements of new and stranger Regions; and be laid up in the
bosom of our Lord, till at the day of thy second coming it shall be reunited to
the body, which is now to be laid down in weakness and dishonor, but we
humbly beg, may then be raised up with glory and power for ever to live and to
behold the face of God in the glories of the Lord Jesus, who is our hope, our
resurrection, and our life, the light of our eyes and the joy of our souls, our
blessed and ever glorious Redeemer. Amen.

Hither the sick persons may draw in, and use the acts of several virtues
respersed in the several parts of this book, the several Letanies, viz. of
repentance, of the passion, and the single prayers, according to his present
needs.
A Prayer to be said in a storm a^ Sea.
O My God, thou did create the Earth and the Sea for thy glory and the use of
man, and do daily show wonders in the deep: look upon the danger and fear of
thy servant: my sins have taken hold upon me, and without the supporting arm of
thy mercy I cannot look up; but my trust is in thee. Do thou O Lord, rebuke the
Sea, and make it calm; for to thee the winds and the sea obey: let not the
waters swallow me up, but let thy Spirit, the Spirit of gentleness and mercy
move upon the waters: Be thou reconciled unto thy servants, and then the face
of the waters will be smooth. I fear that my sins make me like ^onas the cause
of the tempest. Cast out all my sins, and throw not thy servants away from thy
presence and from the land of the living into the depths where all things are
forgotten: But if it be thy will that w^ shall go down into the waters, Lord
(...) my soul into thy holy hands, and preserve it in mercy and safety till the
day of ^est^^^tion of all things: and be pleased ^o^n. ^e my d^^th to the (...)
of thy Son; and ^o accept of it so united as a punishment for all my sins, that
thou may forget all thine anger, and blot my sins out of thy book, and write
my soul there for Jesus Christ his sake, our dearest Lord and most mighty
Redeemer. Amen.

Then make an act of resignation, thus.
TO God pertain the issues of life and death. It is the Lord. Let him do what
seems good in his own eyes. Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven.

Recite Psalm 107. and 130.

A form of a vow to be made in this or the like danger.
IF the Lord will be gracious and hear the Prayer of his servant, and bring me
safe to shore, then I will praise him secretly and publicly, and pay unto the
uses of charity [or Religion] [then name the sum you design for holy uses] O
my God my goods are nothing unto thee: I will also be thy servant all the days
of my life, and remember this mercy and my present purposes and live more to
Gods glory, and with a stricter duty: And do thou please to accept this vow as
an instance of my importunity, and the greatness of my needs, and be thou
graciously moved to pity and deliver me. Amen.

This form also may be used in praying for a blessing on an enterprise; and may
be instanced in actions of devotion as well as of charity.
A Prayer before a journey.
O Almighty God who fillest all things with thy presence, and art a God afar
off as well as near at hand: thou did send thy Angel to bless Jacob in his
journey, and did lead the children of Israel through the Red Sea, making it a
wall on the right hand and on the left: be pleased to let thy Angel go out
before me and guide me in my journey, preserving me from dangers of robbers,
from violence of enemies, and sudden and sad accidents, from falls and errors:
and prosper my journey to thy glory, and to all my innocent purposes: and
preserve me from all sin, that I may return in peace and holiness, with thy
favor and thy blessing, and may serve thee in thankfulness and obedience all
the days of my pilgrimage, and a^ last bring me to thy country, to the
celestial Jerusalem, there to dwell in thy house and to sing praises to thee
for ever. Amen.

Ad. Sect. 4.] A prayer to be said before hearing or reading the word of God.
O Holy and Eternal Jesus who have begotten us by thy word, renewed us by thy
Spirit, fed us by thy Sacraments, and by the daily ministry of thy word: still
go on to build us up to life eternal. Let thy most holy Spirit be present with
me and rest upon me in the reading [or hearing] thy sacred word; that I may do
it humbly, reverently, without prejudice, with a mind ready and desirous to
learn and to obey; that I may be readily furnished and instructed to every good
work, and may practice all thy holy laws and commandments, to the glory of thy
holy name, O holy and eternal Jesus. Amen.

Ad Act. 5.9.10.] A form of confession of sins, and repentance to be used upon
fasting days, or days of humiliation; especially in Lent, and before the Holy
Sacrament.
HAve mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses. For I will confess my
wickedness and be sorry for my sin. * O my dearest Lord, I am not worthy to be
accounted amongst the meanest of thy servants: not worthy to be sustained by
the least fragments of thy mercy, but to be shut out of thy presence for ever
with dogs and unbelievers. But for thy names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto my
sin, for it is great.

I am the vilest of sinners, and the worst of men: proud and vainglorious,
impatient of scorn or of just reproof: not enduring to be slighted, and yet
extremely deserving it: I have been cousened by the colors of humility, and
when I have truly called my self vicious, I could not endure any man else
should say or think so. I have been disobedient to my superiors, churlish and
ungentle in my behavior, unchristian and unmanly. But for thy names sake, etc.

O Just and dear God, how can I expect pity or pardon, who am so angry and
peevish, with and without cause, envious at good rejoicing in the evil of my
neighbors, negligent of my charge, idle and useless, timorous and base,
jealous and impudent, ambitious and hard-hearted, soft, unmortified and
effeminate in my life, indevout in my prayers, without fancy or affection,
without attendance to them or perseverance in them; but passionate and curious
in pleasing my appetite of meat and drink and pleasures, making matter both for
sin and sickness? and I have reaped the cursed fruits of such improvidence,
entertaining undecent and impure thoughts; and I have brought them forth in
undecent and impure actions, and the spirit of uncleanness has entered in, and
unhallowed the temple which thou did consecrate for the habitation of thy
Spirit of love and holiness. But for thy names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto
my sin, for it is great.

Thou have given me a whole life to serve thee in, and to advance my hopes of
heaven: and this precious time I have thrown away upon my sins and vanities,
being improvident of my time and of my talent, and of thy grace and my own
advantages; resisting thy Spirit and quenching him. I have been a great lover
of my self, and yet used many ways to destroy my self; I have pursued my
temporal ends with greediness and indirect means: I am revengfull and
unthankful, forgetting benefits, but not so soon forgetting injuries: curious
and murmuring: a great breaker of promises: I have not loved my neighbors good
nor advanced it in all things where I could; I have been unlike thee in all
things, I am unmercifull and unjust; a sottish admirer of things below, and
careless of heaven and the ways that lead thither.

But for thy names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great.

All my senses have been windows to let sin in, and death by sin. Mine eyes
have been adulterous and covetous; mine ears open to slander and detraction:
my tongue and palate loose and wanton, intemperate, and of foul language,
talkative and lying, rash and malicious, false and flattering, irreligious and
irreverent, detracting and censorious: My hands have been injurious and
unclean: my passions violent and rebellious: my desires impatient and
unreasonable: all my members and all my faculties have been servants of sin:
and my very best actions have more matter of pity, then of confidence; being
imperfect in my best, and intolerable in most. But for thy names sake O Lord,
etc.

Unto this and a far bigger heap of sin, I have added also the faults of others
to my own score by neglecting to hinder them to sin in all that I could and
ought: but I also have encouraged them in sin, have taken off their fears and
hardened their consciences and tempted them directly, and prevailed in it to my
own ruin and theirs, unless thy glorious and unspeakable mercy has prevented
so intolerable a calamity.

Lord I have abused thy mercy, despised thy judgments, turned thy grace into
wantonness; I have been unthankful for thy infinite loving kindness. I have
sinned and repented* and then sinned again, and resolved against it, and
presently broke it; and then I tied my self up with vows, and then was tempted,
and then I yielded by little and little till I was willingly lost again, and my
vows fell off like cords of vanity.

Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin?

And yet O Lord, I have another heap of sins to be unloaded. My secrets sins O
Lord, are innumerable; sins I noted not, sins that I willingly neglected, sins
that I acted upon wilful ignorance and voluntary mispersuasion; sins that I
have forgot; and sins which a diligent and a watchful spirit might have
prevented, but I would not. Lord I am confounded with the multitude of them,
and the horror of their remembrance, though I consider them nakedly in their
direct appearance, without the deformity of their unhandsome and aggravating
circumstances: but so dressed they are a sight too ugly; an instance of
amazement, infinite in degrees, and insufferable in their load.

And yet thou have spared me all this while, and have not thrown me into Hell,
where I have deserved to have been long since, and even now to have been shut
up to an eternity of torments with insupportable amazement, fearing the
revelation of thy day.

Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin?

Thou shall answer for me, O Lord my God; Thou that prayest for me shall be my
Judge.

The Prayer.
THou have prepared for me a more healthful sorrow. O deny not thy servant
when he begs sorrow of thee: Give me a deep contrition for my sins, a hearty
detestation and loathing of them, hating them worse then death with torments.
Give me grace entirely, presently, and for ever to forsake them; to walk with
care and prudence, with fear and watchfulness all my days; to do all my duty
with diligence and charity, with zeal and a never fainting spirit: to redeem
the time, to trust upon thy mercies, to make use of all the instruments of
grace, to work out my salvation with fear and trembling, that thou may have
the glory of pardoning all my sins, and I may reap the fruit of all thy
mercies, and all thy graces of thy patience and long-suffering, even to live a
holy life here, and to reign with thee for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Ad Sect. 6.] Special devotions to be used upon the Lord's Day, and the great
Festvals of Christians.
In the Morning recite the following form of Thanksgiving: upon the special
Festivals adding the comme^oration of the special blessings according to the
following prayers: adding such prayers as you shall choose out of the foregoing
Devotions.

2. Besides the ordinary and public duties of the day, if you retire into your
closet to read and meditate, after you have performed that duty, say the song
of Saint Ambrose commonly called the [ Te Deum] or [We praise thee etc.] then
add the prayers for particular graces which are at the end of the former
Chapters such and as many of them as shall fit your present needs and
affections: ending with the Lords prayer. This form of devotion may for
variety, be indifferently used at other times.

A form of thanksgiving with a recital of public and private blessings: To be
used upon Easter Day, Whit-sunday, Ascension day, and all sundays of the
year: but the middle part of it may be reserved for the more solemn Festivals:
and the other used upon the ordinary; as every man's affections or leisure shall
determine.

[1.] Ex Liturgia S. Basilii magna ex part.
O Eternal Essence, Lord God, Father Almighty, maker of all things in Heaven
and Earth, it is a good thing to give thanks to thee, O Lord, and to pay to
thee all reverence, worship and devotion from a clean and prepared heart; and
with an humble spirit to present a living and reasonable sacrifice to thy
holiness and Majesty: for thou have given unto us the knowledge of thy truth:
and who is able to declare thy greatness and to recount all thy mervellous
works which thou have done in all the generations of the world?

O Great Lord and Governor of all things, Lord and Creator of all things
visible and invisible, who sit upon the throne of thy glory and beholdest
the secrets of the lowest abyss and darkness, thou art without beginning,
uncircumscribed, incomprehensible, unalterable, and seated for ever unmovable
in thy own essential happiness and tranquillity: Thou art the Father of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST: who is,

Our Dearest and most Gracious Savior, our hope, the wisdom of the Father, the
image of thy goodness, the Word eternal and the brightness of thy person, the
power of God from eternal ages, the true light that lighteneth every man that
comes into the World, the Redemption of Man, and the Sanctification of our
Spirits.

By whom the holy Ghost descended upon the Church; the holy Spirit of truth,
the seal of adoption, the earnest of the inheritance of the Saints, the first
fruits of everlasting felicity, the life-giving power, the fountain of
sanctification, the comfort of the Church, the ease of the afflicted, the
support of the weak, the wealth of the poor, the teacher of the doubtful,
scrupulous and ignorant, the anchor of the fearful, the infinite reward of all
faithful souls, by whom all reasonable and understanding creatures serve thee,
and send up a never-ceasing and a never-rejected sacrifice of prayer, and
praises, and adoration.

All Angels and Archangels, all thrones and Dominions, all. Principalities and
Powers, the Cherubims with many eyes, and the Seraphims covered with wings from
the terror and amazement of thy brightest glory: These and all the powers of
Heaven do perpetually sing praises and never-ceasing Hymns, and eternal
Anthems to the glory of the eternal God, the Almighty Father of Men and Angels.

Holy is our God: Holy is the Almighty: Holy is the Immortal: Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God of Sabbath, Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy glory.
Amen.

With these holy and blessed Spirits I also thy servant, O thou great lover of
souls, though I be unworthy to offer praise to such a Majesty, yet out of my
bounden duty humbly offer up my heart and voice to join in this blessed quire,
and confess the glories of the Lord. * For thou art holy, and of thy greatness
there is no end; and in thy justice and goodness thou have measured out to us
all thy works.

Thou made man out of the earth, and did form him after thine own image:
thou did place him in a garden of pleasure, and gave him laws of
righteousness to be to him a seed of immortality.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness and declare the
wonders that he has done for the children of men. For when man sinned and
listened to the whispers of a tempting spirit, and refused to hear the voice of
God, thou did throw him out from Paradise, and sentest him to till the Earth;
but yet left not his condition without remedy, but did provide for him the
salvation of a new birth, and by the blood of thy Son did redeem and pay the
price to thine own justice for thine own creature, lest the work of thine own
hands should perish.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord; etc. For thou, O Lord, in every
age did send testimonies from Heaven, blessings and Prophets, and fruitful
seasons, and preachers of righteousness, and miracles of power, and mercy: thou
spakest by thy Prophets and said, I will help by one that is mighty: and in
the fullness of time spakest to us by thy Son, by whom thou did make both the
Worlds: who by the word of his power, sustains all things in Heaven and Earth:
who thought it no robery to be equal to the Father: who being before all time
was pleased to be born in time, to converse with men, to be incarnate of a holy
Virgin: he emptied himself of all his glories, took on him the form of a
servant, in all things being made like unto us, in a soul of passions and
discourse, in a body of humility and sorrow, but in all things innocent, and in
all things afflicted: and suffered death for us, that we by him might live and
be partakers of his nature and his glories, of his body and of his Spirit, of
blessings of earth, and of the immortal felicities in Heaven.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord, etc. For thou O holy and immortal
God, O sweetest Savior Jesus, were made under the Law to condemn sin in the
flesh: thou who knew no sin were made sin for us: thou gave to us
righteous Commandments, and made known to us all thy Fathers will: thou
did redeem us from our vain conversation, and from the vanity of Idols, false
principles, and foolish confidences, and broughtest us to the knowledge of the
true and only God and our Father, and have made us to thy self a peculiar
people, of thy own purchase, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation: Thou have
washed our souls in the Laver of Regeneration, the Sacrament of Baptism: Thou
have reconciled us by thy death, justified us by thy Resurrection, sanctified
us by thy Spirit [sending him upon thy Church in visible forms, and giving him
in powers, and miracles, and mighty signs, and continuing this incomparable
favor in gifts and sanctifying graces, and promising that he shall abide with
us for ever] thou have led us with thine own broken body, and given drink to
our souls out of thine own heart, and have ascended upon high, and have
overcome all the powers of Death and Hell, and redeemed us from the miseries of
a sad eternity: and sit at the right hand of God, making intercession for
us with a never-ceasing charity.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord, etc. The grave could not hold thee
long, O holy and eternal Jesus, thy body could not see corruption, neither
could thy soul be left in Hell; thou were fre among the dead, and thou brakest
the iron gates of Death, and the bars and chains of the lower prisons: Thou
broughtest comfort to the souls of the Patriarchs who waited for thy coming,
who longed for the redemption of Man, and the revelation of thy day. Abraham,
Isac, and Jacob saw thy day, and rejoiced: and when thou did arise from thy
bed of darkness, and leftest the grave-clothes behind thee, and put on a robe
of glory (over which for 40 days thou did wear a veil) and then entered into
a cloud, and then into glory, then the powers of Hell were confounded, then
Death lost its power and was swallowed up into victory; and though death is not
quite destroyed, yet it is made harmless and without a sting, and the condition
of Humane Nature is made. an entrance to eternal glory; and art become the
Prince of life, the first fruits of the resurrection, the firstborn from the
dead, having made the way plain before our faces, that we may also rise again
in the Resurrection of the last day, when thou shall come again unto us to
render to every man according to his works.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord etc.

O give thanks unto the Lord for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

O all ye angels of the Lord, praise ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O ye spirits and souls of the Righteous, praise ye the Lord: praise him and
magnify him for ever.

And now, O Lord God, what shall I render to thy Divine Majesty for all the
benefits thou have done unto thy servant in my personal capacity.

Thou art my Creator and my Father, my Protector and my Guardian, thou have
brought me from my Mothers womb, thou have told all my Joints, and in thy book
were all my members written: Thou have given me a comely body, Christian and
careful parents, holy education; Thou have been my guide and my teacher all my
days: Thou have given me ready faculties, an unloosed tongue, a cheerful
spirit, straight limbs, a good reputation, and liberty of person, a quiet life,
and a tender conscience [ a loving wife or husband, and hopeful children] thou
were my hope from my youth, through thee have I been holden up ever since I was
born: Thou have clothed me and fed me, given me friends and blessed them; given
me many days of comfort and health, free from those sad infirmities, with
which many of thy Saints and dearest servants are afflicted: Thou have sent thy
Angel to snatch me from the violence of fire and water, to prevent praecipices,
fracture of bones, to rescue me from thunder and lightning, plague and
pestilentiall diseases, murder and robbery, violence of chance and enemies, and
all the spirits of darkness: and in the days of sorrow thou have refreshed me;
in the destitution of provisions thou have taken care of me, and thou have said
unto me, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.

I will give thanks unto the Lord with my whole heart, secretly among the
faithful and in the congregation.

Thou O my dearest Lord and Father have taken care of my soul, have pitied my
miseries, sustained my infirmities, relieved and instructed my ignorances; and
though I have broken thy righteous Laws and Commandments, run passionately
after vanities, and was in love with Death, and was dead in sin, and was
exposed to thousands of temptations, and fell foully, and continued in it, and
loved to have it so, and hated to be reformed; yet thou did call me with the
checks of conscience, with daily Sermons and precepts of holiness, with fear
and shame, with benefits and the admonitions of thy most holy Spirit, by the
counsel of my friends, by the example of good persons, with holy books and
thousands of excellent arts, and would not suffer me to perish in my folly,
but did force me to attend to thy gracious calling, and have put me into a
state of repentance, and possibilities of pardon, being infinitely desirous I
should live, and recover, and make use of thy grace, and partake of thy glories.

I will give thanks unto the Lord with my whole heart, secretly among the
faithful, and in the congregation. For salvation belongs unto the Lord, and
thy blessing is upon thy servant. But as for me I will come into thy house in
the multitude of thy mercies, and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy
temple. * For of thee, and in thee, and through and for thee are all things.
Blessed be the name of God from generation to generation. Amen.

A short Form of thanksgiving to be said upon any special deliverance, as from
Childbirth from Sickness, from battle, or imminent danger at Sea, or Land, etc.
O most merciful and gracious God, thou fountain of all mercy and blessing,
thou have opened the hand of thy mercy to fill me with blessings, and the sweet
effects of thy loving kindness: thou feedest us like a Shepherd, thou governest
us as a king, thou bear us in thy arms like a nurse, thou do cover us
under the shadow of thy wings, and shelter us like a hen; thou (o Dearest Lord
wakest for us as a Watchman, thou providest for us like a Husband, thou love
us as a friend, and think on us perpetually, as a careful mother on her
helpless babe, and art exceeding merciful to all that fear thee: and now, O
Lord, thou have added this great blessing of deliverance from my late danger,
(here name the blessing) it was thy hand and the help of thy mercy that
relieved me, the waters of affliction had drowned me, and the stream had gone
over my soul, if the spirit of the Lord had not moved upon these waters. Thou O
Lord, did revoke thy angry sentence which I had deserved, and which was gone
out against me: Unto thee, O Lord, I ascribe the praise and honor of my
redemption: I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou have considered
my trouble, and have known my soul in adversity: As thou have spread thy hand
upon me for a covering, so also enlarg my heart with thankfulness, and fill my
mouth with praises, that my duty and returns to thee may be great as my needs
of mercy are; and let thy gracious favors, and loving kindness endure for ever
and ever upon thy servant: and grant that what thou have sown in mercy, may
spring up in duty: and let thy grace so strengthen my purposes that I may sin
no more, lest thy threatening return upon me in anger, and thy anger break me
into pieces: but let me walk in the light of thy favor, and in the paths of
thy Commandments; that I living here to the glory of thy name, may at last
enter into the glory of my Lord, to spend a whole eternity in giving praise to
thy exalted and ever glorious name. Amen.

We praise thee, O God: we knowledge thee to be the Lord. All the earth does
worship thee the Father Everlasting. To thee all Angels cry aloud, the heavens
and all the powers therein. To thee Cherubim and Seraphim continually do cry.
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath. Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty
of thy glory. * The glorious company of the Apostles praise thee. * The goodly
fellowship of the Prophets praise thee. * The noble army of Martyrs praise
thee. * The holy Church throughout all the world does knowledge thee, * The
Father of an infinite Majesty. * Thy honorable, true and only Son. * Also the
Holy Ghost the Comforter. * Thou art the King of glory, O Christ. * Thou art
the everlasting Son of the Father. * When thou tookest upon thee to deliver
man, thou did not abhor the Virgins womb. * When thou had overcome the
sharpness of death thou did open the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers. *
Thou sit at the right hand of God in the glory of the Father * We believe
that thou shall come to be our Judge. * We therefore pray thee help thy
servants whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood. * Make them to be
numbered with thy Saints in glory everlasting O Lord save thy people, and bless
thine heritage. Govern them and lift them up for ever. Day by day we magnify
thee and we worship thy name ever world without end. Vouchsafe O Lord, to keep
us this day without sin. O Lord have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us. O Lord
let thy mercy lighten upon us as or trust is in thee. O Lord in thee have
trusted: let me never be confounded Amen.

A Prayer of thanksgiving after the receiving some great blessing, as the birth
of an Heir the success of an honest design, a victory, a good harvest, etc.
O Lord God, Father of mercies, the fountain of comfort and blessing, of life
and peace, o plenty and pardon, who fillest Heaven with thy glory, and earth
with thy goodness; I give thee the most earnest, most humble, and most enlarged
returns of my glad and thankful heart, for thou have refreshed me with thy
comforts, and enlarged me with thy blessing, thou have made my flesh and my
bones to rejoice: for besides the blessings of all mankind, the blessings of
nature, and the blessings of grace, the support of every minute, and the
comforts of every day, thou have opened thy bosom, and at this time have powered
out an excellent expression of thy loving kindness [ here name the blessing]
What am I, O Lord, and what is my Fathers house, what is the life, and what are
the capacities of thy servant that thou shoul'd do this unto me, * that the
great God (...) and Angels should make a special decree in Heaven for me, and
send out an Angel of blessing, and in stead of condemning and ruining me as I
miserably have deserved, to distinguish me from many my equals and my betters,
by this and many other special acts of Grace and favor.

Praised be the Lord daily, even the Lord that helps us, and powers his
benefits upon us. He is our God, even the God of whom comes salvation: God is
the Lord by whom we escape death. Thou have brought me to great honor. and
comforted me on every side.

Thou Lord have made me glad through thy works, I will rejoice in giving praise
for the operation of thy hands.

O give thanks unto the Lord, and call upon his name: tell the people what
things he has done.

As for me, I will give great thanks unto the Lord, and praise him among the
multitude.

Blessed be the Lord God, even the Lord God of Israel: which only does wondrous
and gracious things.

And blessed be the name of his Majesty for ever: and all the earth shall be
filled with his Majesty. Amen. Amen. Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

A prayer to be said on the Feast of Christmas, or the birth of our blessed
Savior Jesus; the same also may be said upon the feast of the Annunciation,
and Purification of the B. Virgin Mary.
O Holy and Almighty God Father of mercies, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Son of thy love and Eternal mercies, I adore and praise and glorify thy
infinite and unspeakable love, and wisdom, who have sent thy Son from the bosom
of felicities to take upon him our nature and our misery, and our guilt, and
have made the Son of God to become the Son of Man, that we might become the
Sons of God, and partakers of the divine nature: since thou have so exalted
humane nature, be pleased also to sanctify my person, that by a conformity to
the humility and laws and sufferings of my dearest Savior I may be united to
his spirit, and be made all one with the most Holy Jesus. Amen.

O holy and Eternal Jesus, who did pity mankind lying in his blood, and sin
and misery, and did choose our sadnesses and sorrows, that thou might make
us to partake of thy felicities: Let thine eyes pity me, thy hands support me,
thy holy ^eet tread down all the difficulties in my way to Heaven; let me dwell
in thy heart, be instructed with thy wisdom, moved by thy affections, choose
with thy will, and be clothed with thy righteousness that in the day of
Judgment I may be found having on thy garments, sealed with thy impression; and
that bearing upon every faculty and member the character of my elder brother, I
may not be cast out with strangers and unbleivers. Amen.

O Holy and ever blessed spirit, who did overshadow the holy Virgin Mother of
our Lord and causedst her to conceive by a miraculous and mysterious manner: be
pleased to overshadow my soul, and enlighten my spirit, that I may conceive the
holy Jesus in my heart, and may bear him in my mind, and may grow up to the
fullness of the stature of Christ, to be a perfect man in Christ Jesus. Amen,

To God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. To the eternal Son that was
incarnate and born of a virgin. To the spirit of the Father and the Son be all
honor and glory, worship and adoration, now and for ever. Amen.

The same Form of Prayer may be used upon our own Birth day, or day of our
Baptism: adding the following prayer.
A Prayer to be said upon our Birthday, or day of Baptism.
O Blessed and Eternal God, I give thee pray and glory for thy great mercy to
me in causing me to be born of Christian parents, and did not allot to me a
portion with Misbelievers and Heathen that have not known thee; thou did not
suffer me to be strangled at the gate of the womb, but thy hand sustained and
brought me to the light of the world, and the illumination of baptism, with
thy grace preventing my election, and by an artificial necessity, and holy
prevention engaging me to the profession and practices of Christianity: Lord
since that, I have broken the promises made in my behalf, and which I confirmed
by my after act; I went back from them by an evil life; and yet thou have still
continued to me life and time of repentance; and did not cut me off in the
beginning of my days, and the progress of my sins: O Dearest God, pardon the
errors and ignorances, the vices and vanities of my youth, and the faults of
my more forward years, and let me never more stain the whiteness of my
baptismal robe: and now that by thy grace, I still persist in the purposes of
obedience, and do give up my name to Christ, and glory to be a Disciple of thy
institution, and a servant of Jesus, let me never fail of thy grace; let no
root of bitterness spring up and disorder my purposes, and defile my spirit. O
let my years be so many degrees of nearer approach to thee; and forsake me not
O God, in my old age, when I am gray headed; and when my strength fails me,
be thou my strength and my guide unto death, that I may reckon my years and
apply my heart unto wisdom, and at last after the spending a holy and a blessed
life, I may be brought unto a glorious eternity, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Then add the form of thanksgiving formerly described. A prayer to be said
upon the days of the memory of Apostles, Martyrs, etc,
O Eternal God to whom do live the spirits of them that depart hence in the
Lord, and in whom the souls of them that be elected after they be delivered
from the burden of the flesh be in peace and rest from their labors, and their
works follow them, and their memory is blessed: I bless and magnify thy holy
and ever glorious name, for the great grace and blessing manifested to thy
Apostles and Martyrs, and other holy persons who have glorified thy name in the
days of their flesh, and have served the interest of religion, and of thy
service, and this day we have thy servant [ name the Apostle or Martyr, etc.]
in remembrance, whom thou have lead through the troubles and temptations of
this World, and now have lodged in the bosom of a certain hope and great
beatitude until the day of restitution of all things. Blessed be the mercy and
eternal goodness of God; and the memory of all thy Saints is blessed: Teach me
to practice their doctrine, to imitate their lives following their example, and
being united as a part of the same mystical body, by the band of the same
faith, and a holy hope, and a never ceasing charity: and may it please thee of
thy gracious goodness shortly to accomplish the number of thine elect, and to
hasten thy Kingdom, that we with thy servant [*] and all others departed in the
true faith and fear of thy holy Name, may have our perfect consummation and
bliss in body and soul in thy eternal and everlasting kingdom. Amen.

A form of prayer recording all the parts and mysteries of Christ's passion;
being a short history of it: to be used especially in the week of the passion,
and before the receiving the blessed Sacrament.
ALl praise, honor, and glory be to the holy and eternal Jesus. I adore thee O
blessed Redeemer, eternal God, the light of the Gentiles and the glory of
Israel; for thou have done and suffered for me more then I could wish, more
then I could think of, even all that a lost and a miserable perishing sinner
could possibly need.

Thou were afflicted with thirst and hunger, with heat and cold, with labors
and sorrows, with hard journeys and restless nights; and when thou were
contriving all the mysterious and admirable ways of paying our scores, thou
did suffer thy self to be designed to slaughter by those for whom in love
thou were ready to dye.

What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou thus
visitest him?

Blessed be thy Name, O holy Jesus; for thou wentest about doing good, working
miracles of mercy, healing the sick, comforting the distressed, instructing the
ignorant, raising the dead, inlightning the blind, strengthening the lame,
streightening the crooked, relieving the poor, preaching the Gospel, and
reconciling sinners by the mightiness of thy power, by the wisdom of thy
Spirit, by the Word of God, and the merits of thy Passion, thy healthful and
bitter passion.

Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him, etc.

Blessed be thy Name, O holy Jesus, who were content to be conspired against by
the Jews, to be sold by thy servant, for a vile price, and to wash the feet of
him that took money for thy life, and to give to him and to all thy Apostles
thy most holy Body and Blood o become a Sacrifice for their sins, even for
their betraying and denying thee; and for all my sins, even for my crucifying
thee a fresh; and for such sins which I am ashamed to think; but that the
greatness of my sins magnify the infiniteness of thy mercies, who did so
great things for so vile a person.

Lord what is man, etc.

Blessed be thy Name, O holy Jesus, who being to depart the world did comfort
thy Apostles, pouring out into their ears and hearts treasures of admirable
discourses; who did recommend them to thy Father with a mighty charity, and
then did enter into the Garden set with nothing but Briars and ^orrows, where
thou did suffer a most unspeakable agony, until the sweat strained through
thy pure skin like drops of blood; and there did sigh and groan, and fall
flat upon the earth, and pray and submit to the intolerable burden of thy
fathers wrath which I had deserved and thou sufferedst.

Lord what is man etc.

Blessed be thy Name O holy Jesus, who have sanctified to us all our natural
infirmities and passions by vouchsafing to be in fear and trembling, and sore
amazement, by being bound and imprisoned, by being harrassed and dragged with
cords of violence and rude hands; by being quenched in the brook in the way, by
being sought after like a theif, and used like a sinner, who were the most holy
and the most innocent, cleaner then an Angel and brighter then the Morning Star.

Lord what is man, etc.

Blessed be thy Name O holy Jesus, and blessed be that loving kindness and
pity, by which thou did neglect thy own sorrows and go to comfort the sadness
of thy Disciples, quickening their dullness, encouraging their duty, arming their
weakness with excellent precepts against the day of trial. Blessed be that
humility and sorrow of thine, who being Lord of the Angels, yet would need,
and receive comfort from thy servant the Angel; who did offer thy self to thy
persecutors and made them able to seize thee; and did receive the Traitors
kiss, and sufferedst a veil to be thrown over thy holy face, that thy enemies
might not presently be confounded by so bright a luster; and would do a
miracle to cure a wound of one of thy spiteful enemies; and did reprove a
zealous servant in behalf of a malicious adversary; and then did go like a
Lamb to the slaughter without noise or violence or resistance, when thou
could have commanded millions of Angels for thy guard and rescue.

Lord what is man etc.

Blessed be thy Name O holy Jesus, and blessed be that holy sorrow thou did
suffer when thy Disciples fled, and thou were left alone in the hands of cruel
men, who like evening Wolves thirsted for a draught of thy best blood: and thou
were led to the house of Annas, and there asked insnaring questions, and
smitten on the face by him whose ear thou had but lately healed: and from
thence were dragged to the house of Caiaphas and there all night did endure
spittings, affronts, scorn, contumelies, blows, and intolerable insolences,
and all this for man who was thy enemy and the cause of all thy sorrows:

Lord what is man etc.

Blessed be thy Name O holy Jesus, and blessed be thy mercy, who when thy
servant Peter denied thee, and forsook thee, and forswore thee, did look
back upon him, and by that gracious and chiding look did call him back to
himself and thee: who were accused before the High Priest, and railed upon, and
examined to evil purposes, and with designs of blood: who were declared
guilty of death for speaking a most necessary and most profitable truth: who
were sent to Pilate and found innocent, and sent to Herod and still found
innocent, and were arrayed in white both to declare thy innocence and yet to
deride thy person, and were sent back to Pilate and examined again, and yet
nothing but innocence found in thee and malice round about thee to devour thy
life, which yet thou were more desirous to lay down for them, then they were to
take it from thee.

Lord what is man, etc.

Blessed be thy Name, O holy Jesus, and blessed be that patience and charity by
which for our sakes thou were content to be smitten with canes, and have that
holy face which Angels with joy and wonder do behold, be spit upon, and be
despised when compared with Barabbas, and scourged most rudely with unhallowed
hands, till the pavement was purpled with that holy blood; and condemned to a
sad and shameful, a public and painful death, and arrayed in Scarlet, and
crowned with thorns, and stripped naked, and then clothed, and laden with the
cross, and tormented with a tablet stuck with nails at the fringes of thy
garment, and bound hard with cords and dragged most vilely and most piteously
till the load was too great, and did sink thy tender and virginal body to the
earth; and yet did comfort the weeping women, and did more pity thy
persecutors then thy self, and were grieved for the miseries of Jerusalem to
come forty years after more then for thy present passion.

Lord what is man etc.

Blessed be thy Name, O holy Jesus, and blessed be that incomparable sweetness
and holy sorrow which thou sufferedst, when thy holy hands and feet were nailed
upon the cross, and the cross being set in a hollowness of the earth did in
the fall rend the wounds wider, and there naked and bleeding, sick and faint,
wounded and despised, did hang upon the weight of thy wounds three long
hours, praying for thy persecutors, satisfying thy Fathers wrath, reconciling
the penitent thief, providing for thy holy and afflicted mother, tasting
vinegar and gall, and when the fullness of thy suffering was accomplished, did
give thy soul into the hands of God, and did descend to the regions of
longing souls who waited for the revelatio^ of this thy day in their prisons of
hope: and then thy body was transfixed with a spear, and issued forth two
Sacraments, Water and blood, and thy body was composed to burial, and dwelt in
darkness three days and three nights.

Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou
thus visitest him?

The Prayer.
THus O blessed Jesu thou did finish thy holy passion with pain and anguish
so great, that nothing could be greater then it, except thy self and thy own
infinite mercy, and all this for man, even for me, then whom nothing could be
more miserable, thy self only excepted who becamest so by undertaking our
guilt and our punishment. And now Lord who have done so much for me, be pleased
only to make it effectual to me that it may not be useless and lost as to my
particular, lest I become etenally miserable' and lost to all hopes and
possibilities of comfort. All this deserves more love then I have to give: but
Lord do thou turn me all into love, and all my love into obedience, and let my
obedience be without interruption, and then I hope thou will accept such a
return as I can make: make me to be something that thou delightest in, and thou
shall have all that I am or have from thee, even whatsoever thou make fit for
thy self. Teach me to live wholly for my Savior Jesus, and to be ready to dye
for Jesus, and to be conformable to his life and sufferings, and to be united
to him by inseparable unions, and to own no passions but what may be servants
to Jesus and Disciples of his institution. O sweetest Savior clothe my soul
with thy holy robe: hide my sins in thy wounds, and bury them in thy grave, and
let me rise in the life of grace, and abide and grow in it till I arrive at the
Kingdom of Glory. Amen Our Father etc.

Ad. Sect. 7.8, 10. A form of prayer or intercession for all estates of people
in the Christian Church. The parts of which may be added to any other forms:
and the whole office entirely as it lies is proper to be said in our
preparation to the holy Sacrament, or on the day of celebration.
1. For our selves.
O Thou gracious Father of mercy, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, have mercy
upon thy servants who bow our heads, and our knees, and our hearts to thee:
pardon and forgive us all our sins, give us the grace of holy repentance and a
strict obedience to thy holy word; strengthen us in the inner man with the
power of the holy Ghost for all the parts and duties of our calling and holy
living: preserve us for ever in the unity of the holy Catholic Church, and in
the integrity of the Christian faith, and in the love of God, and of our
neighbors, and in hope of life Eternal. Amen.

2. For the whole Catholic Church.
O holy Jesus King of the Saints, and Prince of the Catholic Church, preserve
thy spouse whom thou have purchased with thy right hand and redeemed and
cleansed with thy blood; the whole Catholic Church from one end of the Earth
to the other; she is founded upon a rock, but planted in the sea. O preserve
her safe from schism, heresy, and sacrilege. Unite all her members with the
bands of Faith, Hope and Charity, and an external communion, when it shall
seem good in thine eyes: let the daily sacrifice of prayer and Sacramental
thanksgiving never cease, but be for ever presented to thee, and for ever
united to the intercession of her dearest Lord, and for ever prevail for the
obtaining for every of its members grace and blessing, pardon and salvation.
Amen.

3. For all Christian Kings, Princes and Governors.
O King of Kings, and Prince of all the Rulers of the Earth, give thy grace and
Spirit to all Christian Princes, the spirit of wisdom and counsel, the spirit
of government and godly fear: Grant unto them to live in peace and honor, that
their people may love and fear them, and they may love and fear God: speak good
unto their hearts concerning the Church, that they may be nursing Fathers to
it, Fathers of the Fatherless, Judges and Avengers of the cause of Widows,
that they may be compassionate to the wants of the poor, and the groans of the
oppressed, that they may not vex or kill the Lords people with unjust or
ambitious wars, but may feed the flock of God, and may inquire after and do all
things which may promote peace, public honesty and holy religion, so
administering things present, that they may not fail of the everlasting glories
of the world to come where all thy faithful people shall reign Kings for ever.
Amen.

4. For all the orders of them that minister about H. things.
O thou great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, Holy and Eternal Jesus, give
unto thy servants the Ministers of the Mysteries of Christian religion the
Spirit of prudence and sanctity, faith and charity, confidence and zeal,
diligence and watchfulnes, that they may declare thy will unto the people
faithfully and dispense thy Sacraments rightly, and intercede with thee
graciously and acceptably for thy servants. Grant O Lord, that by a holy life
and a true belief, by well doing and patient suffering (when thou shall call
them to it) they may glorify thee the great lover of souls, and after a
plentiful conversion of sinners from the error of their ways they may shine
like the stars in glory. Amen.

Give unto thy servants the Bishops a discerning Spirit that they may lay hands
suddenly on no man, but may depute such persons to the Ministeries of religion,
who may adorn the Gospel of God, and whose lips may preserve knowledge, and
such who by their good preaching and holy living, may advance the service of
the Lord Jesus. Amen.

5. For our nearest relatives, as Husband Wife, Children, Family, etc.
O God of infinite mercy, let thy loving mercy and compassion descend upon the
head of thy servants [ my wife, or husband; children and family:] be pleased to
give them health of body and of spirit, a competent portion of temporals, so as
may with comfort support them in their journey to Heaven: preserve them from
all evil and sad accidents, defend them in all assaults of their enemies,
direct their persons and their actions, sanctify their hearts and words, and
purposes, that we all may by the bands of obedience and charity be united to
our Lord Jesus, and always feeling thee our merciful and gracious Father, may
become a holy family, discharging our whole duty in all our relations, that we
in this life being thy children by adoption and grace, may be admitted into thy
holy family hereafter for ever to sing praises to thee in the Church of the
firstborn, in the family of thy redeemed ones. Amen.

6. For our Parents, our Kindred in the flesh, our Friends and Benefactors.
O God merciful and gracious, who have made [ my Parents.] my friends and my
Benefactors ministers of thy mercy and instruments of providence to thy
servant, I humbly beg a blessing to descend upon the heads of [ name the
persons, or the relations] Depute thy holy Angels to guard their persons, thy
holy spirit to guide their souls, thy providence to minister to their
necessities: and let thy grace and mercy preserve them from the bitter pains of
eternal death, and bring them to everlasting life through Jesus Christ. Amen.

7. For all that lie under the rod of war* famine, pestilence: to be said in
the time of plague, or war, etc.
O Lord God almighty, thou art our Father, we are thy children, thou art our
Redeemer, we thy people purchased with the price of thy most precious blood, be
pleased to moderate thy anger toward thy servants, let not thy whole
displeasure arise, lest we be consumed and brought to nothing. Let health and
peace be within our dwellings, let righteousness and holiness dwell for ever in
our hearts and be expressed in all our actions, and the light of thy
countenance be upon us in all sufferings, that we may delight in the service
and in the mercies of God for ever. Amen.

O gracious Father and merciful God, if it be thy will, say unto the
destroying Angel, it is enough, and though we are not better then our brethren
who are smitten with the rod of God, but much worse, yet may it please thee,
even because thou art good, and because we are timorous and sinful, not yet
fitted for our appearance, to set thy mark upon our foreheads, that thy Angel
the Minister of thy justice may pass over us and hurt us not: let thy hand
cover thy servants and hide us in the clefts of the rock in the wounds of the
holy Jesus, from the present anger that is gone out against us: that though we
walk thorough the valley of the shadow of death we may fear no evil, and
suffer none: and those whom thou have smitten with thy rod, support with thy
staff, and visit them with thy mercies and salvation, through Jesus Christ.
Amen.

8. For all women with child and for unborn children.
O Lord God who art the Father of them that trust in thee, and show mercy to
a thousand generations of them that fear thee, have mercy upon all women great
with child [*] be pleased to give them a joyful and a safe deliverance; and
let thy grace preserve the fruit of their wombs, and conduct them to the holy
Sacrament of Baptism, that they being regenerated by thy spirit, and adopted
into thy family and the portion and duty of Sons, may live to the glory of God,
to the comfort of their parents and friends, to the edification of the
Christian Commonwealth, and the salvation of their own souls through Jesus
Christ. Amen.

9. For all estates of Men and Women in the Christian Church.
O Holy God, King Eternal, out of the infinite storehouses of thy grace and
mercy give unto all Virgins chastity, and a religious spirit; to all persons
dedicated to thee and to religion, continence and meekness, an active zeal, and
an unwearied spirit: to all married paires faith and holiness: to widows and
fatherless, an all that are oppressed, thy patronage, comfort and defense: to
all Christian women simplicity and modesty, humility and chastity, patience and
charity: give unto the poor, to all that are robbed and spoiled of their goods,
a competent support, and a contented spirit, and a treasure in heaven
hereafter: give unto prisoners and captives, to them that toil in the mines,
and row in the galleys strength of body and of spirit, liberty and redemption,
comfort and restitution: to all that travel by land thy Angel for their guide
and a holy and prosperous return: to all that travel by sea freedom from
Pirates and shipwreck, and bring them to the Haven where they would be: to
distressed and scrupulous consciences, to melancholy and disconsolate persons,
to all that are afflicted with evil and unclean spirits, give a light from
heaven, great grace and proportionable comforts, and timely deliverance; give
them patience and resignation; let their sorrows be changed into grace and
comfort, and let the storm wast them certainly to the regions of rest and glory.

Lord God of mercy give to thy Martyrs Confessors and all thy persecuted,
constancy and prudence, boldness and hope, a full faith and a never failing
charity: To all who are condemned to death do thou minister comfort, a strong,
a quiet, and a resigned spirit: take from them the fear of death, and all
remaining affections to sin, and all imperfections of duty, and cause them to
die full of grace, full of hope: and give to all faithful, and particularly to
them who have recomme^ded themselves to the prayers of thy unworthy servant, a
supply of all their needs temporal and spiritual, and according to their
several states and necessities, rest and peace, pardon and refreshment: and
show us all a mercy in the day of judgment. Amen.

Give O Lord, to the magistrates equity, sincerity, courage and prudence, that
they may protect the good, defend religion, and punish the wrong doers: Give to
the Nobility wisdom, valor, and loyalty: To Merchants justice and
faithfulness: to all Artificers and Laborers truth and honesty: to our enemies
forgiveness and brotherly kindness.

Preserve to us the heavens and the Air in healthful influence and
disposition, the Earth in plenty, the kingdom in peace and good government,
our marriages in peace, and sweetness and innocence of society, thy people
from famine and pestilence, our houses from burning and robbery, our persons
from being burnt alive, from banishment and prison, from Widowhood and
destitution, from violence of pains and passions, from tempests and
earthquakes, from inundation of waters, from rebellion or invasion, from
impatience and inordinate cares, from tediousness of spirit and despair, from
murder, and all violent accursed and unusual deaths, from the surprise of
sudden and violent accidents, from passionate and unreasonable fears, from all
thy wrath, and from all our sins, good Lord deliver and preserve thy servants
for ever. Amen.

Repress the violence of all implacable warring and tyrant Nations: bring home
unto thy fold all that are gone astray: call into the Church all strangers:
increase the number and holiness of thy own people: bring infants to ripeness
of age and reason; confirm all baptized people with thy grace and with thy
Spirit: instruct the novices and new Christians: let a great grace and
merciful providence bring youthful persons safely and holily through the
indiscretions and passions and temptations of their younger years: and those
whom thou have or shall permit to live to the age of a man, give competent
strength and wisdom, take from them covetousness and churlishness, pride and
impatience: fill them full of devotion and charity repentance and sobriety,
holy thoughts and longing desires after Heaven and heavenly things: give them a
holy and a blessed death, and to us all a joyful resurrection through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Ad Sect. 10. The manner of using these devotions by way of preparation to the
receiving the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
The just preparation to this holy Feast consisting principally in a holy life,
and consequently in the repetation of the acts of all virtues and especially of
Faith Repentance Charity and thanksgiving to the exercise of these four graces
let the person that intends to communicate in the times set apart for his
preparation and devotion* for the exercise of his Faith recite the prayer or
Letany of the passion. For the exercise of Repentance the form of confession of
sins with the prayer annexed: And for the graces of thanksgiving and charity,
let him use the special forms of prayer above described; or if a less time can
be allotted for preparatory devotion the two first will be the more proper as
containing in them all the personal duty of the communicant. To which upon the
morning of that holy solemnity, let him add.

A prayer of preparation or address to the holy Sacrament.
An act of Love.
O Most gracious and eternal God, the helper of the helpless, the comforter of
the comfortless, the hope of the afflicted, the bread of the hungry, the drink
of the thirsty, and the Savior of all them that wait upon thee, I bless and
glorify thy Name, and adore thy goodness, and delight in thy love, that thou
have once more given me the opportunity of receiving the greatest favor which
I can receive in this World, even the body and blood of my dearest Savior. O
take from me all affection to sin or vanity: let not my affections dwell below,
but soar upwards to the element of love, to the seat of God, to the Regions of
Glory, and the inheritance of Jesus, that I may hunger and thirst for the bread
of life, and the wine of elect souls, and may know no loves but the love of
God, and the most merciful Jesus, Amen.

An act of Desire.
O Blessed Jesus, thou have used many arts to save me, thou have given thy life
to redeem me, thy holy Spirit to sanctify me, thy self for my example, thy
Word for my Rule, thy grace for my guide, the fruit of thy body hanging on the
tree of the cross, for the sin of my soul: and after all this thou have sent
thy Apostles and Ministers of salvation to call me, to importune me, to
constrain me to holiness and peace and felicity. O now come Lord Jesus, come
quicly: my heart is desirous of thy presence, and thirsty of thy grace, and
would fain entertain thee, not as a guest, but as an inhabitant, as the Lord of
all my faculties. Enter in and take possession, and dwell with me for ever,
that I also may dwell in the heart of my dearest Lord, which was opened for me
with a spear and love.

An act of contrition.
Lord thou shall find my heartfull of cares and worldly desires, cheated with
love of riches, and neglect of holy things, proud and unmortified false and
crafty to deceive it self, intricated and inta^gled with difficult cases of
conscience, with knots which my own wildness and inconsideration and impatience
have tied and shuffled together: O my dearest Lord, if thou can behold such
an impure seat, behold the place to which thou art invited is full of passion
and prejudice, evil principles and evil habits, peevish and disobedient,
lustful and intemperate, and full of sad remembrances that I have often
provoked to jealousy and to anger thee my God, my dearest Savior, him that
dyed for me, him that suffered torments for me, that is infinitely good to me,
and infinitely good and perfect in himself. This, O dearest Savior, is a sad
truth and I am heartily ashamed, and truly sorrowful for it, and do deeply
hate all my sins, and am full of indignation against my self for so unworthy,
so careless, so continued, so great a folly: and humbly beg of thee to increase
my sorrow and my care, and my hatred against sin; and make my love to thee
swell up to a great grace, and then to glory, and immensity.

An act of Faith.
This indeed is my condition: But I know, O blessed Jesus, that thou did take
upon thee my nature, that thou might suffer for my sins, and thou did
suffer to deliver me from them and from thy Fathers, wrath: and I was delivered
from this wrath that I might serve thee in holiness and righteousness all my
days, Lord I am sure thou did the great work of Redemption for me and all
mankind, as that I am alive: This is my hope, the strength of my spirit, my
joy and my confidence: and do thou never let the spirit of unbelief enter into
me and take me from this Rock: Here I will dwell, for I have a delight therein:
Here I will live, and here I desire to die.

The Petition.
Therefore, O blessed Jesu, who art my Savior and my God, whose body is my
food, and thy righteousness is my robe, thou art the Priest and the Sacrifice,
the Master of the feast, and the feast it self, the Physician of my soul, the
light of my eyes, the purifier of my stains: enter into my heart, and cast out
from thence all impurities, all the remains of the Old man; and grant I may
partake of this holy Sacrament with much reverence and holy relish, and great
effect, receiving hence the communication of thy holy body and blood, for the
establishment of an unreproveable faith, of an unfeigned love, for the fullness
of wisdom, for the healing my soul, for the blessing and preservation of my
body, for the taking out the sting of temporal death, and for the assurance of
a holy resurrection, for the ejection of all evil from within me, and the
fulfilling all thy righteous Commandments, and to procure for me a mercy and a
fair reception at the day of judgment, through thy mercies, O holy and ever
blessed Savior Jesus. Amen.

Here also may be added the prayer after receiving the cup. * Ejaculations to
be said before or at the receiving the holy Sacrament.

Like as the Heart desires the water brooks: so longs my soul after thee, O
God. My soul is a thirst for God, yea even for the living God, when shall I
come before the presence of God?

O Lord my God, great are thy wondrous works which thou have done: like as be
also thy thoughts which are to usward, and yet there is no man that orders
them unto thee.

O send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me, and bring me unto
thy holy hill and to thy dwelling: And that I may go unto the Altar of God,
even unto the God of my joy and gladness: and with my heart will I give thanks
to thee, O God my God.

I will wash my hands in innocence, O Lord: and so will I go to thine altar:
that I may show the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works.

Examine me, O Lord, and prove me, try out my reins and my heart: For thy
loving kindness is now and ever before my eyes: and I will walk in thy truth.

Thou shall prepare a table before me against them that trouble me; thou have
anointed my head with oil, and my cup shall be full. But thy loving loving
kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I will dwell
in the house of the Lord for ever.

This is the bread that comes down from Heaven, that a man may eat thereof and
not die.

Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him: and
has eternal life abiding in him, and I will raise him up at the last day.

Lord whether shall we go but to thee? thou have the words of eternal life.

If any man thirst let him come unto me and drink.

The bread which we break, is it not the communication of the body of Christ?
and the cup which we drink, is it not the communication of the blood of Christ?
What are those wounds in thy hands? They are those with which I was wounded in
the house of my friends, Zech 13.6.

Immediately before the receiving, say

Lord I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof. But do thou
speak the word only and thy servant shall be he led.

Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show thy praise. O God make speed
to save me, O Lord make have to help me.

Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

After receiving the consecrated and blessed bread, say,

O taste and see how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusts in
him. * The beasts do lack and suffer hunger; but they which seek the Lord shall
want no manner of thing that is good. Lord what am I, that my Savior should
become my food, that the Son of God should be the meat of Worms, of dust and
ashes, of a sinner, of him that was his enemy? But this thou have done to me,
because thou art infinitely good and wonderfully gracious, and love to bless
every one of us, in turning us from the evil of our ways. Enter into me
blessed Jesus, let no root of bitterness spring up in my heart; but be thou
Lord of all my faculties. O let me feed on thee by faith and grow up by the
increase of God to a perfect man in Christ Jesus. Amen. Lord I believe, help
mine unbelief. Glory be to God the Father, Son, etc.

After the receiving the cup of blessing.

It is finished. Blessed be the mercies of God revealed to us in Jesus Christ.
O blessed and eternal high Priest, let the sacrifice of the Cross which thou
did once offer for the sins of the whole World, and which thou do now and
always represent in Heaven to thy Father by thy never ceasing intercession, and
which this day has been exhibited on thy holy Table Sacramentally, obtain
mercy and peace, faith and charity, safety and establishment to thy holy Church
which thou have founded upon a Rock, the Rock of a holy Faith; and let not the
gates of Hell prevail against her, nor the enemy of mankind take any soul out
of thy hand, whom thou have purchased with thy blood, and sanctified by thy
Spirit. Preserve all thy people from Heresy, and division of spirit, from
scandal and the spirit of delusion, from sacrilege and hurtful persecutions.
Thou O blessed Jesus did die for us: keep me for ever in holy living, from
sin and sinful shame, in the communion of thy Church, and thy Church in safety
and grace, in truth and peace unto thy second coming. Amen.

Dearest Jesu since thou art pleased to enter into me, O be jealous of thy
house and the place where thine honor dwells: suffer no unclean spirit, or
unholy thought to come near thy dwelling, lest it defile the ground where thy
holy feet have trod. O teach me so to walk, that I may never disrepute the
honor of my Religion, nor stain the holy Robe which thou have now put upon my
soul, nor break my holy Vows, which I have made, and thou have sealed, nor lose
my right of inheritance, my privilege of being coheir with Jesus, into the hope
of which I have now further entered: but be thou pleased to love me with the
love of a Father, and a Brother, and a husband, and a Lord; and make me to
serve thee in the communion of Saints, in receiving the Sacrament, in the
practice of all holy virtues, in the imitation of thy life, and conformity to
thy sufferings; that I having now put on the Lord Jesus, may marry his love and
his enmities, may desire his glory, may obey his laws, and be united to his
Spirit; and in the day of the LORD I may be found having on the Wedding
Garment, and bearing in my body and soul the marks of the LORD JESUS, that I
may enter into the joy of my LORD, and partake of his glories for ever and
ever. Amen.

Ejaculations to be used any time that day, after the solemnity is ended.
LOrd, if I had lived innocently, I could not have deserved to receive the
crumbs that fall from thy Table: How great is thy mercy who have feasted me with
the Bread of Virgins, with the Wine of Angels, with Manna from Heaven!

O when shall I pass from this dark glass, from this veil of Sacraments, to the
vision of thy eternal clarity, from eating thy body, to beholding thy face in
thy eternal Kingdom!

Let not my sins crucify the Lord of life again: Let it never be said
concerning me, the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the Table.

O that I might love thee, as well as ever any creature loved thee! Let me
think nothing but thee, desire nothing but thee, enjoy nothing but thee!

O Jesus be a Jesus unto me. Thou art all things unto me. Let nothing ever
please me but what savors of thee, and thy miraculous sweetness.

Blessed be the mercies of our Lord, who of God is made unto me Wisdom and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption.

He that glories, let him glory in the Lord. Amen.

THE END.
A CATALOGUE of some Books Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in
Ivie-lane, London.
A Parahphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament by Henry
Hammond D. D. in sol.

The Practical Catechism, with all other English Treatises of Henry Hammond D.
D. in two volumes in 4o.

Dissertationes quatuor, quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and Primaeva
Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra santentiam D. Blondelli and aliorum. Authore
Henrico Hammond, in 4o.

A Letter of Resolution of six Quaeries, in 12o.

Of Schism. A Defense of the Church of England, against the Exceptions of the
Romanists, in 12o.

Of Fundamentals in a notion referring to Practice, by H. Hammond, D. D. in 12o

The names of several Treatises and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor D. D. viz.
1. (...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundays of the Year; together with
a Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness and Separation of
the Office Ministerial, in sol.

2. Episcopacy asserted, in 4o.

3. The History of the Life and death of the Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, 2d
Edit. in sol.

4: The Lib. of Prophesying, in 4o.

5. An Apology for authorized and Set-forms of Liturgy; in 4o.

6. A Discourse of Baptism, its institution and efficacy upon all Believers,
in 4o.

7. The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 12o

8. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12o.

9. A Short Catechism for institution of young persons in the Christian
Religion, in 12o.

9 The Real Presence and Spiritual of CHRIST in the Blessed Sacrament proved
against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, in 8o.

Certamen R^ligio^^re, or a Conference between the late King of England, and
the are Lord Marquis of Worcester concerning Religion, at Ragland Castle;
Together with a Vindication of the Protestant Cause, by Chr. Cartwright in 4o.

The Psalter of David, with Titles and Collects according to the matter of each
Psalm, by the Right honorable Chr. Hatton, in 12o.

Boare^g^s and Barnabas, or Judgment and Mercy for wounded and afflicted souls,
in several Seliloquies, by Francis Quarles, in 12o.

The life of Faith in dead Tires, by Chr. Hudson in 12o.

Motives for Prayer upon the seven days of the Week, by Sir Richard Baker
Knight, in 12o.

The Guide unto True Blessedness, or a Body of the Doctrine of the Scriptures,
directing man to the saving knowledge of God by Sam. Crook, in 12o.

Six excellent Sermons upon several occasions, preached by Edward Willan Vicar
of Heane, in 4o.

The Dipper dipped, or the Anabaptists duck'd and plunged over head and ears, by
Daniel Featly D.D. in 4o.

H^rmes Theologus, or a Divine Mercury: new descants upon old Records, by
Theoph. Wodnote, in 12o.

Philosophical Elements, concerning Government and Civil society: by Thomas
Hobbs of Malmesbury, in 12o.

An Essay upon Statius, or the five first books of Publ. Papinius Statius his
Thebais, by Tho. Stephans Schoolmaster in S ^amonds bury, 8o.

Nemenclatura Brevis anglo-Latina Graeca in usum Scolae Westmonaste^^^nsis^p^r
F Gregory, in 8o.

Grammati^^s Graecae Enchi^^d^on in usum Scholae Colligialis Wigorniae, in 8o.

A Discourse of Holy Love, by Sir Geo Strode Knight, in 12o.

The Saints Honeycomb full of Divine Truths, by Rich. Gov^ Preacher of Hen^on
S G^o^ge in So^^cisethshire in 8o.

Devotions digested into several Discourses and Meditations upon the Lords most
Holy Prayer. Together with additional Exercitations upon Baptism, The Lords
Supper, Heresies, Blasphemy, The Creatures, Sin, The souls pantings after God,
The Mercies of God, The souls complaint of its absence from God; by Peter
Samwaies, Fellow lately resident in Trinity College, Cambridge, in 12o.

Of the Division between the English and Romish Church upon Reformation, by
Hen: Fern D D in 12o.

Directions for the profitable reading of the Scriptures, by John whit. M. A.
in 8o.

The Exemplary Lives and Memorable Act. of 9. the most worthy women of the
world 3 Jews, 3 Gentiles, 3 Christians, by Tho. Heywood in 4o.

The Saints Legacies, or a Collection of premises out of the Word of God. in
12o.

Judicium Vniversitatis Oxoniensis de Solemn. Leg. and ^^dere, Juramento
Negativo etc. in 8o.

Certain Sermons and Letters of Defense and Resolution to some of the late
Controversaries of our times by Jasper Mayn, D. D. in 4o.

Janua Linguarum Referta, sive omnium Scientiarum and Linguarum seminarium,
Auctore Cl. Viro J. A. Cemenio, in 8o.

A Tratise concerning Divine providence, very seasonable for all Ages, by Tho.
Morton Bishop of Duresme, in 8o.

Animadversions upon Mr Hobbs his Leviathan, with some Observations upon Sir
Walter Rawleighs History of the World, by Alex. R^sse, in 12

Fifty Sermons preached by that learned and reverend Divine John Done, in sol.

Wits-Common-wealth, in 12

The Banquet of Jests new and old, in 12o.

Balz^cs Letters the fourth part, in 8o.

Quarles Virgin Widow a Play, in 4o.

Solomon's Recantation, in 4o. by Francis Quarles.

Amesii Antisynodalia, in 12o.

Christ's Commination against Scandalizers, by John Tombs, in 12o.

Dr. Stuart's Answer to Fountains Letter, in 4o.

A Tract of Fortification, with 22 brass cuts, in 4o.

Dr Griffiths Sermon preached at S. Paul's, in 4o

Blessed birthday, printed at Oxford, in 8o.

A Discourse of the state Ecclesiastical, in 4o.

An Account of the Church Catholic where it was before the Reformation, by
Edward Bough^n D. D. in 4o.

An Advertisement to the Jurymen of England touching Witches, written by the
Author of the Observations upon Mr. Hobbs Leviathan. in 4o

Episcopacy and presbytery considered, by Hen. Fern D. D. in 4o.

A Sermon preached at the Isle of Wi^ht before His Majesty, by Hen. Fern. D.D.
in 4o.

The Commoners Liberty or the English-mans Birthright, in 4o.

An Expedient for composing Differences in Religion, in 4o.

A Treatise of Self-denial, in 4o.

The holy Life and Death of the late Vi^countesse Falkland in 12o.

Certain Considerations of present Concernment, Touching the Reformed Church of
England, by Henry Fern, in 12o.

Englands Faithful Reprover and Monitour, in 12o.

Newly published,

The grand Conspiracy of the Members against the Mind, of Jews against their
King. As it has been delivered in four Sermons: by John Allington, B. D. in 12o

The Quakers wild Questions objected against the Ministers of the Gospel, and
many sacred acts and offices of Religion, with brief answers thereunto: Together
with a Discourse of the holy Spirit his workings and impressions on the souls
of men, by R. Sherlock, B. D. in 8o.

White Salt, or a sober correction of a mad world: By John Shaman, B. D. a
discontinuer, in 12o.

The Matching of the Magistrates Authority, and the Christians true liberty in
matters of Religion. By William Iyford, B.D. and late Minister of Sherbo^n in
Dors. in 4o.


