A Plea for PREROGATIVE: OR, Give Caesar his due. Being the Wheel of Fortune
turned round: Or, The World turned topsie-turvie. Wherein is described the true
Subjects loyalty to maintain his Majesty's Prerogative and privileges of
Parliament.

By Thorny Ayl^: alias, John Tailor.

Malice, Disloyalty, War and Sects aspire,
Religion, Peace, Obedience are ith mire.
MALICE.PEACE.RELIGION.OBEDIENCE.LOVE.WAR.SECTS.DISLOYATY.


Religion, Peace, Obedience, Love, no doubt,
Though they be let, the Wheel will turn about.
London, printed for T. Banks. 1642.

A Plea for PREROGATIVE: OR, Give Caesar his due.
THE Divel's horne-mad, Religion here should flourish,
Or England constantly the Truth should nourish:
And He (contriving with the Romish Sect)
They soon a hellish stratagem project,
That with a strange blast of a Powder-blow,
Into the Air the Parliament to throw,
And with a whirle-winde terror to appall
Gods Word professed, the Court, the State and all
Records, Laws, Statutes, Grants, Decrees and Charters,
Men, women, children (piece-meale torn in quarters;)
Magnifique Buildings, pompous Monuments;
Illustrious guildings, sumptuous ornaments;
King, Prince, Peers, Commons, with one puff should caper,
And (in a moment) turned to air and vapor.
The Devil and Rome are all stark mad at this,
That they, their great desired aim should miss,
Devised more mischiefs from the infernal pit,
To make us this deliverance to forget,
And be ungrateful to that power above,
Who this great danger from us did remove,
For Satan knows, that base ingratitude
Does all, and every damned vice include;
And therefore it is the total of transgressions
To be unthankful for Gods gracious blessings:
There Is nothing else draws down The Almighty's hate,
It has dismembered wretched Englands state;
Pride, avarice, lust, has broke our happy peace,
And daily do our sins, and shames increase.
He Is a wise man (that without danger) can
Serve God his King, and be an honest man;
For (in these days) to speak truth and do right,
Is paid with scandal, danger and despite.
Thus vice is entered, virtue is thrust out,
And Fortunes Wheel is madly turned about;
Peace, Love, Religion and Obedience
Are virtues of exceeding excellence;
Yet as the Picture in the Wheel does show,
They are turned downwards in the spokes below,
Whilst Malice, War, Sects and Disloyalty
Are in the upper spokes, exalted high,
And true Obedience never did refuse,
To give to God and Caesar both their dues;
Though she be humble, free from arrogance,
Yet her humility does her advance:
And though she be trod down, I make no doubt
But Fortunes Wheel will shortly turn about:
Disloyalty does proudly overtop her,
And makes a glistning gilded show of copper,
Full of corruption, baseness and deceit,
Deluding and most feigned counterfeit.
Some do complain of Fortune and blind chance,
And do their hands and eyes toward heaven advance;
And cry, O God (which madst the glorious Sun,)
What has poor England against Religion done,
That all her goodness topsie turvie lies,
Derided, jeered at, wronged by contraries.
Religion was the sacred bond and tie,
The rule and square how men should live and dye;
The ground and sole foundation of the Law;
The good man's sword and shield; the bad man's awe;
It Was one entire in Majesty high stated,
Now broken, fractur'd, rent and dislocated;
Divided into Sects, in pieces shattered;
And (like a Beggars cloak) all patched and totterd.
And what has England done to work all this?
Nothing at all, but doing all amiss;
Esteeming earths corrupted fa^ing dross,
And slighting heaven, and true Religions loss.
These are the causes, these for vengeance calls;
This makes high climers to have loest falls,
When men seek Honor with ambicious guile,
My little wit does at their follies smile;
That though they seem most glorious, great and stout;
Yet Fortunes Wheel will quickly turn about.
The potent Pope and Conclave of that Sect,
Did (and do) daily stratagems project.
The mungrill Papist, the Arminian,
The consubstantiall misled Lutheran;
The Anabaptists, Brownists, Arians,
Scismaticall Disciplinarians.
These, and more Sects of Seperatists beside,
Do from Religion to opinion slide;
And as they from each other disagree,
In various fashions God is served we see.
The Eternal Word's high Majesty in such
(That man can never honor it too much,)
Is turned unto the lowest spoke o'th Wheel,
And too too few the overthrow does feel.
The King, who is the Lords anointed known,
Whose Crowns and Kingdoms (under God's (...)
I will not say it t'oppresse, but true and just
To guide all under his great charge and trust
Though he (next Christ) imediate power has;
And his resisters merit heavens hot (...)
Yet this is not remembered, very few
Will render Caesar what is Caesar's due;
Which is obedience, loyalty and love
(Because his power is from the power above;)
But Church and State, are by the rabble rout
Abused; thus Fortunes wheel is turned about.
Religion (true) that ought to be the ^ye
From God to man, that man should (...)
Is made a stable, a very staulking horse
Wherein each beast does (...) a beastly course.
Religion now each ignoramus whirles
Into the fancies of fools, boys and girls,
Who dare talk of Misterious (...)
(Better then Bishops can) in (...)
They can find out Daniels prophetique meaning,
And from the Bible they have so much gleaning,
That they dare venture with their quirks and quips
To expound Saint John and his Apocalips.
Thus they think we, and we think they are out;
But Fortunes wheel I hope will turn about.
Sects up are mounted, and their impudence
And ignorance has drove Religion hence;
As once the Papists, in Queen Mary's reign,
The Protestant profession did disdain;
When swords and halters, and tormenting flames,
Exiles, imprisonments, and all th'extreames
That hell or Roman (...),
The Gospel to suppress by tyran^ize;
And now the Almighty has this Kingdom graced,
That Popish superstition is defaced:
A crew of new Sects are sprung up of late,
As bad as Papists were to Church and State;
Whose barren knowledge seems all things to know,
Who would all rule, and learning overthrow;
Whose wisdoms still are in the wane, most dull;
Whose ignorance is always at the full;
Whose good works are invisible, so good
Not to be seen, felt, heard, or understood:
Of these mad Sects, there is too too many a wigeon,
That does despise the Protestant Religion;
And worse then Papists they deride and flout,
But Fortunes wheel, I guess, will turn about.
Peace (the same day that Christ rose from the grave)
Was the first gift He his Disciples gave;
And that his Peace should still with them remain Ioh. 20.19 26.

He (eight days after, gave them Peace again;
That Peace which passes understanding all; Phil. 4.7.

Is racketed and bandied like a ball:
War, strife, contention, mischief and debate
Opposes Peace, and seeks to ruinate
Fair England, by the means of men accursed,
Who wrong her most whom she has bred and nursed.
And now against her Peace the have madly fought,
But Fortunes wheel I know will turn about.
Love is the Livery, cognizance, and Crest
Christ gives his servants, who are ever blessed, Ioh, 13.35

The Immortal God, left glorious heaven above,
And was made mortal (O transcendent Dove!)
Nay more, he for his enemies did dye,
And rise, that they might live eternally.
He called them brethren (so their lo^es to win) Heb. 2.1^.

And made himself like them, in all but sin,
He calls each true believing soul his brother
And loved us so, cause we should love each other
But all this love which he bestowed so free,
Is back repaid with Malice, as we see:
The Wheel does show us how the case does stand,
Malice and hatred has the upper hand;
Our words and works do show we love him not;
Our love to one another is forgot;
We say and do the most part to this end
(He that so loved us) how we may offend;
And stead of loving one another, as
Our blessed Saviors last Commandment was,
With malice we would cut each others throats;
Which shows we do not wear Christ's livery coats:
And as Himself has long ago foretold,
The Increase of sin makes many men's love cold.
Thus man his malice against man does spout,
God grant the Wheel may quickly turn about.
Nor shall my Muse in this task further run;
I wish the King and Parliament had done;
That as his Majesty is known to be,
Gods chief vicegerent in his sovereignty;
So He with them may All as one combine
To settle things, both Human and Divine;
That we may be held free from all offense,
And gain him hither, and not drive him hence
With Libels, tumults, and a wretched rout,
For which I Will hope the Wheel will turn about.
FINIS.

