A BRIEF DIRECTOR FOR THOSE That would send their Letters to any parts of
England, Scotlaud, or Ireland. Or a List of all the Carriers, Waggoners
Coaches, Posts, Ships, Barks, Hoys, and Passage-boats, that come to London,
from the most parts and places, by Land and Sea.
Alphabetically Printed, so that none may pretend Ignorance, who would gladly
send, but know not where to carry their Letters. With the days when they come,
and when they return. And also to send Letters to the most habitable parts of
the World, and to have an answer.
A.
The Carriers of Abbington lodge at the George in Bredstreet, come on
Wednesday, and go on Thursday. Ali^bury, Buckinghamshire at the George at
Holborn-Bridge, the Swan in the Strand, the Angel behind St. Clements Church,
and the Bell in Holborn; every other day. St. Albans, on Friday, at the Peacock
in Aldersgate Street; a Coach to the Bell there on Tuesday. A^our at the Castle
in Woodstreet, on Thursd. Frid. and Saturday.

B.
Bla^vile, Dorcet. at the Chequer near Charing Cross, every second Thursd.
Bl^ndford at the Rose at Holborn bridge. Braintree and Bocking in Essex, at the
Talbot in Gracious street, com on Thursdays, and go on Fridays. Bathe at the
Three Cups in Bredstreet, on Fridays, and go on Saturdayes. Bristol there also,
on Th^rsdays at the Swan near Holborn Bridge. Brereton in Dorce^: at the Rose
near Holborn-Bridge, on Thursdays, and go on Fridays. Blackburn in Lancashire
at the Bell in Friday-street, on Wednesdays and Fridays. Be^^e in Lancashire,
at the Ax in Alderman-bury on Wednesdayes and Fridayes. From Buckinghamshire
and Bedfordshire, at the Sarazens head without Newgate; and at the Queens Arms
near Holborn-bridge, at the Windwill in St. John's street. Broomsbury at the
Mayden-head in Cateaten street, on Thursdays, and Fridays. Bingham, Notting. on
Fridays, at the Bull in Smithfield-bars. Burford, Oxon. at the Bell in
Friday-street, on Thursday. Buckingham at the Kings Head in the old Change.
Wednesdays and Thursdayes, and at the Sarazens-head in Carterlane. Fridays at
the George near Holborn-bridge, on Wednesdays. Bewdley at the Castle in
W^^^street, Thursdays. Brackley at the George near Holborn-bridge, on
Wednesdays. Banbury at the George near Holborn-bridge, Wednesdayes. Bedford at
the Three Horshoes in Aldersgate street, on Thursdayes. Bridgeno^th at the
Maidenhead in Cateaten-street. Bury at the Dolphin without B^shopsgate, on
Thursdayes. The Wagons of Bury come every Thursday to the Four Swans in
Bishopsgate-street. A Foor-Post from the said Berry, on Wednesday, to the
Green-Dragon in Bishopsgate-street. Barstable at the Star in B^^dstreet, on
Fridays. Bampton at the Mermaid in Carterlane, on Thursdayes. Brill at St.
Paul's Head in Carterlane, on Tuesdayes. Bampton at the Bear at Basingshaw, on
Tuesdays. Balcomb at the Crown in Basinglane, on Fridayes. Broughton at the Ax
in Aldermanbury, on Friday. A Coach gots to Buk from the Kings Arms at
Leaden Hall.

C.
Colchester do lodge at the Crosse-keys in Graciousstreet, on Thursdayes.
Che^^am at the White heart in Holborn. Cogshall at the Spread-Eagle in
Gracious-street, Thursdayes. Chippinganger in Essex, Wednesdayes, to the Crown
without A^gate. Cheltenham in Glo^^. Cambden, Chippin-Norten, Fridayes, at the
three Cup^ in B^edstreet. Chester at B^^soms Inn, in St. Laurence-lane,
Fridayes and Saterdayes. Congerton in Cheshire at the Ax in Aldermanbury, on
Thursdayes and Fridayes. Chard in Dorcetshire at the Queens Arms near
Holborn-bridge, on Fridays, and at the George in Bredstreet. Cole-Ashby in
Nothamp. at the B^^^ in Smithfield, Cra^^ley in Bedfordsh: at the Bear and
Ragged staff in Smithfield, on Thursdayes. Coventry in Warwicksh. at the R^m
in Smithfield, on Wednesdayes and Thursdayes. Creet in Leicestersh. at the Rose
in Smithfield. Coaches from Cambridge, on Thursday and Friday at the black Bull
in Bishopsgate-street. Coventry at the Ax in Aldermanbury, on Thursdayes.
Cambridge at the Bell in Colemanstreet, on Thursday. Foot-post of Canterbury,
every Wednesday and Saturday, to the Swan at Summers key. Crookborn in
Devonshire do lodge at the Queens Arms near Holborn-bridge, on Tuesdayes. C^ln
in Lancash. at the White horse at Cripple-gate, on Wednesday. Chesterfield in
Derbish. at the Castle in Woodstreet, on Wednesday.

D.
Dunmore in Essex, at the Saracens-head in Graciousstreet, Thursdayes and
Fridayes. The Wagons lie at the Crown without Algate. Di^marsh in Barksh. at
the George in Bredstreet. Doncaster in Yorksh. at the B^^ll. Savag^ without
Ludgate, on Fridays and Mondayes. D^rchester at the Rose near Holborn-bridge,
Thirsdayes. Denbigh in Wales, at Bos^ms Inn every Thursday. Daintree, Friday,
at the Cross keys in St. John's street. From Duncebanger at the three Cups in
St. John street. Derby and Derbishire at the Ax in Aldermanbury, Fridays, and
at the Castle in Woodstreet Thursdays and Fridayes.

E.
Epping in Essex, at the Princes Arms in Leadenhal-street Thursdayes. Exeter at
the Star in Bredstreet on Fridayes, and at the Rose near Holborn-bridge on
Thursdayes. Evesham in Worcest. at the Castle in Woodstreet, Friday.

F.
Feckingham Forest in Worcestersh. at the Crown in high Holborn; and at the
Queens-Head in St. Giles in the Fields. Farington in Barkshire, at St. Paul's
head in Carterlane, on Tuesdayes.

G.
Grindon Underwood in Bucks. at St. Paul's head in Carterlane, on Tuesdayes.
Gloucester at the Saracens head without Newgate, and at the Saracens head in
Carterlane, on Fridayes. Wagons every week from Gloucestershire, at the Swan
near Holborn Bridge.

H.
Hadley in Suffolk, at the Kings Arms in Leadenhallstreet, on Wednesdayes.
Huntington at the white Hind without Cripplegate, on Thursdayes. Hereford at
the Kings Head in the Old Change, on Fridayes. Halifax at the Greyhound in
Smithfield, and at the Bear in B^lingshaw, likewise at the Ax in Aldermanbury,
also at the White Heart in Coleman-street. Hatfield in Hertford at the Bell in
St. John street, Thursdayes. Harding in Hertford. at the Cock in
Aldersgatestreet, on Tuesday. Wagon lies at the Bull in Bishopsgate street,
Mondayes, etc. A Coach from Hartford: every Friday to the Four Swans within
Bishopsgate. A Coach from Hatfield every Friday, to the B^ll in
Aldersgate Street. Highworth at the Rose at Holborn-bridge, on Saturday.

I.
Ipswich at the George in Lumbard street, Thursdays. The Post of Ipswich at the
Crosse-keys in Gracious street, on Thursdayes. Ingerst^ne in Essex, on
Wednesday, to the Kings Arms in Leadenhall street. Jewel in Dorcet, at Jarrets
Hall. Isle of Wight at the Bell-Savage, and Bell in Friday street, on
Saturdayes.

K.
Keinton in Warwick. at the Bell in Friday-street, Fridayes. Kingston upon
Hull, at the Bull in Leadenhallstreet. Kendall at the White Horse without
Cripple-gate, on Thursday.

L.
Lincoln at the White Horse without Cripple-gate, on Friday. Laighten
Beudesart, at the Harts-Horns in Smithfield, Mondayes. Leic^ster at the
Saracens head without Newgate, and at the Castle near Smithfield-bars on
Thursdayes. Lewton in Hertford. at the Cock in Aldersgate Street, Tuesd. Leeds
in York. at the Bear in Basingshaw, wednesday, and at the Ax in Aldermanbury.
Leicester at the Red Lion in Aldersgate Street. Loughborough at the Ax in
Aldermanbury.

M.
Malden in Essex at the Cross-keys in Gracious-street, Thursdayes. Monmouth at
St. Paul's head in Carterlane. Marlborough at the Swan near Holborn-bridge,
Thursdayes. Manchester at the Bear in Basingshaw, on Thursdayes. And at the Ax
in Aldermanbury, and at the Two-necked Swan in Ladlane. Mansfield in Nottingh.
at the Castle in Woodstreet, Thursdayes. Maxfield in Cheshire, at the Ax in
Aldermanbury, thursdayes. Middlewich at the Ax in Aldermanbury, on Fridayes.

N.
New Elm at the George in Bredstreet, wednesdayes. Netherly in Stafford. at the
Bear and ragged Staff in Smithfield, thursday. Northampton and Nottingham at
the Ram in Smithfield, Saturday. Norwich at the Dolphin without bishopsgate,
Mondayes. Nantwich in Cheshire, at the Ax in Aldermanbury, on wednesday.
Nun^aton in Warwick. at the Ax in Aldermanbury, Friday. Newbery at the Kings
arms near Holborn-bridge, wednesdayes. Northwi^h in Cheshire, at the Ax in
Aldermanbury, Thursday. From Newark in Notting. a Coach and Wagon on
Saturdayes, at the Cross keys in Whitecrosse-street. Naylans at the four
Swans in bishopsgatestreet.

O.
Oxford at the Saracens head without Newgate, and in Warwick lane. O^ey in
Bucks. at the Cock in Aldersgate Street, on Mondayes. Oundle in Northamp. at
the Ram in Smithfield. Ockingham at the White Horse in Friday street, Fridayes.

P.
Preston in Lancash. at the Bell in Friday-street. Pontefract in York. at the
Bell in Basingshaw, on Wednesdayes.

R.
Redding in Berks. at the George in Bredstreet, Thursdayes. Ro^hdel in Lancash.
at the Ax in Aldermanbury wednesday. Richmond in Yorksh. at the Bell in
Basinghalstreet, and Rippon, wednesday.

S.
Sudbury in Suffolk, at the Saracens head in Graciousstreet, on thursdayes.
Sabridgew^rth in Hertfordsh. and Stock in Essex, at the Kings arms in
Leadenhall-street, thursdayes. Stroodwater in Glouc. at the B^ll in
Friday-street, Fridays. Soisam in Northamp. at the Saracens-head in Carterlane,
fridays. Sheffield in Yorksh. at the Castle in Woodstreet, thursdayes.
Swallowfield in Berks. at the black Bull in Holborn, thursdayes. Salisbury at
the Queens arms near Holborn bridge on thursday. Shrewsbury at Bo^oms Inn, on
thursdays, Skittlebrig and Ferribrig at the Bell at Basinghall, wednesdays.
Stoppard in Che^; at the Ax in Aldermanbury. Stonystr^-ford at the Rose and
Crown in St. John's street, tuesday. From Saffron-Market is a Foot-post at the
Chequer in Holb. Stampford at the B^l in Aldersgate Street, wednesdayes. The
Wagon from Sa^-Walden in Essex, at the Bull in B^street, tuesdayes. S^bury and
(...), at (...) hall on Fridayes. S^ford in Ch^ire at the Ax in Aldermanbury.
Staford at the Swan ^h two Necks in Ladlane, thursdayes. Coach from Stanford in
(...) st. to the Cro^-keys in Whitecrosse-street, saturdayes.

T.
Teuxbury in Glouc. at the three Cups in Bredstreet, fridayes. Tame in Oxon. at
the S^ns head in Carterlane, fridays. (...) in Devon. at the Star in
Bredstreet, on fridays. (...) in Northamp. at the Castle in Smith^ld Thursdayes.

V.
(...), or D^vifes, at the Swan near H^lborn-bridge, on Thursdayes.

W.
^ver in B^s. at the black Swan in Holborn, Tuesday. W^m in Essex at the
C^ste-keys in Gracious-street, Thursdayes. Wallingfield in ^olk, at the
Spread-Eagle in Graci^-street, Thursdayes. Wallingford, (...) at the George in
Bredstreet, wednesdayes. Win^mb in Glouc. at the three Cups in Bredstreet,
fridayes. Warwick at the Bell in Friday-street, fridayes. A Wagon from Ware at
the Vine in Bishopsgate-street, fridayes. Woodstrck in Oxon. Wantege, Berks. at
the Maremaid in Carterlane, Thursdayes. W^ster, at the Castle in Woodstreet,
and at the Mouth at Aldersgate, on fridayes. W^e in Bucks. at the George near
Holborn-bridge, wednesday. Watford in Middl^sex at the Swan near
Holborn-bridge. Wells in Summers. at the Rose near Holborn-bridge, Thursdayes.
Witney in Oxon. at the Saracens head without Newgate, wednesdayes. Winchester
at the Rose at Holborn-bridge on Thursday. Witney at the Maydenhead in
Ca^-street, Thursdayes. W^cest. and Warwick. at the Rose and Crown in
High-Holborn. Walsingham in No^. at the Chequer in Holborn, Thursday. Wendover
in Bucks. at the Bell in Holborn. A Foot-post comes to the Croste keys in
Holborn every second Thursday. W^field in Yorksh. at the Bear in B^singshaw,
the Ax in Aldermanbury, and the White-hart in Coleman-street, on Thursdayes.
VVarrington and VViggon, at the B^il in Friday-street, wednesdates.

Y.
(...). at the B^ll-Savage without Ludgate, on friday. A F^-post from ^rk to
the Rose and Crown in S^. (...) street, Thursday.

The Inns and Lodgings of the Carriers (...) come into the ^urrough of (...)
cut of the Counties of ^nt, S^x, and Surrey.
A Carri^ from Ry^ in Surrey, ^nes every Thursday to the P^con in (...).
T^bridge, of Seve^, of Faul, and ^burst in Kent, at the Katherine Wheel on
Thursdayes: (...) Carriers of Mar^, (...) and W^bleton in Su^x. On Thursdayes
from H^st and ^by in Kent; and from Darling and ^bead in Surrey, to the
Greybound in Southwark. Te^ and ^st in Kent, and B^lin Suex, at the Spur in
Southwark, on Thursd. To the Queens head in Southwark on wednesd. come from P^b
in H^stire, and from C^ster (...) Arundel Billingburst, Rye. (...), and W^st,
in Sussix, and from (...) and Li^vil in Surrey. Cr^broke, Bev^den, in Kant, and
from L^is P^h V^field, and C^field in Suss^x, do lodge at the ^bot in
Southwark, on wednesdayes. To the George in Southwark, on Thursdayes come from
Gilford, (...), Gou^st, and Cbiddin^n in Surrey. To the White Heart in the
Borough of Southwark, come from D^r Centerbury, Sandwhich, Bidd^den, Mayfield,
Ed^bridge, He^, VVi^, ^, on Fridayes. From ^, to the Kings head in Southwark,
on Thursday. A C^rier from Tunbridge to the Green Dragon in Foul-lane, and
Queen^ Head in S^ark, on Friday.

From E^me (...), comes a Coach and Wagon to the King^ Head in Southwarke
every other day.

Certain Directions for to find out Ships, Barks, and Hoighs that do come to
London.
A Hoigh from C^lchester comes to Smarts Key weekly. From Ipswich or Lyn, to
Dice key. From Barwick to Galley key. From Ireland, Pool, Plymouth, Dartmouth,
Waymouth, to Chesters key.

From Sandwich or Dover in Kent, to S^bbs Dock. From Rochester, Marget,
Feversham, and Maidstone, to Katherines D^ck. From Scotland, at the A^mitage.
From Dunkirk at the Custom House key. From Holland or Z^^land, at the
Brewhouses in St. Katherines.

At Lion key Tide-boats pass between London and Deptford, Greenwich,
VVoolwich, Erith, Greenhith, Raynam, Tu^fleet, and Grayes.

At Billingsgate are Barges, Light-horsemen, Tilt boats, and Wherries, to
Gravesend, Milton, or further.

Passage boats to carry Passengers either East or West, about London Bridge.

At Bull Wharf come boats twice a week, which carry Goods between London, and
Kingston upon Thames, and Colebrook. Boats for Passengers and Goods, to Henly,
Maidenhead, Windsor, Stanes, Chertsey, and Redding, at Queenhith.

All those that would send Letters to the most habitable parts of the world, or
to any parts of Great Britain, either England, Scotland, or Ireland, let them
repair to the General Postmaster at the Stocks by the Exchange.


