THE POPES BENEDICTION OR, His general pardon to be purchased only with money
and without penance: Sent into England by Ignatius Holy Water a Jesuit, to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and to the rest of his Subjects there.



London, Printed 1641.

THE POPES BENEDICTION. OR His general pardon, etc.
All hail to our Laud of little Grace;
WHereas your Grace employed Ignatius Holy Water, to move our holiness for
some consolation in these your miseries, in regard that no petition or request
of yours, nor any such loyal subject to us, as your Grace has bin, should
suffer repulse; know that we out of our holy clemency, have first granted a
particular pardon to your Grace, for all offenses and sins, of what nature
soever heretofore committed, or hereafter to be committed, Gratis. But withal
know it is not usual for us to remit sins, (the nature whereof we are
ignorant) under the value of 50000. marks starling at least. But your Grace
having so well improved your time (for you had almost reduced great part of the
Island) to be conformable to our holy rites, Ceremonies, and customs, (which
the ignorant call superstitious, and committing Adulteries with the whore of
Babylon) we being holily affected, and studious to reward virtue, not only have
granted your own pardon gratis, but are desirous that your Grace would publish
our free and easy remissions to all your friends that are well affected to our
Holiness.

1. If any Priest have stole any holy or consecrated things out of any holy
place, (to show that we are merciful to your friends) we tax him at seven
grosses, which in your English coin amounts to ten shillings six pence, what
though the value of the thing stole amounted to 20. li. it may be his gown was
as bare as the bowling-alley on his head, and though he took a course that was
not very commendable, yet necessary, for your sake at the said rate, for it is
very fit his sin should not be committed without money, we pronounce his pardon
and our love.

2. Next if a man commit adultery with a woman in the Church, as many a man
through heat of blood may do, especially having such objects to behold, as
would thaw the icie blood of a holy Priest in the holy time of Lent, he for his
absolution shall pay but six grosses, that is nine shillings.

3. If a Priest buy a Benefice, as we see no reason why he should not, it being
for his profit, another poor man gaping for it, charity begins at home, eight
grosses that is twelve shillings.

4. He that has killed his father, mother, wife, sister, or any other kinsman,
or kinswoman, or all of them, so they be of the laity is rated at five grosses,
or seven grosses, and the reason why he is rated so low, all or any of these
may be done upon good grounds, as his father might be old and hard-hearted, one
that would neither die nor allow him means, his mother in possibility to be a
witch, had not his provident hand prevented it, his wife incontinent might give
him the Horns, and make his head the wonder of the world, his sister one of
St. Antholins society, his kinsman and kinswoman pinpe and bawd, he rather
deserves to be rewarded.

5. A man that beats his wife with child, and either or both of them die,
though his intentions might be good, he would not it may be be burdensome to
the parish, or to save his own charges, or it may be the breed was not good,
so that he killed both mother and infant, or it may be he had a greater mind to
another woman, yet he shall pay five grosses, seven shillings six pence for his
absolution.

6. If any of the sacred order of Priesthood, keep a Concubine, he is rated
at seven grosses, that is something with the most, considering they are men*
they eat as good meats of mortality as others. They shrive, swive young and
handsome Maids, they are allowed no wives to spend their Talent upon; therefore
they must needs have a little Coitum, for Physicians say it is wholesome and
good, ad renes purgando, yet we must not wink at him without the said sum.

7. If a Priest defile a Virgin, he shall pay for his absolution six grosses,
nine shillings, and no more. For we taking into our serious consideration, what
a woman was made for, and what she was made handsome for; and conceiving it
most fit that she should be broken up in religion, that she might afterward
trade with a more safe Conscience think him not worthy a deeper censure.

8. An absolution for him that lies with his Godmother, or with any woman of
his blood or carnal kindred, or for him that lies with his sister or his own
mother, is taxed at five grosses, seven shillings. For though a man by the
rules of nature ought to requite courtesies, and for that reason did carnalium
coire cum his Godmother, and though it may be he was bashful, and ashamed to
disclose his intentions to a stranger, and therefore out of modesty made bold
with his sister, and though it may be his father was an old man and not able to
satisfy his mothers libidinous appetite, and some body must needs do it, and
he could not endure that any should Cuckold his father but himself, or it may
be his mother was a widow and would marry again, unless she might have some
satisfaction in her case, and if she married, it might be prejudicial to his
estate, and therefore he would play the part of a Stallion, yet we cannot tax
him at less then five grosses.

9. If a man have vowed to build an Hospital, to found a Chapel, or erect a
Church parochial, and has afterward seriously considered what inconveniences
may thereby ensue, as a bad use might be made of his good intentions, and so in
times to come, vice rather then religion may be nurtured in them, and the many
sums of money, it would cost him to no purpose; and therefore have a desire to
have a dispensation from his vow, it shall cost him ten grosses.

10. If any man have a wife, that he is desirous to part withal (for reasons to
himself best known) and in her place would marry and live with the other, and
have his children made Legitimate, all this shall be done for ten grosses
that is 15. shillings.

Our holiness would have been pleased, to have perticularized more offenses,
and the penalties for them, but we were informed by your Messenger Ignatius
Holy Water, that time was very precious to you, and if he made not have you
were in Posse, to be sent to Lim bum Patrum, without our holiness pardon, (which
Mary defend) which is the only cause that makes our holiness to be so brief,
but at the next return of this our holy messenger, we will vouchsafe to
nominate the penalties of the rest of the pardonable offenses. In the Interim,
let not your Grace be too remiss to see these sums tolerated, and transported
to our holiness use.

FINIS.

