A full and complete Answer against the Writer of a late Volume set forth,
entitled A Tale in a Tub, or A Tub-Lecture: with a Vindication of that
ridiculous name called ROUNDHEADS.

Together with some excellent verses on the defacing of Cheap Side Cross.

Also proving that it is far better to preach in a Boat than in a Tub.

By THORNY AILO, Annagram.



LONDON, Printed for F. Cowles, T. Bates, and T. Banks. 1642.

First, The Complaint of the abused most ridiculous Roundheads.
COme, brethren, let us deplore our woeful state,
Since all we have done is almost undone:
Our pains and charges both betimes and late
Is like the battry of an Eld^^ Gun;
We back again unto our trade must fall,
Nor shall we be allowed to preach at all.
And we from Sylla to Charybdis cast
And from Chrybdis back to Sylla hurld,
From wrong to injury, from grief that is past,
To woe that is present, we rub through the world,
'Twixt Hawke and Buzzard, we seem Planet-struck,
'Midst Chance and Fate, bad Fortune and ill Luck.
It Is manifest that we have done our best,
To bring all wit and learning in disgrace;
Tho Church and Churchmen we do still molest,
In hope we each might have a Preachers Place:
Our zeal has still the House of Prayer denied,
And many a Barn and Stable sanctified.
What have we not done? we have raved and railed,
Vn^ail'd, reviled, exclaimed, and made a noise,
Brake windows down, left nothing unassail'd,
And wanting men (to clamor) borrowed boys:
We have most stoutly played the beasts like men,
In hope to be all beneficed, (But when?)
It Is said, that they which China dishes make,
Do bury them in the earth an hundred years:
Their Makers being dead, their Heirs do take
Those dishes from the earth, and all our fears
Is, that do what we can with works and wishes,
Our labors will be like to China dishes.
For now again the wicked 'gin to rise,
And call us Roundheads, and such scurvie names,
And do our pure profession scandalize
With Libels, Pamphlets, and most true exclaimes:
So that we gape like pining Tantalus,
For all we have done is wroth seant a Lowse.
But why do I thus toll our griefs in Meetre, Prose is meeter for our
capacities by half, hang Poets and Poetry, we could never endure them, no
verse is more sweet than a man's neck-verse (if it be said in season) and as for
Rhyme, it is as much distastefull to us as Reason, Yet I would needs know by
what Reason we have the name of Roundheads put upon us; me thinks our heads
are no rounder than our forefathers: Some say they call us so, because our
tongues do trowle more roundly than our Ancestors did, and that they did use
honest Square dealing, and we only profess and practice Round Talking or
speaking. Others say, that we are so termed, because we do cut our hair
shorter than our ears; and the reason is, because long hair hinders the sound
of the Word from entering into the heart: and (truly) it is no shame for a man
to wear his own ears. Yet in the 19. Chapter of Leviticus, and the 27 verse,
we are forbid to cut round the corners of our heads, or to mar the tufts of our
beards; but those words were spoken to the Jews by Moses, and all the world
knows that we are Gentiles, we have nothing to do with Jews or ceremonies, I
can eat Pork and Pig (which was forbidden to the Jews) and I love a good Sow
or a Bore next my wife and my self.

Others there be that say we are called Roundheads, in regard that by our
heads we are more like Globes than those that wear their hair long, and man
being a little world, is by the roundnesse of the head a figure or emblem of
the greater.

Morgan Llewellin (that grave Greek Author) says in the ninth Chapter of his
Litigious Aphorisms, That Bias the Philosopher was borne in an Haven Town of
Ionia, called P^i^ne: This Bias had a Round Running head, and he devised (from
the mold of his head) the first Round Bowls, in memory whereof they are
called Bias Bowls to this day; but the world is too full of rubs now, and most
heads run like Bowls, contrary to the Bias, that an honest man can hardly win
a good game all his life time.

There are some that report, that we are called Roundheads, and Ovall-heads,
by reason of the similitude of an egg, I mused why that comparison was, but at
last I perceived, that the a^lusion was not to the Ovall for me of the Egg, but
to the addlenesse of the brains in the head, which I hold to be very
significant.

There was a fellow lately did set forth a Pamphlet, entitled A Tale in a Tub,
or A Tub Lecture; The speaker of it he says was one My heel mend sole, an
inspired Brownist, and a most upright Translator: The house (where it is said
to be spoken) was near Bedlam; the time when, the 21 of December last, and the
writers name of it, is only under the two threadbare letters of I. T.

I could almost persuade my self, that those letters of I. T. should stand for
John Tailor the Aquaticall Poet, and yet me thinks he should have preferred a
Boat before a tub to make a pulpit of, for a Boat is more primitive to preach
out of, then a Tub or a Kinderkin. A fishers boat once served the best
Preacher that ever was, for a Canonical Pulpit; but let that business alone,
and return to the Tub. It is not impossible, but a Cobbler may draw or vent a
Firkin of small wit out of a Hogs-head, and (verily) me thinks it was a rare
business, that the Hogs-head did not leake when the man ran over amain; But
it is the property and policy of a Learned man to barrel up more then he can
broach. There was such Virtue once in Tub, that a grave and wise Philosopher
made choice of one for his study, which tub he valued so highly, that he would
not change it for the Place of Alexander the Great, (or Alexander of St.
Magnus) and that may be the reason that our brother (the Cobbler) made choice
of a Tub, (he that is offended at it, I wish him in Cornelius his Tub, and that
is a pocky Tub, as a French Gentleman told me the other day) but to return to
our purpose, I have read of a people inhabiting somewhere beyond the unknown
Southern World (or Terra Australis Incognita) these people do once a year
offer their old shoes and boots to their Heathen Gods, O what a mighty trade
might a preaching Cobbler drive there being able alone of himself, to prepare
and offer the Sacrifice, and so preach the oblation Sermon too, I know a worthy
member fit to be an Assistant to him, one that is originally a Heele-maker, but
now he is an inspired expounder, there are so many of us now a days in
England, that some may be well spared into other Countries.

In the history of Spain in the City of Salamanca, there dwelt a most
Heroical and Magnificent Cobbler named Signior Laza^illo Bobadilla de Tormes,
this brave Spark (at his death) and on his deathbed called his eldest son to
him, and after he had given his last blessing, he gave him this counsel. My
son (quoth he) I must leave thee, thou know that my father (and thy
Grandfather) was a famous Cordwainer in Civil, thy mother a Millers daughter
of Tolledo, they and I here live in fame and reputation, and I dye a man
renowned for my Art. And therefore I charge thee (on my blessing) that thou do
thy best endeavor to retain the dignity of the Majesty of so great a family.
Truly, a man of such mighty spirit was too good to be a Spanyard, a Papist or a
Cobbler, had he been inspired as some of our Brethren are, he would have proved
that Simon called Simon Magus was at Rome once, (welfare all good tokens he
brake his neck there) but as concerning Simon Peter, many wise men will never
believe that, he was there, though the Papists say to the contrary and with
Tooth and Nail defend their furious asseverations. Also he would have proved
Pope Ione to have been both literally and mystically the Arrant whore of
Babylon.

It is devoutly acknowledged that we have had many Worthy and zealous Brethren
that have stiffly stood for the cause, (as the Sisters can testify if they
please) as namely the reverend Mr. How the Cobbler, The most industrious Mr.
Walker the Ironmonger, the zealous Mr. Green the Felt-maker, the painful Mr.
Spencer the Stablegroome, the pavior of Monmouth, the Sowgelder of Wallingford,
the Barber and Baker of Abingdon, and many hundreds more of true religious
Millers Weavers, I had almost for got Tailors, but that one Mr. Squire, a
Gentleman of that function at Roderhith beinga double yarded man, because he
has two, but neither of them London measure, he is a mighty painestaker for us
all in the true w^y of railing down Learning, wit, order and decency, what
though he fail now and then in stretching silver lace on a petticoate, that he
can frugally save out of 4. yards compass one yard; I say a Tailor may stretch
lace and conscience, and his bill too, but all is one for that, he is a true
zelot and so forth, but though these have the honor to be named in our
catalogue of remembrance, yet one of our chief props and pillars, is
ingratefully forgotten, he being a man of such a vast merit, that it is a shame
he should be buried alive (in his fame I mean) the first letter of his name
is a Brewers Clarke, he is a man that has more in him then all the world is
worthy to see or know, he has some pith or weight in him and had he but
courageously attempted the downfall of the Babell Cross in Cheapeside, if he
had been but valiantly seconded he would would have laid it level with the
pavement, for he fears not the Hangman, and is able to keep a Quarter as big
as half a year with any man.

But I am afraid that our cake is but dough baked, (though our zeal was warm
enough to heat the Oven as hot as a furnace) for we are crossed, and the Cross
stands to baffle and brave us, and further an unhappy pated fellow did lately
write these following Verses, in the behalf of the Cross, and disgrace of us.

Verses upon the defacing of Cheapeside Cross, with the Pictures of Christ and
Saint Peter.
HOw? steal the lead from Cheapeside-crosse (O base)
I Will take my oath on it it is a hoavy case:
Some say the Devil did it, and I grant
The Devil is a mighty Puritant.
He never could endure the Cross because
Man (on the Cross) was ransomd from his claws;
But whosoever 'twas, Brownist, Punk or Pimp:
If not the Devil, 'twas the Devils Impe,
What e're he may pretend, he is a Gross
Damb'd Jew, that tortures Christ upon the Cross?
I wonder why the watchmen did not scare Vm,
Sure 'twas some sleeping watch that lackt a larum
And so St. Peter (whom our Savior chose)
One of his twelve Apostles, had his Nose,
And both his Arms knocked of, were was the Cock
That did not wake S. Peter at that knock?
Christ made him an Apostle, now who can
Without his Arms make him (...)
Some Crop-eare did it in revenge I fear,
Because St. Peter cut off Malchus ear.
What did the babe, what did our Lady do?
Poor Innocents alas, they fuffered too.
This shows the Devils brood, like th'Irish wild,
Will spare no man or woman, maid or child:
Now my opinion of the cross is this,
It is amiss to such as make it amiss.
To such as reverence it, or adore it,
Or say their prayers to it, or before it.
Such do pervert it from its proper use,
And turn an Ornament to an abuse.
Turks, Infidels, Moors, Pagans, Heathen, Jews,
They know not Christ, therefore no Crosses use.
And no true Christian justly can repine,
To let a Cross stand as a Christian sign.
Knaves may deface it, fools may worship it,
All which may be for want of grace or wit,
To those that wronged the Cross this is my curse,
They never may have crosses in their purse.
And thus Brethren you may perceive and see, how these Iigmaking jeering Poets,
do with their pestiferous Rimes (or Verses) support and prop up that
Golden-Leaden nest of Idols and Images, but for a conclusion, if I cannot have
it overthrown, demolished, cast down, raced, confounded, overturned, defaced,
delapidated, distroyed, laid waste, ruinated, subverted, or call it what you
will, (so it be taken away) and the lead melted into bullets to kill Irish
Rebels; I say if I cannot have it so, I will wish it so, and there is an end
before Finis.

FINIS.

