THE RULE AND EXERCISES OF HOLY LIVING

By Ier. Tailor D:D*

Non magna loquimur sed vivimus.

LONDON printed for R: Royston in I^ye lane. 1650.





THE RVLE AND EXERCISES OF HOLY LIVING.

In which are described The MEANS and INSTRUMENTS of obtaining every Virtue,
and the Remedies against every Vice, and Considerations serving to the
resisting all temptations.

Together with Prayers containing the whole duty of A Christian, and the parts
of Devotion fitted to all Occasions, and furnished for all Necessities.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane. MDCL.

To the right Honorable and truly Noble RICHARD Lord VAUGHAN, Earl of Carbery,
Baron of Emlin, and Molingar, Knight of the honorable Order of the Bath.
My Lord,
I Have lived to see Religion painted upon Banners, and thrust out of Churches,
and the Temple turned into a Tabernacle, and that Tabernacle made ambulatory,
and covered with skins of Beasts and torn Curtains, and God to be worshipped
not as he is the Father of our Lord Jesus (an afflicted Prince, the King of
sufferings) nor, as the God of peace (which two appellatives God newly took
upon him in the New Testament, and glories in for ever:) but he is owned now
rather as the Lord of Hosts, which title he was pleased to lay aside when the
Kingdom of the Gospel was preached by the Prince of peace But when Religion
puts on Armor, and God is not acknowledged by his New Testament titles,
Religion may have in it the power of the Sword, but not the power of Godliness;
and we may complain of this to God, and amongst them that are afflicted, but we
have no remedy, but what we must expect from the fellowship of Christ's
sufferings; and the returns of the God of peace. In the mean time, and now that
Religion pretends to stranger actions upon new principles; and men are apt to
prefer a prosperous error before an afflicted truth; and some will think they
are religious enough if their worshipings have in them the prevailing
ingredient; and the Ministers of Religion are so scattered that they cannot
unite to stop the inundation, and from Chaires or Pulpits, from their Synods or
Tribunals, chastise the iniquity of the error and the ambition of evil Guides,
and the infidelity of the willingly seduced multitude; and that those few good
people who have no other plot in their religion but to serve God and save their
souls, do want such assistances of ghostly counsel as may serve their emergent
needs, and assist their endeavors in the acquist of virtues, and relieve their
dangers when they are tempted to sin and death, I thought I had reasons
enough inviting me to draw into one body those advices which the several
necessities of many men must use at some time or other, and many of them,
daily: that by a collection of holy precepts they might less feel the want of
personal and attending Guides, and that the rules for conduct of souls might
be committed to a Book which they might always have; since they could not
always have a Prophet at their needs, nor be suffered to go up to the house of
the Lord to inquire of the appointed Oracles.

I know, my Lord, that there are some interested persons who add scorn to the
afflictions of the Church of ENGLAND, and because she is afflicted by Men, call
her forsaken of the Lord, and because her solemn assemblies are scattered,
think that the Religion is lost, and the Church divorced from God, supposing
CHRIST (who was a Man of sorrows) to be angry with his Spouse when she is like
him, [for that is the true state of the Errour] and that he who promised his
Spirit to assist his servants in their troubles, will, because they are in
trouble take away the Comforter from them, who cannot be a comforter, but while
he cures our sadnesses, and relieves our sorrows, and turns our persecutions
into joys, and Crowns, and Scepters. But concerning the present state of the
Church of England, I consider, that because we now want the blessings of
external communion in many degrees, and the circumstances of a prosperous and
unafflicted people, we are to take estimate of our selves with single
judgments, and every Man is to give sentence concerning the state of his own
soul by the precepts and rules of our Lawgiver, not by the after decrees and
usages of the Church; that is, by the essential parts of Religion rather then
by the uncertain significations of any exterior adherencies: for though it be
uncertain, when a Man is the Member of a Church, whether he be a Member of
Christ or no, because in the Churches Net there are fishes good and bad; yet we
may be sure that if we be Members of Christ, we are of a Church to all purposes
of spiritual religion and salvation: and in order to this give me leave to
speak this great truth.

That Man does certainly belong to God, who 1 Believes and is baptized into all
the Articles of the Christian faith, and studies to improve his knowledge in
the matters of God, so as may best make him to live a holy life. 2 He that in
obedience to Christ worships God diligently, frequently, and constantly with
natural Religion, that is, of prayer, praises, and thanksgiving. 3 He that
takes all opportunities to remember Christ's death by a frequent Sacrament (as
it can be had) or else by inward acts of understanding, will, and memory (which
is the spiritual communion) supplies the want of the external rite. 4 He that
lives chastely. 5 And is merciful. 6 And despises the World, using it as a Man,
but never suffering it to rif^e a duty. 7 And is just in his dealing, and
diligent in his calling. 8 He that is humble in his spirit. 9 And obedient to
Government. 10 And content in his fortune and employment. 11 He that does his
duty because he loves God. 12 And especially if after all this he be afflicted,
and patient, or prepared to suffer affliction for the cause of God. The Man
that has these twelve signs of grace and predestination does as certainly
belong to God, and is his Son, as surely as he is his creature.

And if my brethren in persecution, and in the bands of the Lord Jesus can
truly show these marks, they shall not need be troubled that others can show a
prosperous outside, great revenues, public assemblies, uninterrupted
successions of Bishops, prevailing Armies, or any arm of flesh, or less
certain circumstance. These are the marks of the Lord Jesus, and the
characters of a Christian: This is a good Religion: and these things Gods grace
has put into our powers, and Gods Laws have made to be our duty, and the
nature of Men, and the needs of Commonwealths have made to be necessary: the
other accidents and pomps of a Church are things without our power, and are not
in our choice; they are good to be used when they may be had, and they help to
illustrate or advantage it: but if any of them constitute a Church in the being
of a society and a Government, yet they are not of its constitution as it is
Christian, and hopes to be saved.

And now the case is so with us that we are reduced to that Religion which no
Man can forbid; which we can keep in the midst of a persecution; by which the
Martyrs in the days of our Fathers went to Heaven; that by which we can be
servants of God, and receive the Spirit of Christ, and make use of his
comforts, and live in his love, and in charity with all men; and they that do
so cannot perish.

My Lord, I have now described some general lines and features of that Religion
which I have more particularly set down in the following pages: in which I have
neither served nor disserved the interest of any party of Christians as they
are divided by uncharitable names from the rest of their brethren; and no Man
will have reason to be angry with me for refusing to mingle in his unnecessary
or vicious quarrels: especially while I study to do him good by conducting him
in the narrow way to Heaven, without intricating him in the Labyrinths and
wild turnings of Questions, and uncertain talkings. I have told what Men
ought to do; and by what means they may be assisted; and in most cases I have
also told them why; and yet with as much quickness as I could think necessary
to establish a Rule, and not to engage in Homily or Discourse. In the use of
which Rules (although they are plain, useful, and fitted for the best, and for
the worst understandings, and for the needs of all men, yet) I shall desire the
Reader to proceed with the following advices.

1. They that will with profit make use of the proper instruments of virtue,
must so live, as if they were always under the Physicians hand. For the
Counsels of Religion are not to be applied to the distempers of the soul, as
men use to take Hellebore; but they must dwell together with the Spirit of a
man, and be twisted about his understanding for ever: They must be used like
nourishment; that is, by a daily care and meditation; not like a single
medicine, and upon the actual pressure of a present necessity. For counsels and
wise discourses applied to an actual distemper, at the best are but like strong
smells to an Epileptick person, sometimes they may raise him, but they never
cure him. The following rules if they be made familiar to our natures, and the
thoughts of every day, may make Virtue and Religion become easy and habitual:
but when the temptation is present, and has already seized upon some portions
of our consent, we are not so apt to be counseled, and we find no gust or
relish in the Precept: the lessons are the same, but the instrument is
unstrung, or out of tune.

2. In using the instruments of virtue we must be curious to distinguish
instruments from duties; and prudent advices from necessary injunctions; and if
by any other means the duty can be secured, let there be no scruples stirred
concerning any other helps; only, if they can in that case strengthen and
secure the duty, or help toward perseverance, let let them serve in that
station in which they can be placed. For there are some persons in whom the
Spirit of God has breathed so bright a flame of love, that they do all their
acts of virtue by perfect choice, and without objection; and their zeal is
warmer then that it will be allayed by temptation: and to such persons
mortification by Philosophical instruments, as fasting, sackcloth, and other
rudenesses to the body is wholly useless: It is always a more uncertain means
to acquire any virtue, or secure any duty; and if love has filled all the
corners of our soul, it alone is able to do all the work of God.

3. Be not nice in stating the obligations of Religion; but where the duty is
necessary, and the means very reasonable in it self, dispute not too busily
whether in all Circumstances it can fit thy particular; but super totam
materiam, upon the whole, make use of it. For it is a good sign of a great
Religion, and no imprudence when we have sufficiently considered the substance
of affairs, then to be easy, humble, obedient, apt and credulous in the
circumstances which are appointed to us in particular by our spiritual Guides,
or in general, by all wise men in cases not unlike. He that gives Alms, does
best, not always to consider the minutes and strict measures of his ability,
but to give freely, incuriously and abundantly. A man must not weigh grains in
the accounts of his repentance; but for a great sin have a great sorrow, and
a great severity; and in this take the ordinary advices; though it may be, a
less rigor might not be insufficient: (...), or Arithmeticall measures,
especially of our own proportioning, are but arguments of want of Love, and of
forwardness in Religion; or else are instruments of scruple, and then become
dangerous. Use the rule heartily and enough, and there will be no harm in thy
error, if any should happen.

4. If thou intendest heartily to serve God, and avoid sin in any one
instance, refuse not the hardest and most severe advice that is prescribed in
order to it, though possibly it be a stranger to thee; for whatsoever it be,
custom will make it easy.

5. When many instruments for the obtaining any virtue or restraining any vice
are propounded, observe which of them fits thy person, or the circumstances of
thy need, and use it rather then the other: that by this means thou may be
engaged to watch and use spiritual arts and observation about thy soul.
Concerning the managing of which as the interest is greater, so the necessities
are more, and the cases more intricate, and the accidents and dangers greater
and more importunate; and there is greater skill required then in the securing
an estate, or restoring health to an infirm body. I wish all men in the world
did heartily believe so much of this as is true; it would very much help to do
the work of God.

Thus (My Lord) I have made bold by your hand to reach out this little scroll
of cautions to all those who by seeing your honored name set before my Book,
shall by the fairnes of such a Frontispiece be invited to look into it. I must
confess it cannot but look like a design in me, to borrow your name and beg
your Patronage to my book, that if there be no other worth in it, yet at least
it may have the splendor and warmth of a burning glass, which borrowing a
flame from the Eye of Heaven, shines and burns by the rays of the Sun its
patron. I will not quit my self from the suspicion: for I cannot pretend it to
be a present either of it self fit to be offered to such a Personage, or any
part of a just return, (but I humbly desire you would own it for an
acknowledgement) of those great endearments, and noblest usages you have past
upon me: But so, men in their Religion, give a piece of Gum, or the fat of a
cheap Lamb in Sacrifice to him that gives them all that they have or need: and
unless He who was pleased to employ your Lordship as a great Minister of his
Providence in making a Promise of his good to me, the meanest of his servants [
that he would never leave me nor forsake me] shall enable me by greater
services of Religion to pay my great Debt to your Honor, I must still increase
my score; since I shall now spend as much in my needs of pardon for this
boldness, as in the reception of those favors by which I stand accountable to
your Lordship in all the bands of service and gratitude; though I am in the
deepest sense of duty and affection

My most Honored Lord, Your Honors most obliged and Most Humble Servant
TAILOR.

THE TABLE.
CHAP. I. Consideration of the general instruments, and means serving to a holy
life: by way of introduction. Page 1 Sect. 1.
Care of our time and the manner of spending it. Page 4 23 Rules for employing
our time. Page 7 The 5 benefits of this exercise. Page 16
Sect. 2.
Purity of intention or purpose in all our actions, etc. Page 17 10. Rules for
our intentions. Page 19 8 Signs of purity of intention. Page 22 3 Appendant
Considerations. Page 26
Sect. 3.
The consideration and practice of the presence of God Page 27 6 Several
manners of the divine presence. Page 28 10 Rules of exercising this
consideration. Page 33 The 5 benefits of this exercise. Page 36 Prayers and
Devotions according to the Religion and purposes of the faregoing
considerations. Page 39 Devotions for ordinary days. Page 40
CHAP. II. Of Christian sobriety. Page 61 Sect. 1.
Of sobriety in the general sense. Page 61 5 Evil consequents of
voluptuousness or sensuality Page 62 3 Degrees of sobriety. Page 63 6 Rules
for suppressing voluptuousness. Page 64
Sect. 2.
Of Temperance in eating and drinking. Page 67 4 Measures of Temperance in
eating. Page 69 8 Signs and effects of Temperance. Page 70 Of Drunkenness.
Page 72 7 Evil consequents to drunkenness. Page 73 8 Signs of drunkenness.
Page 75 11 Rules for the obtaining temperance: Page 76
Sect. 3.
Of Chastity. Page 80 The 10 evil consequents of uncleanness. Page 83 7 Acts
of Chastity in general. Page 88 5 Acts of Virginal or Maiden Chastity. Page 89
5 Rules for Widows or Vidual Chastity. Page 91 6 Rules for married persons, or
ma^rimonial chastity. Page 92 10 Remedies against uncleanness. Page 95
Sect. 4.
Of Humility. Page 100 9 Arguments against pride by way of consideration Page
100 19 Acts or offices of humility. Page 103 14 Means and exercises of
obtaining and increasing the grace of humility. Page 111 17 Signs of humility.
Page 117
Sect. 5.
Of Modesty. Page 119 4 Acts and duties of Modesty as it is opposed to
curiosity Page 119 6 Acts of Modesty as it is opposed to boldness. Page 123 10
Acts of Modesty as it is opposed to undecency. Page 124
Sect. 6.
Of Contentedness in all estates and accidents. Page 128 2 General arguments
for content. Page 129 8 Instruments or exercises to procure contentednes. Page
135 8 Means to obtain content by way of consideration. Page 148 The
Considerations applied to particular cases. Page 148 Of Poverty. Page 156 The
charge of many Children. Page 163 Violent Necessities. Page 164 Death of
Children, Friends, etc. Page 166 Untimely Death. Page 167 Death unseasonable.
Page 169 Sudden Deaths or violent. Page 171 Being Childlesse. Page 171 Evil, or
unfortunate Children. Page 172 Our own Death. Page 172 Prayers for the several
graces and parts of Christian sobriety, fitted to the necessity of several
persons. Page 173
CHAP. III. Of Christian Justice. Page 180 Sect. 1.
Of Obedience to our Superiors. Page 182 15 Acts and duties of obedience to
all our Superiors. Page 183 12 Remedies against disobedience by way of
consideration. Page 187 3 Degrees of obedience. Page 192
Sect. 2.
Of Provision, or that part of justice which is due from Superiors to
inferiors. Page 193 12 Duties of kings and all the supreme power, as
Lawgivers. Page 194 2 Duties of Superiors as they are Judges. Page 197 5
Duties of parents to their children Page 199 Duty of Husbands and wives
reciprocally. Page 202 7 Duties of Masters of Families Page 203 Duty of
Guardians or Tutors. Page 204
Sect. 3.
Of Negotiation or civil contracts. Page 205 13 Rules and measures of Justice
in bargaining Page 205
Sect. 4.
Of Restitution. Page 211 7 Rules of making Restitution as it concerns the
persons obliged. Page 212 9 As it concerns other circumstances. Page 216
Prayers to be said in relation to the several obligations and offices of
Justice. Page 220
CHAP. IIII. Of Christian religion. Page 227 1. Of the internal actions of
religion. Page 228
Sect. 1.
Of Faith. Page 229 The 7 acts and offices of Faith. Page 229 8 Signs of true
Faith. Page 231 8 Means and instruments to obtain Faith. Page 234
Sect. 2.
Of Christian Hope. Page 236 The 5 acts of Hope. Page 237 5 Rules to govern our
Hope. Page 238 12 Means of Hope and Remedies against despair Page 240
Sect. 3.
Of Charity or the Love of God. Page 246 The 8 acts of Love to God. Page 248
The 3 measures and rules of Divine Love. Page 251 6 Helps to increase our Love
to God, by way of exercise. Page 252 The 2 several states of Love to God* Page
256 viz. The state of obedience. Page 256 The state of zeal. Page 256 8
Cautions and rules concerning zeal. Page 257 2. Of the external actions of
Religion Page 260
Sect. 4.
Of Reading or Hearing the word of God. Page 260 5 General considerations
concerning it. Page 263 5 Rules for hearing or reading the word of God. Page
262 4 Rules for reading spiritual books or hearing sermons. Page 264
Sect. 5.
Of Fasting. Page 266 15 Rules for Christian Fasting. Page 266 Benefits of
Fasting. Page 272
Sect. 6.
Of keeping Festivals and days holy to the Lord, particularly the Lords day.
Page 273 10 Rules for keeping the Lords day and other Christian Festivals. Page
276 3. Of the mixed actions of Religion Page 281
Sect. 7.
Of Prayer* Page 281 8 Motives to Prayer. Page 281 16 Rules for the practice of
Prayer. Page 283 6 Cautions for making vows. Page 291 7 Remedies against
wandering thoughts in Prayer. Page 293 10 Signs of tediousness of Spirit in
our prayers, and all actions of Religion. Page 295 11 Remedies against
tediousness of Spirit. Page 296
Sect. 8.
Of Alms. Page 302 The 18 several kinds of corporal Alms. Page 303 The 14
several kinds of spiritual Alms. Page 304 The 5 several kinds of mixed Alms.
Page 305 16 Rules for giving Alms. Page 305 13 Motives to Charity. Page 313
Remedies against the parents of unmercifulness. Page 316 1.9 Against Envy by
way of consideration. Page 316 2.12 Remedies against anger by way of exercise.
Page 317 13 Remedies against anger by way of consid. Page 322 3.7 Remedies
against Covetousness. Page 325
Sect. 9.
Of Repentance. Page 332 11 Acts and parts of Repentance. Page 335 4 Motives to
Repentance. Page 344
Sect. 10.
Of Preparation to and the manner how to receive the holy Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. Page 347 14 Rules for Preparation and worthy Communicating. Page
349 The effects and benefits of worthy Communicating. Page 357 Prayers for all
sorts of Men, and all necessities relating to the several parts of the virtue
of religion. Page 360

The Rule and Exercises of Holy Living, etc.
CHAP. I. Consideration of the general instruments and means serving to a holy
Life: by way of Introduction.
IT is necessary that every Man should consider, that since God has given him
an excellent nature, wisdom and choice, an understanding soul, and an immortal
spirit, having made him Lord over the Beasts, and but a little lower then the
Angels; he has also appointed for him a work and a service great enough to
employ those abilities, and has also designed him to a state of life after
this, to which he can only arrive by that service and obedience. And therefore
as every man is wholly Gods own portion by the title of creation: so all our
labors and care, all our powers and faculties must be wholly employed in the
service of God, even all the days of our life, that this life being ended, we
may live with him for ever.

Neither is it sufficient that we think of the service of God as a work of the
least necessity, or of small employment, but that it be done by us as God
intended it; that it be done with great earnestness and passion, with much
zeal and desire: that we refuse no labor, that we bestow upon it much time,
that we use the best guides, and arrive at the end of glory by all the ways of
grace, of prudence and religion.

And indeed if we consider how much of our lives is taken up by the needs of
nature, how many years are wholly spent before we come to any use of reason,
how many years more before that reason is useful to us to any great purposes,
how imperfect our discourse is made by our evil education, false principles,
ill company, bad examples, and want of experience; how many parts of our wisest
and best years are spent in eating and sleeping, in necessary businesses, and
unnecessary vanities, in worldly civilities, and less useful circumstances, in
the learning arts and sciences, languages or trades; that little portion of
hours that is left for the practices of piety, and religious walking with God,
is so short and trifling, that were not the goodness of God infinitely great,
it might seem unreasonable or impossible for us to expect of him eternal joys
in heaven, even after the well spending those few minutes which are left for
God, and Gods service, after we have served our selves, and our own occasions.

And yet it is considerable, that the fruit which comes from the many days of
recreation and vanity is very little, and although we scatter much, yet we
gather but little profit: but from the few hours we spend in prayer and the
exercises of a pious life, the return is great and profitable; and what we sow
in the minutes and spare portions of a few years, grows up to crowns and
scepters in a happy and a glorious eternity.

1. Therefore, Although it cannot be enjoined, that the greatest part of our
time be spent in the direct actions of devotion and religion, yet it will
become, not only a duty, but also a great providence to lay aside for the
services of God, and the businesses of the Spirit as much as we can: because
God rewards our minutes with long and eternal happiness; and the greater
portion of our time we give to God, the more we treasure up for our selves; and
No man is a better Merchant than he that lays out his time upon God, and his
money upon the Poor.

2. Only it becomes us to remember and to adore Gods goodness for it, that
God has not only permitted us to serve the necessities of our nature, but
has made them to become parts of our duty; that if we by directing these
actions to the glory of God intend them as instruments to continue our persons
in his service, he by adopting them into religion may turn our nature into
grace, and accept our natural actions, (...): Arrian. Epict. l. 1. c. 13.
as actions of religion, God is pleased to esteem it for a part of his service,
if we eat or drink; so it be done temperately, and as may best preserve our
health, that our health may enable our services toward him: And there is no
one minute of our lives (after we are come to the use of reason) but we are, or
may be doing the work of God, even then when we most of all serve our selves.

3. To which if we add, that in these and all other actions of our lives we
always stand before God, acting, and speaking and thinking in his presence,
and that it matters not that our conscience is sealed with secrecy, since it
lies open to God, it will concern us to behave our selves carefully, as in the
presence of our Judge.

These three considerations rightly managed, and applied to the several parts
and instances of our lives, will be like Elisha stretched upon the child, apt
to put life and quickness into every part of it, and to make us live the life
of grace, and do the work of God.

I shall therefore by way of introduction reduce these three to practice, and
show how every Christian may improve all and each of these to the advantage of
piety, in the whole course of his life: that if he please to bear but one of
them upon his spirit, he may feel the benefit, like an universal instrument,
helpful in all spiritual and temporal actions.

SECT. I. The first general instrument of holy living: Care of our time.
HE that is choice of his time will also be choice of his company, and choice
of his actions, lest the first engage him in vanity and loss, and the latter
by being criminal be a throwing his time and himself away, and a going back in
the accounts of eternity.

God has given to man a short time here upon earth, and yet upon this short
time eternity depends: but so, that for every hour of our life (after we are
persons capable of laws, and know good from evil) we must give account to the
great Judge of Men and Angels. And this is it which our blessed Savior told
us, that we must account for every idle word; not meaning, that every word
which is not designd to edification, or is less prudent, shall be reckoned for
a sin, but that the time which we spend in our idle talking and unprofitable
discoursings, that time which might and ought to have been employed to
spiritual and useful purposes, that is to be accounted for.

For we must remember, that we have a great work to do, many enemies to
conquer, many evils to prevent, much danger to run through, many difficulties
to be mastered, many necessities to serve, and much good to do, many children
to provide for, or many friends to support, or many poor to relieve, or many
diseases to cure, besides the needs of nature, and of relation, our private and
our public cares, and duties of the world, which necessity and the Providence
of God has adopted into the family of Religion.

And that we need not fear this instrument to be a snare to us, or that the
duty must end in scruple, vexation, and eternal fears, we must remember, that
the life of every man may be so ordered (and indeed must,) that it may be a
perpetual serving of God: The greatest trouble and most busy trade, and wordly
incombrances, when they are necessary or charitable, or profitable in order to
any of those ends, which we are bound to serve whether public or private,
being a doing Gods work. For God provides the good things of the world to serve
the needs of nature, by the labors of the Plowman, the skill and pains of the
Artisan, and the dangers and traffic of the Merchant: These men are in their
callings the Ministers of the Divine providence, and the stewards of the
creation, and servants of the great family of God, the World, in the employment
of procuring necessaries for food and clothing, ornament and Physic. In their
proportions also, a King and a Priest, and a Prophet, a Judge and an Advocate,
doing the works of their employment according to their proper rules, are doing
the work of God, because they serve those necessities which God has made, and
yet made no provisions for them but by their Ministry. So that no man can
complain, that his calling takes him off from religion, his calling it self and
his very worldly employment, in honest trades and offices is a serving of God,
and if it be moderately pursued, and according to the rules of Christian
prudence, will leave void spaces enough for prayers and retirements of a more
spiritual religion.

God has given every man work enough to do, that there shall be no room for
idleness, and yet has so ordered the world, that there shall be space for
devotion. He that has the fewest businesses of the world, is called upon to
spend more time in the dressing of his soul, and he that has the most affairs,
may so order them, that they shall be a service of God; whilst at certain
periods they are blessed with prayers and actions of religion, and all day long
are hallowed by a holy intention.

However, so long as Idleness is quite shut out from our lives, all the sins
of wantonness, softness and effeminacy are prevented, and there is but little
room left for temptation: and therefore to a busy man temptation is fain to
climb up together with his businesses, and sins creep upon him only by
accidents and occasions; whereas to an idle person they come in a full body,
and with open violence, and the impudence of a restless importunity.

Idleness is called the sin of Sodom and her daughters, Ezekiel 16.49. S^nec.
and indeed is the burial of a living man, an idle person being so useless to
any purposes of God and man, that he is like one that is dead, unconcerned in
the changes and necessities of the world: and he only lives to spend his time,
and eat the fruits of the earth, like vermin or a wolf, when their time comes
they dye and perish, and in the mean time do no good; they neither plow nor
carry burdens: all that they do, either is unprofitable, or mischievous.

Idleness is the greatest prodigality in the world: it throws away that,
which is invaluable in respect of its present use, and irreparable when it is
past, being to be recovered by no power of art or nature. But the way to secure
and improve our time we may practice in the following rules.

Rules for employing our Time.
1. In the morning, when you awake, accustom your self to think first upon
God, or something in order to his service; and at night also, let him close
thine eyes; and let your sleep be necessary and healthful, not idle and
expensive of time, beyond the needs and conveniences of nature; and sometimes
be curious to see the preparation which the sun makes, when he is coming forth
from his chambers of the East.

2. Let every man that has a calling, be diligent in pursuance of its
employment, so as not lightly, or without reasonable occasion to neglect it in
any of those times, which are usually and by the custom of prudent persons and
good husbands employed in it.

3. Let all the Intervals, or void spaces of time be employed in prayers,
reading, meditating, works of nature, recreation, charity, friendlinesse and
neighborhood, and means of spiritual and corporal health: ever remembering, so
to work in our calling, as not to neglect the work of our high calling; but to
begin and end the day with God, with such forms of devotion, as shall be proper
to our necessities.

4. The resting days of Christians, and Festivals of the Church must in no
sense be days of idleness: for it is better to plow upon holy days, then to
do nothing, or to do vitiously; but let them be spent in the works of the day,
that is, of Religion and Charity, according to the rules appointed ^ee Chap. 4.
^^ct. 6.
.

5. Avoid the company of Drunkards and busybodies, and all such as are apt to
talk much to little purpose: for no man can be provident of his time, that is
not prudent in the choice of his company: and if one of the Speakers be vain,
tedious and trifling, he that hears, and he that answers in the discourse are
equal losers of their time.

6. Never talk with any man, or undertake any trifling employment merely to
pass the time away: for every day well spent may become a day of salvation,
and time rightly employed is an acceptable time. And remember, that the time
thou triflest away was given thee to repent in, S. Bern. de tripli ci custodia.
to pray for pardon of sins, to work out thy salvation, to do the work of
grace, to lay up against the day of Judgment, a treasure of good works, that
thy time may be crowned with Eternity.

7. In the midst of the works of thy calling often retire to God in short
prayers and ejaculations, and those may make up the want of those larger
portions of time, Laudatur Augustus Caesar apud Lucanum.
which it may be thou desire for devotion, -- media inter praelia semper
stella^um caelique plagi^ superisque vacabat.
and in which thou think other persons have advantage of thee: for so thou
reconcilest the outward work, and thy inward calling, the Church and the
Commonwealth, the employment of thy body and the interest of thy soul; for be
sure, that God is present at thy breathings and hearty sighings of prayer
as soon, as at the longer offices of less busied persons; and thy time is as
truly sanctified by a trade, and devout, though shorter prayers, as by the
longer offices of those whose time is not filled up with labor and useful
business.

8. Let your employment be such as may become a reasonable person; and not be a
business fit for children or distracted people; but fit for your age and
understanding. For a man may be very idly busy, and take great pains to so
little purpose, that in his labors and expense of time he shall serve no end
but of folly, and vanity. There are some Trades, that wholly serve the ends of
idle persons and fools; and such as are fit to be seized upon by the severity
of laws, and banished from under the sun: and there are some people who are
busy, but it is as Domitian was, in catching flies.

9. Let your employment be fitted to your person and calling. Some there are
that employ their time in affairs infinitely below the dignity of their person,
and being called by God, or by the Republic to help to bear great burdens, and
to judge a people, do enfeeble their understandings, and disable their persons
by sordid and brutish business. Thus Nero went up and down Greece, and
challenged the Fiddlers at their trade. Aeropus a Macedonian King made Lanterns.
Harcatius the King of Parthia was a Mole-catcher: and Biantes the Lydian filed
needles. He that is appointed to minister in holy things, must not suffer
secular affairs and sordid arts to eat up great portions of his employment: a
Clergy man must not keep a Tavern, nor a Judge be an Inne-keeper; and it was a
great idleness in Theophylact the Patriarch of C. P. to spend his time in his
stable of horses, when he should have been in his study, or the Pulpit, or
saying his holy offices. Such employments are the diseases of labor, and the
rust of time which it contracts, not by lying still, but by dirty employment.

10. Let your employment be such as becomes a Christian, that is, in no sense
mingled with sin; for he that takes pains to serve the ends of covetousness,
or ministers to another lust, or keeps a shop of impurities or intemperance,
is idle in the worst sense; for every hour so spent runs him backward, and must
be spent again in the remaining and shorter part of his life, and spent better.

11. Persons of great quality, and of no trade, are to be most prudent and
curious in their employment and traffic of time. They are miserable, if their
education has been so loose and undisciplined, as to leave them unfurnished of
skill to spend their time: but most miserable are they, if such misgovernment
and unskilfulnesse make them fall into vicious and baser company, and drive on
their time by the sad minutes and periods of sin and death. * They that are
learned know the worth of time, and the manner how well to improve a day; and
they are to prepare themselves for such purposes, in which they may be most
useful in order to arts of arms: to counsel in public, or government in their
Country: But for others of them that are unlearned, let them choose good
company, such as may not tempt them to a vice, or join with them in any; but
that may supply their defects by counsel and discourse, by way of conduct or
conversation. Let them learn easy and useful things, read history, and the laws
of the Land, learn the customs of their Country, the condition of their own
estate, profitable and charitable contrivances of it: let them study prudently
to govern their families, learn the burdens of their Tenants, the necessities
of their neighbors, and in their proportion supply them, and reconcile their
enmities, and prevent their Lawsuits, or quickly end them, and in this glut of
leisure and disimployment, let them set apart greater portions of their time
for religion, and the necessities of their Souls.

12. Let the women of noble birth and great fortunes do the same things in
their proportions and capacities, nurse their children, look to the affairs of
the house, visit poor cottages, and relieve their necessities, be courteous to
the neighborhood, learn in silence of their husbands, or their spiritual
Guides, read good books, pray often, and speak little, and learn to do good
works for necessary uses, for by that phrase S. Paul expresses the obligation
of Christian women to good houswifery, and charitable provisions for their
family and neighborhood.

13. Let all persons of all conditions avoid all delicacy and niceness in
their clothing or diet, because such softness engages them upon great
mispendings of their time, while they dress and comb out all their
opportunities of their morning devotion, and half the days severity, and sleep
out the care and provision for their Souls.

14. Let every one of every condition avoid curiosity, and all enquiry into
things that concern them not. For all business in things that concerns us not,
is an employing our time to no good of ours, and therefore not in order to a
happy Eternity. In this account our neighbors necessities are not to be
reckoned; for they concern us as one member is concerned in the grief of
another; but going from house to house, tatlers, and busybodies, which are
the canker and rust of idleness, as id^enesse is the rust of time, are
reprooved by the Apostle in severe language, and forbidden in order to this
exercise.

15. As much as may be cut off all impertinent and useless employments of your
life, unnecessary and fantastic visits, long waitings upon great personages,
where neither duty nor necessity, nor charity obliges us, all vain meetings,
all laborious trifles, and whatsoever spends much time to no real, civil,
religious, or charitable purpose.

16. Let not your recreations be lavish spenders of your time, but choose such
which are healthful, short, transient, recreative, and apt to refresh you; but
at no hand dwell upon them, or make them your great employment: for he that
spends his time in sports, and calls it recreation, is like him, whose garment
is all made of fringes, and his meat nothing but sawces, they are healthlesse,
chargeable and useless. And therefore avoid such games which require much time
or long attendance; or which are apt to steal thy affections from more severe
employments. For to whatsoever thou have given thy affections, thou will not
grudge to give thy time. Natural necessity and the example of S. John (who
recreated himself with sporting with a tame Partridge) teach us that it is
lawful to relax and unbend our bow, Cas^^an. Coll^^ 24 c. ^1
but not to suffer it to be unready or unstrung.

17. Set apart some portions of every day for more solemn devotion and
religious employment, which be severe in observing: and if variety of
employment or prudent affairs, or civil society press upon you, yet so order
thy rule, that the necessary parts of it be not omitted; and though just
occasions may make your prayers shorter, yet let nothing but a violent, sudden
and impatient necessity make thee upon any one day wholly to omit thy morning
and evening devotions; which if you be forced to make very short, you may
supply and lengthen with ejaculations and short retirements in the day time in
the midst of your employment, or of your company.

18. Do not the work of God negligently and idly: Jerem. 48.10.
let not thy heart be upon the world, when thy hand is lift up in prayer: and
be sure to prefer an action of religion in its place and proper season before
all worldly pleasure, letting secular things (that may be dispensed with in
themselves,) in these circumstances wait upon the other; not like the Patriarch
who ran from the Altar in S. Sophia to his stable in all his Pontificals, and
in the midst of his office, to see a Colt newly fallen from his beloved and
much valued Mare Phorbante. More prudent and severe was that of Sr. Thom. More,
who being sent for by the King when he was at his prayers in public, returned
answer, he would attend him when he had first perfomed his service to the KING
of Kings. And it did honor to Rusticus, that when Letters from Caesar were
given to him, Plutarch. ^e Curio^t.
he refused to open them, till the Philosopher had done his Lecture. In
honoring God and doing his work, put forth all thy strength, for of that time
only thou may be most confident that it is gained, which is prudently and
zealously spent in Gods Service.

19. When the Clock strikes, or however else you shall measure the day, it is
good to say a short ejaculation every hour, that the parts and returns of
devotion may be the measure of your time; and do so also in all the breaches of
thy sleep, that those spaces which have in them no direct business of the
world may be filled with religion.

20. If by thus doing you have not secured your time by an early and forehanded
care, yet be sure by a timely diligence to redeem the time, that is, to be
pious and religious in such instances in which formerly you have sinned, (...).
^rocop. 2. Vandal.
and to bestow your time especially upon such graces, the contrary whereof you
have formerly practiced, doing actions of chastity and temperance with as great
a zeal and earnestness as you did once act your uncleanness: and then, by all
arts to watch against your present and future dangers, from day to day securing
your standing; this is properly to redeem your time, that is, to buy your
security of it at the rate of any labor and honest arts.

21. Let him that is most busied set apart some solemn time every year, in
which, for the time quitting all worldly business, he may attend wholly to
fasting and prayer, 1 Cor. 7.5.
and the dressing of his soul by confessions, meditations and attendances upon
God; that he may make up his accounts, renew his vows, make amends for his
carelessenesse, and retire back again from whence levity and the vanities of
the world, or the importunity of temptations, or the distraction of secular
affairs have carried him.

22. In this we shall be much assisted, and we shall find the work more easy,
if before we sleep every night (...). Pythag. Carm.
we examine the actions of the past day with a particular scrutiny, if there
have been any accident extraordinary: as, long discourse, a Feast, much
business, variety of company: If nothing but common has happened, the less
examination will suffice: only let us take care that we sleep not without such
a recollection of the actions of the day, as may represent any thing that is
remarkable, and great, either to be the matter of sorrow or thanksgiving: for
other things, a general care is proportionable.

23. Let all these things be done prudently and moderately; not with scruple
and vexation. For these are good advantages, but the particulars are not divine
commandments; and therefore are to be used as shall be found expedient to
every ones condition. For, provided that our duty be secured; for the degrees
and for the instruments, every man is permitted to himself and the conduct of
such who shall be appointed to him. He is happy, that can secure every hour to
a sober or a pious employment: but the duty consists not scrupulously in
minutes and half hours, but in greater portions of time; provided, that no
minute be employed in sin, and the great portions of our time be spent in sober
employment; and all the appointed days and some portions of every day be
allowed for Religion. In all the lesser parts of time we are left to our own
elections and prudent management, and to the consideration of the great degrees
and differences of glory that are laid up in Heaven for us, according to the
degrees of our care and piety and diligence.

The benefits of this Exercise.
This exercise, besides that it has influence upon our whole lives, it has a
special efficacy and incurious persons. 4. I^ not doing good, as the proper
business of all our days. 5. It prepares us so against sudden changes, that
we shall not easily be surprised

SECT. II. The second general instrument of Holy Living: Purity of intention.
THat we should intend and design Gods glory in every action we do, whether it
be natural or chosen, is expressed by S. Paul, Whether ye eat or drink, do all
to the glory of God: 1 Cor. 1^ 31.
Which rule, when we observe; every action of nature becomes religious, and
every meal is an act of worship, and shall have its reward in its proportion,
as well as an act of prayer. Blessed be that goodness and grace of God, which
out of infinite desire to glorify and save mankind, would make the very works
of nature capable of becoming acts of virtue, that all our life time we may do
him service.

This grace is so excellent, that it sanctifies the most common action of our
life, and yet so necessary, that without it the very best actions of our
devotion are imperfect and vicious. For he that prays out of custom, or gives
alms for praise, or fasts to be accounted religious, is but a Pharisee in his
devotion, and a beggar in his alms, and an hypocrite in his fasts. But a holy
end sanctifies all these, and all other actions which can be made holy, and
gives distinction to them and procures acceptance.

For, as to know the end, distinguishes a Man from a Beast: so to choose a good
end, distinguishes him from an evil man. Hezekiah repeated his good deeds upon
his sick bed, and obtained favor of God; but the Pharisee was accounted
insolent for doing the same thing; because this man did it to upbraid his
brother, the other to obtain a mercy of God. Zecharias questioned with the
Angel about his message, and was made speechless for his incredulity; but the
blessed Virgin Mary questioned too, and was blameless; for she did it to
enquire after the manner of the thing; but he did not believe the thing it
self: He doubted of Gods power, or the truth of the Messenger; but ^he only of
her own incapacity. This was it which distinguished the mourning of David from
the exclamation of Saul: the confession of Pharaoh from that of Manasses; the
tears of Peter from the repentance of Judas: For the praise is not in the deed
done, Seneca.
but in the manner of its doing. If a man visits his sick friend, and watches
at his pillow for charity sake, and because of his old affection we approve it:
but if he does it in hope of legacy, he is a Vulture, and only watches for the
carcass. The same things are honest and dishonest: the manner of doing them,
and the end of the design makes the separation.

Holy intention is to the actions of a man that which the soul is to the body,
or form to its matter, or the root to the tree, or the Sun to the World, or the
Fountain to a River, or the Base to a Pillar: for without these the body is a
dead trunk, the matter is sluggish, the tree is a block, the world is
darkness, the river is quickly dry, the pillar rushes into flatnesse and a
ruin; and the action is sinful, or unprofitable and vain. The poor Farmer that
gave a dish o^ cold water to Artaxerxes was rewarded with a golden goblet; and
he that gives the same present to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple shall
have a Crown: but if he gives water in despite when the Disciple needs wine or
a Cordial, his reward shall be to want that water to cool his tongue. * But
this duty must be reduced to rules.

Rules for our intentions.
1. In every action reflect upon the end; and in your undertaking it, consider
why you do it, and what you propound to your self for a reward, and to your
action as its end.

2. Begin every action in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: the meaning of which is, that we be careful, that we do not the action
without the permission or warrant of God. 2. That we design it to the glory of
God, if not in the direct action, yet at least in its consequence; if not in
the particular, yet at least in the whole order of things and accidents. 3.
That it may be so blessed, that what you intend for innocent and holy purposes,
may not by any chance or abuse, or misunderstanding of men be turned into evil,
or made the occasion of sin.

3. Let every action of concernment be begun with prayer, that God would not
only bless the action, but sanctify your purpose; and make an oblation of
the action to God: holy and well intended actions being the best oblations and
presents we can make to God; and when God is entitled to them, he will the
rather keep the fire upon the Altar bright and shining.

4. In the prosecution of the action, renew and re-inkindle your purpose by
short ejaculations to these purposes. [ Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy Name let all praise be given:] and consider, [ Now I am working the
work of God: I am his servant, I am in a happy employment, I am doing my
Masters business; I am not at my own dispose, I am using his talents, and all
the gain must be his:] for then be sure, as the glory is his, so the reward
shall be thine. If thou bring his goods home with increase, he will make
thee ruler over Cities.

5. Have a care that while the Altar thus sends up a holy fume, thou do not
suffer the birds to come and carry away the Sacrifice: that is, let not that
which began well, and was intended for Gods glory, decline and end in thy own
praise, or temporal satisfaction, or a sin. A story told to represent the
vileness of unchastity is well begun; but if thy female auditor be pleased
with thy language, and begins rather to like thy person for thy story, then to
dislike the crime: ^ui furatur ut ^^^chetur, moechus est tragis quam fur Arist.
Eth.
be watchful, lest this goodly head of gold descend in silver and brass, and
end in iron and clay, like Nebuchadnezzars image; for from the end it shall
have its name and reward.

6. If any accidental event which was not first intended by thee can come to
pass, let it not be taken into thy purposes, nor at all be made use of; as if
by telling a true story you can do an ill turn to your enemy, by no means do
it; but when the temptation is found out, turn all thine enmity upon that.

7 In every more solemn action of Religion, join together many good ends, that
the consideration of them may entertain all your affections, and that when any
one ceases, the purity of your intention may be supported by another supply. He
that fasts only to tame a rebellious body, when he is provided of a remedy
either in Grace or Nature, may be tempted to leave off his fasting. But he that
in his fast intends the mortification of every unruly appetite, an accustoming
himself to bear the yoke of the Lord, a contempt of the pleasures of meat and
drink, humiliation of all wilder thoughts, obedience, and humility, austerity
and charity, and the convenience and assistance to devotion, and to do an act
of repentance; whatever happens, will have reason enough to make him to
continue his purpose, and to sanctify it. And certain it is, the more good
ends are designed in an action, the more degrees of excellency the man obtains.

8. If any temptation to spoil your purpose happens in a religious duty, do not
presently omit the action, but rather strive to rectify your intention and to
mortify the temptation. S. Bernard taught us this rule. For when the Devil
observing him to preach excellently, and to do much benefit to his hearers,
tempted him to vain glory, hoping that the good man to avoid that, would cease
preaching, he gave this answer only, I neither began for thee, neither for
thee will I make an end.

9. In all actions which are of long continuance, deliberation and abode, let
your holy and pious intention be actual, that is, that it be by a special
prayer, or action, by a peculiar act of resignation or oblation be given to
God: but in smaller actions, and little things, and indifferent, fail not to
secure a pious habitual intention, that is, that it be included within your
general care, that no action have an ill end; and that it be comprehended in
your general prayers, whereby you offer your self and all you do to Gods glory.

10. Call not every temporal end, a defiling of thy intention, but only, 1.
When it contradicts any of the ends of God, or 2. When it is principally
intended in an action of religion. For sometimes a temporal end is part of our
duty: and such are all the actions of our calling, whether our employment be
religious or civil. We are commanded to provide for our family: but if the
Minister of Divine offices shall take upon him that holy calling for covetous
or ambitious ends, or shall not design the glory of God principally and
especially, he has polluted his hands and his heart; and the fire of the Altar
is quenched, or it sends forth nothing but the smoke of mushromes, or
unpleasant gums. And it is a great unworthiness to prefer the interest of a
creature before the ends of God the Almighty Creator.

But because many cases may happen in which a man's heart may deceive him, and
he may not well know what is in his own spirit; therefore by these following
signs we shall best make a judgment whether our intentions be pure, and our
purposes holy.

Signs of purity of intention.
1. It is probable our hearts are right with God, See Sect. 1. of this Chapt.
Rule 18.
and our intentions innocent and pious, if we set upon actions of religion or
civil life with an affection proportioned to the quality of the work; that we
act our temporal affairs with a desire no greater then our necessity; and that
in actions of religion we be zealous, active, and operative, so far as prudence
will permit; but in all cases, that we value a religious design before a
temporal; when otherwise they are in equal order to their several ends: that
is, that whatsoever is necessary in order to our souls health be higher
esteemed than what is for bodily; and the necessities, the indispensable
necessities of the spirit be served before the needs of nature, when they are
required in their several circumstances: Or plainer yet; when we choose any
temporal inconvenience, rather than commit a sin, and when we choose to do a
duty rather than to get gain. But he that does his recreation, or his
merchandise cheerfully, promptly, readily and busily, and the works of religion
slowly, flatly, and without appetite, and the spirit moves like Pharaohs
chariots when the wheels were off, it is a sign that his heart is not right
with God, but it cleaves too much to the world.

2. It is likely our hearts are pure, and our intentions spotless, when we are
not solicitous of the opinion and censures of men; but only that we do our
duty, and be accepted of God. For our eyes will certainly be fixed there from
whence we expect our reward: and if we desire that God should approve us, it is
a sign we do his work, and expect him our Play Master.

3. He that does as well in private between God and his own soul as in public,
in Pulpits, in Theaters, and Marketplaces, has given himself a good testimony
that his purposes are full of honesty, nobleness and integrity. For what
Helkanah said to the Mother of Samuel, Am not I better to thee then ten sons?
Is most certainly verified concerning God: that he, who is to be our Judge, is
better then ten thousand witnesses. But he, that would have his virtue
published, studies not virtue, but glory. He is not just, Seneca Ep. 113.
that will not be just without praise: but he is a righteous man that does
justice, when to do so, is made infamous: and he is a wise man who is delighted
with an ill name that is well gotten. S. Chrysostom. l. 2. de compan. cordis.
And indeed that man has a strange covetousness, or folly, that is not
contented with this reward, that, He has pleased God. And see what he gets by
it? He that does good works for praise, S. Greg. moral. 8. cap. 25.
or secular ends sells an inestimable jewel for a trifle; and that which would
purchase Heaven for him, he parts with for the breath of the people, which at
the best is but air, and that not often wholesome.

4. It is well also when we are not sollicitous or troubled concerning the
effect and event of all our actions; but that being first by Prayer recommended
to him, is left at his dispose: for then in case the event be not answerable to
our desires, or to the efficacy of the instrument, we have nothing left to rest
in, but the honesty of our purposes; which it is the more likely we have
secured, by how much more we are indifferent concerning the success. S. James
converted but eight persons, when he preached in Spain; and our blessed Savior
converted fewer, then his own Disciples did: And if thy labors prove
unprosperous, if thou be much troubled at that, it is certain thou did not
think thy self secure of a reward for your intention, which you might have done
if it had been pure and just.

5. He loves virtue for Gods sake and its own, that loves and honors it
wherever it is to be seen; but he that is envious or angry at a virtue that is
not his own, at the perfection or excellency of his Neighbor, is not covetous
of the virtue, but of its reward and reputation, and then his intentions are
polluted. It was a great ingenuity in Moses, that wished all the people might
be prophets; but if he had designed his own honor, he would have prophesied
alone. But he that desires only that the work of God and religion shall go on,
is pleased with it, who ever is the instrument.

6. He that despises the world and all its appendant vanities is the best
Judge; and the most secured of his intentions, because he is the furthest
removed from a temptation. Every degree of mortification is a testimony of the
purity of our purposes, and in what degree we despise sensual pleasure, or
secular honors, or worldly reputation, in the same degree we shall conclude
our heart, right to religion and spiritual designs.

7. When we are not sollicitous concerning the instruments and means of our
actions, but use those means which God has laid before us, with resignation,
indifferency and thankfulness, it is a good sign that we are rather intent
upon the end of Gods glory, than our own convenience or temporal satisfaction.
He that is indifferent whether he serve God in riches or in poverty is rather a
seeker of God, than of himself; and he that will throw away a good book,
because it is not curiously gilded, is more desirous to please his eye, than
to inform his understanding.

8. When a temporal end consisting with a spiritual and pretended to be
subordinate to it happens to fail and be defeated, if we can rejoice in that so
Gods glory be secured, and the interests of religion; it is a great sign our
hearts are right, and our ends prudently designed and ordered.

When our intentions are thus balanced, regulated and discerned, we may
consider, 1. That this exercise is of so universal efficacy in the whole course
of a holy life, that it is like the soul to every holy action, and must be
provided for in every undertaking; and is of it self alone sufficient to make
all natural and indifferent actions to be adopted into the family of religion.

2. That there are some actions, which are usually reckoned as parts of our
religion, which yet of themselves are so relative and imperfect, that without
the purity of intention they degenerate: and unless they be directed and
proceed on to those purposes which God designed them to, they return into the
family of common, secular, or sinful actions. Thus alms are for charity:
fasting for temperance: prayer is for religion: humiliation is for humility:
austerity or sufferance is in order to the virtue of patience; and when these
actions fail of their several ends, or are not directed to their own purposes,
alms are misspent; fasting is an impertinent trouble; prayer is but lip-labor;
humiliation is but hypocrisy; sufferance is but vexation; for such were the
alms of the Pharisee, the fast of Iezabel, the prayer of Judah reproved by the
Prophet Isaiah, the humiliation of Ahab, the martyrdom of Heretics; in which
nothing is given to God but the body, or the forms of religion, but the soul,
and the power of godliness is wholly wanting.

3. We are to confider that no intention can sanctify an unholy or unlawful
action: Saul the King disobeyed Gods commandment, and spared the cattle of
Amalek to reserve the best for sacrifice: And Saul the Pharisee persecuted the
Church of God with a design to do God service: and they that killed the Apostles
had also good purposes, but they had unhallowed actions: When there is both
truth in election and charity in the intention; S. ^ern. lib. de. praecept.
when we go to God in ways of his own choosing, or approving, then our eye is
single, and our hands are clean, and our hearts are pure. But when a man does
evil that good may come of it, or good to an evil purpose, that man does like
him that rowls himself in thorns that he may sleep easily: he rosts himself in
the fire, that he may quench his thirst with his own sweat; he turns his face
to the East that he may go to bed with the Sun. I end this with the saying of a
wise Heathen. He is to be called evil that is good only for his own sake:
Regard not how full hands you bring to God, Publius Mimu^^^
but how pure: Many cease from sin out of fear alone, not out of innocence or
love of virtue, and they (as yet) are not to be called innocent, but timorous.

SECT. III The third general instrument of holy living: or the practice of the
presence of God.
THat God is present in all places, that he sees every action, hears all
discourses, and understands every thought, is no strange thing to a Christian
ear, who has been taught this doctrine, not only by right reason, and the
consent of all the wise men in the world, but also by God himself in holy
Scripture. [ Am I a God at hand (says the Lord) and not a God afar off? Jer.
23.24.
Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him? Hebr. 4.^3.
(says the Lord) Do not I fill heaven and earth? Neither is there any creature
that is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and open to the
eyes of him with whom we have to do; Acts. 17.28.
for in him we live and move and have our being.] God is wholly in every place,
included in no place, not bound with cords (except those of love) not divided
into parts, not changeable into several shapes, filling heaven and earth with
his present power, and with his never absent nature. Lib 7. de Civit. ^^p. 3^.
So S. Augustine expresses this article. So that we may imagine God to be as
the Air and the Sea, and we all enclosed in his circle, wrapped up in the lap of
his infinite nature, or as infants in the wombs of their pregnant Mothers: and
we can no more be removed from the presence of God, than from our own being.

Several manners of the divine presence.
The presence of God is understood by us in several manners and to several
purposes.

1. God is present by his essence, which because it is infinite cannot be
contained within the limits of any place: and because he is of an essential
purity, and spiritual nature, he cannot be undervalued by being supposed
present in the places of unnatural uncleanness: because as the sun reflecting
upon the mud of strands and shores is unpolluted in its beams: so is God not
dishonored when we suppose him in every of his Creaturer, and in every part of
every one of them, and is still as unmixt with any unhandfome adherence, as is
the soul in the bowels of the body.

2. God is every where present by his power. He roules the Orbs of Heaven with
his hand, he fixes the Earth with his Foot, he guides all the Creatures with
his Eye, and refreshes them with his influence: He makes the powers of Hell to
shake with his terrors, and binds the Devils with his Word, and throws them
out with his command; and sends the Angels on Emba^^ies with his decrees: He
hardens the joints of Infants, and confirms the bones when they are fashioned
beneath secretly in the earth: He it is that assists at the numerous
productions of fishes, and there is not one hollownesse in the bottom of the
sea, but he shows himself to be Lord of it, by sustaining these the Creatures
that come to dwell in it: And in the wilderness, the Bittern and the Stork,
the Dragon and the Satyr, the Unicorn and the Elk live upon his provisions, and
revere his power, and feel the force of his Almightinesse.

3. God is more specially present in some places by the several and more
special manifestations of himself to extraordinary purposes. 1. By glory: Thus
his fear is in Heaven; because there he fits incircled with all the outward
demonstrations of his glory, which he is pleased to show to all the inhabitants
of those his inward and secret Courts. And thus they that die in the Lord may
be properly said to be gone to God; with whom although they were before, yet
now they enter into his Courts, into the secret of his Tabernacle, into the
retinue and splendour of his glory. That is called walking with God, but this is
dwelling or being with him. I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, so
said Paul. But this manner of the Divine presence is reserved for the elect
people of God, and for their portion in their country.

4. God is by grace and benediction specially present in holy places, Mat.
18.20. Heb. 10.25.
and in the solemn assemblies of his servants. If holy people meet in grots and
dens of the earth, when persecution or a public necessity disturbs the public
order, circumstance, and convenience, God fails not to come thither to them:
but God is also by the same or a greater reason present there where they meet
ordinarily, by order, and public authority: There God is present ordinarily,
that is, at every such meeting. God will go out of his way to meet his Saints,
when themselves are forced out of their way of order by a sad necessity: 1
King. 5 9. Psalm. 138 ^.2.
but else, Gods usual way is to be present in those places where his servants
are appointed ordinarily to meet. But his presence there signifies nothing but
his readiness to hear their prayers, to bless their persons, to accept their
offices, and to like even the circumstance of orderly and public meeting. For
thither, the prayers of consecration, the public authority separating it, and
Gods love of order, and the reasonable customs of Religion, have in ordinary,
and in a certain degree fixed this manner of his presence; and he loves to have
it so.

5. God is especially present in the hearts of his people by his holy Spirit:
and indeed the hearts of holy men are Temples in the truth of things, and in
type and shadow they are of Heaven it self. For God reigns in the hearts of his
servants. There is his Kingdom. The power of grace has subdued all his
enemies. There is, his power. They serve him night and day and give him thanks
and praise; that is, his glory: This is the religion and worship of God in the
Temple. The temple it self is the heart of man; Christ is the High Priest, who
from thence sends up the incense of prayers and joins them to his own
intercession, and presents all together to his Father; and the Holy Ghost by
his dwelling there, has also consecrated it into a Temple; 1 Cor. 3 16. 2 Cor.
6 16.
and God dwells in our hearts by faith, and Christ by his Spirit, and the Spirit
by his purities; so that we are also Cabinets of the Mysterious Trinity; and
what is this short of Heaven it self, but as infancy is short of manhood, and
letters of words? The same state of life it is, but not the same age. It is
Heaven in a Looking-glass, (dark, but yet true) representing the beauties of
the soul, and the graces of God, and the images of his eternal glory by the
reality of a special presence.

6. God is especially present in the consciences of all persons good and bad,
by way of testimony and judgment: that is, he is there a remembrancer to call
our actions to mind, a witness to bring them to judgment, and a Judge to
acquit or to condemn. And although this manner of presence is in this life
after the manner of this life, that is, imperfect, and we forget many actions
of our lives; yet the greatest changes of our state of grace or sin, our most
considerable actions are always present, like Capital Letters to an aged and
dim eye: and at the day of judgment God shall draw aside the cloud and
manifest this manner of his presence more notoriously, and make it appear, that
he was an observer of our very thoughts; and that he only laid those things by
which because we covered with dust and negligence they were not then discerned.
But when we are risen from our dust and imperfection, they all appear plain and
legible.

Now the consideration of this great truth is of a very universal use in the
whole course of the life of a Christian. All the consequents and effects of it
are universal. * He that remembers that God stands a witness and a judge,
beholding every secrecy; besides his impiety, must have put on impudence if he
be not much restrained in his temptation to sin. For the greatest part of
sins is taken away, if a man have a witness of his conversation: And he is a
great despiser of God who sends a Boy away when he is going to commit
fornication, and yet will dare to do it, though he knows God is present, and
cannot be sent o^^: as if the eye of a little Boy were more awful, then the
all-seeing eye of God. S. Aug. de verbis Don. c. 3
He is to be feared in public, he is to be feared in private: if you go forth
he spies you: if you go in he sees you: when you light the candle he observes
you: when you put it out, then also God marks you: Be sure that while you are
in his sight you behave your self as becomes so holy a presence. But if you
will sin, retire your self wisely, and go where God cannot see: For no where
else can you be safe. And certainly, if men would always actually consider,
and really esteem this truth, that God is the great Eye of the World, always
watching over our actions, and an ever open ear to hear all our words, and an
unwearied arm ever lifted up to crush a sinner into ruin, it would be the
readiest way in the world to make sin to cease from amongst the children of
men, and for men to approach to the blessed estate of the Saints in Heaven, who
cannot sin, for they always walk in the pres^nce and behold the face of God. *
This instrument is to be reduced to practice according to the following Rules.

Rules of exercising this consideration.
1. Let this actual thought often return, that God is omnipresent filling every
place, and say with David, Psalm. 13^ 7.^.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence?
If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there. If I make my bed in hell, thou art
there, etc. This thought by being frequent will make an habitual dread and
reverence toward God, and fear in all thy actions: For it is a great necessity
and engagement to do unblameably, when we act before that Judge, (...) de
con^ol.
who is infallible in his sentence, all knowing in his information, severe in
his anger, powerful in his providence, and intolerable in his wrath and
indignation.

2. In the beginning of actions of Religion, make an act of adoration, that is,
solemnly worship God, and place thy self in Gods presence, and behold him with
the eye of faith, and le^ thy desires actually six on him as the object of thy
worship, and the reason of thy hope, and the fountain of thy blessing. For when
thou have placed thy self before him, and kneelest in his presence, it is most
likely, all the following parts of thy devotion will be answerable to the
wisdom of such an apprehension, and the glory of such a presence.

3. Let every thing you see, represent to your spirit the presence, the
excellency and the power of God, and let your conversation with the creatures
lead you unto the Creator; for so shall your actions be done more frequently
with an actual eye to Gods presence, by your often seeing him in the glass of
the creation. In the face of the Sun you may see Gods beauty: In the fire you
may feel his heat warming, in the water his gentleness to refresh you: he it is
that comforts your spirit when you have taken Cordials: it is the dew of Heaven
that makes your field give you bread; and the breasts of God are the bottles
that minister drink to your necessities. This Philosophy which is obvious to
every man's experience, is a good advantage to our piety, and by this act of
understanding, our wills are checked from violence and misdemeanour.

4. In your retirement make frequent colloquies or short discoursings between
God and thy own soul. Seven times a day do I praise thee: and in the night
season also I thought upon thee when I was waking. So did David: and every act
of complaint or thanksgiving, every act of rejoicing or of mourning, every
petition and every return of the heart in these entercourses, is a going to
God, an appearing in his presence, and a representing him present to thy spirit
and to thy necessity. And this was long since by a spiritual person called, a
building to GOD a Chapel in our heart. It reconciles Martha's im ployment
with Mary's Devotion, Charity, and Religion; the necessities of our calling,
and the employments of devotion. For thus in the midst of the works of your
Trade, you may retire into your Chapel [your Heart] and converse with GOD by
frequent addresses and returns.

5. Represent and offer to GOD, acts of love and fear, which are the proper
effects of this apprehension, and the proper exercise of this consideration.
For as GOD is every where present by his power, he calls for reverence and
godly fear: As he is present to thee in all thy needs, and relieves them, he
deserves thy love; and since in every accident of our lives we find one or
other of these apparent, and in most things we see both, it is a proper and
proportionate return, that to every such demonstration of God, we express our
selves sensible of it by admiring the Divine goodness, or trembling at his
presence, ever obeying him because we love him, and ever obeying him because we
fear to offend him. This is that which Enoch did, who thus walked with God.

6. Let us remember that God is in us, and that we are in him: we are his
workmanship, let us not deface it: we are in his presence, let us not pollute
it by unholy and impure actions. God has also wrought all our works in us: ^sa
26..12.
and because he rejoices in his own works, if we defile them, and make them
unpleasant to him, we walk perversely with GOD, and he will walk crookedly
toward us.

7. God is in the bowels of thy brother, refresh them when he needs it, and
then you give your alms in the presence of God, and to God, and he feels the
relief which thou providest for thy brother.

8. God is in every place; suppose it therefore to be a Church: and that
decency of deportment and piety of carriage, which you are taught by religion
or by custom, or by civility and public manners to use in Churches, the same
use in all places: with this difference only, that in Churches let your
deportment be religious in external forms and circumstances also; but there and
every where let it be religious in abstaining from spiritual undecencies, and
in readiness to do good actions: that it may not be said of us, as God once
complained of his people; J^^em. ^1.15. Sec^nd. (...). Edic.
Why has my beloved done wickedness in my house?

9. God is in every creature: be cruel toward none, neither abuse any by
intemperance. Remember that the creatures and every member of thy own body is
one of the lesser cabinets and receptacles of God. They are such which God has
blessed with his presence, hallowed by his touch, and separated from unholy use
by making them to belong to his dwelling.

10. He walks as in the presence of God, that converses with him in frequent
prayer and frequent communion, that runs to him in all his necessities: that
asks counsel of him in all his doubtings, that opens all his wants to him, that
weeps before him for his sins; that asks remedy and support for his weakness,
that fears him as a Judge, reverences him as a Lord, obeyes him as a Father,
and loves him as a Patron.

The Benefits of this exercise.
The benefit of this consideration and exer^ise being universal upon all the
parts of piety, I shall less need to speci^ie any particulars; but yet most
properly this exercise of considering help to prayer, producing in us reverence
and awfulnesse to the divine Majesty of God, and actual devotion in our
offices. 2. It produces a confidence in God, and fearlessenesse of our enemies,
his rod strikes us, his staff supports us: To which we may add this, that God
who is always with us, is especially by promise with us tribulation, to turn
the misery into a mercy, and that our greatest trouble may become our advantage
by intitling us to a new manner of the Divine presence. 3. It is apt to produce
joy and rejoicing in God; we being more apt to delight in the partners and
witnesses of our conversation; every degree of mutual abiding and conversing
being a relation and an endearment: we are of the same household with God; he is
with us in our natural actions to preserve us, in our recreations to restrain
us, in our public actions to applaud or reprove us, in our private to observe
us, in our sleeps to watch by us, in our watchings to refresh us: and if we
walk with God in all his ways as he walks with us in all ours, we shall find
perpetual reasons to enable us to keep that rule of God, Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again I say rejoice. And this puts me in mind of a saying of an
old religious person, ^n vit^^ S. (...)
[There is one way of overcoming our ghostly enemies, spiritual mirth, and a
perpetual bearing of God in our mindes] This effectively refists the Devil, and
suffers us to receive no hurt from him. 4. This exercise is apt also to
enkindle holy desires of the enjoyment of God, because it produces joy when we
do enjoy him; The same desires that a weak man has for a Defender, the sick
man for a Physician, the poor for a Patron, the child for his Father, the
espoused Lover for her betrothed. humility of spirit, apprehensions of our
great distance and our great needs, our daily wants, and hourly supplies,
admiration of Gods unspeakable mercies: It is the cause of great modesty and
decency in our actions; it helps to recollection of mind, and restrains the
scatterings and loosnesse of wandering thoughts; it establishes the heart in
good purposes, and leads on to perseverance; it gains purity and perfection,
(according to the saying of God to Abraham, Walk before me and be perfect) holy
fear, and holy love, and indeed every thing that pertains to holy living: when
we see our selves placed in the Eye of God who sets us on work and will reward
us plenteously, to serve him with an Eye-service is very pleasing; for he also
sees the heart: and the want of this consideration was declared to be the cause
why Israel sinned so grievously, [ For they say the Lord has forsaken the
earth, and the Lord sees not: Ezekiel. 9.9. Psalm. 10.^^.
therefore the land is full of blood, and the city full of perverseness.] What
a child would do in the eye of his Father, and a Pupil before his Tutor, and a
Wife in the presence of her Husband, and a servant in the sight of his Master,
let us always do the same: for we are made a spectacle to God, to Angels, and
to men; we are always in the sight and presence of the Allseeing and Almighty
God; who also is to us a Father, and a Guardian, a Husband, and a Lord.

Prayers and Devotions according to the religion and purposes of the foregoing
Considerations.
I. For grace to spend our time well.
O Eternal God who from all eternity do behold and love thy own glories and
perfections infinite, and have created me to do the work of God, after the
manner of men, and to serve thee in this generation, and according to my
capacities; give me thy grace, that I may be a curious and prudent spender of
my time, so as I may best prevent or resist all temptations, and be profitable
to the Christian Commonwealth, and by discharging all my duty may glorify thy
Name. Take from me all slothfulness and give me a diligent and an active
spirit, and wisdom to choose my employment, that I may do works proportionable
to my person, and to the dignity of a Christian, and may fill up all the spaces
of my time with actions of religion and charity, that when the Devil assaults
me, he may not find me idle; and my dearest Lord, at his sudden coming may
find me busy in lawful, necessary, and pious actions, improving my talent
entrusted to me by thee my Lord, that I may enter into the joy of my Lord to
partake of his eternal felicities, even for thy mercy sake, and for my dearest
Saviors sake. Amen.

Here follows the devotion of ordinary days; for the right employment of those
portions of ^ime which every day must allow for religion.

The first prayers in the Morning as soon as we are dressed.
Humbly and reverently compose your self, with heart lift up to God and your
head bowed, and meekly kneeling upon your knees, say the Lords Prayer: after
which use the following Collects, or as many of them as you shall choose.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

I. An act of adoration being the song that the Angels sing in Heaven.
HOly, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come: Heaven
and Earth, Angels and Men, the Air and the Sea give glory, and honor, and
thanks to him that sits on the throne, who lives for ever and ever. Rev.
11.^7.
All the blessed spirits and souls of the righteous cast their crowns before
the throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever. ^ 5.10.13.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor, and power, for thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. Revel.
^.^.3.
Great and mavelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty: Just and true are thy
ways, thou King of Saints. Thy wisdom is infinite, thy mercies are glorious;
and I am not worthy O Lord to appear in thy presence before whom the Angels
hide their faces. O Holy and Eternal Jesus, Lamb of God who were slain from the
beginning of the world, thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every
nation, and have made us unto our God Kings and Priests and we shall reign
with thee for ever. Blessing, honor, glory and power be unto him that sits
on the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever. Amen.

II. An act of thanksgiving being the song of David for the Morning.
SIng praises unto the Lord O ye saints of his, and give thanks to him for a
remembrance of his holiness. For his wrath indureth but the twinkling of an
eye, and in his pleasure is life: heaviness may endure for a night, but joy
comes in the morning. Thou Lord have preserved me this night from the violence
of the spirits of darkness, from all sad casualtyes, and evil accidents, from
the wrath which I have every day deserved: thou have brought my soul out of
hell, thou have kept my life from them that go down into the pit: thou have
showed me mavelous great kindesse and have blessed me for ever: the
greatness of thy glory reaches unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the
clouds. Therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise without ceasing, O my
God I will give thanks unto thee for ever. Allelujah.

III. An act of oblation or presenting our selves to God for the day.
MOst Holy and Eternal God, Lord and Sovereign of all the creatures, I humbly
present to thy divine Majesty, my self, my soul and body, my thoughts and my
words, my actions and intentions, my passions and my sufferings to be disposed
by thee to thy glory, to be blessed by thy providence, to be guided by thy
counsel to be sanctified by thy spirit, and afterward that my body and soul
may be received into glory: for nothing can perish which is under thy custody;
and the enemy of souls cannot devour what is thy portion, nor take it out of
thy hands. This day, O Lord, and all the days of my life I dedicate to thy
honor; and the actions of my calling to the uses of grace, and the religion of
all my days to be united to the merits and intercession of my holy Savior
Jesus, that in him and for him I may be pardoned and accepted. Amen.

IV. An act of repentance or contrition.
FOr as for me, I am not worthy to be called thy servant, much less am I
worthy to be thy son, for I am the vilest of sinners and the worst of men, a
lover of the things of the world, and a despiser of the things of God, [ proud
and envious, lustful and intemperate] greedy of sin, and impatient of reproof,
desirous to seem holy, and negligent of being so, transported with interest,
fooled with presumption and false principles, disturbed with anger, with a
peevish and unmortified spirit, and disordered by a whole body of sin and
death. Lord pardon all my sins for my sweetest Saviors sake; thou who did
dye for me, Holy Jesus, save me and deliver me, reserve not my sins to be
punished in the day of wrath and eternal vengeance; but wash away my sins, and
blot them out of thy remembrance, and purify my soul with the waters of
repentance and the blood of the cross, that for what is past thy wrath may not
come out against me, and for the time to come I may never provoke thee to anger
or to jealousy. O just and dear God be pitiful and gracious to thy servant.
Amen.

V. The prayer or petition.
Bless me gracious God in my calling to such purposes as thou shall choose for
me, or employ me in: Relieve me in all my sadnesses, make my bed in my
ficknesse, give me patience in my sorrows, confidence in thee and grace to call
upon thee in all temptations. O be thou my Guide in all my actions, my
protector in all dangers: give me a healthful body, and a clear understanding,
a sanctified, and just, a charitable, and humble, a religious and a contented
spirit; let not my life be miserable and wretched, nor my name stained with sin
and shame, nor my condition lifted up to a tempting and dangerous fortune; but
let my condition be blessed, my conversation useful to my Neighbors and
pleasing to thee, that when my body shall lie down in its bed of darkness, my
soul may pass into the Regions of light, and live with thee for ever through
Jesus Christ. Amen.

VI. An act of intercession or prayer for others to be added to this, or any
other office, as our devotion, or duty, or their needs shall determine us.
O God of infinite mercy, who have compassion on all men, and relievest the
necessities of all that call to thee for help, hear the prayers of thy servant
who is unworthy to ask any petition for himself, yet in humility and duty is
bound to pray for others. * O let thy mercy descend upon the whole Church, For
the Church.
preserve her in truth and peace, in unity and safety, in all storms, and
against all temptations and enemies, that she offering to thy glory the never
ceasing sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving may advance ^he honor of her
Lord, and be filled with his Spirit, and partake of his glory. Amen.

For the Glory.
Remember them that minister about holy things, let them be clothed with
righteousness, and sing with joyfulnesse. Amen.

For wife or husband.
Bless thy servant [my Wife or Husband] with health of body and of spirit. O
let the hand of thy blessing be upon his [or her] head night and day, and
support him in all necessities, strengthen him in all temptations, comfort him
in all his sorrows, and let him be thy servant in all changes, and make us both
to dwell with thee for ever in thy favor, in the light of thy countenance, and
in thy glories. Amen.

For our children.
Bless my children with healthful bodies, with good understandings, with the
graces and gifts of thy Spirit, with sweet dispositions and holy habits, and
sanctify them throughout in their bodies and souls and spirits, and keep them
unblameable to the coming of the Lord Jesus. Amen.

For Friends and Benefa^tors.
Be pleased, O Lord, to remember my friends, all that have prayed for me, and
all that have done me good [ here name such whom you would specially
recommend:] Do thou good to them, and return all their kindness double into
their own bosom, rewarding them with blessings, and sanctifying them with thy
graces, and bringing them to glory.

For our family.
Let all my family and kindred, my neighbors and acquaintance [ here name what
other relation you please] receive the benefit of my prayers and the blessings
of God; the comforts and supports of thy providence, and the sanctification of
thy Spirit.

For all in misery.
Relieve and comfort all the persecuted and afflicted: speak peace to troubled
consciences: strengthen the weak: confirm the strong: instruct the ignorant:
deliver the oppressed from him that spoileth him, and relieve the needy that
has no helper, and bring us all by the waters of comfort, and in the ways of
righteousness to the kingdom of rest and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

To God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, To the eternal Son that was
incarnate and born of a Virgin, To the Spirit of the Father and the Son, be all
honor and glory, worship and thanksgiving now and for ever. Amen.

Another form of prayer for the Morning.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Our Father,
etc.
I.
MOst glorious and eternal God, Father of mercy, and God of all comfort, I
worship and adore thee with the lowest humility of my soul and body, and give
thee all thanks and praise for thy infinite and essential glories and
perfections, and for the continual demonstration of thy mercies upon me, upon
all mine, and upon thy holy Catholic Church.

II.
I acknowledge dear God that I have deserved the greatest of thy wrath and
indignation; and that if thou had dealt with me according to my deserving, I
had now at this instant been desperately bewailing my miseries in the sorrows
and horrors of a sad eternity. But thy mercy triumphing over thy justice and
my sins, thou have still continued to me life and time of repentance; thou have
opened to me the gates of grace and mercy, and perpetually call upon me to
enter in and to walk in the paths of a holy life, that I might glorify thee
and be glorified of thee eternally.

III.
BEhold, O God, for this thy great and unspeakable goodness; for the
preservation of me this night, and for all other thy graces and blessings I
offer up my soul and body, all that I am, and all that I have as a Sacrifice to
thee and thy service; humbly begging of thee to pardon all my sins, to defend
me from all evil, to lead me into all geod, and let my portion be amongst thy
redeemed ones in the gathering together of the Saints, in the Kingdom of grace
and glory.

IV.
GUide me, O Lord, in all the changes and varieties of the world, that in all
things that shall happen, I may have an evennesse and tranquillity of spirit;
that my soul may be wholly resigned to thy Divinest will and pleasure, never
murmuring at thy gentle chastisements and fatherly correction, never waxing
proud and insolent though I feel a torrent of comforts and prosperous successes.

V.
FIx my thoughts, my hopes and my desires upon Heaven and heavenly things;
teach me to despise the world, to repent me deeply for my sins; give me holy
purposes of amendment, and ghostly strength and assistances to perform
faithfully whatsoever I shall intend piously. Enrich my understanding with an
eternal treasure of Divine truths, that I may know thy will, and thou who
workest in us to will and to do of thy good pleasure; teach me to obey all thy
Commandments, to believe all thy Revelations, and make me partaker of all thy
gracious promises.

VI.
TEach me to watch over all my ways, that I may never be surpised by sudden
temptations or a careless spirit, nor ever return to folly and vanity. Set a
watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips, that I offend in
my tongue neither against piety nor charity. Teach me to think of nothing but
thee and what is in order to thy glory and service; to speak nothing but thee
and thy glories; and to do nothing but what becomes thy servant whom thy
infinite mercy by the graces of thy holy Spirit has sealed up to the day of
Redemption.

VII.
LEt all my passions and affections be so mortified and brought under the
dominion of grace, that I may never by deliberation and purpose, nor yet by
levity, rashness, or inconsideration offend thy Divine Majesty. Make me such
as thou would have me to be: strengthen my faith, confirm my hope, and give
me a daily increase of charity, that this day and ever I may serve thee
according to all my opportunities and capacities; growing from grace to grace,
till at last by thy mercies I shall receive: the consummation and perfection of
grace, even the glories of thy Kingdom in the full fruition of the face and
excellencies of God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost: to whom be glory
and praise, honor and adoration given by all Angels and all Men, and all
Creatures, now and to all eternity. Amen.

To this may be added the prayer of intercession for others whom we are bound
to remember; which is at the end of the foregoing prayer: or else you may take
such special prayers which follow at the end of the fourth Chapter, [for
parents, for children, etc.]

After which conclude with this ejaculation.

Now and in all tribulation and anguish of spirit, in all dangers of soul and
body in prosperity and adversity, in the hour of death, and in the day of
judgment holy, and most blessed Savior Jesus, have mercy upon me, save me and
deliver me and all faithful people. Amen.

Between this and No^n usually are said the public prayers appointed by
Authority: to which all the Clergy are obliged; and other devout persons that
have leisure do accompany them.

Afternoon, or at any time of the day, when a devout person retires into his
closer for private prayer, or spiritual exercises, he may say the following
devotions.

An exercise to be used at any time of the day.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, etc. Our Father, etc.

The hymn collected out of the Psalms, recounting the excellencies and
greatness of God. O be joyful in God all ye lands: sing praises unto the
honor of his Name, make his Name to be glorious. * O Come hither and behold
the works of God, how wonderful he is in his doings toward the children of men.

He rules with his power for ever: He is the Father of the fatherless, and
defends the cause of the widow, even God in his holy habitation.

He is the God that makes men to be of one mind in a house, and brings the
prisoners out of captivity: but lets the runnagates continue in scarceness.

It is the Lord that commands the warers; it is the glorious God that makes
the thunder. * It is the Lord that rules the sea; the voice of the Lord is
mighty in operation, the voice of the Lord is a glorious voice.

Let all the Earth fear the Lord, stand in awe of him all ye that dwell in the
world: Thou shall show us wonderful things in thy righteousness, O God of our
salvation, thou that art the hope of all the ends of the Earth, and of them
that remain in the broad Sea.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Or this,

O Lord, thou art my God, I will exalt thee: I will praise thy Name, for thou
have done wonderful things: thy counsels of old are faithfulness and truth,
Isay 25.1.

Thou in thy strength ^etst fast the Mountains, and art girded about with
power. Thou stillest the raging of the Sea, and the noise of his waves, and the
madness of his people.

They also that remain in the uttermost parts of the Earth shall be afraid at
thy tokens: thou that make the outgoings of the morning and evening to
praise thee.

O Lord God of Hosts who is like unto thee: thy truth most mighty Lord is on
every side. Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord, there is none
that can do as thou do. * For thou art great and do wondrous things: thou
art God alone.

God is very greatly to be feared in the counsel of the Saints: and to be had
in reverence of all them that are round about him.

Righteousness and equity is in the habitation of thy seat: mercy and truth
shall go before thy face. * Glory and worship are before him: power and honor
are in his Sanctuary.

Thou Lord art the thing that I long for: thou art my hope even from my youth:
through thee have I been holden up ever since I was born: thou art he that took
me out of my mothers womb: my praise shall be always of thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

After this may be read some portion of holy Scripture out of the New
Testament, or out of the sapiential books of the Old. viz. Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, etc. because these are of great use to piety and to civil
conversation. Upon which when you have a while meditated; humbly composing your
self upon your knees, say as follows. Ejaculations.
My help stands in the Name of the Lord: who has made Heaven and Earth.

Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant: and I shall be safe.

Do well, O Lord, to them that be true of heart: and evermore mightily defend
them.

Direct me in thy truth and teach me: for thou art my Savior and my great
Master.

Keep me from sin and death eternal: and from my enemies visible and invisible.

Give me grace to live a holy life: and thy favor that I may dye a godly and
happy death.

Lord hear the prayer of thy servant: and give me thy holy Spirit.

The prayer.
O Eternal God, merciful and gracious, vouchsafe thy favor and thy blessing
to thy servant: let the love of thy mercies, and the dread and fear of thy
Majesty, make me careful and inquisitive to search thy will, and diligent to
perform it, and to persevere in the practices of a holy life, even till the
last of my days.

II.
KEep me, O Lord, for I am thine by creation; guide me, for I am thine by
purchase, thou have redeemed me by the blood of thy Son: and love me with the
love of a Father; for I am thy child by adoption and grace: let thy mercy
pardon my sins, thy providence secure me from the punishments and evils I have
deserved, and thy care watch over me; that I may never any more offend thee:
make me in malice to be a child; but in understanding, piety, and the fear of
God, let me be a perfect man in Christ, innocent and prudent, readily furnished
and instructed to every good work.

III.
KEep me, O Lord, from the destroying Angel, and from the wrath of God: let thy
anger never rise against me; but thy rod gently correct my follies and guide
me in thy ways, and thy staff support me in all sufferings and changes.
Preserve me from fracture of bones, from noisome, infections, and sharp
sicknesses, from great violences of Fortune and sudden surprises; keep all my
senses entire till the day of my death; and let my death be neither sudden,
untimely, nor unprovided: let it be after the common manner of men, having in
it nothing extraordinary, but an extraordinary piety, and the manifestation of
thy great and miraculous mercy.

IV.
LEt no riches ever make me forget my self; no poverty ever make me to forget
thee: Let no hope or fear, no pleasure or pain, no accident without, no
weakness within, hinder or discompose my duty, or turn me from the ways of
thy Commandments. O let thy Spirit dwell with me for ever, and make my soul
just and charitable, full of honesty, full of religion, resolute and constant
in holy purposes, but inflexible to evil. Make me humble and obedient,
peaceable and pious; let me never envy any man's good, nor deserve to be
despised my self; and if I be, teach me to bear it with meekness and charity.

V.
GIve me a tender conscience; a conversation discreet, and a^fable, modest and
patient, liberal and obliging body; a chaste and healthful, competency of
living according to my condition, contentedness in all estates, a resigned
will and mortified affections, that I may be as thou would have me, and my
portion may be in the lot of the righteous, in the brightness of thy
countenance, and the glories of eternity. Amen*

Holy is our God. * Holy is the Almighty. * Holy is the Immortal. Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God of Sabbath, have mercy upon me.

A form of Prayer for the evening, to be said by such who have not time, or
opportunity to say the public prayers appointed for this office.
I.
O Eternal God, Evening prayer.
Great Father of Men and Angels, who have established the Heavens and the Earth
in a wonderful order, making day and night to succeed each other: I make my
humble address to thy Divine Majesty, begging of thee mercy and protection
this night and ever. O Lord pardon all my sins, my light and rash words, the
vanity and impiety of my thoughts, my unjust and uncharitable actions, and
whatsoever I have transgressed against thee this day, or at any time before.
Behold, O God, my soul is troubled in the remembrance of my sins, in the
frailty and sinfulness of my flesh exposed to every temptation, and of it self
not able to resist any: Lord God of mercy I earnestly beg of thee to give me a
great portion of thy grace; such as may be sufficient, and effectual for the
mortification of all my sins and vanities and disorders; that as I have
formerly served my lust, and unworthy desires, so now I may give my self up
wholly to thy service, and the studies of a holy life.

II.
BLessed Lord, teach me frequently and sadly to remember my sins; and be thou
pleased to remember them no more; let me never forget thy mercies, and do thou
still remember to do me good. Teach me to walk always as in thy presence:
Ennoble my soul with great degrees of love to thee, and configne my spirit with
great fear, religion and veneration of thy holy Name and laws; that it may
become the great employment of my whole life to serve thee, to advance thy
glory, to root out all the accursed habits of sin, that in holiness of life,
in humility, in charity, in chastity, and all the ornaments of grace, I may by
patience wait for the coming of our Lord Jesus. Amen.

III.
Teach me, O Lord to number my days that I may apply my heart unto wisdom;
ever to remember my last end, that I may not dare to sin against thee: Let thy
holy Angels be ever present with me to keep me in all my ways from the malice
and violence of the spirits of darkness; from evil company, and the occasions
and opportunities of evil, from perishing in popular judgments, from all the
ways of sinful shame, from the hands of all mine enemies; from a sinful life,
and from despair in the day of my death: Then, O brightest Jesu, shine
gloriously upon me, let thy mercies and the light of thy Countenance sustain me
in all my agonies, weaknesses and temptations. Give me opportunity of a prudent
and spiritual Guide, and of receiving the holy Sacrament; and let thy loving
spirit so guide me in the ways of peace and safety, that with the testimony of
a good conscience, and the sense of thy mercies and refreshment, I may depart
this life in the unity of the Church, in the love of God, and a certain hope of
salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord and most blessed Savior. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

Another form of Evening Prayer, which may also be used at bedtime. Our
Father, etc.
I Will lift up my eyes unto the hills from whence comes my help. Psalm. 121


My help comes of the Lord which made heaven and earth.

He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: he that keeps thee will not slumber.

Behold, he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep.

The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.

The sun shall not smite thee by day: neither the moon by night.

The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul.

The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in: from this time forth
for evermore. Glory be to the Father, etc.

I.
VIsit I beseech thee, O Lord, this habitation with thy mercy, and me with thy
grace and salvation. Let thy holy Angels pitch their tents round about and
dwell here, that no illusion of the night may abuse me, the spirits of
darkness may not come near to hurt me, no evil or sad accident oppress me:
and let the eternal spirit of the Father dwell in my soul and body, filling
every corner of my heart with light and grace. Let no deed of darkness
overtake me; and thy blessing most blessed God be upon me for ever, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

II.
INto thy hands most blessed Jesu, I commend my soul and body, for thou have
redeemed both with thy most precious blood. So bless and sanctify my sleep
unto me, that it may be temperate, holy, and safe, a refreshment to my wearied
body to enable it so to serve my soul, that both may serve thee with a never
failing duty. O let me never sleep in sin or death eternal, but give me a
watchful and a prudent spirit, that I may omit no opportunity of serving thee,
that whether I sleep or wake, live or die, I may be thy servant and thy child:
that when the work of my life is done, I may rest in the bosom of my Lord, till
by the voice of the Archangel, the trump of God, I shall be awakened and called
to sit down and feast in the eternal supper of the Lamb. Grant this O Lamb of
God, for the honor of thy mercies and the glory of thy name, O most merciful
Savior and Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

III.
BLessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, who has sent his Angels, and
kept me this day from the destruction that walks at noon, and the arrow that
flies by day: and has given me his Spirit to restrain me from those evils to
which my own weaknesses, and my evil habits, and my unquiet enemies would
easily betray me. Blessed and for ever hallowed be thy name for that never
ceasing shower os blessing by which I live, and am content, and blessed, and
provided for in all necessities, and set forward in my duty and way to heaven.
* Blessing, honor, glory and power, be unto him that sits on the throne,
and to the Lamb for ever and ever. Amen.

Holy is our God, * Holy is the Almighty, Holy is the Immortal. Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God of Sabbath, have mercy upon me.

Ejaculations and short meditations to be used in the Night when we wake.
Stand in awe and sin not: Psalm. 4.
commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still. I will lay me down in
peace and sleep: for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety.

O Father of Spirits and the God of all flesh have mercy and pity upon all sick
and dying Christians, and receive the souls which thou have redeemed returning
unto thee.

Blessed are they that dwell in the heavenly Jerusalem: where there is no need
of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it: for the glory of God does
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. And there shall be no night
there, and they need no candle, for the Lord God gives them light, and they
shall reign for ever and ever. Revel 21.23.

Meditate on Jacobs wrestling with the Angel all night: be thou also
importunate with God for a blessing, and give not over till he has blessed
thee.

Meditate on the Angel passing over the children of Israel, and destroying the
Egyptians, for disobedience and oppression. Pray for the grace of obedience and
charity and for the divine protection.

Meditate on the Angel who destroyed in a night the whole army of the Assyrians
for fornication. Call to mind the sins of thy youth, the sins of thy bed; and
say with David, My reins chasten me in the night season, and my soul refuses
comfort. Pray for pardon and the grace of chastity.

Meditate on the agonies of Christ in the garden, his sadness and affliction
all that night; and thank and adore him for his love that made him suffer so
much for thee: and hate thy sins which made it necessary for the Son of God to
suffer so much.

Meditate on the four last things. 1. The certainty of death. 2. The terrors
of the day of judgment. 3. The joys of Heaven. 4. The pains of Hell, and the
eternity of both.

Think upon all thy friends which are gone before thee, and pray that God would
grant to thee to meet them in a joyful resurrection.

The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up.
Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness, looking for and hasting
unto the coming of the day of God. 2 Pet. 3.10.11.

Lord in mercy remember thy servant in the day of Judgment.

Thou shall answer for me, O Lord my God. In thee, O Lord have I trusted: let
me never be confounded. Amen.

I desire the Christian Reader to observe that all these offices or forms of
prayer (if they should be used every day) would not spend above an hour and a
half: but because so^e of them are double (and so but one of them to be used
in one day) it is much less: and by affording to God one hour in 24. thou
may have the comforts and rewards of devotion. But he that thinks this is
too much, either is very busy in the world, or very careless of heaven.
However, I have parted the prayers into smaller portions that he may use which,
and how many he please in any one of the forms.

Ad Sect. 2. A prayer for holy Intention in the beginning and pursuit of any
considerable action, as Study, Preaching, etc.
O Eternal God, who have made all things for man, and man for thy glory,
sanctify my body and soul, my thoughts and my intentions, my words and
actions, that whatsoever I shall think or speak, or do, may he by me designed
to the glorification of thy Name, and by thy blessing it may be effective and
successeful in the work of God, according as it can be capable. Lord turn my
necessities into virtue, the works of nature into the works of grace, by making
them orderly, regular, temperate, subordinate and profitable to ends beyond
their own proper efficacy: And let no pride or self-seeking, no covetousness
or revenge, no impure mixture or unhandsome purposes, no little ends and low
imaginations pollute my Spirit, and unhallow any of my words and actions: but
let my body be a servant of my spirit, and both body and spirit servants of
Jesus, that doing all things for thy glory here, I may be partaker of thy glory
hereafter thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Ad Sect. 3. A prayer meditating and referring to the divine presence. This
prayer is especially to be used in temptation to private sins.
O Almighty God infinite and eternal, thou fillest all things with thy
presence; thou art every where by thy essence and by thy power, in heaven by
Glory, in holy places by thy grace and favor, in the hearts of thy servants by
thy Spirit, in the consciences of all men by thy testimony and observation of
us: Teach me to walk always as in thy presence, to fear thy Majesty, to
reverence thy wisdom and omniscience, that I may never dare to commit any
undecency in the eye of my Lord and my Judge, but that I may with so much care
and reverence demean my self, that my Judge may not be my accuser, but my
Advocate: that I expressing the belief of thy presence here by careful walking,
may feel the effects of it in the participation of eternal glory thorough Jesus
Christ. Amen.

CHAP. II. Of Christian Sobriety.
Sect. I. Of sobriety in the general sense.
CHristian Religion in all its moral parts is nothing else but the Law of
Nature and great Reason, complying with the great necessities of all the world,
and promoting the great profit of all relations, and carrying us through all
accidents of variety of chances to that end which God has from eternal ages
purposed for all that live according to it, and which he has revealed in Jesus
Christ: and according to the Apostles A^ithmetik has but these three parts of
it. 1. Sobriety. 2. Justice. 3. Religion. For the grace of God bringing
salvation has appeared to all men; (...). 2.11, 12
teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live 1.
Soberly, 2. Righteously, and 3. Godly in this present world, looking for that
blessed hope and glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ. The first contains all our deportment in our personal and private
capacities, the f^ir treating of our bodies, and our spirits. The second
e^larges our duty in all relations to our Neighbor. The third contains the
offices of direct Religion, and intercourse with God.

Christian sobriety is all that duty that concerns our selves in the matter of
meat and drink and pleasures and thoughts, and it has within it, the duties of
1. Temperance. 2. Chastity. 3. Humility. 4. Modesty. 5. Content,

It is a using severity, denial, and frustration, of our appetite when it
grows unreasonable in any of these instances: the necessity of which we shall
to best purpose understand, by considering the evil consequences of sensuality,
effeminacy or fondness after carnal pleasures.

Evil consequents of voluptuousness or sensuality.
1. A longing after sensual pleasures is a dissolution of the spirit of a man,
and makes it loose, soft, and wandering, unapt for noble, wise, or spiritual
employments; because the principles upon which pleasure is chosen and pursued,
are sottish, weak, and unlearned, such as prefer the body before the soul, the
appetite before reason, sense before the Spirit, the pleasures of a short
abode, before the pleasures of eternity.

2. The nature of sensual pleasure is vain, empty, and unsatisfying, biggest
always in expectation, and a mere vanity in the enjoying, and leaves a sting
and thorn behind it, when it goes off. Our laughing if it be loud and high
commonly ends in a deep sigh, and all the instances of pleasure have a sting in
the tail, though they carry beauty on the face and sweetness on the lip.

3. Sensual pleasure is a great abuse to the Spirit of a man; being a kind of
fascination or witchcraft, blinding the understanding and enslaving the will.
And he that knows he is freeborn or redeemed with the blood of the Son of
God, (...). Arrian. c. 2. l. 1.
will not easily suffer the freedom of his soul to be entangled and rifled.

4. It is most contrary to the state of a Christian, whose life is a perpetual
exercise, (...), etc. Epist. c. 34
a wrestling and a warfare, to which, sensual pleasure disables him, by
yiedling to that enemy with whom he must strive if ever he will be crowned. And
this argument the Apostle intimated: He that striveth for masteries is
temperate in all things: 1 Cor. 9.25.
Now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown* but we an incorruptible.

5. It is by a certain consequence the greatest impediment in the world to
martyrdom; that being a fondness, this being a cruelty to the flesh: to which
a Christian man arriving by degrees must first have crucified the les^er
affections: for he that is overcome by little arguments of pain, will hardly
consent to lose his life with torments.

Degrees of sobriety.
Against this voluptuousness, sobriety is opposed in three degrees.

1. A despite or disaffection to pleasures, or a resolving against all
entertainment of the instances and temptations of sensuality, and it consists
in the internal faculties of will and understanding, decreeing and declaring
against them, disapproving and disliking them upon good reason, and strong
resolution.

2. A fight and actual war against all the temptations and offers of sensual
pleasure in all evil instances and degrees; and it consists in prayer, in
fasting, in cheap diet, and hard lodging, and laborious exercises, and avoiding
occasions, and using all arts and industry of fortifying the Spirit, and making
it ^evere, manly, and Christian.

Apoc. 2.17.
3. Spiritual pleasure is the highest degree of Sobriety, and in the same degree
in which we relish and are in love with spiritual delights, the hidden Manna,
with the sweetnesses of devotion, with the joys of thanksgiving, with
rejoycings in the Lord, with the comsorts of hope, with the delitiousnesse of
charity and almsdeeds, with the sweetness of a good conscience, with the
peace of meekness, and the felicities of a contented spirit: in the same
degree we disrelish and loath the husks of swinish lusts, and the parings of
the apples of Sodom: and the taste of sinful pleasures is unsavory as the
Drunkards vomit.

Rules for suppressing voluptuousness.
The precepts and advices which are of best and of general use in the curing of
sensuality are these.

1. Accustom thy self to cut off all superfluity in the provisions of thy life:
for our desires will enlarge beyond the present possession so long as all the
things of this world are unsatisfying: if therefore you suf^er them to extend
beyond the measures of necessity or moderated convenience, they will still
swell: but you reduce them to a little compass, when you make nature to be
your limit. (...) tum (...) desinant. (...)*
We must more take care that our desires should ceas^, then that they should be
satisfied: and therefore reducing them to narrow scantlings and small
proportions is the best instrument to redeem their trouble and prevent the
dropsy, because that is next to an universal denying them: it is certainly a
paring off from them all unreasonablenesse and irregularity. For whatsoever
covets unseemly things, L. 3 (...)* c. 12.
and is apt to swell to an inconvenient bulk, is to be chastened and tempered:
and such are sensuality, and a Boy, said the Philosopher.

2. Suppress your sensual desires in their first approach: for then they are
least, Fac^llus (...), qua^ (...) 86.
and thy faculties and election are stronger; but if they in their weakness
prevail upon thy strengths, there will be no resisting them when they are
increased, and thy abilities lessened. you shall scarce obtain of them to end,
if you suffer them to begin.

3. Divert them with some laudable employment, and take off their edge by
inadvertency, or a not attending to them. For since the faculties of a man
cannot at the same time with any sharpness attend to two objects, if you
employ your spirit upon a book or a bodily labor, or any innocent and
indifferent employment, you have no room left for the present trouble of a
sensual temptation. For to this sense it was that Alexander told the Queen of
Caria, (...).
that his Tutor Leonidas had provided two Cooks for him [Hard marches all
night, and a small dinner the next day:] these tamed his youthful aptnesses to
dissolution, so long as he eat of their provisions.

4. Look upon pleasures, not upon that side that is next the Sun, or where
they look beauteously, that is, as they come toward you to be enjoyed; for
then they paint, and smile, and dress themselves up in tinsel and glass, gems
and counterfeit imagery: but when thou have rifled and discomposed them with
enjoying their false beauties, voluptate^ ab^untes fe^la^ and paenitentia
plenas animis nostris nat^^a ^ubi^cit, quo minus c^pide repetantur. Senec.
and that they begin to go of^, then behold them in their nakedness and
weariness: L^ta veni^e Ven^s, tris^is abire so ^et.
See what a sigh and sorrow, what naked unhandsome proportions and a filthy
carcass they discover; and the next time they counterfeit, remember what you
have already discovered, and be no more abused. And I have known some wise
persons have advised to cure the passions and longings of their children by
letting them taste of every thing they passionately fancied: for they should be
sure to find less in it then they looked for, and the impatience of their
being denied would be loosened and made slack; and when our wishings are no
bigger then the thing deserves, and our usages of them according to our needs
(which may be obtained by try^ng what they are, and wha^ good they can do us)
we shall find in all pleas^res so little entertainment, that the vanity of the
possession will soon reprove the violence of the appetite. And if this
permission be in innocent instances, it may be of good use: But Solomon tried
it in all things, taking his fill of all pleasures: and soon grew weary of them
all. The same thing we may do by reason which we do by experience, if either we
will look upon pleasures as we are sure they will look when they go off, after
their enjoyment, or if we will credit the experience of those men who have
tasted them and loathed them.

5. Often consider, and contemplate the joys of heaven, that when they have
filled thy desires, which are the sails of the soul, thou may steer only
thither, and never more look back to Sodom. And when thy soul dwells above, and
looks down upon the pleasures of the World, they seem like things at distance,
little and contemptible, and men running after the satisfaction of their
sottish appetites seem foolish as fishes, thousands of them running after a
rotten worm that covers a deadly hook; or at the best but like children with
great noise pursuing a bubble rising from a wallnut shell, which ends sooner
then the noise.

6. To this, the example of Christ and his Apostles, of Moses and all the Wise
men of all ages of the world will much help: who understanding how to
distinguish good from evil, did choose a sad and melancholy way to feli^itie,
rather then the broad, pleasant and easy path to folly and misery.

But this is but the general. Its first particular is Temperance.

SECT. II. Of Temperance in Eating and Drinking.
SObriety is the bridle of the passions of desire, and Temperance is the bit
and curb of that bridle, (...).
a restraint put into a man's mouth, a moderate use of meat and drink, so as may
best consist with our health, and may not hinder but help the works of the soul
by its necessary supporting us, and ministering cheerfulness and refreshment.

Temperance consists in the actions of the soul principally: for it is a grace
that chooses natural means in order to proper and natural and holy ends: It is
exercised about eating and drinking, because they are necessary: but therefore
it permits the use of them only as they minister to lawful ends: It does not
eat and drink for pleasure but for need, and for refreshment, which is a part
or a degree of need. I deny not but eating and drinking may be, and in
healthful bodies always is with pleasure: because there is in nature no
greater pleasure, than that all the appetites which God has made should be
satisfied: and a man may choose a morsel that is pleasant, the less pleasant
being rejected as being less useful, less apt to nourish, or more agreeing
with an infirm stomach, or when the day is festival, by order, or by a private
joy. In all these cases it is permitted to receive a more free delight, and to
design it too, as the less principal: that is, that the chief reason why we
choose the more delicious, be the serving that end for which such refreshments
and choices are permitted. But when delight is the only end and rests in it
self, and dwells there long, then, eating and drinking is not a serving of God,
but an inordinate action; because it is not in the way to that end whether God
directed it. But the choosing of a delicate before a more ordinary dish is to
be done as other humane actions are, in which there are no degrees and precise
natural limits described, but a latitude is indulged: it must be done
moderately, prudently, and according to the accounts of wise, religious, and
sober men; and then God who gave us such variety of creatures, and our choice
to use which we will, may receive glory from our temperate use, and
thanksgiving, and we may use them indifferently without scruple, and a making
them to become snares to us, either by too licentious and studied use of them,
or too restrained and scrupulous fear of using them at all, but in such certain
circumstances in which no man can be sure he is not mistaken.

But temperance in meat and drink is to be estimated by the following measures.

Measures of Temperance in eating.
1. Eat not before the time, unless necessity, or charity, or any intervening
accident, which may make it reasonable and prudent, should happen. Remember it
had almost cost Jonathan his life because he tasted a little honey before the
sun went down, contrary to the Kings commandment, and although a great need
which he had, excused him from the sin of gluttony, yet it is inexcusable when
thou eatest before the usual time, and thrustest thy hand into the dish
unseasonably, out of greediness of the pleasure, and impatience of the delay.

2. Eat not hastily and impatiently, but with such decent and timely action,
that your eating be a humane act, subject to deliberation and choice, and that
you may consider in the eating: whereas he that eats hastily, cannot consider
particularly of the circumstances, degrees, and little accidents and chances
that happen in his meal; but may contract many little undecencies, and be
suddenly surprised.

3. Eat not delicately, or nicely, that is, be not troublesome to thy self or
others in the choice of thy meats, or the delicacy of thy sauces. It was
imputed as a sin to the sons of Israel, that they loathed Manna and longed for
flesh: the quails stuck in their nostrills, and the wrath of God fell upon
them. And for the manner of dressing, the sons of Eli were noted of indiscreet
curiosity: they would not have the flesh boiled, but raw that they might roast
it with fire. Not that it was a sin to eat it, or desire meat roasted; but that
when it was appointed to be boiled, they refused it; which declared an
intemperate and a nice palate. It is lawful in all senses to comply with a weak
and a nice stomach: but not with a nice and curious palate. When our health
requires it, that ought to be provided for; but not so, our sensuality and
intemperate longings. Whatsoever is set before you, eat; if it be provided for
you, you may eat it be it never so delicate; and be it plain and common, so it
be wholesome and fit for you, it must not be refused upon curiosity; for every
degree of that is a degree of intemperance. Happy and innocent were the ages of
our forefathers, Fo^lix initium prior aetas contenta d^lcibus arvis

Facileque se^a solebat jejunia solvere glande. ^oeth. l. 1. de consol.
Arbuteos ^erus, montanaque frag^a lege^ a^t.


who eat herbs and parched corn, and drank the pure stream, and broke their
fast with nuts and roots; and when they were permitted flesh, eat it only
dressed with hunger and fire; and the first sauce they had was bitter herbs,
and sometimes bread dipped in vinegar. But in this circumstance moderation is to
be reckoned in proportion to the present customs, to the company, to education,
and the judgment of honest and wise persons, and the necessities of nature.

4. Eat not too much: load neither thy stomach nor thy understanding. If thou
sit at a bountiful table, be not greedy upon it, and say not there is much meat
on it. Remember that a wicked Eye is an evil thing: and what is created more
wicked then an eye? Therefore it weepeth upon every occasion. Stretch not thy
hand whithersoever it looks, and thrust it not with him into the dish. A very
little is sufficient for a man well nurtured, and he fetches not his wind
short upon his bed.

Signs and effects of Temperance.
We shall best know that we have the grace of temperance by the following
signs, which are as so many arguments to engage us also upon its study and
practice.

1. A temperate man is modest; greediness is unmannerly and rude. And this is
intimated in the advice of the son of S^rach. When thou sit amongst many
reach not thy hand out first of all. ^cc^us. 3.17, 18
Leave off first for manners sake, and be not unsatiable lest thou offend. * 2
Temperance is accompanied with gravity of deportment: Cicero vocat temperan^ia^
o^nat^m vi^^, in quo decorum ^^lud and hones^um situm est.
greediness is gar^sh, and rejoices loosely at the sight of dainties.* 3.
Sound, but moderate sleep is its sign and its effect. Verse 2^
Sound sleep comes of moderate eating: he rises early and his wits are with
him. * 4 A spiritual joy and a devout prayer. 5. * A suppressed and seldom
anger. * 6. A command of our thoughts and passions. * 7. A seldom returning and
a never prevailing temptation. * 8. To which add, that a temperate person is
not curious of sauces and deliciousness. He thinks not much, and speaks not
often of meat and drink; has a healthful body, and long life, unless it be
hindered by some other accident; whereas to gluttony, ^bid.
the pain watching and choler, the pangs of the belly are continual company:
And therefore (...) said handsomely concerning the luxury of the Rhodians, They
built houses as if they were immortal, but they feasted as if they meant to
live but a little while. And An^ipater by his reproach of the old glutton
Demades well expressed the baseness of this sin, Plutarch. de cupid. divit.
saying, that Demades now old and always a glutton, was like a spent
sacrifice, nothing left of him but his belly and his tongue, all the man
besides, is gone.

Of Drunkenness.
But I desire that it be observed; that because intemperance in eating is not
so soon perceived by others as immoderate drinking, and the outward visible
effects of it are not either so notorious or so ridiculous, therefore gluttony
is not of so great disreputation amongst men as drunkenness: yet according to
its degree it puts on the greatness of the sin before God, and is most
strickly to be attended to, least we be surprised by our security and want of
diligence; and the intemperance is alike criminal in both, according as the
affections are either to the meat or drink. Gluttony is more uncharitable to
the body, and drunkenness to the soul, or the understanding part of man; and
therefore in Scripture is more frequently forbidden and declaimed against, then
the other: and sobriety has by use obtained to signify Temperance in drinking.

Drunkenness is an immoderate affection, and use of drink. That I call
immoderate, that is besides or beyond that order of good things, for which God
has given us the use of drink. The ends are; digestion of our meat,
cheerfulness and refreshment of our spirits, or any end of health; besides
which, if we go, or at any time beyond it, it is inordinate and criminal, it is
the vice of drunkenness. It is forbidden by our blessed Savior in these
words. [ Take heed to your selves lest at any time your hearts be overcharged
with surfeiting and drunkennesse] Surfeiting, Luke 2^ 34.
] that is the evil effects the sottishness and remaining stupidity of
habitual, or of the last nights drunkenness. For Christ forbids both the
actual and the habitual intemperance; not only the effect of it, but also the
affection to it: for in both there is sin. He that drinks but little, (...).
Schol. in Aristoph.

Idem fe^e apud Plutarch. vinolentia animi quandam r^missionem and levit^tem,
^brietas sutilitatem significat. Plutarch. de garrul.


if that little makes him drunk, and if he know beforehand his own infirmity,
is guilty of surfeiting, not of dru^kennesse. But he that drinks much and is
strong to bear it, and is not deprived of his reason violently, is guilty of
the sin of drunkenness. It is a sin not to prevent such uncharitable effects
upon the body and understanding: And therefore a man that loves not the drink
is guilty of surfeiting, if he does not watch to prevent the evil effect: and
it is a sin, and the greater of the two, inordinately to love or to use the
drink, though the surfeiting, or violence do not follow. Good therefore is the
counsel of the son of Syrach: Show not thy valiantness in wine; for wine has
destroyed many. Ecclus. 31.21.


Evil consequents to drunkenness.
The evils and sad consequents of drunkenness (the consideration of which are
as so many arguments to avoid the sin) are to this sense reckoned by the
writers of holy Scripture, Prove. 2^.2^. Ecclu^. 31.27.
and other wise personages of the world. 1. It causes woes and mischief,
wounds and sorrow, sin and shame Multa siciunt ^bri^ (...) postea sobrie^
pudet. Sene^.
; it makes bitterness of spirit, brawling and quarrelling, it increases rage
and lesseneth strength, it makes red eyes, and a loose and babbling tongue. 2.
It particularly ministers to lust, and yet disables the body; so that in effect
it makes man wanton as a Satyr, and impotent as age: And Solomon in enumerating
the evils of this vice adds this to the account: Thine eyes shall behold
strange women, and thy heart shall utter perverse things: Prove. 23.33
as if the drunkard were only desire, and then impatience, muttering and
enjoying like an Eunuch embracing a woman. 3. It besots and hinders the actions
of the understanding, making a man brutish in his passions, Insania^ come^ est
i^a, contubu^ (...) obriet^s.

Plutarch. -- Corpus enustum
Hestemis viciis (...) q^nque (...)
(...) est vuluntaria infania.
Senec.
and a fool in his reason; and differs nothing from madness, but that it is
voluntary, and so is an equal evil in nature, and a worse in manners. 4. It
takes off all the guards, and lets loose the reins of all those evils to which
a man is by his nature, or by his evil customs inclined, and from which he is
restrained by reason and severe principles. Drunkenness calls off the Watch
men from their towers, and then all the evils that can proceed from a loose
heart, and an untied tongue, and a dissolute spirit, and an unguarded,
unlimited will, all that we may put upon the accounts of drunkenness. 5. It
extinguisheth and quenches the Spirit of God: for no man can be filled with the
Spirit of God and with wine at the same time; And therefore Saint Paul makes
them exclusive of each other. Ephesians. 5.18.
Be not drunk with wine wherein is excess, but be filled with the Spirit: And
since Joseph's cup was put into Benjamins sack, no man has a divining gobler.
6. It opens all the Sanctuaries of Nature, and discovers the nakedness of the
soul, all its weaknesses and follies; it multiplies sins and discovers them; it
makes a man incapable of being a private friend, Prove. 31.4.
or a public Counselor. 7. It takes a man's soul into slavery and
imprisonment more then any vice whatsoever, (...). Philem.
because it disarms a man of all his reason and his wisdom, whereby he might be
cured, and therefore commonly grows it upon him with age: a drunkard being
still more a fool and less a man. I need not add any sad examples, since all
story and all ages have too many of them. Amnon was slain by his brother
Absalom, when he was warm and high with wine. Simon the High Priest and two of
his sons were slain by their brother at a drunken feast. Holofernes was drunk
when Judith slew him: and all the great things that Daniel spoke of Alexander
were drowned with the surfeit of one nights intemperance: (...) bibendi and
(...) S^hyphus p^^didit.
and the drunkenness of Noah and Lot are upon record to eternal ages, that in
those early instances, and righteous persons and less criminal drunkenness
then is that of Christians in this period of the world, God might show that
very great evils are prepared to punish this vice; no less then shame, and
slavery, and incest, the first upon Noah, the second upon one of his sons, and
the third in the person of Lot.

Signs of drunkenness.
But if it be enquired concerning the periods and distinct significations of
this crime, and when a man is said to be drunk? To this I answer, That
drunkenness is in the same manner to be judged as sickness. As every illness
or violence done to health in every part of its continuance is a part or degree
of sickness: so is every going off from our natural and common temper and our
usual severity of behavior, a degree of drunkenness. He is not only drunk
that can drink no more; for few are so; but he has sinned in a degree of
drunkenness who has done any thing toward it beyond his proper measure. But
its parts and periods are usually thus reckoned. 1. Apish gestures. 2. Much
talking. 3. Immoderate laughing. 4. Dullness of sense. 5. Scurrility, that is,
wanton, or jeering, or abusive language. 6. An useless understanding. 7.
Stupid sleep. 8. Epilepsies, or fallings, and reelings and beastly vomitings.
The least of these, even when the tongue begins to be untyed, is a degree of
drunkenness.

But that we may avoid the sin of intemperance in meats and drinks, besides the
former rules of measures, these counsels also may be useful.

Rules for obtaining Temperance.
1. Be not often present at feasts, nor at all in dissolute company, when it
may be avoided; for variety of pleasing objects steals away the heart of man:
and company is either violent or enticing; and we are weak or complying, or
perhaps desirous enough to be abused. But if you be unavoidably or indiscreetly
engaged, let not mistaken civilitie or good nature engage thee, either to the
temptation of staying (if thou understandest thy weakness) or the sin of
drinking inordinately.

2. Be severe in your judgment concerning your proportions, and let no
occasion make you enlarge far beyond your ordinary. For a man is surprised by
parts; and while he thinks one glass more will not make him drunk, that one
glass has disabled him from well discerning his present condition and
neighbor danger: while men think themselves wise they become fools: they think
they shall taste the aconite and not dye, or crown their heads with juice of
poppy and not be drowsy; and if they drink off the whole vintage, still they
think they can swallow another gobler. Senec. (...). Chi hi^ bev^^o turto il
mare (...) bear (...)
But remember this, when ever you begin to consider whether you may safely take
one draught more, it is then high time to give over: let that be accounted a
sign late enough to break off: for every reason to doubt, is a sufficient
reason to part the company.

3. Come not to table but when thy need invites thee: and if thou be in
health leave something of thy Appetite unfilled, something of thy natural heat
unimployed, that it may secure thy digestion, and serve other needs of nature
or the spirit.

4. Propound to thy self (if thou be in a capacity) a constant rule of
living, of eating and drinking; which though it may not be fit to observe
scrupulously, lest it become a snare to thy conscience, or endanger thy health
upon every accidental violence: yet let not thy rule be broken often nor much,
but upon great necessity and in small degrees.

5. Never urge any man to eat or drink beyond his own limits, and his own
desires. Nil interest favea^ s^eler^, an illud facia^. Sen^^.
He that does otherwise is drunk with his brothers surfeit, and reeles and
falls with his intemperance, that is, the sin of drunkenness is upon both their
scores, they both lie wallowing in the guilt.

6. Use S. Paul's instruments of Sobriety. Let us who are of the day be sober,
putting on the brestplate of faith and love, and for an helmet the hope of
Salvation. Faith, Hope, and Charity are the best weapons in the world to fight
against intemperance. The faith of the Mahometans forbids them to drink wine,
and they abstain religiously, as the sons of Rechab: and the faith of Christ
forbids drunkenness to us; and therefore is infinitely more powerful to
suppress this vice, when we remember that we are Christians, and to abstain
from drunkenness and gluttony is part of the Faith and Discipline of Jesus,
and that with these vices, neither our love to God, nor our hopes of heaven can
possibly consist; and therefore when these enter the heart, the other goes out
at the mouth: for this is the Devil that is cast out by fasting and prayer,
which are the proper actions of these graces.

7. As a pursuance of this rule, it is a good advice, that as we begin and end
all our times of eating with prayer and thanksgiving: so at the meal we remove
and carry up our mind and Spirit to the Celestial table, often thinking of
it, and often desiring it; that by enkindling thy desire to heavenly banquets,
thou may be indifferent and less passionate for the Earthly.

8. Mingle discourses pious, or in some sense profitable, and in all senses
charitable and innocent, with thy meal, as occasion is ministered.

9. Let your drink so serve your meat, as your meat does your health; that it
be apt to convey and digest it, and re^resh the spirits; but let it never go
beyond such a refreshment as may a little lighten the present load of a sad or
troubled spirit; never to inconvenience, lightness, sottishness, vanity, or
intemperance: and know that the loosing the bands of the tongue; and the very
first dissolution of its duty, is one degree of the intemperance.

10. In all cases be careful that you be not brought under the power of such
things which otherwise are lawful enough in the use. All things are lawful for
me, but I will not be brought under the power of any thing, said Saint Paul.
And to be perpetually longing, and impatiently desirous of any thing, so that a
man cannot abstain from it, is to lose a man's liberty, and to become a servant
of meat and drink, or smoke: And I wish this last instance were more considered
by persons who little suspect themselves guilty of intemperance, though their
desires are strong and impatient, and the use of it perpetual and unreasonable
to all purposes, but that they have made it habitual, and necessary as
intemperance it self is made to some men.

11. Use those advices which are prescribed as instruments to suppress
voluptuousness in the foregoing Section.

Of Chastity.
Reader stay, and read not the advices of the following Section, unless thou
have a chaste spirit, or desire to be chaste, or at least, art apt to
consider whether you ought or no. For there are some spirits so Atheistical,
and some so wholly possessed with a spirit of uncleanness, that they turn the
most prudent and chaste discourses into dirt and filthy apprehensions: like
choleric stomachs changing their very Cordials and medicines into bitterness;
and in a literal sense turning the grace of God into wantonness: They study
cases of conscience in the matter of carnal sins, not to avoid, but to learn
ways how to offend God and pollute their own spirits: and search their houses
with a Sunbeam that they may be instructed in all the corners of nastinesse. I
have used all the care I could, in the following periods, that I might neither
be wanting to assist those that need it, nor yet minister any occasion of fancy
or vainer thoughts to those that need them not. If any man will snatch the pure
taper from my hand, and hold it to the Devil, he will only burn his own
fingers, but shall not rob me of the reward of my care and good intention,
since I have taken heed how to express the following duties, and given him
caution how to read them.

CHastity is that duty which was mystically intended by GOD in the Law of
Circumcision. It is the circumcision of the heart, the cutting off all
superfluity of naughtiness, and a suppression of all irregular desires in the
matter of sensual or carnal pleasure. I call all desires irregular and sinful
that are not sanctified; 1. By the holy institution or by being within the
protection of marriage. 2. By being within the order of nature. 3. By being
within the moderation of Christian modesty. Against the first are, fornication,
adultery, and all voluntary pollutions of either sex. Against the second are
all unnatural lusts, and incestuous mixtures. Against the third is all
immoderate use of permitted beds; concerning which, judgment is to be made as
concerning meats and drinks; there being no certain degree of frequency or
intension prescribed to all persons, but it is to be ruled as the other actions
of a man, by proportion to the end, by the dignity of the person in the honor
and severity of being a Christian, and by other circumstances, of which I am to
give account.

Chastity is that grace which forbids and restrains all these, keeping the body
and soul pure in that state in which it is placed by God, whether of the single
or of the married life. Concerning which our duty is thus described by S. Paul.
1 These. 3.4, 5.
[For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain
from fornication: that every one of you should know how to possess his vessel
in sanctification and honor: Not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the
Gentiles which know not God.

Chastity is either abstinence or continence. Abstinence is that of Virgins or
Widows: Continence of married persons. Chaste marriages are honorable and
pleasing to God: Widowhood is pitiable in its solitariness and loss, but
amiable and comely when it is adorned with gravity and purity, and not sullied
with remembrances of the passed license, nor with present desires of returning
to a second bed. But Virginity is a life of Angels, the enamel of the soul, the
huge advantage of religion, Virginitas e^t in (...) corruptionis perp^^ua
^^^^tatio. S. Aug. l. d^ virg. c. 13.
the great opportunity for the retirements of devotion: and being empty of
cares, it is full of prayers: being unmingled with the World, it is apt to
converse with God: and by not feeling the warmth of a too forward and indulgent
nature, flames out with holy fires, till it be burning like the Cherubim and
the most extasied order of holy and unpolluted Spirits.

Natural virginity of it self is not a state more acceptable to God: but that
which is chosen and voluntary in order to the conveniences of Religion and
separation from worldly incombrances, is therefore better then the married
life; not that it is more holy, but that it is a freedom from cares, an
opportunity to spend more time in spiritual employments; it is not allayed with
businesses and attendances upon lower affairs: and if it be a chosen condition
to these ends; it contains in it a victory over lusts, and greater desires of
Religion, and self-denial, and therefore is more excellent then the married
life, in that degree in which it has greater religion, and a greater
mortification, a less satisfaction of natural desires, and a greater fullness
of the spiritual: and just so is to expect that little coronet or special
reward which God has prepared (extraordinary and besides the great Crown of
all faithful souls) for those who have not defiled themselves with women, Apoc.
14 4. (...). 56.45.
but follow the Virgin Lamb for ever.

But some married persons even in their marriage do better please God then some
Virgins in their state of virginity: They by giving great example of conjugal
affection, by preserving their faith unbroken, by educating children in the
fear of God, by patience and contentedness, and holy thoughts and the exercise
of virtues proper to that state, do not only please God, but do it in a higher
degree then those Virgins whose piety is not answerable to their great
opportunities and advantages.

However, married persons, and Widows, and Virgins are all servants of God and
coheirs in the inheritance of Jesus, if they live within the restraints and
laws of their particular estate, chastely, temperately, justly, and religiously.

The evil consequents of Uncleanness.
The blessings and proper effects of chastity we shall best understand by
reckoning the evils of uncleanness and carnality.

1. Uncleanness of all vices is the most shameful. Prove. ^. 23.
The eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight, saying; No eye shall see
me: and disguiseth his face. In the dark they dig through houses which they had
marked for themselves in the day time: Job. 24.^5.
they know not the light: for the morning is to them as the shadow of death. He
is swift as the waters; their portion is cursed in the earth, (...).
he beholds not the way of the vineyards. Shame is the eldest daughter of
Uncleanness.

2. The appetites of uncleanness are full of cares and trouble, and its
fruition is sorrow and repentance. 2 (...) 6
The way of the adulterer is hedged with thorns: Appetitu^ fornicati^^ is
anxietas est: s^tietas vero peni^entia. S* Hieron.
full of fears and jealousies, burning desires and impatient waitings,
tediousness of delay, and sufferance of affronts, and amazements of discovery.

3. Most of its kinds are of that condition, that they involve the ruin of
two souls: and he that is a fornicatour or adulterous, steals the soul as well
as dishonours the body of his Neighbor: and so it becomes like the sin of
falling Lucifer, who brought a part of the stars with his tail from Heaven.

4. Of all carnal sins it is that alone which the Devil takes delight to
imitate and counterfeit; communicating with Witches and impure persons in no
corporal act, but in this only.

5. Uncleanness with all its kinds is a vice which has a professed enmity
against the body. 1 Cor. 6.18:
Every sin which a man does is without the body, but he that commits
fornication sins against his own body.

6. Uncleanness is hugely contrary to the spirit of Government by embasing the
spirit of a man, (...).
making it effeminate, sneaking, soft, and foolish, without courage, without
confidence. David felt this after his folly with Bathsheba: he fell to unkingly
arts and stratagems to hide the crime, and he did nothing but increase it; and
remaind timorous and poor spirited, till he prayed to God once more to
establish him with a free and a Princely spirit. Spiritu p^i^cipali (...)
consir^^^, P. 51.
And no superior dare strictly observe discipline upon his charge, if he has
let himself loose to the shame of incontinence.

7. The Gospel has added two arguments against uncleanness which were never
before used, nor indeed could be, since GOD has given the holy Spirit to them
that are baptized, and rightly confirmed, and entered into covenant with him,
our bodies are made temples of the holy Ghost in which he dwells: and therefore
uncleanness is Sacrilege and defiles a Temple. It is S. Paul's argument [ Know
ye not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost? 1 Cor. ^. 6.1^. 1 Co^.
3.^.17.
] and [ He that defiles a Temple, him will God destroy. Therefore Glorify God
in your bodies, that is, flee fornication.]

To which for the likeness of the argument add, That our bodies are members of
Christ, and therefore God forbid that we should take the members of Christ and
make them members of a harlot: So that uncleanness dishonours Christ, and
dishonours the holy Spirit: it is a sin against God, and in this sense a sin
against the Holy Ghost.

8. The next special argument which the Gospel ministers especially against
adultery, E^hes. 5.32.
and for preservation of the purity of marriage, is that [Marriage is by Christ
hallowed into a mystery to signify the Sacramental and mystical union of
Christ and his Church. He therefore that breaks this knot, which the Church and
their mutual faith has tied, and Christ has knit up into a mystery,
dishonours a great rite of Christianity, of high, spiritual and excellent
signification.

9. S. Gregory reckons uncleanness to be the parent of these monsters:
Blindness of mind, Mor. 1.^^
inconsideration, precipitancy or giddiness in actions self love, hatred of
God, love of the present pleasures, a despite or despair of the joys of
religion here, and of Heaven hereafter. Whereas a pure mind in a chaste body is
the Mother of wisdom and deliberation, sober counsels, and ingenuous actions,
open deportment, and sweet carriage, sincere principles, and unprejudicate
understanding, love of God, and selfdenyall, peace and confidence, holy prayers
and spiritual comfort, and a pleasure of Spirit infinitely greater then the
sottish and beastly pleasures of unchastity. S. Cyprian de bono pucheitiae
For to overcome pleasure is the greatest pleasure, and no victory is greater
then that which is gotten over our lusts and filthy inclinations.

10. Add to all these, the public dishonesty and disreputation that all the
Nations of the world have cast upon adulterous and unhallowed embraces.
Abimelech to the men of Gerar made it death to meddle with the wife of Isaac:
and Judah condemned Thamar to be burnt for her adulterous conception: and God,
besides the Law made to put the adulterous person to death, did constitute a
settled and constant miracle to discover the adultery of a suspected woman,
Numb. ^.14.
that her bowels should burst with drinking the waters of Jealousy. The
Egyptian Law was to cut off the nose of the adulteress, and the offending part
of the adulterer. The Locrians put out the adulterers both eyes. The Germans
(as Tacitus reports) placed the Adulteress amidst her kindred naked, and shaved
her head, and caused her husband to beat her with clubs thorough the city. The
Gortinaeans crowned the man with wool to shame him for his effeminacy: and the
Cumani caused the woman to ride upon an ass naked and hooted at: (...)
and for ever after called her by an appellative of scorn [A rider upon the
asse] All nations barbaro^s and civil agreeing in their general design of
rooting so dishonest and shameful vice from under heaven.

The middle Council. Tribur. ^. 46. Council. ^urel. 1. ^ub Clodavaen.
ages of the Church were not pleased that the Adulteress should be put to
death: but in the primitive ages the Cod. de adulteriis. ad leg^m (...) 1. and
Cod. Thend. de adulteriis C. placuit.
civil Laws by which Christians were then governed, gave leave to the wronged
husband to kill his adulterous wife, if he took her in the fact: but because it
was a privilege indulged to men, rather than a direct detestation of the
crime, a consideration of the injury rather then of the uncleanness, therefore
it was soon altered: but yet has caused an inquiry, whether is worse, the
Adultery of the man or the woman.

The resolution of which case in order to our present affair, is thus, In
respect of the person, the fault is greater in a man then in a woman, who is of
a more plyant and easy spirit, and weaker understanding, and has nothing to
supply the unequal strengths of men, but the defensative of a passive nature
and armor of modesty, which is the natural ornament of that sex. And it is
unjust that the man should demand chastity and severity from his wife, ^
which himself will not observe toward her, said the good Emperor Antoninus:
It is as if the man should persuade his wife to fight against those enemies to
which he had yielded himself a prisoner. 2. In respect of the effects and evil
consequents, the adultery of the woman is worse, as bringing bastardy into a
family, and disinherisons or great injuries to the Lawful children, and
infinite violations of peace, and murders, and divorces, and all the effects of
rage and madness. 3. But in respect of the crime, and as relating to God they
are equal, intolerable, and damnable: And the Church anciently refused to
admit such persons to the holy Communion, until they had done seven years
penances in fasting, in sackcloth, in severe inflictions and instruments of
chastity and sorrow, according to the discipline of those ages.

Acts of chastity in general.
The actions and proper offices of the grace of chastity in general are these.

1. To resist all unchaste thoughts; at no hand entertaining pleasure in the
unfruitful fancies and remembrances of uncleanness; although no definite
desire or resolution be entertained.

2. At no hand to entertain any desire, or any fantastic, imaginative loves,
though by shame, -- Casso saltem delect^mine, amare quod potiri non licet.
Poeta.

Patellas luxuriae oculos dixit Isidorus, (...), al us quidam.

Time videre unde possis cadere, and noli fieri pe^ver^a simplicitate securus.
S. Aug.


or disability, or other circumstance they be restrained from act.

3. To have a chaste eye and hand: for it is all one with what part of the body
we commit adultery: and if a man lets his eye loose, and enjoyes the lust of
that, he is an adulterer. Look not upon a woman to lust after her. And
supposing all the other members restrained, yet if the eye be permitted to
lust, the man can no otherwise be called chaste, then he can be called severe
and mortified, that sits all day seeing plays and revellings, and out of
greediness to fill his eye, neglects his belly: There are some vessels which
if you offer to lift by the belly or bottom you cannot stir them, but are soon
removed if you take them by the ears. It matters not with which of your members
you are taken and carried off from your duty and severity.

4. To have a heart and mind chaste and pure: that is, detesting all
uncleanness; disliking all its motions, past actions, circumstances,
likenesses, discourses: and this ought to be the chastity of Virgins and
Widows, of old persons and Eunuchs especially, and generally of all men
according to their several necessities.

6. To Discourse chastely and purely, Sp. Minucius Pontisex Posthumiu^ monuit*
(...) verbis vitae castimoniam non ^aeq^antibus ut^r^ tur Plutarch. de cap c. a
inim utilit.
with great care declining all undecencies of language, chastening the tongue,
and restraining it with grace, as vapors of wine are restrained with a bunch
of myrrh.

6. To disapprove by an after act all involuntary and natural pollutions: for
if a man delights in having suffered any natural pollution, and with pleasure
remember it, he chooses that which was in it self involuntary: and that which
being natural was innocent, becoming voluntary is made sinful.

7. They that have performed these duties and parts of Chastity, will certainly
abstain from all exterior actions of uncleanness: those noonday and
midnight Devils, those lawless and ungodly worshippings of shame and
uncleanness; whose birth is in trouble, whose growth is in folly, and whose
end is in shame.

But besides these general acts of Chastity which are common to all states of
men and women, there are some few things proper to the severals.

Acts of virginal Chastity.
1. Virgins must remember that the virginity of the body is only excellent in
order to the purity of the soul: who therefore must consider that since they
are in some measure in a condition like that of angels, it is their duty to
spend much of their time in Angelical employment: for in the same degree that
Virgins live more spiritually then other persons, in the same degree is their
virginity a more excellent state: But else it is no better then that of
involuntary or constrained Eunuchs; a misery and a trouble, or else a mere
privation, as much without excellency as without mixture.

2. Virgins must contend for a singular modesty; whose first part must be an
ignorance in the distinction of sexes, or their proper instruments: or if they
accidentally be instructed in that, it must be supplied with an inadvertency or
neglect of all thoughts and remembrances of such difference: and the following
parts of it, must be pious and chaste thoughts, holy language, and modest
carriage.

3. Virgins must be retired and unpublick: for all freedom and looseness of
society is a violence done to virginity; not in its natural, but in its moral
capacity: that is, it looses part of its severity, strictness and opportunity
of advantages by publishing that person, whose work is religion, whose company
is Angels, whose thoughts must dwell in heaven, and separate from all mixtures
of the world.

4. Virgins have a peculiar obligation to charity: for this is the virginity of
the soul; as purity, integrity, and separation is of the body, which doctrine
we are taught by Saint Peter. Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the
truth thorough the spirit unto unfaigned love of the brethren: ^. Pet. 1.22.
see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently. For a Virgin that
consecrates her body to God, and pollutes her spirit with rage, or impatience,
or inordinate anger, gives him what he most hates, a most foul and defiled soul.

5. These rules are necessary for Virgins that offer that state to God, and
mean not to enter into the state of marriage: for they that only wait the
opportunity of a convenient change, are to steer themselves by the general
rules of Chastity.

Rules for Widows or vidual Chastity.
For Widows, the fontinel of whose desires has been opened by the former
permissions of the marriage bed, they must remember.

1. That God has now restrained the former license, bound up their eyes, and
shut up their heart into a narrower compass, and has given them sorrow to be
a bridle to their desires. A Widow must be a mourner; and she that is not,
cannot so well secure the chastity of her proper state.

2. It is against public honesty to marry another man so long as she is with
child by her former Husband: and of the same fame it is in a lesser
proportion, to marry within the year of mourning: but anciently it was infamous
for her to marry, till by common account the body was dissolved into its first
principle of earth.

3. A Widow must restrain her memory and her fancy: not recalling or recounting
her former permissions and freer licenses with any present delight: for then
she opens that sluice which her Husbands death and her own sorrow have shut up.

4. A Widow that desires her widowhood should be a state pleasing to God, must
spend her time as devoted Virgins should, in fastings and prayers, and charity.

5. A Widow must forbid her self to use those temporal solaces, which in her
former estate were innocent, but now are dangerous.

Rules sor married persons, or matrimonial chastity.
Concerning married persons; besides the keeping of their mutual faith Nifi
fundamenta stirpis iacta sint probe. Mis^ros ne^esse est esse (...) posteros.
Eu^^.
, and contract with each other, these particulars are useful to be observed.

1. Although their mutual endearments are safe within the protection of
marriage, yet they that have Wives or Husbands must be as though they had them
not; that is, they must have an affection greater to each other then they have
to any person in the world, but not greater then they have to God: but that
they be ready to part with all interest in each others person rather then sin
against God.

Non d^b^mu^ eode^ ^mico uti and ^dula^e* ^ec eadem ut uxore and soorto. Plut.
con^jug. pre^^pt,
2. In their permissions and license they must be sure to observe the order of
Nature, and the ends of God. He is an ill Husband that uses his Wife as a man
treats a Harlot, having no other end but pleasure. Concerning which our best
rule is, that although in this, as in eating and drinking there is an appetite
to be satisfied, which cannot be done without pleasing that desire, yet since
that desire and satisfaction was intended by Nature for other ends, they should
never be separate from those ends, but always be joined with all or one of
these ends; with a desire of children, or to avoid fornication, or to lighten
and ease the cares and sadnesses of household affairs, or to endear each other:
but never with a purpose either in act or desire to separate the sensuality
from these ends which hallow it. Onan did separate his act from its proper end,
and so ordered his embraces that his Wife should not conceive, and God punished
him.

3. Married persons must keep such modesty and decency of treating each other,
Non recte ^st ab H^rodeto dictum simul cum tunl^^ mulie^em ^o^^cun^iam exue^e.
Qu^^ n. casta est posita vest, verecun^iam ^ju^ loco induit, maximaque
verecundia con^u^e^ ^essera maximi iuvicem amori^ utuntur. Plut. conju^.
precept.
that they never force themselves into high and violent lusts, with arts and
misbecoming devices: always remembering that those mixtures are most innocent
which are most simple, and most natural, most orderly and most safe.

4. It is a duty of matrimonial chastity to be restrained and temperate in the
use of their lawful pleasures: concerning which although no universal Rule can
antecedently be given to all persons, any more then to all bodies one
proportion of meat and drink: yet married persons are to estimate the degree of
their license according to the following proportions. * 1. That it be moderate
so as to consist with health. * 2. That it be so ordered as not to be too
expensive of time, that precious opportunity of working out our salvation. * 3.
That when duty is demanded it be always paid (so far as is in our powers and
election) according to the foregoing measures. * That it be with a temperate
affection, without violent transporting desires, or too sensual applications.
Concerning which a man is to make judgment by proportion to other actions, and
the severities of his religion, and the sentences of sober and wise persons.
For it is a sad truth, that many married persons thinking that the floodgates
of liberty are set wide open without measures or restraints (so they sail in
that channel) have felt the final rewards of intemperance and lust, by their
unlawful using of lawful permissions. Only let each of them be temperate, and
both of them be modest. Socrates was wont to say, that those women to whom
Nature had not been indulgent in good features and colors, should make it up
themselves with excellent manners; and those who were beautiful and comely,
should be careful that so fair a body be not polluted with unhandsome usages.
To which Plutarch adds; that a wife if she be unhandsome, should consider, how
extremely ugly she should be, De conjug ^raec^pt,
if she wanted modesty: but if she be handsome, let her think how gracious that
beauty would be if she superads chastity.

5. Married persons by consent are to abstain from their mutual entertainments
at solemn times of devotion: not as a duty of it self necessary, but as being
the most proper act of purity which in their condition they can present to God:
and being a good advantage for attending their preparation to the solemn duty,
and their demeanor in it. It is S. Paul's counsel, that by consent for a time
they should abstain, that they may give themselves to fasting and prayer. 1
Cor. 7.5.
And though when Christians did receive the holy Communion every day, it is
certain they did not abstain, but had children: yet when the Communion was more
seldom, Hoe etiam ex m^re C^ristia^orum. Ter^ul. Suadens fa^minis Chris^ianis
ne (...) nubant: ait* Quis denique s^l^^ni^a^ Paschae ab (...) ^ecur^^
^^^^nebit* Tertul. ad (...). 2 ^. Et ex m^re etiam ^ontilium. P^ut (...). Nubis
a^t^m si le^es civit^tit re^te colimus cavendum est, ne ad ^empla and
sacri^ici^ acce^samu^, (...) ante (...) Itaque expedit (...) et somno inter
ecto, (...) interva^^o adhibito, mundos ruisum quasi de inte^ro, et a^ novum
diem nova cogita^tes (ut (...) Demo^ritus) surgere.
they did with religon abstain from the marriage bed during the time of their
solemn preparatory devotions, as anciently they did, from eating and drinking
till the solemnity of the day was past.

6. It were well if married persons would in their penitential prayers, and in
their general confessions suspect themselves, and accordingingly a^k a general
pardon for all their undecencies and more passionate applications of themselves
in the offices of marriage: that what is lawful and honorable in its kind may
not be sullied with imperfect circumstances; or if it be, it may be made clean
again by the interruption and recallings of such a repentance of which such
uncertain parts of action are capable.

But because of all the dangers of a Christian, none more pressing and
troublesome then the temptations to lust, no enemy more dangerous then that of
the ^lesh, no accounts greater then what we have to reckon for at the audit of
Conc^piscence, therefore it concerns all that would be safe from this death to
arm themselves by the following rules to prevent, or to cure all the wounds of
our flesh made by the poisoned arrows of Lust.

Remedies against uncleanness.
1. When a temptation of Just assaults thee, Contra ^^bidini^ i^pe^um
apprehenda fugam fi vis obtine^^ vict^^^iam. S. Aug.
do not resist it by heaping up arguments against it, and disputing with it,
considering its offers, and its danger, but ^^ie from it, that is, think not at
all of it; lay aside all consideration concerning it, and turn away from it,
Nella quer^^ d' amor chi fug^ (...).
by any severe and laudable thought or business. S. Hierome very wittily
reproves the Gentile superstition, who pictured the Virgin Deityes armed with a
shield and lance, as if chastity could not be defended without war and direct
contention. No; this enemy is to be treated otherwise. If you hear it speak,
though but to dispute with it, it ruins you; and the very arguments, you go
about to answer, leave a relish upon the tongue. A man may be burned if he goes
near the fire, though but to quench his house; and by handling pitch, though
but to draw it from your cloths, you defile your ^ingers.

2 Avoid idleness, and fill up all the spaces of thy time with severe and
useful employment: for lust usually creepes in at those emptinesses, where the
soul is unimployed and the body is at ease. For no easy, healthful, and idle
person was ever chaste, if he could be tempted. But of all employments, bodily
labor is most useful and of greatest benefit for the driving away this Devil.

3 Give no entertainment to the beginnings, the first motions and secret
whispers of the spirit of impurity. For if you totally suppress it, it dies: if
you permit the furnace to breath its smoke and flame out at any vent, it will
rage to the consumption of the whole. This cockatrice is soonest crushed in the
shell, but if it grows, it turns to a serpent, and a Dragon, and a Devil.

4 Corporal mortification and hard usages of our body has by all ages of the
Church bin an approv d remedy against the spirit of fornication. A spare diet,
and a thin course table, seldom refreshment, frequent fasts, not violent and
interrupted with returns to ordinary feeding, but constantly little,
unpleasant, of wholesome but sparing nourishment: For by such cutting off the
provisions of victual we shall weaken the strengths of our Enemy. To which if
we add, lyings upon the ground, painful postures in prayer, reciting our
devotions with our arms extended at full length, like Moses praying against
Amalek, o^ our blessed SAVIOR hanging upon his painful bed of sorrows, the
Cross; and (if the lust be upon us and sharply tempting) by inflicting any
smart to overthrow the strongest passion by the most violent pain, we shall
find great ease for the present, and the resolution and apt sufferance against
the future danger. And this was Saint Paul's remedy, In vira S: Paul's
I bring my body under; he used some rudenesses toward it. But it was a great
nobleness of chastity which S. Hierome reports of a Son of the King of
Nicomedia, who being tempted upon flowers and a perfumed bed with a soft
violence, but yet tied down to the temptation* and solicited with
circumstances of Asian Luxury by an impure Curresan; least the easiness of his
posture should abuse him, spit out his tongue into her face: to represent that
no virtue has cost the Saints ^enedictus i^ spini^ se volutavit. S.
Martinianus faciem et manus us^it. S. Johannes cogno n^nto Bonus, calam^s
acuto^ inter ungue^ et carnem digitoru^ in^rusit. S. Theocti^^^ in sylvis more
ferarum vixit ne iuter (...). ^ollueretur.
so much, as this of Chastity.

5. Fly from all occasions, temptations, loosenesses of company, Balls and
Revellings, undecent mixtures of wanton dancings, idle talk, private society
with stranger women, starings upon a beauteous face, the company of women that
are singers, amorous gestures, garish and wanton dressings, feasts and liberty,
banquets and perfumes, which are made to persecute chastity; some of these
being the very Prologues to lust, and the most innocent of them being but like
condited or pickled Mushroms, which if carefully corrected, (...) che non mi
scalda non vogl^o them Scotti.
and seldom tasted, may be harmless, but can never do good: Ever remembering
that it is easier to dye for chastity, then to live with it; and the Hangman
could not extort a consent from some persons, from whom a Lover would have
entreated it. For the glory of chastity will easily overcome the rudeness of
fear and violence; but easiness and softness, and smooth temptations creep
in, and like the Sun make a maiden lay by her vail and robe, which persecution
like the Northern wind, made her hold fast and clap close about her.

6. He that will secure his chastity, mus^ first cure his pride and his rage.
For oftentimes lust is the punishment of a proud man, to tame the vanity of his
pride by the shame and affronts of unchastity: and the same intemperate heat
that makes anger, does enkindle lust.

7. If thou be assaulted with an unclean Spirit, trust not thy self alone,
but run forth into company, whose reverence and modesty may suppress, or
whose society may divert thy thoughts: and a perpetual witness of thy
conversation is of especial use against this vice, which evaporates in the open
air like Camphyre, being impatient of light and witnesses.

8. Use frequent and earnest prayer to the King of Purities, the first of
Virgins, the eternal GOD, who is of an essential purity* that he would be
pleased to reprove and cast out the unclean Spirit. For besides the blessings
of prayer by way of reward, it has a natural virtue to restrain this vice:
because a prayer against it, is an unwillingnesse to act it; and so long as we
heartily pray against it, our desires are secured, and then th^^ Devil has no
power. This was S. Paul's other remedy. [ For this cause I besought the Lord
thrice.]

9. Hither bring in succor from consideration of the Divine presence, and of
his holy Angels, meditation of Death, and the passions of CHRIST upon the
Cross, imitation of his purities, and of the Virgin Mary his unspotted and
holy Mother, and of such eminent Saints who in their generations were burning
and shining lights, unmingled with such uncleanness which defile the soul,
and who now follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

10. These remedies are of universal e^ficacy in all cases extraordinary and
violent: Da^^^ (...) opera ut m^trimunio devin. ciantur. quod est tutissimum
^^ventu^^^ vinculu^* Plut. (...) educ. lib.
but in ordinary and common, the remedy which GOD has provided, that is,
Honorable marriage, has a natural efficacy, besides a virtue by Divine
blessing, to cure the inconveniences which otherwise might a^flict persons
temperate and sober.

Sect. 4. Of Humility.
HUmility is the great Ornament and Jewel of Christian Religion; that whereby
it is distinguished from all the wisdom of the world; it not having been
taught by the wise men of the Gentiles; but first put into a discipline, and
made part of a religion by our Lord Jesus Christ, who propounded himself
imitable by his Disciples so signally in nothing, as in the twinne sisters of
Meekness and Humility. Learn of me for I am meek and humble, and ye shall
find rest unto your souls.

For all the World, all that we are, and all that we have; our bodies and our
souls, our actions and our sufferings, our conditions at home, our accidents
abroad, our many sins, and our seldom virtues are as so many arguments to
make our souls dwell low in the deep valleys of Humility.

Arguments against Pride by way of Consideration.
1. Our Body is weak and impure, sending out more uncleanness from its
several sinkes then could be endured if they were not necessary and natural:
and we are forced to pass that through our mouths, which as soon as we see
upon the ground, we loathe like rottenness and vomiting.

2. Our strength is inferior to that of many Beasts, and our infirmities so
many that we are forced to dress and tend Horses and Asses, that they may help
our needs, and relieve our wants.

3. Our beauty is in color inferior to many flowers, and in proportion of
parts it is better then nothing. For even a Dog has parts as well proportioned
and fitted to his purposes, and the designs of his nature, as we have: and
when it is most florid and gay, three fits of an ague can change it into
yellowness and leanness, and the hollowness and wrinkles of deformity.

4. Our learning is then best when it teaches most humility: but to be proud of
Learning is the greatest ignorance in the World. For our learning is so long in
getting, and so very imperfect, that the greatest Clerk knows not the
thousand part of what he is ignorant; and knows so uncertainly what he seems
to know, and knows no otherwise then a Fool, or a Child, even wha^ is told
him, or what he guesses at, that except those things which concern his duty,
and which God has revealed to him, which also every Woman knows so far as is
necessary; the most Learned Man has nothing to be proud of, unless this be a
sufficient argument to exalt him, that he uncertainly guesses at some more
unnecessary things then many others, who yet know all that concerns them, and
mind other things more necessary for the needs of life and Commonwealths.

5. He that is proud of riches is a Fool. For if he be exalted above his
Neighbors because he has more gold, how much inferior is he to a Gold
Mine? How much is he to give place to a chain of Pearl, or a knot of Diamonds?
For certainly that has the greatest excellence from whence he derives all his
gallantry and pre-eminence over his Neighbors.

6. If a man be exalted by reason of any excellence in his soul, he may please
to remember, that all souls are equal; and their differing operations are
because their instrument is in better tune, their body is more healthful, or
better tempered: which is no more praise to him, then it is that he was born in
Italy.

7. He that is proud of his birth is proud of the blessings of others, not of
himself: for if his parents were more eminent in any circumstance then their
Neighbors, he is to thank God, and to rejoice in them; but still he may be a
Fool, or unfortunate, or deformed; and when himself was born, it was
indifferent to him whether his Father were a King or a Peasant; for he knew not
any thing, nor chose any thing: and most commonly it is true, that he that
boasts of his Ancestors, who were the founders and raisers of a Noble Family,
does confess that he has in himself a less virtue and a less honor, and
therefore that he is degenerated.

8. Whatever other difference there is between thee and thy Neighbor, if it be
bad, it is thine own, but thou have no reason to boast of thy misery and shame:
if it be good, thou have received it from God; and then thou art more obliged
to pay duty and tribute, use and principal to him: and it were a strange folly
for a man to be proud of being more in debt ^hen another.

9. Remember what thou were before thou were begotten? Nothing. What were thou
in the first regions of thy dwelling, before thy birth? Uncleanness. What were
thou for many years after? Weakness. What in all thy life? A great sinner.
What in all thy excellencies? A mere debtor to God, to thy parents, to the
earth, to all the creatures. A^ulel^^ de Demon. Socratis.
But we may if we please use the method of the Platonists, who reduce all the
causes and arguments for humility which we can take from our selves, to these
seven heads. 1. The spirit of a man is light and troublesome. 2. His body is
brutish and sickly. 3. He is constant in his folly and errou^, and inconstant
in his manners and good purposes. 4. His labors are vain, intricate, and
endless. 5. His fortune is changeable, but seldom pleasing, never perfect. 6.
His wisdom comes not till he be ready to die, that is, till he be past using
it. 7. His death is certain, always ready at the door, but never far off *.
Upon these or the like meditations if we dwell, or frequently retire to them,
we shall see nothing more reasonable then to be humble; and nothing more
foolish then to be proud.

Acts or offices of humility.
The grace of humility is exercised by these following rules.

1. Think not thy self better for any thing that happens to thee from without.
For although thou may by gifts bestowed upon thee be better then another, as
one horse is better then another, that is, of more use to others; yet as thou
art a man, thou have nothing to commend thee to thy self, but that only by
which thou art a man; that is, by what thou choosest and refusest.

2. Humility consists not in railing against thy self, or wearing mean clothes,
or going softly and submissely; but in a hearty and real evil or mean opinion
of thy self. Believe thy self an unworthy person, heartily, as thou believe
thy self to be hungry, or poor, or sick, when thou art so.

3. Whatsoever evil thou say of thy self be content that others should think
to be true: and if thou call thy self fool, be not angry if another say so
of thee: For if thou think so truly, all men in the world desire other men
to be of their opinion; and he is an hypocrite that accuses himself before
others, with an intent not to be believed. But he that calls himself
intemperate, foolish, lustful, and is angry when his neighbors call him so, is
both a false and a proud person*

(...) and pro nihilo repu^a^i. (...).
4. Love to be concealed, and little esteemed: be content to want praise, never
being troubled when thou art slighted or undervalued: for thou can not
undervalue thy self, and if thou think so meanly as there is reason, no
contempt will seem unreasonable, and therefore it will be very tolerable.

5. Never be ashamed of thy birth, or thy (...) ^ill in ^obili^^do (...)
^^gnosce parentado.
parents, or thy trade G^i del ar^e sua se (...) sempre (...).
, or thy present employment, for the meannesse or poverty of any of them: and
when there is an occasion to speak of them, such an occasion as would invite
you to speak of any thing that pleases you, omit it not; but speak as readily
and indifferently of thy meannesse, as of thy greatness. Primislaus the first
King of Bohemia kept his country shoes always by him, to remember from
whence he was raised: and Agatho^les by the furniture of his Table confessed,
that from a Potter he was raised to be the King of Sicily.

6. Never speak any thing directly tending to thy praise or glory: that is,
with a purpose to be commended, and for no other end. If other ends be mingled
with thy honor, as if the glory of God, or charity, or necessity, or any thing
of prudence be thy end, you are not tied to omit your discourse, or your
design that you may avoid praise, but pursue your end, though praise come
along in the Company. Only let not praise be the design.

7. When thou have said or done any thing for which thou receivest praise or
estimation, take it indifferently, and return it to God, reflecting upon him as
the Giver of the gift, or the blesser of the action, or the aid of the design:
and give God thanks for making thee an instrument of his glory, or the benefit
of others.

8. Secure a good name to thy self by living virtuously and humbly: but let
this good name be nursed abroad, and never be brought home to look upon it: let
others use it for their own advantage: let them speak of it if they please, but
do not thou at all use it, but as an instrument to do God glory, and thy
neighbor more advantage. Let thy face like Moses shine to others, but make no
looking glasses for thy self.

9. Take no content in praise when it is offered thee: but let thy rejoicing in
Gods gift be allayed with fear, lest this good bring thee to evil. Use the
praise as you use your pleasure in eating and drinking: if it comes, make it do
drudgery, let it serve other ends, and minister to necessities, and to caution,
lest by pride you lose your just praise which you have deserved; or else by
being praised unjustly, you receive shame into your self, with God and wise men.

10. Use no stratagems and devices to get praise. Some use to enquire into the
faults of their own actions or discourses on purpose to hear that it was well
done or spoken, (...). Arrian. Epict. cap. 21. lib. 1.
and without fault: others bring the matter into talk, or thrust themselves
into company, and intimate and give occasion to be thought or spoke of. These
men make a bait to persuade themselves to swallow the hook, till by drinking
the waters of vanity they swell and burst.

11. Make no suppletories to thy self, when thou art disgraced or slighted,
After alteri sat^^ a^plum^ theatrum si^inus. ^atis u^^as satis u^^s. ^eue^.
by pleasing thy self with supposing thou did deserve praise, though they
understood thee not, or enviously detracted from thee: neither do thou get to
thy self a private theater and flatterers, in whose vain noises, and
fantastic praises thou may keep up thy own good opinion of thy self.

12. Entertain no fancies of vanity and private whispers of this Devil of
pride: such as was that of Nebuchodonosor; Is not this great Babylon which I
have built for the honor of my name, and the might of my majesty, and the
power of my kingdom? Some fantastic spirits will walk alone, and dream
waking, of greatnesses, of palaces, of excellent orations, full theaters, loud
appl^uses, sudden advancement, great fortunes: and so will spend an hour with
imaginative pleasure, all their employment being nothing but fumes of pride,
and secret, indefinite desires, and significations of what their heart wishes:
In this, although there is nothing of its own nature directly vicious, yet it
is either an ill mother, or an ill daughter, an ill sign or an ill effect; and
therefore at no hand consisting with the safety and interests of humility.

13. Suffer others to be pra^sed in thy presence: and entertain their good and
glory with delight: but at no hand disparage them or lessen the report, or make
an objection: and think not* the advancement of thy brother is a lessening of
thy worth. * But this act is also to extend further.

14. Be content that he should be employed, and thou laid by as unprofitable;
his sentence approved, thine rejected; he be preferred, and thou fixed in a low
employment.

15. Never compare thy self with others, unless it be to advance them and to
depresse thy self. To which purpose we must be sure in some sense or other to
think our selves the worst in every company where we come: one is more learned
then I am; another is more prudent; a third, honorable; a fourth more chaste;
or he is more charitable, or less proud. For the humble man observes their
good and reflects only upon his own vileness; or considers the many evils of
himself certainly known to himself, and the ill of others but by uncertain
report: or he considers that the evils done by another are out of much
infirmity, or ignorance, but his own sins are against a clearer light; and if
the other had so great helps, he would have done more good and less evil; or
he remembers that his old sins before his conversion were greater in the nature
of the thing, or in certain circumstances, then the sins of other men (So S.
Paul reckoned himself the chiefest of sinners, because formerly he had acted
the chiefest sin of persecuting the Church of God.) But this rule is to be used
with this caution: That though it be good always to think meanest of our
selves, yet it is not ever safe to speak it, because those circumstances and
considerations which determine thy thoughts, are not known to others as to thy
self; and it may concern others that they hear thee give God thanks for the
graces he has given thee. But if thou preservest thy thoughts and opinion of
thy self truly humble, you may with more safety give God thanks in public for
that good which cannot, or ought not to be concealed.

16. Be not always ready to excuse every oversight, or indiscretion, or ill
action: but if thou be guilty of it, confess it plainly; for virtue scorns
a lie for its cover; but hide to a sin with it, is like a crust of leprosy
drawn upon an ulcer: if thou be not guilty (unless it be scandalous) be not
over earnest to remove it: but rather use it as an argument to chastise all
greatness of fancy and opinion in thy self; and accustom thy self to bear
reproof patiently and contentedly, and the harsh words of thy enemies, as
knowing that the anger of an enemy is a better Monitor, and represents our
faults or admonishes us of our duty with more heartinesse, then the kindness
does, or precious balms of a friend.

17. Give God thanks for every weakness, deformity, and imperfection, and
accept it as a favor and grace of God, and an instrument to resist pride and
nurse humility; ever remembering that when God by giving thee a crooked back,
has also made thy spirit stoop or less vain, thou art more ready to enter the
narrow gate of Heaven, then by being strait, and standing upright, and thinking
highly. Thus the Apostles rejoiced in their infirmities, not moral, but
natural, and accidental, in their being beaten and whipped like slaves, in their
nakedness and poverty.

18. Upbraid no man's weakness to him to discomfort him; neither report it to
disparage him; neither delight to remember it to lessen him, or to set thy self
above him. Be sure never to praise thy self, or to dispraise any man else,
unless GODS glory, or some holy end do hallow it. And it was noted to the
praise of Cyrus, that amongst his equals in age he would never play at any
sport, or use any exercise in which he knew himself more excellent then they:
but in such in which he was unskilful he would make his challenges, Ama l'
amico tuc^ con (...) suo. In collo^^iis pucri invisi alus non fi^nt si non
(...) in ^isputarsnnibus vistoriam semper obtinere laborent. Non n. tantum
egregium est scire vlneere, sed etiam posse vinci pulchrum est, ubi victoria
est demnosa. P^ut. ^e educ. liber.
lest he should shame them by his victory, and that himself might learn
something of their skill, and do them civilities.

19. Besides the foregoing parts and actions, humility teaches us to submit our
selves and all our faculties to GOD: To believe all things, to do all things,
to suffer all things which his will enjoynes us; to be content in every estate
or change, knowing we have deserved worse then the worst we feel: And (as
Anytus said to Alcibiades) he has taken but half, when he might have taken
all: to adore his goodness, to fear his Greatness, to worship his eternal
and infinite excellencies, Nihil ita dignum est ^dro ut enruin mores qui
compellanti^us se difficiles praebent. Plutarch.
and to submit our selves to all our superiors in all things according to
Godliness: and to be meek and gentle in our conversation toward others.

Now although according to the Nature of every grace, this begins as a gift,
and is increased like a habit, that is, best by its own acts, yet besides the
former acts and offices of humility, there are certain other exercises and
considerations, which are good helps and instruments for the procuring and
increasing this grace, and the curing of pride.

Means and exercises of obtaining and increasing the grace of Humility.
1. Make confession of thy sins often to God; and consider what all that evil
amounts to, which you then charge upon your self. Look not upon them as
scattered in the course of a long life: now, an intemperate anger, then, too
full a meal: now, idle talking, and another time impatience: but unite them
into one continued representation, and remember, that he whose life seems fair,
by reason that his faults are scattered at large distances, in the several
parts of his life, yet if all his errors and follies were articled against
him; the man would seem vicious and miserable: and possibly this exercise,
really applied upon thy Spirit, may be useful.

2. Remember that we usually disparage others upon slight grounds, and little
instances; and toward them one fly is enough to spoil a whole box of ointment:
and if a man be highly commended, we think him sufficiently lessened, if we
clap one sin or folly, or infirmity into his account: Let us therefore be just
to our selves, since we are so severe to others, and consider, that whatsoever
good, any one can think or say of us, we can tell him of hundreds of base and
unworthy, and foolish actions, any one of which were enough (we hope) to
destroy another reputation: Therefore let so many be sufficient to destroy our
over high thoughts of our selves.

3. When thy Neighbor is cried up by public fame, and popular noises; that we
may disparage and lessen him, we cry out that the people is a Heard of
unlearned and ignorant persons, ill judges, loud trumpets, but which never give
certain sound: let us use the same art to humble our selves, and never take
delight and pleasure in public reports, (...) Arrim (...)
and acclamations of assemblies, and please our selves with their judgment, of
whom in other the like cases we affirm that they are mad.

4. We change our opinion of others by their Kindness or unkindnesse toward
us. If he be my Patron and bounteous, he is wise, he is noble, his faults are
but warts, his virtues are mountainous: but if he proves unkind or rejects our
importunate suite, then he is ill natured, covetous, and his free meal is
called gluttony; that which before we called civility, is now very
drunkenness, and all he speaks is flat and dull, and ignorant as a swine:
This indeed is unjust toward others, but a good instrument, if we turn the
edge of it upon our selves: we use our selves ill, abusing our selves with
false principles, cheating our selves with lies and pretenses, stealing the
choice and election from our wills, placing voluntary ignorance in our
understandings, denying the desires of the Spirit, setting up a faction against
every noble and just desire; the least of which because we should resent up to
reviling the injurious person, it is but reason we should at least not flatter
our selves with fond and too kind opinions.

5. Every day call to mind some one of thy foulest sins, or the most
shameful of thy disgraces, or the indiscreetest of thy actions, or any thing
that did then most trouble thee, and apply it to the present swelling of thy
spirit and opinion, and it may help to allay it.

6. Pray often for this grace with all humility of gesture and passion of
desire, and in thy devotion interpose many acts of humility by way of
confession and address to God, and reflection upon thy self.

7. Avoid great Offices and employments, and the noises of worldly honor. For
in those states many times, so many ceremonies and circumstances will seem
necessary, as will destroy the sobriety of thy thoughts. If the number of thy
servants be fewer, and their observances less, and their reverences less
solemn, possibly they will seem less then thy dignity: and if they be so
much and so many, it is likely they will be too big for thy spirit. ^abis
ab^^^ne ^ dixit Pythagoras. (...) Magistratus ^er suffragia fabis ^ata
crea^antur. (...).
And here be thou very careful, lest thou be abused by a pretense that thou
would use thy great Dignity as an opportunity of doing great good. For
supposing it might be good for others, yet it is not good for thee: they may
have encouragement in noble things from thee, and by the same instrument thou
may thy self be tempted to pride and vanity: And certain it is, GOD is as
much glorified by thy example of humility in a low or temperate condition, as
by thy bounty in a great and dangerous.

8. Make no reflexe acts upon thy own humility, nor upon any other grace with
which GOD has enriched thy soul. For since GOD oftentimes hides from his
Saints and Servants the sight of those excellent things by which they shine to
others (though the dark side of the Lantern be toward themselves) that he
may secure the grace of humility; it is good that thou do so thy self: and if
thou beholdest a grace of GOD in thee, remember to give him thanks for it, that
you may not boast in that which is none of thy own: and consider how thou have
sullyed it, by handling it with dirty fingers, with thy own imperfections, and
with mixture of unhandsome circumstances. Spiritual pride is very dangerous,
not only by reason, it spoils so many graces by which we drew nigh to the
Kingdom of GOD, but also because it so frequently creeps upon the spirit of
holy persons. For it is no wonder for a Beggar to call himself poor; or a
Drunkard to confess that he is no sober person: But for a holy person to be
humble; for one whom all men esteem a Saint, to fear lest himself become a
Devil, and to observe his own danger, and to discern his own infirmities, and
make discovery of his bad adherencies, is as hard as for a Prince to submit
himself to be guided by Tutors, and make himself subject to discipline like the
meanest of his servants.

9. Often meditate upon the effects of Pride on one side, and Humility on the
other. 1. That Pride is like a Canker, and destroys the beauty of the fairest
flowers, the most excellent gifts and graces: Mat. 11.25
but Humility crowns them all. Secondly, That Pride is a great hinderance to
the perceiving the things of GOD, and Humility is an excellent preparative and
instrument of spiritual wisdom. Thirdly, That Pride hinders the acceptance of
our prayers, but Humility pierces the clouds, and will not depart till the
most High shall regard. Fourthly, That Humility is but a speaking truth, and
all Pride is a lie. Fifthly, That Humility is the most certain way to real
honor, and pride is ever affronted or despised. Sixthly, That Pride turned
Lucifer into a Devil, and Humility exalted the Son of God above every Name, and
placed him eternally at the right hand of his Father. Seventhly, That GOD
resists the proud, James 4.6.
professing open defiance and hostility against such persons, but gives grace
to the humble, * Grace and pardon, * remedy and relief against misery and
oppression, * content in all conditions, * tranquillity of spirit, * patience
in afflictions, * love abroad, * peace at home, * and utter freedom from
contention and * the sin of censuring others, * and the trouble of being
censured themselves. For the humble man will not judge his brother for the mote
in his eye, being more troubled at the beam in his own eye; and is patient and
glad to be reproved, because himself has cast the first stone at himself, and
therefore wonders not that others are of his mind.

10. Remember that the blessed Savior of the world has done more to
prescribe, and transmit, and secure this grace than any other: John 13.15
his whole life being a great continued example of humility: a vast descent
from the glorious bosom of his Father to the womb of a poor maiden, to the form
of a servant, to the miseries of a sinner, to a life of labor, to a state of
poverty, to a death of malefactors, to the grave of death, and the intolerable
calamities which we deserved: and it were a good design and yet but
reasonable, that we should be as humble in the midst of our greatest
imperfections and basest sins as Christ was in the midst of his fullness of the
spirit, great wisdom, perfect life and most admirable virtues.

11. Drive away all flatterers from thy company, and at no hand endure them;
for he that endures himself so to be abused by another is not only a fool for
entertaining the mockery, but loves to have his own opinion of himself to be
heightened and cherished.

12. Never change thy employment for the sudden coming of another to thee: But
if modesty permits or discretion, appear to him that visits thee the same that
thou were to God and thy self in thy privacy. But if thou were walking or
sleeping, or in any other innocent imploiment or retirement, snatch not up a
book to seem studious, nor fall on thy knees to seem devout, nor alter any
thing to make him believe thee better employed then thou were.

13 To the same purpose it is of great use that he who would preserve his
humility, should choose some spiritual person to whom he shall oblige himself
to discover his very thoughts, and fancies; every act of his and all his
intercourse with others in which there may be danger; that by such an opennesse
of spirit, he may expose every blast of vain glory, every idle thought to be
chastened and lessened by the rod of spiritual discipline: and he that shall
find himself tied to confess every proud thought, every vanity of his spirit,
will also perceive they must not dwell with him, nor find any kindness from
him: and besides this, the nature of pride is so shameful, and unhandsome, that
the very discovery of it is a huge mortification and means of suppressing it. A
man would be ashamed to be told that he enquires after the faults of his last
Oration or action on purpose to be commended: and therefore when the man shall
tell his spiritual Guide the same shameful story of himself, it is very likely
he will be humbled, and heartily ashamed of it.

14. Let every man suppose what opinion he should have of one that should spend
his time in playing with drumsticks and cockle-shells, and that should wrangle
all day long with a little boy for pins, or should study hard and labor much
to cozen a child of his gauds, and who would run into a river deep and
dangerous with a great burden upon his back, even then when he were told of the
danger and earnestly importuned not to do it: and let him but change the
Instances and the person, and he shall find that he has the same reason to
think as bad of himself, who pursues trifles with earnestness, spending his
time in vanity, and his labor for that which profits not; who knowing the laws
of God, the rewards of virtue, the cursed consequents of sin, that it is an
evil spirit that tempts him to it, a Devil, one that hates him, that longs
extremely to ruin him, that it is his own destruction that he is then working,
that the pleasures of his sin are base and brutish, unsatisfying in the
enjoyment, soon over, shameful in their story, bitter in the memory, painful in
the effect here, and intolerable hereafter, and for ever: yet in despite of all
this, he runs foolishly into his sin and his ruin, merely because he is a
fool, and winks hard, and rushes violently like a horse into the battle, or
like a mad man to his death. He that can think great and good things of such a
person, the next step may court the rack for an instrument of pleasure, and
admire a swine for wisdom, and go for counsel to the prodigal and trifling
grasshopper.

After the use of these and such like instruments and considerations, if you
would try how your soul is grown; you shall know that humility like the root of
a goodly tree is thrust very far into the ground by these goodly fruits which
appear above ground.

Signs of Humility.
1. The humble man trusts not to his own discretion, but in matters of
concernment relyes rather upon the judgment of his friends, counselors, or
spiritual guides. 2. He does not pertinaciously pursue the choice of his own
will, but in all things lets God choose for him, and his Assai ^omman^a chi
(...) di^ie ^^aggio.
Superiors in those things which concern them. 3. He does not murmur against
commands. 4. He is not inquisitive into the reasonableness of indifferent and
innocent commands, but believes their command to be reason enough in such cases
to exact his obedience. 5. He lives according to a rule, and with compliance to
public customs, without any affectation or singularity. 6. He is meek and
indifferent in all accidents and chances. 7. (...) p^tientia o^^end t. S. Hier.
He patiently bears injuries. 8. He is always unsatisfied in his own conduct,
resolutions, and counsels. 9. He is a great lover of good men, and a praiser of
wise men, and a censurer of no man. 10. He is modest in his speech, and
reserved in his laughter. 11. He fears when he hears himself commended, le^t
God make another judgment concerning his actions than men do. 12. He gives no
pert or saucy answers when he is reproved, whether justly or unjustly. 13. He
loves to sit down in private, and if he may, he refuses the temptation of
offices and new honors. 14. He is ingenuous, free and open in his actions and
discourses. 15. He mends his fault and gives thanks when he is admonished. 16.
He is ready to do good offices to the murderers of his fame, ^o his slanderers,
backbiters and detractors, as Christ washed the feet of Judas. 17. And is
contented to be suspected of Indiscretion, so, before God he may be really
innocent, and not offensive to his neghbour, nor wanting to his just and (...)
in terest

SECT. V. Of Modesty.
MOdesty is the appendage of Sobriety, and is to Chastity, ^o Temperance and to
Humility as the fringes are to a Garment. It is a grace of God that moderates
the over-activenesse and curiosity of the mind, and orders the passions of the
body, and external actions, and is directly opposed to Curiosity, to Boldness,
to Indecency. The practice of Modesty consists in these following rules.

Acts and duties of Modesty as it is opposed to Curiosity. (...).

1. Inquire not into the secrets of God, but be content to learn thy duty
according to the quality of thy person or employment: Eccl^^. 3.21, 22 23.
that is plainly, if thou be not concerned in the conduct of others: but if
thou be a teacher, learn it so as may best enable thee to discharge thy
office. Qui (...) Maje^tati^ (...) glo^i^. Prove. 25
Gods commandments were proclaimed to all the world, but Gods counsels are to
himself and to his secret ones, when they are admitted within the veil.

2. Inquire not into the things which are too hard for thee, but learn modestly
to know thy infirmities and abilities, and raise not thy mind up to enquire
into mysteries of State, or the secrets of Government, or difficulties
Theological, (...). Arrian. lib. 1. c. 26.

Et plus ^apere interdum vulgus quod quantum opus est sapiat. Lactant.


if thy employment really be, or thy understanding be judged to be of a lower
rank.

3. Let us not enquire into the affairs of others that concern us not, but be
busied within our selves and our own spheres; ever remembering that to pry into
the actions or interests of other men not under our charge, may minister to
pride, to tyranny, to uncharitableness, to trouble, but can never consist with
modesty, unless where duty or the mere intentions of charity, and relation do
warrant it.

Ecclus. 7.21. Ne cechi in lettor^, ne mano in ^asca, ne orecchi in secreti
al^ru^
4. Never listen at the doors or windows: for besides that it contains in it
danger and a snare, it is also an invading my neighbors privacy, and a laying
that open which he therefore enclosed, that it might not be open. Never ask what
he carries covered so curiously; for it is enough that it is covered curiously.
Hither also is reducible that we never open letters without public authority,
or reasonably presumed leave, or great necessity, or charity.

Every man has in his own life sins enough, in his own mind trouble enough,
in his own fortune evils enough, and in performance of his offices failings
more then enough to entertain his own enquiry: so that curiosity after the
affairs of others, cannot be without envy and an evil mind. What is it to me
if my Neighbors Grandfather were a Syrian, or his Grandmother illegitimate, or
that another is indebted five thousand pounds, or whether his wife be
expensive? But commonly curious persons, (or as the Apostles phrase is)
busybodies are not sollicitous, or inquisitive into the beauty and order of a
well governed family, or after the virtues of an excellent person; but if there
be any thing for which men keep locks and bars and porters, things that blush
to see the light, and either are shameful in manners, or private in nature,
these things are their care and their business. * But if great things will
satisfy our enquiry, the course of the Sun and Moon, the spots in their faces,
the Firmament of Heaven, and the supposed Orbs, the ebbing and flowing of the
Sea, are work enough for us: or if this be not, let him tell me, whether the
number of the stars be even or odd, and when they began to be so? since some
ages have discovered new stars which the former knew not, but might have seen,
if they had bin where now they are fixed. * If these be too troublesome, search
lower, and tell me, why this turfe this year brings forth a Daisie, and the
next year a Plantane: why the apple bears his seed in his heart, and wheat
bears it in his head: let him tell, why a graft taking nourishment from a
crab-stock shall have a fruit more noble then its nurse and parent: let him
say, why the best of oil is at the the top, the best of wine in the middle, and
the best of honey at the bottom, otherwise then it is in some liquors that are
thinner, and in some that are thicker? But these things are not such as please
busy bodies. They must feed upon Tragedies, and stories of misfortunes and
crimes; and yet tell them ancient stories of the ravishment of chaste maidens,
or the debauchment of nations, or the extreme poverty of learned persons, or
the persecutions of the old Saints, or the changes of government, and sad
accidents happening in Royal families amongst the Arsacidae, the Caesar's, the
Ptolomies, these were enough to scratch the itch of knowing sad stories. But
unless you tell them something sad and new, something that is done within the
bounds of their own knowledge or relation, it seems tedious and unsatisfying;
which shows plainly it is an evil spirit: envy and idleness married
together, and begot curiosity. Therefore Plutarch rarely well compares, curious
and inquisitive ears to the execrable gates of cities, out of which only
Malefactors, and hangmen and tragedies pass, nothing that is chaste or holy. *
If a Physician should go from house to house unsent for and enquire what woman
has a Cancer in her bowels, or what man has a fistula in his colic gut,
though he could pretend to cure it, he would be almost as unwelcome as the
disease it self: and therefore it is inhumane to enquire after crimes and
disasters without pretense of amending them, but only to discover them. We are
not angry with Searchers and Publicans when they look only on public
merchandise; but when they break open trunks, and pierce vessels, and unrip
packs, and open sealed letters.

Curiosity is the direct incontinency of the spirit: and adultery it self in
its principle is many times nothing but a curious inquisition after, and
envying of another man's enclosed pleasures: and there have been many who
refused fairer objects that they might ravish an enclosed woman, from her
retirement and single possessour. But these inquisitions are seldom without
danger, never without baseness; they are neither just nor honest, nor
delightful, and very often ^selesse to the curious inquirer. For men stand upon
their guards against them, as they secure their meat against Harpyes and Cats,
laying all their counsels and secrets out of their way; or as men clap their
garments close about them when the searching and saucy winds would discover
their nakedness: as knowing that what men willingly hear, they do willingly
speak of. Knock therefore at the door before you enter upon your neighbors
privacy; and remember that there is no difference between entering into his
house, and looking into it.

Acts of Modesty as it is opposed to boldness. (...)

1. Let us always bear about us such impressions of reverence and fear of God
as to tremble at his voice, to express our apprehensions of his greatness in
all great accidents, in popular judgments, loud thunders, tempests, earth
quakes, not only for fear of being smitten our selves, or that we are
concerned in the accident, but also that we may humble our selves before his
Almightinesse, and express that infinite distance between his infiniteness
and our weaknesses, at such times especially when he gives such visible
arguments of it. He that is merry and ayry at shore when he sees a sad and a
loud tempest on the sea, or dances briskly when God thunders from heaven,
regards not when God speaks to all the world, but is possessed with a firm
immodesty.

2. Be reverent, modest, and reserved in the presence of thy betters, giving to
all according to their quality their titles of honor, keeping distance,
speaking little, answering pertinently, not interposing without leave or
reason, not answering to a question propounded to another; and ever present to
thy superiors the fairest ^ide of thy discourse, of thy temper, of thy
ceremony, as being ashamed to serve excellent persons with unhandsome
intercourse.

3. Never lie before a King, Quem Deus tegit verecundi^e pallio hujus maculas
hominibus non oftend (...) May mon. Can Eth.

(...). Meliss.


or a great person, nor stand in a lie when thou art accused, nor offer to
justify what is indeed a fault, but modestly be ashamed of it, ask pardon and
make amends.

4. Never boast of thy sin, but at least lay a vail upon thy nakedness and
shame, and put thy hand before thine eyes, that thou may have this beginning
of repentance, to believe thy sin to be thy shame. A Ch^one saltem vel ab
Helide disce pudorem

A^sc^ndunt spurcas haec Monumenta lupas. Mart. l. 1. epist. 35.


For he that blushes not at his crime, but adds shamelessenesse to his shame,
has no instrument left to restore him to the hopes of virtue.

5. Be not confident and affirmative in an uncertain matter, but report things
modestly, and temperately according to the degree of that persuasion, which is,
or ought to be begotten in thee by the efficacy of the authority, or the reason
inducing thee.

6. Pretend not to more knowledge then thou have, but be content to seem
ignorant where thou art so, lest thou be either brought to shame, Ecclus
3.25.
or retirest into shamelessenesse.

Acts of Modesty as it is opposed to undecency.
(...)
1. In your prayers, in churches, and places of religion use reverent postures,
great attention, grave ceremony, the lowest gestures of humility; remembering
that we speak to God, in our reverence to whom we cannot possibly exceed; but
that the expression of this reverence be according to law or custom, and the
example of the most prudent and pious persons: that is, let it be the best in
its kind to the best of essences.

2. In all public meetings, private addresses, in discourses, in journeyes use
those forms of salutation, reverence and decency, which the custom prescribes,
and is usual amongst the most sober persons; giving honor to whom honor
belongs, taking place of none of thy betters, and in all cases of question
concerning civil precedence, giving it to any one that will take it, if it be
only thy own right that is in question.

3. Observe the proportion of affections in all meetings and to all persons: be
not merry at a funeral, nor sad upon a festival, but rejoice with them that
rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

4. Abstain from wanton and dissolute laughter, petulant and uncomely jests,
loud talking, jeering, and all such actions which in civil account are called
undecencies, and incivilities.

5. Toward your parents use all modesty of duty and humble carriage: toward
them and all your kindred be severe in the modesties of chastity: ever fearing,
lest the freedoms of natural kindness should enlarge into any neighborhood
of unhandsomenesse. For all incestuous mixtures, and all circumstances and
degrees toward it, are the highest violations of modesty in the world: for
therefore incest is grown to be so high a crime, especially in the last periods
of the world, because it breaks that reverence which the consent of all nations
and the severity of humane laws has enjoined toward our parents and nearest
kindred, in imitation of that law which God gave to the Jews in prosecution of
Modesty in this instance.

6. Be a curious observer of all those things which are of good report, Philip
4.8.
and are parts of public honesty. For public fame, and the sentence of
prudent and public persons, is the measure of good and evil in things
indifferent: and charity requires us to comply with those fancies and
affections which are agreeable to nature, or the analogy of virtue, or public
laws, or old customs. It is against Modesty for a woman to marry a second
husband as long as she bears a burden by the first, or to admit a second love
while her funeral tears are not wiped from her cheeks. ^t meret^ix abigittellem
ve oque seraque ^araque si memini for^^icaeri na patet. Mart.
It is against public honesty to do some lawful actions of privacy in public
theaters, and therefore in such cases retirement is a duty of modesty.

7. Be grave, decent and modest in thy clothing and ornament: never let it be
above thy condition, not always equal to it, never light or amarous, never
discovering a nakedness thorough a thin vail, which thou pretendest to hide:
never to lay a snare for a soul, but remember what becomes a Christian
professing holiness, chastity, and the discipline of the holy Jesus.

8. Hither also is to be reduced singular and affected walking, proud, nice and
ridiculous gestures of body, painting and lascivious dressings, all which
together God reprooves by the Prophet: The Lord says, because the daughters of
Sion are haughty, Isaiah 3.15.
and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as
they go, and make a tinkling with their feet, therefore the Lord will smite her
with a scab of the crown of the head, and will take away the bravery of their
tinkling ornaments. Prove. 6.13.
And this duty of modesty in this instance is expressly enjoined to all
Christian women by Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 2.9.
That women adorn themselves in modest apparel with shamefastness and
sobriety, not with broidered hair, or gold or pearl, or costly array, but
(which becomes women professing godliness) with good works.

9. As those meats are to be avoided which tempt our stomachs beyond our
hunger, so also should prudent persons decline all such spectacles, relations,
Theaters, loud noyses and outcries which concern us not, and are besides our
natural or moral interest. Our senses should not like petulant and wanton
Girle^ wander into Markets and Theaters without just employment; Oedipu^^
curio. (...) ^n extremas con^e, it ^alamit^l^^^ Plu^^
but when they are sent abroad by reason, return quickly with their errand, and
remain modestly at home under their guide, till they be sent again.

10. Let all persons be curious in observing modesty toward themselves in the
handsome treating their own body, and such as are in their power, whether
living or dead. Against this rule they offend who expose to others their own,
or pry into others nakedness beyond the limits of necessity, or where a leave
is not made holy by a permission from God. It is also said that God was pleased
to work a miracle about the body of Epiphanius to reprove the immodest
curiosity of an unconcerned person who pryed too near when charitable people
were composing it to the grave. In all these cases and particulars, although
they seem little, yet our duty and concernment is not little. Concerning which,
I use the words of the Son of Sirach, He that despises little things, shall
perish by little and little.

SECT. VI. Of Contentedness in all estates and accidents.
Virtues and Discourses are like Friends, necessary in all fortunes; but those
are the best which are Friends in our sadnesses, and support us in our sorrows,
and sad accidents: and in this sense, no man that is virtuous can be
friendlesse; nor has any man reason to complain of the Divine Providence, or
accuse the public disorder of things, or his own infelicity, since God has
appointed one remedy for all the evils in the World, and that is, a contented
spirit: For this alone makes a man pass through fire and not be scorched,
through Seas and not be drowned, through hunger and nakedness and want
nothing. For since all the evil in the World consists in the disagreeing
between the object and the appetite, as when a man has what he desires not, or
desires what he has not, or desires amiss; he that composes his spirit to the
present accident, has variety of instances for his virtue, but none to trouble
him, because his desires enlarge not beyond his present fortune: and a wise man
is placed in the variety of chances like the Nave or Center of a wheel, in the
midst of all the circumvolutions and changes of posture, without violence or
change, save that it turns gently in compliance with its changed parts, and is
indifferent which part is up and which is down; for there is some virtue or
other to be exercised what ever happens, either patience or thanksgiving, love
or fear, moderation or humility, charity or contentedness, and they are every
one of them equally in order to his great end, an immortal felicity: and beauty
is not made by white or red, by black eyes and a round face, by a strait body
and a smooth skin; but by a proportion to the fancy: No rules can make
amability, our minds and apprehensions make that; and ^o is our felicity; and
we may be reconciled to poverty and a low fortune, if we suffer contentedness
and the grace of God to make the proportions. For no man is poor that does not
think himself so: But if in a full fortune, with impatience he desires more, he
proclaims his wants and his beggarly condition.

But because this grace of contentedness was the sum of all the old moral
Philosophy, N^n fa^^a tibi est si (...).
and a great duty in Christianity, and of most universal use in the whole
course of our lives, and the only instrument to ease the burdens of the World
and the enmities of sad chances, it will not be amiss to press it by the
proper arguments by which God has bound it upon our spirits, it being fastened
by Reason and Religion, by duty and interest, by necessity and convenience, by
example, and by the proposition of excellent rewards, no less then peace and
felicity.

1. Contentedness in all estates is a duty of Religion: it is the great
reasonableness of complying with the Divine Providence which governes all the
World, and has so ordered us in the administration of his great Family. He
were a strange fool that should be angry because Dogs and Sheep need no shoes,
and yet himself is full of care to get some: God has supplied those needs to
them* by natural provisions, and to thee by an artificial: for he has given
thee reason to learn a trade, or some means to make or buy them, so that it
only differs in the manner of our provision; and which had you rather want,
shoes or reason? And my Patron that has given me a Farm is freer to me then if
he gives a loaf ready baked. But however, all these gifts come from him, and
therefore it is fit he should dispense them as he please; and if we murmr
here, we may at the next melancholy be troubled that God did not make us to be
Angels, or Stars. For if that which we are or have, do not content us, we may
be troubled for every thing in the World, which is besides our being, or our
possessions.

(...).
God is the Master of the Scenes, we must not choose which part we shall act; it
concerns us only to be careful that we do it well, always saying, If this
please God let it be as it is: and we who pray that Gods will may be done in
Earth as it is in Heaven must remember that the Angels do whatsoever is
commanded them, and go where ever they are sent, and refuse no circumstances:
and if their employment be crossed by a higher decree, they sit down in peace
and rejoice in the event; Dan. 10.13.
and when the Angel of Judea could not prevail in behalf of the people
committed to his charge, because the Angel of Persia opposed it, he only told
the story at the command of God, and was as content, and worshipped with as
great an ecstasy in his proportion, as the prevailing Spirit. Do thou so
likewise: keep the station where God has placed you, and you shall never long
for things without, but sit at home feasting upon the Divine Providence and thy
own reason, by which we are taught that it is necessary and reasonable to
submit to God.

For, is not all the World Gods family? Are not we his creatures? Are we not as
clay in the hand of the Potter? Do we not live upon his meat, and move by his
strength and do our work by his light? Are we any thing but what we are from
him? And shall there be a mutiny among the flocks and herd^, because their Lord
or their Shepherd chooses their pastures, and suffers them not to wander into
Deserts and unknown ways? If we choose, we do it so foolishly that we cannot
like it long, and most commonly not at all: but God who can do what he please,
is wise to choose safely for us, affectionate to comply with our needs, and
powerful to execute all his wise decrees. Here therefore is the wisdom of the
contented man, to let God choose for him: for when we have given up our wills
to him, and stand in that station of the battle where our great General has
placed us, our spirits must needs rest while our conditions have for their
security the power, the wisdom, and the charity of God.

2. Contentedness in all accidents brings great peace of spirit, and is the
great and only instrument of temporal felicity. It removes the sting* from the
accident, and makes a man not to depend upon chance, and the uncertain
dispositions of men for his well being, but only on GOD and his own Spirit.
(...). Arrian. Ep.
We our selves make our fortunes good or bad, and when God lets loose a Tyrant
upon us, or a sickness, or scorn, or a lessened fortune, if we fear to dye,
or know not to be patient, or are proud, or covetous, then the calamity sits
heavy on us. But if we know how to manage a noble principle, and fear not Death
so much as a dishonest action, and think impatience a worse evil then a Fever,
and Pride to be the biggest disgrace, and poverty to be infinitely desirable
before the torments of covetousness; then we who now think vice to be so
easy, and make it so familiar, and think the cure so impossible, shall quickly
be of another mind, and reckon these accidents amongst things elegible.

But no man can be happy that has great hopes and great fears of things
without, and events depending upon other men, or upon the chances of Fortune.
The rewards of Virtue are certain, and our provisions for our natural support
are certain, or if we want meat till we dye, then we dye of that disease, and
there are many worse then to dye with an atrophy or Consumption, or unapt and
courser nourishment: But he that suffers a transporting passion concerning
things within the power of others, is free from sorrow and amazement no longer
then his enemy shall give him leave; and it is ten to one but he shall be
smitten then and there where it shall most trouble him: for so the Adder
^eaches us where to strike, by her curious and fearful defending of her head.
The old Stoics when you told them of a sad story would still answer (...);
What is that to me? Yes; for the Tyrant has sentenced you also to prison.
Well! what is that? He will put a chain upon my leg, but he cannot bind my
soul. No: but he will kill you. Then I Will dye. If presently, let me go that I
may presently be freer then himself: Philip 4.11, 12. 1 Timothy 6.8. Hebr. 13.5.
Chi ^en ^ man non p^o soss^^ a grand honor non puo. (...),
but if not till anon or to morrow, I will dine first, or sleep, or do what
reason and nature calls for, as at other times. This in Gentile Philosophy is
the same with the discourse of S. Paul, I have learnd in whatsover state I am
therewith to be content. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to
abound, every where and in all things I am instructed, both how to be full and
to be hungry, both to abound and suffer need.

We are in the world like men playing at Tables, the chance is not in our
power, but to play it, is; and when it is fallen we must manage it as we can,
and let nothing trouble us, but when we do a base action, or speak like a fool,
or think wickedly: these things God has put into our powers: but concerning
those things which are wholly in the choice of another, they cannot fall under
our deliberation, and therefore neither are they fit for our passions. My fear
may make me miserable, but it cannot prevent what another has in his power and
purpose: and prosperities can only be enjoyed by them who fear not at all to
lose them, since the amazement and passion concerning the future takes off all
the pleasure of the present possession. Therefore if thou have lost thy land,
do not also lose thy constancy: and if thou must die a little sooner, yet do
not die impatiently. For no chance is evil to him that is content, (...)
and to a man nothing is miserable, unless it be unreasonable. No man can make
another man to be his slave, unles he has first enslaved himself to life and
death, to pleasure or pain, to hope or fear, command these passions, and you
are ^reer then the Parthian kings.

Instruments or exercises to procure contentedness.
Upon the strength of these premises we may reduce this virtue to practice by
its proper instruments first, and then by some more special confiderations or
arguments of content.

1. When any thing happens to our displeasure, let us endeavor to take off its
trouble by turning it into spiritual or artificial advantage, and handle it on
that side, in which it may be useful to the defignes of reason. For there is
nothing but has a double handle, or at least we have two hands to apprehend
it. When an enemy reproaches us, let us look on him as an impartial relator of
our faults, for he will tell thee truer then thy fondest friend will, and thou
may call them precious balms, though they break thy head, and forgive his
anger while thou make use of the plainness of his declamation. The Ox when
he is weary treads surest, and if there be nothing else in the disgrace but
that it makes us to walk warily, and tread sure for fear of our enemies, that
is better then to be flattered into pride and carelessenesse. This is the
charity of Christian Philosophy, which expounds the sense of the divine
providence fairly, and reconciles us to it by a charitable construction: and we
may as well refuse all physic if we consider it only as unpleasant in the
taste, and we may find fault with the rich valleys of Thasus, because they are
circled with sharp mountains: but so also we may be in charity with every
unpleasant accident, because though it taste bitter it is intended for health
and medicine.

If therefore thou fallest from thy employment in public, take sanctuary in an
honest retirement, being indifferent to thy gain abroad, or thy safety at home:
If thou art out of favor with thy Prince, secure the favor of the KING of
Kings, and then there is no harm come to thee: and when Zeno Citiensis lost all
his goods in a storm, he retired to the studies of Philosophy, to his short
cloak, and a severe life, and gave thanks to fortune for his prosperous
mischance. When the North-winde blows hard, and it rains sadly, none but fools
sit down in it and cry,: wise people defend themselves against it with a warm
garment, or a good fire, and a dry roof: when a storm of a sad mischance beats
upon our spirits, turn it into some advantage by observing where it can serve
another end, either of religion or prudence, of more safety or less envy: it
will turn into something that is good, if we list to make it so: at least it
may make us weary of the worlds vanity, and take off our confidence from
uncertain riches, and make our spirits to dwell in those regions, where content
dwells essentially: if it does any good to our souls, it has made more then
sufficient recompense for all the temporal affliction. He that threw a stone at
a dog, and hit his cruel stepmother, said, that although he intended it
otherwise, yet the stone was not quite lost: and if we fail in the first
design, if we bring it home to another equally to content us, or more to
profit us, then we have put our conditions past the power of chance; and this
was called in the old Greek Comedy a being revenged on fortune by becoming
Philosophers and turning the chance into reason or religion: for so a wise man
shall overrule his stars, and have a greater influence upon his own content,
then all the constellations and planets of the firmament.

2. Never compare thy condition with those above thee; but to secure thy
content look upon those thousands with whom thou would not for any interest
change thy fortune and condition. A soldier must not think himself
unprosperous, if he be not successeful as the son of Philip, or cannot grasp a
fortune as big as the Roman Empire: Be content that thou art not lessened as
was Pyrrhus: or if thou be, that thou art not routed like Crassus: and when
that comes to thee, it is a great prosperity, that thou art not cag'd and made
a spectale like Bajazet: or thy eyes were not pulled out like Zedekiahs: or
that thou were not flead alive like Valentinian. If thou admirest the
greatness of Xerxes, look also on those that dug the mountain Atho, or
whose ears and noses were cut off, because the Hellespont carried away the
bridge. It is a fine thing (thou think) to be carried on men's shoulders: but
give God thanks that thou art not forced to carry a rich fool upon thy
shoulders: as those poor men do whom thou beholdest. There are but a few Kings
in mankind, but many thousands who are very miserable, if compared to thee.
However it is a huge folly rather to grieve for the good of others, then to
rejoice for that good which God has given us of our own.

And yet there is no wise or good man that would change persons or conditions
entirely with any man in the world. It may be he would have one man's wealth
added to himself, or the power of a second, or the learning of a third, but
still he would receive these into his own person, because he loves that best,
and therefore esteems it best, and therefore overvalues all that which he is,
before all that which any other man in the world can be. Would any man be Dives
to have his wealth, or Judas for his office, or Saul for his kingdom, or
Absalom for his beauty, or Achitophel for his policy? It is likely he would
wish all these, and yet he would be the same person still. For every man has
desires of his own, and objects just fitted to them, without which he cannot
be, unless he were not himself. And let every man that loves himself so well
as to love himself before all the world, consider, if he have not something for
which, in the whole he values himself far more then he can value any man else.
There is therefore no reason to take the finest feathers from all the winged
nation to deck that bird, that thinks already she is more valuable then any the
inhabitants of the air. Either change all or none. Cease to love your self
best, or be content with that portion of being and blessing for which you love
your self so well.

3. It conduces much to our content, if we pass by those things which happen
to our trouble, and consider that which is pleasing and prosperous, that by the
representation of the better the worse may be blotted out: and at the worst you
have enough to keep you alive, and to keep up, and to improve your hopes of
Heaven. If I be overthrown in my suit at Law, yet my house is left me still and
my land: or I have a virtuous wife, or hopeful children, or kind friends, or
good hopes: If I have lost one child, It may be I have two or three still left
me; or else reckon the blessings which already you have received, and therefore
be pleased in the change and variety of affairs to receive evil from the hand
of God as well as good. Antipater of Tarsus used this art to support his
sorrows on his death bed, and reckoned the good things of his past life, not
forgetting to recount it as a blessing, and argument that God took care of
him, that he had a prosperous journey from Cilicia to Athens. Or else please
thy self I a speranza e il pan de pove^i
Non si male nunc, and ol^m sic* erit

with hopes of the future: for we were not born with this sadness upon us; and
it was a change that brought us into it, and a change may bring us out again.
(...).
Harvest will come, and then every farmer is rich, at least for a month or
two. It may be thou art entered into the cloud which will bring a gentle shower
to refresh thy sorrows.

Now suppose thy self in as great a sadness, as ever did load thy spirit,
would thou not bear it cheerfully and nobly, if thou were sure that within
a certain space some strange excellent fortune would relieve thee, and enrich
thee, and recompense thee so as to overflow all thy hopes and thy desires, and
capacities? Now then, when a sadness lies heavy upon thee, remember that thou
art a Christian designed to the inheritance of Jesus: and what do thou think
concerning thy great fortune, thy lot and portion of eternity? Do thou think
thou shall be saved or damned? Indeed if thou think thou shall perish, I
cannot blame thee to be sad, sad till thy heart strings crack: but then why art
thou troubled at the loss of thy money? what should a damned man do with
money, which in so great a sadness it is impossible for him to enjoy? Did ever
any man upon the rack, afflict himself because he had received a cross answer
from his Mistress? or call for the particulars of a purchase upon the gallows?
If thou do really believe thou shall be damned, I do not say it will cure
the sadness of thy poverty, but it will swallow it up. * But if thou believe
thou shall be saved, consider how great is that joy, how infinite is that
change, how unspeakable is the glory, how excellent is the recompense for all
the sufferings in the world, if they were all laden upon thy spirit? So that
let thy condition be what it will, if thou considerest thy own present
condition, and compare it to thy future possibility, thou can not feel the
present smart of a cross fortune to any great degree, either because thou have
a far bigger sorrow, or a far bigger joy. Here thou art but a stranger
traveling to thy Country where the glories of a kingdom are prepared for
thee, it is therefore a huge folly to be much afflicted because thou have a
less convenient Inn to lodge in by the way.

But these arts of looking forwards and backwards are more then enough to
support the spirit of a Christian: there is no man but has blessings enough in
present possession to outweigh the evils of a great affliction. Tell the joints
of thy body, and do not accuse the universal providence for a lame leg, or the
want of a finger, when all the rest is perfect: and you have a noble soul, a
particle of Divinity, the image of GOD himself: and by the want of a finger you
may the better know how to estimate the remaining parts, and to account for
every degree of the surviving blessings. Aristippus in a great suit at law lost
a Farm, and to a Gentleman who in civility pitied and deplored his loss, He
answered, I have two Farms left still, and that is more then I have lost, and
more then you have by one. If you miss an Office for which you stood
Candidate, then besides that you are quit of the cares and the envy of it, you
still have all those excellencies which rendered you capable to receive it, and
they are better then the best Office in the Commonwealth. If your estate be
lessened, you need the less to care who governs the Province, whether he be
rude or gentle. I am crossed in my journey, and yet I escaped robbers; and I
consider, that if I had been se^ upon by Villanes I would have redeemed that
evil by this which I now suffer, and have counted it a deliverance: or if I did
fall into the hands of thieves, yet they did not steal my land: or I am fallen
into the hands of Publicans and Sequestrators, and they have taken all from me,
what now? let me look about me. They have left me the Sun and the Moon, Fire
and Water, a loving wife, and many friends to pity me, and some to relieve me,
and I can still discourse, and unless I list they have not taken away my merry
countenance, and my cheerful spirit, and a good conscience: they still have
left me the providence of God, and all the promises of the Gospel, and my
Religion, and my hopes of Heaven, and my charity to them too: and still I
sleep, and digest, I eat and drink, I read and meditate, I can walk in my
Neighbors pleasant fields, and see the varieties of natural beauties, and
delight in all that in which God delights, that is, in virtue and wisdom, in
the whole creation, and in God himself: and he that has so many causes of joy,
and so great, is very much in love with sorrow and peevishness, who loses all
these pleasures, and chooses to sit down upon his little handful of thorns:
such a person were fit to bear N^ro company in his funeral sorrow for the loss
of one of P^ppea s hairs, or help to mourn for Lesbia's sparrow: and because he
loves it, he deserves to starve in the midst of plenty, and to want comfort
while he is encircled with blessings.

4. Enjoy the present whatsoever it be, and be not sollicitous for the future:
for if you take your foot from the present standing, quid sit suturum cra^ fuge
quaerere, and
quem fors dierum cunque d^bit, lucro
Appone.
Hor. l. 1. Od 4.
and thrust it forward toward to morrows event, you are in a restless
condition: it is like refusing to quench your present thirst by fearing you
shall want drink the next day. If it be well to day, it is madness to make the
present miserable by fearing it may be ill to morrow, when your belly is full
of to days dinner to fear you shall want the next days supper: for it may be
you shall not, and then to what purpose was this days affliction? But if to
morrow you shall want, Prudens futuri temporis exitum.
Caliginosa nocte premit Deus
Ridetque, si mortalis ultra
Fas trepidet: quod adelt memento
Componere aequus.
Hor l. 3. Od. 29. (...).

your sorrow will come time enough, though you do not hasten it; let your
trouble tarry till its own day comes. But if it chance to be ill to day do not
increase it by the care of to morrow. Enjoy the blessings of this day, if God
sends them, and the evils of it bear patiently and sweetly: for this day is
only ours, we are dead to yesterday, and we are not yet born to ye morrow. He
therefore that enjoyes the present, if it be good, enjoyes as much as is
possible: and if only that days trouble leans upon him, it is singular and
finite. Sufficient to the day (said Christ) is the evil thereof. Sufficient,
but not intolerable: but if we look abroad and bring into one days thoughts
the evil of many, certain and uncertain, what will be, and what will never be,
our load will be as intolerable as it is unreasonable. To reprove this
instrument of discontent, the Ancients fained that in Hell stood a man twisting
a rope of Hay, and still he twisted on suffering an Ass to eat up all that was
finished: so miserable is he who thrusts his passions forward toward future
events, and suffers all that he may enjoy to be lost and devour d by folly and
inconsideration, thinking nothing fit to be enjoyed but that which is not, or
cannot be had. Just so, many young persons are loath to dye, and therefore
desire to live to old age, and when they are come thither, are troubled that
they are come to that state of life to which before they were come, they were
hugely afraid they should never come.

5. Let us prepare our minds against changes, always expecting them, that we
be not surprised when they come: For nothing is so great an enemy to
tranquillity and a contented spirit, as the amazement and confusions of
unreadinesse and inconsideration: and when our fortunes are violently changed,
our spirits are unchanged, if they always stood, in the Suburbs and
expectation of sorrows. O Death, how bitter art thou to a man that is at rest
in his possessions: and to the Rich Man who had promised to himself ease and
fullness for many years, it was a sad arrest that his soul was surprised the
first night: but the Apostles who every day knocked at the gate of death, and
looked upon it continually, went to their Martyrdom in peace and evennesse.

6. Let us often frame to our selves and represent to our considerations the
images of those blessings we have, just as we usually understand them when we
want them. Consider how desirable health is to a sick man, or liberty to a
prisoner; and if but a fit of the toothach seizes us with violence, all those
troubles which in our health afflicted us, disband instantly and seem
inconsiderable. He that in his health is troubled that he is in debt, and
spends sleeplesse nights, and refuses meat because of his infelicity, let him
fall into a fit of the Stone or a high Fever, despises the arrest of all his
first troubles, and is as a man unconcerned. Remember then that God has given
thee a blessing, the want of which is infinitely more trouble then thy present
debt, or poverty or loss; and therefore is now more to be valued in the
possession, and ought to outweigh thy trouble. The very privative blessings,
the blessings of immunity, safeguard, liberty and integrity which we commonly
enjoy, deserve the thanksgiving of a whole life. If God should send a Cancer
upon thy face, or a Wolf into thy side, if he should spread a crust of
Leprosy upon thy skin, what would thou give to be but as now thou art?
Would thou not on that condition be as poor as I am? or as the meanest of
thy brethren? Would you not choose your present loss or affliction as a thing
extremely eligible, and a redemption to thee if thou might exchange the
other for this? Thou art quit from a thousand calamities, every one of which if
it were upon thee would make thee insensible of thy present sorrow: and
therefore let thy joy (which should be as great for thy freedom from them, as
is thy sadness when thou feel any of them) do the same cure upon thy
discontent. For if we be not extremely foolish or vain, thanklesse or
senseless, a great joy is more apt to cure sorrow and discontent, then a great
trouble is. I have known an affectionate wife when she has been in fear of
parting with her beloved Husband, heartily desire of God his life or society
upon any conditions that were not sinful; and choose to beg with him, rather
then to feast without him: and the same person has upon that consideration
born poverty nobly, when God has heard her prayer in the other matter: What
wise man in the world is there who does not prefer a small fortune with peace
before a great one with contention, and war and violence? and then he is no
longer wise if he alters his opinion when he has his wish.

7. If you will secure a contented spirit, you must measure your desires by
your fortune and condition, ^ssai ba^ta per chi none in^ordo.
not your fortunes by your desires. That is, be governed by your needs not by
your fancy; by Nature, not by evil customs and ambitious principles. He that
would shoot an arrow out of a Plow, or hunt a Hare with an Elephant, is not
unfortunate for missing the mark or prey; but he is foolish for choosing such
unapt instruments: and so is he that runs after his content with appetites not
springing from natural needs, but from artificial, fantastical and violent
necessities: These are not to be satisfied; or if they were, a man has chosen
an evil instrument toward his content: Nature did not intend rest to a Man by
filling of such desires. Is that Beast better that has two or three Mountains
to graze on, then a little Be that feeds on Dew or Manna, and lives upon what
falls every morning from the Storehouses of Heaven Clouds and Providence: ^
Nume^ aquae viridi si margin^ claud^ret unda^
Kerba, nec in^enuum violatent (...)
(...) pascunt oli^^
(...), levesque malv^
F^ui paratis and valid^ mihi
L^toc d^me^*
Horat. l. 1. Od. 31. Am^b^ lev^m ^upi^ssam
(...) pascui^
Te^^^ mihi ^atum es^ p^^num
Car^^ interim ^olo^ibus. (...).

Can a Man quench his thirst better out of a River then a full Urn, or drink
better from the Fountain when it is finely paved with Marble, then when it
swells over the green Turfe? Pride and artificial gluttonies do but adulterate
Nature, making our diet healthlesse, our appetites impatient and unsatisfiable,
and the taste mixed, fantastical, and meretricious. But that which we miscal
poverty, is indeed Nature: and its proportions are the just measures of a Man,
and the best instruments of content: But when we create needs that God or
Nature never made, we have erected to our selves an infinite stock of trouble
that can have no period.

Sempronius complained of want of clothes, and was much troubled for a new
suit, being ashamed to appear in the Theater with his Gown a little
threadbare: but when he got it and gave his old clothes to Codrus, the poor
man was ravished with joy, and went and gave God thanks for his new purchase:
and Codrus was made richly fine and cheerfully warm by that which Sempronius
was ashamed to wear; and yet their natural needs were both alike, the
difference only was, that Sempronius had some artificial and fantastical
necessities superinduced, which Codrus had not; and was harder to be relieved,
and could not have joy at so cheap a rate; because the one lived according to
Nature, the other by Pride and ill customs, and measures taken by other men's
eyes and tongues, and artificial needs. He that propounds to his fancy things
greater then himself, or his needs, and is discontent and troubled when he
fails of such purchases, ought not to accuse Providence, or blame his fortune
but his folly. God and Nature made no more needs then they mean to satisfy:
and he that will make more must look for satisfaction where he can.

8. In all troubles and sadder accidents, let us take sanctuary in Religion,
and by innocence cast out anchors for our souls to keep them from shipwreck,
though they be not kept from storm. ^^cate culpa in calamitati^us (...).
For what Philosophy shall comfort a Villane that is haled to the rack for
murdering his Prince; or that is broken upon the wheel for Sacrilege: his cup
is full of pure and unmingled sorrow: His body is rent with torment, his name
with ignominy, his soul with shame and sorrow which are to last eternally: but
when a man suffers in a good cause, or is afflicted and yet walks not perversely
with his God, then, Anytus and Melitus may kill me, but they cannot hurt me;
then S. Paul's character is engraved in the forehead of our fortune: We are
troubled on every side, 2 Cor. 4.8.
bu^ not distressed, perplexed, but not in despair, persecuted, but not
forsaken, cast down, but not destroyed: and who is he that will harm you if ye
be followers of that which is good? 1 Pet. 3.13. 1 Pet. 4.15, 16.
For indeed every thing in the World is indifferent but sin: and all the
scorchings of the Sun are very tolerable in respect of the burnings of a Fever
or a Calenture. The greatest evils are from within us: and from our selves also
we must look for our greatest good; for God is the Fountain of it, but reaches
it to us by our own hands; and when all things look sadly round about us, then
only we shall find how excellent a fortune it is to have God to friend; and of
all friendships that only is created to support us in our needs. For it is sin
that turns an Ague into a Fever, and a Fever to the Plague, fear into
despair, anger into rage, and loss into madness, and sorrow to amazement and
confusion: but if either we were innocent, or else by the sadness are made
penitent, we are p^t to School, or into the Theater, either to learn how, or
else actually to combat for a Crown; the accident may serve an end of mercy,
but is not a Messenger of wrath.

Let us not therefore be governed by external and present, and seeming things;
nor let us make us the same judgment of things, that common and weak
understandings do; nor make other men, and they not the wisest, to be judges of
our felicity, so that we be happy or miserable as they please to think us; but
let reason and experience, and religion, and hope relying upon the Divine
promises be the measure of our judgment. Beati^ud^ pendet a ^ n^^is con^^lm in
affectionem animi constantem desinent^bu^. Plut.
No wise man did ever describe felicity without virtue: and no good man did
ever think virtue could depend upon the variety of a good or bad fortune. It is
no evil to be poor, but to be vicious and impatient.

Means to obtain content by way of consideration.
To these exercises and spiritual instruments if we add the following
considerations concerning the nature and circumstances of humane chance, we
may better secure our peace. For as to children who are afraid of vain Images,
we use to persuade confidence by making them to handle and look nearer such
things, that when in such a familiarity they perceive them innocent, they may
overcome their fears: so must timorous, fantastical, sad and discontented
persons be treated; they must be made to consider and on all sides to look upon
the accident, and to take all its dimensions, and consider its consequences,
and to behold the purpose of God, and the common mistakes of men, and their
evil sentences they usually pass upon them; For then we shall perceive that
like Colts and unmanag'd Horses we start at dead bones and livelesse blocks,
things that are unactive as they are innocent. But if we secure our hopes and
our fears, and make them moderate and within government, we may the sooner
overcome the evil of the accident: for nothing that we feel is so bad as what
we fear.

Non te al o^nia lera genuit O Agamemnon, Atreus. Opus ^st te gaudere and
n^erere: Mortalis n. natus est, and ut haud velis Superi sic constitue^unc
1. Consider that the universal providence of God has so ordered it, that the
good things of Nature and Fortune are divided, that we may know how to bear our
own and relieve each others wants and imperfections. It is not for a Man, but
for a God to have all excellencies and all felicities. He supports my poverty
with his wealth, I counsel and instruct him with my learning and experience. He
has many friends, I many children: He has no Heir, I have no inheritance: and
any one great blessing together with the common portions of Nature and
necessity is a fair fortune, if it be but health or strength, or the swiftness
of Ahimaaz. For it is an unreasonable discontent to be troubled that I have not
so good Cocks, or Dogs, or Horses as my Neighbor, being more troubled that I
want one thing that I need not, then thankful for having received all that I
need. Nero had this disease, that he was not content with the fortune of the
whole Empire, but put the Fiddlers to death for being more skilful in the trade
then he was: and Dionysius the elder, was so angry at Philoxenus for singing,
and with Plato for disputing better then he did, that he sold Plato a Slave
into Aegina, and condemned the other to the Quarries.

This consideration is to be enlarged by adding to it that there are some
instances of fortune and a fair condition that cannot stand with some others,
but if you desire this, you must lose that, and unless you be content with
one, you lose the comfort of both. If you covet Learning, you must have leisure
and a retired life: if to be a Politician, you must go abroad and get
experience and do all businesses, and keep all company, and have no leisure at
all. If you will be rich, you must be frugal: If you will be popular, you must
be bountiful: If a Philosopher, you must despise riches. The Greek that design
d to make the most exquisite picture that could be imagined fancyed the eye of
Chion^, and the hair of Paegnium, and Tarsia's lip, and Philenium's chinne, and
the forehead os Delphia, and set all these upon Milphidippas neck, and thought
that he should out do both Art and Nature. But when he came to view the
proportions he found that what was excellent in Tarsia did not agree with the
other excellency of Philenium; and although singly they were rare pieces, yet
in the whole they made a most ugly face. The dispersed excellencies and
blessings of many men, if given to one would not make a handsome, but a
monstrous fortune. Use therefore that faculty which Nature has given thee, and
thy education has made actual, and thy calling has made a duty: but if thou
desire to be a Saint, refuse not his persecution: If thou would be famous
as Epaminondas or Fabricius, accept also of their poverty, for that added
luster to their persons and envy to their fortune, and their virtue without it
could not have been so excellent. Let Euphorion sleep quietly with his old rich
Wife: and let Medius drink on with Alexander: and remember, thou can not have
the riches of the first, unless you have the old Wife too; nor the favor
which the second had with his Prince, unless you buy it at his price Prandet
Aristoteles quando Phillippo lubet. Di^gen^^ quando Diogeni.
, that is, pay thy sobriety down at first, and thy health a little after; and
then their condition though it look d splendidly, yet when you handle it on all
sides, it will prick your fingers.

2. Consider how many excellent personages in all Ages have suffered as great
or greater calamities then this which now tempts thee to impatience. Agis was
the most noble of the Greeks, and yet his Wife bore a Child by Alcibiades: and
Philip was Prince of I^urea, and yet his Wife run away with his Brother Herod
into Galilee: and certainly in a great fortune that was a great calamity. But
these are but single instances. Almost all the ages of the world have noted
that their most eminent Scholars were most eminently poor, some by choice, but
most by chance, and an inevitable decree of providence: And in the whole sex of
women God has decreed the sharpest pains of childebirth, to show that there is
no state exempt from sorrow, and yet that the weakest, persons have strengths
more then enough to bear the greatest evil: and the greatest Queens and the
Mothers of Saints and Apostles, have no charter of exemption from this sad
sentence. But the Lord of men and Angels was also the King of sufferings; and
if thy course robe trouble thee, remember the swaddling clothes of Jesus: if thy
bed be uneasy, yet it is not worse than his Manger; and it is no sadness to
have a thin table, if thou call to mind that the King of heaven and earth
was fed with a little breast milk; and yet besides this he suffered all the
sorrows which we deserved. We therefore have great reason to sit down upon our
own hearths, and warm our selves at our own fires, and feed upon content at
home: for it were a strange pride to expect to be more gently treated by the
Divine providence then the best and wisest men, then Apostles and Saints, nay,
then the son of the Eternal God, the heir of both the worlds.

This Consideration may be enlarged by surveying all the states and families of
the world: and he S^rviu^ Suluitius.
that at once saw Aegina and Megara, Pyraeus and Corinth lie gasping in their
ruins, and almost buried in their own heaps had reason to blame Cicero for
mourning impatiently the death of one woman. In the most beauteous and splendid
fortune there are many cares and proper interruptions and allayes; In the
fortune of a Prince there is not the course robe of beggary; but there are
infinite cares: and the Hic in foro beatus esse creditur
Cum fo^ibus-apertis sit suis miser^imus
Imperat mulier, jubet omnia, semper litigat,
Multa adferunt illi dolore^, nihil mihi.
E^rre quam sortem patiuntur omnes Nemo recusat.

Judge sits upon the Tribunal with great ceremony and ostentation of fortune,
and yet at his house, or in his breast there is something that causes him to
sigh deeply. Pittacus was a wise and valiant man, but his wife overthrew the
Table when he had invited his friends: upon which the good man to excuse her
incivility and his own misfortune said, that every man had one evil, and he was
most happy that had but that alone; And if nothing else happens, yet sicknesses
so often do imbitter the fortune and content of a family, that a Physician in a
few years, and with the practice upon a very few families, gets experience
enough to minister to almost all diseases.

3. There are many accidents which are esteemed great calamities, and yet we
have reason enough to bear them well and unconcernedly; for they neither touch
our bodies nor our souls: our health and our virtue remains entire, our life
and our reputation. It may be I am slighted, or I have received ill language,
but my head aches not for it, neither has it broke my thigh, nor taken away my
virtue, unless I lose my charity or my patience. Inquire therefore what you
are the worse either in your soul or in your body, for what has happened: for
upon this very, stock many evils will disappeare, since the body and the soul
make up the whole man: and when the daughter of Stilpo proved a wanton, Si
natu^ e^ T^^phime solus omnium (...) lege
Ut sem ^r ^ant tibi re^ arbit^io tuo
Felicitatem hanc si qui^ p^omisit ^eum
Iras^e^eris jure, non mala is fide
^t improbe egi^^et.
Menan.
he said it was none of his sin, and therefore there was no reason it should be
his misery: And if an enemy has taken all that from a Prince whereby he was a
King; he may refresh himself by considering all that is left him, whereby he is
a man.

4. Consider that sad accidents and a state of affliction is a School of
virtue: it reduces our spirits to soberness, and our counsels to moderation;
it corrects levity, and interrupts the confidence of sinning. It is good for me
(said David) that I have been afflicted, 119. Psalm. 10. part. v. 3.
for thereby I have learned thy Law. And I know (O Lord) that thou of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled. For God, who in mercy and wisdom
governs the world, would never have suffered so many sadnesses, and have sent
them especially to the most virtuous and the wisest men, but that he intends
they should be the seminary of comfort, the nursery of virtue, the exercise of
wisdom, the trial of patience, the venturing for a crown, and the gate of glory.

5. Consider that afflictions are oftentimes the occasions of great temporal
advantages: and we must not look upon them as they sit down heavily upon us,
but as they serve some of Gods ends, and the purposes of universal Providence:
And when a Prince fights justly, and yet unprosperously, if he could see all
those reasons for which God has so ordered it, he would think it the most
reasonable thing in the world, and that it would be very ill to have it
otherwise. If a man could have opened one of the pages of the Divine counsel,
and could have seen the event of Joseph's being sold to the Merchants of Amalek,
he might with much reason have dried up the young man's tears: and when Gods
purposes are opened in the events of things, as it was in the case of Joseph,
when he sustained his Fathers family and became Lord of Egypt, then we see what
ill judgment we made of things, and that we were passionate as children, and
transported with sense and mistaken interest. The case of Themistocles was
almost like that of Joseph, for being banished into Egypt, he also grew in
favor with the King, and told his wife, He had been undone, unless he had
been undone. For God esteems it one of his glories that he brings good out of
evil, and therefore it were but reason we should trust God to govern his own
world as he pleases: and that we should patiently wait till the change comes,
or the reason be discovered.

And this consideration is also of great use to them who envy at the prosperity
of the wicked, and the success of Persecutors, and the baits of fishes, and
the bread of dogs. God fails not to sow blessings in the long furrows which the
plowers plow upon the back of the Church: and this success which troubles us
will be a great glory to God, and a great benefit to his Saints and servants,
and a great ruin to the Persecutors, who shall have but the fortune of
Theramenes one of the thirty Tyrants of Athens, who escaped when his house fell
upon him, and was shortly after put to death with torments by his Colleagues in
the Tyranny.

To which also may be added that the great evils which happen to the best and
wisest men are one of the great arguments, upon the strength of which we can
expect felicity to our souls, and the joys of another world. And certainly
they are then very tolerable and eligible, when with so great advantages they
minister to the faith and hope of a Christian. But if we consider what
unspeakable tortures are provided for the wicked to all eternity, we should not
be troubled to see them prosperous here, but rather wonder that their portion
in this life is not bigger, and that ever they should be sick, or crossed, or
affronted, or troubled with the contradiction and disease of their own vices,
since if they were fortunate beyond their own ambition it could not make them
recompense for one hours torment in Hell, which yet they shall have for their
eternal portion.

After all these considerations deriving from sense and experience, grace and
reason, there are two remedies still remaining, and they are Necessity and Time.

6. For it is but reasonable to bear that accident patiently which God sends,
since impatience does but entangle us like the fluttering of a bird in a net,
but cannot at all ease our trouble, or prevent the accident: it must be run
thorough, and therefore it were better we compose our selves to a patient, Nemo
(...) quod (...) est pati^.
then to a troubled and miserable suffering.

7. But however, if you will not otherwise be cured, time at last will do it
alone; and then consider, do you mean to mourn always, or but for a time? If
always; you are miserable and foolish. If for a time; then why will you not
apply those reasons to your grief at first, with which you will cure it at
last: or if you will not cure it with reason, see how little of a man there is
in you, that you suffer time to do more with you then reason or religion: you
suffer your selves to be cured just as a beast, or a tree is; let it alone and
the thing will heal it self; but this is neither honorable to thy person, nor
of reputation to thy religion. However be content to bear thy calamity, because
thou art sure in a little time it will sit down gentle and easy: For to a mortal
man no evil is immortal: And here let the worst thing happen that can, it will
end in death, and we commonly think that to be near enough.

8. Lastly, of those things which are reckoned amonstg evils, some are better
then their contraries; and to a good man the very worst is tolerable.

Poverty or a low For^une.
1. Poverty is better then riches, and a mean fortune to be chosen before a
great and splendid one. It is indeed despised and makes men contemptible: it
exposes a man to the insolence of evil persons, and leaves a man defencelesse:
it is always suspected: its stories are accounted lies, and all its counsels
follyes: it puts a man from all employment: it makes a man's discourses tedious,
and his society troublesome. This is the worst of it: and yet all this and
^arre worse then this the Apostles suffered for being Christians; and
Christianity it self may be esteemed an affliction as well as poverty, if
this be all that can be said against it; for the Apostles and the most eminent
Christians were really poor, and were used contemptuously: and yet, that
poverty is despised may be an argument to commend it, Alta ^ortuna alto
trava^lio apporto:
if it be despised by none but persons vicious and ignorant. However, certain
it is that a great fortune is a great vanity, and riches is nothing but danger,
trouble, and temptation; like a garment that is too long, and bears a train;
not so useful to one, but it is troublesome to two; to him that bears the one
part upon his shoulders; and to him that bears the other part in his hands: But
poverty is the sister of a good mind, the parent of sober counsels and the
nurse of all virtue.

For, what is it that you admire in the fortune of a great King? Is it that he
always goes in a great company? You may thrust your self into the same crowd,
or go often to Church, and then you have as great a company as he has, and
that may upon as good ground please you as him, that is, justly neither: for so
impertinent and useless pomp, and the other circumstances of his distance, are
not made for him, but for his Subjects, that they may learn to separate him
from common usages, and be taught to be governed. ^
But if you look upon them as fine things in themselves, you may quickly alter
your opinion when you shall consider that they cannot cure the toothach, nor
make one wise, or fill the belly, or give one nights sleep, (though they help
to break many) nor satisfying any appetite of Nature, or Reason, or Religion:
but they are states of greatness which only makes it possible for a Man to be
made extremely miserable. And it was long ago observed by the Greek
Tragedians, and from them by Arrianus, (...)
Bis se^ dierum mensura cons^ro ego agr^s
Ber^cynchia arv^
Animusque meus sursum usq. evectus ad polum
De^i^it h^mi, and me sic videtur all^qui.
Disce haud nimis magni^acere m^rtalia.
Tantal. in ^^agaed.
saying, That all our Tragedies are of Kings and Princes, and rich or ambitious
personages, but you never see a poor man have a part, unless it be as a
Chorus, or to fill up the Scenes, to dance or to be derided: but the Kings and
the great Generals; First (says he) they begin with joy (...) crown the
houses: but about the third or fourth Act, they cry out, O Citheron why did
thou spare my life to reserve me for this more sad calamity? And this is really
true in the great accidents of the World: for a great estate has great
crosses, and a mean fortune has but small ones. It may be the poor man loses a
Cow (for if his Child dies he is quit of his biggest care) but such an
accident in a rich and splendid Family doubles upon the spirits of the parents:
Or it may be the poor man is troubled to pay his rent, and that is his biggest
trouble: but it is a bigger care to secure a great fortune in a troubled
estate, or with equal greatness, or with the circumstances of honor, and the
niceness of reputation to defend a Lawsuit: and that which will secure a
common man's whole estate, is not enough to defend a great man's honor.

And therefore it was not without mystery observed among the Ancients, ^fune^ta
(...) Templo Nondu^ habitas, nullas ^^mmoruin ere^imus aras Ut colitur pax
atque (...).
that they who made gods of gold and silver, of hope and fear, peace and
fortune, Garlic and Onions, Beasts and Serpents, and a quartan Ague, yet never
deified money: meaning, that however wealth was admired by common or abused
understandings; yet from riches, that is, from that proportion of good things
which is beyond the necessities of Nature, no moment could be added to a man's
real content or happiness. Corn from Sardinia, herds of Calabrian cattle,
meadows through which pleasant Liris glides, Horat. od^ 3^. l^b. 1.
silks from Tyrus, and golden Chalices to drown my health in, are nothing but
instruments of vanity or sin, and suppose a disease in the soul of him that
longs for them, or admires them: And this I Chap. 4. Sect. ^. ^^tle of
Covetousness
have otherwhere represented more largely; to which I here add, that riches
have very great dangers to their souls, not only who covet them, but to all
that have them. For if a great personage undertakes an action passionately, and
upon great interest, let him manage it indiscreetly, let the whole design be
unjust, let it be acted with all the malice and impotency in the World, he
shall have enough to flatter him, but not enough to reprove him. He had need be
a bold man that shall tell his Patron, he is going to Hell; and that Prince had
need be a good man that shall suffer such a Monitor: And though it be a
strange kind of civility and an evil dutifulness in Friends and Relatives to
suffer him to perish without reproof or medicine, rather then to seem
unmannerly to a great sinner, yet it is none of their least infelicities, that
their wealth and greatness shall put them into sin, and yet put them past
reproof. I need not instance in the habitual intemperance of rich Tables, nor
the evil accidents and effects of fullness; pride and lust, wantonness and
softness of disposition, huge talking, and an imperious spirit, despite of
Religion, and contempt of poor persons: At the best, it is a great temptation
for a man to have in his power whatsoever he can have in his sensual desires; 2
Iam. 5.6, 7.
and therefore riches is a blessing like to a present made of a whole Vintage
to a Man in a Hectic Fever; he will be much tempted to drink of it, and if he
does he is inflam d, and may chance to dye with the kindness.

Now besides what has been already noted, in the state of poverty there is
nothing to be accounted for, but the fear of wanting necessaries, of which if a
man could be secured, that he might live free from care, all the other parts of
it might be reckoned amongst the advantages of wise and sober persons, rather
then objections against that state of fortune.

But concerning this I consider, that there must needs be great security to all
Christians, since CHRIST not only made express promises that we should have
sufficient for this life; but also took great pains and used many arguments to
create confidence in us: and such they were which by their own strength were
sufficient, though you abate the authority of the Speaker. The Son of GOD
told us, his Father takes care of us: He that knew all his Fathers counsels
and his whole kindness toward mankind, told us so. How great is that truth,
how certain, how necessary, which CHRIST himself proved by arguments. The
excellent words and most comfortable sentences which are our Bills of Exchange,
upon the credit of which we lay our cares down, and receive provisions for our
need, are these. Take no thought for your life what ye shall eat or what ye
shall drink, Mat. 6.25.
nor yet for your body what ye shall put on. Is not the life more then meat,
and the body then raiment? Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not
neither do they reap, nor gather into barns, yet your heavenly Father feeds
them. Are ye not much better then they? which of you by taking thought can add
one cubit to his stature? And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the
Lillies of the field, how they grow: They toil not, neither do they spin, and
yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one
of these. Therefore if God so clothe the grass of the field which to day is,
and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of
little faith? Therefore take no thought, saying, what shall we eat, or what
shall we drink, or wherewithal shall we be clothed? (for after all these
things do the Gentiles seek;) For your heavenly Father knows that ye have
need of all these things. But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. Take therefore
no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for the things of
it self: sufficient to the day is the evil thereof. The same discourse is
repeated by S. Luke: and accordingly our duty is urged and our confidence
abetted by the Disciples of our Lord, Luke 12.22. to the (...) verse. Phil.
4.6. 1 Timothy 6.17.
in diverse places of holy Scripture. So S. Paul, Be careful for nothing, but in
every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your request be
made known unto God: And again, Charge them that are rich in this world that
they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living
GOD* who gives us richly all things to enjoy: and and yet again, Let your
conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things as ye
have; for he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee: So that we
may boldly say, the Lord is my helper. And all this is by S. Peter summed up in
our duty, thus: Cast all your care upon him, for he cares for you: Which words
he seems to have borrowed out of the 55 Psalm, verse 23. where David says the
same thing almost in the same words; To which I only add the observation made
by him, and the argument of experience; I have been young and now am old, and
yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. And
now after all this, a fearlesse confidence in God and concerning a provision of
necessaries is so reasonable that it is become a duty; and he is scarce a
Christian whose faith is so little as to be jealous in God and suspicious
concerning meat and clothes: that man has nothing in him of the nobleness or
confidence of Charity.

Does not God provide for all the birds and beasts and fishes? Do not the
sparrows fly from their bush, and every morning find meat where they laid it
not? Do not the young ravens call to God and he feeds them? and were it
reasonable that the sons of the family should fear the Father would give meat
to the chickens and the servants, his sheep and his dogs, but give none to
them? He were a very ill Father that should do so: or he were a very foolish
son that should think so of a good Father. * But besides the reasonableness of
this faith and this hope; we have infinite experience of it. How innocent, how
careless, how secure is Infancy? and yet how certainly provided for! we have
lived at Gods charges all the days of our life, and have (as the Italian
proverb says) set down to meat at the sound of a bell; and hitherto he has
not failed us: we have no reason to suspect him for the future; we do not use
to serve men so; and less time of trial creates great confidences in us
toward them who for twenty years together never broke their word with us: and
God has so ordered it that a man shall have had the experience of many years
provision, before he shall understand how to doubt: that he may be provided for
an answer against the temptation shall come, and the mercies felt in his
childehood, may make him fear less when he is a man. * Add to this that God
has given us his holy Spirit; he has promised heaven to us; he has given us
his son; and we are taught from Scripture to make this inference from hence,
How should not he with him give us all things else?

The Charge of many Children.
We have a title to be provided for as we are Gods creatures: another title as
we are his Children: another because God has promised: and every of our
children has the same title; and therefore it is a huge folly and infidelity
to be troubled and full of care because we have many children. Every child we
have to feed is a new revenue, a new title to Gods care and providence; so that
many children are a great wealth: and if it be said they are chargeable, it is
no more then all wealth and great revenues are. For what difference is it?
Titius keeps ten ploughs, Cornelia has ten children: He has land enough to
employ, and to feed all his hindes; ^he blessings, and promises, and the
provisions and the truth of God to maintain all her children. His hindes and
horses eat up all his corn, and her children are sufficiently maintained with
her little. They bring in and eat up; and she indeed eats up, but they also
bring in from the store houses of heaven, and the granaries of God: and my
children are not so much mine as they are Gods: he feeds them in the womb by
ways secret and insensible; and would not work a perpetual miracle to bring
them forth, and then to starve them.

Violent necessities.
But some men are highly tempted, and are brought to a strait, that without a
miracle they cannot be relieved, what shall they do? It may be their pride or
vanity has brought the necessity upon them, and it is not a need of Gods
making; and if it be not they must cure it themselves by lessening their
desires, and moderating their appetites; and yet if it be innocent though
unnecessary, God does usually relieve such necessities; and he does not only
upon our prayers grant us more then he promised of temporal things: but also he
gives many times more then we ask. This is no object for our faith, but ground
enough for a temporal and prudent hope: and if we fail in the particular, God
will turn it to a bigger mercy, if we submit to his dispensation, and adore him
in the denial. But if it be a matter of necessity, let not any man by way of
impatience cry out, that God will not work a miracle; for God by miracle did
give meat and drink to his people in the wilderness, of which he had made no
particular promise in any Covenant: and if all natural means fail, it is
certain that God will rather work a miracle then break his word: He can do
that, He cannot do this. Only we must remember that our portion of temporal
things is but food and raiment: God has not promised us coaches and horses,
rich houses and jewels, Tyrian silks and Persian carpets; neither has he
promised to minister to our needs in such circumstances as we shall appoint,
but such as himself shall choose. God will enable either thee to pay thy debt
(if thou beggest it of him) or else he will pay it for thee, that is, take thy
desire as a discharge of thy duty, and pay it to thy Creditor in blessings, or
in some secret of his providence. It may be he has laid up the corn that shall
feed thee, in the granary of thy Brother; or will clothe thee with his wool; he
enabled Saint Peter to pay his Gabel, by the ministry of a fish; and Elias to
be waited on by a crow, who was both his minister, and his steward for
provisions: and his Holy Son rode in triumph upon an ass that grazed in
another man's pastures. And if God gives to him the dominion and reserves the
use to thee, thou have the better half of the two; but the charitable man
serves God and serves thy need; and both join to provide for thee, and God
blesses both. But if he takes away the fleshpots from thee, he can also alter
the appetite, and he has given thee power and commandment to restrain it: and
if he lessens the revenue, he will also shrink the necessity; or if he gives
but a very little, he will make it go a great way: or if he sends thee but
course diet, he will bless it and make it healthful, and can cure all the
anguish of thy poverty by giving thee patience, and the grace of
contentedness. For the grace of God secures you of provisions, and yet the
grace of God feeds and supports the spirit in the want of provisions: and if a
thin table be apt to enfeeble the spirits of one used to feed better, yet the
cheerfulness of a spirit that is blessed will make a thin table become a
delicacy, if the man was as well taught as he was fed, and learned his duty
when he received the blessing. Poverty therefore is in some senses eligible and
to be preferred before riches, but in all senses it is very tolerable.

Death of Children, or nearest Relatives and Friends.
There are some persons who have been noted for excellent in their lives and
passions, rarely innocent, and yet hugely penitent for indiscretions and
harmless infirmities, such as was Paulina one of the ghostly children of S.
Hierom, and yet when any of her children dyed she was arrested with a sorrow so
great as brought her to the margent of her grave. And the more tender our
spirits are made by Religion, the more easy we are to let in grief, if the
cause be innocent, and be but in any sense twisted with piety and due
affections. * To cure which we may consider that all the world must die, and
therefore to be impatient at the death of a person concerning whom it was
certain and known that he must die, is to mourn because thy friend or child
was not born an Angel, and when thou have a while made thy self miserable by an
importunate and useless grief, it may be thou shall die thy self, and leave
others to their choice whether they will mourn for thee or no: but by that time
it will appear how impertinent that grief was which served no end of life, and
ended in thy own funeral. But what great matter is it, if sparks fly upward, or
a stone falls into a pit, if that which was combustible be burned, or that
which was liquid be melted, or that which is mortal do die? It is no more then
a man does every day; for every night death has gotten possession of that day,
and we shall never live that day over again; and when the last day is come
there are no more days left for us to die. And what is sleeping and waking,
but living and dying? what is Sping and Autumn, youth and old age, morning and
evening, but real images of life and death, and really the same to many
considerable effects and changes?

Untimely death.
But it is not mere dying that is pretended by some as the cause of their
impatient mourning; but that the child died young, before he knew good and
evil; his right hand from his left, and so lost all his portion of this world,
and they know not of what excellency his portion in the next shall be. * If he
dyed young, he lost but little, for he understood but little, and had not
capacities of great pleasures, or great cares: but yet he dyed innocent and
before the sweetness of his soul was deflour d and ravished from him by the
flames and follies of a forward age: he went out from the dining-rooms before
he had fallen into error by the intemperance of his meat or the deluge of
drink: and he has obtained this favor of God, that his soul has suffered a
less imprisonment, and her load was sooner taken o^f that he might with lesser
delays go and converse with immortal spirits: and the babe is taken into
Paradise before he knows good and evil, (For that knowledge threw our great
Father out) and this ignorance returns the child thithe. * But (as concerning
thy own particular) remove thy thoughts back to those days in which thy child
was not born, and you are now but as then you was, and there is no difference
but that you had a son born, and if you reckon that for evil, you are
unthankful for the blessing; if it be good, it is better that you had the
blessing for a while then not at all, and yet if he had never been born, this
sorrow had not been at all: but be no more displeased at God for giving you the
blessing for a while, then you would have been if he had not given it at all;
and reckon that intervening blessing for a gain, but account it not an evil;
and if it be a good, turn it not into sorrow and sadness. * But if we have
great reason to complain of the calamities and evils o^ our life, then we have
the less reason to grieve that those whom we loved, have so small a portion of
evil assigned to them. And it is no small advantage, that our children dying
young receive: for their condition of a blessed immortality is rendered to them
secure by being snatched from the dangers of an evil choice and carried to their
little cells of felicity, where they can weep no more. And this the wisest of
the Gentiles understood well, when they forbade any offerings or libations to
be made for dead infants, as was usual for their other dead; as believing they
were entered into a secure possession, to which they went with no other
condition, but that they passed into it thorough the way of mortality, and for
a few months wore an uneasy garment. And let weeping parents say, if they do
not think that the evils their little babes have suffered are suf^icient. If
they be, why are they troubled that they were taken from those many and
greater, which in succeeding years are great enough to try all the reason and
religion which art and nature, and the grace of God has produced in us, to
enable us for such sad contentions. And possibly we may doubt concerning men
and women, but we cannot suspect that to infants death can be such an evil, but
that it brings to them much more good, then it takes them from in this life.

Death unseasonable.
But others can well bear the death of infants: but when they have spent some
years of childehood or youth, and are entered into arts, and society, when they
are hopeful and provided for, when the parents are to reap the comfort of all
their fears and cares, then it breaks the spirit to loose them. This is true in
many; but this is not love to the dead, but to themselves: for they miss what
they had flatterd themselves into by hope and opinion: and if it were kindnes^e
to the dead, they may consider, that since we hope he is gone to God and to
rest, it is an ill expression of our love to them, that we weep for their good
fortune. For that life is not best which is longest: and when they are
descended into the grave, it shall not be inquired how long they have lived,
but how well. And yet this shortening of their days is an evil wholly
depending upon opinion. Juvenis relinquit vi^am que^ (...) dili^unt.

Menan^.


For if men did naturally live but twenty years, then we should be satisfied if
they dyed about sixteen, or eighteen: and yet eighteen years now are as long as
eighteen years would be then; and if a man were but of a days life, it is well
if he lasts till even long, and then says his compline an hour before the
time: and we are pleased and call not that death immature if he lives till
seventy: and yet this age is as short of the old periods, before and since the
flood, as this youths age (for whom you mourn) is of the present fullness.
Suppose therefore a decree passed upon this person (as there have been many
upon all mankind) and God has set him a shorter period; and then we may as
well bear the immature death of the young man, as the death of the oldest men:
for they also are immature and unseasonable in respect of the old periods of
many generations. * And why are we troubled that he had arts and sciences
before he dyed? or are we troubled that he does not live to make use of them?
the first is cause of joy, for they are excellent in order to certain ends: And
the second cannot be cause of sorrow, because he has no need to use them as
the case now stands, being provided for with the provisions of an Angel, and
the manner of Eternity. However, the sons and the parents, friends and relatives
are in the world, like hours and minutes to a day. The hour comes and must
pass; and some stay but minutes, and they also pass, and shall never return
again. But let it be considered, that from the time in which a man is
conceived, from that time forward to Eternity he shall never cease to be: and
let him dye young or old, still he has an immortal soul and has laid down his
body only for a time as that which was the instrument of his trouble and
sorrow, and the scene of sicknesses and disease. But he is in a more noble
manner of being, after death, then he can be here* and the child may with more
reason be allowed to cry for leaving his mothers womb for this world, then a
man can for changing this world for another.

Sudden deaths or violent.
Others are yet troubled at the manner of their childs or friends death He was
drowned, or lost his head, or dyed of the plague, and this is a new spring of
sorrow: but no man can give a sensible account, how it shall be worse for a
child to dye with drowning in half an hour, then to endure a fever of one and
twenty days. And if my friend lost his head, so he did not lose his constancy,
and his religion, he dyed with huge advantage.

Being Childelesse.
But by this means I am left without an Heir: Well, suppose that: Thou have no
Heir, and I have no inheritance; and there are many Kings and Emperors that
have died childlesse: many Royal lines are extinguished: And Augustus Caesar
was forced to adopt his wives son to inherit all the Roman greatness. And
there are many wise persons that never married; and we read no where that any
o^ the children of the Apostles did survive their Fathers: and all that inherit
any thing of Christ's kingdom come to it by Adoption, not by natural
inheritance: and to dye without an natural heir is no intolerable evil, since
it was sanctified in ^he person of Jesus who dyed a Virgin.

Evil or unfortunate Children.
And by this means we are freed from the greater srorows of having a fool, a
swine, or a goat to rule after us in our families: and yet even this condition
admits of comfort. For all the wild Americans are supposed to be the sons of
Dodonai^; (...). Epict.
and the sons of Jacob are now the most scattered and despised people in the
whole world. The son of Solomon was but a silly weak man; and the son of
Hezekiah was wicked: and all the fools and barbarous people, all the thieves
and pirates, all the slaves and miserable men and women of the world a^e the
sons and daughters of Noah; and we must not look to be exempted from that
portion of sorrow which God gave to Noah, and Adam, to Abraham, to Isaac and
to Jacob: I pray God send us into the lot of Abraham. (...).
But if any thing happens worse to us, it is enough for us that we bear it
evenly.

Our own death.
And how if you were to die your self? you know you must. Only be ready for
it, by the preparations of a good life; Ad fines cum perv^ne^is (...) P^th^* ^*
and then it is the greatest good that ever happened to thee: else there is
nothing that can comfort you. But if you have served God in a holy life, send
away the women and the weepers, tell them it is as much intemperance to weep
too much, as to laugh too much: and when thou art alone, or with fitting
company, dye as thou should; but do not dye impatiently and like a fox
caught in a trap. For if you fear death you shall never the more avoid it, but
you make it miserable. Fannius that killed himself for fear of death, dyed as
certainly, as Portia that eat burning coals, or Cato that cut his own throat.
(...).
To dye is necessary and natural, and it may be honorable: but to dye poorly,
and basely, and sinfully, that alone is it, that can make a man unfortunate. No
man can be a slave, but he that fears pain, or fears to die. To such a man
nothing but chance and peaceable times can secure his duty, and he depends upon
things without, sor his felicity; and so is well but during the pleasure of his
enemy, or a Thief, or a Tyrant, or it may be, of a dog, or a wild bull.

Prayers for the several Graces and parts of Christian Sobriety.
A Prayer against Sensuality.
O Eternal Father, thou that sit in Heaven invested with essential Glories
and Divine perfections, fill my soul with so deep a sense of the excellencies
of spiritual and heavenly things, that my affections being weaned from the
pleasures of the world, and the false allurements of sin, I may with great
severity and the prudence of a holy discipline and strict desires, with clear
resolutions and a free spirit have my conversation in Heaven and heavenly
employments; that being in affections as in my condition a Pilgrim and a
stranger here, I may covet after and labor for an abiding city, and at last
may enter into and for ever dwell in the Celestial Jerusalem which is the
mother of us all, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For Temperance.
O ALmighty God and gracious Father of Men, and Angels, who openest thy hand
and fillest all things with plenty, and have provided for thy servant
sufficient to satisfy all my needs: teach me to use thy creatures soberly and
temperately, that I may not with loads of meat or drink make the temptations of
my enemy to prevail upon me, or my spirit unapt for the performance of my duty,
or my body healthlesse, or my affections sensual and unholy. O my God, never
suffer that the blessings which thou give me may either minister to sin or
sickness, but to health and holiness, and thanksgiving, that in the strength
of thy provisions I may cheerfully and actively and diligently serve thee: that
I may worthily feast at thy table here, and be accounted worthy through thy
grace to be admitted to thy table hereafter at the Eternal supper of the Lamb
to sing an Allelujah to God the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost for ever and
ever. Amen.

For Chastity: to be said especially by unmarried persons.
ALmighty God, our most holy and eternal Father, who art of pure eyes, and
can behold no uncleanness; let thy gracious and holy Spirit descend upon thy
servant, and reprove the spirit of Fornication and Uncleanness, and cast him
out, that my body may be a holy Temple, and my soul a Sanctuary to entertain
the Prince of purities, the holy and eternal Spirit of God. O let no impure
thoughts pollute that soul which God has sanctified; no unclean words pollute
that tongue which God has commanded to be an Organ of his praises; no unholy
and unchaste action rend the vail of that Temple where the holy JESUS has been
pleased to enter, and has chosen for his habitation: but seal up all my senses
from all vain objects, and let them be entirely possessed with Religion, and
fortified with prudence, watchfulness and mortification: that I possessing my
vessel in holiness, may lay it down with a holy hope, and receive it again in a
joyful resurrection through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the love of God, to be said by Virgins and Widows professed or
resolved so to live: and may be used by any one.
O Holy and purest Jesus who were pleased to espouse every holy soul and join
it to thee with a holy union, and mysterious instruments of religious society
and communications, O fill my soul with Religion and desires, holy as the
thoughts of Cherubim, passionate beyond the love of women, that I may love thee
as much as ever any creature loved thee, even with all my soul, and all my
faculties, and all the degrees of every faculty; let me know no loves but those
of duty and charity, obedience and devotion, that I may for ever run after thee
who art the King of Virgins, and with whom whole kingdoms are in love* and for
whose sake Queens have dyed; and at whose feet Kings with joy have laid their
Crowns and Scepters: My soul is thine O dearest Jesu, thou art my Lord, and
have bound up my eyes and heart from all stranger affections; give me for my
dowry purity and humility, modes^y and devotion, charity and patience, and at
last bring me into the Bride-chamber to partake of the felicities and to lie in
the bosom of the Bridegroom to eternal ages, O holy and sweetest Savior
Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer to be said by married persons in behalf of themselves and each other.
O Eternal and gracious Father who have consecrated the holy estate of marriage
to become mysterious, and to represent the union of Christ and his Church, let
thy holy Spirit so guide me in the doing the duties of this state, that it may
not become a sin unto me; nor that liberty which thou have hallowed by the holy
Jesus, become an occasion of licentiousness by my own weakness and
sensuality: and do thou forgive all those irregularities and too sensual
applications which may have in any degree discomposed my spirit and the
severity of a Christian. Let me in all accidents and circumstances be severe in
my duty toward thee, affectionate and dear to my wife [or Husband] a guide and
good example to my family, and in all quietness, sobriety, prudence and peace
a follower of those holy pairs who have served thee with godliness and a good
testimony: and the blessings of the eternal God, blessings of the right hand,
and of the left be upon the body and soul of thy servant my Wife [or Husband]
and abide upon her [or him] till the end of a holy and happy life; and grant
that both of us may live together for ever in the embraces of the holy and
eternal Jesus, our Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Prayer for the grace of Humility.
O Holy and most gracious Master and Savior Jesus, who by thy example and by
thy precept, by the practice of a whole life and frequent discourses did
command us to be meek and humble in imitation of thy incomparable sweetness
and great humility: be pleased to give me the grace as thou have given me the
commandment: enable me to do whatsoever thou command, and command whatsoever
thou please: O mortify in me all proud thoughts, and vain opinions of my
self: let me return to thee the acknowledgement and the sruits of all those
good things thou have given me, that by confessing I am wholly in debt to thee
for them, I may not boast my self for what I have received and for what I am
highly accountable: and for what is my own, teach me to be asham d and humbled,
it being nothing but sin and misery, weakness and uncleanness. Let me go
before my brethren in nothing but in striving to do them honor and thee glory;
never to seek my own praise; never to delight in it when it is offered; that
despising my self I may be accepted by thee in the honors with which thou
shall crown thy humble and despised servants for Jesus's sake in the kingdom of
eternal glory. Amen.

Acts of Humility and modesty by way of prayer and meditation.
1.
Lord I know that my spirit is light and thorny, my body is brutish and
exposed to sickness; I am constant to folly, and inconstant in holy purposes:
My labors are vain and fruitless; my fortune full of change and trouble,
seldom pleasing, never perfect: My wisdom is folly; being ignorant even of the
parts and passions of my own body: and what am I, O Lord, before thee, but a
miserable person, hugely in debt, not able to pay?

2.
Lord I am nothing, and I have nothing of my self, I am less then the least of
all thy mercies.

3.
What was I before my birth? First nothing, and then uncleanness. What during
my childehood? weakness and folly. What in my youth? folly still and passion,
lust and wildenesse. What in my whole life? a great sinner, a deceived and an
abused person. Lord pity me, for it is thy goodness that I am kept from
confusion and amazement when I consider the misery and shame of my person, and
the defilements of my nature.

4.
Lord what am I, and Lord what art thou? What is man that thou art mindeful of
him, and the son of Man that thou so regardest him?

5.
How can Man be justified with God? or how can he be clean that is born of a
Woman? Behold even to the Moon and it shines not, yea the Stars are not pure
in his sight. How much less Man that is a Worm, and the son of Man which is a
Worm? Job 25.

A Prayer, for a contented spirit, and the grace of moderation and patience.
O Almighty God, Father and Lord of all the Creatures, who have disposed all
things and all chances so as may best glorify thy wisdom, and serve the ends
of thy justice, and magnify thy mercy, by secret and undiscernable ways
bringing good out of evil; I most humbly b^seech thee to give me wisdom from
above that I may adore thee and admire thy ways, and footsteps which are in
the great Deep and not to be searched out; teach me to submit to thy providence
in all things, to be content in all changes of person and condition, to be
temperate in prosperity, and to read my duty in the lines of thy mercy, and in
adversity to be meek, patient and resigned, and to look through the cloud, that
I may wait for the consolation of the Lord, and the day of redemption; in the
mean time doing my duty with an unwearied diligence, and an undisturbed
resolution, having no fondness for the vanities or possessions of this World,
but laying up my hopes in Heaven and the rewards of holy living, and being
strengthened with the Spirit in the inner man, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

CHAP. III. Of Christian Justice.
Justice is by the Christian Religion enjoined in all its parts by these two
propositions in Scripture. [ Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
even so do to them.] This is the measure of communicative justice, or of that
justice which supposes exchange of things profitable, for things profitable:
that as I supply your need, you may supply mine, as I do a benefit to you, I
may receive one by you: and because every man may be injured by another,
therefore his security shall depend upon mine: if he will not let me be safe,
he shall not be safe himself, (only the manner of his being punished, is upon
great reason both by God and all the World taken from particulars, and
committed to a public dis-interested person, who will do justice without
passion, both to him and to me.) If he refuses to do me advantage, he shall
receive none when his needs require it. And thus God gave necessities to men,
that all men might need; and several abilities to several persons, that each
Man might help to supply the public needs, and by joining to fill up all
wants, they may be knit together by justice, as the parts of the world are by
nature: and he has made us all obnoxicus to injuries, and made every little
thing s^r^ng enough to do us hurt by some instrument or other; and has given
us all a sufficient stock of self love, and desire of self preservation, to be
as the chain to tie together all the pars of society, and to restrain us from
doing violence, lest we be violently dealt withal our selves.

The other part of justice is commonly called distributive, and is commanded in
this rule, [ Render to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom
to whom custom, fear to whom fear, Romans 13.7.
honor to whom honor. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another] This
justice is distinguished from the first, because the obligation depends not
upon contract or express bargain, but passes upon us by virtue of some command
of God, or of our Superior, by nature or by grace, by piety or religion, by
trust or by office, according to that Commandment [ As every man has received
the gift, so let him minister the same one to another, 1 Pet. 4.10.
as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. And as the first considers an
equality of persons in respect of the contract or particular necessity: this
supposes a difference of persons, and no particular bargains, but such
necessary entercourses, as by the Laws of God or man are introduced. But I
shall reduce all the particulars of both kinds to these four heads. 1.
Obedience. 2. Provision. 3. Negotiation. 4. Restitution.

Sect. I. Of Obedience to our Superiors.
OUr Superiors are set over us in affairs of the World, or the affairs of the
Soul, and things pertaining to Religion, and are called accordingly,
Ecclesiastical or Civil* Toward whom our duty is thus generally described in
the new Testament. For Temporal or Civil Governors the Commands are these.
Romans 13.8.
[ Render to Caesar the things that are Caesars] and [ Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers: For there is no power but of God: Titus 3.1.
The powers that be are ordained of God: whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation] and [ Put them in mind to be subject to princip^lities
and powers and to obey Magistrates] and [ Submit your selves to every ordinance
of man, 1 Pet. 2.13.
for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors,
as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and the
praise of them that do well.

For Spiritual or Ecclesiastical governors thus we are commanded. [ Obey them
that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your
souls, as they that must give an account] and [ Hold such in reputation] and [
to this end did I write that I might know the proof of you, whether ye be
obedient in all things] said S. Paul to the Church of Corinth. Heb. 13.17.
Philip 2.29. 2 Cor. 2.2.
Our duty is reducible to practice by the following rules.

Acts and duties of Obedience to all our Superiors.
1. We must obey all humane laws appointed and constituted by lawful Authority,
that i^, of the supreme power, according to the constitution of the place in
which we live: all laws I mean, which are not against the law of God.

2. In obedience to humane laws we must observe the letter of the Law where we
can without doing violence to the reason of the Law, and the intention of the
Lawgiver: but where they cross each other, the charity of the Law is to be
preferred before its discipline, and the reason of it before the letter.

3. If the general reason of the Law ceases in our particular, and a contrary
reason rises upon us, we are to procure dispensation, or leave to omit the
observation of it in such circumstances; if there be any persons or office
appointed for granting it: but if there be none, or if it is not easily to be
had, or not without an inconvenience greater then the good of the observation
of the Law in our particular, we are dispensed withal in the nature of the
thing, without further process or trouble.

4. As long as the Law is obligatory, so long our obedience is due; and he that
begins a contrary c^stom without reason, sins: but he that breaks the law when
the custom is entered and fixed, is excused, because it is supposed, the
legislative power consents, when by not punishing, it suffers disobedience to
grow up to a custom.

5. Obedience to humane laws must be for conscience sake: that is, because in
such obedience public order, and charity, and benefit is concerned: and
because the Law of God commands us, therefore we must make a conscience in
keeping the just Laws of Superiors: and although the matter before the making
of the Law was indifferent, (...). Arist. eth. 5. cap. 7.
yet now the obedience is not indifferent, but next to the Laws of God, we are
to obey the Laws of all our Superiors, who the more public they are, the
first they are to be in the order of obedience.

6. Submit to the punishment and censure of the Laws, and seek not to reverse
their judgment by opposing, but by submitting, or flying, or silence to pass
through it, or by it as we can: and although from inferior Jugdes we may appeal
where the Law permits us, yet we must sit down and rest in the judgment of the
Supreme: and if we be wronged, let us complain to God of the injury, not of the
persons, and he will deliver thy soul from unrighteous Judges.

7. Do not believe thou have kept the Law, when thou have suffered the
punishment. For although patiently to submit to the power of the sword, be a
part of obedience, yet this is such a part as supposes another lest undone: and
the Law punishes, not because she is as well pleased in taking vengeance, as in
being obeyed, but because she is displeased, she uses punishment as a means to
secure obedience for the future, or in others. Therefore although in such cases
the Law is satisfied, and the injury, and the injustice is paid for, yet the
sins of irreligion, and scandal, and disobedience to God must still be so
accounted sor, as to crave pardon, and be washed off by repentance.

8. Humane Laws are not to be broken with scandal, nor at all without reason;
for he that does it causelessly is a despiser of the Law, and undervalues the
Authority. For humane Laws differ from divine Laws principally in this: 1. That
the positive commands of a man may be broken upon smaller, and more reasons
then the p^sitive com^ands of God: we may upon a smaller reason omit to keep
any of the fasting days of the Church, then omit to give alms to the poor:
only this, the reason must bear weight according to the gravity and
concernment of the Law; a Law in a small matter may be omitted for a small
reason, in a great matter not without a greater reason. And 2. The negative
precepts of men may cease by many instruments, by contrary customs, by public
disrelish, by long omission: but the negative precepts of God never can cease,
but when they are expressly abrogated by the same Authority. But what those
reasons are that can dispense with the command of a man, a man may be his own
Judge, and sometimes take his proportions from his own reason and necessity,
sometimes from public fame, and the practice of pious and severe persons, and
from popular customs, in which a man shall walk most safely, when he does not
walk alone, but a spiritual man takes him by the hand.

9. We must not be too forward in procuring dispensations: nor use them any
longer then the reason continues for which we first procured them: for to be
dispensed withal is an argument of natural infirmity, if it be necessary; but
if be not, it signifies an indisciplined and unmortified spirit.

10. We must not be too busy in examining the prudence and unreasonablenesse
of humane Laws: for although we are not bound to believe them all to be the
wisest, yet if by enquiring into the lawfulne^se of them, or by any other
instrument we find them to fail, of that wisdom with which some others are
ordained, yet we must never make use of it to disparage the person of the
Lawgiver, or to counten^nce any man's disobedience, much less our own.

11. Pay that reverence to the person of thy Prince, of his Ministers, of thy
Parents and spiritual Guides, which by the customs of the place thou live in
are usually paid to such persons in their several degrees: that is, that the
highest reverence be paid to the highest person, and so still in proportion:
and that this reverence be expressed in all the circumstances and manners of
the city and nation.

12. Lift not up thy hand against thy Prince or Parent upon what pretense
soever: but bear all personal affronts and inconveniences at their hands, and
seek no remedy but by patience, and piety, yielding and praying, or absenting
thy self.

13 Speak not evil of the Ruler of thy people, neither Curse thy Father or
Mother, nor revile thy spiritual Guides, nor discover and lay naked their
infirmities: but treat them with reverence and religion, and preserve their
Authority sacred by esteeming their persons venerable.

14. Pay tribute and customs to Princes according to the Laws: and maintenance
to thy Parents according to their necessity: and honorable support to the
Clergy according to the dignity of the work, and the customs of the place.

15. Remember always that duty to our Superiors is not an act of commutative
justice, but of distributive: That is, although Kings and Parents and spiritual
Guides are to pay a great duty to their Inferiors, the duty of their several
charges and government: yet the good govovernment of a King and of Parents are
actions of Religion as they relate to God, and of Piety as they relate to their
people and families. And although we usually call them just Princes who
administer their Laws exactly to the people, because the actions are in the
matter of justice, yet in propriety of speech, they are rather to be called
Pious, and Religious. For as he is not called a just Father that educates his
children well, but pious; so that Prince who defends and well rules his people,
is Religious, and does that duty for which alone he is answerable to God. The
consequence of which is this, so far as concerns our duty: If the Prince or
Parent fail of their duty, we must not fail of ours: for we are answerable to
them and to God too; as being accountable to all our Superiors, and so are
they to theirs: they are above us, and God is above them.

Remedies against disobedience: and means to endear our obedience, by way of
consideration.
1. Consider that all authority descends from God, and our Superiors bear the
image of the Divine Power, which God imprints on them as on an image of clay,
or a coin upon a less perfect metal, which who so defaces, shall not be
answerable for the loss or spoil of the materials, but the effacing the Kings
Image, and in the same measure will God require it at our hands, if we despise
his authority upon whomsoever he has imprinted it. He that despises you,
despises me. And Dathan and Abiram were said to be gathered together against
the Lord. And this was S. Paul's argument for our obedience. [ The powers that
be, are ordained of God.]

2. There is very great peace and immunity from sin in resigning our wills up to
the command of others: for provided that our duty to God be secured, their
commands are warrants to us in all things else; and the case of conscience is
determined, if the command be evident and pressing: and it is certain, the
action that is but indifferent, and without reward, if done only upon our own
choice, is an act of duty and of religion, and rewardable by the grace and
favor of God, if done in obedience to the command of our Superiors. For since
naturally we desire what is forbidden us, and (sometimes there is no other evil
in the thing, but that it is forbidden us) God has in grace enjoined and
proportionably accepts obedience as being directly opposed to the former
irregularity, and it is acceptable, although there be no other good in the
thing that is commanded us, but that it is commanded.

3. By obedience we are made a society and a republic, and distinguished from
herds of Beasts, and heaps of Flies, who do what they list, and are incapable
of Laws, and obey none, and therefore are killed and destroyed, though never
punished, and they never can have a reward.

4. By obedience we are rendered capable of all the blessings of government,
signified by Saint Paul in these words [ He is the Minister of God to thee for
good, Romans 13.4.
] and by Saint Peter in these [ Governors are sent by him for the punishment
of evil doers, 1 Pet. 2.14.
and for the praise of them that do well.] And he that ever felt, or saw, or
can understand the miseries of confusion in public affairs, or amazement in a
heap of sad, tumultuous, and indefinite thoughts, may from thence judge of the
admirable effects of order, and the beauty of Government. What health is to the
body, and peace is to the Spirit, that is Government to the societies of Men,
the greatest blessing which they can receive in that temporal capacity.

5. No Man shall ever be fit to govern others that knows not first how to obey.
For if the spirit of a Subject be rebellious, in a Prince it will be tyrannical
and intolerable, and of so ill example, that as it will encourage the
disobedience of others, so it will render it unreasonable for him to exact of
others, what in the like case he refused to pay.

6. There is no sin in the World which God has punished with so great severity
and high detestation as this of disobedience. For the crime of Idolatry God
sent the Sword amongst his people, but it was never heard that the Earth opened
and swallowed up any but Rebels against their Prince*

7. Obedience is beter then the particular actions of Religion, and he serves
GOD better that follows his Prince in lawful services, then he that refuses
his command upon pretense he must go say his prayers* But Rebellion is
compared to that sin which of all sins seems the most unnatural and damned
impiety. Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft.

8. Obedience is a complicated act of virtue, and many graces are exercised in
one act of obedience. It is an act of Humility, of mortification and
self-denial, of charity to God, of care of the public, of order and charity to
our selves and all our society, and a great instance of a victory over the most
refractory and unruly passions.

9. To be a Subject is a greater temporal felicity then to be a King: for all
eminent Governments according to their height have a great burden, huge care,
infinite business, little rest, (...)
(...). Homer. Il. (...)

innumerable ^ears, and all that he enjoyes above another is, that he does
enjoy the things of the World with other circumstances, and a bigger noise; and
if others go at his single command, it is also certain he must suffer
inconvenience at the needs and disturbances of all his people: and the evils of
one man, and of one family are not enough for him to bear, unless also he be
almost crushed with the evils of mankind. He therefore is an ungrateful person
that will press the scales down with a voluntary load, and by disobedience put
more thorns into the Crown or Mitre of his Superior. Much better is the advice
of S. Paul, Obey them that have the rule over you, as they that must give an
account for your souls, that they may do it with joy and not with grief: for
(besides that it is unpleasant to them) it is unprofitable for you.

10. The Angels are ministering spirits and perpetually execute the will and
commandment of God: and all the wise men and all the good men of the world are
obedient to their Governors: and the eternal Son of God esteemed it his Meat
and drink to do the will of his Father, and for his obedience alone obtained
the greatest glory: and no man ever came to perfection but by obedience: and
thousands of Saints have chosen such institutions and manners of living, in
which they might not choose their own work, nor follow their own will, nor
please themselves, but be accountable to others, and subject to discipline, and
obedient to command, as knowing this to be the highway of the Cross, the way
that the King of sufferings and humility did choose, and so became the King of
Glory.

11. No man ever perished who followed first the will of God, and then the will
of his Superiors: but thousands have been damned merely for following their
own will, and relying upon their own judgments, and choosing their own work,
and doing their own fancies: For if we begin with our selves, whatsoever seems
good in our eyes, is most commonly displeasing in the eyes of God.

12. The sin of Rebellion, though it be a spiritual sin and imitable by Devils,
yet it is of that disorder, unreasonablenesse and impossibility amongst
intelligent spirits, that they never murmured or mutined in their lower
stations against their Superiors. Nay, the good Angels of an inferior Order
durst not revile a Devil of a higher Order. This consideration which I reckon
to be most pressing in the discourses of reason and obliging next to the
necessity of a Divine precept, we learn from S. Jude [ Likewise also these
filthy dr^amers despise dominion and speak evil of dignities: Iud^ 8.9.
And yet Michael the Archangel when contending with the Devil he disputed about
the body of Moses durst not bring against him a railing accusation.

But because our Superiors rule by their example, by their word or law, and by
the rod, therefore in proportion there are several degrees and parts of
obedience, of several excellencies and degrees toward perfection.

Degrees of Obedience.
1. The first is the obedience of the outward work: and this is all that Humane
Laws of themselves regard; for because Man cannot judge the heart, therefore
it prescribes nothing to it: the public end is served not by good wishes, but
by real and actual performances; and if a Man obeyes against his will he is not
punishable by the Laws.

2 The obedience of the will, and this is also necessary in our obedience to
Humane Laws, not because man requires it for himself, but because God commands
it toward Man; and of it (although Man cannot, yet) God will demand account.
For we are to do it as to the Lord and not to men; and therefore we must do it
willingly. But by this means our obedience in private is secured against secret
arts and subterfuges; and when we can avoid the punishment, yet we shall not
decline our duty, but serve Man for Gods sake, that is, cheerfully, promptly,
vigorously, for these are the proper parts of willingness and choice.

3. The understanding must yield obedience in general, though not in the
particular instance; that is, we must be firmly persuaded of the excellency of
the obedience, though we be not bound in all cases to think the particular Law
to be most prudent. But in this, our rule is plain enough. Our understanding
ought to be inquisitive whether the civil constitution agree with our duty to
God; but we are bound to inquire no further; And therefore beyond this,
although he, who having no obligation to it (as Counselors have) inquires not
at all into the wisdom or reasonableness of the Law, be not always the
wisest Man, yet he is ever the best Subject. For when he has given up his
understanding to his Prince and Prelate, provided that his duty to God be
secured by a precedent search, has also with the best, and with all the
instruments in the World secured his obedience to Man.

Sect. 2. Of Provision, or that part of Justice which is due from Superiors to
Inferiors.
AS God has imprinted his authority in several parts upon several estates of
Men, as Princes, Parents, Spiritual Guides, so he has also delegated and
committed parts of his care and providence unto them, that they may be
instrumental in the conveying such blessings which God knows we need, and
which he intends should be the effects of Government. For since GOD governes
all the World as a King, provides for us as a Father, and is the great Guide
and Conductor of our spirits as the Head of the Church, and the great Shepherd
and Bishop of our souls, they who have portions of these dignities, have also
their share of the administration: the sum of all which is usually signified in
these two words [ Governing] and [ Feeding] and is particularly recited in the
following rules.

Duties of Kings and all the Supreme power, as, Lawgivers.
1. Princes of the people and all that have Legislative power must provide
useful and good Laws for the defense of propriety, for the encouragement of
labor, for the safeguard of their persons, for determining controversies, for
reward of noble actions, and excellent arts and rare inventions, for promoting
trade, and enriching their people.

^
2. In the making Laws Princes must have regard to the public dispositions, to
the affections and disaffections of the people; and must not introduce a Law
with public scandal and displeasure: but consider the public benefit, and the
present capacity of affairs and general inclinations of men's minds. For he
that enforces a Law upon a people against their first and public apprehensions
tempts them to disobedience, and makes Laws to become snares and hooks to
catch the people, and to enrich the treasury with the spoil and tears and
curses of the Communalty, and to multiply their mutiny and their sin.

3. Princes must provide that the Laws be duly executed: for a good Law
without execution is like an unperformed promise: and therefore they must be
severe exactors of accounts from their Delegates and Ministers of Justice.

4. The severity of Laws must be tempered with dispensations, pardons, and
remissions according as the case shall alter, and new necessities be
introduced, (...). Eth. 5. cap. 10.
or some singular accident shall happen, in which the Law would be unreasonable
or intolerable as to that particular. And thus the people with their
importunity prevailed against Saul in the case of Jonathan, and obtained his
pardon for breaking the Law which his Father made, because his necessity forced
him to taste honey, and his breaking the Law in that case did promote that
service whose promotion was intended by the Law.

5. Princes must be Fathers of the people, and provide such instances of
gentleness, ease, wealth, and advantages, as may make mutual confidence
between them; and must fix their security under GOD in the love of the people,
which therefore they must with all arts of sweetness, remission, popularity,
nobleness and sincerity endeavor to secure to themselves.

6. Princes must not multiply public Oaths without great, eminent, and
violent necessity, lest the security of the King become a snare to the people,
and they become false when they see themselves suspected, or impatient when
they are violently held fast: but the greater and more useful caution is upon
things then upon persons; and if security of Kings can be obtained otherwise,
it is better that Oaths should be the last refuge, and when nothing else can
be sufficient.

L'avaritia de Re^pe^^eds (...).
7. Let not the people be tempted with arguments to disobey, by the imposition
of great and unnecessary taxes: for that lost to the son of Solomon the
dominion of the ten Tribes of Israel.

8. Princes must in a special manner be Guardians of Pupils and Widows, not
suffering their persons to be oppressed, or their states imbecill'd, or in any
sense be exposed to the rapine of covetous persons, but be provided for by just
laws, and provident Judges, and good Guardians, ever having an ear ready open
to their just complaints, and a heart full of pity, and one hand to support
them, and the other to avenge them.

9. Princes must provide that the Laws may be so administered, that they be
truly and really an ease to the people, not an instrument of vexation: and
therefore must be careful that the shortest and most equal ways of trials be
appointed, fees moderated, and intricacies and windings as much cut off as may
be, lest injured persons be forced to perish under the oppression, or under
the Law, in the injury or in the suit. Laws are like Princes, the best and most
beloved, who are most easy of access.

C^i compr^ il magistrato tarza ^pan^ la^^giustitia.
10. Places of judicature ought at no hand to be sold by pious Princes, who
remember themselves to be Fathers of the people. For they that buy the Office
will sell the act, and they that at any rate will be judges, will not at an
easy rate do justice; and their bribery is less punishable, when bribery
opened the door by which they entered.

11. Ancient privileges, favors, customs, and Acts of grace indulged by
former Kings to their people, must not without high reason and great
necessities be revoked by their successors; nor forseitures be exacted
violently, nor penal Laws urged rigorously, nor in light cases, nor Laws be
multiplied without great need, nor vicious persons which are publicly and
deservedly hated, be kept in defiance of popular desires, nor any thing that
may unnecessarily make the yoke heavy, and the affection light, that may
increase murmures, and lessen charity; always remembering, that the interest of
the Prince and the People is so infolded in a mutual embrace, that they cannot
be untwisted without pulling a limb off, or dissolving the bands and
conjunction of the whole body.

12. All Princes must esteem themselves as much bound by their word, by their
grants, and by their promises, as the meanest of their Subjects are by the
restraint and penalty of Laws: and although they are superior to the people,
yet they are not superior to their own voluntary concessions; and engagements,
their promises and Oaths, when once they are passed from them.

The Duty of Superiors as they are Judges.
1. Princes in judgment, and their Delegate Judges must judge the causes of
all persons uprightly and impartially, without any personal consideration of
the power of the mighty, or the bribe of the rich, or the needs of the poor.
For although the poor must fare no worse for his poverty, yet in justice he
must fare no better for it: And although the rich must be no more regarded, yet
he must not be less. And to this purpose the Tutor of Cyrus instructed him,
when in a controversy where a great Boy would have taken a large coat from a
little Boy because his own was too little for him, and the others was too big,
he adjudged the great coat to the great Boy: his Tutor answered, Sir, If you
were made a Judge of decency or fitness, you had judged well in giving the
biggest to the biggest: but when you were appointed Judge, not whom the coat
did fit, but whose it was, you should have considered the title, and the
possession, who did the violence, and who made it, or who bought it? And so it
must be in judgments between the rich and the poor: it is not to be considered
what the poor Man needs, but what is his own.

2. A Prince may not, much less may inferior Judges deny justice when it is
legally and competently demanded: and if the Prince will use his Prerogative in
pardoning an offender against whom justice is required, he must be careful to
give satisfaction to the injured person, or his Relatives by some other
instrument; and be watchful to take away the scandal, that is, lest such
indulgence might make persons more bold to do injury: and if he spares the
life, let him change the punishment into that which may make the offender (if
not suffer justice, yet) do justice, and more real advantage to the injured
person.

These rules concern Princes and their Delegates in the making or administering
Laws, in the appointing rules of justice and doing acts of judgment. The duty
of Parents to their Children and Nephews is briefly described by S. Paul.

The Duty of Parents to their Children.
1. Fathers provoke not your Children to wrath, Ephesians. 6.4.
that is, be tender boweld, pitiful and gentle, complying with all the
infirmities of the Children; and in their several ages proportioning to them
several usages according to their needs and their capacities.

2. Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, that is, secure
their religion, season their younger years with prudent and pious principles,
make them in love with virtue, and make them habitually so, before they come to
choose or to discern good from evil, that their choice may be with less
difficulty and danger. For while they are under discipline, they suck in all
that they are first taught, and believe it infinitely, provide for them, wise,
learned and virtuous Tutors P^^ or mihi ratio vive (...) hon^ste quam ut ^ time
dicen^i vi eret^s. Quin^^. lib 1. c. 2
, and good company and discipline H ^r 1^.9. (...) ap^d Pluta^^^ de ^ibor.
educand.
, seasonable baptism, catechism and confirmation. For it is a great folly to
heap up much wealth for our Children, and not to take care concerning the
Children for whom we get it. It is as if a man should take more care about his
shoe then about his foot.

3. Parents must show piety at home, that is, they must give good example and
reverent deportment, 1 Timothy 5.4.
in the face of their children; and all those instances of charity, which
usualy endear each other; sweetness of conversation, af^ability, frequent
admonition, all significations of love and tenderness, care and watchfulness
must be expressed toward Children, that they may look upon their Parents as
their friends and patrons, their defense and sanctuary, their treasure and
their Guide. Hither is to be reduced the nursing of Children, which is the
first and most natural and necessary instance of piety, which Mothers can show
to their Babes; a duty from which nothing will excuse, but a disability,
sickness, danger, or public necessity.

4. Parents must provide for their own according to their condition, 1 Timothy 5.8.
education, and employment; called by S. Paul, a laying up for the Children,
that is, an enabling them by competent portions, or good trades, arts or
learning to defend themselves against the chances of the world, that they may
not be exposed to temptation, to beggary, or unworthy arts: and although this
must be done without covetousness, without impatient and greedy desires of
making them rich, yet it must be done with much care, and great affection, with
all reasonable provision, and according to our power: and if we can without sin
improve our estates for them, that also is part of the duty we owe to God for
them: and this rule is to extend to all that descend from us, although we have
been overtaken in a fault, and have unlawful issue; they also become part of
our care, yet so as not to injure the production of the lawful bed.

5. This duty is to extend to a provision of conditions and an estate of life.
Parents must according to their power and reason provide Husbands or Wives for
their children Liberi sine consensu parentum contrabere non debent. Andromacha
apud Euripidem cum petita fuit ad nuptias, respondit, patris sui esse
sponsalium suorum curam habere: and Achilles apud Homerum Regis filiam sine
patris sui consensu noluit ducere. Il. 1. (...). Et. Iustinianus Imp. ait,
naturali simul and civili ratione congruere, ne filii ducant uxores citra
Parentum authoritatem. Simo Terentianus parat abdicationem quia Pamphilus clam
ipso duxisset uxorem. Istiusmodi sponsalia fiunt irrita nis^ velint parents:
At si subsequuta est copula, ne temere rescindantur connubia multae suadent
cautiones and pericula. Liberi autem quamdiu secundum leges patrias sui juris
non sunt, clandestin^s nuptias si ineant, peccant contra quintum praeceptum,
and jus natural.
. In which they must secure piety and Eosdem quos maritus nosse Deos and colere
solos uxor debet: super vacaneis a. religionibus, and alienis superstitionibus
fores occludere. Nulli enim Deum grata sunt sacra quae mulier clanculum and
furtim facit. Plutarch. conjug. praecept. Genesis 24. Vocemus puellam and
quaeramus os ejus.
Religion, and the affection and love of the interested persons; and after
these, let them make what provisions they can for other conveniences or
advantages: Ever remembering that they can do no injury more afflictive to the
children then to join them with cords of a disagreeing affection: It is like
tying a Wolf and a Lamb, or planting the Vine in a Garden of Coleworts. Let
them be persuaded with reasonable inducements to make them willing and to
choose according to the parents wish, but at no hand let them be forced. Better
to sit up all night, then to go to bed with a Dragon.

The duty of Husbands, etc. See Chapt. 2. Sect. 3. Rules for married persons.
1 Husbands must give to their wives, love, maintenance, duty, and the
sweetnesses of conversation [and wives (...). Menand.

(...) Homer.


must pay to them all they have, or can with the interest of obedience and
reverence] and they must be complicated in affections and interest, that there
be no distinction between them of Mine and Thine: And if the title be the man's,
or the woman's, yet the use must be common, only the wisdom of the man is to
regulate all extravagancies and indiscretions: in other things, no question is
to be made; and their goods should be as their children not to be divided, but
of one possession and provision: whatsoever is otherwise is not marriage but
merchandise. And upon this ground I suppose it was, that S. (...).
Basil commended that woman, who took part of her Husbands goods to do good
works withal: for supposing him to be unwilling, and that the work was his
duty, or hers alone, or both theirs in conjunction, or of great advantage to
either of their souls, and no violence to the support of their families, she
has right to all that: And Abigail of her own right made a costly present to
David, when her husband Nabal had refused it. The Husband must Laetum esse
deber and officiosum mariti imperium.

Plut. Namque es ei Pater, and Frater, venerandaque Matter: nee minus facit ad
dignitatem viri si mulier eum suum Praeceptorem, Philosophum, Magistrumque
appellet.

Plutarch.
rule over his wife, as the soul does over the body, obnoxious to the same
sufferings, and bound by the same affections, and doing or suffering by the
permissions and interest of each other: that (as the old Philosopher said) as
the humors o^ the body are mingled with each other in their whole substances:
so marriage may be a mixture of interests, of bodies, of minds, of friends, a
conjunction Convictio est quasi quaedam intentio benevolentiae.
of the whole life, and the noblest of friendships. But if after all the ^air
deportments, and innocent chaste complyances the Husband be morose and ungentle,
let the (...).

Inferior Matrona suo sit Sexte Marito
Non aliter f^unt foemina, virqque pares.
Mart.
Wife discourse thus: If while I do my duty my Husband neglects me, what will
he do if I neglect him? And if she thinks to be separated by reason of her
husbands unchaste life, let her consider, that then the man will be uncurably
ruined, and her Rivals could wish nothing more then that they might possess
him alone

The duty of Masters of Families.
1. The same care is to extend to all of our family in their proportions as to
our Children^ for as by S. Paul's oeconomie the Heir dif^ers nothing from a
servant while he is in minority: so a servant should differ nothing from a
child in the substantial part of the care; and the difference is only in
degrees: Servants and Masters are of the same kindred, of the same nature, and
heirs of the same promises, and therefore * 1. must be provided of necessaries
for their support and maintenance. 2. They must be used with mercy. 3. Their
work must be tolerable and merciful. 4. Their restraints must be reasonable. 5.
Their recreations fitting and healthful. 6. Their religion and the interest of
souls taken care of. 7. And Masters must correct their servants with
gentleness, prudence and mercy, not for every slight fault, not always, not
with upbraiding and disgraceful language, but with such only as may express
and reprove the fault, and amend the person. But in all these things measures
are to be taken by the contract made, by the Laws and Customs of the place, by
the sentence of prudent and merciful men, and by the cautions and remembrances
given us by God, such as is that written by S. Paul, [as knowing that we also
have a Master in Heaven.] The Master must not be a lion in his house, lest his
power be obeyed, and his person hated; his eye be waited on, and his business
be neglected in secret. No servant will do his duty unless he make a
conscience, or love his Master: if he does it not for Gods sake or his masters,
he will not need to do it always for his own.

The Duty of Guardians, or Tutors.
Tutors and Guardians are in the place of Parents, and what they are in fiction
of Law; they must remember as an argument to engage them to do in reality of
duty. They must do all the duty of Parents, excepting those obligations which
are merely natural.

^he duty of Ministers and Spiritual Guides to the people is of so great
burden, so various rules, so intricate and busy caution, that it requires a
distinct tractate by it self. SECT. III. Of Negotiation, or Civil Contracts.
THis part of Justice is such as depends upon the Laws of Man directly, and
upon the Laws of God only by consequence and indirect reason: and from civil
Laws or private agreements it is to take its estimate and measures: and
although our duty is plain and easy, requiring of us honesty in contracts,
sincerity in affirming, simplicity in bargaining, and faithfulness in
performing, yet it may be helped by the addition of these following rules and
considerations.

Rules and measures of justice in bargaining.
1. In making contracts use not many words* for all the business of a bargain
is summed up in few sentences: and he that speaks least, means fairest, as
having fewer opportunities to deceive.

2. Lie not at all, neither in a little thing nor in a great, neither in the
substance nor in the circumstance, neither in word nor deed: that is, pretend
not what is false, cover not what is true, and let the measure of your
affirmation or denial be the understanding of your contractor: for he that
deceives the buyer or the seller by speaking what is true in a sense not
intended or understood by the other, is a liar and a thief. For in bargains you
are to avoid not only what is false, but that also which deceives.

3. In prices of bargaining concerning uncertain Merchandises you may buy as
cheap ordinarily as you can, and sell as dear as you can, so it be 1. without
violence, and 2. when you contract on equal terms, with persons in all senses
(as to the matter and skill of bargaining) equal to your self, that is,
Merchants with Merchants, wise men with wise men, rich with rich: and 3. when
there is no deceit, and no necessity, and no Monopoly: For in these cases, viz.
when the Contractors are equal, and no advantage on either side, both parties
are voluntary, and therefore there can be no injustice or wrong to either. But
then add also this consideration, that the public be not oppressed by
unreasonable and unjust rates: for which the following rules are the best
measure.

4. Let your prices be according to that measure of good and evil which is
established in the fame and common accounts of the wisest and most merciful Men
skilled in that manufacture or commodity; and the gain such which without
scandal is allowed to persons in all the same circumstances.

5. Let no prices be heightened by the necessity or unskilfulnesse of the
contractor; for the first is direct uncharitableness to the person, and
injustice in the thing (because the Man's necessity could no^ naturally enter
into the consideration of the value of the commodity) and the other is deceit
and oppression: much less must any Man make necessities; as by engrossing a
commodity, by monopoly, by detaining corn, or the like indirect arts: for such
persons are unjust to all single persons with whom in such cases they contract,
and oppressors of the public.

6. In intercourse with others do not do all which you may lawfully do; but
keep something within thy power: and because there is a latitude of gain in
buying and selling, take not thou the utmost penny that is lawful, or which
thou think so; for although it be lawful, yet it is not safe; and he that
gains all that he can gain lawfully this year, possibly next year will be
tempted to gain something unlawfully.

7. He that sels dearer by reason he s^ls not for ready money, must increase
his price no higher then to make himself recompense for the loss which
according to the Rules of trade he sustained by his forbearance, according to
common computation, reckoning in also the hazard, which he is prudently,
warily, and charitably to estimate: But although this be the measure of his
justice, yet because it happens either to their friends, or to necessitous and
poor persons, they are in these cases to consider the rules of friendship and
neighborhood, and the obligations of charity, lest justice turn in^o
unmercifulness.

8. No Man is to be raised in his price or rents in regard of any accident,
(...) ne ami^i ne pa^e^^*
advantage or disadvantage of his person. A Prince must be used conscionably as
well as a common person, and a Beggar be treated justly as well as a Prince;
with this only difference, that to poor persons the utmost measure and extent
of justice is unmerciful, which to a rich person is innocent, because it is
just, and he needs not thy mercy and remission.

9. Let no Man for his own poverty become more oppressing and cruel in his
bargain, but quietly, modestly, diligently, and patiently recommend his estate
to God, and follow its interest and leave the success to him: for such courses
will more probably advance his trade, they will certainly procure him a
blessing, and a recompense, and if they cure not his poverty, they will take
away the evil of it: and there is nothing el^e in it that can trouble him.

10. Detain not the wages of the hireling: for every degree of detention of it
beyond the time is injustice, and uncharitableness, and grindes his face till
tears and blood come out: but pay him exactly according to Covenant, or
according to his needs.

11. Religiously keep all promises and Covenants, though made to your
disadvantage, though afterward you perceive you might have been better: and
let not any precedent act of yours be altered by any after-accident. Let
nothing make you break your promise, unless it be unlawful or impossible, that
is, either out of your natural, or out of your civil power, your self being
under the power of another; or that it be intolerably inconvenient to your
self, and of no ^urgam ad (...) ^^^misi quamvis n^n conco^e^^m: sed non si
febri^^tavero ^ube^t n. t^c^ta e^^e^tio, si p^t^ro, si deb^bo. S^ne. ^f^ice ut
idem ^^atus sit cum exigitur, qui ^^it ^um p^omitterem. ^estitu^^e lev^tas non
erit si aliquid ^nte^venerit novi. ^ad^m (...) omnia praesta et idem s^m* L. 4.
c. 39. de Benefic*
advantage to another; or that you have leave expressed, or reasonably presumed.

12. Let no Man take wages or fees for a work that he cannot do, or cannot with
probability undertake, or in some sense profitably, and with ease, or with
advantage manage: Physicians must not meddle with desperate diseases, and known
to be incurable, without declaring their sense before hand; that if the patient
please he may entertain him at adventure, or to do him some little ease.
Advocates must deal plainly with their Clients, and tell them the true state
and danger of their case; and must not pretend confidence in an evil cause: but
when he has so cleared his own innocence; if the Client will have collateral
and legal advantages obtained by his industry, he may engage his endeavor,
provided he do no injury to the right cause, or any Man's person.

13. Let no Man appropriate to his own use what God by a special mercy, or the
Republic has made common; Brassa vol. in e^am. s^mpl.
for that is both against Justice and Charity too: and by miraculous accidents
God has declared his displeasure against such enclosures. When the Kings of
Naples enclosed the Gardens of Oenotria, where the best Manna of Calabria
descends, that no Man might gather it without paying tribute; the Manna ceased,
till the tribute was taken off; and then it came again, and so till after the
third trial, the Princes found they could not have that in proper which GOD
made to be common, they left it as free as GOD gave it. The like happened in
Epire when Lysnnachus laid an impost upon the Tragasaean Salt, Caelius Rh d. l.
9. c. 1^.
it vanished, till Lysimachus left it public. And when the procurators of King
Antigonus imposed a rate upon the sick people that came to Edepsum to drink the
waters which were lately sprung and were very healthful, Athenae. ^e paos. l. 3.
instantly the waters dried up, and the hope of gain perished.

1 These. 4.6. Levit. 19 13. 1 Cor. 6.8. Mark 10.19.
The sum of all is in these words of Saint Paul, [Let no man go beyond and
defraud his brother in any matter; because the Lord is the avenger of all such]
and our blessed Savior in the enumerating the duties of justice, besides the
Commandment of [ Do not steal] adds [ Defraud not] forbidding (as a distinct
explication of the old Law) the tacit and secret thest of abusing our Brother
in Civil Contracts. And it needs no other arguments to enforce this caution,
but only, that the Lord has undertaken to avenge all such persons: And as he
always does it in the great day of recompenses: so very often he does it here,
by making the unclean portion of injustice to be as a Cankerworm eating up all
the other increase: it procures beggary, and a declining estate, or a caytive,
cursed spirit, an ill name, the curse of the injured and oppressed person, and
a Fool or a Prodigal to be his Heir.

SECT. IV. Of Restitution.
REstitution is that part of Justice to which a man is obliged by a precedent
contract or a soregoing ^ault, by his own act, ^
or another man's, either with, or without his will. He that borrows is bound to
pay, and much more he that s^^als or cheats. For if he that borrows and pays
not when he is able be an unjust person, and a robber, because he possesses
another man's goods to the right owners prejudice^ then, he that took them at
first without leave is the same thing in every instant of his possession, which
the Debtor is after the time in which he should and could have made payment.
For in all sins we are to distinguish the transient or passing act from the
remaining effect or evil. The act of stealing was soon over, and cannot be
undone, and for it the sinner is only answerable to God, or his Vicegerent,
and he is in a particular manner appointed to expiate it, by suffering
punishment, and repenting, and asking pardon, and judging and condemning
himself, doing acts of justice and charity in opposition and contradiction to
that evil action. But because in the case of stealing there is an injury done
to our neighbor, and the evil still remains after the action is past, therefore
for this we are accountable to our neighbor, and we are to take the evil off
from him which we brought upon him, or else he is an injured person, a sufferer
all the while: and that any man should be the worse for me and my direct act,
and by my intention, is against the rule of equity, of justice and of charity;
I do not that to others which I would have done to my self, (...) da tum et
cam^^m, (...) s^ti^ faccie te (...).
for I grow richer upon the ruins of his fortune. Upon this ground, it is a
determined rule in Divinity, Our sin can never be pardoned till we have
restored what we unjustly took, or wrongfully detain: restored it (I mean)
actually, or in purpose and desire, which we must really perform when we can:
and this doctrine, besides its evident and apparent reasonableness, is derived
from the express words of Scripture, reckoning Restitution to be a part of
Repentance, necessary in order to the remission of our sins. [ If the wicked
restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, etc. he shall surely live,
he shall not dye.] Ezekiel. 33.15.
The practice of this part of justice is to be directed by the following Rules.

Rules of making Restitution.
1. Whosoever is an effective, real cause of doing his Neighbor wrong, by what
instrument soever he does it, (whether by commanding or encouraging it, by
counselling or commending (...). Tatilas apud Procop. Goth. 3. Qui laudat
servum fugitivum tenetur. Non n. oportet laudando augeri malum. Vlpian in lib.
1. cap. de servo corrupto.
it, by acting it, or not (...). Nicet. Choniat. in Michael. Comnen. Sic Syri
ab Amphyctionibus judicio damnati quia piraticam non prohibuerunt cum poterant.
hindering it when he might and ought, by concealing it, or receiving it) is
bound to make restitution to his Neighbor; if without him the injury had not
been done, but by him, or his assistance it was. For by the same reason that
every one of these is guilty of the sin, and is cause of the injury, by the
same they are bound to make reparation; because by him his Neighbor is made
worse, and therefore is to be put into that state from whence he was forced.
And suppose that thou have persuaded an injury to be done to thy Neighbor,
which others would have persuaded if thou had not, yet thou art still
obliged, because thou really did cause the injury; just as they had been
obliged if they had done it; and thou art not at all the less bound by having
persons as ill inclined as thou were.

2. He that commanded the injury to be done, is first bound: then, he that did
it; and after these they also are obliged who did so assist, as without them
the thing would not have been done. If satisfaction be made by any of the
former, the latter is tied to repentance, but no restitution: But if the
injured person be not righted, every one o^ them is who^ly guilty of the
injustice, and therefore bound to restitution singlely and entirely.

3. Whosoever intends a little injury to his Neighbor, and acts it, and by it
a greater evil accidentally comes, he is obliged to make an entire reparation
of all the injury, of that which he intended, ^tiam^i ^^tem damni da. ^e
nol^i^i, in c^tum qu^^i p^uden^ descrit tenendu^ (...). Ex t^to n. nol^i^e
debet qui imp ^ade^tia ^efen^itur.
and of that which he intended not, but yet acted by his own instrument, Senec.
Controv.
going further then he at first purposed it. He that set fire on a plane Tree
to spite his Neighbor, and the plane Tree set fire upon his Neighbors House,
is bound to pay for all the loss, because it did all arise from his own ill
intention. It is like murder committed by a drunken person, Involuntarium orcum
ex voluntario (...) pro yvoluntario.
involuntary in some of the effect, but voluntary in the other parts of it, and
in all the cause, and therefore the guilty person is answerable for all of it.
And when Ariarathes the Cappadocian King had but in wantonness stopped the mouth
of the river Melanus, although he intended no evil, yet Euphrates being swelled
by that means, Strabo
and bearing away some of the strand of Cappadocia did great spoil to the
Phrygians and Galatians, and therefore by the Roman Senate was condemned in
three hundred talents toward reparation of the damage. Much rather therefore
when the lesser part of the evil was directly intended.

4. He that hinders a charitable person from giving alms to a poor man is tied
to restitution, if he hindered him by fraud or violence. Because it was a right
which the poor man had when the good man had designed and resolved it; and the
fraud or violence hinders the effect, but not the purpose, and therefore he who
used the deceit or the force is injurious, and did damage to the poor man. But
if the alms were hindered only by entreaty, the hinderer is not tied to
restitution, because entreaty took not liberty away from the giver, (...). Eth.
l. 5. c 4
but left him still Master of his own act, and he had power to alter his
purpose, and so long there was no injustice done. The same is the case of a
Testator giving a legacy either by kindness, or by promise and common right.
He that hinders the charitable Legacy by fraud or violence, or the due Legacy
by entreaty is equally obliged to restitution. The reason of the latter part of
this case is, because he that entreats or persuades to a sin is as guilty as he
that acts it: and if without his persuasion the sin and the injury would not be
acted, he is in his kind the entire cause, and therefore obliged to repair the
injury as much as the person that does the wrong immediately.

5. He that refuses to do any part of his duty (to which he is otherwise
obliged) without a bribe, is bound to restore that money, because he took it in
his Neighbors wrong, and not as a salary for his labor, or a reward of his
wisdom (for his stipend has paid all that, or) he has obliged himself to do
it by his voluntary undertaking.

6. He that takes any thing from his Neighbor which was justly forfeited, but
yet takes it not as a Minister of justice, but to satisfy his own revenge or
avarice, is tied to repentance but not to restitution. For my Neighbor is not
the worse for my act, for thither the Law and his own demerits bore him, but
because I took the forfeiture indirectly I am answerable to God, for my
unhandsome, unjust, or uncharitable circumstances. Thus Philip of Macedon was
reproved by Aristides for destroying the Phocenses; because although they
deserved it, yet he did it not in prosecution of the law of Nations, but to
enlarge his own dominions.

7. The heir of an obliged person is not bound to make restitution, if the
obligation passed only by a personal act: but if it passed from his person to
his estate, then the estate passes with all its burden. If the Father by
persuading his neighbor to do injustice ^e bound to restore, the action is
extinguished by the death of the Father; because it was only the Fathers sin
that bound him, which cannot directly bind the son; therefore the son is free.
And this is so in all personal actions, unless where the civil Law interposes
and alters the case.

These rules concern the persons that are obliged to make restitution: the
other circumstances of it are thus described. 8. He that by fact, or word, or
sign, either fraudulently, or violently does hurt to his Neighbors body,
life, goods, good name, friends, or soul is bound to make restitution in the
several instances, according as they are capable to be made. In all these
instances we must separate entreaty and inticements from deceit or violence. If
I persuade my Neighbor to commit adultery, I still leave him or her in their
own power: and though I am answerable to God for my sin, yet not to my
Neighbor. For I made her to be willing; yet she was willing (...). Epict.
, that is, the same at last as I was at first: but if I have used fraud, and
made her to believe a lie (...). Plato Non licet suffurari mentem vel
Samaritani. R. Maimon. Can. Eth.
, upon which confidence she did the act, and without it she would not (as if I
tell a woman her Husband is dead, or intended to kill her, or is himself an
adulterous man) or if I use violence, that is, either force her or threaten her
with death, or a grievous wound, or any thing that takes her from the liberty
of her choice, I am bound to restitution, that is, to restore her to a right
understanding of things and to a full liberty, by taking from her the deceit or
the violence.

9. An Adulterous person is tied to restitu- of the injury, so far as it is
reparable, and can be made to the wronged person; that is, to make provision
for the children begotten in unlawful embraces, that they may do no injury to
the legitimate by receiving a common portion: and if the injured person do
account of it, he must satisfy him with money for the wrong done to his bed.
He is not tied to offer this, because it is no proper exchange, but he is bound
to pay it, if it be reasonably demanded: for every man has justice done him,
when himself is satisfied, though by a word, or an action, or a penny.

10. He that has killed a man is bound to restitution by allowing such a
maintenance to the children and near relatives of the deceased as they have
lost by his death, (...). Mich. Ephesians. ad 5. Eth.
considering and allowing for all circumstances of the man's age, and health,
and probability of living. And thus Hercules is said to have made expiation for
the death of Iphitus whom he slew, by paying a mulct to his children.

11. He that has really lessened the same of his neighbor by fraud or
violence is bound to restore it by its proper instruments: Sic Vivianus^elip^it
de injusta accusatione (...) Cas^iodor. 4.41.
such as are confession of his fault, giving testimony of his innocence or
worth, doing him honor, or (if that will do it, and both parties agree) by
money which answers all things.

12. He that has wounded his neighbor is tied to the expenses of the Surgeon
and other incidences, and to repair whatever loss he sustains by his disability
to work or trade: and the same is in the case of false imprisonment; in which
cases only the real e^fect and remaining detriment are to be mended and
repaired: for the action it self is to be punished or repented of, and enters
not into the question of restitution. But in these and all other cases the
injured person is to be restored to that perfect and good condition from which
he was removed by my fraud or violence, so far as is possible. Thus a ravisher
must repair the temporal detriment of injury done to the maid, and give her a
dowry, or marry her if she desire it. For this restores her into that capacity
of being a good wife, which by the injury was lost, as far as it can be done.

13. He that robs his Neighbor of his goods, or detains any thing violently
or fraudulently, is bound not only to restore the principal, but all its
fruits and emoluments which would have accrued to the right owner during the
time of their being detained. * By proportion to these rules, we may judge of
the obligation that lies upon all sorts of injurious persons: that
sacrilegious, the detainers of tithes, cheaters of men's inheritances, unjust
Judges, false witnesses and accusers, those that do fraudulently or violently
bring men to sin, that force men to drink, that laugh at and disgrace virtue,
that persuade servants to run away, or commend such purposes, violent
persecutors of religion in any instance; and all of the same nature.

14. He that has wronged so many, or in that manner (as in the way of daily
trade) that he knows not in what measure he has done it, or who they are; must
redeem his fault by alms, and largesses to the poor, according to the value of
his wrongful dealing, as near as he can proportion it. Better it is to go
begging to Heaven, then to go to Hell laden with the spoils of rapine and
injustice.

15. The order of paying the debts of contract, or restitution, are in some
instances set down by the civil laws of a kingdom, in which cases their rule is
to be observed: In destitution or want of such rules, we are 1. to observe the
necessity of the Creditor. 2. Then the time of the delay: and 3. The special
obligations, of friendship or kindness: and according to these in their
several degrees, make our restitution, if we be not able to do all that we
should: but if we be, the best rule is to do it as soon as we can, taking our
accounts in this as in our humane actions, according to prudence, and civil or
natural conveniences or possibilities; only securing these two things. 1. That
the duty be not wholly omitted: and 2. That it be not deferred at all out of
covetousness, or any other principle that is vicious. Remember, that the same
day in which Zacheus made restitution to all whom he had injured, the same day
Christ himself pronounced that salvation was come to his house. ***

16. But besides the obligation arising from contract or default, Luke 19.9.
there is one of another sort which comes from kindness, and the acts of
charity and friendship. Gratitude.
He that does me a favor has bound me to make him a return of thankfulness.
The obligation comes not by covenant, not by his own express intention, but by
the nature of the thing; and is a duty springing up within the spirit of the
obliged person, to whom it is more natural to love his friend, and to do good
for good, then to return evil for evil: because a man may forgive an injury,
but he must never forget a good turn. For every thing that is excellent, and
every thing that is profitable, whatsoever is good in it self or good to me,
cannot but be beloved; and what we love, we naturally cherish and do good to.
He therefore that refuses to do good to them whom he is bound to love, or to
love that which did him good, is unnatural and monstrous in his affections, and
thinks all the world borne to minister to him, with a greediness worse then
that of the sea, which although it receives all rivers into it self, yet it
furnishes the clouds and springs with a return of all thy need.

Our duty to benefactors is to esteem and love their persons: to make them
proportionable returns of service or duty, or profit, according as we can, or
as they need, or as opportunity presents it self, and according to the
greatnesses of their kindnesses: and to pray to God to make them recompense for
all the good they they have done to us; which last office is also requisite to
be done for our Creditors, who in charity have relieved our wants.

Prayers to be said in relation to the several Obligations and Ofces of Justice.
A Prayer for the Grace of Obedience: to be said by all persons under Command.
O Eternal God, Great Ruler of Men and Angels, who have constituted all things
in ^ wonderful order, making all the creatures subject to man, and one man to
another, and all to thee, the last link of this admirable chain being fastened
to the foot of thy throne: teach me to obey all those whom thou have set over
me, reverencing their persons, submitting indifferently to all their lawful
commands, cheerfully undergoing those burdens which the public wisdom and
necessity shall impose upon me; at no hand murmuring against government, lest
the Spirit of pride and mutiny, of murmur and disorder enter into me, and
consigne me to the portion of the disobedient and rebellious, of the Despisers
of dominion, and revilers of dignity. Grant this O holy God for his sake, who
for his obedience to the Father has obtained the glorification of eternal
ages, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Prayers for Kings and all Magistrates, for our Parents spiritual and natural,
are in the following Letanies at the end of the fourth Chapter. A Prayer to be
said by Subjects, when their Land is invaded and overrun by barbarous or wicked
people, enemies of the Religion, or the Government.
I.
O Eternal God, thou alone rulest in the Kingdoms of men, thou art the great
God of battles and recompenses, and by thy glorious wisdom, by thy Almighty
power, and by thy secret providence, do determine the events of war and the
issues of humane counsels and the returns of peace and victory, now at least be
pleased to let the light of thy countenance, and the effects of a glorious
mercy, and a gracious pardon return to this Land. Thou see how great evils we
suffer under the power and tyranny of war, and although we submit to, and adore
thy justice in our sufferings, yet be pleased to pity our misery, to hear our
complaints, and to provide us of remedy against our present calamities: let not
the defenders of a righteous cause go away ashamed, nor our counsels be for
ever confounded, nor our parties defeated, nor religion suppressed, nor
learning discountenanced, and we be spoiled of all the exterior ornaments,
instruments and advantages of piety, which thou have been pleased formerly to
minister to our infirmities, for the interests of learning and religion. Amen.

II.
WE confess dear God, that we have deserved to be totally extinct and separate
from the Communion of Saints, and the comforts of Religion, to be made servants
to ignorant, unjust and inferior persons, or to suffer any other calamity
which thou shall allot us as the instrument of thy anger, whom we have so often
provoked to wrath and jealousy. Lord we humbly lie down under the burden of
thy rod, begging of thee to remember our infirmities, and no more to remember
our sins, to support us with thy staff, to lift us up with thy hand, to refresh
us with thy gracious eye* and if a sad cloud of temporal infelicities must
still encircle us, open unto us the window of Heaven, that with an eye of faith
and hope we may see beyond the cloud, looking upon those mercies which in thy
secret providence and admirable wisdom thou designest to all thy servants, from
such unlikely and sad beginnings. Teach us diligently to do all our duty, and
cheerfully to submit to all thy will; and at last be gracious to thy people
that call upon thee, that put their trust in thee, that have laid up all their
hopes in the bosom of God, that besides thee have no helper. Amen.

A Prayer to be said by Parents for their Children.
O Almighty and most merciful Father, who have promised children as a reward to
the Righteous, and have given them to me as a testimony of thy mercy, and an
engagement of my duty; be pleased to be a Father unto them, and give them
healthful bodies, understanding souls, and sanctified spirits, that they may be
thy servants, and thy children all their days. Let a great mercy and
providence lead them through the dangers and temptations and ignorances of
their youth, that they may never run into folly, and the evils of an unbridled
appetite. So order the accidents of their lives, that by good education,
careful Tutors, holy example, innocent company, prudent counsel, and thy
restraining grace, their duty to thee may be secured in the midst of a crooked
and untoward generation: and if it seem good in thy eyes, let me be enabled to
provide conveniently for the support of their persons, that they may not be
destitute and miserable in my death; or if thou shall call me off from this
World by a more timely summons, let their portion be, thy care, mercy, and
providence over their bodies and souls: and may they never live vicious lives,
nor dye violent or untimely deaths; but let them glorify thee here with a free
obedience, and the duties of a whole life, that when they have served thee in
their generations, and have profited the Christian Commonwealth, they may be
coheirs with Jesus in the glories of thy eternal Kingdom, through the same, our
Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer to be said by Masters of Families, Curats, Tutors, or other obliged
persons for their charges.
O Almighty God, merciful and gracious, have mercy upon my Family [or Pupils,
or Parishioners, etc.] and all committed to my charge: sanctify them with thy
grace, preserve them with thy providence, guard them from all evil by the
custody of Angels, direct them in the ways of peace and holy Religion by my
Ministry and the conduct of thy most holy Spirit, and consigne them all with
the participation of thy blessings and graces in this World, with healthful
bodies, with good understandings, and sanctified spirits to a full fruition of
thy glories hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Prayer to be said by Merchants, Tradesmen, and Handicrafts men.
O Eternal God, thou Fountain of justice, mercy and benediction, who by my
education and other effects of thy providence have called me to this
profession, that by my industry I may in my small proportion work together for
the good of my self and others: I humbly beg thy grace to guide me in my
intention, and in the transaction of my affairs that I may be diligent, just,
and faithful: and give me thy favor, that this my labor may be accepted by
thee as a part of my necessary duty, and give me thy blessing to assist and
prosper me in my Calling, to such measures as thou shall in mercy choose for
me: and be pleased to let thy holy Spirit be for ever present with me, that I
may never be given to covetousness and sordid appetites, to lying and
falsehood, or any other base, indirect and beggarly arts, but give me prudence,
honesty and Christian sincerity, that my trade may be sanctified by my
Religion, my labor by my intention and thy blessing, that when I have done my
portion of work thou have allotted me, and improved the talent thou have
entrusted to me, and served the Commonwealth in my capacity, I may receive the
mighty price of my high calling, which I expect and beg, in the portion and
inheritance of the ever blessed Savior and Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer to be said by Debtors and all persons obliged whether by crime or
contract.
O Almighty God who art rich unto all, the treasure and Fountain of all good,
of all justice, and all mercy, and all bounty, to whom we owe all that we are,
and all that we have, being thy Debtors by reason of our sins, and by thy own
gracious contract made with us in Jesus Christ: teach me in the first place to
perform all my Obligations to thee, both of duty and thankfulness; and next
enable me to pay my duty to all my friends, and my debts to all my Creditors,
that none be made miserable, or lessened in his estate by his kindness to
me, or traffic with me. Forgive me all those sins and irregular actions by
which I entered into debt further then my necessity required, or by which such
necessity was brought upon me: but let not them suffer by occasion of my sin.
Lord reward all their kindness into their bosoms, and make them recompense
where I cannot, and make me very willing in all that I can, and able for all
that I am obliged to, or if it seem good in thine eyes to afflict me by the
continuance of this condition, yet make it up by some means to them, that the
prayer of thy servant may obtain of thee, at least to pay my debt in blessings.
Amen.

II.
LOrd sanctify and forgive all that I have tempted to evil by my discourse or
my example: instruct them in the right way whom I have lead to error, and let
me never run further on the score of sin; but do thou blot out all the evils
I have done, by the sponge of thy passion, and the blood of thy Cross; and
give me a deep and an excellent repentance, and a free and a gracious pardon,
that thou may answer for me, O Lord, and enable me to stand upright in
judgment; for in thee, O Lord, have I trusted, let me never be confounded.
Pity me, and instruct me; guide me and support me, pardon me and save me, for
my sweet Savior Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Prayer for Patron and Benefactours.
O Almighty GOD thou Fountain of all good, of all excellency both to Men and
Angels, extend thine abundant favor and loving kindness to my Patron, to all
my friends and Benefactors: Reward them, and make them plentiful recompense for
all the good which from thy merciful providence they have conveyed unto me: Let
the light of thy countenance shine upon them, and let them never come into any
affliction or sadness, but such as may be an instrument of thy glory and their
eternal comfort. Forgive them all their sins; let thy Divinest Spirit preserve
them from all deeds of Darkness. Let thy ministering Angels guard their persons
from the violence of the spirits of Darkness: And thou who know every
degree of their necessity by thy infinite wisdom, give supply to all their
needs by thy glorious mercy, preserving their persons, sanctifying their
hearts, and leading them in the ways of righteousness, by the waters of
comfort, to the land of eternal rest and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

CHAP. IV. Of Christian Religion.
REligion in a large sense does signify the whole duty of Man, comprehending
in it Justice, Charity, and Sobriety: because all these being commanded by God
they become a part of that honor and worship which we are bound to pay to him.
And thus the word is used in S. James, James 1.27.
Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the
fatherless and Widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from
the world. But in a more restrained sense it is taken for that part of duty
which particularly relates to God in our worshippings and adoration of him, in
confessing his excellencies, loving his person, admiring his goodness,
believing his Word, and doing all that which may in a proper and direct manner
do him honor. It contains the duties of the first Table only, and so it is
called Godliness Tit. 2.12.
, and is by Saint Paul, distinguished from Justice and Sobriety. In this sense
I am now to explicate the parts of it.

Of the internal actions of Religion.
Those I call the internal actions of Religion, in which the soul only is
employed, and ministers to God in the special actions of Faith, Hope, and
Charity. Faith believes the revelations of God: Hope expects his promises: and
Charity loves his excellencies and mercies. Faith gives our understanding to
God: Hope gives up all the passions and affections to Heaven and heavenly
things: and Charity gives the will to the service of God. Faith is opposed to
Infidelity: Hope to Despair: Charity to Enmity and Hostility; and these three
sanctify the whole Man, and make our duty to God and obedience to his
Commandments to be chosen, reasonable, and delightful, and therefore to be
entire, persevering, and universal.

SECT. I. Of Faith. The Acts and Offices of Faith, are
1. TO believe every thing which God has revealed to us; and when once we are
convinced that God has spoken it, to make no further enquiry, D^mus D^um
aliquid posse qu^ (...) f^t^a^ur investi^^ro non posse. S. August. l. 2. ca^.
7. de Civitat.
but humbly to submit, ever remembering that there are some things which our
understanding cannot fathom nor search out their depth.

2. To believe nothing concerning God but what is honorable and excellent, as
knowing that belief to be no honoring of God which entertains of him any
dishonorable thoughts. Faith is the parent of Charity, and whatsoever Faith
entertains must be apt to produce love to God: but he that believes God to be
cruel or unmerciful, or a rejoycer in the unavoidable damnation of the greatest
part of mankind, or that he speaks one thing and privately means another;
thinks evil thoughts concerning God, and such, as for which we should hate a
man, and therefore are great enemies of Faith, being apt to destroy charity.
Our Faith concerning God must be as himself has revealed and described his own
excellencies: and in our discourses we must remove from him all imperfection,
and attribute to him all excellency.

3. To give our selves wholly up to Christ in heart and desire to become
Disciples of his doctrine with choice (besides conviction) being in the
presence of God, but as Idiots, that is, without any principles of our own to
hinder the truth of God; but sucking in greedily all that God has taught us,
believing it infinitely, and loving to believe it. For this is an act of Love
reflected upon Faith, or an act of Faith leaning upon Love.

4. To believe all Gods promises, and that whatsoever is promised in Scripture
shall on Gods part be as surely performed as if we had it in possession. This
act makes us to rely upon God with the same confidence as we did on our Parents
when we were children, when we made no doubt, but whatsoever we needed we
should have it if it were in their power.

5. To believe also the conditions of the promise, or that part of the
revelation which concerns our duty. Many are apt to believe the Article of
remission of sins, but they believe it without the condition of repentance, or
the fruits of holy life: and that is to believe the Article otherwise then God
intended it. For the Covenant of the Gospel is the great object of Faith, and
that supposes our duty to answer his grace; that God will be our God, so long,
as we are his people; The other is not Faith but Flattery.

6. To profess publicly the doctrine of Jesus Christ, openly owning
whatsoever he has revealed and commanded, not being ashamed of the word of
God, or of any practices enjoined by it; and this, without complying with any
man's interest, not regarding favor, nor being moved with good words, not
fearing disgrace, or loss, or inconvenience, or death it self.

7. To pray without doubting, without weariness, without faintness,
entertaining no jealousies, or suspicions of God, but being confident of Gods
hearing us, and os his returns to us, whatsoever the manner or the instance be,
that if we do our duty, it will be gracious and merciful.

These acts of Faith are in several degrees in the servants of Jesus: some have
it but as a grain of mustard seed, some grow up to a plant, some have the
fullness of faith: but the least faith that is must be a persuasion so strong
as to make us undertake the doing of all that duty which Christ built upon the
foundation of believing: but we shall best discern the truth of our faith by
these following signs. Dial. adver. Lucif.
S. Hierom reckons three.

Signs of true Faith.
1. An earnest and vehement prayer: for it is impossible we should heartily
believe the things of God and the glories of the Gospel, and not most
importunately desire them. For every thing is desired according to our belief
of its excellency and possibility.

2. To do nothing for vain glory, but wholly for the interests of religion, and
these Articles we believe; valuing not at all the r^mours of men, but the
praise of God, to whom by faith, we have given up all our intellectual
faculties.

3. To be content with God for our Judge, for our Patron, for our Lord, for our
friend, desiring God to be all in all to us, as we are in our understanding and
affections wholly his.

Add to these.

4. To be a stranger upon earth in our affections, and to have all our thoughts
and principal desires fixed upon the matters of Faith, the things of Heaven.
For if a man were adopted heir to Caesar, he would (if he believed it real and
effective) despise the present, and wholly be at court in his Fathers eye; and
his desires would outrun his swiftest speed, and all his thoughts would spend
themselves in creating Ideas, and little fantastic images of his future
condition. Now God has made us Heirs of his Kingdom, and Coheirs with Jesus:
if we believed this, we would think and affect, and study accordingly. But he
that rejoices in gain, and his heart dwells in the world, and is espoused to a
fair estate, and transported with a light momentany joy, and is afflicted with
losses, and amazed with temporal persecutions, and esteems disgrace, or poverty
in a good cause to be intolerable, this man either has no inheritance in
Heaven, or believes none; and believes not that he is adopted to be the Son of
God, the Heir of eternal Glory.

5. S. James's sign is the best: [ Show me thy faith by thy works] Faith makes
the Merchant diligent and venturous, and that makes him rich. Ferdinando of
Arragon believed the story told him by Columbus, and therefore he furnished him
with ships, and got the west Indies by his Faith in the undertaker. But Henry
the seventh of England believed him not, and therefore trusted him not with
shipping, and lost all the purchase of that Faith. It is told us by Christ [ He
that forgives shall be forgiven] if we believe this, it is certain we shall
forgive our enemies; for none of us all but need and desire to be forgiven. No
man can possibly despise or refuse to desire such excellent glories as are
revealed to them that that are servants of Christ: and yet we do nothing that
is commanded us as a condition to obtain them. No man could work a days labor
without faith: but because he believes he shall have his wages at the days or
weeks end, he does his duty. But he only believes who does that thing which
other men in the like cases do, when they do believe. He that believes, money
gotten with danger is better then poverty with safety, will venture for it in
unknown lands or seas: and so will he that believes it better to get Heaven
with labor, then to go to Hell with pleasure.

6. He that believes does not make haste, but waits patiently till the times of
refreshment come, and dares trust God for the morrow, and is no more
sollicitous for next year, then he is for that which is past: and it is
certain, that man wants faith who dares be more confident of being supplied
when he has money in his purse, then when he has it only in bills of
exchange from God: or that relyes more upon his own industry then upon Gods
providence, when his own industry fails him. If you dare trust to God when the
case to humane reason seems impossible, and trust to God then also out of
choice, not because you have nothing else to trust to, but because he is the
only support of a just confidence, then you give a good testimony of your
faith.

7. True Faith is confident, and will venture all the world upon the strength
of its persuasion. Will you lay your life on it, your estate, your reputation,
that the doctrine of JESUS CHRIST is true in every Article? Then you have true
Faith. But he that fears men more then God, believes men more then he believes
in God.

8. Faith, if it be true, living, and justifying cannot be separated from a
good life: it works miracles, 2 Cor. 13.5. Romans 8.10.
makes a Drunkard become sober, a lascivious person become chaste, a covetous
man become liberal: it overcomes the world, it works righteousness, and makes
us diligently to do, and cheerfully to suffer whatsoever God has placed in our
way to Heaven.

The Means and Instruments to obtain Faith, are
1. An humble, willing, and docible mind, or desire to be instructed in the
way of God: For persuasion enters like a sunbeam, gently, and without
violence: and open but the window, and draw the curtain and the Sun of
righteousness will enlighten your darkness.

2. Remove all prejudice and love to every thing which may be contradicted by
Faith: How can ye believe (said Christ) that receive praise one of another? An
unchaste man cannot easily be brought to believe that without purity he shall
never see God. He that loves riches can hardly believe the doctrine of poverty
and renuntiation of the world: and alms and Martyrdom, and the doctrine of the
cross is folly to him that loves his ease and pleasures. He that has within
him any principle contrary to the doctrines of Faith, cannot easily become a
Disciple.

3. Prayer which is instrumental to every thing has a particular promise in
this thing. He that lacks wisdom let him ask it of God: and, if you give good
things to your children, how much more shall your Heavenly Father give his
Spirit to them that ask him.

4. The consideration of the Divine Omnipotence, and infinite wisdom, In ^ebus
mirit summa ^reden^i ^itio es (...) S. Aug.
and our own ignorance, are great instruments of curing all doubting, and
silencing the murmures of infidelity.

5. Avoid all curiosity of inquiry into particulars, and circumstances and
mysteries: for true faith is full of ingenuity, and hearty simplicity, free
from suspicion, wise and confident, trusting upon generals without watching and
prying into unnecessary or undiscernable particulars. No Man carries his bed
into his field to watch how his corn grows; but believes upon the general order
of Providence and Nature; and at Harvest finds himself not deceived.

6. In time of temptation be not busy to dispute, but rely upon the
conclusion, and throw your self upon God, and contend not with him, but in
prayer, and in the presence, and with the help of a prudent untempted guide:
and be sure to esteem all changes of belief which offer themselves in the time
of your greatest weakness (contrary to the persuasions of your best
understanding) to be temptations, and reject them accordingly.

7. It is a prudent course that in our health and best advantages we lay up
particular arguments and instruments of persuasion and confidence, to be
brought forth and used in the great day of expense; and that especially in such
things in which we use to be most tempted, and in which we are least confident,
and which are most necessary, and which commonly the Devil uses to assault us
withal in the days of our visitation.

8. The wisdom of the Church of God is very remarkable in appointing Festivals
or Holidayes, whose solemnity and Offices have no other special business but
to record the Article of the day; such as, Trinity Sunday, Ascension, Easter,
Christmas day: and to those persons who can only believe, not prove or
dispute, there is no better instrument to cause the remembrance, and plain
notion, and to endear the affection and hearty assent to the Article, then the
proclaiming and recommending it by the festivity and joy of a Holy day.

Sect. II. Of the Hope of a Christian.
^
FAith differs from Hope in the extension of its object, and in the intension of
degree. Saint Austin thus accounts their differences. Faith is of all things
revealed, good and bad, rewards and punishments, of things past, present, and
to come, of things that concern us, and of things that concern us not: But Hope
has for its Object things only that are good and fit to be hoped for, future,
and concerning our selves: and because these things are offered to us upon
conditions of which we may so fail as we may change our will; therefore our
certainty is less then the adherences of faith; which (because Faith relyes
only upon one proposition, that is, the truth of the Word of God) cannot be
made uncertain in themselves, though the object of our Hope may become
uncertain to us, and to our possession: for it is infallibly certain, that
there is Heaven for all the godly, and for me amongst them all, if I do my
duty. But that I shall enter into Heaven is the object of my Hope, not of my
Faith, and is so sure, as it is certain I shall persevere in the ways of God.

The Acts of Hope, are
1. To rely upon God with a confident expectation of his promises; ever
esteeming that every promise of God is a magazine of all that grace and relief
which we can need in that instance for which the promise is made. Every degree
of hope is a degree of confidence.

2. To esteem all the danger of an action and the possibilities of miscarriage,
and every cross accident that can intervene, to be no defect on Gods part, but
either a mercy on his part, or a fault on ours: for then we shall be sure to
trust in God when we see him to be our confidence, and our selves the cause of
all mischances. The hope of a Christian is prudent and religious.

3. To rejoice in the midst of a misfortune or seeming sadness, knowing that
this may work for good, and will, if we be not wanting to our souls. This is a
direct act of Hope to look through the cloud, and look for a beam of light from
God, and this is called in Scripture, Rejoicing in tribulation, when the God of
hope fills us with all joy in believing. Every degree of hope brings a degree of
joy.

4. To desire, to pray, and to long for the great object of our hope, the
mighty price of our high calling; and to desire the other things of this life,
as they are promised, that is, so far as they are made necessary and useful to
us in order to Gods glory, and the great end of fouls. Hope and Fasting are
said to be the two wings of Prayer. Fasting is but as the wing of a Bird, but
Hope is like the wing of an Angel soaring up to Heaven, and bears our prayers
to the throne of Grace. Without Hope it is impossible to pray; but Hope makes
our prayers reasonable, passionate, and religious; for it relyes upon Gods
promise, or experience, or providence, and story. Prayer is always in
proportion to our Hope, zealous and affectionate.

5. Perseverance is the perfection of the duty of hope, and its last act: and
so long as our hope continues, so long we go on in duty and diligence: but he
that is to raise a Castle in an hour, sits down and does nothing toward it:
and Herod the Sophister left off to teach his son, when he saw that 24 Pages
appointed to wait on him, and called by the several Letters of the Alphabet
could never make him to understand his letters perfectly.

Rules to govern our Hope.
1. Let your Hope be moderate, proportioned to your state, person and
condition, whether it be for gifts or graces, or temporal favors. It is an
ambitious hope for a person whose diligence is like them that are least in the
Kingdom of Heaven, to believe themselves endea^'d to God as the greatest
Saints, or that they shall have a throne equal to S. Paul or the blessed Virgin
Mary. A Stammerer cannot with moderation hope for the gift of Tongues, or a
Peasant to become learned as Origin: or if a Beggar desires or hopes to become
a King, or asks for a thousand pound a year, we call him impudent, not
passionate, much less reasonable. Hope that God will crown your endeavors
with equal measures of that reward which he indeed freely gives, but yet gives
according to our proportions. Hope for good success according to, or not much
beyond the efficacy of the causes and the instrument, and let the Husbandman
hope for a good Harvest, not for a rich Kingdom, or a victorious Army.

2. Let your hope be well founded, relying upon just confidences, that is, upon
God according to his revelations and promises. For it is possible for a Man to
have a vain hope upon God: and in matters of Religion it is presumption to hope
that Gods mercies will be powered forth upon lazy persons that do nothing
toward holy and strict walking, nothing (I say) but trust, and long for an
event besides and against all disposition of the means. Every false principle
in Religion is a Reed of Egypt, false and dangerous. * Rely not in temporal
things upon uncertain prophecies, and Astrology, not upon our own wit or
industry, not upon gold or friends, not upon Armies and Princes, expect not
health from Physicians that cannot cure their own breath, much less their
mortality: use all lawful instruments, but expect nothing from them above their
natural or ordinary efficacy, and in the use of them from God expect a
blessing. A hope that is easy and credulous is an arm of flesh, Ier. 17.5.
an ill supporter without a bone.

3. Let your hope be without vanity, or garishnesse of spirit, but sober, grave
and silent, fixed in the heart, not born upon the lip, apt to support our
spirits within, but not to provoke envy abroad.

4. Let your hope be of things possible, safe and useful. Di cosi ^uori di c
ede^^^ Non voler far (...).
He that hopes for an opportunity of acting his revenge, or lust, or rapine,
watches to do himself a mischief. All evils of our selves or Brethren are
objects of our fear, not hope: and when it is truly understood, things useless
and unsafe can no more be wished for, then things impossible can be obtained.

5. Let your hope be patient, without tediousness of spirit, or hastiness of
prefixing time. Make no limits or prescriptions to God, but let your prayers
and endeavors go on still with a constant attendance on the periods of Gods
providence. The Men of Bethulia resolved to wait upon God but five days
longer. But deliverance stayed seven days, and yet came at last: and take not
every accident for an argument of despair: but go on still in hoping, and begin
again to work if any ill accident have interrupted you.

Means of Hope, and remedies against Despair.
The means to cure Despair, and to continue or increase Hope, are partly by
consideration, partly by exercise.

1. Apply your mind to the cure of all the proper causes of Despair: and they
are weakness of spirit, or violence of passion. He that greedily covets, (...).
is impatient of delay, and desperate in contrary accidents; and he that is
little of heart, is also little of hope, and apt to sorrow and suspicion.

2. Despise the things of the World, and be indifferent to all changes and
events of providence; and for the things of God the promises are certain to be
performed in kind; and where there is less variety of chance, there is less
possibility of being mocked: but he that creates to himself thousands of little
hopes, uncertain in the promise, fallible in the event, and depending upon ten
thousand circumstances (as are all the things of this World) shall often fail
in his expectations, and be used to arguments of distrust in such hopes.

3. So long as your hopes are regular and reasonable, though in temporal
affairs, such as are deliverance from enemies, escaping a storm or shipwreck,
recovery from a sickness, ability to pay your debts, etc. remember that there
are some things ordinary, and some things extraordinary to prevent despair. In
ordinary, Remember that the very hoping in God is an endearment of him, and a
means to obtain the blessing [ I will deliv^r him because he has put his trust
in me.] 2. There are in God all those glorious Attributes and excellencies
which in the nature of things can possibly create or confirm Hope. God is 1.
Strong, 2. Wise. 3. True. 4. Loving. There cannot be added another capacity to
create a confidence; for upon these premises we cannot fail of receiving what
is fit for us. 3. God has obliged himself by promise that we shall have the
good of every thing we desire: for even losses and denials shall work for the
good of them that fear God. And if we will trust the truth of God for
performance of the general, we may well trust his wisdom to choose for us the
particular. * But the extraordinaries of God are apt to supply the defect of
all natural and humane possibilities. 1. God has in many instances given
extraordinary virtue to the active causes and instruments: to a jawbone to kill
a multitude: to 300 Men to destroy a great Army, to Jonathan and his
Armor-bearer to rout a whole Garrison. 2. He has given excellent sufferance
and vigorousnesse to the sufferers, arming them with strange courage, heroical
fortitude, invincible resolution, and glorious patience: and thus, he lays no
more upon us then we are able to bear: for when he increases our sufferings, he
lessens them by increasing our patience. 3. His providence is extraregular and
produces strange things beyond common rules: and he that lead Israel through a
Sea, and made a Rock power forth waters, and the Heavens to give them bread and
flesh, and whole Armies to be destroyed with fantastic noises, and the
fortune of all France to be recovered and entirely revolved by the arms and
conduct of a Girl against the torrent of the English fortune and Chivalry; can
do what he please, and still retains the same affections to his people, and the
same providence over mankind as ever: Heb. 2.18.
and it is impossible for that Man to despair, who remembers that his Helper is
Omnipotent, and can do what he please: let us rest there awhile; he can if he
please: And he is infinitely loving: willing enough; and he is infinitely wise,
choosing better for us then we can do for our selves. This in all ages and
chances has supported the afflicted people of God and carried them on dry
ground through a red Sea. God invites and cherishes the hopes of Men by all the
variety of his providence.

4. If your case be brought to the last extremity, and that you are at the pits
brink, even the very Margent of the Grave, yet then despair not; at least put
it off a little longer: and remember that whatsoever final accident takes away
all hope from you, if you stay a little longer, and in the mean while bear it
sweetly, it will also take away all despair too. For when you enter into the
Regions of death, you rest from all your labors and your fears.

5. Let them who are tempted to despair of their salvation, consider how much
Christ suffered to redeem* us from sin and its eternal punishment: and he that
considers this, must needs believe, that the desires which God had to save us
were not less then infinite, and therefore not easily to be satisfied without
it.

6. Let no Man despair of Gods mercies to forgive him, unless he be sure that
his sins are greater then Gods mercies. If they be not, we have much reason
to hope that the stronger ingredient will prevail so long as we are in the time
and state of repentance, and within the possibilities and latitude of the
Covenant; and as long as any promise can but reflect upon him with an oblique
beam of comfort. Possibly the Man may err in his judgment of circumstances,
and therefore let him fear: but because it is not certain he is mistaken, let
him not despair.

7. Consider that God who knows all the events of Men, and what their final
condition shall be, who shall be saved, and who will perish, yet he treats
them as his own, calls them to be his own, offers fair conditions as to his
own, gives them blessings, arguments of mercy, and instances of fear to call
them off from death, and to call them home to life, and in all this shows no
despair of happiness to them, and therefore much less should any Man despair
for himself, since he never was able to read the Scrols of the eternal
predestination.

8. Remember that despair belongs only to passionate Fools or Villains, (such
as were Achitophel and Judas) or else to Devils and damned persons: and as the
hope of salvation is a good disposition toward it; so is despair a certain
consignation to eternal ruin. A Man may be damned for despairing to be saved.
Despair is the proper passion of damnation. V. Bid.
God has placed truth and felicity in Heaven: Curiosity and repentance upon
Earth: but misery and despair are the portions of Hell.

9. Gather together into your spirit, and its ^reasure-house [the Memory] not
only all the promises of GOD, but also the remembrances of experience, and the
former senses of the Divine favors, that from thence you may argue from times
past to the present, and enlarge to the future, and to greater blessings. For
although the conjectures and expectations of Hope are not like the conclusions
of Faith, yet they are a Helmet against the scorchings of Despair in temporal
things, and an anchor of the soul sure and steadfast against the fluctuations of
the Spirit in matters of the soul. Saint Bernard reckons diverse principles of
Hope by enumerating the instances of the Divine Mercy; and we may by them
reduce this rule to practice in the following manner. 1. GOD has preserved me
from many sins; his mercies are infinite, I hope he will still preserve me
from more, and for ever *. 2. I have sinned and GOD smote me not: his mercies
are still over the penitent, I hope he will deliver me from all the evils I
have deserved He has forgiven me many sins of malice, and therefore surely he
will pity my infirmities. * 3. God visited my heart, and changed it: he loves
the work of his own hands, and so my heart is now become: I hope he will love
this too. * 4. When I repented he received me graciously; and therefore I hope
if I do my endeavor he will totally forgive me. 5. He helped my slow and
beginning endeavors, and therefore I hope he will lead me to perfection. * 6.
When he had given me something first, then he gave me more. I hope therefore he
will keep me from falling, and give me the grace of perseverance. * 7. He has
chosen me to be a Disciple of Christ's institution; he has elected me to his
Kingdom of grace, and therefore I hope also, to the Kingdom of his glory. * 8.
He died for me when I was his enemy, and therefore I hope he will save me when
he has reconciled me to him, and is become my friend. * 9. God has given us
his Son, how should not he with him give us all things else? All these S.
Bernard reduces to these three Heads, as the instruments of all our hopes. 1.
The charity of God adopting us. 2. The truth of his promises. 3. The power of
his performance: which if any truly weighs, no infirmity or accident can break
his hopes into undiscernable fragments, but some good planks will remain after
the greatest storm and shipwreck. This was S. Paul's instrument: Experience
begets hope, and hope makes not ashamed.

10. Do thou take care only of thy duty, of the means and proper instruments
of thy purpose, and leave the end to God: lay that up with him, and he will
take care of all that is entrusted to him: and this being an act of confidence
in God, is also a means of security to thee.

11. By special arts of spiritual prudence and arguments secure the confident
belief of the Resurrection, and thou can not but hope for every thing else
which you may reasonably expect, or lawfully desire upon the stock of the
Divine mercies and promises.

12. If a despair seizes you in a particular temporal instance, let it not
defile thy spirit with impure mixture, or mingle in spiritual considerations;
but rather let it make thee fortify thy soul in matters of Religion, that by
being thrown out of your Earthly dwelling and confidence, you may retire into
the strengths of grace, and hope the more strongly in that, by how much you are
the more defeated in this, that despair of a fortune or a success, may become
the necessity of all virtue.

Sect. 3. Of Charity, or the love of God.
LOve is the greatest thing that God can give us, for himself is love, and it
is the greatest thing we can give to God, for it will also give our selves, and
carry with it all that is ours. The Apostle calls it the band of perfection; it
is the Old, and it is the New, and it is the great Commandment, and it is all
the Commandments, for it is the fulfilling of the Law. It does the work of all
other graces without any instrument but its own immediate virtue. For as the
love to sin makes a Man sin against all his own reason, and all the
discourses of wisdom, and all the advices of his friends, and without
temptation, and without opportunity: so does the love of God, it makes a man
chaste without the laborious arts of fasting and exterior disciplines,
temperate in the midst of feasts, and is active enough to choose it without any
intermedial appetites, and reaches at Glory thorough the very heart of Grace,
without any other arms but those of Love. It is a grace that loves God for
himself, and our Neighbors for God. The consideration of Gods goodness and
bounty, the experience of those profitable and excellent emanations from him,
may be, and most commonly are the first motive of our love: but when we are
once entered, and have tasted the goodness of God, we love the spring for its
own excellency, passing from passion to reason, from thanking to adoring, from
sense to spirit, from considering our selves, to an union with God: and this is
the image and little representation of Heaven; it is beatitude in picture, or
rather the infancy and beginnings of glory.

We need no incentives by way of special enumeration to move us to the love of
God, for we cannot love any thing for any reason real or imaginary, but that
excellency is infinitely more eminent in God. There can but two things create
love, Perfection and Usefulness: to which answer on our part, first
admiration, and 2. Desire: and both these are centred in love. For the
entertainment of the first, there is in God an infinite nature, immensity or
vastness without extension or limit, Immutability, Eternity, Omnipotence,
Omniscience, Holiness, Dominion, Providence, Bounty, Mercy, Justice,
Perfection in himself, and the end to which all things and all actions must be
directed, and will at last arrive. The consideration of which may be
heightened, if we consider our distance from all these glories: Our smallness
and limited nature, our nothing, our inconstancy, our age like a span, our
weakness and ignorance, our poverty, our inadvertency, and inconsideration,
our disabilities and disaffections to do good, our harsh natures and unmerciful
inclinations, our universal iniquity, and our necessities dependencies, not
only on God originally, and essentially, but even our need of the meanest of
Gods creatures, and our being obnoxious to the weakest and the most
contemptible. But for the entertainment of the second we may consider that in
him is a torrent of pleasure for the voluptuous, he is the fountain of honor
for the ambitious, an inexhaustible treasure for the covetous: our vices are in
love with fantastic pleasures and images of perfection, which are truly and
really to be found no where but in God. And therefore our virtues have such
proper objects, that it is but reasonable they should all turn into love: for
certain it is that this love will turn all into virtue. S Aug. lib. 2. confess.
cap. 6.
For in the scrutinies for righteousness and judgment, when it is inquired
whether such a person be a good man or no, the meaning is not, what does ^e
believe, or what does he hope, but what he loves?

The acts of Love to God, are
1. Love does all things which may please the beloved person, it performs all
his commandments: and this is one of the greatest instances and arguments of
our love that God requires of us. [This is love that we keep his commandments.
Love is obedient.

2. It does all the intimations and secret significations of his pleasure whom
we love: and this is an argument of a great degree of it The first instance is
it that makes the love accepted: but this gives a greatness and singularity to
it. The first is the least, and less then it cannot do our duty; but without
this second, we cannot come to perfection. Great love is also plyant and
inquisitive in the instances of its expression.

3. Love gives away all things that so he may advance the interest of the
beloved person: it relieves all that he would have relieved, and spends it self
in such real significations as it is enabled withal. He never loved God that
will quit any thing of his Religion, to save his money. Love is always liberal
and communicative.

4. It suffers all things that are imposed by its beloved, or that can happen
for his sake, or that intervenes in his service, cheerfully, sweetly,
willingly, expecting that God should turn them into good, and instruments of
^elicity. Charity hops all things, endures all things. 1 Cor. 13.
Love is patient and content with any thing so it be together with its beloved.

5. Love is also impatient of any thing that may displease the beloved person,
hating all ^in as the enemy of its friend; for love contracts all the same
relations and marries the same friendships, and the same hatreds; and all
affection to a sin is perfectly inconsistent with the love of God, love is not
divided between God and Gods enemy: we must love God with all our heart, that
is, give him a whole and undivided affection, having love for nothing else but
such things which he allows, and which he commands, or loves himself.

6. Love endeavors for ever to be present, to converse with, to enjoy, to be
united with its object, loves to be talking of him, reciting his praises,
telling his stories, repeating his words, imitating his gestures, transcribing
his copy in every thing; and every degree of union and every degree of
likeness is a degree of love; and it can endure any thing but the displeasure
and the absence of its beloved. For we are not to use God and Religion, as men
use perfumes, with which they are delighted when they have them, but can very
well be without them. True chari^y is res^lesse till it enjoyes God in such
instances in which it wants him: Amori^ ut morsum qui vere (...)*
it is like hunger and thirst, it must be fed or it cannot be answered, and
nothing can supply the presence, or make recompense for the absence of God, or
of the effects of his favor, and the light of his countenance.

7. True love in all accidents locks upon the beloved person, and observes his
countenance, and how he approves or disproves it, and accordingly looks sad or
cheerful. He that loves God is not displeased at those accidents which God
chooses, nor murmurs at those changes which he makes in his family, nor envies
at those gifts he bestows, but chooses as he likes, and is ruled by his
judgment, and is perfectly of his persuasion, loving to learn where God is the
Teacher, and being content to be ignorant or silent where he is not pleased to
open himself.

8. Love is curious of little things: of circumstances and measures, and little
accidents, not allowing to it self any infirmity, which it strives not to
master: aiming at what it cannot yet reach at, Plutarchu^ citan^ ca^mo^ ^e suo
Apolline, adj^^it ex Herodo^o quasi d^ suo, de eo (...) meum continens est^.
desiring to be of an Angelical purity and of a perfect innocence, and a
Seraphical fervor, and fears every image of offense, is as much afflicted at
an idle word, as some at an act of adultery, and will not allow to it self so
much anger as will disturb a child; nor endure the impurity of a dream; and
this is the curiosity and niceness of divine Love; this is the fear of God,
and is the daughter and production o^ Love.

The Measures and Rules of Divine Love.
But because this passion is pure as the brightest and smoothest mirror, and
therefore is apt to be sullyed with every impurer breath, we must be careful
that our love to God be governed by these measures.

1. That our love be sweet, even and full of tranquillity, having in it no
violences or transportations, but going on in a course of holy actions and
duties which are proportionable to our condition, and present state; not to
satisfy all the desire, but all the probabilities and measures of our
strength. A new beginner in religion has passionate and violent desires, but
they must not be the measure of his actions* But he must consider his strength,
his late sickness and state of death, the proper temptations of his condition,
and stand at first upon his defense, not go to storm a strong Fort, or attaque
a potent enemy, or do heroical actions and fitter for giants in Religion.
Indiscreet violences, and untimely forwardness are the rocks of religion
against which tender spirits often suffer shipwreck.

2. Let our love be prudent and without illusion: that is, that it express it
self in such instances which God has chosen, or which we choose our selves by
proportion to his rules and measures. Love turns into doting when religion
turns into Superstition. No degree of love can be imprudent, but the
expressions may: we cannot love God too much, but we may proclaim it in
undecent manners.

3. Let our love be firm, constant and inseparable, not coming and returning
like the tide, but descending like a never failing river, ever running into the
Ocean of Divine excellency, passing on in the channels of duty and a constant
obedience, and never ceasing to be what it is, till it comes to be what it
desires to be; still being a river till it be turned into sea and vastness,
even the immensitie of a blessed Eternity.

Although the consideration of the Divine excellencies and mercies be
infinitely sufficient to produce in us love to God (who is invisible and yet
not distant from us, but we feel him in his blessings, he dwells in our hearts
by faith, we feed on him in the Sacrament, and are made all one with him in the
incarnation and glorifications of Jesus) yet that we may the better enkindle
and increase our love to God, the following advices are not useless.

Helps to increase our love to God; by way of exercise.
1. Cut off all earthly and sensual loves, for they pollute and unhallow the
pure and Spiritual love. Every degree of inordinate affection to the things of
this world, and every act of love to a sin is a perfect enemy to the love of
God: and it is a great shame to take any part of our affection from the eternal
God to bestow it upon his creature in defiance of the Creator, or to give it to
the Devil, our open enemy, in disparagement of him who is the fountain of all
excellencies and Celestial amities.

2. Lay fetters and restraints upon the imaginative and fantastic part:
because our fancy being an imperfect and higher faculty is usually pleased
with the entertainment of shadows and gauds; and because the things of the
world fill it with such beauties and fantastic imagery, the fancy presents
such objects as amiable to the affections, and elective powers. Persons of
fancy, such as are women and children have always the most violent loves; but
therefore if we be careful with what representments we fill our fancy, we may
the sooner rectify our loves. To this purpose, it is good that we transplant
the instruments of fancy into religion: and sor this reason music was brought
into Churches, and ornaments, and persumes, and comely garments, and
solemnities, and decent ceremonies, that the busy and less discerning fancy
being bribed with its proper objects may be instrumental to a more celestial
and spiritual love.

3. Remove solicitude or worldly cares, and multitudes of secular businesses;
for if these take up the intention and actual application of our thoughts and
our employments, they will also possess our passions; which if they be filled
with one object though ignoble, cannot attend another though more excellent. We
always contract a friendship and relation with those with whom we converse:
our very Country is dear to us for our being in it: and the Neighbors of the
same Village, and those that buy and sell with us have seized upon some
portions of our love, and therefore if we dwell in the affairs of the World, we
shall also grow in love with them; and all our love, or all our hatred, all our
hopes, or all our fears, which the eternal God would willingly secure to
himself, and esteem amongst his treasures and precious things, shall be spent
upon trifles and vanities.

4. Do not only choose the things of God, but secure your inclinations and
aptnesses for God and for Religion. For it will be a hard thing for a Man to do
such a personal violence to his first desires, as to choose whatsoever he has
no mind to. A Man will many times satisfy the importunity and daily
solicitations of his first longings: and therefore there is nothing can secure
our loves to God, but stopping the natural Fountains, and making Religion to
grow near the first desires of the soul.

5. Converse with God by frequent prayer. In particular, desire that your
desires may be right, and love to have your affections regular and holy: To
which purpose make very frequent addresses to God by ejaculations and
communions, and an assiduous daily devotion: Discover to him all your wants,
complain to him of all your affronts, do as Hezekiah did, lay your misfortunes
and your ill news before him, spread them before the Lord, call to him for
health, run to him for counsel, beg of him for pardon; and it is as natural to
love him to whom we make such addresses, and of whom we have such dependancies,
as it is for children to love their parents.

6. Consider the immensity and vastness of the Divine love to us, expressed in
all the emanations of his providence. 1. In his Creation. 2. In his
conservation of us. For it is not my Prince or my Patron, or my Friend that
supports me, or relieves my needs, but God, who made the Corn that my friend
sends me, who created the Grapes and supported him, who has as many
dependances, and as many natural necessities, and as perfect disabilities as my
self. God indeed made him the instrument of his providence to me, as he has
made his own Land or his own Cattle to him: with this only difference, that
God by his ministration to me intends to do him a favor and a reward, which to
natural instruments he does nor. 3. In giving his Son. 4. In forgiving our
sins. 5. In adopting us to glory: and ten thousand times ten thousand little
accidents and instances happening in the doing every of these; and it is not
possible but for so great love we should give love again, for God we should
give Man, for felicity we should part with our misery. Nay, so great is the
love of the holy Jesus, ^
God incarnate, that he would leave all his triumphant glories, and dye once
more for Man, if it were necessary for procuring felicity to him.

In the use of these instruments love will grow in several knots and steps like
the Sugarcanes of India according to a thousand varieties in the person
loving, and it will be great or less in several persons, and in the same,
according to his growth in Christianity: but in general discoursing there are
but two states of love, and those are Labor of love, and the zeal of love: the
first is duty, the second is perfection.

The two states of love to God.
The least love that is, must be obedient, pure, simple, and communicative:
that is, it must exclude all affection to sin, and all inordinate affection to
the World; and must be expressive according to our power, in the instances of
duty, and must be love for loves sake; and of this love Martyrdom is the
highest instance; that is, a readiness of mind rather to suffer any evil then
to do any. Of this our blessed Savior affirmed, That no man had greater love
then this: that is, this is the highest point of duty, the greatest love that
God requires of Man. And yet he that is the most imperfect must have this love
also in preparation of mind, and must differ from another in nothing, except
in the degrees of promptness and alacrity. And in this sense, he that loves
God truly (though but with a beginning and tender love) yet he loves God with
all his heart, that is, with that degree of love which is the highest point of
duty, and of Gods charge upon us; and he that loves God with all his heart, may
yet increase with the increase of God, just as there are degrees of love to God
among the Saints, and yet each of them love him with all their powers and
capacities.

2. But the greater state of love is the zeal of love, which runs out into
excrescencies, and suckers like a fruitful and pleasant tree, or bursting into
gums, and producing fruits, not of a monstrous, but of an extraordinary and
heroical greatness. Concerning which, these cautions are to be observed.

Cautions and rules concerning zeal.
1. If zeal be in the beginnings of our spiritual birth, or be short (...) Gal.
4.18.
, sudden and transient, or be a consequent of a man's natural temper, or come
upon any cause, but after a long growth of a temperate and well regulated love,
it is to be suspected for passion, and forwardness, rather then the vertical
point of love.

2. That zeal only is good which in a fervent love has temperate expressions.
For let the affection boil as high as it can, yet if it boil over into
irregular and strange actions, it will have but few, but will need many
excuses. Elijah was zealous for the Lord of Hosts, and yet he was so
transported with it, that he could not receive answer from God, till by Music
he was recompos d and tamed: and Moses broke both the Tables of the Law by
being passionately zealous against them that brake the first.

3. Zeal must spend its greatest heat principally in those things that concern
our selves; but with great care and restraint in those that concern others.

4. Remember that zeal being an excrescence of Divine love, must in no sense
contradict any action of love: Love to God includes love to our Neighbor, and
therefore no pretense of zeal for Gods Phil. 3.6.
glory must make us uncharitable to our brother, for that is just so pleasing
to God, as hatred is an act of love.

5. That zeal that concerns others, can spend it self in nothing but arts, and
actions and charitable instruments for their good: and when it concerns the
good of many that one should suffer, it must be done by persons of a competent
authority, and in great necessity, in seldom instances, according to the Law of
God or Man; but never by private right, or for trifling accidents, or in
mistaken propositions. The Zealots in the Old Law had authority to transfix and
stab some certain persons; but GOD gave them warrant; it was in the case of
Idolatry, or such notorious huge crimes; the danger of which was insuportable,
and the cognizance of which was infallible: And yet that warrant expired with
the Synagogue.

6. Zeal in the instances of our own duty, and personal deportment is more safe
then in matters of counsel, and actions besides our just duty, and tending
toward perfection. Though in these instances there is not a direct sin, even
where the zeal is less wary, yet there is much trouble and some danger: (as,
if it be spent in the too forward vows of Chastity, and restraints of natural
and innocent liberties.)

7. Zeal may be let loose in the instances of internal, personal, and spiritual
actions, that are matters of direct duty: as in prayers, and acts of adoration,
and thanksgiving, and frequent addresses: provided that no indirect act pass
upon them to defile them; such as complacency, and opinions of sanctity,
censuring others, scruples and opinions of necessity, unnecessary fears,
superstitious numbrings of times and hours; but let the zeal be as forward as
it will, as devout as it will, as Seraphicall as it will in the direct address
and intercourse with God, there is no danger, no transgression. Do all the
parts of your duty as earnestly as if the salvation of all the world, ^
and the whole glory of God, and the confusion of all Devils, and all that you
hope or desire did depend upon every one action.

8. Let zeal be seated in the will and choice, and regulated with prudence and
a sober understanding, not in the fancies and affections; Romans 10.2.
for these will make it full of noise and empty of profit, but that will make
it deep and smooth, material and devout.

The sum is this: That, zeal is not a direct duty, no where commanded for it
self, Titus 2.14. Revel. 3.19.
and is nothing but a forwardness and circumstance of another duty, and
therefore is then only acceptable when it advances the love of God and our
Neighbors, whose circumstance it is: That zeal is only safe, only acceptable
which increases charity directly; and because love to our Neighbor, and
obedience to God are the two great portions of charity, we must never account
our zeal to be good, but as it advances both these, if it be in a matter that
relates to both; or severally, if it relates severally. S. Paul's zeal was
expressed in preaching without any offerings or stipend, in traveling, in
spending and being spent for his flock, in suffering, in being willing to be
accursed for love of the people of God, and his Countrymen: Let our zeal be as
great as his was, so it be in affections to others, but not at all in angers
against them: In the first then is no danger; in the second there is no safety.
In brief; let your zeal (if it must be expressed in anger) be always more
severe against thy 2 Cor 7.11.
self, then against others.

The other part of Love to God is Love to our Neighbor, for which I have
reserved the Paragraph of Alms.

Of the external actions of Religion.
Religion teaches us to present to God our bodies as well as our souls; for God
is the Lord of both; and if the body serves the soul in actions natural and
civil, and intellectual, it must not be eased in the only offices of Religion,
unles^e the body shall expect no portion of the rewards of Religion, such as
are resurrection, reunion, and glorification. Our bodies are to God a living
sacrifice, and to present them to God is holy and acceptable. Romans 12.1.


The actions of the body as it serves to religion, and as it is distinguished
from Sobriety and Justice; either relate to the word of God, or to prayer, or
to repentance, and make these kinds of external actions of religion. 1.
Reading and hearing the word of God. 2. Fasting and corporal austerities,
called by S. Paul, bodily exercise. 3. Feasting or keeping days of public joy
and thanksgiving.

SECT. IV. Of Reading, or Hearing the Word of God.
REading and Hearing the word of God are but the several circumstances of the
same duty; instrumental especially to faith, but consequently to all other
graces of the Spirit. It is all one to us whether by the eye or by the ear the
Spirit conveyes his precepts to us. If we hear S. Paul saying to us, that [
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge:] or read it in one of his Epistles;
in either of them we are equally and sufficiently instructed. The Scriptures
read are the same thing to us, which the same doctrine was, when it was
preached by the Disciples of our blessed Lord; and we are to learn of either
with the same dispositions. There are many that cannot read the word, and they
must take it in by the ear; and they that can read, find the same word of God
by the eye. It is necessary that all men learn it some way or other, and it is
sufficient in order to their practice that they learn it any way. The word of
God is all those Commandments and Revelations, those promises and threatenings,
the stories and sermons recorded in the Bible: nothing else is the word of God,
that we know of, by any certain instrument. The good books and spiritual
discourses, the sermons or homilies written or spoken by men are but the word
of men, or rather explications of, and exhortations according to the Word of
God: but of themselves* they are not the Word of God. In a Sermon, the Text
only is in a proper sense to be called Gods Word: and yet good Sermons are of
great use and convenience for the advantages of Religion. He that preaches an
hour together against drunkenness with the tongue of men or Angels, has spoke
no other word of God but this [ Be not drunk with wine wherein there is
excess:] and he that writes that Sermon in a book, and publishes that book,
has preached to all that read it, a louder Sermon then could be spoken in a
Church. This I say to this purpose that we may separate truth from error,
popular opinions from substantial Truths. For God preaches to us in the
Scripture, and by his secret assistances and spiritual thoughts and holy
motions: Good men preach to us when they by popular arguments, and humane arts
and complyances expound and press any of those doctrines which God has
preached unto us in his holy Word. But

1. The Holy Ghost is certainly the best Preacher in the world, and the words
of Scripture the best sermons.

2. All the doctrine of salvation is plainly set down there, that the most
unlearned person by hearing it read, may understand all his duty. What can be
plainer spoken then this, [ Thou shall not kill. Be not drunk with wine:
Husbands love your wives: whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye
so to them*] The wit of man cannot more plainly tell us our duty, or more
fully, then the Holy Ghost has done already.

3. Good sermons, and good books are of excellent use: but yet they can serve
no other end but that we practice the plain doctrines of Scripture.

4. What Abraham in the parable said concerning the brethren of the rich man,
is here very proper: They have Moses and the Prophets le^ them hear them: Luke
16.29, 31.
But if they refuse to hear these* neither will they believe though one should
arise from the dead to preach unto them.

5. Reading the holy Scriptures is a duty expressly Deuteronomy 31.13. Luke 24.45.
Matthew. 22.29. Acts 15.21. Revel. 1.3. 2 Timothy 3.16.
commanded us, and is called in Scripture [ Deuteronomy 31.13. Luke 24.45. Matthew.
22.29. Acts 15.21. Revel. 1.3. 2 Timothy 3.16.
Preaching:] all other preaching is the effect of humane skill and industry,
and although of great benefit, yet it is but an Ecclesiastical ordinance; the
Law of God concerning Preaching, being expressed in the matter of reading the
Scriptures, and hearing that word of God, which is, and as it is there
described.

But this duty is reduced to practice in the following Rules.

Rules for hearing or reading the word of God.
1. Set apart some portion of thy time according to the opportunities of thy
calling and necessary employment, for the reading of holy Scripture; and if it
be possible, every day read or hear some of it read: you are sure that book
teaches all truth, commands all holiness, and promises all happiness.

2. When it is in your power to choose, accustom your self to such portions
which are most plain and certain duty, and which contain the story of the Life
and Death of our blessed Savior. Read the Gospels, the Psalms of Da^id; and
especially those portions of Scripture which by the wisdom of the Church are
appointed to be publicly read upon Sundays and holy days, viz. the Epistles
and Gospels. In the choice of any other portions, you may advise with a
Spiritual Guide, that you may spend your time with most profit.

3. Fail not, diligently to attend to the reading of holy Scriptures upon those
days wherein it is most publicly and solemnly read in Churches: for at such
times, besides the learning our duty, we obtain a blessing along with it, it
becoming to us upon those days apart of the solemn Divine worship.

4. When the word of God is read or preached to you, be sure you be of a ready
heart and mind, free from worldly cares and thoughts, diligent to hear,
careful to mark, studious to remember, and desirous to practice all that is
commanded, and to live according to it: Do not hear for any other end but to
become better in your life, and to be instructed in every good work, and to
increase in the love and service of God.

5. Beg of God by prayer that he would give you the spirit of obedience and
profit, and that he would by his Spirit write the word in your heart, and that
you describe it in your life. To which purpose serve your self of some
affectionate ejaculations to that purpose, before and after this duty.

Concerning spiritual books and ordinary Sermons take in these advices also.
6. Let not a prejudice to any man's person hinder thee from receiving good by
his doctrine, if it be according to godliness: but (if occasion offer it, or
especially if duty present it to thee; that is, if it be preached in that
assembly where thou art bound to be present) accept the word preached as a
message from God, and the Minister as his Angel in that ministration.

7. Consider and remark the doctrine that is represented to thee in any
discourse; and if the Preacher adds any accidental advantages, any thing to
comply with thy weakness, or to put thy spirit into action, or holy
resolution, remember it, and make use of it; but if the Preacher be a weak
person, yet the text is the doctrine thou art to remember; that contains all
thy duty, it is worth thy attendance to hear that spoken often, and renewed
upon thy thoughts, and though thou be a learned man, yet the same thing
which thou know already, if spoken by another, may be made active by that
application. I can better be comforted by my own considerations, if another
hand applies them, then if I do it my self; because the word of God does not
work as a natural agent, but as a Divine instrument: it does not prevail by the
force of deduction, and artificial discoursings only, but chie^ly by way of
blessing in the ordinance, and in the ministry of an appointed person. At
least obey the public order, and reverence the constitution, and give good
example of humility, charity and obedience.

8. When Scriptures are read, you are only to enquire with diligence and
modesty into the meaning of the Spirit: but if homilies or sermons be made upon
the words of Scripture, you are to consider, whether all that be spoken be
conformable to the Scriptures. For although you may practice for humane
reasons, and humane arguments ministered from the Preacher^ art, yet you must
practice nothing but the command of God, nothing but the Doctrine of Scripture,
that is, the text.

9. Use the advice of some spiritual or other prudent man for the choice of
such spiritual books which may be of use and benefit for the edification of thy
spirit in the ways of holy living; and esteem that time well accounted for,
that is prudently and affectionately employed, in hearing or reading good books
and pious discourses: ever remembering that God by hearing us speak to him in
prayer, obliges us to hear him speak to us in his word, by what instrument
soever it be conveyed.

SECT. V. Of Fasting.
FAsting, if it be considered in it self without relation to Spiritual ends, is
a duty no where enjoined, or counseled. But Christianity has to do with it,
as it may be made an instrument of the Spirit by subduing the lusts of the
flesh, or removing any hindrances of religion; And it has been practiced by
all ages of the Church, and advised in order to three ministeries. 1. To
Prayer. 2. To Mortification of bodily lusts. 3. To Repentance: and is to be
practiced according to the following measures.

Rules for Christian Fasting.
1. Fasting in order to prayer is to be measured by the proportions of the
times of prayer: that is, it ought to be a total faft from all things during
the solemnity (unless a probable necessity intervene.) Thus the Jews eat
nothing upon the Sabbath-dayes till their great offices were performed, that
is, about the sixth hour: and S. Peter used it as an argument, that the
Apostles in Pente^ost were not drunk, because it was but the third hour of the
day, of such a day, in which it was not lawful to eat or drink til the sixth
hour: and the Jews were offended at the Disciples for plucking the ears of corn
upon the Sabbath early in the morning, because it was before the time in which
by their customs they esteemed it lawful to break their fast. In imitation of
this custom, and in prosecution of the reason of it, the Christian Church has
religiously observed fasting before the Holy Communion: and the more devout
persons (though without any obligation at all) refused to eat or drink till
they had finished their morning devotions: and further yet upon days of
public humiliation, which are designed to be spent wholly in Devotion, and for
the averting Gods judgments (if they were imminent) fasting is commanded
together with prayer, commanded (I say) by the Church to this end, that the
Spirit might be clearer and more Angelical when it is quitted in some
proportions from the loads of flesh.

2. Fasting, when it is in order to Prayer, must be a total abstinence from all
meat, or else an abatement of the quantity: for the help which fasting does to
prayer cannot be served by changing flesh into fish, or milk-meats into dry
diet, but by turning much into little, or little into none at all during the
time of solemn and extraordinary prayer.

3. Fasting as it is instrumental to Prayer, must be attended with other aids
of the like virtue and efficacy, such as are, removing for the time all worldly
cares and secular businesses; and therefore our blessed Savior enfolds these
parts within the same caution. [ Take heed lest your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness and the cares of this world, ^^^unium (...)
^^^^mosyna (...) Augus^.
and that day overtake you unawares.] To which add alms; for upon the wings of
fasting and alms, holy prayer infallibly mounts up to Heaven.

4. When Fasting is intended to serve the duty of Repentance, it is then best
chosen when it is short, sharp and afflictive; that is, either a total
abstinence from all nourishment (according as we shall appoint, or be
appointed) during such a time as is separate for the solemnity and attendance
upon the employment: or if we shall extend our severity beyond the solemn
days, and keep our anger against our sin, as we are to keep our sorrow, that
is, always in a readiness, and often to be called upon; then, to refuse a
pleasant morsel, to abstain from the bread of our desires, and only to take
wholesome and less pleasing nourishment, vexing our appetite by the refusing a
lawful satisfaction, since in its petulancy and luxury it preyed upon an
unlawful.

5. Fasting designed for repentance must be ever joined with an extreme care
that we fast from sin: for there is no greater folly or undecency in the world,
then to commit that for which I am now judging and condemning my self. This is
the best fast: and the other may serve to promote the interest of this, by
increasing the disaffection to it, and multiplying arguments against it.

6. He that fasts for repentance, must, during that solemnity, abstain from all
bodily delights, and the sensuality of all his senses, and his appetites; for a
man must not when he mourns in his fast be merry in his sport; weep at dinner,
and laugh all day after; have a silence in his kitchen, and music in his
chamber; judge the stomach, and feast the other se^ses. I deny not but a man
may in a single instance punish a particular sin with a proper instrument: If a
man have offended in his palate, he may choose to fast only; if he have sinned
in softness and in his touch, he may choose to lie hard, or work hard, and use
sharp inflictions: but although this Discipline be proper and particular, yet
because the sorrow is of the whole man, no sense must rejoice, or be with any
study or purpose feasted and entertained softly. This rule is intended to
relate to the solemn days appointed for repentance publicly or privately:
besides which in the whole course of our life, even in the midst of our most
festival and freer joys we may sprinkle some single instances, and acts of
self condemning, or punishing: as to refuse a pleasant morsel, or a delicious
draught with a t^cit remembrance of the sin that now returns to displease my
spirit: and though these actions be single, there is no undecency in them,
because a man may abate of his ordinary liberty and bold freedom with great
prudence, so he does ^t without singularity in himself, or trouble to others:
but he may not abate of his solemn sorrow: that may be caution; but this would
be softness effoeminacy and undecency.

7^ When fasting is an act of mortification, that is, is intended to subdue a
bodily lust; as the spirit of fornication, or the fondness of strong and
impatient appetties, it must not be a sudden, sharp, and violent fast, but a
state of fasting, a diet of fasting, a daily lessening our portion of meat and
drink, and a choosing such a course diet which may make the least preparation
for the lusts of the body. Digi^na (...) man^i^.
He that fasts 3 days without ^ood, will weaken other parts more then the
ministers of fornication: and when the meals return as usually, they also will
be served as soon as any. In the mean time they will be supplied and made active
by the accidental heat that comes with such violent fastings: for this is a
kind of aerial Devil; the Prince that rules in the air is the Devil of
fornication; and he will be as tempting with the windiness of a violent fast,
as with the flesh of an ordinary meal. But a daily substraction of the
nourishment will introduce a less busy habit of body, and that will prove the
more effectual remedy.

8. Fasting alone will not cure this Devil, though it helps much toward it;
^hi digiuna et altro ^^en no^ ^a sparag^^ il Pane, etal inferno va. See Chap.
2. Sect. 2. and 3.
but it must not therefore be neglected, but assisted by all the proper
instruments of remedy against this unclean spirit; and what it is unable to do
alone, in company with other instruments, and Gods blessing upon them it may
effect.

9. All fasting for whatsoever end it be undertaken, must de done without any
opinion of the necessity of the thing it self, without censuring others, with
all humility, in order to the proper end; and just as a man takes physic of
which no man has reason to be proud, and no man thinks it necessary, but
because he is in sickness, or in danger and disposition to it.

10. All fasts ordained by lawful authority are to be observed in order to the
same purposes to which they are enjoined; and to be accompanied with actions of
the same nature, just as it is in private fasts; for there is no other
difference, but that in public our Superiors choose for us, what in private
we do for our selves.

11. Fasts ordained by lawful authority are not to be neglected because alone
they cannot do the thing in order to which they were enjoined. It may be one
day of Humiliation will not obtain the blessing, or alone kill the lust, yet it
must not be despised, if it can do any thing toward it. An act of Fasting is
an act of self-denial, and though it do not produce the habit, yet it is a good
act.

12. When the principal end why a Fast is publicly prescribed, is obtained by
some other instrument in a particular person; as if the spirit of Fornication
be cured by the rite of Marriage, or by a gift of chastity, yet that person so
eased, is not freed from the Fasts of the Church by that alone, if those fasts
can prudently serve any other end of Religion, as that of prayer, or
repentance, or mortification of some other appetite: for when it is
instrumental to any end of the Spirit, it is freed from superstition, and then
we must have some other reason to quit us from the Obligation, or that alone
will not do it.

13. When the Fast publicly commanded by reason of some indisposition in the
particular person cannot operate to the end of the Commandment, yet the
avoiding offense, and the complying with public order is reason enough to make
the obedience to be necessary. For he that is otherwise disobliged (as when the
reason of the Law ceases, as to his particular, yet) remains still obliged is
he cannot do otherwise without scandal: but this is an obligation of charity,
not of justice.

14. All fasting is to be used with prudence and charity: for there is no end
to which fasting serves, but may be obtained by other instruments, and
therefore it must at no hand be made an instrument of scruple, or become an
enemy to our health, or be imposed upon persons that are sick or aged, or to
whom it is in any sense uncharitable; such as are wearied Travelers; or to
whom in the whole kind of it, it is useless, such as are Women with child,
poor people, and little children. But in these cases the Church has made
provision, and inserted caution into her Laws, and they are to be r^duced to
practice according to custom, and the sentence of prudent persons, with great
latitude, and without ni^enesse and curiosity: having this in our first care,
that we secure our virtue, and next that we secure our health, that we may the
better exercise the labors of virtue, lest out of too much austerity we bring
our selves to that condition, that it be necessary to be indulgent to
softness, ease and extreme tenderness. S. ^asil^ ^onast. Constit. cap. 5.
C^ss^^^ co^t. 21. c. 2^. ne per causam necess^^atis (...), u^ voluptatibus
servie^^^*


15. Let not intemperance be the Prologue or the Epilogue to your fast, lest
the fast be so far from taking off any thing of the sin, that it be an
occasion to increase it; and therefore when the fast is done, (...). Naz.
be careful that no supervening act of gluttony, or excessive drinking unhallow
the religion of the passed day; but eat temperately according to the proportion
of other meals, lest gluttony keep either of the gates to abstinence.

The benefits of Fasting.
He that undertakes to enumerate the benefits of fasting, may in the next page
also reckon all the benefits of physic: for fasting is not to be commended as
a duty, but as an instrument; and in that sense, no Man can reprove it, or
undervalue it; but he that knows neither spiritual arts, nor spiritual
necessities: but by the Doctors of the Church it is called, the nourishment of
prayer, the restraint of lust, the wings of the soul, the diet of Angels, the
instrument of humility, and self-denial, the purification of the Spirit: and
that palenesse and maigrenesse of visage which is consequent to the daily fast
of great mortifiers, is by Saint Basil said to be the mark in the Forehead
which the Angel observed, when he signed the Saints in the forehead to escape
the wrath of God. [ The soul that is greatly vexed, which goes stooping and
feeble, and the eyes that fail, and the hungry soul shall give thee praise and
righteousness, O Lord. B^ruch ^ 18.


Sect. VI. Of keeping Festivals and days holy to the Lord: particularly, the
Lords day.
TRue natural Religion, that which was common to all Nations and Ages did
principally rely upon four great propositions. 1. That there is one God. 2.
That God is nothing of those things which we see. 3. That God takes care of
all things below and governs all the World. 4. That he is the Great Creator of
all things without himself: and according to these were framed the four first
precepts of the Decalogue. In the first, the Unity of the Godhead is expressly
affirmed. In the second, his invisibility and immateriality. In the third is
affirmed Gods government and providence, by avenging them that swear falsely by
his Name, by which also his Omniscience is declared. In the fourth
Commandment, he proclaims himself the Maker of Heaven and Earth: for in
memory of Gods rest from the work of six days the seventh was hallowed into a
Sabbath: and the keeping it was a confessing GOD to be the great Maker of
Heaven and Earth; and consequently to this, it also was a confession of his
goodness, his Omnipotence and his Wisdom, all which were written with a Sun
beam in the great book of the Creature.

So long as the Law of the Sabbath was bound upon Gods people, so long GOD
would have that to be the folemn manner of confessing these attributes; but
when the Priesthood being changed there was a change also of the Law, the great
duty remained unalterable in changed circumstances. We are eternally bound to
confess God Almighty to be the Maker of Heaven and Earth; but the manner of
confessing it, is changed from a rest or a doing nothing, to a speaking
something, from a day to a symbol, from a ceremony to a substance, from a
Jewish rite to a Christian duty: we profess it in our Creed, we confess it in
our lives, we describe it by every line of our life, by every action of duty,
by faith, and trust, and obedience: and we do also upon great reason comply
with the Jewish manner of confessing the Creation, so far as it is instrumental
to a real duty. We keep one day in seven, and so confess the manner and
circumstance of the Creation: and we rest also that we may tend holy duties: so
imitating Gods rest better then the Jew in Synesius who lay upon his face from
evening to evening, and could not by stripes or wounds be raised up to steer
the ship in a great storm: Gods rest was not a natural cessation: he who could
not labor could not be said to rest; but Gods rest is to be understood to be a
beholding and a rejoicing in his work finished: and therefore we truly
represent Gods rest, when we confess and rejoice in Gods works and Gods glory.

This the Christian Church does upon every day, but especially upon the Lords
day, which she has set apart for this and all other Of^ices of Religion, being
determined to this day, by the Resurrection of her dearest Lord, it being the
first day of joy the Church ever had. And now, upon the Lords day we are not
tied to the rest of the Sabbath, but to all the work of the Sabbath: and we are
to abstain from bodily labor, not because it is a direct duty to us as it was
to the Jews, but because it is necessary in order to our duty, that we attend
to the Offices of Religion.

The observation of the Lords day differs nothing from the observation of the
Sabbath in ^he matter of Religion, but in the manner. They differ in the
ceremony and external rite. Rest with them was the principal: with us it is the
accessory. They differ in the office or forms of worship: For they were then to
worship God as a Creator and a gentle Father: we are to add to that, Our
Redeemer, and all his other excellencies and mercies: and though we have more
natural and proper reason to keep the Lords day then the Sabbath, yet the Jews
had a Divine Commandment for their day, which we have not for ours: but we
have many Commandments to do all that honor to GOD which was intended in the
fourth Commandment: and the Apostles appointed the first day of the week, for
doing it in solemn Assemblies; and the manner of worshipping God and doing him
solemn honor and service upon this day we may best observe in the following
measures.

Rules for keeping the Lords day and other Christian Festivals.
1. When you go about to distinguish Festival days from common, do it not by
lessening the devotions of ordinary days, that the common devotion may seem
bigger upon Festivals, but on every day keep your ordinary devotions entire,
and enlarge upon the Holy day.

2. Upon the Lords day we must abstain from all servile and laborious works,
except such which are matters of necessity, of common life, or of great
charity: for these are permitted by that authority which has separated the day
for holy uses. The Sabbath of the Jews though consisting principally in rest,
and established by God, did yield to these. The labor of Love and the labors
of Religion were not against the reason and the spirit of the Commandment, for
which the Letter was decreed, and to which it ought to minister: And therefore
much more is it so on the Lords day, where the Letter is wholly turned into
Spirit, and there is no Commandment of God, but of spiritual and holy actions.
The Priests might kill their beasts and dress them for sacrifice; and Christ
though born under the law, might heal a sick man, and the sick man might carry
h^s bed to witness his recovery, and confess the mercy, and leap and dance to
God for joy: and an Ox might be led to water, and an Ass be haled ou^ of a
ditch, and a man may take physic, and he may eat meat, and therefore there
were of necessity some to prepare and minister it: and the performing these
labors did not consist in minutes, and just determined stages, but they had,
even then, a reasonable latitude: so only as to exclude unnecessary labor, or
such as did not minister to charity or religion. And therefore this is to be
enlarged in the Gospel, whose Sabbath or rest is but a circumstance, and
accessory to the principal and spiritual duties: Upon the Christian Sabbath,
necessity is to be served first, then charity, and then religion; for this is
to give place to charity in great instances; and the second to the first in
all; and in all cases God is to be worshipped in spirit and in truth.

3. The Lords day being the remembrance of a great blessing, must be a day of
joy, festivity, spiritual rejoicing and thanksgiving, and therefore it is a
proper work of the day to let your devotions spend themselves in singing or
reading Psalms, in recounting the great works of God, in remembering his
mercies, in worshipping his excellencies, in celebrating his attributes, in
admiring his person, in sending portions of pleasant meat to them for whom
nothing is provided, and in all the arts and instruments of advancing Gods
glory, and the reputation of religion: in which it were a great decency that a
memorial of the resurrection should be inserted, that the particular religion
of the day be not swallowed up in the general: And of this we may the more
easily serve our selves by rising seasonably in the morning to private
devotion, and by retiring at the leisures and spaces of the day not employed in
public offices.

4. Fail not to be present at the public hours and places of prayer, entering
early and cheerfully, attending reverently and devoutly, abiding patiently
during the whole office, piously assisting at the prayers, and gladly also
hearing the Sermon, and at no hand omitting to receive the Holy Communion when
it is offered (unless some great reason excuse it) this being the great
solemnity of thanksgiving, and a proper work of the day.

5. After the solemnities are past, and in the intervalls between the morning
and evening devotion (as you shall find op portunity) visit sick persons,
reconcile differences, do offices of Neighborhood, inquire into the needs of
the poor, especially housekeepers, relieve them as they shall need, and as you
are able: for then we truly rejoice in God, when we make our neighbors, the
poor members of Christ, rejoice together with us.

6. Whatsoever you are to do your self as necessary, you are to take care that
others also, who are under your charge, do in their station and manner. Let
your servants be called to Church, and all your family that can be spared from
necessary and great household ministeries: those that cannot, let them go by
turns, and be supplied otherwise as well as they may: and provide on these
days especially that they be instructed in the articles of faith, and
necessary parts of their duty.

7. Those who labor hard in the week, must be eased upon the Lords day; such
ease being a great charity and alms: but at no hand must they be permitted to
use any unlawful games, any thing forbidden by the laws, any thing that is
scandalous, or any thing that is dangerous, and apt to mingle sin with it; no
games prompting to wantonness, to drunkenness, to quarrelling, to ridiculous
and superstitious customs, but let their refreshments be innocent, and
charitable, and of good report, and not exclusive of the duties of religion.

8. Beyond these bounds because neither God nor man has passed any obligation
upon us, we must preserve our Christian liberty and not suffer our selves to be
entangled with a yoke of bondage: for even a good action may become a snare to
us, if we make it an occasion of scruple by a pretense of necessity, binding
loads upon the conscience not with the bands of God, but ^f men, and of fancy,
or of opinion, or of tyranny. Whatsoever is laid upon us by the hands of man,
must be acted and accounted of by the measures of a man; but our best measure
is this: He keeps the Lords day best that keeps it with most religion, and with
most charity.

9. What the Church has done in the article of the resurrection, she has in
some measure done in the other articles of the Nativity, of the Ascension, and
of the Descent of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost: And so great blessings deserve
an anniversary solemnity, since he is a very unthankful person that does not
often record them in the whole year, and esteem them the ground of his hopes,
the object of his faith, the comfort of his troubles, and the great effluxes of
the divine mercy greater then all the victories over our temporal enemies, for
which all glad persons usually give thanks. And if with great reason the memory
of the resurrection does return solemnly every week, it is but reason the other
should return once a year. * To which I add, that the commemoration of the
articles of our Creed in solemn days and offices is a very excellent
instrument to convey and imprint the sense and memory of it upon the spirits of
the most ignorant person. For as a picture may with more fancy convey a story
to a man, then a plain narrative either in word or writing: so a real
representment, and an office of remembrance, and a day to declare it, is f^r
more impressive then a picture, or any other art of making and fixing imagery.

10. The memories of the Saints are precio^s to God, and therefore they ought
also to be so to us; and such persons who served God by holy living,
industrious preaching, and religious dying, ought to have their names preserved
in honor, and God be glorified in them, and their holy doctrines and lives
published and imitated; and we by so doing give testimony to the article of the
communion of Saints. But in these cases as every Church is to be sparing in the
number of days, so also should she be temperate in her injunctions, not
imposing them but upon voluntary and unbusied persons, without snare or burden.
But the Holy day is best kept by giving God thanks for the excellent persons,
Apostles or Martyrs we then remember, and by imitating their lives: this all
may do: and they that can also keep the solemnity, must do that too, when it is
publicly enjoined.

The mixed actions of religion are, 1. Prayer. 2. Alms. 3. Repentance. 4.
Receiving the blessed Sacrament.

Sect. 7. Of Prayer.
THere is no greater argument in the world of our spiri^ual danger and
unwillingness to religion then the backwardness which most men have always,
and all men have sometimes to say their prayers: so weary of their length, so
glad when they are done, so witty to excuse and frustrate an opportunity: and
yet all is nothing but a desiring of God to give us the greatest and the best
things we can need, and which can make us happy: it is a work so easy, so
honorable, and to so great purpose, that in all the instances of religion and
providence (except only the incarnation of his Son) God has not given us a
greater argument of his willingness to have us saved, and of our
unwillingnesse to accept it, his goodness and our gracelessenesse, his
infinite condescension, and our carelessenesse and folly, then by rewarding so
easy a duty with so great blessings.

Motives to prayer.
I cannot say any thing beyond this very consideration and its appendages to
invite Christian people to pray often. But we may consider: That first it is a
duty commanded by God and his holy Son: 2. It is an act of grace and highest
honor that we dust and ashes are admitted to speak to the Eternal God, to run
to him as to a Father, to lay open our wants to complain of our burdens, to
explicate our scruples, to beg remedy and ease, support and counsel, health and
safety, deliverance and salvation: and 3. God has invited us to it by many
gracious promises of hearing us. 4. He has appointed his most glorious Son to
be the president of prayer, and to make continual intercession for us to the
throne of grace. 5. He has appointed an Angel to present the prayers of his
servants: and 6. Christ unites them to his own, and sanctifies them, and makes
them effective and prevalent: and 7. Has put it into the hands of men to
rescind or alter all the decrees of God which are of one kind, (that is,
conditional, and concerning our selves and our final estate, and many instances
of our intermedial or temporal) by the power of prayers. 8. And the prayers of
men have saved cities and kingdoms from ruin; prayer has raised dead men to
life, has stopped the violence of fire, shut the mouths of wild beasts, has
altered the course of nature, caused rain in Egypt, and drowth in the sea, it
made the Sun to go from West to East, and the Moon to stand still, and rocks
and mountains to walk, and it cures di^eases without physic, and makes physic
to do the work of nature, and nature to do the work of grace, and grace to do
the work of God; and it does miracles of accident and event: and yet prayer
that does all this, is of it self nothing but an ascent of the mind to God, a
desiring things fit to be desired, and an expression of this desire to God as
we can, and as becomes us: And our unwillingnesse to pray, is nothing else but
a not desiring what we ought passionately to long for; or if we do desire it,
it is a choosing rather to miss our satisfaction and felicity, then to ask for
it.

There is no more to be said in this affair, but that we reduce it to practice
according to the following Rules.

Rules for the practice of Prayer.
1. We must be careful that we never ask any thing of God that is sinful, or
that directly ministers to sin: for that is to ask of God to dishonor himself,
and to undo us: we had need consider what we pray; for before it returns in
blessing it must be joined with Christ's intercession, and presented to God: Let
us principally ask of God power and assistances to do our duty, to glorify
God, to do good works; to live a good life, to dye in the fear and favor of
God, and eternal life: these things God delights to give, and commands that we
shall ask, and we may with confidence expect to be answered graciously; for
these things are promised without any reservation of a secret condition: if we
ask them, and do our duty toward the obtaining them, we are sure never to
miss them.

2. We may lawfully pray to God for the gifts of the Spirit that minister to
holy ends, such as are the gift of preaching, the spirit of prayer, good
expression, a ready and unloosed tongue, good understanding, learning,
opportunities to publish them, etc. with these only restraints. 1. That we
cannot be so confident of the event of those prayers, as of the former. 2. That
we must be curious to secure our intention in these desires, that we may not
ask them to serve our own ends, but only for Gods glory, and then we shall have
them, or a blessing for desiring them: In order to such purposes our intentions
in the first desires cannot be amiss; because they are able to sanctify other
things, and therefore cannot be unhallowed themselves. 3. We must submit to
Gods will, desiring him to choose our employment, and to furnish out our
persons as he shall see expedient.

3. Whatsoever we may lawfully desire of temporal things, we may lawfully ask
of God in prayer, and we may expect them as they are promised. 1. Whatsoever is
necessary to our life and being is promised to us; and therefore we may with
certainty expect food and raiment; food to keep us alive; clothing to keep us
from nakedness and shame; so long as our life is permitted to us, so long all
things necessary to our life shall be ministered: we may be secure of
maintenance, but not secure of our life, for that is promised, not this: only
concerning food and raiment we are not to make accounts by the measure of our
desires, but by the measure of our needs. 2. Whatsoever is convenient for us,
pleasant, and modestly delectable, we may pray for; so we do it 1. with
submission to Gods will. 2. Without impatient desires. 3. That it be not a
trifle and inconsiderable, but a matter so grave and concerning, as to be a fit
matter to be treated on between God and our souls. 4. That we ask it not to
spend upon our lusts, but for ends of justice, or charity, or religion, and
that they be employed with sobriety.

4. He that would pray with effect must live with care and piety. 1 John 3.2.
John ^ ^1. Is^y 1.15. (...) Mal. 3.^^. 1 Timothy 2.^ P^al: 4:16 and 6^:1^:
For although God gives to sinners and evil persons the common blessings of
life and chance, yet either they want the comfort and blessing of those
blessings, or they become occasions of sadder accidents to them, or serve to
upbraid them in their ingratitude or irreligion: and in all cases, they are not
the effects of prayer, or the fruits of promise, or instances of a fathers
love; for they cannot be expected with confidence, or received without danger,
or used without a curse and mischief in their company. * But as all sin is an
impediment to prayer, so some have a special indisposition toward acceptance;
such are uncharitableness and wrath, Hypocrisy in the present action, Pride
and Lust: because these by defiling the body or the spirit, or by contradicting
some necessary ingredient in prayer (such as are Mercy, Humility, Purity, and
Sincerity) do defile the prayer and make it a direct sin in the circumstances
or formality of the action.

5. All prayer must be made with Faith and Hope: that is, we must certainly
believe we shall receive the grace which GOD has commanded us to ask: Mark ^^
^4: Ja^es ^.6.7*
and we must hope for such things which he has permitted us to ask; and our
H^pe shall not be vain, though we miss what is not absolutely promised,
because we shall at least have an equal blessing in the denial, as in the
grant. And therefore the former conditions must first be secured, that is, that
we ask things necessary, or at least good and innocent and profitable; and that
our persons be gracious in the eyes of God; or else what God has promised to
our natural needs, he may in many degrees deny to our personal incapacity; but
the thing being secured, and the person disposed, there can be no fault at all:
for whatsoever else remains is on Gods part, and that cannot possibly fail. But
because the things which are not commanded cannot possibly be secured (for we
are not sure they are good in all circumstances) we can but hope for such
things, even after we have secured our good intentions. We are sure of a
blessing, but in what instance we are not yet assured.

6. Our prayers must be fervent, intense, earnest and importunate when we pray
for things of high concernment and necessity. Romans 12.12. ^t 15.3^. Col. 4.12 1
These. 3.10. ^phes. 6.1^. ^ames 5.16. 1 Pet. 4.7
[ Continuing instant in prayer: striving in prayer: laboring fervently in
prayer: night and day praying exceedingly: praying always with all prayer] so
S. Paul calls it: watching unto prayer] so Saint Peter [praying earnestly] so
S. James: and this is not at all to be abated in matters spiritual and of duty:
for according as our desires are, so are our prayers; and as our prayers are,
so shall be the grace; and as that is, so shall be the measure of glory. But
this admits of degrees according to the perfection or imperfection of our state
of life: but it has no other measures, but ought to be as great as it can; the
bigger the better; we must make no positive restraints upon it our selves. In
other things we are to use a bridle: and as we must limit our desires with
submission to Gods will: so also we must limit the importunity of our prayers
by the moderation and term of our desires. Pray for it as earnestly as you may
desire it.

7. Our desires must be lasting, and our prayers frequent, assiduous, and
continual: not asking for a blessing once and then leaving it; but daily
renewing our suits, and exercising our hope, and faith and patience, and
long-suffering, and Religion, and resignation, and self-denial in all the
degrees we shall be put to. This circumstance of duty our blessed Savior
taught, saying, [That men ought always to pray and not to faint] Always to
pray signifies the frequent doing of the duty in general: Luke 18.1.21.36
but because we cannot always ask several things, and we also have frequent
need of the same things, and those are such as concern our great interest, the
precept comes home to this very circumstance; and S. Paul calls it, [ praying
wit^o^t ceasing] and himself in his own case gave a precedent: 1 These. 5.17.
[ For this cause I besought the Lord thrice] and so did our blessed Lord, he
went thrice to God on the same errand, with the same words in a short space,
about half a night; for his time to solicit his suit was but short: and the
Philippians were remembered by the Apostle, their spiritual Father always in
every prayer of his. Phil. 1.4.
And thus we must always pray for the pardon of our sins, for the assistance
of Gods grace, for charity, for life eternal, never giving over till we dye:
and thus also we pray for supply of great temporal needs in their several
proportions: in all cases being curious we do not give over out of weariness,
or impatience: For God oftentimes defers to grant our suit, because he loves to
hear us beg it, and has a design to give us more then we ask, even a
satisfaction of our desires, and a blessing for the very importunity.

8 Let the words of our prayers be pertinent, grave, material, not studiously
many, but according to our need, sufficient to express our wants, and to
signify our importunity. God hears us not the sooner for our many words, but
much the sooner for an earnest desire, to which, let apt and sufficient words
minister, be they few, or many, according as it happens. A long prayer and a
short, differ not in their capacities of being accepted; for both of them take
their value according to the fervency of spirit, and the charity of the prayer.
That prayer which is short by reason of an impatient spirit, or dullness, or
despite of holy things, or indifferency of desires, is very often criminal,
always imperfect: and that prayer which is long out of ostentation, or
superstition, or a trifling spirit, is as criminal and imperfect as the other
in their several instances. This rule relates to private prayer. In public,
our devotion is to be measured by the appointed office, and we are to support
our spirit with spiritual arts, that our private spirit may be a part of the
public spirit, and be adopted into the society and blessings of the communion
of Saints.

9. In all forms of prayer mingle petition with thanksgiving, that you may
endear the present prayer, and the future blessing by returning praise and
thanks for what we have already received. This is Saint Paul's advice, [ Be
careful for nothing, Phil. 9.6.
but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your
requests be made known unto God.]

10. Whatever we beg of God, let us also work for it; if the thing be matter of
duty, or a consequent to industry. For God loves to bless labor and to reward
it, (...). Arrian. l. 2. c. 36.
but not to support idleness. And therefore our blessed Savior in his Sermons
joins watchfulness with prayer: for Gods graces are but assistances, not new
creations of the whole habit in every instant, or period of our life. Read
Scriptures, and then pray to GOD for understanding: Pray against temptation,
but you must also resist the Devil, and then he will flee from you. Ask of GOD
competency of living, but you must also work with your hands, the things that
are honest, that ye may have to supply in time of need: We can but do our
endeavor, and pray for blessing, and then leave the success^ with GOD: and
beyond this we cannot deliberate, we cannot take care; but so far we must.

11. In all our prayers we must be careful to attend our present work, Inter
s^ cra and v^^ta verbi^ ^tiamp^^fani^ (...) Ta^it.
having a present mind, not wandering upon impertinent things, not distant from
our words, much less contrary to them: and if our thoughts do at any time
wander, and divert upon other objects, bring them back again with prudent and
severe arts; by all means striving to obtain a diligent, a sober, an untroubled
and a composed spirit.

12. Let your posture and gesture of body in prayers be reverent, grave, and
humble; according to public order, or the best examples, if it be in public;
if it be in private, either stand, or kneel, or lie flat upon the ground on
your face, in your ordinary and more solemn prayers; but in extraordinary,
casual, and ejaculatory prayers, the reverence and devotion of the soul, and
the lifting up the eyes and hands to God with any other posture not undecent,
is usual and commendable; for we may pray in bed, on horseback, 1 Timothy 2.8.
every where, and at all times, and in all circumstances: and it is well if we
do so; and some servants have not opportunity to pray so often as they would,
unless they supply the appeti^es of Religion by such accidental devotions.

1 Timothy 2.2.
13. [ Let prayers and supplications, and giving of thanks be made for all men:
for Kings and all that are in authority: For this is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior.] We who must love our Neighbors as our selves, must
also pray for them as for our selves: with this only dif^erence; that we may
enlarge in our temporal desires for Kings, and pray for secular prosperity to
them with more importunity then for our selves; because they need more to
enable their duty and government, and for the interests of Religion and
Justice. This part of prayer is by the Apostle called [ intercession] in which
with special care we are to remember our Relatives, our Family, our Charge, our
Benefactours, our Creditours; not forgetting to beg pardon and charity for our
Enemies, and protection against them.

14. Rely not on a single prayer in matters of great concernment: but make it
as public as you can by obtaining of others to pray for you: this being the
great blessing of the communion of Saints, that a prayer united is strong like
a well ordered Army; and God loves to be tied fast with such cords of love, and
constrained by a holy violence.

15. Every time that is not seized upon by some other duty, is seasonable
enough for prayer; but let it be performed as a solemn duty morning and
evening, that God may begin and end all our business, and the out goings of
the morning and evening may praise him; for so we bless God, and God blesses
us. And yet fail not to find or make opportunities to worship God at some
other times of the day; at least by ejaculations and short addresses: more or
less, longer or shorter, solemnly or without solemnity, privately or
publicly, as you can, or are permitted: always remembering, that as every sin
is a degree of danger and unsafety: so every pious prayer and well employed
opportunity is a degree of return to hope and pardon.

Cautions for making vows.
16. A vow to God is an act of prayer, and a great degree and instance of
opportunity, and an increase of duty by some new uncommanded instance, or some
more eminent degree of duty, or frequency of action, or earnestness of spirit
in the same. And because it has pleased God in all Ages of the World to admit
of intercourse with his servants in the matter of vows, it is not ill advice,
that we make vows to God in such cases in which we have great need, or great
danger. But let it be done according to these rules, and by these cautions.

1. That the matter of the vow be lawful. 2. That it be useful in order to
Religion or charity. 3. That it be grave, not trifling and impertinent, but
great in our proportion of duty toward the blessing. 4. That it be in an
uncommanded instance, that is, that it be of something, or in some manner, or
in some degree to which formerly we were not obliged, or which we might have
omitted without sin. 5. That it be done with prudence, that is, that it be
safe in all the circumstances of person, lest we beg a blessing and fall into a
snare. 6. That every vow of a new action be also accompanied with a new degree
and enforcement of our essential and unalterable duty: such as was Jacobs vow;
that (besides the payment of a tithe) God should be his God: that so he might
strengthen his duty to him first in essentials and precepts; and then in
additionals and accidentals. For it is but an ill Tree that spends more in
leaves and suckers and gummes, then in fruit: and that thankfulness and
Religion is best, that first secures duty, and then enlarges in counsels.
Therefore let every great prayer and great need, and great danger draw us to
GOD, nearer by the approach of a pious purpose to live more strictly, and let
every mercy of GOD answering that prayer produce a real performance of it. 7.
Let not young beginners in Religion enlarge their hearts and streighten their
liberty by vows of long continuance: nor (indeed) any one else without a great
experience of himself, and of all accidental dangers. Vows of single actions
are safest, A^gustum an^ulum non g^sta: Dixit Py^hag: id e^^, vitae genus
liberum sectare, nec vinculo temetipsum obst^inge: P^ut^rch:
and proportionable to those single blessings ever begged in such cases of
sudden and transient importunities. 8. Let no action which is matter of
question and dispute in Religion, Sic Novatus novitio^ suo^ compuli^ ad
iur^^dum. ne unquam ad Catholicos Episcopos ^^dirent: Eusebius* (...) ^cclihill:
ever become the matter of a vow. He vows foolishly that promises to God to
live and dye in such an opinion, in an article not necessary, not certain; or
that upon confidence of his present guide, binds himself for ever to the
profession of what he may afterward more reasonably contradict, or may find
not to be useful, or not profitable; but of some danger, or of no necessity.

If we observe the former rules we shall pray piously and effectually; but
because even this duty has in it some especial temptations, it is necessary
that we be armed by special remedies against them. The dangers are. 1. Wandering
thoughts. 2. Tediousness of spirit. Against the first these advices are
profitable.

Remedies against wandering thoughts in Prayer.
If we feel our spirits apt to wander in our prayers, and to retire into the
World, or to things unprofitable, or vain and impertinent.

1. Use prayer to be assisted in prayer: pray for the spirit of supplication,
for a sober, fixed, and recollected spirit: and when to this you add a moral
industry to be steady in your thoughts, whatsoever wanderings after this do
return irremediably, are a misery of Nature, and an imperfection, but no sin
while it is not cherished and indulged too.

2. In private it is not amiss to attempt the cure by reducing your prayers
into Collects, and short forms of prayer, making voluntary interruptions and
beginning again, that the want of spirit and breath may be supplied by the
short stages and periods.

3. When you have observed any considerable wandering of your thoughts, bind
your self to repeat that prayer again with actual attention, or else revolve
the full sense of it in your spirit, and repeat it in all the effect and
desires of it: and possibly the tempter may be driven away with his own art,
and may cease to interpose his trifles, when he perceives they do but vex the
person into carfulness, and piety: and yet he loses nothing of his devotion,
but doubles the earnestness of his care.

4. If this be not seasonable, or opportune, or apt to any Man's circumstances,
yet be sure with actual attention to say a hearty Amen to the whole prayer,
with one united desire, earnestly begging the graces mentioned in the prayer:
for that desire does the great work of the prayer and secures the blessing, if
the wandering thoughts were against our will, and disclaimed by contending
against them.

5. Avoid multiplicity of businesses of the World; and in those that are
unavoidable, labor for an evennesse and tranquillity of spirit, that you may
be untroubled and smooth in all tempests of fortune: for so we shall better
tend Religion, when we are not torn in pieces with the cares of the World, and
seized upon with low affections, passions and interest.

6. It helps much to attention and actual advertisement in our prayers, if we
say our prayers silently, without the voice, only by the spirit. For in mental
prayer, if our thoughts wander, we only stand still; when our mind returns,
we go on again, there is none of the prayer lost, as it is, if our mouths speak
and our hearts wander.

7. To incite you to the use of these or any other counsels you shall meet
with, remember that it is a great undecency to desire of God to hear those
prayers, a great part whereof we do not hear our selves. If they be not worthy
of our attention, they are far more unworthy of Gods.

Signs of tediousness of spirit in our prayers and all actions of religion.
The second temptation in our prayer is a tediousness of spirit, or a
weariness of the employment: like that of the Jews, who complained that they
were weary of the new moons, and their souls loathed the frequent return of
their Sabbaths: so do very many Christians, who first pray without fervor and
earnestness of spirit: and secondly meditate but seldom, and that without
fruit, or sense or affection: or thirdly who seldom examine their consciences,
and when they do it, they do it but sleepily, slightly, without compunction, or
hearty purpose, or fruits of amendment. 4. They enlarge themselves in the
thoughts and fruition of temporal things, running for comfort to them only in
any sadness and misfortune. 5. They love not to frequent the Sacraments, nor
any the instruments of religion, as sermons, confessions, prayers in public,
fastings, but love ease, and a loose undisciplined life. 6. They obey not their
superiors, but follow their own judgment, when their judgment follows their
affections, and their affections follow sense and worldly pleasures. 7. They
neglect, or dissemble, or defer, or do not attend to the motions and
inclinations to virtue which the spirit of God puts into their soul. 8. They
repent them of their vows and holy purposes, not because they discover any
indiscretion in them, or intolerable inconvenience, but because they have
within them labor, and (as the case now stands to them) displeasure. 9. They
content themselves with the first degrees, and necessary parts of virtue, and
when they are arrived thither, they sit down, as if they were come to the
mountain of the Lord, and care not to proceed on toward perfection. 10. They
enquire into all cases in which it may be lawful to omit a duty, and though
they will not do less then they are bound to, yet they will do no more then
needs must; for they do out of fear, and self love, not out of the love of God,
or the spirit of holiness and zeal. The event of which will be this. He that
will do no more then needs must, will soon be brought to omit something of his
duty, and will be apt to believe less to be necessary then is.

Remedies against tediousness of spirit.
The Remedies against this temptation are these.

1. Order your private devotions so, that they become not arguments and causes
of tediousness by their indiscreet length; but reduce your words into a
narrower compass, still keeping all the matter, and what is cut off in the
length of your prayers, supply in the earnestnes^e of your spirit; for so
nothing is lost while the words are changed into matter, and length of time
into fervency of devotion. The forms are made not the less perfect, and the
spirit is more, and the scruple is removed.

2. It is not imprudent if we provide variety of forms of Prayer to the same
purposes; that the change by consulting with the appetites of fancy, may better
entertain the Spirit: and possibly we may be pleased to re^ite a hymn, when a
collect seems flat to us and unpleasant, and we are willing to sing rather then
to say, or to sing this rather then that: we are certain that variety is
delightful, and whether that be natural to us, or an imperfection, yet if it be
complied with, it may remove some part of the temptation.

3. Break your office and devotion into fragments, and make frequent returnings
by ejaculations and abrupt entercourses with God; for so, no length can
oppress your tenderness and sickliness of spirit; and by often praying in
such manner and in all circumstances, we shall habituate our souls to prayer,
by making it the business of many lesser portions of our time: and by
thrusting in between all our other employments, it will make every thing relish
of religion, and by degrees turn all into its nature.

4. Learn to abstract your thoughts and desires from pleasures and things of
the world. For nothing is a direct cure to this evil, but cutting off all
other loves and adherences. Order your affairs so, that religion may be
propounded to you as a reward, and prayer as your defense, and holy actions as
your security, and charity and good works as your treasure: Consider that all
things else are satisfactions but to the brutish part of a man, and that these
are the refreshments and relishes of that noble part of us by which we are
better then beasts: and whatsoever other instrument, exercise or consideration
is of use to take our loves from the world, the same is apt to place them upon
God.

5. Do not seek for deliciousness and sensible consolations in the actions of
religion, but only regard the duty and the conscience of it. For although in
the beginning of religion most frequently, and at some other times irregularly,
God complyes with our infirmity, and encourages our duty with little
overflowings of spiritual joy, and sensible pleasure, and delicacies in prayer,
so as we seem to feel some little beam of Heaven and great refreshments from
the spirit of consolation; yet this is not always safe for us to have, neither
safe for us to expect and look for: and when we do, it is apt to make us cool
in our enquiries and waitings upon Christ when we want them: It is a running
after him, not for the miracles, but for the loaves; not for the wonderful
things of God, and the desires of pleasing him, but for the pleasures of
pleasing our selves. And as we must not judge our devotion to be barren or
unfruitful when we want the overflowings of joy running over: so neither must
we cease for want of them; If our spirits can serve God choosingly and greedily
out of pure conscience of our duty, it is better in it self, and more safe to
us.

6. Let him use to soften his spirit with frequent meditation upon sad and
dolorous objects, as of death, the terrors of the day of judgment; fearful
judgments upon sinners, strange horrid accidents, fear of Gods wrath, the
pains of Hell, the unspeakable amazements of the damned, the intolerable load
of a sad Eternity. For whatsoever creates fear, or makes the spirit to dwell in
a religious sadness, is apt to entender the spirit, and make it devout and
plyant to any part of duty. For a great fear, when it is ill managed, is the
parent of superstition; but a discreet and well guided fear produces religion.

7. Pray often and you shall pray oftener, and when you are accustomed to a
frequent devotion, it will so insensibly unite to your nature and affections,
that it will become trouble to omit your usual or appointed prayers: and what
you obtain at first by doing violence to your inclinations, at last will not be
left without as great unwillingnesse as that by which at first it entered. This
rule relyes not only upon reason derived from the nature of habits, which turn
into a second nature, and make their actions easy, frequent and an delightful:
but it relyes upon a reason depending upon the nature and constitution of
grace, whose productions are of the same nature with the parent, and increases
it self, naturally growing from granes to huge trees, from minutes to vast
proportions, and from moments to Eternity. But be sure not to omit your usual
prayers without great reason, though without sin it may be done; because after
you have omitted something, in a little while you will be passed the scruple of
that, and begin to be tempted to leave out more: keep your self up to your
usual forms; you may enlarge when you will; but do not contract or lessen them
without a very probable reason.

8. Let a man frequently and seriously by imagination place himself upon his
deathbed, and consider what great joys he shall have for the remembrance of
every day well spent; and what then he would give that he had so spent all his
days: He may guess at it by proportions: for it is certain he shall have a
joyful and prosperous night, who has spent his day holily; and he resignes his
soul with peace into the hands of God, who has lived in the peace of God, and
the works of religion in his life time. This consideration is of a real event,
it is of a thing that will certainly come to pass. It is appointed for all men
once to die, and after death comes judgment; the apprehension of which is
dreadful, and the presence of it is intolerable, unless by religion and
sanctity we are disposed for so venerable an appearance.

9. To this may be useful that we consider the easiness of Christ's yoke, the
excellences and sweetnesses that are in religion, the peace of conscience, See
the Great Exemplar, Part. 3. Disc. 14. of the easiness of Christian Religion.
the joy of the Holy Ghost, the rejoicing in God, the simplicity and pleasure
of virtue, the intricacy, trouble and business of sin; the blessings and
health and reward of that, the curses, the sicknesses and sad consequences of
this; and that, if we are weary of the labors of religion, we must eternally
sit still and do nothing: for whatsoever we do, contrary to it, is infinitely
more full of labor, care, difficulty, and vexation.

10. Consider this also, that tediousness of spirit, is the beginning of the
most dangerous condition and estate in the whole World. For it is a great
disposition to the sin against the holy Ghost; it is apt to bring a Man to
backsliding, and the state of unregeneration, to make him return to his vomit
and his sink, and either to make the Man impatient, or his condition
scrupulous, unsatisfied, irksome and desperate: and it is better that he had
never known the way of godliness, then after the knowledge of it, that he
should fall away. There is not in the World a greater sign that the spirit of
Reprobation is beginning upon a Man, then when he is habitually and
constantly, or very frequently, weary, and slights, or loathes holy Offices.

11. The last remedy that preserves the hope of such a Man, and can reduce him
to the state of zeal and the love of God, is a pungent, sad, and a heavy
affliction; not desperate, but recreated with some intervals of kindness, and
little comforts, or entertained with hopes of deliverance: which condition, if
a Man shall fall into, by the grace of God he is likely to recover: but if this
help him not, it is infinite odds but he will quench the Spirit.

Sect. 8. Of Alms.
LOve is as communicative as fire, as busy, and as active, and it has four
twin Daughters, extreme like each other; and but that the Doctors of the School
have done as Thamars Midwife did, who bound a Scarlet thread, something to
distinguish them, it would be very hard to call them asunder. Their names are:
1. Mercy. 2. Beneficence, or well-doing. 3. Liberality. And 4. Alms; which by
a special privilege has obtained to be called after the Mothers name, and is
commonly called, Charity. The first or eldest is seated in the affection, and
it is that, which all the other must attend. For Mercy without Alms is
acceptable, when the person is disabled to express outwardly, what he heartily
desires. But Alms without Mercy, are like prayers without devotion, or
Religion without Humility. 2. Beneficence, or well doing, is a promptness and
nobleness of mind, making us to do offices of courtesy, and humanity to all
sorts of persons in their need, or out of their need. 3. Liberality is a
disposition of mind opposite to covetousness, and consists in the despite and
neglect of money upon just occasions, and relates to our friends, children,
kindred, servants and other relatives. 4. But Alms is a relieving the poor and
needy. The first and the last only are duties of Christianity. The second and
third are circumstances and adjuncts of these duties: for Liberality increases
the degree of Alms, making our gift greater; and Beneficence extends it to
more persons and orders of Men, spreading it wider. The former makes us
sometimes to give more then we are able; and the latter gives to more then need
by the necessity of Beggars, and serves the needs and conveniences of persons,
and supplies circumstances: wheraes properly, Alms are doles and largesses to
the necessitous and calamitous people; supplying the necessities of Nature, and
giving remedies to their miseries.

Mercy and Alms are the body and soul of that charity which we must pay to our
Neighbors need: and it is a precept which God therefore enjoined to the World,
that the great inequality which he was pleased to suffer in the possessions and
accidents of Men, might be reduced to some temper and evennesse; and the most
miserable person might be reconciled to some sense and participation of
felicity.

Works of mercy, or the several kinds of corporal Alms.
The works of Mercy are so many as the affections of Mercy have objects, or as
the World has kinds of misery. Men want meat or drink, or clothes, or a
house, or liberty, or attendance, or a grave. In proportion to these, seven
works are usually assigned to Mercy; and there are seven kinds of corporal
alms reckoned. 1. To feed the hungry. Mat. 25.35
2. To give drink to the thirsty. 3. Or clothes to the naked. 4. To redeem
Captives. 5. To visit the sick. 6. To entertain strangers. 7. To bury the dead.
Matt 26. 2 Samuel 2.
But many more may be added. Such as are. 8. To give physic to sick persons.
9. To bring cold and starved people to warmth and to the fire: for sometimes
clothing will not do it; or this may be done when we cannot do the other. 9. To
lead the blind in right ways. 10. To lend money. 11. To forgive debts. 12. To
remit forfeitures. 13. To mend high ways and bridges. 14. To reduce or guide
wandering travelers. 15. To ease their labors by accomodating their work with
apt instruments; or their journey with beasts of carriage. 16. To deliver the
poor from their oppressors. 17. To dye for my brother Nobilis haec ess^t
pie^atis ^ixa duobus
Quod Pro fratr^ mori vellet uterque prior.
Mart.
. 18 To pay maidens dowries, and to procure for them honest and chaste marriages.

Works of spiritual Alms and mercy, are
1 These 5.14.
1. To teach the ignorant. 2. To counsel doubting persons. 3. To admonish
sinners diligently, prudently, seasonably, and charitably: To which also may be
reduced, provoking and encouraging to good works. Hebr. 10.24
4. To comfort the afflicted. 5. To pardon offenders. 6. To suffer and support
the weak. 7. To pray for all estates of men, and for relief to all their
necessities. To which may be added. 8* To punish or correct refractorinesse. 9.
To be gentle and charitable in censuring the actions of others. 10. To
establish the scrupulous, wavering, and inconstant spirits. 11. To confirm the
strong. 12. Not to give scandal. 13. To quit a man of his fear. 14 P^ella
prosternit se ad pedes: miserere vi^ginitatis (...) prostituas hoc corpus sub
tam turpi titulo. ^^st. Apoll. Tyr.
To redeem maidens from prostitution and publication of their bodies.

To both these kinds, a third also may be added of a mixed nature, partly
corporal, and partly spiritual: such are, 1. Reconciling enemies Laudi ductum
apud Vert. (...).
. 2. Erecting public Schools of Learning. 3. Maintaining Lectures of Di^inity.
4. Erecting Colleges for Religion, and retirement from the noises and more
frequent temptations of the World. 5. Finding employment for unbusied persons,
and putting children to honest Trades. For the particulars of Mercy or Alms
cannot be narrower then Men's needs are: and the old method of Alms is too
narrow to comprize them all; and yet the kinds are too many to be discoursed
of particularly: only our blessed Savior in the precept of Alms, uses the
instances of relieving the poor, and forgiveness of injuries; and by
proportion to these, the rest, whose duty is plain, simple, easy and
necessary, may be determined. But Alms in general are to be disposed of
according to the following Rules.

Rules for giving Alms.
1. Let no Man do Alms of that which is none of his own; S. Greg. 7. l. (...)
Epist.
for of that he is to make restitution; that is due to the owners, not to the
poor: for every Man has need of his own, and that is first to be provided for;
and then you must think of the needs of the poor. He that gives the poor what
is not his own, makes himself a thief, and the poor to be the receivers. This
is not to be understood, as if it were unlawful for a Man that is not able to
pay his debts, to give smaller Alms to the poor. He may not give such portions
as can in any sense more disable him to do justice: but such, which if they
were saved could not advance the other duty, may retire to this, and do here
Praebe at ut misericordia ut (...) vetur ju f^^tia. S. Aug. Prove. 3.9.
what they may, since in the other d^ty they cannot do what they should. But
generally Cheaters and Robbers cannot give alms of what they have cheated and
robbed, unless they cannot tell the persons whom they have injured, or the
proportions; and in such cases they are to give those unknown portions to the
poor by way of restitution, for it is no alms: only God is the supreme Lord
to whom those escheats devolve, and the poor are his Receivers.

2. Of money unjustly taken and yet voluntarily parted with, we may and are
bound to give alms: such as is money given and taken for false witness,
bribes, simoniacal contracts, because the Receiver has no right to keep it,
nor the Giver any right to recall it, it is unjust money, and yet payable to
none but to the supreme Lord (who is the person injured) and to his Delegates,
that is, the poor. To which I insert these cautions. 1. If the person injured
by the unjust sentence of a bribed Judge, or by false witness, be poor, he is
the proper object and bosom to whom the restitution is to be made. De^ret ^p.
tit^^e Si^uonia:
2. In case of Simony, the Church, to whom the Simony was injurious, is the lap
into which the restitution is to be powered, and if it be poor and out of
repair, the alms or restitution (shall I call it) are to be paid to it.

3. There is some sort of gain that has in it no injustice properly so called;
but it is unlawful and filthy lucre: such as is money taken for work done
unlawfully upon the Lords day, hire taken for disfiguring ones self, and for
being professed jesters, the wages of such as make unjust bargains, and of
harlots: of this money there is some preparation to be made before it be given
in Alms. The money is infected with the plague, and must pass thorough the
fire or the water before it be fit for alms: the person must repent and leave
the crime, and then minister to the poor.

4. He that gives alms must do it in mercy, D^num nudum (...) ni^i consensa
ves^iatur. l. ^ C de pact^.
that is, out of a true sense of the calamity of his brother, first feeling it
in himself in some proportion, and then endeavoring to ease himself and the
other of their common calamity. Against this rule they offend who give alms
out of custom, or to upbraid the poverty of the other, or to make him
mercenary and obliged, or with any unhandsome circumstances.

5. He that gives alms must do it with a single eye and heart; that is,
without designs to get the praise of men: and if he secures that, he may
either give them publicly, or privately: for Christ intended only to provide
against pride and hypocrisy, when he bade alms to be given in secret; it
being otherwise one of his Commandments, that our light should shine before
men: this is more excellent, that is more safe.

6. To this also appertains, Qui dedit be^^ficium (...) narret q^i a^^^pit. ^
Senec.
that he who has done a good turn should so forget it as not to speak of it:
but he that boasts it or upbraids it, has paid himself, and lost the
nobleness of the charity.

7. Give alms with a cheerful heart and countenance, 2 Cor. 9.7.
not grudgingly or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver; and therefore
give quickly when the power is in thy hand, and the need is in thy Neighbor,
and thy Neighbor at the door. He gives twice that relieves speedily.

8. According to thy ability give to all men that need; Luke 6.30.
and in equal needs give first to good men, rather then to bad men; and if the
needs be unequal, do so too; provided that the need of the poorest be not
violent or extreme: Galat. 6.10.
but if an evil man be in extreme necessity, he is to be relieved rather then a
good man who can tarry longer, and may subsist without it; and if he be a good
man, he will desire it should be so: because himself is bound to save the life
of his brother with doing some inconvenience to himself: and no difference of
virtue or vice, can make the ease of one beggar equal with the life of another.

9. Give no alms to vicious persons, if such alms will support their sin: as
if they will continue in idleness [ if they will not work, neither let them eat]
or if they will spend it in drunkenness, 2 These. 3.10. A Cavallo ^hi non Porta
sella b^^da ^on si crevella.
or wantonness: such persons when they are reduced to very great want, must be
relieved in such proportions, as may not relieve their dying lust, but may
refresh their faint or dying bodies.

10. The best objects of charity are poor house keepers that labor hard, and
are burdened with many children; or Gentlemen fallen into sad poverty,
especially if by innocent misfortune (and if their crimes brought them into it,
yet they are to be relieved accordding to the former rule) persecuted persons,
widows, and fatherless children, putting them to honest trades or schools of
learning: and search into the needs of numerous and meaner families; Beatus qui
^ntelligit ^uper (...) and paupe^^^. Psa^.
for there are many persons that have nothing left them but misery and modesty:
and toward such we must add two circumstances of charity. A donare ^ ten^re
ing^gno ^isogna h^ve^e.
1. To enquire them out^ 2. To convey our relief to them so as we do not make
them ashamed.

11. Give, looking for nothing again, that is, without consideration of future
advantages: give to children, to old men, to the unthankful, and the dying, and
to those you shall never see again: for else your alms or curtesy is not
charity, but traffic and merchandise: and be sure that you omit not to relieve
the needs of your enemy and the injurious; for so possibly you may win him to
your self; but do you intend the winning him to God.

12. Trust not your alms to intermedial, uncertain and under dispensers: by
which rule is not only intended the securing your alms in the right chanel;
but the humility of your person, and that which the Apostle calls the labor of
love: and if you converse in Hospitals, and Almshouses, and minister with your
own hands what your heart has first decreed, you will find your hearts
endeared and made familiar with the needs and with the persons of the poor,
those excellent images of Christ.

13. Whatsoever is superfluous in thy estate is to be dispensed in alms. He
that has two coats must give to him that has none; that is, he that has
beyond his need must give that which is beyond it: Only among needs we are to
reckon not only what will support our life, but also what will maintain the
decency of our estate and person; not only in present needs, but in all future
necessities, and very probable contingencies, but no further: we are not
obliged beyond this, unless we see very great, public and calamitous
necessities: but yet, if we do extend beyond our measures, and give more then
we are able, we have the Philippians and many holy persons for our precedent,
we have S. Paul for our encouragement, we have Christ for our Counselor, we
have God for our rewarder, and a great treasure in Heaven for our recompense
and restitution. But I propound it to the consideration of all Christian
people, that they be not nice and curious, fond and indulgent to themselves in
taking accounts of their personal conveniences, and that they make their
proportions moderate and easy, according to the order and manner of
Christianity; and the consequent will be this, that the poor will more
plentifully be relieved, themselves will be more able to do it, and the duty
will be less chargeable, and the owners of estates charged with fewer accounts
in the spending them. It cannot be denied, but in the expenses of all liberal
and great personages many things might be spared: some superfluous servants,
some idle meetings, some unnecessary and imprudent feasts, some garments too
costly, some unnecessary Lawsuits, some vain journeyes: and when we are
tempted to such needless expenses, if we shall descend to moderation, and lay
aside the surplusage, we shall find it with more profit to be laid out upon
the poor members of Christ, then upon our own with vanity. But this is only
intended to be an advice in the manner of doing alms: for I am not ignorant
that great variety of clothes always have been permitted to Princes and
Nobility, and others in their proportion; and they usually give those clothes
as rewards to servants, and other persons needful enough, and then they may
serve their own fancy and their duty too: but it is but reason and religion to
be careful, that they be given to such only where duty, or prudent liberality,
or alms determine them: but in no sense let them do it so as to minister to
vanity, to luxury, to prodigality. The like also is to be observed in other
instances. And if we once give our minds to the study and arts of alms, we
shall find ways enough to make this duty easy, profitable and useful.

1. He that plays at any game must resolve before hand to be indifferent to
win or lose: but if he gives to the poor all that he wins, it is better then to
keep it to himself: but it were better yet, that he lay by so much as he is
willing to lose, and let the game alone, and by giving so much alms, traffic
for eternity. That is one way.

2. Another is, keeping the fasting days of the Church; which if our condition
be such as to be able to cast our accounts, and make abatements for our wanting
so many meals in the whole year, (which by the old appointment did amount to
153, and since most of them are fallen into desuetude, we may make up as many
of them as we please by voluntary fasts) we may from hence find a considerable
relief for the poor. But if we be not willing sometimes to fast that our
brother may ea^, we should ill dye for him. S. Martin had given all that he had
in the world to the poor, save one coat, and that also he divided between two
beggars. A Father in the mount of Nitria was reduced at last to the Inventary
of one Testament, and that book also was tempted from him by the needs of one
whom he thought poorer then himself. Greater yet. S. Paulinus sold himself to
slavery to redeem a young man, for whose captivity his Mother wept sadly; and
it is said that S. Katherine sucked the envenomd wounds of a villain who had
injured her most impudently: And I shall tell you of a greater charity then all
these put together: Christ gave himself to shame and death to redeem his
enemies from bondage, and death, and Hell.

3. Learn of the frugal man, and only avoid sordid actions and turn good
husband and change your arts of getting into providence for the poor, and we
shall soon become rich in good works; and why should we not do as much for
charity, as for covetousness, for Heaven, as for the fading world, for God and
the Holy Jesus, as for the needless supersluities of back and belly?

14. In giving alms to beggars and persons of that low rank, it is better to
give little to each that we may give to the more, so extending our alms to many
persons: but in charities of religion, as building Hospitals, Colleges, and
houses for devotion, and in supplying the accidental wants of decayed persons,
fallen from great plenty to great necessity, it is better to unite our alms
then to disperse them, to make a noble relief or maintenance to one, and to
restore him to comfort, then to support only his natural needs, and keep him
alive only, unrescued from sad discomforts.

15. The Precept of alms or charity binds not indefinitely to all the
instances and kinds of charity: for he that delights to feed the poor, and
spends all his proportion that way, is not bound to enter into prisons and
redeem captives: but we are obliged by the presence of circumstances, and the
special disposition of providence, and the pityablenesse of an obobject, to
this or that particular act of charity. The eye is the sense of mercy, and the
bowels are its organ, and that enkindles pity, and pity produces alms: when
the eye sees what it never saw, the heart will think what it never thought: but
when we have an object present to our eye, then we must pity, for there the
providence of God has fitted our charity with circumstances. He that is in thy
sight or in thy Neighborhood is fallen into the lot of thy charity.

16. If thou have no money, Luke 21.^. (...) ^.6. (...) un (...) non ti (...)
morta. 2 Cor. 8.12. 1. P^t. 1.22.
yet thou must have mercy, and art bound to pity the poor, and pray for them,
and throw thy holy desires and devotions into the treasure of the Church: and
if thou do what thou art able, be it little or great, corporal or spiritual,
the charity of alms, or the charity of prayers, a cup of wine, or a cup of
water, if it be but love to the brethren, or a desire to help all, or any of
Christ's poor, it shall be accepted according to what a man has, not according
to what he has not. For Love is all this, and all the other Commandments* and
it will express it self where it can, and where it cannot, yet it is love
still, and it is also sorrow that it cannot.

Motives to Charity.
The motives to this duty are such as holy Scripture has propounded to us by
way of consideration and proposition of its excellencies, Matthew. 6.4. ^^ Matthew.
13.12.33. et 25.3^ Luke. 11.41.
and consequent reward. 1. There is no one duty which our blessed Savior did
recommend to his Disciples with so repeated an injunction as this of Charity
and Alms. To which add the words spoken by our Lord, It is better to give
then to receive; and when we consider how great a blessing it is that we beg
not from door to door, 1 Timothy 4.
it is a ready instance of our thankfulness to God, for his sake to relieve them
that do. 2. This duty is that alone whereby the future day of judgment shall be
transacted. For nothing but charity and alms is that whereby Christ shall
declare the justice and mercy of the eternal sentence. Martyrdom it self is not
there expressed, and no otherwise involved, but as it is the greatest charity.
3. Christ made himself the greatest and daily example of alms or charity. He
went up and down doing good, preaching the Gospel, and healing all diseases:
and God the Father is imitable by us in nothing but in purity and mercy. Philip
4.17.
4. Alms given to the poor redound to the emolument of the Giver both temporal
and eternal. 5. They are instrumental to the remission of sins, Our
forgiveness and mercy to others being made the very rule and proportion of our
confidence and hope and our prayer to be forgiven our selves. Acts 10.4. Hebr.
13.6. Eccles 3.1. Dan. 4.27.
6. It is a treasure in Heaven, it procures friends when we dye. It is reckoned
as done to Christ whatsoever we do to our poor brother; and therefore when a
poor man begs for Christ his sake, if he have reason to ask for Ch is it his
sake, give it him if thou can. Now every man has title to ask for Ch ists
sake, whose need is great, and himself unable to cure it, and if the man be a
Christian. Whatsoever charity Christ will reward, all that is given for Christ's
sake, and therefore it may be asked in his name: but every man that uses that
sacred name for an endearment, has not a title to it, neither he nor his need.
7. It is one of the wings of prayer, by which it flies to the throne of grace.
8. It crowns all the works of piety. 9. It causes thanksgiving to God on our
behalf. 10. And the bowels of the poor bless us, and they pray for us. 11. And
that portion of our estate, out of which a tenth, or a fifth, or a twentieth,
or some offering to God for religion and the poor goes forth, certainly returns
with a greater blessing upon all the rest. It is like the effusion of oil by
the Sidonian woman; Nun^uam me^^ni (...) qui libe^ter op^ra ch^^it^ti^ exe^cu^^.

S. Hieron. Epist. (...) Ne^ot.
as long as she poures into empty vessels, it could never cease running: or
like the Widows barrel of meal, it consumes not as long as she fed the Prophet.
12. The sum of all is contained in the words of our blessed Savior: Give
alms of such things as you have, and behold all things are clean unto you. 13.
To which may be added, that charity or mercy is the peculiar character of Gods
Elect, and a sign of predestination; which advantage we are taught by S. Paul:
Coloss. 3.12.
[Put on therefore as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercy,
kindness, etc. forbearing one another, and forgiving o^e another; if any man
have a quarrel against any. The result of all which we may read in the words
of S. Chrysostom: To know the art of alms, is greater then to be crowned with
the Diadem of kings. And yet to convert one soul is greater then to pour out
ten thousand talents into the baskets of the poor.

But because giving Alms is an act of the virtue of mercifulness, our
endeavor must be by proper arts to mortify the parents of unmercifulness,
which are 1. Envy. 2. Anger. 3. Covetousness, in which we may be helped by the
following rules or instruments.

Remedies against unmercifulness, and uncharitableness.
1. Against Envy: by way of consideration.
Against Envy I shall use the same argument I would use to persuade a man from
the Fever or the dropsy. 1. Because it is a disease, it is so far from having
pleasure in it, or a temptation to it, that it is full of pain, a great
instrument of vexation; it eats the flesh, and dries up the marrow, and makes
hollow eyes, and lean cheeks, and a pale face. 2. It is nothing but a direct
resolution never to enter into Heaven by the way of noble pleasure taken in the
good of others. 3. It is most contrary to God. 4. And a just contrary state to
the felicities and actions of Heaven, where every star increases the light of
the other, and the multitude of guests at the supper of the Lamb makes the
eternal meal more festival. 5. It is perfectly the state of Hell, and the
passion of Devils: for they do nothing but despair in themselves, Nemo alienae
vi^tuti invid^t qui satis confidit (...) Cic. contr. M. Anth.
and envy others quiet or safety, and yet cannot rejoice either in their good,
or in their evil, although they endeavor to hinder that, and procure this,
with all the devices and arts of malice and of a great understanding. 6. Envy
can serve no end in the world; it cannot please any thing, nor do any thing,
nor hinder any thing, but the content and felicity of him that has it. 7. Envy
can never pretend to justice, as hatred and uncharitableness sometimes may: for
there may be causes of hatred, and I may have wrong done me, and then hatred
has some pretense, though no just argument: But no man is unjust or injurious
for being prosperous or wise. 8. And therefore many men prosesse to hate
another, but no man owns envy, as being an enmity and displeasure for no cause
but goodness or felicity: Envious men being like Cantharides and Caterpillars,
^omera^ Th^r^^tis malo^ (...) descri^^n, ^aliti^ ^ummam (...).

Pelid^ mptimi^ e^at, ^tque inimicus Uly s^i.


that delight most to devour ripe and most excellent fruits. 9. It is of all
crimes the basest: for malice and anger are appeased with benefits, but envy is
exasperated, as envying to fortunate persons both their power and their will to
do good: and never leaves murmuring till the envied person be le velled, and
then only the Unltur leaves to eat the liver: for if his Neighbor be made
miserable the envious man is apt to be troubled: like him that is so long
unbuilding the turrets till all the roof is low or flat, or that the stones
fall upon the lower buildings, and do a mischief that the man repents of.

2. Remedies against anger by way of exercise.
The next enemy to mercifulnes and the grace of Alms is Anger, against which
there are proper instruments both in prudence and religion.

1. Prayer is the great remedy against anger: for it must suppose it in some
degree removed before we pray, and then it is the more likely it will be
finished when the prayer is done: We must lay aside the act of anger, as a
prepatory to prayer, and the curing the habit will be the effect and blessing
of prayer: so that if a man to cure his anger, resolves to address himself to
God by prayer, it is first necessary that by his own observation and diligence
he lay the anger aside, before his prayer can be fit to be presented; and when
we so pray, and so endeavor, we have all the blessings of prayer which God
has promised to it, to be our security for success.

2. If Anger arises in thy breast, instantly seal up thy lips, and let it not
go forth: (...) cum rectus ra^ida ^^cupavit
Futiles linguae jubeo cavere
Vana latratus j^cula^tis ^ap^no*
Turbatus sum and n^n sum l^cutus.
Psalm. 76.
for like fire when it wants vent, it will suppress it self. It is good in a
fever to have a tender and a smooth tongue; but it is better that it be so in
anger; for if it be rough and distempered, there it is an ill sign, but here
it is an ill cause. Angry passion is a fire, and angry words are like breath to
fan them; together they are like steel and flint sending out fire by mutual
collision: some men will discourse themselves into passion, and if their
neighbor be enkindled too, together they flame with rage and violence.

3. Humility is the most excellent natural cure for anger in the world: for he
that by daily considering his own infirmities and failings makes the error of
his neighbor or servant to be his own case, and remembers that he daily needs
Gods pardon, and his brothers charity, will not be apt to rage at the levities
or misfortunes, or indiscretions of another; greater then which he considers
that he is very frequently, and more inexcusably guilty of.

4. Consider the example of the ever blessed Jesus, who suffered all the
contradictions of sinners, and received all affronts and reproaches of
malicious, rash and foolish persons, and yet in all them was as dispassionate
and gentle as the morning sun in Autumn: and in this also he propounded himself
imitable by us. For if innocence it self did suffer so great injuries and
disgraces, it is no great matter for us quietly to receive all the calamities of
fortune and indiscretion of servants, and mistakes of friends, and unkindnesses
of kindred, and rudenesses of enemies, since we have deserved these and worse,
even Hell it self.

5. If we be tempted to anger in the actions of Government and Discipline to
our inferiors (in which case anger is permitted so far as it is prudently
instrumental to Government, and only is a sin when it is excessive and
unreasonable, and apt to disturb our own discourse, or to express it self in
imprudent words or violent actions) let us propound to our selves the example
of God the Father, who at the same time, and with the same tranquillity decreed
Heaven and Hell, the joys of blessed Angels and souls, and the torments of
Devils and accursed spirits: and at the day of judgment when all the World
shall burn under his feet, God shall not be at all inflamed, or shaken in his
essential seat and center of tranquillity and joy. And if at first the cause
seems reasonable, yet defer to execute thy anger till thou may better judge.
For as Phocion told the Athenians, who upon the first news of the death of
Alexander were ready to revolt, stay awhile, for if the King be not dead, your
haste will ruin you. But if he be dead, your stay cannot prejudice your
affairs, for he will be dead to morrow as well as to day: so if thy servant or
inferior deserve punishment, staying till to morrow will not make him
innocent, but it may possibly preserve thee so, by preventing thy striking a
guiltless person, or being furious for a trifle.

6. Remove from thy self all provocations and incentives to anger; especially
1. Games of chance, and great wagers, petty curiosities and worldly business
and carfulness about it; but manage thy self with indifferency, or contempt
of those external things, and do not spend a passion upon them, for it is more
then they are worth. ^ui pan^a ^^q^i^unt non multis ex^^unt. Plut.
But they that desire but few things can be crossed but in a few. 2. In not
heaping up with an ambitious or curious prodigality, any very curious or choice
Utensils, Seals, Jewels, Glasses, precious stones, because those very many
accidents which happen in the spoiling or loss of these rarities, is in event,
an irresistible cause of violent anger. 3. Do not entertain nor suffer
talebearers: for they abuse our ears first, and then our credulity, and then
steal our patience, and it may be for a lie; and if it be true, the matter is
not considerable; or if it be, yet it is pardonable: and we may always escape
with patience at one of these out-lets: either 1 By not hearing slanders, or 2
By not believing them, or 3 By not regarding the thing, or 4 By forgiving the
person. 4. To this purpose also it may serve well if we choose (as much as we
can) to live with peaceable persons, for that prevents the occasions of
confusion: and if we live with prudent persons they will not easily occasion
our disturbance. But because these things are not in many Men's power, therefore
I propound this rather as a felicity then a remedy or a duty; and an art of
prevention rather then of cure.

7. Be not inquisitive into the affairs of other Men, nor the faults of thy
servants, nor the mistakes of thy friends; but what is offered to you, use
according to the former rules but do not thou go out to gather sticks to kindle
a fire to burn thy own house. And add this; if my friend said or did well in
that for which I am angry, I am in the fault, not he: But if he did amiss, he
is in the misery, not I: for either he was deceived, or he was malicious, and
either of them both is all one with a miserable person; and that is an object
of pity, no^ of anger.

8. Use all reasonable discourses to e^cuse the faults of others, considering
that there are many circumstances of time, of person, of accident, of
inadvertency, of infrequency, of aptness to amend, of sorrow for doing it; and
it is well that we take any good in exchange for the evil is done or suffered.

9. Upon the arising of anger instantly enter into a deep consideration of the
joys of Heaven, or the pains of Hell: for fear and joy are naturally apt to
appease this violence. (...)


10. In contentions be always passive, never active; upon the defensive, not
the assaulting part, and then also give a gentle answer, receiving the furies
and indiscretions of the other like a stone into a bed of Moss and soft
compliance; and you shall find it sit down quietly; whereas anger and violence
makes the contention loud, and long and injurious to both the parties.

11. In the actions of Religion be careful to temper all thy instances with
meekness, and the proper instruments of it: and if thou be apt to be angry,
neither fast violently, nor entertain the too forward heats of zeal: but secure
thy duty with constant and regular actions, and a good temper of body with
convenient refreshments and recreations.

12. If anger rises suddenly and violently, first restrain it with
consideration, and then let it end in a hearty prayer for him that did the real
or seeming injury: The former of the two stops its growth, and the latter quite
kills it, and makes amends for its monstrous and involuntary birth.

Remedies against Anger by way of consideration.
1. Consider that Anger is a professed enemy to counsel, it is a direct storm,
in which no Man can be heard to speak, or call from without: for if you counsel
gently, you are despised, if you urge it and be vehement, you provoke it more:
be careful therefore to l^y up beforehand a great stock of reason and
prudent consideration, (...)
(...).
Medea.
that like a besieged Town you may be provided for, and be defensible from
within, since you are not likely to be relieved from without. Anger is not to
be suppressed but by something that is as inward as it self, and more habitual:
To which purpose add, that 2. of all passions it endeavors most to make reason
useless. 3. That it is an universal poison, of an infinite object; for no Man
was ever so amorous as to love a Toad, none so envious as to repine at the
condition of the miserable, no Man so timoro^s as to fear a dead Be; but anger
is troubled at every thing, and every Man, and every accident, and therefore
unless it be suppressed it will make a Man's condition restless. 4. If it
proceeds from a great cause it turns to fury; if from a small cause, it is
peevishness, and so is always either terrible or ridiculous. 5. It makes a
Man's body monstrous, deformed, and contemptible, the voice horrid, the eyes
cruel, the face pale or fiery, the gate fierce, the speech clamorous and loud.
6. It is neither manly nor ingenuous. 7. It proceeds from softness of spirit
and pusillanimity; which makes that Women are more angry then Men, fick persons
more then the healthful, old Men more then young, unprosperous and calamitous
people then the blessed and fortunate. 8. It is a passion fitter for Flies and
Insects then for persons professing nobleness and bounty. 9. It is troublesome
not only to those that suffer it, but to them that behold it; there being no
greater incivility ^isce^^ quid coen^ po^e^ in^^atiu^ (...).
of entertainment then for the Cooks fault, or the negligence of the servants,
to be cruel, or outrageous, or unpleasant in the presence of the guests. 10. It
makes marriage to be a necessary and unavoidable trouble, friendships, and
societies, and familiarities to be intolerable. 11. It multiplies the evils of
drunkenness, and makes the levities of Wine to run into madness. 12. It makes
innocent jesting to be the beginning of Tragedies. 13. It turns friendship
into hatred, * it makes a Man lose himself, and his reason and his argument in
disputation. * It turns the desires of knowledge into an itch of wrangling. *
It adds insolency to power. * It turns justice into cruelty, and judgment
into oppression. * It changes discipline into tediousness and hatred of
liberal institution. * It makes a prosperous Man to be envyed and the
unfortunate to be unpittied. * It is a confluence of all the irregular
passions: there is in it envy and sorrow, fear and scorn, pride and prejudice,
rashness and inconsideration, rejoicing in evil and a desire to inflict it,
self love, impatience and curiosity. * And lastly, though it be very
troublesome to others, yet it is most troublesome to him that has it.

In the use of these arguments and the former exercises be diligent to observe,
left in your desires to suppress anger you be passionate and angry at your
self for being angry; (...) ^^aro bilem pharmach^ qui elurunt.
like Physicians who give a bitter potion when they intend to eject the
bitterness of choler; for this will provoke the person and increase the
passion: But placidly and quietly set upon the mortification of it; and attempt
it first for a day; resolving that day not at all to be angry; and to be
watchful and observant, for a day is no great trouble: but then, after one
days watchfulness it will be as easy to watch two days, as at first it was
to watch one day; and so you may increase till it becomes easy and habitual.

Only observe that such an anger alone is criminal which is against charity to
my self or my neighbor; but anger against sin is a holy zeal, and an effect of
love to God and my brother, for whose interest I am passionate, like a
concerned person: and if I take care that my anger makes no reflection of scorn
or cruelty upon the offender, or of pride and violence, or transportation to my
self, anger becomes charity and duty: And when one commended Charilaus the King
of Sparta, for a gentle, a good and a meek Prince, his colleague said said well,
How can he be good who is not an enemy even to vicious persons. ^


3. Remedies against Covetousness, the third enemy of mercy.
Covetousness is also an enemy to Alms, though not to all the effects of
mercifulness: but this is to be cured by the proper motives to charity before
mentioned, and by the proper rules of justice; which being secured, the arts of
getting money are not easily made criminal. To which also we may add.

1. Covetousness makes a man miserable; because riches are not means to make a
man happy: and unless felicity were to be bought with money he is a vain person
who admires heaps of gold and rich possessions; Quid (...)
(...), quan^a ^^mo^um ve^te^u^ in (...)
Jugera quot vic^na foroqua^ ^meri^ a (...)
Nemo malus ^^lix.
Juv. ^^^. 4.
for what Hippomachus said to some persons, who commended a tall man as fit to
be a Champion in the Olympic games: it is true (said he) if the crown hang so
high that the longest arm could reach it: The same we may say concerning
riches, they were excellent things, if the richest man were certainly the
wisest and the best: but as they are, they are nothing to be wondered at,
because they contribute nothing toward felicity: which appears because some
men choose to be miserable that they may be rich, rather then be happy with the
expense of money and doing noble things.

2. Riches are useless and unprofitable; for beyond our needs and conveniences
nature knows no use of riches; and they say, that the Princes of Italy when
they sup alone, eat out of a single dish, and drink in a plain glass, and the
wife eats without purple: for nothing is more frugal then the back and belly,
if they be used as they should, but when they would entertain the eyes of
strangers, when they are vain and would make a noise, then riches come forth to
set forth the spectacle, and furnish out the Comedy of wealth, of vanity. No
man can with all the wealth in the world buy so much skill as to be a good
Lutenist; Plut.
he must go the same way that poor people do, he must learn and take pains;
much less can he buy constancy, or chastity, or courage: nay not so much as
the contempt of riches: and by possessing more then we need, we cannot obtain
so much power over our souls, as not to require more: And certainly riches must
deliver me from no evil, if the possession of them cannot take away the longing
for them If any man be thirsty, drink cools him. If he be hungry, ea^ing meat
satisfies him; and when a man is cold and calls for a warm cloak, he is
pleased if you give it him; but you trouble him, if you load him with six or
eight cloaks. Nature rests and sits still when she has her portion; but what
which exceeds it, is a trouble and a burden: and therefore in true Philosophy,
No man is rich but he that is poor according to the common account: for when
God has satisfied those needs which he made; that is, all that is natural,
whatsoever is beyond it, is thirst and a disease, and unless it be sent back
again in charity or religion, can serve no end but vice or vanity, it can
increase the appetite to represent the man poorer, and full of a new and
artificial, unnatural need; but it never satisfies the need it makes, or makes
the man richer. No wealth can satisfy the covetous desire of wealth.

2. Riches are troublesome: but the satisfaction of those appetites which God
and nature ha^h made are cheap and easy: for who ever paid use-money for bread
and onions and water to keep him alive: but when we cove^ after houses of the
frame and design of Italy, or long for jewels, or for my next neighbors
field, or horses from Barbary, or the richest perfumes of Arabia, or Galatian
mules, or fat Eunuchs for our slaves from Tunis, or rich coaches from Naples,
then we can never be satisfied till we have the best thing that is fancied, and
all that can be had, and all that can be desired, and that we can lust no more:
but before we come to the one half of our first wild desires, we are the
bondmen of Usurers, and of our worse tyrant appetites, and the tortures of envy
and impatience. But I consider that those who drink on still when their thirst
is quenched, or eat even after they well dined are sorced to vomit, not only
their superfluity, but even that which at first was necessary: so those that
covet more then they can temperately use, are oftentimes forced to part even
with that patrimony which would have supported their persons in freedom and
honor, and have satisfied all their reasonable desires.

4. Contentedness is therefore health because covetousness is a direct
sickness: and it was well said of Aristippus (as Plutarch reports him) if any
man after much eating and drinking be still unsatisfied, he has no need of
more meat or more drink, but of a Physician; he more needs to be purged then to
be filled; and therefore since covetousness cannot be satisfied, it must be
cured by emptiness, and evacuation; The man is without remedy, unless he be
reduced to the scantling of nature, and the measures of his personal necessity.
Give to a poor man a house, and a few cowes, pay his little debt, and set him
on work, and he is provided for and quiet; but when a man enlarges beyond a
fair possession and desires another Lordship, you spite him if you let him have
it; for by that he is one degree the further off from rest in his desires and
satisfaction: and now he sees himself in a bigger capacity to a larger fortune;
and he shall never find his period, till you begin to take away something of
what he has: for then he will begin to be glad to keep that which is left; but
reduce him to natures measures, and there he shall be sure to find rest: for
there no man can desire beyond his belly full, and when he wants that, any one
friend or charitable man can cure his poverty; but all the world cannot satisfy
his covetousnes.

5. Covetousness is the most fantastical and contradictory disease in the
whole world, and it must therefore be incurable, because it strives against its
own cure. No man therefore abstains from meat because he is hungry, nor from
wine because he loves it and needs it: but the covetous man does so: for he
desires it passionately because he says he needs it, and when he has it, he
will need it still, because he dares not use it. He gets clothes because he
cannot be without them; but when he has them, then he can: as if he needed
c^rn for his granary, and clothes for his wardrope, more then for his back and
belly. For covetousness pretends to heap much together for fear of want, and
yet after all his pains and purchase, he suffers that really which at first he
feared vainly; and by not using what he gets, he makes that suffering to be
actual, present, and necessary, which in his lowest condition was but future,
contingent and possible. It stirs up the desire, and takes away the pleasure of
being satisfied. It increases the appetite and will not content it, it swells
the principal to no purpose, and lessens the use to all purposes; disturbing
the order of nature, and the designs of God; making money not to be the
instrument of exchange or charity, nor corn to feed himself or the poor, nor
wool to cloth himself or his brother, nor wine to refresh the sadness of the
afflicted, nor his oil to make his own countenance cheerful: but all these to
look upon, and to tell over, and to take accounts by and make himself
considerable, and wondered at by fools, that while he lives he may be called
Rich, and when he dies may be accounted Miserable, and like the Dishmakers of
China, may leave a greater heap of dirt for his Nephews, while he himself has
a new lot fallen to him in the portion of Dives: But thus the Ass carried wood
and sweet herbs to the Baths, but was never washed or perfumed himself: he
heaped up sweets for others, while himself was filthy with smoke and ashes. And
yet it is considerable; If the man can be content to feed hardly, and labor
extremely, and watch carefully, and suffer affronts and disgrace that he may
get money more then he uses in his temperate and just needs, with how much ease
might this man be happy? And with how great uneasinesse and trouble does he
make himself miserable? For he takes pains to get content, and when he might
have it, he lets it go. He might better be content with a virtuous and quiet
poverty then with an artificial troublesome and vicious: The same diet and a less
labor would at first make him happy, and for ever after rewardable.

6. The sum of all is that which the Apostle says; Covetousness is Idolatry;
that is, it is an admiring money for itself, not for its use; it relyes upon
money, and loves it more then it loves God and religion: and it is the root of
all evil: it teaches men to be cruel and crafty, industrious in evil, full of
care and malice: it devours young heirs, and grindes the face of the poor, and
undoes those who specially belong to Gods protection, helpless, craftlesse and
innocent people; it inquires into our parents age, and longs for the death of
our friends: it makes friendship and art of rapine, and changes a partner into
a Vultur, and a companion into a thief; and after all this it is for no good to
it self, for it dare not spend those heaps of treasure which it snatched: and
men hate Serpents and Basilisks worse then Lions and Be^rs; for these kill
because they need the prey, but they sting to death and eat not.* And if they
pretend all this care and heap for their Heirs, (like the Mice of Africa hiding
the golden oar in their bowels, and refusing to give back the indigested gold
till their guts be out) they may remember, that what was unnecessary for
themselves, is as unnecessary for their sons; and why cannot they be without it
as well as their Fathers who did not use it? and it often happens, that to the
sons it becomes an instrument to serve some lust or other; that as the gold was
useless to their Fathers, so may the sons be to the public; fools or
prodigals, loads to their Country, and the curse and punishent of their
Fathers avarice; and yet all that wealth is short of one blessing; but it is a
load coming with a curse, and descending from the family of a long derived sin.
However the Father transmits it to the son, and it may be the son to one more,
till a Tyrant, or an Oppressor, or a War, or a change of government, or the
Usurer, or folly, or an expensive vice makes holes in the bottom of the bag,
and the wealth runs out like water, and flies away like a Bird from the hand of
a child.

7. Add to these, the consideration of the advantages of poverty; that it is a
state freer from temptation, secure in dangers: but of one trouble; safe under
the Divine Providence: cared for in Heaven by a daily ministration, and for
whose support God makes every day a new decree: a state of which Christ was
pleased to make open profession, and many wise Men daily make vows: that a rich
Man is but like a pool to whom the poor run, and first trouble it and then draw
it dry: that he enjoyes no more of it then according to the few and limited
needs of a Man; he cannot eat like a Wolf or an Elephant: that variety of
dainty fare ministers but to sin and sicknesses: -- sed olim
Prodigio par est in nobilitate
Senectus. Hortulus hic, puteusque brevis nec rest movendus In tenues plantas
facili diffunditur haustu. Vive bidentis amans and culti villicus horti unde
epulum possis centum dare Pythagoraeis. Est aliquid quocunque loco quocunque
recessu, unius Dominum sese fecisse^ lacertae.

Juven. Sat. 3.
that the poor Man feasts oftener then the rich; because every little
enlargement is a feast to the poor; but he that feasts every day feasts no day,
there being nothing left to which he may beyond his Ordinary extend his
appetite: that the rich Man sleeps not so soundly as the poor labourer; that
his fears are more, and his needs are greater (for who is poorer, he that needs
5 l. or he that needs 5000) the poor Man has enough to fill his belly, and the
rich has not enough to fill his eye: that the poor Man's wants are easy to be
relieved by a common charity, but the needs of rich Men cannot be supplied but
by Princes; and they are left to the temptation of great vices to make
reparation of their needs: and the ambitious labors of Men to get great
estates is but like the selling of a Fountain to buy a Fever, a parting with
content to buy necessity, a purchase of an unhandsome condition at the price of
infelicity: that Princes and they that enjoy most of the world, have most of it
but in title and supreme rights, and reserved privileges, pepper-corns,
homages, trifling services and acknowledgements, the real use descending to
others to more substantial purposes: These considerations may be useful to the
curing of covetousness, that the grace of mercifulness enlarging the heart of
a Man, his hand may not be contracted, but reached out to the poor in alms.

Sect. 9. Of Repentance.
REpentance, of all things in the World makes the greatest change: it changes
things in Heaven and Earth; for it changes the whole Man from sin to grace,
from vicious habits to holy customs, from unchaste bodies to Angelical souls,
from Swine to Philosophers, from drunkenness to sober counsels; and GOD
himself, with whom is no variableness or shadow of change, is pleased by
descending to our weak understandings, to say, that he changes also upon Man's
repentance, that he alters his decrees, revokes his sentence, cancels the Bills
of accusation, throws the Records of shame and sorrow from the Court of Heaven,
and lifts up the sinner from the grave to life, from his prison to a throne,
from Hell and the guilt of eternal torture, to Heaven and to a title to never
ceasing felicities. If we be bound on earth* we shall be bound in heaven; if we
be absolved here, we shall be loosed there; if we repent, God will repent, and
not send the evil upon us which we had deserved.

But repentance is a conjugation and society of many duties; and it contains
in it all the parts of a holy life, from the time of return to the day of our
death inclusively; and it has in it somethings specially relating to the sins
of our former days which are now to be abolished by special arts, and have
obliged us to special labors, and brought in many new necessities, and put us
into a very great deal of danger; and because it is a duty consisting of so
many parts and so much employment, it also requires much time, and leaves a Man
in the same degree of hope of pardon, as is his restitution to the state of
righteousness and holy living, for which we covenanted in Baptism.

For we must know that there is but one repentance in a Man's whole life, if
repentance be taken in the proper, and strict Evangelicall Covenant-sense, and
not after the ordinary understanding of the word: That is, we are but once to
change our whole state of life, from the power of the Devil and his entire
possession, from the state of sin and death, from the body of corruption, to
the life of grace, to the possession of Jesus, to the kingdom of the Gospel;
and this is done in the baptism of water, or in the baptism of the Spirit, when
the first rite comes to be verified by Gods grace coming upon us, and by our
obedience to the heavenly calling, we working together with God. After this
change, if ever we fall into the contrary state, and be wholly estranged from
God and Religion, and profess our selves servants of unrighteousness, God
has made no more covenant of restitution to us, there is no place left for any
more repentance, or entire change of condition, or new birth: a Man can be
regenerated but once: and such are voluntary, malicious Apostates, Witches,
obstinate impenitent persons, and the like: But if we be overtaken by
infirmity, or enter into the marches or borders of this estate, and commit a
grievous sin, or ten, or twenty, so we be not in the entire possession of the
Devil, we are for the present in a damnable condition if we dye; but if we live
we are in a recoverable condition; for so we may repent often: we repent or
rise from death but once, but from sickness many times; and by the grace of
God we shall be pardoned if so we repent. But our hopes of pardon are just as
is the repentance, which if it be timely, hearty, industrious and effective,
God accepts: not by weighing granes or scruples, but by estimating the great
proportions of our life; a hearty endeavor and an effectual ge^neral change
shall get the pardon; the unavoidable infirmities, and past evils, and present
imperfections, and short interruptions, against which we watch, and pray, and
strive, being put upon the accounts of the cross, and paid for by the Holy
Jesus. This is the state and condition of repentance; its parts and actions
must be valued according to the following rules.

Acts and parts of Repentance.
1. He that repents truly is greatly sorrowful for his past sins; not with a
superficial sigh or tear, but a pungent afflictive sorrow; such a sorrow as
hates the sin so much, that the man would choose to dye rather then act it any
more: This sorrow is called in Scripture [ a weeping sorely, a weeping with
bitterness of heart, a weeping day and night, a sorrow of heart, a breaking of
the spirit, mourning like a dove, and chattering like a swallow:] and we may
read the degree and manner of it by the lamentations and sad accents of the
Prophet Jeremy, when he wept for the sins of the nation; by the heart breaking
of David, when he mourned for his murder and adultery: and the bitter weeping
of S. Peter, after the shameful denying of his Master. Ier. 13 17. Joel 2.13.
Ezekiel. 27.31 James 4.9.
The expression of this sorrow differs according to the temper of the body, the
sex, the age, and circumstance of action, and the motive of sorrow, and by many
accidental tendernesses, or Masculine hardnesses; and the repentance is not to
be estimated by the tears, but by the grief; and the grief is to be valued not
by the sensitive trouble, but by the cordial hatred of the sin, and ready
actual dereliction of it, and a resolution and real resisting its consequent
temptations. Some people can shed tears for nothing, some for any thing; but
the proper and true effects of a godly sorrow are; fear of the divine
judgments, apprehension of Gods displeasure, watchings and strivings against
sin, patiently enduring the cross of sorrow (which God sends as their
punishment) in accusation of our selves, in perpetually begging pardon, in mean
and base opinion of our selves, and in all the natural productions from these
according to our temper and constitution: for if we be apt to weep in other
accidents, it is ill if we weep not also in the sorrows of repentance: not,
that weeping is of it self a duty, but that the sorrow, if it be as great, will
be still expressed in as great a manner.

2. Our sorrow for sins must retain the proportion of our sins, though not the
equality; we have no particular measures of sins: we know not which is greater
of Sacrilege or Superstion, Idolatry or Covetousness, Rebellion or
Witchcraft; and therefore God ties us not to nice measures of sorrow, but only
that we keep the general Rules of proportion; that is, that a great sin have a
great grief; a smaller crime being to be washed off with a lesser shower.

3. Our sorrow for sins is then best accounted of for its degree, Hugo de S.
victor.
when it together with all the penal and afflictive duties of repentance, shall
have equalled or exceeded the pleasure we had in commission of the sin.

4. True repentance is a punishing duty, and acts its sorrow, and judges and
condemns the sin by voluntary submitting to such sadnesses as God sends on us,
or (to prevent the judgment of God) by judging our selves, and punishing our
bodies and our spirits by such instruments of piety as are troublesome to the
body: such as are, fasting, watching, long prayers, troublesome postures in our
prayers, expensive alms, and all outward acts of humiliation. For he that must
judge himself, must condemn himself if he be guilty; and if he be condemned he
must be punished; and if he be so judged, it will help to prevent the judgment
of the Lord. S. Paul instructing us in this particular. 1 Cor. 11.3^
But I before intimated that the punishing actions of repentance are only
actions of sorrow, and therefore are to make up the proportions of it. For our
grief may be so full of trouble as to outweigh all the burdens of fasts and
bodily afflictions, and then the other are the less necessary; and when they
are used, the benefit of them is to obtain of God a remission or a lessening of
such temporal judgments which God has decreed against the sins, as it was in
the case of Ahab: but the sinner is not by any thing of this reconciled to the
eternal favor of God; for as yet, this is but the Introduction to Repentance.

5. Every true penitent is obliged to confess his sins, and to humble himself
before God for ever: Confession of sins has a special promise. If we confess
our sins he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins: 1 John 1.9.
meaning that God has bound himself to forgive us if we duly confess our
sins, and do all that for which confession was appointed; that is, be ashamed
of them, and own them no more. For, confession of our sins to God can signify
nothing of it self in its direct nature: He sees us when we act them, and keeps
a record of them; and we forget them unless he reminds us of them by his
grace: so that to confess them to God does not punish us, or make us ashamed,
but confession to him, if it proceeds from shame and sorrow, and is an act of
humility and self condemnation, and is a laying open our wounds for cure, then
it is a duty God delights in: in all which circumstances, because we may very
much be helped if we take in the assistance of a spiritual Guide; therefore the
Church of God in all ages has commended, and in most ages enjoined (...). S.
Basil reg. brev. 228. Council. Laod. c. 2. Council. Quinisext. c. 102. Tertul de
poenit.
that we confess our sins, and discover the state and condition of our souls
to such a person whom we or our superiors judge fit to help us in such needs.
For so [ if we confess our sins one to another] as S. James advises, we shall
obtain the prayers of the holy Man whom God and the Church has appointed
solemnly to pray for us: and when he knows our needs he can best minister
comfort, or reproof, oil or Causticks, he can more opportunely recommend your
particular state to GOD, he can determine your cases of conscience, and judge
better for you then you do for your self; and the shame of opening such Ulcers,
may restrain your forwardness to contract them; and all these circumstances of
advantage will do very much toward the forgiveness. And this course was taken
by the new Converts in the days of the Apostles [ For many that believed, Acts
19.18
came and confessed and showed their deeds.] And it were well if this duty were
practiced prudently and innocently in order to public Discipline, or private
comfort and instruction: but that it be done to God, is a duty, not directly
for it self, but for its adjuncts, and the duties that go with it, or before
it, or after it: which duties because they are all to be helped and guided by
our Pastors and Curates of souls, he is careful of his eternal interest that
will not lose the advantage of using a private guide and judge. He that hides
his sins shall not prosper [Non dirigetur, Prove* 28.13
says the Vulgar Latin] he shall want a guide, but who confesses and
forsakes them shall have mercy. And to this purpose Clima^us reports that
diverse holy persons in that age did use to carry Table-books with them, and in
them described an account of all their determinate thoughts, purposes, words
and actions, in which they had suffered infirmity, that by communicating the
estate of their souls they might be instructed and guided, and corrected, or
encouraged.

6. True repentance must reduce to act all its holy purposes, and enter into
and run through the state of holy Romans 6.3.4.7. verses 8.10.13.13.14.11.22.27.
Gal. 5.6.24.6.15. 1 Cor. 7.19. 2 Cor. 13 5. Colos. 1.21.22.23. Heb.
12.1.14.16.10.16.22. 1 Pet. 1.15. 2 Pet. 1.4.9.10.3.11. 1 John 1.6.3.3.9.5.16.
living, which is contrary to that state of darkness in which in times past we
walked. For to resolve to do it, and yet not to do it, is to break our
resolution and our faith, to mock God, to falsify and evacuate all the
preceding acts of repentance, and to make our pardon hopeless, and our hope
fruitless. He that resolves to live well when a danger is upon him, or a
violent fear, or when the appetites of Lust are newly satisfied, or newly
served, and yet when the temptation comes again, sins again, and then is
sorrowful, and resolves once more against it, and yet falls when the temptation
returns, is a vain Man, but no true penitent, nor in the state of grace; and if
he chance to dye in one of these good moods is very far from salvation: for if
it be necessary that we resolve to live well, it is necessary we should do so.
For resolution is an imperfect act, a term of relation, and signifies nothing
but in order to the action: it is as a faculty is to the act, as Spring is to
the Harvest, as Eggs are to Birds, as a Relative to its Correspondent, nothing
without it. No Man therefore can be in the state of grace and actual favor by
resolutions and holy purposes; these are but the gate and portal toward
pardon: a holy life is the only perfection of Repentance, and the firm ground
upon which we can cast the anchor of hope in the mercies of God through Jesus
Christ.

7. No Man is to reckon his pardon immediately upon his returns from sin to
the beginnings of good life, but is to begin his hopes and degrees of
confidence according as sin dies in him, and grace lives; as the habits of sin
lessen, and righteousness grows, according as sin returns but seldom in
smaller instances and without choice, and by surprise without deliberation, and
is highly disrelished and presently dashed against the Rock Christ Jesus by a
holy sorrow and renewed care, and more strict watchfulness. For a holy life
being the condition of the Covenant on our part, as we return to God, so God
returns to us, and our state returns to the probabilities of pardon.

8. Every Man is to work out his salvation with fear and trembling; and after
the commission of sins his fears must multiply, because every new sin, and
every great declining from the ways of God is still a degree of new danger,
and has increased Gods anger, and has made him more uneasy to grant pardon:
and when he does grant it, it is upon harder terms both for doing and
suffering; that is, we must do more for pardon, and it may be, suffer much
more. For we must know that God pardons our sins by parts: as our duty
increases, and our care is more prudent and active, so Gods anger decreases:
and yet it may be the last sin you committed, made God unalterably resolved to
send upon you some sad judgment. Of the particulars in all cases we are
uncertain; and therefore we have reason always to mourn for our sins that
have so provoked GOD, and made our condition so full of danger, that it may be,
no prayers, or tears or duty can alter his sentence concerning some sad
judgment upon us. Thus GOD irrevocably decreed to punish the Israelites for
Idolatry, although Moses prayed for them, and God forgave them in some degree;
that is, so that he would not cut them of^ from being a people; yet he would
not forgive them so, but he would visit that their sin upon them: and he did so.

9. A true penitent must all the days of his life pray for pardon, (...).
Tacit.
and never think the work completed till he dies; not by any act of his own, by
no act of the Church, by no forgiveness by the party injured, by no
restitution: these are all instruments of great use and efficacy, and the means
by which it is to be done at length: but still the sin lies at the door ready
to return upon us in judgment, and damnation, if we return to it in choice or
action: and whether God has forgiven us or no, we know not I p^^c^ti and I
de^iti Son se^p^e piu di (...).
, and how far we know not; and all that we have done is not of sufficient worth
to obtain pardon: therefore still pray, and still be sorrowful for ever having
done it, and for ever watch against it; and then those beginnings of pardon
which are working all the way, will at last be perfected in the day of the Lord.

10. Defer not at all to repent; much less may thou put it off to thy
deathbed: It is not an easy thing to root out the habits (...). Arria.
of sin, which a Man's whole life has gathered and confirmed. We find work
enough to mortify one beloved lust, in our very best advantage of strength and
time, and before it is so deeply rooted as it must needs be supposed to be at
the end of a wicked life: and therefore it will prove impossible when the work
is so great, and the strength's so little, when sin is so strong and grace so
weak: for they always keep the same proportion of increase and decrease, and
as sin grows, grace decays: so that the more need we have of grace, the
less at that time we shall have: because the greatness of our sins which
makes the need, has lessened the grace of GOD (which should help us) into
nothing. To which add this consideration; that on a Man's deathbed, the day of
repentance is past: for repentance being the renewing of a holy life, a living
the life of Grace, Mortem v^niente^ nemo hilaris excipit, nisi qui ad (...) se
di^ composu^^at.
it is a contradiction to say, that a Man can live a holy life upon his
deathbed: especially, if we consider, that for a sinner to live a holy life
must first suppose him to have overcome all his evil habits, (...). Arria.
and then to have made a purchase of the contrary graces, by the labors of
great prudence, watchfulness, self denial and severity. Nothing that is
excellent can be wrought suddenly.

11. After the beginnings of thy recovery, be infinitely fearful of a relapse,
and therefore upon the stock of thy sad experience, observe where thy failings
were, and by especial arts fortify that saculty, and arm against that
temptation. For if all those arguments which God uses to us to preserve our
innocence, and thy late danger, and thy fears, and the goodness of God making
thee once to escape, and the shame of thy fall, and the sense of thy ^own
weaknesses will not make thee watchful against a fall, especially knowing how
much it costs a man to be restored, it will be infinitely more dangerous if
ever thou fallest again, not only for fear God should no more accept thee to
pardon; but even thy own hopes will be made more desperate and thy impatience
greater; and thy shame turn to impudence, and thy own will be more estranged,
violent, and refractory, and thy latter end will be worse then thy beginning.
To which add this consideration: That thy sin which was formerly in a good way
of being pardoned, will not only return upon thee with all its own loads, but
with the baseness of unthankfulness, and thou will be set as far back from
Heaven as ever; and all thy former labors and fears, and watchings and agonies
will be reckoned for nothing, but as arguments to upbraid thy folly, who when
thou had set one foot in Heaven, did pull that back and carry both to Hell.

Motives to Repentance.
I shall use no other arguments to move a sinner to repentance, but to tell him
unless he does he shall certainly perish; and if he does repent timely and
entirely, that is, live a holy life, he shall be forgiven and be saved: But yet
I desire that this consideration be enlarged with some great circumstances; and
let us remember.

1. That to admit mankind to repentance and pardon was a favor greater then
ever God gave to the angels and devils: for they were never admitted to the
condition of second thoughts: Christ never groaned one groan for them; he never
suffered one stripe, nor one affront, nor shed one drop of blood to restore
them to hopes of blessedness after their first failings. But this he did for
us, he paid the score of our sins, only that we might be admitted to repent,
and that this repentance might be effectual to the great purposes of felicity
and salvation.

2. Consider that as it cost Christ many millions of prayers and groans, and
sighs, so he is now at this instant and has been for these 1600 years night
and day incessantly praying for grace to us that we may repent, and for pardon
when we do, and for degrees of pardon beyond the capacities of our infirmities,
and the merit of our sorrows and amendment: and this prayer he will continue
till his second coming; Hebr. 7.25. 2 Cor. 5.20.
for he ever lives to make intercession for us, and that we may know what it
is in behalf of which he intercedes, S. Paul tells us his design [ we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though he did beseech you by us, we pray yo^ in
Christ's stead to be reconciled to God; and what Christ prays us to do, he
prays to God that we may do; that which he desires of us as his servants, he
desires of God who is the fountain of the grace and powers unto us, and without
whose assistance we can do nothing.

3. That ever we should repent, was so costly a purchase, and so great a
concernment, and so high a favor, and the event is esteemed by God himself so
great an excellency, that our blessed Savior tells us, there shall be joy in
Heaven over one sinner that repents: Luke 15.7.
meaning that when Christ shall be glorified and at the right hand of his
Father make intercession for us, praying for our repentance; the conversion and
repentance of every sinner is part of Christ's glorification; it is the
answering of his prayers, it is a portion of his reward, in which he does
essentially glory by the joys of his glorified humanity. This is the joy of
our Lord himself directly, not of the Angels, save only by reflection: The joy
(said our blessed Savior) shall be in the presence of the Angels; they shall
see the glory of the Lord, the answering of his prayers, the satisfaction of
his desires, and the reward of his sufferings, in the repentance and consequent
pardon of a sinner. For therefore he once suffered, and for that reason he
rejoices for ever: and therefore when a penitent sinner comes to receive the
effect and full consummation of his pardon, it is called [ an entering into the
joy of our Lord] that is, a partaking of that joy which Christ received at our
coversion and enjoyed ever since.

4. Add to this, that the rewards of Heaven are so great and glorious, and
Christ's burden is so light, his yoke is so easy, that it is a shameless
impudence to expect so great gloryes at a less rate then so little a service;
at a lower rate then a holy life. It cost the heart blood of the Son of God to
obtain Heaven for us upon that condition; and who shall dye again to get Heaven
for us upon easier terms? What would you do, if God should command you to kill
your eldest son, or to work in the mines for a thousand years together, or to
fast all thy life time with bread and water? Were not Heaven a very great
bargain even after all this? And when God requires nothing of us, but to live
soberly, justly and godly (which things of themselves are to a man a very great
felicity, and necessary to our present well being) shall we think this to be an
intolerable burden, and that Heaven is too little a purchase at that price? and
that God in mere justice will take a deathbed sigh or groan, and a few
unprofitable tears and promises in exchange for all our duty?

If these motives joined together with our own interest, even as much as
felicity and the sight of God, and the avoiding the intolerable pains of Hell
and many intermedial judgments comes to, will not move us to leave, 1. The
filthiness, and 2. The trouble, and 3. The uneasinesse, and 4. The
unreasonablenesse of sin, and turn to God, there is no more to be said, we
must perish in our folly.

SECT. X. Of preparation to, and the manner how to receive the holy Sacrament
of the Lords Supper.
THe celebration of the holy Sacrament is the great mysteriousnesse of the
Christian religion, and succeeds to the most solemn rite of natural and
Judaical religion, the Law of sacrificing. For God spared mankind, and took
the sacrifie of beasts together with our solemn prayers for an instrument of
expiation. But these could not purify the soul from sin, but were typical of
the sacrifice of something that could. But nothing could do this, but either
the offering of all that sinned, that every man should be the anathema or
devo^ed thing, or else by some one of the same capacity, who by some superadded
excellency might in his own personal sufferings have a value great enough to
satisfy for all the whole kind of sinning persons. This the Son of God JESUS
CHRIST, God and Man undertook, and finished by a Sacrifice of himself upon the
Altar of the Cross.

2. This Sacrifice, because it was perfect, could be but one, and that once;
but because the needs of the world should last as long as the world self, it
was neces^ary that there should be a perpe^ual ministry established, whereby
this one sufficient sacrifice should be made eternally effectual to the several
new a^i^ing needs of all the world who should desire it, or in any sense be
capable of it.

3. To this end Christ was made a Priest for ever: he was initiated or
consecrated on the cross, and there began his Priesthood, which was to last
till his coming to judgment. It began on earth, but was to last and be
officiated in Heaven, where he sits perpetually, representing and exhibiting to
the Father that great effective sacrifice (which he of^ered on the cross) to
eternal and never failing purposes.

4. As Christ is pleased to represent to his Father that great Sacrifice as a
means of atonement and expiation for all mankind, and with special purposes
and intendment for all the elect, all that serve him in holiness: so he has
appointed that the same ministry shall be done upon earth too, in our manner,
and according to our proportion; and therefore has constituted and separated
an order of men, who by showing forth the Lords death by Sacramental
representation may pray unto God after the same manner that our Lord and high
^riest does, that is, offer to God and repres^nt in this solemn prayer and
Sacrament, Christ as already offered, so sending up a gracious instrument
whereby our prayers may for his sake and in the same manner of intercession be
offered up to God in our behalf, and for all them for whom we pray to all those
purposes for which Christ dyed.

5. As the Ministers of the Sacrament do in a Sacramental manner present to God
the sacrifice of the cross, by being imitators of Christ's intercession; so the
people are sacrificers too in their manner; for besides that, by saying Amen,
they join in the act of him that ministers, and make it also to be their own:
so when they eat and drink the consecrated and blessed Elelements worthily,
they receive Christ within them, and therefore may also offer him to God, while
in their sacrifice of obedience and thanksgiving they present themselves to God
with Christ whom they have spiritually received, that is, themselves with that
which will make them gracious and acceptable. The offering their bodies and
souls and services to God in him, and by him, and with him, who is his Fathers
well-beloved, and in whom he is well pleased, cannot but be accepted to all the
purposes of blessing, grace, and glory.

6. This is the sum of the greatest mystery of our Religion: it is the copy of
the passion, and the ministration of the great mystery of our Redemption; and
therefore whatsoever intitles us to the general privileges of Christ's passion,
all that is necessary by way of disposition to the celebration of the Sacrament
of his passion: because this celebration is our manner of applying or using it.
The particulars of which preparation are represented in the following rules.

1. No Man must dare to approach to the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper if
he be in a state of any one sin, that is, Vasa pu^a ad (...) Divinam, Pl^ut
(...) c^p. (...).
unless he have entered into the state of repentance, that is, of sorrow and
amendment* lest it be said concerning him, as it was concerning Judas, the hand
of him that betraieth me is with me on the Table: and he that receives Christ
into an impure soul or body, first turns his most excellent nourishment into
poison, and then ^eeds upon it.

2. Every communicant must first have examined himself, that is, tried the
condition and state of his soul, searched out the secret Ulcers, enquired out
its weaknesses and indiscretions, and all those aptnesses where it is exposed
to temptation, that by finding out its diseases he may find a cure, and by
discovering its aptnesses he may secure his present purposes of future
amendment, and may be armed against dangers and temptations.

3. This examination must be a Man's own act, and inquisition into his life; but
then also it should lead a Man on to run to those whom the Great Physician of
our souls Christ Jesus has appointed to minister physic to our diseases; that
in all dangers and great accidents we may be assisted for comfort and remedy,
for medicine and caution.

4. In this affair let no Man deceive himself, and against such a time which
public Authority has appointed for us to receive the Sacrament, weep for his
sins by way of solemnity and ceremony, and still retain the affection: but he
that comes to this feast must have on the Wedding garment* that is, he must
have put on Jesus Christ* and he must have put off the old man with his
affections and lusts, and he must be wholly conformed to Christ in the image of
his mind: For then we have put on Christ, when our souls are clothed with his
righteousness, when every faculty of our foul is proportioned and vested
according to the pattern of Christ's life. And therefore a Man must not leap
from his last nights Surfeit, and Bath, and then communicate: but when he has
begun the work of God effectually, and made some progress in repentance, and
has walked some stages and periods in the ways of godliness, then let him
come to him that is to minister it, and having made known the state of his
soul, he is to be admitted: but to receive it into an unhallowed soul and body,
is to receive the dust of the Tabernacle in the water^ of jealousy; it will
make the belly to swell, and the thigh to rot: it will not convey Christ to us,
but the Devil will enter and dwell there, till with it he returns to his
dwelling of torment. Remember always that after a great sin or after a habit
of sins, a Man is not soon made clean; and no unclean thing must come to this
Feast. It is not the preparation of two or three days that can render a person
capable of this banque^: For in this seast, all Christ, and Christ's passion,
and all his graces, the blessings and effects of his sufferings are conveyed:
nothing can fit us for this, but what can unite us to Christ, and obtain of him
to present our needs to his heavenly Father: this Sacrament can no otherwise be
celebrated but upon the same terms on which we may hope for pardon and Heaven
it self.

5. When we have this general and indispensably necessary preparation, we are
to make our souls more adorned and trimmed up with circumstances of pious
actions, and special devotions, setting apart some portion of our time
immediately before the day of solemnity according as our great occasions will
permit* and this time is specially to be spent in actions of repentance,
confession of our sins, renewing our purposes of holy living, praying for
pardon of our failings, and for those graces which may prevent the like
sadnesses for the time to come; meditation upon the passion, upon the infinite
love of God expressed in so great mysterious manners of redemption; and
indefinitely in all acts of virtue which may build our souls up into a Temple
fit for the reception of Christ himself and the inhabitation of the holy Spirit.

6. The celebration of the holy Sacrament being the most solemn prayer, joined
with the most effectual instrument of its acceptance, must suppose us in the
love of God, and in charity with all the World: and therefore we must before
every Communion especially, remember what differences or jealousies are between
us and any one else; and recompose all disunions, and cause right
understandings between each other; offering to satisfy whom we have injured,
and to forgive them who have injured us, without thoughts of resuming the
quarrel when the solemnity is over; for that is but to rake the embers in light
and fantastic ashes: it must be quenched, and a holy flame enkindled: no
fires must be at all, but the fires of love and zeal; and the altar of incense
will send up a sweet perfume, and make atonement for us.

7. When the day of the feast is come, lay aside all cares and impertinencies
of the World, and remember that this is thy Souls day; a day of traffic and
intercourse with Heaven. Arise early in the morning. 1. Give God thanks for the
approach of so great a blessing. 2. Confess thy own unworthiness to admit so
Divine a Guest. 3. Then remember and deplore thy sins which have made thee so
unworthy. 4. Then confess Gods goodness and take sanctuary there, and upon
him place thy hopes. 5. And invite him to thee with renewed acts of love, of
holy desire, of hatred of his enemy, sin. 6. Make oblation of thy self wholly
to be disposed by him, to the obedience of him, to his providence and
possession, and pray him to enter, and dwell there for ever: And after this,
with joy and holy fear, and the forwardness of love, address thy self to the
receiving of him, to whom and by whom, and for whom, all faith, and all hope,
and all love in the whole Catholic Church, both in Heaven and Earth is
designed; him, whom Kings and Queens, and whole Kingdoms are in love with, and
count it the greatest honor in the World, that their Crowns and Scepters are
laid at his holy feet.

8. When the holy Man stands at the Table of blessing and ministers the rite of
consecration, then do as the Angels do, who behold, and love, and wonder; that
the Son of God should become food to the souls of his servants; that he who
cannot suffer any change or lessening should be broken into pieces and enter
into the body to support and nourish the spirit, and yet at the same time
remain in Heaven while he descends to thee upon Earth; that he who has
essential felicity should become miserable and dye sor thee, and then give
himself to thee for ever to redeem thee from sin and misery; that by his wounds
he should procure health to thee, by his affronts he should entitle thee to
glory, by his death he should bring thee to life, and by becoming a Man he
should make thee partaker of the Divine nature. These are such glories that
although they are made so obvious that each eye may behold them, yet they are
also so deep, that no thought can fathom them: But so it has pleased him to
make these mysteries to be sensible, because the excellency and depth of the
mercy is not intelligible; that while we are ravished and comprehended within
the infiniteness of so vast and mysterious a mercy, yet we may be as sure of
it, as of that thing we see and feel, and smell and taste; but yet is so great,
that we cannot understand it.

9. These holy mysteries are offered to our senses, but not to be placed under
our feet; they are sensible, but not common: and therefore as the weakness of
the Elements adds wonder to the excellency of the Sacrament: so let our
reverence and venerable usages of them add honor to the Elements, and
acknowledge the glory of the mystery, and the Divinity of the mercy. Let us
receive the consecrated Elements with all devotion, and humility of body and
spirit; and do this honor to it, that it be the first food we eat, and the
first beverage we drink that day, unless it he in case of sickness, or other
great necessity: and that your body and soul both be prepared to its reception
with abstinence from secular pleasures, that you may better have attended
fastings and preparatory prayers. For if ever it be seasonable to observe the
counsel of Saint Paul, that married persons by consent should abstain for a
time that they may attend to solemn Religion, ^
it is now. It was not by Saint Paul nor the after ages of the Church called a
duty so to do, but it is most reasonable, that the more solemn actions of
Religion should be attended to without the mixture of any thing that may
discompose the mind, and make it more secular, or less religious.

10. In the act of receiving, exercise acts of Faith, with much confidence and
resignation, believing it not to be common bread and wine, but holy in their
use, holy in their signification, holy in their change, and holy in their
effect, and believe if thou art a worthy Communicant thou do as verily
receive Christ's body and blood to all effects and purposes of the spirit, as
thou do receive the blessed elements into thy mouth; that thou put thy
finger to his hand, and thy hand into his side, and thy lips to his fontinel of
blood, (...) vulne^a: fig imu^ lin^uam. Cypri^^ de Coen^ ^om.
sucking life from his heart: and yet if thou do communicate unworthily;
thou eatest and drinkest Christ to thy danger, and death, and destruction.
Dispute not concerning the secret of the mystery, and the nicety of the manner
of Christ's presence: it is sufficient to thee that Christ shall be present to
thy soul, as an instrument of grace, as a pledge of the resurrection, as the
earnest of glory and immortality, and a means of many intermedial blessings,
even all such as are necessary for thee, and are in order to thy salvation: and
to make all this good to thee, there is nothing necessary on thy part but a
holy life, and a true belief of all the sayings of Christ, amongst which,
indefinitely assent to the words of institution, and believe that Christ in the
holy Sacrament gives thee his body and his blood. He that believes not this,
is not a Christian; He that believes so much, needs not to enquire further, nor
to entangle his faith by disbelieving his sense.

11. Fail not this solemnity according to the custom of pious and devout people
to make an offering to God for the uses of religion and the poor, according to
thy ability. For when Christ feasts his body, let us also feast our fellow
members who have right to the same promises, and are partakers of the same
Sacrament, and partners of the same hope, and cared for under the same
providence, and descended from the same common parents, and whose Father God
is, and Christ is their Elder Brother. If thou chancest to communicate where
this holy custom is not observed publicly, supply that want by thy private
charity, but offer it to God at his holy Table, at least by thy private
designing it there.

12. When you have received, pray and give thanks. Pray for all estates of men:
for they also have an interest in the body of Christ whereof they are members:
and you in conjunction with Christ (whom then you have received) are more fit
to pray for them in that advantage, and in the celebration of that holy
sacrifice which then is Sacramentally represented to GOD. * Give thanks for the
passion of our Dearest Lord: remember all its parts, and all the instruments of
your Redemption; and beg of GOD that by a holy perseverance in well doing you
may from shadows pass on to substances, from eating his body to seeing his
face, from the Typical, Sacramental, and Transient, to the Real, and
Eternal Supper of the Lamb.

13. After the solemnity is done, let Christ dwell in your hearts by faith, and
love, and obedience, and conformity to his life and death; as you have taken
CHRIST into you, so put CHRIST on you, and conform every faculty of your soul
and body to his holy image and perfection. Remember that now Christ is all one
with you; and therefore when you are to do an action, consider how Christ did,
or would do the like, and do you imitate his example, and transcribe his copy,
and understand all his Commandments, and choose all that he propounded, and
desire his promises and fear his threatenings, and marry his loves and hatreds,
and contract all his friendships; for then you do every day communicate;
especially when Christ thus dwells in you, and you in Christ, growing up
toward a perfect man in Christ Jesus.

14. Do not instantly upon your return from Church, return also to the world,
and secular thoughts and employments; but let the remaining parts of that day
be like a post-Communion or an after-office, entertaining your blessed Lord
with all the caresses and sweetness of love and colloquies, and entercourses
of duty and affection, acquainting him with all your needs, and revealing to
him all your secrets, and opening all your infirmities; and as the a^fairs of
your person or employment call you off, so retire again with often ejaculations
and acts of entertainment to your beloved Guest.

The effects and benefits of worthy communicating.
When I said that the sacrifice of the cross which Christ offered for all the
sins and all the needs of the world is represented to God by the Minister in
the Sacrament, and offered up in prayer and Sacramental memory, after the
manner that Christ himself intercedes for us in Heaven (so far as his glorious
Priesthood is imitable by his Ministers on earth) I must of necessity also
mean, that all the benefits of that sacrifice are then conveyed to all that
communicate worthily: But if we descend to particulars; Then and there the
Church is nourished in her faith, strengthened in her hope, enlarged in her
bowels with an increasing charity: there all the members of Christ are joined
with each other, and all to Christ their head; and we again renew the Covenant
with God in Jesus Christ, and God seals his part, and we promise for ours, and
Christ unites both, and the holy Ghost signs both in the collation of those
graces which we then pray for, and exercise and receive all at once: there our
bodies are nourished with the signs, and our souls with the mystery: our
bodies receive into them the seed of an immortal nature, and our souls are
joined with him, who is the first fruits of the resurrection and never can dye:
and if we desire any thing else and need it, here it is to be prayed for, here
to be hoped for, here to be received; Long life and health, and recovery from
sickness, and competent support and maintenance, and peace, and deliverance
from our enemies, and content, and patience, and joy, and sanctified riches, or
a cheerful poverty and liberty, and whatsoever else is a blessing, was
purchased for us by Christ in his death and resurrection, and in his
intercession in Heaven: and this Sacrament being that to our particulars, which
the great mysteries are in themselves, and by design to all the world, if we
receive worthily we shall receive any of these blessings, according as God
shall choose for us; and he will not only choose with more wisdom, but also
with more affection then we can for our selves.

After all this, it is advised by the Guides of souls, wise men and pious, that
all persons should communicate very often, even as often as they can without
excuses or delays: Every thing that puts us from so holy an employment when we
are moved to it, being either a sin or an imperfection; an Infirmity or
indevotion, and an unactivenesse of Spirit. All Christian people must come:
They indeed that are in the state of sin must not come so, but yet they must
come: First they must quit their state of death, and then partake of the bread
of life. They that are at enmity with their neighbors must come, that is no
excuse for their not coming; only they must not bring their enmity along with
them, but leave it, and then come. They that have variety of secular
employments must come; only they must leave their secular thoughts and
affections behind them, and then come and converse with God. ^
If any man be well grown in grace he must needs come, because he is
excellently disposed to so holy a feast: but he that is but in the infancy of
piety had need to come that so he may grow in grace. The strong must come lest
they become weak, and the weak that they may become strong. The sick must come
to be cured; the healthful to be preserved. They that have leisure must come
because they have no excuse: They that have no leisure must come hither, that
by so excellent religion they may sanctify their business. The penitent
sinners must come, that they may be justified: and they that are justified,
that they may be justified still. They that have fears and great reverence to
these mysteries, and think no preparation to be sufficient must receive, that
they may learn how to receive the more worthily: and they that have a less
degree of reverence, must come often to have it heightened: that as those
Creatures that live amongst the snowes of the Mountains turn white with their
food and conversation with such perpetual whitenesses: so our souls may be
transformed into the similitude and union with Christ by our perpetual feeding
on him, and conversation, not only in his Courts, but in his very heart, and
most secret affections, and incomparable purities.

Prayers for all sorts of Men, and all necessities; relating to the several
parts of the virtue of Religion.
A Prayer for the Graces of Faith, Hope Charity.
O Lord God of infinite mercy, of infinite excellency, who have sent thy holy
Son into the world to redeem us from an intolerable misery, and to teach us a
holy religion, and to forgive us an infinite debt: give me thy holy Spirit,
that my understanding and all my faculties may be so resigned to the discipline
and doctrine of my Lord, that I may be prepared in mind and will to dye for
the testimony of Jesus, and to suffer any affliction or calamity that shall
offer to hinder my duty, or tempt me to shame or sin, or apostasy: and let my
faith be the parent of a good life, a strong shield to repel the fiery darts
of the Devil, and the Author of a holy hope, of modest desires, of confidence
in God, and of a never failing charity to thee my God, and to all the world,
that I may never have my portion with the unbelievers, or uncharitable, and
desperate persons; but may be supported by the strengths of faith in all
temptations, and may be refreshed with the comforts of a holy hope in all my
sorrows, and may bear the burden of the Lord, and the infirmities of my
neighbor by the support of charity, that the yoke of Jesus may become easy to
me, and my love may do all the miracles of grace, till from grace it swell to
glory, from earth to heaven, from duty to reward, from the imperfections of a
beginning, and little growing love it may arrive to the consummation of an
eternal and never ceasing charity, through Jesus Christ the Son of thy love,
the Anchor of our hope, and the Author and finisher of our faith, to whom with
thee, O Lord God, Father of Heaven and Earth, and with thy holy Spirit be all
glory, and love, and obedience, and dominion now and for ever. Amen.

Acts of love by way of prayer and ejaculation: to be used in private.
O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for thee, my
flesh longs Psalm. 63.

I am ready not only to be bound, but to dye for the name of the Lord Jesus.
Acts 23.

How amiable are thy Tabernacles thou Lord of Hosts: my soul longs, yea even
faints for the courts of the Lord: My heart and my flesh cries out for the
living God: Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will still be
praising thee. Psalm. 84.



A Prayer to be said in any affliction, as death of children, of husband or
wife, in great poverty, in imprisonment, in a sad and disconsolate spirit, and
in temptations to despair.
O Eternal God, Father of Mercyes and God of all comfort with much mercy look
upon the sadnesses and sorrows of thy servant. My sins lie heavy upon me, and
press me sore, and there is no health in my bones by reason of thy displeasure
and my sin. The waters are gone over me, and I stick fast in the deep mire, and
my miseries are without comfort, because they are punishments of my sin: and I
am so evil and unworthy a person, that though I have great desires, yet I have
no dispositions or worthiness toward receiving comfort. My sins have caused my
sorrow, and my sorrow does not cure my sins: and unless for thy own sake, and
merely because thou art good, thou shall pity me and relieve me, I am as much
without remedy, as now I am without comfort. Lord pity me; Lord let thy grace
refresh my Spirit. Let thy comforts support me, thy mercy pardon me, and never
let my portion be amongst hopeless and accursed spirits; for thou art good and
gracious; and I throw my self upon thy mercy. Let me never let my hold go, and
do thou with me what seems good in thy own eyes: I cannot suffer more then I
have deserved: and yet I can need no relief so great as thy mercy is: for thou
art infinitely more merciful then I can be miserable: and thy mercy which is
above all thy own works, must needs be far above all my sin and all my misery.
Dearest Jesus, let me trust in thee for ever, and let me never be confounded.
Amen.

Ejaculations and short meditations to be used in time of sickness and sorrow,
or danger of Death.
Hear my Prayer, O Lord, and let my crying come unto thee. * Hide not thy face
from me in the time of my trouble, incline thine ear unto me when I call: O
hear me and that right soon, * For my days are consumed like smoa^ and my
bones are burnt up as it were a firebrand. * My heart is smitten down and
withered like grass; so that I forget to eat my bread: and that because of
thine indignation and wrath: for thou have taken me up and cast me down. *
Thine arrows stick fast in me and thy hand presses me sore. There is no health
in my flesh because of thy displeasure: neither is there any rest in my bones
by reason of my sin. * My wickednes^es are gone over my head and are a sore
burden too heavy for me to bear. * But I will confess my wickedness, and be
sorry for my sin. * O Lord rebuke me not in thy indignation, neither chasten me
in thy displeasure. * Lord be merciful unto me, heal my soul for I have sinned
against thee.

Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great

O God, thou art my God for ever and ever: man therefore is but vanity. And now
Lord what is my hope, truly my hope is even in thee. * Hear my prayer, O Lord,
and with thine ears consider my calling, hold not thy peace at my tears. * Take
this plague away from me: I am consumed by the means of thy heavy hand. * I am
a stranger with thee and a sojourner, as all my Fathers were. * O spare me a
little that I may recover my strength before I go hence and be no more seen. *
My soul cleaves unto the dust: O quicken me according to thy word. * And when
the snares of death compass me round about: let not the pains of hell take
hold upon me.

An Act of Faith concerning resurrection and the day of judgment, to be said by
sick persons or meditated.
I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon
the earth: and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God: whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold,
though my reins be consumed within me. Job 19.

God shall come and shall not keep silence: there shall go before him a
consuming fire, and a mighty tempest shall be stirred up round about him: he
shall call the heaven from above, and the earth that he may judge his people. *
O blessed Jesu, thou art my judge and thou art my Advocate: have mercy upon me
in the hour of my death, and in the day of judgment.

See John 5.28. and 1 Thessal. 4.15.

Short Prayers to be said by sick persons.
O Holy Jesus, thou art a merciful High Priest and touched with the sense of
our infirmities; thou know the sharpness of my sickness, and the weakness
of my person. The clouds are gathered about me, and thou have covered me with
thy storm: My understanding has not such apprehension of things as formerly:
Lord let thy mercy support me, thy spirit guide me, and lead me through the
valley of this death safely; that I may pass it patiently, holily, with
perfect resignation, and let me rejoice in the Lord, in the hopes of pardon, in
the expectation of glory, in the sense of thy mercies, in the refreshments of
thy spirit, in a victory over all temptations.

Thou have promised to be with us in tribulation.



O holy Jesu, thou did dye for us; by thy I fe^r lest something should happen
that may discompose the state of my soul, that may displease thee: Do what thou will with me, so thou do but preserve me in thy fear and favor. Thou
know that it is my great ^ear, but let thy Spirit secure, that nothing may
be able to separate me from the love of God in Jesus Christ; and then smite me
here, that thou may spare me for ever; and yet O Lord smite me friendly: for
thou know my infirmities. Into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have
redeemed me, O Lord, thou God of truth. * Come holy Spirit, help me in this
conflict. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Let the sick person often meditate upon these following promises and gracious
words of God. My help comes of the Lord who preserves them that are true of
heart, Psalm. 7.11.

And all they that know thy Name will put their trust in thee: for thou Lord
have never failed them that seek thee, Psalm. 9.10.

O how plentiful is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee, and that thou have prepared for them that put their trust in thee, even
before the sons of men, Psalm. 31.

Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that put
their trust in his mercy, to deliver their souls from death, Ps. 33.

The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart: and will save such as
are of an humble spirit. Psalm. 34.17.

Thou Lord shall save both man and beast: how excellent is thy mercy, O God:
and the children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of thy wings,
Psalm. 36.7.

They shall be satisfied with the plenteousness of thy house: and thou shall
give them to drink of thy pleasures as out of the rivers, v. 8.

For with thee is the well of life: and in thy light we shall see light, v. 9.

Commit thy way unto the Lord, and put thy trust in him, and he shall bring it
to pass, Ps. 37.5.

But the salvation of the righteous comes of the Lord: who is also their
strength in the time of trouble, v. 40.

So that a Man shall say, verily there is a reward for the righteous:
doubtless there is a God that judges the earth, Psalm. 58.10.

Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and receivest unto thee: he shall dwell
in thy court, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house, even of
thy holy temple, Psalm. 65.4.

They that sow in tears shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126.6.

It is written, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5.

The prayer of faith shall save the sick: and the Lord shall raise him up: and
if he have committed sins they shall be forgiven, Iam. 5.15.

Come and let us return unto the Lord: for he has torn and he will heal us, he
has smitten, and he will bind us up, Hos. 6.1.

If we sin we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and
he is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.2.

If we confess our sins he is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. He that forgives shall
be forgiven, Luke 6.37.

And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will he hears us, 1 John 5 14. And ye know that he was
manifested to take away our sins, 1 John 3.5.

If ye being evil know to give good things to your children, how much more
shall your Father which is in Heaven give good things to them that ask him?
Matthew. 7.11.

This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ
came into the World to save sinners. * He that has given us his Son, how
should not he with him give us all things else.

Acts of hope to be used by sick persons, after a pious life.
I am persuaded that neither death nor life, Romans 8.38.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished Tim. 4.7.

Blessed be the God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies and Cor. 1.3.

A prayer to be said in behalf of a sick or dying person.
O Lord God, there is no number of thy days, nor of thy mercies; and the sins
and sorrows of thy servant also are multiplied. Lord look upon him with much
mercy and pity, forgive him all his sins, comfort his sorrows, ease his
pain, satisfy his doubts, relieve his fears, instruct his ignorances,
strengthen his understanding, take from him all disorders of spirit, weakness
and abuse of fancy: Restrain the malice and power of the spirits of darkness;
and suffer him to be injured neither by his ghostly enemies, nor his own
infirmities, and let a holy and a just peace, the peace of God be within his
conscience.

Lord preserve his senses till the last of his

Hither the sick person may draw in, and use the acts of several virtues
respersed in the several parts of this book, the several Letanies, viz. of
repentance, of the passion, and the single pray^rs, according to his present
needs. A prayer to be said in a storm at Sea.
O my God, thou did create the earth and the Sea for thy glory and the use of
Man, and do daily show wonders in the deep: look upon the danger and fear of
thy servant: my sins have taken hold upon me, and without the supporting arm of
thy mercy I cannot look up; but my trust is in thee. Do thou, O Lord, rebuke
the Sea, and make it calm; for to thee the winds and the sea obey: let not the
waters swallow me up, but let thy Spirit, the Spirit of gentleness and mercy
move upon the waters: Be thou reconciled unto thy servants, and then the face
of the waters will be smooth. I fear that my sins make me like Jonas the
cause of the tempest. Cast out all my sins, and throw not thy servants away
from thy presence, and from the land of the living into the depths where all
things are forgotten: But if it be thy will that we shall go down into the
waters, Lord receive my soul into thy holy hands, and preserve it in mercy and
safety till the day of restitution of all things: and be pleased to unite my
death to the death of thy Son, and to accept of it so united as a punishment
for all my sins, that thou may forget all thine anger, and blot my sins
out of thy book, and write my soul there for Jesus Christ his sake, our dearest
Lord and most mighty Redeemer. Amen.

Then make an act of resignation, thus,
To God pertain the issues of life and death. It is the Lord, let him do what
seems good in his own eyes. Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven.

Recite Psalm 107. and 130.

A form of a vow to be made in this or the like danger.
If the Lord will be gracious and hear the prayer of his servant, and bring me
safe to shore, then I will praise him secretly and publicly, and pay unto the
uses of charity [or Religion] [then name the sum you design for holy uses] O
my God my goods are nothing unto thee: I will also be thy servant all the days
of my life, and remember this mercy and my present purposes, and live more to
Gods glory, and with a stricter duty: And do thou please to accept this vow as
an instance of my importunity, and the greatness of my needs, and be thou
graciously moved to pity and deliver me. Amen.

This form also may be used in praying for a blessing on an enterprise; and may
be instanced in actions of devotion as well as of charity.

A prayer before a journey.
O Almighty God who fillest all things with thy presence, and art a God afar
off as well as near at hand: thou did send thy Angel to bless Jacob in his
journey, and did lead the children of Israel through the Red Sea, making it
a wall on the right hand and on the left: be pleased to let thy Angel go out
before me and guide me in my journey, preseving me from dangers of robbers,
from violence of enemies, and sudden and sad accidents, from falls and errors:
and prosper my journey to thy glory, and to all my innocent purposes: and
preserve me from all sin, that I may return in peace and holiness, with thy
favor and thy blessing, and may serve thee in thankfulness and obedience all
the days of my pilgrimage, and at last bring me to thy country, to the
celestial Jerusalem, there to dwell in thy house and to sing praises to thee
for ever. Amen.

Ad Sect. 4] A prayer to be said before hearing or reading the word of God.
O Holy and Eternal Jesus who have begotten us by thy word, renewed us by thy
Spirit, fed us by thy Sacraments, and by the daily ministry of thy word: still
go on to build us up to life eternal. Let thy most holy Spirit be present with
me and rest upon me in the reading [or hearing] thy sacred word; that I may do
it humbly, reverently, without prejudice, with a mind ready and desirous to
learn and to obey; that I may ^e readily furnished and instructed to every good
work, and may practice all thy holy laws and commandments, to the glory of thy
holy name, O holy and eternal Jesus. Amen.

Ad Sect. 5, 9, 10.] A form of confession of sins, and repentance to be used
upon fasting days, or days of humiliation; especially in Lent, and before the
Holy Sacrament.
Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses. For I will con^esse my
wickedness and be sorry for my sin. * O my Dearest Lord, I am not worthy to be
accounted amongst the meanest of thy servants: not worthy to be sustained by
the least fragments of thy mercy, but to be shut out of thy presence for ever
with dogs and unbelievers. But for thy names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto my
sin, for it is great.

I am the vilest of sinners, and the worst of men: proud and vain glorious,
impatient of scorn or of just reproof: ^ot enduring to be slighted, and yet
extremely deserving it: I have been cosened by the colors of humility, and
when I have truly called my self vicious, I could not endure any man else
should say so or think so. I have been disobedient to my Superiors, churlish
and ungentle in my behavior, unchristian and unmanly. But for thy names sake,
etc.

O Just and Dear God, how can I expect pity or pardon who am so angry and
peevish, with and without cause, envious at good, rejoicing in the evil of my
neighbors, negligent of my charge, idle and useless, timorous and base,
jealous and impudent, ambitious and hard hearted, soft, unmortified and
effeminate in my life, indevout in my prayers, without fancy or affection,
without attendance to them or perseverance in them; but passionate and curious
in pleasing my appetite of meat and drink and pleasures, making matter both for
sin and sickness; and I have re^ped the cursed fruits of such improvidence,
entertaining undecent and impure thoughts; and I have brought them forth in
undecent and impure actions, and the spirit of uncleanness has entered in, and
unhallowed the temple which thou did consecrate for the habitation of thy
Spirit of love and holiness. But for thy names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto
my sin, for it is great.

Thou have given me a whole life to serve thee in, and to advance my hopes of
heaven: and this precious time I have thrown away upon my sins and vanities,
being improvident of my time and of my talent, and of thy grace and my own
advantages; resisting thy Spirit, and quenching him. I have been a great lover
of my self, and yet used many ways to destroy my self: I have pursued my
temporal ends with greediness and indirect means: I am revengful and
unthankful, forgetting benefits, but not so soon forgetting injuries: curious
and murmuring: a great breaker of promises: I have not loved my neighbors
good, nor advanced it in all things where I could: I have bin unlike thee in
all things, I am unmerciful and unjust; a sottish admirer of things below, and
careless of heaven and the ways that lead thither.

But for thy names sake, O Lord, be merciful un^^ my sin, for it is great.

All my senses have been windows to let sin in, and death by sin; Mine eyes
have been adulterous and covetous: mine ears open to slander and detraction: my
tongue and palate loose and wanton, intemperate, and of foul language,
talkative and lying, rash and malicious, false and flattering, irreligious and
irreverent, detracting and censorious: My hands have bin injurious and unclean:
my passions violent and rebellious: my desires impatient and unreasonable: all
my members and all my faculties have been servants of sin: and my very bes^
actions have more matter of pity, then of confidence; being imperfect in my
best, and intolerable in most. But for thy names sake, O Lord, etc.

Unto this and a far bigger heap of sin, I have added also the faults of others
to my own score* by neglecting to hinder them to sin in all that I could and
ought: but I also have encouraged them in sin, have taken off their fears and
hardened their consciences and tempted them directly, and prevailed in it to my
own r^ine and theirs, unless thy glorious and unspeakable mercy has prevented
so intolerable a calamity.

Lord I have abused thy mercy, despised thy judgments, turned thy grace into
wantonness; I have been unthankful for thy infinite loving kindness: I have
sinned and repented, and then sinned again, and resolved against it, and
presently broke it; and then I tied my self up with vows, and then was tempted,
and then I yielded by little and little till I was willingly lost again, and my
vows fell of^ like cords of vanity.

Miserable man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of sin?

And yet O Lord, I have another heap of sins to be unloaded. My secrets sins O
Lord, are innumerable; sins I noted not, sins that I willingly neglected, sins
that I acted upon wilful ignorance and voluntary mispersuasion; sins that I
have forgot; and sins which a diligent and a watchful spirit might have
prevented, but I would not. Lord I am confounded with the multitude of them,
and the horror of their remembrance though I consider them nakedly in their
direct appearances, without the deformity of their unhandsome and aggravating
circumstances: but so dressed they are a sight too ugly: an instance of
amazement, infinite in degrees, and insufferable in their load.

And yet thou have spared me all this while, and have not thrown me into Hell,
where I have deserved to have been long since, and even now to have been shut
up to an eternity of torments with insupportable amazement, fearing the
revelation of thy day.

Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin?

Thou shall answer for me, O Lord my God; Thou that Prayest for me shall be my
Judge.

The Prayer.
Thou have prepared for me a more healthful sorrow. O deny not thy servant when
he begs sorrow of thee: Give me a deep contrition for my sins, a hearty
detestation and loathing of them, hating them worse then death with torments.
Give me grace entirely, presently, and for ever to forsake them; to walk with
care and prudence, with fear and watchfulness all my days; to do all my duty
with diligence and charity, with zeal and a never fainting spirit: to redeem
the time, to trust upon thy mercies, to make use of all the instruments of
grace, to work out my salvation with fear and trembling, that thou may have
the glory of pardoning all my sins, and I may reap the fruit of all thy
mercies, and al thy graces, of thy patience and long-suffering, even to live a
holy life here, and to reign with thee for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Ad Sect. 6.] Special dev^tions to be used upon the Lord's Day, and the great
Festivalls Of Christians.
In the Morning recite the following form of Thanksgiving: upon the special
Festivalls adding the commemoration of the special blessing according to the
following prayers: adding such prayers as you shall choose out of the foreg^ing
Devotions.

2. Besides the ordinary and public duties of the day, if you retire into your
closet to read and meditate; after you have performed that duty, say the song
of S. Ambrose commonly called the [Te Deum] or [We praise thee, etc] then add
the prayers for particular graces which are at the end of the former Chapters,
such and as many of them as shall fit your present needs and affections: ending
with the Lords prayer. This form of devotion, may for variety, be indifferently
used at other times.

A form of thanksgiving with a recital of public and private blessings: To be
used upon Easter Day, Whit-sunday, Ascension-day, and all Sundays of the year:
but the middle part of it may be reserved for the more solemn Festivals; and
the other used upon the ordinary; as every man's affections or leisure shall
determine.

[I.] Ex Liturgia S. Basilii magna ex part.

O Eternal Essence, Lord God, Father Almighty, Maker of all things in Heaven
and Earth, it is a good thing to give thanks to thee, O Lord, and to pay to
thee all reverence, worship and devotion from a clean and prepared heart; and
with an humble spirit to present a living and reasonable sacrifice to thy
holiness and Majesty: for thou have given unto us the knowledge of thy truth:
and who is able to declare thy greatness, and to recount all thy mavelous
works which thou have done in all the generations of the world.

O Great Lord and Governor of all things, Lord and Creator of all things
visible and invisible, who sit upon the throne of thy glory, and beholdest
the secrets of the lowest abyss and darkness, thou art without beginning,
uncircumscribed, incomprehensible, unalterable, and seated for ever unmovable
in thy own essential happiness and tranquillity: Thou art the Father of our
Lord JESU SCHRIST: who is,

Our Dearest and most Gracious Savior, our hope, the wisdom of the Father, the
image of thy goodness, the Word eternal and the brightness of thy person, the
power of God from eternal ages, the true light that lightneth every Man that
comes into the World, the Redemption of Man, and the Sanctification of our
Spirits.

By whom the holy Ghost descended upon the Church; the holy Spirit of truth,
the seal of adoption, the earnest of the inheritance of the Saints, the first
fruits of everlasting felicity, the life-giving power, the fountain of
sanctification, the comfort of the Church, the ease of the afflicted, the
support of the weak, the wealth of the poor, the teacher of the doubtful,
scrupulous and ignorant, the anchor of the fearful, the infinite reward of all
faithful souls, by whom all reasonable and understanding creatures serve thee,
and send up a never-ceasing, and a never-rejected sacrifice of prayer, and
praises, and adoration.

All Angels and Archangels, all Thrones and Dominions, all Principalities and
Powers, the Cherubins with many eyes, and the Seraphin^ covered with wings from
the terror and amazement of thy brightest glory: These and all the powers of
Heaven do perpetually sing praises and never-ceasing Hymns, and eternal Anthems
to the glory of the eternal God, the Almighty Father of Men and Angels.

Holy is our God: Holy is the Almighty: Holy is the Immortal: Holy, Holy, Holy*
Lord God of Sabbath, Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy glory.
Amen. * With these holy and blessed Spirits I also thy servant, O thou great
lover of souls, though I be unworthy to offer praise to such a Majesty, yet out
of my bounden duty humbly offer up my heart and voice to join in this blessed
quire, and confess the glories of the Lord. * For thou art holy, and of thy
greatness there is no end; and in thy justice and goodness thou have measured
out to us all thy works.



O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare the
wonders that he has done for the children of men. For when man sinned and
listened to the whispers of a tempting spirit, and refused to hear the voice of
God, thou did throw him out from Paradise, and sentest him to till the Earth;
but yet left nor his condition without remedy, but did provide for him the
salvation of a new birth, and by the blood of thy Son did redeem and pay the
price to thine own justice for thine own creature, lest the work of thine own
hands should perish.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord, etc. For thou, O Lord, in every
age did send testimonies from Heaven, blessings and Prophets, and fruitful
seasons, and preachers of righteousness, and miracles of power, and mercy: thou
spakest by thy Prophets and said, I will help by one that is mighty: and in
the fullness of time spakest to us by thy Son, by whom thou did make both the
Worlds: who by the word of his power, sustains all things in Heaven and Earth:
who thought it no robbery to be equal to the Father: who being before all time
was pleased to be born in time, to converse with men, to be incarnate of a holy
Virgin: he emptied himself of all his glories, took on him the form of a
servant, in all things being made like unto us, in a soul of passions and
discourse, in a body of humility and sorrow, but in all things innocent, and in
all things afflicted: and suffered death for us, that we by him might live and
be partakers of his nature and his glories, of his body and of his Spirit, of
the blessings of earth, and of immortal felicities in Heaven.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord etc. For thou O holy and immortal
God, O sweetest Savior Jesus, were made under the Law to condemn sin in the
flesh: thou who knew no sin were made sin for us: thou gave to us
righteous Commandments, and made known to us all thy Fathers will: thou
did redeem us from our vain conversation, and from the vanity of Idols, false
principles, and foolish confidences, and broughtest us to the knowledge of the
true and only God and our Father, and have made us to thy self a peculiar
people, of thy own purchase, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation: Thou have
washed our souls in the Laver of Regeneration, the Sacrament of Baptism: Thou
have reconciled us by thy death, justified us by thy Resurrection, sanctified
us by thy Spirit [sending him upon thy Church in visible forms, and giving him
in powers, and miracles, and mighty signs, and continuing this incomparable
favor in gi^ts and san^tifying graces, and promising that he shall abide with
us for ever] thou have fed us with thine own broken body, and given drink to
our souls out of thine own heart: and have ascended up on high, and have
overcome all the powers of Death and Hell, and redeemed us from the miseries of
a sad eternity: and sit at the right hand of God, making intercession for
us with a never-ceasing charity.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord, etc. The grave could not hold thee
long, O holy and eternal Jesus, thy body could not see corruption, neither
could thy soul be left in Hell; thou were free among the dead, and thou brakest
the iron gates of Death, and the bars and chains of the lower prisons: Thou
broughtest comfort to the souls of the Patriarchs who waited for thy coming,
who longed for the redemption of Man, and the revelation of thy day. Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob saw thy day, and rejoiced: and when thou did arise from thy
bed of darkness, and leftest the grave-clothes behind thee, and put on a robe
of glory (over which for 40 days thou did wear a vail) and then entered into
a cloud, and then into glory, then the powers of Hell were confounded, then
Death lost its power and was swallowed up into victory; and though death is not
quite destroyed, yet it is made harmless and without a sting, and the
condition of Humane Nature is made an entrance to eternal glory; and art become
the Prince of life, the first fruits of the resurrection, the firstborn from
the dead, having made the way plain before our faces, that we may also rise
again in the Resurrection of the last day, when thou shall come again unto us
to render to every Man according to his works.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord, etc.
O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.
O all ye angels of the Lords, praise ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.
O ye spirits and souls of the Righteous, praise ye the Lord: praise him and
magnify him for ever.
And now, O Lord God, what shall I render to thy Divine Majesty for all the
benefits thou

Thou art my Creator and my Father, my Protector and my Guardian, thou have
brought me from my Mothers womb, thou have told all my joints, and in thy book
were all my members written: Thou have given me a comely body, Christian and
careful parents, holy education; Thou have been my guide and my teacher all my
days: Thou have given me ready faculties, and unloosed tongue, a cheerful
spirit, strait limbs, a good reputation, and liberty of person, a quiet life,
and a tender conscience [ a loving wife or husband, and hopeful children] thou
were my hope from my youth, through thee have I been holden up ever since I was
born: Thou have clothed me and fed me, given me friends and blessed them; given
me many days of comfort and health, free from those sad infirmities, with
which many of thy Saints and dearest servants are afflicted: Thou have sent thy
Angel to snatch me from the violence of fire and water, to prevent praecipices,
fracture of bones, to rescue me from thunder and lightning, plague and
pestilential diseases, murder and robbery, violence of chance and enemies, and
all the spirits of darkness: and in the days of sorrow thou have refreshed
me: in the destitution of provisions thou have taken care of me, and thou have
said unto me, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.

I will give thanks unto the Lord with my whole heart, secretly among the
faithful and in the congregation.

Thou O my dearest Lord and Father have taken care of my soul, have pitied my
miseries, sustained my infirmities, relieved and instructed my ignorances; and
though I have broken thy righteous Laws and Commandments, run passionately
after vanities and was in love with Death, and was dead in sin, and was exposed
to thousands of temptations, and fell foully, and continued in it, and loved to
have it so, and hated to be reformed; yet thou did call me with the checks of
conscience, with daily Sermons and precepts of holiness, with fear and shame,
with benefits and the admonitions of thy most holy Spirit, by the counsel of my
friends, by the example of good persons, with holy books and thousands of
excellent arts, and would not suffer me to perish in my folly, but did
force me to attend to thy gracious calling, and have put me into a state of
repentance, and possibilities of pardon, being infinitely desirous I should
live, and recover, and make use of thy grace, and partake of thy glories.

I will give thanks unto the Lord with my whole heart, secretly among the
faithful, and in the congregation. * For salvation belongs unto the Lord, and
thy blessing is upon thy servant. But as for me, I will come into thy house in
the multitude of thy mercies, and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy
temple. * For of thee, and in thee, and through thee, and for thee are all
things. Blessed be the name of God from generation to generation. Amen. A ^hort
Form of thanksgiving to be said upon any special deliverance, as from
Ch^ld-birth, from Sickness, from ba^^el, or imminent danger at sea, or Land,
etc. O most merciful and gracious God, thou fountain of all mercy and blessing,
thou have opened the hand of thy mercy to fill me with blessings, and the sweet
effects of thy loving kindness: thou feedest us like a Shepherd, thou
governest us as a king, thou bear us in thy arms like a nurse, thou do
cover us under the shadow of thy wings, and shelter us like a hen; thou (O
Dearest Lord) wakest for us as a Watchman, thou providest for us like a
Husband, thou love us as a friend, and think on us perpetually, as a
careful mother on her helpless babe, and art exceeding merciful to all that
fear thee; and now, O Lord, thou have added this great blessing of deliverance
from my late danger, ( here name the blessing) it was thy hand and the help of
thy mercy that relieved me, the waters of affliction had drowned me, and the
stream had gone over my soul, if the spirit of the Lord had not moved upon
these waters: Thou O Lord, did revoke thy angry sentence which I had
deserved, and which was gone out against me: Unto thee, O Lord, I ascribe the
praise and honor of my redemption: I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy,
for thou have considered my trouble, and have known my soul in adversity: As
thou has^ s^r^ad thy hand upon me for a covering, so also enlarge my heart with
thankfulness, and fill my mouth with praises, that my duty and returns to the^
may be great as my needs of mercy are; and let thy gracious favors, and
loving kindnes^e endure for ever and ever upon thy servant: and grant that what
thou have sown in mercy may spring up in duty: and let thy grace so strengthen
my purposes that I may sin no more, lest thy threatening return upon me in
anger, and thy anger break me into pieces: but let me walk in the light of thy
favor, and in the paths of thy Commandments; that I living here to the glory
of thy name, may at last enter into the glory of my Lord, to spend a whole
eternity in giving praise to thy exalted and ever glorious name. Amen.

We praise thee O God: we knowledge thee to be the Lord, * All the earth does
worship thee the Father Everlasting. * To thee All Angels cry aloud, the
Heavens and all the powers therein. * To thee Cherubim and Seraphim continually
do cry. * Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath. * Heaven and Earth are full of
the Majesty of thy glory. * The glorious company of the Apostles praise thee. *
The goodly fellowship of the Prophets praise thee. * The noble army of Martyrs
praise thee. * The holy Church throughout all the world does knowledge thee. *
The Father of an infinite Majesty. * Thy honorable, true and only Son. * Also
the Holy Ghost the Comforter. * Thou art the King of glory O Christ. * Thou art
the everlasting Son of the Father. * When thou tookest upon thee to deliver
man, thou did not abhor the Virgins womb. * When thou had overcome the
sharpness of death, thou did open the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers. *
Thou sit at the right hand of God in the glory of the Father. * We believe
that thou shall come to be our Judge. * We therefore pray thee help thy
servants whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood. * Make them to be
numbered with thy Saints in glory everlasting. * O Lord save thy people, and
bless thine heritage. * Govern them and lift them up for ever. * Day by day we
magnify thee. * And we worship thy name ever world without end. * Vouchsafe O
Lord, to keep us this day without ^in. * O Lord have mercy upon us: have mercy
upon us. * O Lord let thy mercy lighten upon us as our trust is in thee. O Lord
in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded. Amen.

A Prayer of thanksgiving after the receiving some great blessing, as the birth
of an Heir, the success of an honest design, a victory, a good harvest, etc.
O Lord God, Father of mercies, the fountain of comfort and blessing, of life
and peace, of plenty and pardon, who fillest Heaven with thy glory, and earth
with thy goodness; I give thee the most earnest, most humble, and most enlarged
returns of my glad and thankful heart, for thou have refreshed me with thy
comforts, and enlarged me with thy blessing, thou have made my flesh and my
bones to rejoice: for besides the blessings of all mankind, the blessings of
nature, and the blessings of grace, the support of every minute, and the
comforts of every day, thou have opened thy bosom, and at this time have powered
out an excellent expression of thy loving kindness [here name the blessing]
What am I O Lord, and what is my Fathers house, what is the life, and what are
the capacities of thy servant that thou should do this unto me, * that the
great God of men and Angels should make a special decree in Heaven for me, and
send out an Angel of blessing, and instead of condemning and ruining me as I
miserably have deserved, to distinguish me from many my equals and my betters,
by this and many other special acts of grace and savor.

Praised be the Lord daily, even the Lord that helps us and powers his
benefits upon us. He is our God, even the God of whom comes salvation: God is
the Lord by whom we escape death. Thou have brought me to great honor, and
comforted me on every side.

Thou Lord have made me glad through thy works, I will rejoice in giving praise
for the operation of thy hands.

O give thanks unto the Lord, and call upon his name: tell the people what
things he has done.

As for me, I will give great thanks unto the Lord: and praise him among the
multitude.

Blessed be the Lord God, even the Lord God of Israel: which only does wondrous
and gracious things.

And blessed be the name of his Majesty for ever: and all the earth shall be
filled with his Majesty. Amen. Amen. Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

A Prayer to be said on the Feast of Christmas, or the birth of our ble^sed
Savior Jesus; the same also may be said upon the Feast of the Annunciation,
and Purification of the B. Virgin Mary. O Holy and Almighty God, Father of
mercies, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of thy love and Eternal
mercies, I adore and praise, and glorify thy infinite and unspeakable love,
and wisdom, who have sent thy Son from the bosom of felicities to take upon him
our nature and our misery, and our guilt, and have made the Son of God to
become the Son of Man, that we might become the Sons of God, and partakers of
the divine nature: since thou have so exalted humane nature, be pleased also to
sanctify my person, that by a conformity to the humility and laws, and
sufferings of my dearest Savior I may be united to his spirit, and be made all
one with the most Holy jesus. Amen

O Holy and Eternal Jesus who did pity mankind might make us to partake
of thy felicities: let thine eyes pity me, thy hands support me, thy holy feet
tread down all the difficulties in my way to Heaven, let me dwell in thy heart,
be instructed with thy wisdom, moved by thy affections, choose with thy will,
and be clothed with thy righteousness, that in the day of judgment I may be
found having on thy garments, sealed with thy impression; and that bearing upon
every faculty and member the character of my elder brother, I may not be cast
out with strangers and unbelievers. Amen.

To God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. * To the eternal Son that was
incarnate and born of a virgin. * To the spirit of the Father and the Son be
all honor and glory* worship and adoration, now and for ever. Amen

The same Form of Prayer may be used upon our own Birthday, or day of our
Baptism: adding the following prayer.

A Prayer to be said upon our Birthday, or day of Baptism.
O Blessed and Eternal God, I give thee praise and glory for thy great mercy to
me in causing me to be born of Chris^ian parents, and did not allot to me a
portion with Misbelievers and Heathen that have not known thee; thou did not
suffer me to be strangled at the gate of the womb, but thy hand sustained and
brought me to the light of the world, and the illumination of baptism, with
thy grace preventing my election, and by an artificial necessity, and holy
prevention engaging me to the profession and practices of Christianity: Lord
since that, I have broken the promises made in my behalf, and which I confirmed
by my after act; I went back from them by an evil life; and yet thou have still
continued to me life and time of repentance; and did not cut me off in the
beginning of my days, and the progress of my sins: O Dearest God, pardon the
errors and ignorances, the vices and vanities of my youth, and the faults of
my more forward years, and let me never more stain the whiteness of my
baptismal robe: and now that by thy grace, I still persist in the purposes of
obedience, and do give up my name to Christ, and glory to be a Disciple of thy
institution, and a servant of Jesus, let me never fail of thy grace; let no
root of bitterness spring up and disorder my purposes, and desile my spirit. O
let my years be so many degrees of nearer approach to thee; and forsake me not
O God, in my old age, when I am gray headed; and when my strength fails me be
thou my strength and my guide unto death, that I may reckon my years and apply
my heart unto wisdom, and at last after the spending a holy and a blessed life,
I may be brought unto a glorious eternity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen

Then add the form of thanksgiving formerly described. A prayer to be said
upon the days of the memory of Apostles, Martyrs, etc.
O Eternal God to whom do live the spirits of them that depart hence in the
Lord, and in whom the souls of them that be elected after they be delivered
from the burden of the flesh be ^n peace and rest from their labors, and their
works follow them, and their memory is blessed: I bless and magnify thy holy
and ever glorious name, for the great grace and blessing manifested to thy
Apostles and Martyrs, and other holy persons who have glorified thy name in the
days of their flesh, and have served the interest of religion, and of thy
service, and this day we have thy servant [ name the Apostle or Martyr, etc.]
in remembrance, whom thou have lead thorough the troubles and temptations of
this World, and now have lodged in the bosom of a certain hope and great
beatitude until the day of restitution of all things. Blessed be the mercy and
eternal goodness of God; and the memory of all thy Saints is blessed: Teach me
to practice their doctrine, to imitate their lives following their example, and
being united as a part of the same mystical body, by the band of the same
^aith, and a holy hope, and a never ceasing charity: and may it please thee of
thy gracious goodness shortly to accomplish the number of thine elect, and to
hasten thy Kingdom, that we with thy servant [*] and all others departed in the
true faith and fear of thy holy Name, may have our perfect consummation and
bliss in body and soul in thy eternal and everlasting kingdom. Amen.

A form of prayer recording all the parts and mysteries of Christ's passion;
being a short history of it: to be used especially in the week of the passion;
and before the receiving the blessed Sacrament.
All praise, honor, and glory be to the holy and eternal Jesus. I adore thee O
bles^ed Redeemer, eternal God, the light of the Gentiles and the glory of
Israel; for thou have done and suffered for me more then I could wish, more
^hen I could think of, even all that a lost and a miserable perishing sinner
could possibly need.

Thou were afflicted with thirst and hunger, with heat and cold, with labors
and sorrows, with hard journeys and restless nights; and when thou were
contriving all the mysterious and admirable ways of paying our scores, thou
did suffer thy self to be designed to slaughter by those for whom in love
thou were ready to dye.

What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou thus
visit^st him?

Blessed be thy Name, O holy Jesus; for thou wentest about doing good, working
miracles of mercy, healing the sick, comforting the distressed, instructing the
ignorant, raising the dead, inlightning the blind, strengthening the ^ame,
straitning the crooked, relieving the poor, preaching the Gospel, and
reconciling sinners by the mightiness of thy power, by the wisdom of thy
Spirit, by the Word of God, and the merits of thy Passion, thy hea^thful and
bitter passion.

Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him, etc. Blessed be thy Name O holy
Jesus who were content to be conspired against by the Jews, to be sold by thy
servant for a vile price, and to wash the feet of him that took mone^ for thy
life, and to give to him and to all thy Apostles thy most holy Body and Blood,
to become a Sacrifice for their sins, even for their betraying and denying
thee; and for all my sins, even for my crucifying thee afresh, and for such
sins which I am ashamed to think, but that the greatness of my sins magnify
the infiniteness of thy mercies who did so great things for so vile a person.

Lord what is man, etc. Blessed be thy Name O holy Jesus, who being to depart
the World did comfort thy Apostles, pouring out into their ears and hearts
treasures of admirable discourses; who did recommend them* to thy Father with
a mighty charity, and then did enter into the Garden set with nothing but
Briars and sorrows, where thou did suffer a most unspeakable agony, until
the sweat strained through thy pure skin like drops of blood; and there did
sigh and groan, and fall flat upon the earth, and pray and submit to the
intolerable burden of thy Fathers wrath which I had deserved and thou
sufferedst.

Lord what is man, etc. Blessed be thy Name O holy Jesus, who have sanctified
to us all our natural infirmities and passions, by vouchsafing to be in fear
and trembling, and sore amazement, by being bound and imprisoned, by being
harrassed and drag d with cords of violence and rude hands; by being drench d
in the brook in the way, by being sought after like a thief, and used like a
sinner, who were the most holy and the most innocent, cleaner then an Angel and
brighter then the Morning Star.

Lord what is man, etc. Blessed be thy Name O holy Jesus, and blessed be that
loving kindness and pity, by which thou did neglect thy own sorrows, and go
to comfort the sadness of thy Disciples, quickening their dullness, encouraging
their duty, arming their weakness with excellent precepts against the day of
trial. Blessed be that humility and sorrow of thine, who being Lord of the
Angels, yet would need, and receive comfort from thy servant the Angel; who
did offer thy self to thy persecutors, and made them able to seiz thee, and
did receive the Traitors kiss, and sufferedst a veil to be thrown over thy
holy face, that thy enemies might not presently be confounded by so bright a
lus^re; and would do a miracle to cure a wound of one of thy spiteful
enemies; and did reprove a zealous servant in behalf of a malicious
adversary; and then did go like a Lamb to the slaughter without noise or
violence, or resistance, when thou could have commanded millions of Angels
for thy guard and rescue.

Lord what is man, etc. Blessed be thy Name O holy Jesus, and blessed be that
holy sorrow thou did suffer when thy Disciples fled; and thou were left alone
in the hands of cruel men, who like evening Wolves thirsted for a draught of
thy best blood: and thou were led to the house of Annas, and there asked
insnaring questions, and smitten on the face by him whose ear thou had but
lately healed: and from thence were dragged to the house of Cajaphas, and there
all night did endure spittings, affronts, scorn, contumelies, blows, and
intolerable insolences, and all this for man who was thy enemy and the cause
of all thy sorrows.

Lord what is man, etc. Blessed be thy Name, O holy Jesus, and blessed be thy
mercy, who when thy servant Peter denied thee, and forsook thee, and forswore
thee, did look back upon him, and by that gracious and chiding look did
call him back to himself and thee: who were accused before the High Priest, and
railed upon, and examined to evil purposes, and with designs of blood: who
were declared guilty of death for speaking a most necessary and most profitable
truth: who were sent to Pilate and ^ound innocent, and sent to Herod and still
found innocent, and were arrayed in white both to declare thy innocence and yet
to deride thy person, and were sent back to Pilate and examined again, and yet
nothing but innocence found in thee and malice round about thee to devour thy
life, which yet thou were more desirous to lay down for them, then they were to
take it from thee.

Lord what is man, etc. Blessed be thy Name, O holy Jesus, and blessed be that
patience and charity by which for our sakes thou were content to be smitten with
canes, and have that holy face which Angels with joy and wonder do behold, be
spit upon, and be despised when compared with Barabbas, and scourged most
rudely with unhallowed hands, till the pavement was purpled with that holy
blood; and condemned to a sad and shameful, a public and painful death, and
arrayed in Scarlet, and crowned with thorns, and stripped naked, and then
clothed, and laden with the cross, and tormented with a tablet stuck with
nails at the fringes of thy garment, and bound hard with cords and dragged most
vilely and most piteously till the load was too great, and did sink thy tender
and virginal body to the earth; and yet did comfort the weeping women, and
did more pity thy persecutors then thy self, and were grieved for the
miseries of Jerusalem to come forty years after more then for thy present
passion.

Lord what is man, etc. Blessed be thy Name, O holy Jesus, and blessed be that
incomparable sweetness and holy sorrow which thou sufferedst, when thy holy
hands and feet were nailed upon the cross, and the cross being set in a
hollownesse of the earth did in the fall rend the wounds wider, and there naked
and bleeding, sick and faint, wounded and despised, did hang upon the weight
of thy wounds three long hours, praying for thy persecutors, satisfying thy
Fathers wrath, reconciling the penitent thief, providing for thy holy and
afflicted mother, tasting vinegar and gall, and when the fullness of thy
suffering was accomplished, did give thy soul into the hands of God, and
did descend to the regions of longing souls who waited for the revelation of
this thy day in their prisons of hope: and then thy body was transfixed with a
spear and issued forth two Sacraments, Water and blood, and thy body was
composed to burial, and dwelt in darkness 3 days and 3 nights.

Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou
thus visitest him? The prayer. Thus O blessed Jesu thou did finish thy holy
passion with pain and anguish so great, that nothing could be greater then it,
except thy self and thy own infinite mercy, and all this for man, even for me,
then whom nothing c^uld be more miserable, thy self only excepted who becamest
so by undertaking our guilt and our punishment. And now Lord who have done so
much for me, be pleased only to make it effectual to me, that it may not be
useless and lost as to my particular, lest I become eternally miserable, and
lost to all hopes and possibilities of comfort. All this deserves more love
then I have to give: but Lord do thou turn me all into love, and all my love
into obedience, and let my obedience ^e without interruption, and then I hope
thou will accept such a return as I can make: make me to be something that thou
delightest in, and thou shall have all that I am or have from thee, even
whatsoever thou make fit for thy self. Teach me to live wholly for my Savior
Jesus, and to be ready to dye for Jesus, and to be conformable to his life and
sufferings, and to be united to him by inseparable unions, and to own no
passions but what may be servants to Jesus, and Disciples of his institution. O
sweetest Savior clothe my soul with thy holy robe: hide my sins in thy wounds,
and bury them in thy grave, and let me rise in the life of grace, and abide and
grow in it till I arrive at the Kingdom of Glory. Amen Our Father, etc.

Ad. Sect. 7, 8, 10. A ^orm of prayer or intercession for all estates of people
in the Christian Church. The parts of which may be added to any other forms:
and the whole office entirely as it lies is proper to be said in our
preparation to the holy Sacrament, or o^ the day of celebration.
1. For our selves.
O thou gracious Father of mercy, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, have mercy
upon thy servants who bow our heads, and our knees, and our hearts to thee:
pardon and forgive us all our sins, give us the grace of holy repentance and a
strict obedience to thy holy word; strengthen us in the inner man with the
power of the holy Ghost for all the parts and duties of our calling and holy
living: preserve us for ever in the unity of the holy Catholic Church, and in
the integrity of the Chr^stian faith, and in the love of God, and of our
neighbors, and in hope of life Eternal. Amen.

2. For the whole Catholic Church.
O holy Jesus King of the Saints, and Prince of the Catholic Church, preserve
thy spouse whom tho^ have purchased with thy right hand, and redeemed and
cleansed with thy blood; the whole Catholic Church from one end of the Earth
to the other; she is founded upon a rock, but planted in the sea. O preserve
her safe from schism, heresy, and sacrilege. Unite all her members with the
bands of Faith, Hope and Charity, and an external communion, when it shall seem
good in thine eyes: let the daily sacrifice of prayer and Sacramental
thanksgiving never cease, but be for ever presented to thee, and for ever
united to the intercession of her dearest Lord, and for ever prevail for the
obtaining for every of its members grace and blessing, pardon and salvation.
Amen

3. For all Christian Kings, Princes and Governors.
O King of Kings, and Prince of all the Rulers of the Earth, give thy grace and
Spirit to all Christian Princes, the spirit of wisdom and counsel, the spirit
of government and godly fear: Grant unto them to live in peace and honor, that
their people may love and fear them, and they may love and fear God: speak
good unto their hearts concerning the Church, that they may be nursing Fathers
to it, Fathers of the Fatherless, Judges and Avengers of the cause of Widows,
that they may be compassionate to the wants of the poor, and the groans of the
oppressed, that they may not vex or kill the Lords people with unjust or
ambitious wars, but may feed the ^lock of God, and may inquire after and do all
things which may promote peace, public honesty and holy religion, so
administering things present, that they may not fail of the everlasting glories
of the world to come, where all thy faithful people shall reign Kings for ever.
Amen.

4. For all the orders of them that minister about H. things
O thou great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, Holy and Eternal Jesus, give
unto thy servants the Ministers of the Mysteries of Christian religion the
Spirit of prudence and sanctity, faith and charity, confidence and zeal,
diligence and watchfulness, that they may declare thy will unto the people
faithfully, and dispense the Sacraments rightly, and intercede with thee
graciously and acceptably for thy servants. Grant O Lord, that by a holy life
and a true belief, by well doing and patient suffering (when thou shall call
them to it) they may glorify thee the great lover of souls, and after a
plentiful conversion of sinners from the error of their ways they may shine
like the stars in glory. Amen.

Give unto thy servants the Bishops a discerning Spirit that they may lay hands
suddenly on no man, but may depute such persons to the Ministeries of religion,
who may adorn the Gospel of God, and whose lips may preserve knowledge, and
such who by their good preaching, and holy living may advance the service of
the Lord Jesus. Amen.

5. For our nearest relatives, as Husband, Wife, Children, Family, etc.
O God of infinite mercy, let thy loving mercy and compassion descend upon the
head of thy servants [my wife, or hu^band] children and family: be pleased to
give them health of body and of spirit, a competent portion of temporals, so as
may with comfort support them in their journey to Heaven: preserve them from
all evil and ^ad accidents, defend them in all assaults of their enemies,
direct their persons and their actions, sanctify their hearts and words, and
purposes, that we all may by the bands of obedience and charity be united to
our Lord Jesus, and always feeling thee our merciful and gracious Father, may
become a holy family, discharging our whole duty in all our relations, that we
in this life being thy children by adoption and grace, may be admitted into thy
holy family hereafter for ever to sing praises to thee in the Church of the
firstborn, in the family of thy redeemed ones. Amen.

6. For our Parents, our Kindred in the flesh, our Friends and Benefactors.
O God merciful and gracious, who have made [ my Parents,] my Friends and my
Benefactors ministers of thy mercy and instruments of providence to thy
servant, I humbly beg a blessing to descend upon the heads of [ name the
persons or the relations] Depute thy holy Angels to guard their persons, thy
holy spirit to guide their souls, thy providence to minister to their
necessities: and let thy grace and mercy preserve them from ^he bitter pains of
eternal death, and bring them ^o everlasting life through Jesus Christ. Amen.

7. For all that lie under the rod of war, famine, pestilence: to be said in
the time of plague, or war, etc.
O Lord God Almighty, thou art our Father, we are thy children, thou art our
Redeemer, we thy people purchased with the price of thy most precious blood, be
pleased to moderate thy anger toward thy servants, let not thy whole
displeasure arise, lest we be consumed and brought to nothing. Let health and
peace be within our dwellings, let righteousness and holiness dwell for ever in
our hearts, and be expressed in all our actions, and the light of thy
countenance be upon us in all our sufferings, that we may delight in the
service and in the mercies of God for ever. Amen.

O gracious Father and merciful God, if it be thy will, say unto the destroying
Angel, it is enough, and though we are not better then our brethren who are
smitten with the rod of God, but much worse, yet may it please thee, even
because thou art good, and because we are timorous and sinful, not yet fitted
for our appearance, to set thy mark upon our foreheads, that the Angel thy
Minister of thy justice may pass over us, and hurt us not: let thy hand cover
thy servants and hide us in the clefts of the rock, in the wounds of the holy
Jesus, from the present anger that is gone out against us: that though we walk
thorough the valley of the shadow of death we may fear no evil, and suf^er
none: and those whom thou have smitten with thy rod, support with thy staff,
and visit them with thy mercies and salvation, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

8. For all women with child and for unborn children.
O Lord God who art the Father of them that trust in thee, and show mercy to
a thousand generations of them that fear thee, have mercy upon all women great
with child [*] be pleased to give them a joyful and a safe deliverance; and
let thy grace preserve the fruit of their wombs, and conduct them to the holy
Sacrament of Baptism, that they being regenerated by thy Spirit, and adopted
into thy family and the portion and duty of Sons, may live to the glory of God,
to the comfort of their parents and friends, to the edification of the
Christian Commonwealth, and the salvation of their own souls thorough Jesus
Christ. Amen.

9. For all estates of Men and Women in the Christian Church.
O Holy God, King Eternal, out of the infinite st^re-houses, of thy grace and
mercy give unto all Virgins chastity, and a religious spirit; to all persons
dedicated to thee and to religion, continence and meekness, an active zeal, and
an unwearied spirit: to all married paires faith and holiness: to widows and
fatherless, and all that are oppressed, ^hy pa^ronage, comfort and defense: to
all Christian women simplicity and mod^s^y, humility and chastity, p^tience and
charity* give unto the poor, to all that are robbed and spoiled of their goods,
a competent suppor^, and a contented spirit, and a treasure in heaven
hereafter: give unto prisoners and captives, to them that toil in the mines,
and row in ^he gall^es strength of body and of spirit, liberty and redemption,
comfort and restitution: to all that travel by land thy Angel for their guide,
and a holy and prosperous return: to all that travel by sea freedom from
Pirates and shipwreck, and bring them to the Haven where they would be: to
distressed and scrupulous consciences, to melancholy and disconsolate persons,
to all that are afflicted with evil and unclean spirits give a light from
heaven, great grace and proportionable comforts, and ^imely deliverance; give
them patience and resignation; let their sorrows be changed into grace and
comfort, and let the s^orm waft them certainly to the regions of rest and glory.

Lord God of Mercy give to thy Martyrs, Confessors and all thy persecuted,
constancy and prudence, boldness and hope, a full faith and a never failing
charity: To all who are condemned to death do thou minister comfort, a strong,
a quiet, and a resigned spirit: take from them the fear of death, and all
remaining affections to sin, and all imperfections of duty, and cause them to
dye full of grace, full of hope: and give to all faithful, and particularly to
them who have recommended themselves to the prayers of thy unworthy servant, a
supply of all their needs temporal and spiritual, and according to their
several states and necessities, rest and peace, pardon and refreshment: and
show us all a mercy in the day of judgment. Amen.

Give O Lord, to the Magistrates equity, sincerity, courage and prudence, that
they may protect the good, defend religion, and punish the wrong doers: Give to
the Nobility wisdom, valor, and loyalty: To Merchants justice and
faithfulness: to all Artificers and Laborers truth and honesty: to our
enemies forgiveness and brotherly kindness.

Preserve to us the Heavens and the Air in healthful influence and
disposition, the Earth in plenty, the kingdom in peace and good government, our
marriages in peace, and sweetness and innocence of society, thy people from
famine and pestilence, our houses from burning and robbery, our persons from
being burnt alive, from banishment and prison from Widowhood and destitution,
from violence of pains and passions, from tempests and earthquakes, from
inundation of waters, from rebellion and invasion, from impatience and
inordinate cares, from tediousnes of spirit and despair, from murder, and all
violent accursed and unusual deaths, from the surprise of sudden and violent
accidents, from passionate and unreasonable fears, from all thy wrath, and from
all our sins, good Lord deliver and preserve thy servants for ever. Amen.

Repress the violence of all implacable warring and tyrant Nations: bring home
unto thy fold all that are gone astray: call into the Church all strangers:
increase the number and holiness of thy own people: bring infants to ripeness
of age and reason; confirm all baptized people with thy grace and with thy
Spirit: instruct the Novices and new Christians: let a great grace and merciful
providence bring youthful persons safely and holily through the indiscretions
and passions and temptations of their younger years: and those whom thou have
or shall permit to live to the age of a man, give competent strength and
wisdom, take from them covetousness and churlishness, pride and impatience*
fill them full of devotion and charity, repentance and sobriety, holy thoughts
and longing desires after Heaven and heavenly things: give them a holy and a
blessed death, and to us all a joyful resurrection through Jesus Christ our
Lord: Amen.

Ad. Sect. 10. The manner of using these devotions by way of preparation to the
receiving the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
The just prepararion to this holy Feast consisting principally in a holy life,
and consequently in the repetition of the acts of all virtues, and especially
of Faith, Repentance, Charity and Thanksgiving, to the exercise of these four
graces let the person that intends to communicate in the times set apart for
his preparation and devotion; for the exercise of his faith recite the prayer
or Letany of the passion. For the exercise of Repentance, the form of
confession of sins with the prayer annexed: And for the graces of thanksgiving
and charity, let him use the special forms of prayer above described: or if a
less time can be allotted for preparatory devotion, the two first will be the
more proper as containing in them all the personal duty of the communicant. To
which upon the morning of that holy solemnity, let him add,

A prayer of preparation or address to the holy Sacrament.
An act of Love.
O most gracious and eternal God, the helper of the helpless, the comforter of
the comfortless, the hope of the afflicted, the bread of the hungry, the drink
of the thirsty, and the Savior of all them that wait upon thee, I bless and
glorify thy Name, and adore thy goodness, and delight in thy love, that thou
have once more give^ me the opportunity of receiving the greatest favor which
I can receive in this World* even the body and blood of my dearest Savior. O
take from me all affection to sin or vanity: let not m^ affections dwell below,
but soar upwards to the element of love, to the seat of God, to ^he Regions of
Glory, and the inheritance of jesus, that I may hunger and thirst for the bread
of life, and the wine of ^lect souls, and may know no loves but the love of
God, and the most merciful Jesus. Amen.

An act of Desire.
O blessed Jesus, thou have used many arts to save me, thou have given thy
life to redeem me, thy holy Spirit to sanctify me, thy self for my example,
thy Word for my Rule, thy grace for my guide, the fruit of thy body hanging on
the tree of the cross, for the sin of my soul: and after all this thou have
sent thy Apostles and Ministers of salvation to call me, to importune me, to
constrain me to holiness and peace and felicity. O now come Lord jesus, come
quickly: my heart is desirous of thy presence, and thirsty of thy grace, and
would fain entertain thee, not as a guest, but as an inhabitant, as the Lord of
all my faculties. Enter in and take possession, and dwell with me for ever,
that I also may dwell in the heart of my dearest Lord which was opened for me
with a spear and love.

An act of contrition.
Lord thou shall find my heart full of cares and worldly desires, cheated with
love of riches, and neglect of holy things, proud and unmortified, false and
crafty to deceive it self, intricated and entangled with difficult cases of
conscience, with knots which my own wildness and inconsideration and
impatience have tied and shuffled together: O my dearest Lord, if thou can
behold such an impure seat, behold the place to which thou art invited is full
of passion and prejudice, evil principles and evil habits, peevish and
disobedient, lustful and intemperate, and full of sad remembrances that I have
often provoked to jealousy and to anger thee my God, my dearest Savior, him
that dyed for me, him that suffered torments sor me, that is infinitely good to
me, and infinitely good and perfect in himself. This O dearest Savior is a sad
truth, and I am heartily ashamed, and truly sorrowful for it, and do deeply
hate all my fins, and am full of indignation against my self for so unworthy,
so careless, so continued, so great a folly: and humbly beg of thee to
increase my sorrow, and my care, and my hat^ed against sin; and make my love to
thee swell up to a great grace, and then to glory, and immensity.

An act of Faith.
This indeed is my condition: But I know O blessed Jesus that thou did take
upon thee my nature, that thou might suffer for my sins, and thou did
suffer to deliver me from them and from thy Fathers wrath: and I was delivered
from this wrath that I might serve thee in holiness and righteousness all my
days? Lord I am as sure thou did the great work of Redemption for me and all
mankind, as that I am alive: This is my hope, the strength of my spirit, my
joy and my confidence: and do thou never let the spirit of unbelief enter into
me and take me from this Rock: Here I will dwell for I have a delight therein:
Here I will live, and here I desire to dye.

The Petition.
Therefore O blessed Jesu, who art my Savior and my God, whose body is my
food, and thy righteousness is my robe, thou art the Priest and the Sacrifice,
the Master of the feast, and the Feast it self, the Physician of my soul, the
light of my eyes, the purifier of my stains: enter into my heart, and cast out
from thence all impurities, all the remains of the Old man; and grant I may
partake of this holy Sacrament with much reverence and holy relish, and great
effect, receiving hence the communication of thy holy body and blood, for the
establishment of an unreproveable faith, of an unfeigned love, for the fullness
of wisdom, for the healing my soul, for the blessing and preservation of my
body, for the taking out the sting of temporal death, and for the assurance of
a holy resurrection, for the ejection of all evil from within me, and the
fulfilling all thy righteous Commandments, and to procure for me a mercy and a
fair reception at the day of judgment, through thy mercies O holy and ever
blessed Savior Jesus. Amen.

Here also may be added the prayer after receiving the cup. * Ejaculations to
be said before or at the receiving the holy Sacrament

Like as the Heart desires the waterbrooks: so longs my soul after thee, O
God. My soul is athirst for God, yea even for the living God, when shall I come
before the presence of God?

O Lord my God great are thy wondrous works which thou have done: like as be
also thy thoughts which are to usward, and yet there is no man that orders
them unto thee.

O send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me, and bring me unto
thy holy hill and to thy dwelling: And that I may go unto the Altar of God,
even unto the God of my joy and gladness: and with my heart will I give thanks
to thee O God my God.

I will wash my hands in innocence, O Lord: and so will I go to thine altar:
that I may show the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works.

Examine me, O Lord, and prove me, try out my reins and my heart: For thy
loving kindness is now and ever before my eyes: and I will walk in thy truth.

Thou shall prepare a table before me against them that trouble me: thou have
anointed my head with oil, and my cup shall be full. But thy loving kindness
and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I will dwell in the
house of the Lord for ever.

This is the bread that comes down from Heaven, that a man may eat thereof and
not dye.

Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him: and
has eternal life abiding in him, and I will raise him up at the last day

Lord whither shall we go but to thee: thou have the words of eternal life?

If any man thirst let him come unto me and drink.

The bread which we break, is it not the communication of the body of Christ?
and the cup which we drink, is it not the communication of the blood of Christ?
What are those wounds in thy hands? They are those with which I was wounded in
the house of my friends, Zech. 13.6.

Immediately before the receiving say
Lord I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof. But do thou
speak the word only and thy servant shall be healed.

Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show thy praise. O God make speed
to save me, O Lord make has^e to help me.

Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.
After receiving the consecrated and blessed bread, say,

O taste and see how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusts in
him. * The beasts do lack and suffer hunger; but they which seek the Lord shall
want no manner of thing that is good. Lord what am I, that my Savior should
become my food, that the Son of God should be the meat of Worms, of dust and
ashes, of a sinner, of him that was his enemy? But this thou have done to me*
because thou art infinitely good and wonderfully gracious, and love to bless
every one of us, in turning us from the evil of our ways. Enter into me
blessed Jesus, let no root of bitterness spring up in my heart; but be thou
Lord of all my faculties. O let me feed on thee by faith, and grow up by the
increase of God to a perfect man in Christ Jesus. Amen. Lord I believe, help
mine unbelief. Glory be to God the Father, Son, etc.

After the receiving the cup of blessing.
It is finished. Blessed be the mercies of God revealed to us in Jesus Christ.
O blessed and eternal high Priest, let the sacrifice of the Cross which thou
did once offer for the sins of the whole World, and which thou do now
and always represent in Heaven to thy Father by thy never ceasing
intercession, and which this day has been exhibited on thy holy Table
Sacramentally, obtain mercy and peace, faith and charity, safety, and
establishment to thy holy Church which thou have founded upon a Rock, the Rock
of a holy Faith; and let not the gates of Hell prevail against her, nor the
enemy of mankind take any soul out of thy hand, whom thou have purchased with
thy blood, and sanctified by thy Spirit. Preserve all thy people from Heresy,
and division of spirit, from scandal and the spirit of delusion, from
sacrilege and hurtful persecutions. Thou O blessed Jesus did dye for us:
keep me for ever in holy living, from sin and sinful shame, in the communion of
thy Church, and thy Church in safety and grace, in truth and peace unto thy
second coming. Amen.

Dearest Jesu, since thou art pleased to enter into me, O be jealous of thy
house and the place where thine honor dwells: suffer no unclean spirit, or
unholy thought to come near thy dwelling, lest it defile the ground where thy
holy feet have trod. O teach me so to walk, that I may never disrepute the
honor of my Religion, nor stain the holy Robe which thou have now put upon my
soul, nor break my holy Vows, which I have made, and thou have sealed, nor lose
my right of inheritance, my privilege of being coheir with Jesus, into the
hope of which I have now further entered: but be thou pleased to love me with
the love of a Father, and a Brother, and a Husband, and a Lord, and make me to
serve thee in the communion of Saints, in receiving the Sacrament, in the
practice of all holy virtues, in the imitation of thy life, and conformity to
thy sufferings; that I having now put on the Lord Jesus, may marry his loves
and his enmities, may desire his glory, may obey his laws, and be united to his
Spirit; and in the day of the LORD I may be found having on the Wedding
Garment, and bearing in my body and soul the marks of the LORD JESUS, that I
may enter into the joy of my LORD, and partake of his glories for ever and
ever. Amen.

Ejaculations to be used any time that day, after the solemnity is ended.
Lord, if I had lived innocently, I could not have deserved to receive the
crumbs that fall from thy Table: How great is thy mercy who have feasted me
with the Bread of Virgins, with the Wine of Angels, with Manna from Heaven!

O when shall I pass from this dark glass, from this vail of Sacraments, to
the vision of thy eternal clarity, from eating thy Body, to beholding thy face
in thy eternal Kingdom!

Let not my sins crucify the Lord of life again: Let it never be said
concerning me, the hand of him that betraieth me is with me on the Table.

O that I might love thee, as well as ever any creature lov d thee! Let me
think nothing but thee, desire nothing but thee, enjoy nothing but thee!

O Jesus be a Jesus unto me. Thou art all things unto me. Let nothing ever
please me but what favors of thee, and thy miraculous sweetness.

Blessed be the mercies of our Lord, who of God is made unto me Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption.

He that glories, let him glory in the Lord. Amen.

The End.
LONDON, Printed by R. Norton. MDCL.


