AN APOLOGY FOR PRIVATE PREACHING.

IN WHICH THOSE FORMS are warranted, or rather justified, which the malignant
Sect contemn, and daily by profane Pamphlets make ridiculous.

(Viz.) Preaching in a Tub. Teaching against the back of a Chair, Instructing
at a Tables end. Revealing in a Basket. Exhorting over a Buttery Hatch.
Reforming on a Bed side.

OR (Indeed) any place, according to Inspiration (since it is known) the
Spirit moves in sundry places.)

WHEREUNTO IS ANNEXED, OR RATHER Conjoined, or furthermore united, or moreover
knit, the Spiritual postures, alluding to that of Musket and Pike.

By T. J.

Jun. 28. Printed for R. Wood, T. Wilson, and E. Christopher.

TO you the Sanctified, Elected, Purified, Mundified, Justified, and Separated
Brethren, I make this worthy and acceptable (although not Learned) Apology. It
is not unkown to you how often we have been vilified by the name of Puritans,
Brownists, Separatists, Familists, and (at last) censured with the detestable
name of Roundheads and Prickeares; that we are so it is confessed, but why should
we be termed so in the way of disgrace, or villification, the manner of
speaking makes the difference, I have known one man call another Sir in anger,
likewise a woman beat her Maid by the name of Gentlewoman, terms in themselves
gracious and acceptable, but according to sinister construction, the parties so
termed appear scandalized and rediculous: next they abuse our Doctrine of
Inspiration, and tell us it proceeds from the spirit of contradiction, but
little do they imagine our contradiction is begot by inspiration: for unless
our bodies be haunted with sanctified spirits, how is it possible we should
reveal the word, since most of us scarce know a word of the Book, and that is
the reason that we can preach as well without a Book as with it, but if we can
continue and confide as we have begun (which I shrewdly doubt) it shall be
lawful for every Elder and every Select Brother to use a Horn-booke (provided
he be married) for I have heard a little reading will do a man no hurt, let him
be learned past the Graces and the Sacraments, and (for ought I know) he may
be as fit to teach as the best on's, and go roundly on with his business,
according to his own head, and in conclusion gain the prick and praise,
agreeing with his Auditors Ears, which are long enough to make Asses of those
that write our Names backwards, and fix them before libellous Sermons, saying
they do NOT RVB, when they do Rub, and rub the skin of to, woeful experience
has made it manifest, but though we desire to have our heads rounded, we not
care to have them rounded so close; there ought to be a mean in all things, but
now I Will proceed to my Apology which must prove how necessary it is for a
Tradesman of any degree, to preach in a Tub, reach against the back of a
Chair, instruct at a Tables end, exhorting over a Buttery hatch, Revealing in
a Basket, Reforming on a Bedside:

I shall begin with the first, and produce you the sacred Antiquity of Tubs, in
the Days of Dido and Richard the third, There lived an honest, Religious, and
fair spoken man called Diogenes, a Round-dealing Man, and was so inspired with
the spirit of oposition, that he boldly durst affront the King, and bid him
stand from betwixt him and the Sun; and believe it there was some mystery in
those words: This man (to make short of my Tale) lived in a Tub, and he being a
devout man, we must of necessity have this Argument allowed, that if he lived
in a Tub, he preached also in a Tub, so that at last he Reformed the King, who
would daily leave his Palace to hear his worthy and Religious Tub Lectures, I
wish our Times would not be more proud then the former, he was a man of good
life and conversation, and the Squares went Round with him, and when he was
smitten in Age, the King gave him the Title of Elder every day with which he
continued till the hour of his Death, and so much for this piece of Antiquity.

In the days of King Arthur of Bradley, and his four hundred forty six Elders
of the Round Table, the first men that ever wore Round-Robins, there lived a
Pastor whose Fame (you all have had a spice of) called Cornelius, a sickly man,
and did all in a Tub with very good Ordure, and one that was inspired with the
spirit of Repentance, and a man whose Zeal to the Sister-hood has caused him
in one Lecture to sweat six hours by the clock, where it was his Fate by the
heat of overmuch Devotion, to conclude his days, and preach his own Funeral
Sermon.

And so much Testification I think may stand to justify the lawfulness of the
aforesaid Tub, whose spiritual Hoopes I hope will never fail.

The Back of a Chair is so far from having priority of the TVB, that it is
much inferior to it, and is never provided, but when the good Wife has
employed the TVB about some other business, the body must as well be eased as
the mind, but most commonly it is a vvicker Chair, which though it be not
altogether Round, is half round, and does almost agree as well with the
spiritual groan as the Tub, and in case of necessity may serve as well (take
top and bottom) as the Tubbe; but we do not boldly (as that Arch Square head
of profaneness the Pope does) term our Chair St. Peter's Chair, though we
have much more reason, and so it being needless to justify with stronger
Arguments the benefit of the Chair, it being toward noon, I will draw near
the Tables end, where I doubt not but I shall pick out many wholesome
Arguments, and enough to satisfy any reasonable man without that profane
porridge the Service Book, and in this piece of Doctrine (by your favor) will
be my own Carver: this Table being finished with substance to work upon will
allow a sweet savor, and not strengthen but advance the spirit, and maintain
it when it is up, then if this place be not fit that allows both form and
matter, I Will stand to the censure of the veriest Epicure, who I believe would
sooner swallow this Doctrine than a great many that seem to make a more
religious profession: And now I have satisfied at the Tables end, I will make
no more Apology for it, since apparent truths are rather bindered then helped
with tedious Arguments.

I will now set forward to my Revelation in a Basket, which has been held
sacred because it was given at the cost and charges of our inspired Basket
maker, a man inspired with much Charity, and got all his relief by the Basket,
it was by himself dedicated to the Sheriffs, and by them well furnished for
the full edification of the poor, needy, and imprisoned brethren, who have
suffered for the conforming and tearing off of Surplices; and why may not a man
piously and zealously confirm the aged, and enstruct the youth in a Basket, as
well as in a pulpit: the Tables end Lecture being ended for the Rich, the
Basket Lecture for the poor and needy, let us proceed to the Buttery Hatch,
which is the fittest place in my opinion to administer the liquor of Life and
spiritual drops of comfort, where some zealous men of our Brotherhood have so
overtyred themselves with earnestness in this Doctrine, that they have grown
uncensible, not able to stand on their legs, or give a ready word, that even
with Maudlin sorrow perceiving their weakness to proceed no further, they have
wept with very grief, being supported home with expectation of next mornings
Remedy.

But he whole strength of brain and power of Spirit will preserve to hold out
this Buttery Hatch Lecture, may with much ease administer Reformation on a
Bedside, where inspired with the Spirit of Unity, we constantly conclude, and
join in a copulative love without the unnecessary assistance of any light, but
the flame of our own Zeal, with which I doubt not, but that we are equally
furnished, proceeding from the precious Coals of Devotion: and inflamed by the
provoking Administry of the last Doctrine. I hope these Arguments will suffice
sufficiently to ^nform you of the necessary and profitable causes we have to
vindicate and appologize for the Dignity of private preaching in so many Forms
and according to this Method I shall now march on to the spiritual Postures,
which have allusion to those for Pike and Musket, in which I will not prove
tedious.

It is not unknown to you my beloved Roundheads that there may be a spiritual
warfare, in which you are not particularly exercised in the postures of your
Doctrine you will go near to suffer, and all the select of us; the first I
will instruct you in shall be that alluding to Pike.

Round heads stand to your Arms.
When Authority is absent, -- Disorder your Doctrine. When present, -- Order
your Doctrine. If absent again, -- As you were. If you conceive you shall have
the better on it, Shoulder your Doctrine and march. If Authority be too strong,
then (Roundheads) as you were. If Authority appear weak. Advance your
Doctrine. If strong, -- As you were. If you get stronger in Faction, -- Charge
to the you. But if Authority come in full power, -- Faces about.
Prick-eares, stand to your Arms.
Now Authority is gone, -- Make ready your zeal. If Authority appear not yet,
-- Charge your zeal. If you expect the Victory -- Ioyn your zeal and rest
together Blow your zeal. Prime your zeal. Blow off your loose zeal. If
Authority come not yet, for out Sisters sake Cock your zeal, Guard your zeal.
Blow the coal of your zeal Now if you think to overcome Authority, Present
your zeal to the Left, and give fire to the Right. But if you be vanquishd
betwixt this and Paddington, Faces about.
FINIS.

