A BRIEF RELATION OF THE GLEANINGS OF THE IDIOTISMES AND ABSURDITIES OF MILES
CORBET Esquire, Councellor at Law, Reorder and Burgess for Great Yarmouth.

By ANTHO: ROILY, Student in the Mathemagicks.

Printed in the Year, 1646.

A brief Relation of the Gleanings of the Idiotismes and Absurdities of MILES
CORBET Esquire, etc.
GOds, Goddesses, or Muses, I invoke not,
Or (in this Case) to great Apollo spoke not:
Nor Joves swift Thighborne Son, winged Mercury
Shall (in these following Lines) my Muse supply,
The man I mean to write of is a Theme
That flows upon me, like a flowing stream.
Not Thames in England, or fair Seine a River in France' which runs at
Paris, as Thames does at London.
Seine in France
Were ever greater Floods of Ignorance.
I write of wit and wisdoms Inundation
Of high and mighty Policies Relation
Of things that only are for a Precise man
And far above the reach of any wise man,
Of one that is in shape an M. Corbet is as black without as within.
Ethiopian,
And in Religion a profound Of no Religion.
Vtopian,
Skilled in the learned Laws with such encreace,
That he will deserve a fee to hold his He can speak so much to the purpose that
he does most good, when he says nothing.
peace.
His heart is fired with zeal, and with a warm mouth
He pleades, as grand Recorder of great Yarmouth.
He Is a most stiff Cathedral hater, yet
The State to make him Cathedra, quasi Chair.
Chaire-man held it fit,
Poor Ministers (whom he deemes scandalous)
His power has made 'em, not worth scant a lowse,
He Is Chairman also, for the Examinations
And has a Bosom full of Reservations,
He Is Chairman for the Soap, to keep you cleanly,
As far as is from Edinburgh to Henly,
And by the Parliaments most Grave direction
He swayes Newcastle-Coles by his A very suitable dignity.
Complexion.
He Is Chaire-man for the Salt, (a place most savery,)
And with it feasons all the Kingdoms Or the Rebels knavery.
slavery,
He Is Chaire-man also General and Particular
Over all Causes, in these times Canicular;
Above all persons both Divine and Secular
Within the bounds of Britains square Orbicular.
And though Dame Nature made him not a fair man,
Yet Art made him an A medler in every Committee.
universal Chairman.
Wit, Wealth, or Fortune, made him a Recorder,
And Knight invisible of the forked Order,
Which is an honor But Vulcan was not dubd by a Justices Clark.
Vulcan had from Venus,
From which degree our fates will hardly wean us.
His voice more grievous then a Fevor Tertian,
Irrevocable, like the Medes or Persian,
And (Error proof) he can deny or grant,
Like Three Judges in hell.
Minos, Eacus, or. Rahdamant,
And they are all three Masters of the Chair
To whose possessions he is the adopted heir,
For he is the Cornucopia, that abounded
With all the virtues that adhornes a Roundhead.
He has full power, East, West, and North and South,
To make Malignants, even by word of mouth;
Faults, he can make to be no faults at all,
And He has the art of multiplication, and Substraction.
mountain crimes, can turn to mole-hils small
He can make guiltless guilty, guilty guiltless,
As soon as Cutlers can make swords be hiltlesse.
This is the Miles, whom millions more of miles,
Cannot over reach in stratagems and wiles,
This is the Miles, worth more, by more then half
Then are the Famous miles of Walthams Calfe;
And though nine miles, that calfe did travel then
To suck a Bull, yet dry came home again,
Yet has our mighty Miles such happy luck.
He Is Miles and Taurus both for Calves to suck.
I Will not presume to call him His Admiring audience, are the Calves that do
suck the Bull of his wisdom.
Bull by Patrimony,
For it may be he got that style by Matrimony,
And (in Hay harvest) he is so stout and strong
To make hay with his head, without a Prong.
But leaving these things as a distin'd Omen
For him, or thee, or me, for friend, or foe-men,
Happy is he that is past it, for there be
To many in that It is a catching disease.
case, are scarce shot free.
Now must I write of something accidental,
Wise grave absurdities, high Parliamentall:
And therefore (Readers) with advice take heeding
Whilst I add Vice, to Edifye your reading.
But I must now retract my lines before,
No Goddess, God, or Muses to implore:
Although I crave not these, I humbly crave
That I Will Summers learned Muse may have,
Or Patch, the Cardinals Stultus, or Tom Derry,
Or Muckle John, whose talk a man would weary,
Or Archy (foolish Knaveries precious Jewel)
Let all their wisdoms to my Muse bring fuel,
Let all these aid me, for I have a talk
That rumbles in my verses like a Laike.
These Muses, minds and spirits, if they infuse me,
If I do err all wisemen will excuse me,
For sure, he is a man of small Engine
That stoopes so low to set his wit to mine;
I do protest my Satyrs Chapps are muzled,
And my Invention never so much was puzzled,
For Corbet and his Clarke of Peace, and Quorum,
A First Idiotis. a dog bound over to the Quarter sessions.
Butcher humbly made complaint before 'um,
That Master A Physician in Yormouth, and his diligent dog was a Spannell.
Colmans dog had such deceit
That if his Master touched a piece of meat
The Dog so diligently eyed and watched
That unespy'd, straight the meat he caught.
Grave Corbet hearing both sides, right and left,
Said, that by Law all Felony is thoft,
And therefore that false Dog for his transgression
I Will bind him over to the Quarter-Session.
In 2 Idiotisme. that to confess and deny, is all one.
Yarmonth there are little Lanes, called Rows
Nere which the tide continual Ebbes and flows;
Which places are oftnoyd, with fishes Garbadge,
With dyrt and filthy soil of weeds and Herbadge;
There Is a Decree, that who so souls the street
(Or Row) and does not keep it clean and sweet,
Are at the Sessions doomed, and fined by Law
Whereby Delinquents much are kept in awe.
Miles Corbet, whose grave wisdom sought to prune all,
(Mounted in state upon his high Tribunal)
One of the Dwellers faulty was accused
That he with filth and soil the Row abused
The accused Party would excuse the deed
(But no man to excusings taking heed)
To whom the wise Recorder did reply,
Friend, here is no place for you to prate and ly,
Confession may perhaps some way redress it,
And Sir, you must acknowledge or confess it.
To which an M. Anthony Speck.
Alderman did answer make;
Sir, I suppose your wisdom does mistake:
You are besides the matter quite and clean,
Acknowledge or deny (I think) you mean,
Good Sir, quoth Corbet, pray let me alone,
Is not to acknowledge and Acknowledge and deny, and deny and acknowledge, do
agree like Ling and Cabbadge.
deny all one?
A Crew of tatterd Idiotisme. Corbet bound Beggars over to the Sessions for
Gypfiot.
Beggars, on the way,
Miles Corbets swarthy worship humbly pray
That he his sleeping bounty would awake
And give 'um something for Christ Jesus sake:
He being charitable (though no Lover
Of poor Folk) did for Gypsies bind them over.
The Beggars all appeared unto the suit,
But no man did against them prosecute,
And being then before the judge to answer,
Grim Corbet, (with a visage stern as Cancer)
Accused them all as Gypsies, the Judge said,
Though they are poor and Roguishly arraid;
I do demand, who prosecutes them here,
They all replied, It Is that black Justice there;
And we beseech your Lordship judge, and see
Who looks most like a Gypsy, he, or we.
A Fellow late, whose honesty was little,
Joined 3. Foolery. Master Corbet would teach a Knave to get a Bastard.
Giblets with a wench unchaste and brittle.
It fell so in, and out, her womb did swell,
Her bigness, her disease did plainly tell;
The business of the Fellow and the Wench,
Was brought before Miles Corbet on the Bench,
Who being one that Leachery did hate,
Did the Delinquent, chide, revile, and Rate.
Quoth Miles, this Woman's Belly does appeach you,
And how to get a Bastard I will teach you,
I Will teach you get a Bastard: Sirrah, I
Will make you think on it Sitha, 'till you dye.
With that a man that sat him near unto,
Said Sir, I think it is more then you can do;
You cannot teach him, for his skill is great,
The Spiritual Court knows twice h' has done that feat.
All Is one, quoth Corbet, tell not me what is what,
I Will teach him get a Bastard for all that.
In Yarmouth Town, one Widow 4. Idiotisme. To sue a man for seeking his own
goods, that were stolen from him.
Stigold was,
That kept a shop of Coppar, Tin, and Brass,
The Woman in her shop did buy and sell,
And drove a good trade; but mark what befell,
She trading thus in many a sort of Mettle,
A Thief sold her a misbegotten Kettle.
Quick search was made, the Kettle being sound,
The Buyer by Grim Corbet ore was bound
To answer it at Yarmouth Sessions, where
Her Her shop was lawful to buy and sell in; and the owner found it on her
stall.
self for buying it did fully clear.
The Black Recorder gave her This was foolish Knavish Council, for it cost the
poor woman near 7 l. of which Master Corbet had a large proportion for Facs.
Council then,
She with the accuser to have a bout again
At Norwich City, where at the Assize
The business micht be tried by Nisi prize;
There the grave Judge did of the Woman ask,
Who counseled her to such a^idle task,
A lawless suit against the There was no Law for the Woman to sue the man, for
the man fought but his own goods.
man to bring
His accusation being for the King.
She said that Master Corbet bade her to do it,
Or else she hever had had mind unto it;
The Judge espied one Master William Gray,
And said to him I pray you go your way:
Tell Corbet from me, that he is a Fool,
And (for more skill in Law) may go to school.
Strait Master M. Gray did not do his message at Norwich, but at Yarmouth, at
the Bailiffs house, where Corbet dined.
Gray went, lought, and chanced to find
The man amongst Gentlemen, whom half had dined,
Whereas he told him, that without delay
He had a message from the Judge to say.
What is it secret, he replied again,
Gray answered nay, Be It known unto all men,
My Lord (the Judge) commands me tell you this,
You are a Fool, and that mine errand is.
The Guests round, (inwardly) did smile and flout,
(For they all loved him like the Pox or Gout)
And angry Miles said Gray, I Will thus conclude,
Because you brought to me this message rude,
Expect from me, no further grace or favor
I Will bind you over to the good Behavior.
For that (quoth Mr Gray) I do not care,
You may do if you will, do if you dare.
One Mr 5. Idiotisme. To study, if monday were monday, or not.
Stains (Aturney by profession)
In Christmas time, asked when was Yarmouth Session:
Wise Corbet, on his Thumbs ends took advising,
And all his five wits wisely Catechizing;
He said, if Plowlick The monday after Tvvelfe-day, so called by the Husbandmen
in Norfolk, because on that day, they do first begin to Plough.
Monday fall on Monday,
Which as I take it, is next day to Sunday;
Is it not so, what say you Master He did ask M. Roe, an Alderman of Yarmouth,
if monday would fall to be monday that year.
Roe,
As I do take it, sure it must be so.
The Tuesday next the Sessions noth begin
At Norwich, and the Tuesday next (I win)
The Sessions will be here, sure it must be,
Or my account has much deceived me:
There was a juggling Cunning 6. Idiotisme. To hang a man for an old Almanac
being found in his Study.
man of fame,
A nick-nam'd Conjurer, Mark Pryme by name:
Whose skill was in Astrology so great
That by that Art he many Folks did cheat.
This Mark (pray mark me now what here I write)
Could many Fiends and Planets names recite,
And more strange Magic words from him would drop,
Then are in an He would name Coloquintida, Assafetita, Zarzaparilla. 3.
Bitter, stinking, and pocky Devils; besides Polipodi. um, Bole Armoniack,
Vnguentum Came. phiratum Album, Galba^um, Auxungia Porcina, etc.
Apothecaries shop,
He would (with an impregnible brass forehead)
Talk of the Zones, the Fridgid, and the T^rred,
And from Parnassus Mount, or Agannippe,
He seemed to out do, Cornelius called Agrippe.
'Twas thought this Mark knew all the devils in Hell,
And famed t'erect a figure excellent well:
Wherefore the Country Folks admired his Art
That if they had lost Cow, Calfe, Horse or Cart,
Or silver spoone, or Bodkin, Knife or Ring,
Or Millstone, Windmill, Cork, or any thing
Heavy or From the ponderous weight of a Ladies F^n, to the lightness of a Sow
of Lead.
light, 'twas still his happy lot
To help the People to their goods, or not.
This Mathematick man, this cheat Mark Pryme,
Did gull the People still from time to time
So far, that in Complaints they all agreed
To tell Miles Corbet all their griefs with speed.
He gravely hearing many things alleged
Faults mixed with faults, together interwedg'd,
So that to Prison Pryme was strait committed
At Sessions next to suffer, or b'acquitted,
Then the Recorder wisely gave command
To search Prymes learned study out of hand,
There they found Books some Theological,
Historical, and Phylosophicall.
Amongst the rest they chanced to find a Book
Called Moulsons Almanac, which strait they took
And showed Miles Corbet, who said presently,
This is the Book the knave does conjure by,
This wicked book shall help him to a check,
That at this Sessions now will break his neck.
O rare Oedipus that so found out
The meaning of the book to clear the doubt;
As fit as any Mare is for a Cradle,
Or any Sow for an Imbrodered Sadle:
As suitable as sawdust, and roast beef,
For Moulsous Almanac is but a brief
Of the famed fabulous Sheperds A Book of merry fortune telling, with the
forms of Dice, Stars, etc.
Calender;
And for no use of any Conjurer.
But for all that, Miles will by Law or wit,
Prove Prime to be a Conjurer by it;
And though in most things he was clear excused
Yet when Miles Corbet the strange book produced
And opend it, did show it to the Jury,
And said to them, my Masters I assure ye,
This Book is damnable and dangerous,
He has described here each Celestial House;
He names Albumazer, Copernicus,
Rombombonax, and Mephostophilus,
Here Is pictures of the Bull, Bear, Goat and Lion,
Here Is names of Lucifer, and of Oryon.
And therefore Jury mark your charge this time,
There Is in that book enough to hang Mark Prime.
With that an understanding man or One of them was M. Tho: Chesshire a Divine.
twain,
The substance of the book did strait explain
To be as far from Master Corbets talk
As Oatmeale is from eggs, or cheese from chalk.
By that books virtue we dare both to swear
No man can ever be a Conjurer.
They therefore praid the jury to conceive
The Law cannot a man of life bereave
For any thing which that book does contain;
With that the Jury went and came again
And by their Verdict, Pryme not guilty found
Escaped a Popham Check, twixt Sky and Ground.
And there the learned Recorder gained much credit
As some said, if they did not lie that said it. 6. Idiotisme how M. Corbet,
and his man Nocky being both drunk, fell into a sandhole in Yarmouth Deanes.
With neither lies or fables here I mock ye;
Miles Corbet and squire, (sweet Tony Nockey)
Road like knights errant to make inquisition
And find unlicenc'd Alehouses condition;
Like Spains black Knight, (Don John de fisty kanco)
Or valiant Don Quixot, and Sancho Pancho,
Adventerously they put their feet in stirrops
To punish Victlers and to taste their Sirrops.
The very Visage of Miles was so dreadful
That fear filled many an hosts heart and headfull;
The afrighted tiplers for a Bugg-bear took him;
He lookd so g^im the devil could not outlook him,
The men the women, children, every one,
Did fear him like Rast-head and bloody bone.
Reader for thy good, mine, or any man's
They searched the measure of Pots, Iuggs and kans,
They took survey of cheating, Nick and Froth,
Two knaves, that made drink shrink like Northern cloth
They tasted Ale so deep, that to conclude
Both man and Master were in the ale-titude;
Both in their Perricranians elevated
Took horse, and riding home being lightly pated;
Ambo their beasts, their beastly riders tumbled,
Into a Sandhole, as they ambo stumbled.
The Horses both ran home, and left them there:
But when folks saw their riders not appear
The fear was great, that both the man and master
Had met with knaves, or theives or some disaster;
Then Lanthorns were hung out, and bells were Rung,
And search was made, with travel and with tongue.
To find those men (if they were super ground)
Although they both were better lost then found,
At last they well came home, sound wind and limb
(But in a strange and metamorphos'd trim)
Their hats, their cloakes, their wits both broke and whole
Forgot, and left all in the Sandy hole.
What shall I further in this case dispute,
For very joy, the cheerful Bells were mute,
The darkened Lamhorns Candles snuffes did stink,
And in this joy no man their healths did drink.
One Master 8. Idiotisme, The great Bible brought into the Pulpit, scandalous.
Web, full fourscore year of age
At Basingstoke had spent his pilgrimage,
Was fetched unto the Parliamentall City,
Where Corbet, Chair Committee-man (most witty)
Taxed him, that he offensive Doctrine taught
And the great Bible to the Pulpit brought,
Which (to the people) was so much offensive
Vnedifying, and so apprehensive,
That (to his audience) it was found (Probatum)
To be a crime ycleap'd, Scandalam Datum.
Web answered, Sir, pray understand, and see,
That Scandalum Corbet told the old man, Sir, we have nothing to do with your
Scandalum Datums, and Scandalum Acceptums here, for we say here, that that is
an offense at which the People are offended.
Acc^ptum it may be,
It may be scandal taken, though none given,
And I to such an Exigent am driven,
That having li^'d so long, (I pray you mark)
And that with extreme age my fight is dark;
My Clarke brings the great Bible, and not I,
Because the print is big, when I apply
Or quote a Scripture, because Folk should heed it,
I in the great print can the plainer read it.
Thus did the old man plead; and plead in vain,
He must no more his Benefice retain;
These words of his, no fat^s faction giving,
Was Voted by Miles Corbet from his Living.
Another 9. Idiotisme. Want of teeth scandalous.
Minister in Let^^stershire,
Lived in his Parish five and fifty years
Twice every Sunday he did preach and pray,
And none his life or Doctrine could gainsay;
At last (with extreme age) his T^eeth were shed,
That few o^ none were left within his head,
And want of teeth his speech did so impair,
That the Complaint was brought before the Chair
Where Mighty Miles did tell the old man plainly
That in his preaching all his talk was vainly,
Because his tongue lifp'd hollow inwardly,
Whereby the people could not Edify.
The old man answered, he had preached so long
That he had almost preached out teeth and tongue,
Yet (for all that) he would his Function follow
And pray and preach, although his Voice were hallow;
Then stout Sir Thomas Barrington did say,
In this Emergent Cause spend not the day:
I would have this grave man be ruled by me,
And to devide his Benefice agree;
You shall have half (old man) and take no pain,
The other shall an abler man maintain;
You shall do nothing, and have half your store,
The other shall do all, for as much more.
To which wise speech, the Reverend Pastor sed,
I Will put my Clothes off, when I go to Bed,
My Benefice and I, years halte a hundred
And five, have been conjoined, should not be sundred,
'Twas unto me, my Portion and my Lot,
By Simonaick means I had it not;
I Have preached in season often, and out of season,
And to deprive me now, there is little reason:
I have preached long, and hope to preach again.
TO be understood, by understanding men.
Not Amsterdam, or Edinburgh, or Leeth,
E're punished Preacher for his want of Teeth,
My heart and tongue are both upright, I know,
And with them both my diligence I Will show,
My Living is my my Life, and I Will apply
To live in it (as I have done) 'till I dye.
Then most sententiously wise Corbet spoke,
And willed the Parson his advice to take,
And do as wise Sir Thomas Barrington
Had Counseled him, all further strife to shun.
The old man answered, 'twas not avarice
Or any thing that Mizers, held in price,
But if he should make such a Resignation,
It would o'pe wide the gates of Innovation,
And any Preacher, so might be ejected
By fools, if they his Doctrine disaffected,
I Will keep my Pars'nage (Sans) desire of pelf,
And though I Am old, I Will cut my Bread my self.
The Chairman could no hansome answer utter,
Yet he with his associates, whispering mutter:
Some things the old man's faults to exaggerate,
(For why his wit they all did stagger at)
Which made the Parson into passion fall,
And said, I am much older then you all,
I Am wiser sure then some of you are here,
And as for honesty, I Will mak't appear
In that point, all of you I do defye,
And he does lie, that dares to say I lie.
One Doctor 10. Idiotis. Scandalous to say Venial and Mortal sins, but
neither scandalous or Popish, to say Venial and Damnable.
Vtey, (a man grave and learned)
Who well distnctions (Controverse) descern'd,
Was taxed before Miles Corbet, and his Meny all,
For making ods 'twixt Mortal sins and Venyall:
The Black Recorder did demand strait way
What (in this Case) the witnesses could say,
For Vtey's taxed, that he would often strike
Upon distinctions Romish Catholic;
One said Sins Damnable, he said, I wot
Sins Venial, and Sins Mortal he said not:
A second man the first man's words averred,
Why then (quoth Corbet) thus the Case is cleared,
If Vtey had said Venial sins and Mortal,
He then had opened wide the Popish Portall:
But since both Damnable and Venial were
His words; from Popish Doctrine he is clear.
When 11. Idiotis. M. Corbet and his Brethren ignorant of their Creed.
this last Draco was a Lawmaker of Athens, reported to have written his Laws
in Blood.
Draco Parliament began,
Began the fall of every honest man:
All Laws of God and Man were disanull'd,
The People (from their States) racked, pulled, and gulled,
They (from the King) did take no more, but ALL.
Their Rapine was so Epidemicall.
The Protestant Religion was their plea,
And how to drown, and sink the Popall Sea;
Whilst Protestantisme is extinct Confounded,
By Brownisme, Anabaptisme, and the Roundhead,
And Romes great Sea by them is justifide,
In their accursed attempting Regicide.
London our Englands great Metropolis,
Seemed to be grieved with some Monopolies;
That City e'rst for their Allegiance famed,
For Disallegiance through the whole world shamed;
They grieved for Shipmonyes, and petty things,
The Right Prerogatives of former Kings,
They grieved much, and grumbled at all these,
And then (like Fools) to seek amiss for ease;
The Kings Prerogative was lighter far,
Then half their Taxes in Rebellious War.
For they by Orders, Ordinance, and Votes,
TO have stripped the People even from their Coats;
In this beginning, young, old, more and less,
Made Universal They cried out, as the Jews did, when they said, His Blood be
upon us, and our Children; So these men whom they cried up, has been the
shedders of their Bloods, with their Childrens.
Noise for Burgesses:
Amongst the rest, a swarm of Sectaries
At Yarmouth, Corbet, Corbet, Corbet, Cries,
Who strait to Westminster, did make Repair,
And there, Inthroan'd in the Committee Chair.
Then presently to Yarmouth he sent down,
That what agrievances were in the Town,
He willed 'em that to him they should express it,
And he would take an order to redress it.
Some Aldermen, some Common Council men,
(In number twelve) sat in Committee then,
John A Woollen Draper.
Carter (Alderman) was chief that sat,
Who said he one great grievance would relate:
Which was their Minister did use to pray
Before his Sermon, and in praying say,
Let us praise God for Saint that lived ^ere
In Gods fear, and Eternal Glory, where
They do enjoy the unspeakable fruition
Of the Almighties presence, whose Condition
Is now in everlasting glorious state
As we shall be, if them we imitate.
Digression.
And now good Readers, pardon my Digression,
It Is far beyond the grounds of my Profession
To touch, or write of high Mysterious things,
Or the Incarnation of the King of Kings.
But seeing Unbelievers not Confide
In him that for our sins was Crucifide,
He that for us drank dry Gods wrathful Cup,
He that laid down his Life, and took it up,
He that did satisfy the Doom divine
For all believing Souls, and so for mine.
Shall I hear, that accursed Bla^phomie
Is countenanced (against his Deity)
By Parliament Apostates, shall I then
Neglect to tell'em on it with Tongue and Pen;
He that knows Jesus Christ so much abused,
And suffers it, shall not by him b' exons'd.
And Readers, I your pardons Crave again,
'Twas not the Raptures of an Idle Brain,
Truth, only Truth, did the whole Truth I Will write.
So help me God, as follows Precite.
The grand at Yarmouth.
Committee whether cloa'kd or gound
Sat at a Board, but whether square or Round
I know not well, but words and speeches past
Against the preacher, till they said at last
They heard him say, the blessed Saint Mary, she
The holy Virgin, mother of God to be,
To which they all conclude, they did not know,
Whether she were the Mother of God or no;
And in their wisdoms, circumstances weighing,
They said, it was a greivance in so saying.
If she were not, it is Blasphemy truly,
And for Blaspheming so, and Blasphe^^y
It Is fit, that presently we should present
Complaint of it unto the Parliament.
Some of the Brethren in this zealous puther
Said, Peradventure she might be Gods Mother,
Or else their minister whose Doctrine ever
None ever could disprove, ^ad said so never,
All disagreeing amongst themselves agreed,
By Votes, and Bullets with impartial speed;
With that those impure sanctified Zelots
Did into two bags, drop their holy pelots*
And which bag there the most of bullets got,
Caused her be stil'de the mother of God or not:
And by one bullet which John Carter last,
Put in one bag, the Virgins Cause was cast.
Was ever known such Irreligious sots,
They might as well have drawn cuts, or cast lots,
Or played at cross and pile, or handy dandy,
Such fooleries had been (...) to bandy
As bullets, though too many bandied are
With as much sense in this Rebellious War.
For understand good reader as you read,
These poor Committee men knew not their Creed,
They have denied the Christian Faith like Jews,
And for Religion they may yet go choose;
For our belief most plainly does declare,
That she, in her blessed womb God's Son did bear,
And he was God, (as blessed Esaye says)
Which is a fundamental point of Faith;
God is the Word, he and the word are one,
The word was God, being God's Eternal Son;
The Word was made (...), and that word I know,
Was, and is Jesus, let who dares say no;
That Jesus was the Virgins Son, and she,
Of Jesus (God and Man) must Mother be.
You fond Yarmonthians, what say you to this?
How can you hope for everlasting bliss?
That in your wandering fancies so do vary
As to doubt Jesus for the Son of Mary,
For such as dare say, Jesus is not God,
Through want of Faith, shall down to hell betrod.
Thus did the dullbraind doting, saithlesse dunces
By the Atheist (...) of their leaden Soonces,
With one poor senctific (...), they cast down
The honor which God gave her, and Renown
Which is her due^ this my Religion is,
And yet I am not apist for all this,
Her honor I no ^ot extenuate,
Though I to her th^'re pray or Invocate;
Base are those sade^ ^naves, that down dares tread
His Mother, who is Judge of Quick and Dead,
He that will judge such misbeleiving fellows
Unto the devil, who blows Rebellions bellows.
But leaving these things, (serious and mysterious)
Let Us talk of Parliamentall things Imperious,
The business did bring up the Minister
Before great Corbets throne at Westminster,
Who gave th'accusers thanks, and said that he
Unto their Godly indgements did agree.
And presently a Warrant was dispatched,
By virtue on it the Minister attached:
Which Warrant was obscequiously observed,
And in the very Chancell it was served.
(For in such Zeal, Mil^s Corbe^ will not falter,
His horns dares gore, even at the horns of the Altery
The Minister obay'd, and strait Rode up
To Westminster, to taste afflictions Cup,
Whereof they forced him drink a draught so great,
That he is since deprived of drink and meat,
Of House and Benefice, Goods, Children, Wife,
Or any thing, that may maintain a Life:
But that Gods Mercies over all his Works,
Whereby he lives, in spite of Jews or Turks.
And when at Westminster he did appear,
Where the Recorder sat, in's Supreme Chair;
There Master Gordon (Counselor at Law)
Said such a great Blasphemer he never saw
Of heard of, and with quaking, shaking, shivering,
He read the Article, with dreadful quivering,
At which the whole Committee were ama^'d,
And (terror struck) on one another gazed,
There sat Miles Corbet, there sat all his writ,
Sir Gilbert Pickering, next to him did sir,
And Lowrey, a grave Cambridge Fishmonger,
(A Burgess, and a learned Cosmographer:)
There sat Religions pure and shining Su^,
The most devout and zealous Penington;
One Wheeler, of the first Fruits office, and
Others, who (like the rest) did understand,
Who all said, 'twas a Blasphemy abhorred,
To call Blessed Mary, Mother of God, our Lord.
And one unto the Minister said thus,
I will you The Article was read, and the Minister said, I do confess this
Article, Terminis Terminantibus, where one of the Committee said, Sir, I will
Terminis Terminantibus you.
Terminis Terminantibus:
Then Isaac Penington said to him, Sir,
You stand not here Sir, as a Minister;
Who to his worships (...) did reply,
That in that Article he would Liv^^ Dye,
And whatsoever they (...) ache,
To justify it, on himself he (...)
And some D. Hassall, Deane of Norwich, and others.
(...) were there, who duly said,
Gods Son, was God, Son of the Blessed Maid.
Then Master Corbet some (...) words did sca^ter,
That they would take (...) of that matter:
And then reply (...),
That in no Author (...),
Which did (...) Arikle, wherefore
At this time we will dispute that poy^^ (...)
To whom the Minister did (...),
Sir, if you please (...),
To read grave Cleave^ (...),
They both (...) Virgin Mother of God.
Now may seduced People (...) see,
Of what faith their (...) Ministers be;
Now may they see in wh^^ Cause, they (...),
And hazard to (...),
Men of a Faith that (...),
Deny'ng the Union (...).
These are the (...), whom poor Fools d'obay,
And in their Service fool their Goods away,
Their Loyalties, their Lives, they (...)
Who are to God (...) and Kingdoms Foes:
They have Robbed God, of Glory, (...) the King,
From him they would his Crown and Kingdoms wring;
This have mad People (...), and (...) persist
To kill, and to be killed for (...).
Good God their darkened (...),
That they may (...) their (...) Estate,
Whereby this Cursed Rebellion may decease,
And haples England, gain a happy Peace.
FINIS.

