RULES AND ADVICES To the CLERGY Of the DIOCESE OF (...) For their Deportment
in their Personal and Public Capacities. Given by the Bishop at the Visitation.

DUBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty;
and are to be sold by John North, Bookseller in Castle-Street 1661.

RULES AND ADVICES To the CLERGY.
I.
Personal Duty.

Why take thou my Law into thy mo^h, seeing thou hate to be reformed
thereby. He that lives an evil Life may preach with Truth and Reason, or as did
the Pharisees; but not as Christ, or as one having Authority.





things, must be careful that he be not a servant of passion, whether of anger
or desire. For he that is not a master of his passions will always be useless,
and quickly will become contemptible and cheap in the eyes of his parish.

Be not over rightous (says Solomon) that is, not severe in demanding, or
forcing every thing, though it be indeed his due.

wrong the Church: for though it be true, that you are not to do prejudice to
succession, yet many things may be forgiven upon just occasions, from which the
Church shall receive no incommodity; but be sure that there are but few things
which thou art bound to do in thy personal capacity, but the same also, and
more, thou art obliged to perform, as thou art a public person.



that you can never truly teach humility, or tell what it is, unless you
practice it your selves.



up by his Emptiness. For many will pardon a good man that is less learned; but
if he be proud, no man will forgive him.

In the world ye shall have trouble; but in me ye shall have peace: and
consider this also, which is a great Truth; That every degree of love to the
World, is so much taken from the Love of God.

wisely: in other things, refer your self to God: but if you meet with evil
Tongues, be careful that you bear reproaches sweetly and temperately.





and all that belong to God; but especially for the Conversion of Souls; and be
very zealous for nothing, but for Gods glory, and the salvation of the World,
and particularly of your Charges: Ever remembering that you are by God appointed
as the Ministers of Prayer, and the Ministers of good things; to pray for all
the World, and to heal all the World, as far as you are able.



perseverance, and the measures of perfection in a holy Life, and a holy Death:
but at no hand must he magnify himselfby vain separations from others, or
despising them that are not so holy.

II.
Of Prudence required in Ministers.



and destroy his duty, by unreasonable compliance with their humors; least as
the Bishop of Granata told the Governors of Leria and Patti; like silly
Animals, they take burdens upon their backs at the pleasure of the Multitude,
which they neither can retain with Prudence, nor shake off with safety.



the like, though they object, That you speak for your selves, and in your own
cases. For a counsel is not the worse but the better, if it be profitable both
to him that gives, and to him that takes it. Only do it in simplicity, and
principally intend the good of their Souls.



self-conceit, or any other folly or indiscretion, snatch it not out of your
hand, and cheat you of the reward.



III.
The Rules and Measures of Government to be used by Ministers, in their
respective Cures.



Parish; and speedily suppress it when it is begun: and though all wise men
will abstain from interposing in other men's Affairs, and especially in matters
of Interest, which men love too well, yet it is your Duty here to interpose, by
persuading them to friendships, reconcilements, moderate prosecutions of their
pretenses; and by all means you prudently can, to bring them to peace, and
brotherly kindness.



neglect not frequently to confer with them in the spirit of meekness, and by
the importunity of wise Discourses seeking to gain them. But stir up no
violences against them; but leave them (if they be incurable) to the wise and
merciful disposition of the Laws.



himself void of offense both toward God and man: but if he be an humble
person, modest and inquiring, apt to learn, and desirous of information; if he
seeks for it in all ways reasonable and pious, and is obedient to Laws, then
take care of him; use him tenderly, persuade him meekly, reprove him gently,
and deal mercifully with him, till God shall reveal that also unto him, in
which his unavoidable trouble, and his temptation lies.

Scandals in (...). Vide Romans 16. 17. (...).
the abstract; they are Offenders and Offenses too. But if any man have an
Opinion, let him have it to himself, till he can be cured of his disease by
time, and counsel, and gentle usages. But if he separates from the Church, or
gathers a Congregation, he is proud, and is fallen from the Communion of
Saints, and the Unity of the Catholic Church.



Woe be to you, when all men speak well of you.

people to prattle about Religion and questions; but to speak little, to be
swift to hear, and slow to speak, that they learn to do good works for
necessary Uses, that they work with their hands, that they may have wherewithal
to give to them that need; that they study to be quiet. and learn to do their
own business.



always that a servant of God can no more be hurt by all the powers of
wickedness, than by the noise of a flies wing, or the chirping of a Sparrow.
Brethren do well for your selves: do well for your selves as long as you have
time; you know not how soon death will come.



apt enough to be troublesome: and a question put into their Heads, and a power
of judging into their Hands, is a putting it to their choice, whether you shall
be troubled by them this week, or the next: for much longer you cannot escape.



IV.
Rules and Advices concerning Preaching.



and signification of it, it may in a secondary sense be the Word of God.



learn from them what you ought to teach, you will give but a very ill account
at the day of Judgment, of the souls committed to you. He that receives from
the people what he shall teach them, is like a Nurse that asks of her sick
Child, what Physic she shall give him.



own Eminency; so it is the beginning of Mutiny to preach to the people the
duty of their Superiors and Supreme; it can neither come from a good Principle,
nor tend to a good end. Every Minister ought to preach to his Parish, and urge
their Duty. St. John the Baptist told the Soldiers what the Soldiers should
do; but troubled not their heads with what was the duty of the Scribes and
Pharisees.



Sermons be to preach holy life, obedience, peace, love among neighbors,
hearty love, to live as the old Christians did, and the new should, to do hurt
to no man, to do good to every man. For in these things the honor of God
consists, and the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus.

Cor. 13. For this grace is not finished by good Words, nor yet by good Works,
but it is a great building: and many Materials go to the structure of it. It is
worth your study, for it is the fulfilling of the Commandments.

his charge be frequent and severe against slanderers, detractors and
backbiters: for the crime of backbiting is the poison of charity; and yet so
common, that it is past into a Proverb: [After a good dinner let us sit down
and backbite our neighbors.]



To fear God, and keep his commandments. Speak but very little of the secret
and high things of God; but as much as you can of the Lowness and Humility of
Christ.

damnation against any man or party in a matter of disputation. It is enough
that you reprove an Error; but what shall be the sentence against it at the
day of Judgment, thou know not, and therefore pray for the erring person,
and reprove him; but leave the Sentence to his Judge.



known and accustomed words; and affect not new Fantastical or Schismatical
Terms: Let the Sunday Festival be called the Lords day* and pretend no fears
from the common use of Words amongst Christians. For they that make a business
of the words of common use, and reform Religion by introducing a new Word,
intend to make a change but no amendment; they spend themselves in trifles,
like the barren turf that sends forth no medicinable herbs, but store of
mushroms; and they give a demonstration that they are either impertinent
people, or else of a querulous nature; and that they are ready to disturb the
Church, if they could find occasion.

especially those that directly oppose the indispensable necessity of a holy
life: let him endeavor to understand in what true and useful sense Christ's
active obedience is imputed to us; let him make his people fear the deferring
of their repentance, and putting it off to their deathbed; let him explicate
the nature of faith, so that it be an active and quickening principle of
charity; let him as much as he may, take from them all confidences that slacken
their obedience and diligence; let him teach them to impute all their sins to
their own follies and evil choice, and so build them up in a most holy faith to
a holy life: ever remembering that in all ages it has been the greatest
artifice of Satan, to hinder the increase of Christ's Kingdom, by destroying
those things in which it does consist viz. peace and rightousness, holiness and
mortification.

England and Ireland; nor introduce any Doctrine against any of the four first
General Councils: for these as they are measures of Truth: so also, of
necessity; that is, as they are safe, so they are sufficient; and besides what
is taught by these, no matter of belief is necessary to salvation.



it with plainness and simplicity, and confirm it with easy Arguments and
plain words of Scripture; but without objection: let them be taught to believe
but not to argue: least if the arguments meet with a scrupulous person, it
rather shake the foundation by curious enquiry, than establish it by arguments
too hard.



by pulling him down, is but a dwarf still; and no man is the better, for
making his brother worse. In all things desire that Christ's Kingdom may be
advanced; and rejoice that he is served, whoever be the Minister: that if you
cannot have the fame of a great Preacher, yet you may have the reward of being
a good man: but it is hard, to miss both.

Mary; because these Feasts containing in them the great fundamentals of our
Faith, will with most advantage convey the mysteries to the people, and fix
them in their memories, by the solemnity and circumstances of the day.

God cannot be tempted, neither tempts he any man. God is true, and every man
a liar.



that Herod was for the omission of this, smitten by an Angel; and do thou
tremble, fearing least the judgment of God, be otherwise than the sentence of
the people.

V.
Rules and Advices concerning Catechism.



that all who desire it, may be present; but let all the more ignorant, and
uninstructed part of the people, whether they be old or young be required to be
present: that no person in your Parishes be ignorant in the foundations of
Religion: ever remembering, that if in these things they be unskilful, whatever
is taught besides, is like a house built upon the sand.

all things, what are the issues of eternity: glories never to cease, pains
never to be ended.



Lords day be kept religiously, according to the severest measures of the
Church, and the commands of Authority: ever remembering that as they give but
little Testimony of Repentance and Mortification, who never fast; so they give
but small evidence of their joy in God and in Religion, who are unwilling
solemnly to partake of the Public and Religious Joys of the Christian Church.

them presented to the Bishop, that he may pray over them, and invocate the
Holy Spirit, and minister the holy rite of Confirmation.

VI.
Rules and Advices concerning Visitation of the sick.



them to perfect their repentance, to strengthen their faith, to encourage
their patience, to persuade them to resignation, to the renewing of their holy
vows, to the love of God, to be reconciled to their neighbors, to make
restitution and amends, to confess their sins, to settle their estate, to
provide for their charges, to do acts of piety and charity; and above all
things, that they take care, they do not sin toward the end of their lives.
For if repentance on our deathbed seem so very late for the sins of our life;
what time shall be left to repent us of the sins we commit on our deathbed?



conscience of sick or afflicted people, consider not who asks, but what he
asks; and consult in your answers more with the estate of his soul, than the
conveniencie of his estate: For no flattery is so fatal as that of the
Physician or the Divine.



publicly, with witness and with prudence; least what is charitably intended,
be scandalously reported: and in all your conversation be sure to give good
example, and upon all occasions to give good counsel.

VII.
Of ministering the Sacraments, public prayers and other duties of Ministers.







the Canons, the Articles, and the Homilies of the Church, that he may do his
duty readily, discreetly, gravely* and by the public measures of the laws. To
which also it is very useful that it be added* that every Minister study the
ancient Canons of the Church* especially the Penitentials of the Eastern and
Western Churches: let him read good books, such as are approved by public
authority; such which are useful, wise and holy: not the scriblings of
Unlearned parties, but of men learned, pious, obedient and disinterested; and
amongst these, such especially which describe duty and good life, which
minister to faith and charity, to piety and devotion; Cases of Conscience, and
solid expositions of Scripture. Concerning which, learned and wise persons are
to be consulted.

his own or his peoples duty; such which may enable him to speak well, and to
do well; but to meddle with no controversies, but such by which he may be
enabled to convince the gainsayers in things that concern public peace and a
good life.



and advices, to bring forth for every man's need in the day of his trouble; let
him study and heap together Instruments and Advices for the promoting of every
virtue, and remedies and arguments against every vice; let him teach his people
to make acts of virtue not only by external exercise, but also in the way of
prayer, and internal meditation.

In these and all things else that concern the Ministers duty, if there be
difficulty, (...) are to repair to your Bis^^^ for further advice, assistanc^
and information.

FINIS.

