AN ANSWER To a Book entitled, AN ACCOUNT OF THE Church Catholic; Where it
was before the Reformation; And whether Rome were or be the Church Catholic.

Wherein is proved, That the Catholic Church never was, nor can be distinct
from that which is now called, The Church of Rome.

By R. T. Esquire.

Concordes omnes sumus, unum and idem sentientes: quare qui societatem nostram
devitat, is ne lateat sinceritatem vestram, quod seipsum a tota Ecclesia
abrumpit. Basil. Eust. Printed at Paris. 1654.

AN ANSWER TO A late Book, Entitled An Account of the CHURCH CATHOLIC, etc.
THough every idle Pamphlet deserves not the pains of an answer, yet since new
and dangerous Doctrines have so far overspread this Nation, and taken such
firm root in the hearts of the people, that any defense thereof (though never
so weak) shall be readily embraced and highly magnified; I esteemed it not
altogether un-necessary, to endeavor by this Reply to undeceive the d^luded
multitude, w^o are commonly carried away rather by the authority of some person
(in their opinion) eminent, then by force of Argument.

I should much wonder, that so wo^thy a person, as report ba's represented D.
Boughen to the world, should be the Author of so unworthy a Pamphlet, did I not
consider the horried effects of pride and malice, how they not only tempt
wretched souls out of the right path that leads to eternal felicity, but spur
them on also to a violent opposition of Gods sacred truth, till at length they
break out into open blasphemy against God and his holy Church, for which God
forsakes them, leaving them to their impious and damnable errors, to maintain
which, the most learned and subtle of all Heretics are forced to fly to
fallacious and ridiculous Arguments, which though to some unwary reader they
may at the first appearance seem to carry some show of truth, yet upon more
mature examination they will be plainly discovered to be but false and
deceiptfull colors; and such are all the Arguments in these Answers to the two
Letters of Mr. T. B. which I doubt not but I shall evidently demonstrate to any
impartial reader.

Sect. 1. First then Mr. T. B. desires the Doctor to show him the Catholic
Church distinct from the Church of Rome, and those in her Communion: The Doctor
answers, That the particular Church of Rome is to the whole Catholic, as a
particular member is to the whole body; and therefore as the whole body is
distinct from a particular member, or a particular member from the whole body,
so is the particular Church of Rome distinct from the whole Catholic.

Rub up your Logic Doctor, or let me advise you to go once more to the
University, and converse while with the young Sophisters, who will tell you of
a fallacy called, Ignoratio Elenchi; which indeed runs through almost your
whole book: For let us set these two Propositions against each other, and then
see whether we can discover any contradiction between them.

1. Prop. The Catholic Church is not distinct from the Church of Rome, and
those in Communion with her.

2. Prop. The particular Church of Rome is as distinct from the whole
Catholic, as a particular member is from the whole body.

Where is the contradiction? if both these Propositions may be true (as
certainly they are) where is the conclusion contradictory to the Proposition?
But let us help the Doctor, and form his Argument into a Syllogism, and then
perchance we may discover a contradiction.

Ma. Every particular member is distinct from the whole body.

Min. But the particular Church of Rome is a member of the whole body.

Concl. Therefore the particular Church of Rome is distinct from the whole body.

I must here ask again, where is the contradictory Conclusion to Proposition?
but perchance we wrong the Doctor, in making that his conclusion, which he
intended for his argument to the conclusion contradictory. Let us try that way
then, and see what will follow.

The particular Church of Rome is to the whole Catholic, as a particular
member is to the whole body: Ergo,

The Catholic Church is distinct from the Church of Rome, and those Communion
with her.

An excellent consequence, which every young Sophister will laugh at. But let
us try one way more, for I would fain make something of it; let us help the
Doctor with another Syllogism.

Ma. The particular Church of Rome is distinct from the whole Catholic. But
Min. The Church of Rome, and those in Communion with her, is the particular
Church of Rome. Ergo:

The Church of Rome, and those in Communion with her, is distinct from the
whole Catholics.

Here, I confess, is some apparency of contradiction in this conclusions but
then what a ridiculous Minor is here! By the same way of argumentation I will
prove Westminster and the Suburbs of London to be within the walls of London.
Thus:

Ma. The particular City of London is within the walls of London. But:

Min. The Suburbs of London, and the City of Westminster adjoining there unto,
are the particular City of London. Ergo:

The Suburbs of London, and City of Westminster adjoining thereunto, are within
the walls of London.

If the Minor were as true as the Major, the conclusion would necessarily be
true, but the Minor is as false as yours, and yours as this; for you must know,
good Doctor, that the Church of Rome, and those in Communion with her, are as
much distinct from the particular Church of Rome, as the Suburbs of London, and
City of Westminster are from the City of London.

Sect.. 2. Besides, there is great difference between the Roman Church, and the
particular Church of Rome; the Roman Church, and the Catholic, being
Synonama's, signifying one and the same thing: And though in that demand of Mr.
T. B. the Church of Rome may, in sensu diviso, be limited to the particular
Church or Diocese of Rome, yet in sensu composito, that is, being joined to
the following words, [and those in Communion with her] the Church of Rome is of
as full and ample la^itude and extension, as the whole Catholic Church. And
thus may be answered that trivial and childish objection against these words,
[ Roman Catholike] as if they implied a contradiction, they being but (as I
said before) Synonima's, both expressing the whole Church in her amplest
latitude; for the Church of God is Catholic, in respect of her Faith, Roman,
in respect of her denomination; Catholic, in respect of her doctrine; Roman,
in respect of her discipline; Catholic, in regard she is not consigned to one
Nation, People, or Kingdom, but invites the whole world to her Faith and
Communion, willingly embracing all that will come unto her; Roman, in respect
all particular Churches and persons whatsoever, that are within the Communion
of the Catholic Church, are united in, and subject to one Head, the Bishop of
the particular Church, or Sea of Rome, as being S. Peter's Successor, and
appointed by Christ to be his Vicar on earth. Thus have we vindicated that
expression of [ Roman Catholike] from contradiction; that denomination Roman,
added to the Church, being as universal, and having as large a signification
as the word Catholic, which not withstanding might have se med an unnecessary
addition, had it not been long since occasioned by some Heretics, thereby to
distinguish true from pretended Catholics, for those Heretics well knew,
that they could neither justify their new doctine, nor draw people to their
opinion, but by usurping the name and ti^le of Catholics, therefore the word [
Roman] was added to [ Catholic,] that those Heretics that had forsaken the
Communion of the Roman Church, might not deceive the vulgar under the notion of
Catholics.

3. And here by the way Doctor, I desire you to observe, that there was never
any Schismatique, or Heretic, nor any Sect, or Congregation of men professing
the name of Christ divided from the Catholic Church, but did either actually
or originally separate themselves from that Church, which is now called and
ever was, since the Apostles times, the Church of Rome, and therefore must
necessarily have formerly been in Communion with the same Church, which is an
argument unanswerable, that there was never any Catholic Church distinct from
that, which is now called the Roman Church, or Church of Rome.

4. But in the examination of this discourse, I have discovered another fallacy
in the Doctor, which the Logicians call, a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum
simpliciter. For though the Church of Rome in some respect, viz. as she is the
particular Diocese or Sea of the Bishop of Rome, may be called a particular
Church; yet as she is the Center and Fountain of Unity, in whom all the
particular members of the Church Catholic are united, she is, and may be truly
and properly called, the Catholic Church. And now, good Doctor, the discovery
of these two fallacies might serve for a full and sufficient answer to (almost)
your whole book. But let us proceed.

5. Now the Doctor begins to muster up his arguments against the Church of
Rome, to prove she is not the Catholic Church. And first, If the Church of
Rome (says he) he the Catholic Church, where was the Catholic Church before
She became a Church? Here I expected the Doctor would have begun to speak
sense, but it will not be. Let us then examine the Argument.

There was a time before Rome was a Church, therefore at this time the Church
of Rome, and those in Communion with her, (for those words Doctor, must not be
left out, though you are pleased to take little notice of them) is not the
Catholic Church: Or thus. There was a Catholic Church before Rome became a
Church; therefore now at this time the Church of Rome, and those in Communion
with her, cannot be the Catholic Church: What strange consequences are these?
as if the Catholic Church cannot take Her particular denomination from Rome,
though there were a Catholic Church before Rome was converted to the
Christian Faith. But to answer you in a word, before S. Peter translated his
chair from Antioch to Rome, the Catholic Church could not take its
denomination from Rome, but afterward it might, and did, and that
denominanation of Roman it re^ains to this d^y, and ever will, till S. Peter's
Successor shall translate his Sea from Rome to some other City, which (in all
probability) neither you, Doctor, nor I, shall ever live to see.

6. But let us examine this argument a little further. Mr. T. B. desires the
Doctor to show him the Catholic Church distinct from the Church of Rome, and
those in Communion with Her: The Doctor answers, That there was a Catholic
Church before Rome became a Church; and therefore that was not the Roman. Here
the Doctor has spoke something, though nothing to the purpose, for who ever
questioned that conclusion? The Doctor has forgot himself again, for his
conclusion should have been this, Therefore the Catholic Church was distinct
from the Church of Rome, and those in communion with her; and then let us see
what a fine argument here will be.

There was a Catholic Church before Rome became a Church; therefore the
Catholic Church was distinct from the Church of Rome, and those in communion
with her. Very pretty. Rome was no Church at all; therefore the Church of Rome
was distinct from the Catholic Church. You must not say Doctor, that I impose
this conclusion upon you, the argument is your own, and you think it so strong,
that you urge it again, Sect. 22. and though you have not thus set it down in
express terms, yet is it necessarily involved in your discourse.

7. But I have not yet done with this monstrous argument. Mr. T. B. desires the
Doctor to show him the Church Catholic distinct from the Church of Rome, and
those in Communion with her, for the last 1100. years: The Doctor answers,
that there was a Catholic Church before Rome became a Church. Here we shall
have another fine consequence.

There was a Catholic Church before Rome became a Church, viz somewhat above
1600. years since.

Therefore the Catholic Church has been distinct from the Church of Rome, and
those in communion with her, for th^se last 1100 years.

Most excellently concluded, Mr. Doctor; in brief, the effect of the argument
is this.

There was a time when Rome was no Church at all, therefore for these 1100.
years last past, the Church of Rome, and those in Communion with her, have not
been the Catholic Church.

Just so will I prove that D. Boughen has not been a Doctor of Divinity for
these five years last past.

There was a time when D. Boughen was no Doctor at all, therefore D Boughen has
not been a Doctor of Divinity for these five years last past.

Into what a Labyrinth of absurdities has the poor Doctor cast himself.

8. Let us now proceed to the next argument,, and sum it up, as far as it is
capable, into a syllogisticall form.

If Rome be the Catholic Church, then if she be Orthodox, the Catholic Church
is Orthodox; if she be heretical, or schismatical, the whole Church must be
heretical and schismatical; but the Catholic Church was never heretical or
schismatical, and yet the Church of Rome has been miserably schismatical and
heretical; schismatical, as is to be seen in Platina and Onuphrius, when she
had sometimes two, sometimes three Bishops together, a double, a treble-headed, a
monstrous Church. Therefore Rome cannot be the Catholic Church.

I am sure the Church of Rome was never so monstrous as this argument. The
Doctor is fallen so deep into a fallacy, that he cannot tell how to get out. M.
T. B. demands one thing, and the Doctor lays about him to prove another. But
let us examine the argument.

If by Rome you mean the particular Church, or Sea of Rome; first, it is
impertinent, secondly, I deny your consequence, at least, as to its latter
part, for the Catholic Church has not that necessary dependence on the
particular Sea of Rome, as that she must be heretical or schismatic, when
Rome is so. Rome, as it is a particular Sea, is but a member of the Church
Catholic, and therefore if she should by schism or heresy cut her self off
from the Catholic Church, yet would the Catholic Church remain in her
integrity and purity, as a man would not cease to be a man, according to his
essential parts, though some corrupt and incurable member were cut off from
the body; but if you mean by Rome, the Church of Rome, and those in communion
with her, I then deny your supposition, or your minor proposition, as to that
part; for the Church of Rome in that latitude is not at all distinct from, but
is the very same with the Church Catholic, which can never be heretical or
schismatic; wherefore if the Church of Rome has had sometimes two,
sometimes three pretended Bishops together (as you seem to have learnt out of
Platina and Onuphrius, though you cite no particular place in those Authors)
yet there could be but one true Bishop of Rome, one true Head of the church,
the rest being merely pretenders, and therefore they themselves, and all those
that adhered unto them were schismatiques, and as long as they obstinately
continued in their schism, they were no members either of the Catholic Church,
or the particular Church of Rome, the Catholic Church still remaining pure and
en^ire, and the Sea of Rome a true member thereof.

9. But the Doctor goes further, and charges the Church of Rome with heresy,
even from the confession of her own men.

I must be bold to tell you, Doctor, that your charge is as false as your
doctrine: There was never any Catholic that confessed the Church of Rome, and
those in communion with her, to have been heretical; for that had been to have
confessed the whole Catholic Church to be heretical, and so utterly extinct,
which is impossible; neither was there ever any Catholic that confessed, the
whole Diocese, or Sea of Rome was ever heretical; so that whether by Rome,
you mean the particular Church of Rome, or the Roman Catholic Church, your
assertion is most impudent and false, neither have you named any one man that
confessed it.

10. But perchance the Doctor intended these argunents for light skirmishes
only, and has reserved his main force and reason for his last affault, and
with this reserve hopes to obtain a signal victory over the Church of Rome.
Let us then encounter it, and try what force it brings with it.

If Rome (says he) be the Catholic Church, if any thing be amiss in any
particular, the fault is Hers, and She ought to mend it; therefore Rome is not
the Catholic Church.

What a wretched consequence is this? certainly the Doctor has forgot all his
Logic, or found out some new, which no body knows besides himself; by the same
^idiculous consequence I will prove that the Parliament of England was never
the Supreme Power of England; Thus.

If the Parliament of England were the Supreme Power, if any thing were amiss
in any particular, the fault was in the Parliament, and it ought to have mended
it; therefore the Parliament of England was never the Supreme Power of England.

Yet notwithstanding your ridiculous consequence, I will grant your conclusion,
as being nothing to the purpose; for your conclusion should have been this;
therefore the Church of Rome, and these in communion with her, are not the
Catholic Church. And if we examine the sequel of the Antecedent, we shall
find it as ridiculous as the whole consequence; for why should the church be
blamed for any thing that is a miss in any particular point of doctrine, or
discipline, and that in any particular church, or member of the Church
Catholic? (for by [particular], you must mean one of those, but which I know
not) Arius denied an high point of Catholic Faith, and many of the Eastern
church would not observe Easter Day, according to the Apostolic custom of the
Catholic Church, but I cannot see, why the blasphemy of the one, or the
Judaizing of the other should be imputed to the Church of Rome, and those in
communion with her, which is the Catholic Church; she used all her power and
endeavors to reclaim both, and when heretics have forsaken her faith, or
schismatiques her communion, she has always used that power and authority
wherewith God has invested her, to cause them to return to their faith and
obedience, but if the schismatike shall persist in his schism, or the hererique
in his heresy, the fault is in them, no^ in the church; that you, Doctor, most
obstinately continue in your heresy, the fault is yours, not the churches, she
has employed her utmost endeavors to reclaim you, and therefore cannot justly
be blamed for your heresy or schism; but if any particular Bishops or Pastors
have been negligent in reclaiming heretics or schismatiques, they must answer
for it, still the church is blameless.

10. In the next place the Doctor discourses concerning the Visibility of the
Catholic Church, which he grants to have been always visible, both in, and
from the time of the Apostles to this present day, but he will not grant it
always visible in one and the same place, no not to Rome it self, nor to every
eye.

Answ. The Doctor will be always proving that which was never questioned, but
by his leave, the Catholic Church has been always visible at Rome, even
from its first conversion to the Christian Faith, to this present day, as far
as the Catholic Church can be visible in any particular branch or member; but
who ever said or thought, that the whole Catholic Church was at any time
visible at Rome? that City, we know, was never so capacious, as to be able to
contain all the Catholics that have been for these many ag^s, living at the
same time in Europe, Asia, and Africa.

11. And that it ha^s not been always visible to every eye, (who ever said it
was?) he endeavors to prove, because Elijah saw not the church of Israel in
his time, and because the church was not visible to many in the days of
Rehoboam, of Ahaz, and Manasses.

Answ. If that church were sometimes so obscured, that it might be invisible to
many, nay, to most of that Nation (for it could not be, and be totally
obscured, and invisible to all eyes) yet, good Doctor, you cannot deny, but that
the church was apparently visible, both before and after Elijah, before and
after Rehoboam, before and after Ahaz, before and after Manasses; but neither
you, nor all the Protestants in the world can show, that at any time, not only
for these 1100. years last past, but for 1600. years, even from S. Peter's, to
these our days, there was any Catholic Church distinct from the church of
Rome, and those in communion with her, whereas that church has been most
perspicuously and apparently visible to the world in all ages, since the
Apostles time to this present time: Besides, that the Catholic Church should
be visible in times of hottest persecution, and so visible, that we can even at
this day point at it, and that afterward, when it was more glorious, it should
become invisible to all eyes (as that church must be which was distinct from
the church of Rome, and those in communion with her) and that for so many
hundred years, transcends any man's understanding, but D. Boughens.

12. It is more then probable (says he) that there were in this very Island
7000. souls that were not tainted with Popish errors; but he brings not so
much as a probable argument for it: By Popish Errors he means the ancient
doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church; but it is most improbable, that there
were so many as seven (besides such as were condemned for Heretics, and
confessed to be such, even by Protestants themselves) that before Luthers
Aposta^ie were separated from the Roman church, for there was not so much as
one man or woman that followed Luther, or Calvin, or any other Protestant
whatsoever in their new Doctrine, or embraced their new Reformation, as you
call it, but had been before a professed Roman Catholic.

13. It is enough for us (says the Doctor) to prove them to be errors, to be
against Scripture, and the received sense of the ancient church.

Answ. For shame, Doctor, recall your words, I am sure that this speech must
proceed from much impudence or ignorance, they were never yet proved to be
errors against Scripture, some indeed have barkt against Gods church, and
blasphemed her faith and doctrine, (as you have done in this Pamphlet) wresting
the Scripture to their damnable purposes; and I am sure, that of all men you
will never be able to prove them so: But what can be more apparent to the
world, then that all Antiquity confirms the doctrine of the Roman church, and
condemns yours.

14. That which you say concerning the Popes, Liberius, Honorius, and Jo. 22.
shall be answered hereafter in a more proper place.

15. But the Doctor is sure, that he has manifested, that the Church of Rome,
and those particular churches in her communion, are not, cannot be the
Catholic Church.

Answ. Indeed he has made it so manifest, that no body can see it; for if this
conclusion [ The church of Rome, and those particular churches in her
communion, are not, cannot be the Catholic Church] be either expressly, or
implicitly in any thing that he has said before, I will then lay down the
^^dgells, and never lift up my hand more against D. Boughen.

16. In his following discourse, I con^esse the Doctor seems to say more then
ever he said before, viz. That the church of Rome, and those in communion with
her, might be a Catholic, but not the Catholic Church, a part, but not the
whole.

Answ. But, good Doctor, saying is one thing, and manifesting another; this
must not be begged, but proved; all that he said before was, that Rome was a
particular church, and this too was but only said, not proved at all; and now
he (at least) seems to draw nearer to the question, and say, that the church of
Rome, and those particular churches in her communion, are but a part of the
Catholic Church; and that therefore the Catholic Church is of a larger
extent, and comprehends within her bounds more churches then those only that
are in communion with the church of Rome.

This is easily said, but where are your proofs? where is your Scripture for
it? or where is your authority of Fathers or Counsels for it? can you, or any
man else show, that at any time, between the times of the Apostles, and Luthers
Apostasy, there was any particular church divided from the church of Rome, and
those in communion with her, and yet acknowledged either by the church of Rome,
or any in communion with her, or by any Catholic Father, or any Catholic
Council, to be a true member of the Catholic church? if this cannot be shown
(as I am most certain it cannot) why should we take it upon your word, that the
church of Rome, and those in communion with her, is not the Catholic Church,
but a part only thereof? was there ever any particular church (not in communion
with the church of Rome) that sent her Bishops and Prelates to any General
Council, wherein the whole Catholic Church was represented? or did ever any
General Council receive Bishops, or permit them to sit and vote there, that
were sent from any such church, or that would not acknowledge their subjection
to the Bishop of Rome, as the common Pastor, and visible head of Gods church?
it is very strange, that there should be whole churches, whole countries and
Nations, all true members of the Catholic Church, and so acknowledged, that
were not in communion with the church of Rome, that is, never acknowledged any
subjection to the Sea or Bishop of Rome; and yet that there should be no
Records thereof, that all these should be invisible to the world for these
1600. years together. These are strong arguments against you, Doctor, what
arguments you will hereafter bring for your self, I know not, but as yet, I am
sure, you have brought none at all.

17. I commend your wisdom in concealing the words of those Canons by you
cited. Sect. 10. for you plainly perceived that they made nothing for you. That
sixth canon of the Council of Nice, which seems most to strengthen your cause,
and has been so often objected by your party, and so often answered, has been
proved upon diligent examination, to make directly against you, as appears
plainly: Council. Calc. Act. 16.

18. But the Doctor is much scandalized at the maiming of the Lords Supper; so
that if there were no other cause then that, he could not communicate with the
Church of Rome* Sect. 11. It seems, Doctor Boughen cannot content himself with
that, wherewith the good Primitive Christians were all satisfied. They could be
contented to carry the blessed Sacrament to their houses, and reserve it there
for times of necessity under one Species. They thought it sufficient to
minister it to their sick under the Species of Bread only, to their children
(when that by some was thought necessary) under the Species of Wine only, but
the Doctor will have both, or none. None of the ancient Fathers, nor the most
learned of all the Primitive Christians, could ever find it in Scripture, that
Christ ordained the blessed Sacrament to be given in both kinds to all sorts of
people; but Doctor Boughen is so quick-sighted, that he has discovered that
which the whole church for 1500. years together could not find out.

19. But, good Doctor, how do we rob the Laity of Christ's blood? if those
creatures of Bread and Wine be after Consecration, truly, really, and
substantially changed into the body and blood of our blessed Savior? then
those that receive his body, receive his blood also; for whosoever communicates
under one Species only, receives both the body and blood: And if there be no
such change (as I am sure, according to your doctrine, there is not) then we
^ob them, at the most, but of the sign or figure of Christ's blood; neither
indeed is it in the power of the Priest, or church to rob them of that; for if
the cup after consecration be but a bare sign or figure of Christ's blood, still
retaining its former nature and substance of wine, then may any one, in spite
of the Priest or church, take a cup of wine, when and where he please, and make
it to himself a sign of Christ's blood, and so it may be to him as perfect a
Sacrament, as if received it from the hands of the Priest.

Perchance you will say, it is not a sign but by virtue of Consecration: This
may be easily said, but can you prove it out o^ Scripture, which you make the
sole rule of your Faith? If you can, then will I subscribe to your opinion, if
not, (as I am most certain you cannot) then according to your own Principle,
neither you, nor I, nor any man else is bound to believe it.

20. But here I meet with two Authorities out of S. Cyprian, to prove, that
none can be fit for Martyrdom, that communicate not under the Species of Wine
as well as of Bread: certainly the Doctor (to say no worse) misunderstands S.
Cyprian, for he was too great a Scholar to maintain so false and ridiculous a
doctrine; his words in the first place cited by the Doctor, are these, Quomodo
ad Martyrii p^culum idoneos facimus, si non eos ad bibendum prius in Ecclesia
poculum Domini jure communicationis admittimus? Cypr. li. 1. Epist. 2.

I answer, that all this Father intends inthis Epistle to Pope Cornelius, is;
to desire the Pope, that those, who for fear of persecution had fallen from
their faith, might upon their repentance and reconciliation to the church be
admitted to the holy communion, that by the virtue and power of that Sacrament
they might be the better able to encounter with, and overcome a new
persecution. There is not so much as one word in the whole Epistle concerning
the insufficiency of communicating under one Species only, or the necessity of
communicating under both, those words [ Poculum Domini] the cup of our Lord,
signifying there the blessed Sacrament in general, in allusion to the former
words, [ Poculum Martyrii] the cup of Martyrdom: and this will most plainly
appear to any one that shall impartially ^ead that Epistl^; all that can
possibly be proved out of those words, is, that in some places in or about the
time of S. Cyprian, the Laity we^^ admitted to communicate under both kinds,
which no Catholic ever denied or questioned; and that it was a custom even in
S. Cyprians time to administer the Communion in one kind only, may easily be
proved from those two miracles recorded by the same Father, Sermon. de Lapsis. to
which I refer the Reader.

The other place cited out of S. Cyprian, has these words, Quomodo possumus
propter Christum sanguinem fundere, qui sanguin^ Christi crubescimus bibere?
Lib. 2. Ep. 3*

Answ. These words I confess are S. Cyprians, but they are less to the
purpose then the former, as I shall instantly make it appear.

There were certain Heretics in S. Cyprians time, who contrary to our blessed
Saviors institution (as this Father says) would consecrate in wine alone,
without any mixture of water; and others who would consecrate in water alone,
without wine: against these latter S. Cyprian intends these words cited,
saying, that such drink not the blood of Christ, since water cannot by virtue
of consecration, be changed into the blood of Christ, by reason of the defect
of wine, which is the true matter of the Sa^rament, and therefore could not
have the power and efficacy of the Sacrament to enable men to overcome those
great difficulties and temptations of persecution, and to lay down their lives
for the faith of Christ. But there is not one word in that whole Epistle
concerning receiving the Sacrament under one or both Species.

21. Now to pass by diverse impertinencies, and such things as have been
already answered, let us come to the Doctors Master-argument, (for doubtless
he esteems it so, otherwise he would not so much have insisted upon it, and
repeated it so often) which to set forth in its full luster, he has at last
adventured on this Syllogism.

If ye (the Church of Rome) have at any time denied Jesus Christ to be the true
God, and eternal life, ye were at that time no church, but an Antichristian
Synagogue.

But this did Marcellinus, and Liberius, and Jo. 22. all Bishops of Rome. Ergo;
In those times ye were no church, but an Antichristian Synagogue.

Answ. What an Antichristian Syllogism is here? Antichrist has not more
heads, then this Syllogism has terms. But let us be once more favorable to
the Doctor, and help him to speak sense; he means well, thohgh he has forgot
his Logic: all then that I can make of it, is this.

There was a time when Rome, and all those in communion with her, were no
church at all, but an Antichristian Synagogue.

Therefore the Catholic Church, which never failed, must be distinct from the
Church of Rome, and all those in communion with her.

This I confess is a pretty good consequence, but the Doctor may thank me for
it: Well then, not to question the consequence, we deny the antecedent which is
proved thus:

Marcellinus and Liberius, and ^o. 22. all Bishops of Rome, denied Jesus Christ
to be the true God, and eternal life. Ergo:

There was a time when the Church of Rome, and those in communion with her were
no church, but an antichristian Synagogue.

Ans. This is your consequence, Doctor, not mine. Would not you have laughed at
me, or any man, that should have concluded the whole church of England to have
been formealy heroticall and schismatic, because the King, or Arch bishop of
^anterbury (one whereof you acknowledged head of your pretended Church) was
Heretical or Schismatical? Must every Church stand or fall with its Bishop?
Must the particular members of the Church of Rome necessarily forsake their
faith, if her Bishop fall into Herefie, or Idolatry? You confess, page 9. 10.
that there was a visible true Church of the Jews in those days, when both
their King and High Priest had forsaken the true God, and committed Idolatry;
and must the Church of Rome totally perish, if her Bishop forsake his faith?
Shall the Church of the Jews have a prerogative above the Church of Christ?
This is Logic I understand not.

22. And though this might serve for a full and satisfactory answer, to any
judicious and impartial Reader; yet since I find diverse good Popes falsely
charged with Heresy and Idolatry, I shall endeavor, Ex superabundanti, to
vindicate them from those foul aspersions, and so destroy the Antecedent, as
well as the Consequence, by showing, the Doctor is here as much out in his
History, as he was before in his Logic.

22. First then, Pope Liberius is accused of Arianism, but falsely; for he never
subscribed to that damnable Heresy, never decreed, taught, or maintained it.
He subscribed only to the banishment of S. Athanasius, to which the Emperor
Constantius for^'t and compelled him by torments; as St. Athanasius himself
testifies in both his Apologies, where he clearly acquits him of Heresy. And
if St. Athanasius in an other place, and St. Hierom charge him with subsc^ibing
to Arrianism, it is to be understood, interpretative only; in that he
subscribed to S. Athanasius's banishment, which was procured by the Arrians;
and externally communicated with some Arrian Bishops: especially since not only
those ancient Authors Socrates, lib 2. Eccief. Hist. c. 29. Sozomen. lib. 4. c.
10. Theodoret, lib. 2. c. 16, 17. but also S. Athanasius himself in the
forecited places testifies, that he was no Heretic, and that he did nothing
in compliance with the Arrians, but what he was compelled unto by a tedious
banishment, and force of torments. And that all Italy, and Spain should side
with this Pope in that Heresy, as you afterward charge them, ( Sect. 23.) is
most notoriously false, spoken gratis, without any authority, or ground
whatsoever.

23. The second Pope that stands charged with Heresy is Honorius: but what his
heresy was, the Doctor declares not. It Is true, some Heretics have charged
this Pope (upon what ground I know not) with joining with the Monothelites in
their heresy: but it cannot appear, that ever he held or taught that Heresy,
either publicly or privately. His errors were at the most but conjectured by
some private Letters, which after his death were published in his name. But
that in his life time he renounced that Heresy, appears, Epist. Honor. ad
Sergium. Act. 13. sext. Synod. Yet suppose Honorius had erred; what was that to
the Church of Rome? she notwithstanding might be free from error. And that de
facto, she was free, and persecuted that heresy, Pirrhus Patriarch of
Constantinople, being at her suit banished by H^raclius the Emperor, appears
plainly by Platina, in Honor. 1. and Sabellicus Aenead. 8. lib 6.

24. In the next place comes in Zepherinus, charged with Montanism; but most
unjustly. He was no Montanist; only out of a candid and peaceable disposition,
he endeavored to make peace between the Catholics and the Montanists; and
this was all his Heresy. That plrce of Lyra by you cited, in Mat. 16. makes
rather against you then for you. He says there, that some Popes have
Apostatized, and thence concludes, that the Church depends not on any
particular man's person, but consists in those that profess the true faith of
Christ. He sees not your consequence; That because the Bishop of Rome falls
into Heresy, therefore the Church of Rome must be Heretical; but maintains the
contrary.

25. But behold Marcellinus an Idolater, who denied Christ, and offered
sacrifice to Idols. Answ. So also did S. Peter deny his Master. Marcellinus
externally denied Christ for fear of torments; so did St. Peter for fear of the
Jews: yet they both confessed Christ in their hearts, though they both grievously
sinned in their external denying of him: But as S. Peter repented, and
afterward became a glorious Martyr; so likewise did this blessed Pope follow S.
P^ter, both in his Repentance and Martyrdom.

But what is this to the Church of Rome? Did all the rest of the Apostles deny
Christ, because S. Peter denied him? I suppose, no man of reason will say so;
and if not, why should the whole Church of Rome be said to forsake her faith,
because her Bishop for fear of torments denied Christ in some ex^^^ior action,
as S. Peter had done before him by oaths, and execrations? Perchance, you will
say, that S. Peter was not as truly chief of the Apostles, and head of that
Church. which was then in being, when he denied his Master, as Marcellinus was
Bishop of Rome. To this I answer, that our blessed Savior had then founded his
Church, viz. the night before S. Peter's denial; when he gave an end to the
legal types and ceremonies, and instituted the substance, the blessed Sacrament
of his precious body and blood.

The Church thus founded, S. Peter must necessarily be the head thereof, and
consequently chief of all the Apostles, unless you will deny the Apostles to be
part of that Church, which was then in being. And he that shall deny S. Peter
^o be he^^ th^reof, gives Christ the lie; who formerly had made that promise to
S. Peter in plain and express words, Matthew. 16. 18. Thou ar^ a rock, and upon
this rock will I build my Church. Christ said not; thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock will I build my Church; as you falsely translate, to deceive the
world; but, Thou art Cephas, (which in the Syrian language, which our Savior
then spoke, signifies a Rock; and upon this Cephas (that is, this Rock) will I
build my Church.

Our blessed Savior used not two different words, as you would make the world
believe, as [ Peter] in one place; and [ Rock] in the other; but in both places
used the word ( Cephas) which signifies a Rock, that being the name which
Christ gave to Peter when he first called him. And though the Catholic
Translaters of the New Testament, who profess to follow exactly the vulgar
Latin Edition, as being more authentic, then any Greek Copy now extant in the
world, have translated that place, as you do, viz. Thou art Peter, etc. yet
have they dealt more ingeniously with the world, in advertising, that the word
[ Peter] signifies a Rock; and that our blessed Savior used not two, but one
and the same word [ Cephas,] which signifies a Rock, in that promise made to S.
Peter; whereas you, though professing to follow the Original, yet when it makes
against you forsake it, and follow the Latin; and when that makes against you,
then you pretend to follow the Original. Thus you will always have a shift to
delude the world, and your own souls; for had you in that place followed the
Original, you should have translated it, [ Thou art a Rock,] not [ Thou art
Peter:] besides in the Greek the words are (...) which word (...) signifies a
Rock, as ruly, and as properly as (...).

So then Christ founded his Church on S. Peter as a Rock, as the very connection
of the words demonstrate: For in these words of our blessed Savior [ I say
unto thee (Peter,) thou art a Rock, and upon this Rock will I build my Church.]
Can any reasonable man imagine, that by those words [ This Rock] Christ meant
any other Rock then that whereof he made mention, in the words immediately
preceding, viz. Thou art a Rock?

It is then most apparent that Christ built his Church on S. Peter's person, at
least, as to the Discipline and Government thereof, and consequently upon his
Successors. For if our blessed Savior knew that his Church, even in her very
infancy, when the Apostles themselves inspired with the Holy Ghost, where a
great part thereof would stand in need of some supreme Head and Governor;
certainly he foresaw, that when his Church should be more ample, and numerous,
and more subject to divisions and factions, it would stand in far greater need
of an Universal Head, wherein all particular Churches, and members thereof
might be united; and therefore would not leave it without some common Pastor to
guide and direct it. And I desire you to take notice Doctor, that herein all
the Fathers, both Greek and Latin, Ancient and modern unanimously agree; and
that this common and supreme Pastor of Christ's Church ever was, and ever must
be S. Peter's Successor, who hithet^o (ever since S. Peter placed his Chair
there) has been the bishop of Rome, and for ought we know, ever will be till
the end of the world. And this those very Authors, Stella and Lyra, whom you
have cited for your self, will plainly tell you, even in those very places
which you have cited.

Besides, who ever confirmed the acts of any lawful General Council, but the
Pope? In his absence had he not his Delegates, who sa^e in the supreme place of
the Council, though they were not always Bishops, and that even in the
Eastern Church? I could be more copious in this point, but I here intend a
reply only, not a Treatise of Controversy.

26. I come now to Pope John 22. who stands charged with a strange and
monstrous Heresy, viz. for affirming, that God the Son is greater then God the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, and Stella's authority is produced to prove it.

Answ. I confess Stella has accused him of it, but I must be bold to exc^pt
against his authority and testimony in this matter of fact; for it cannot
appear that Stella spoke this upon any just ground, or probability; for no man
besides Stella, either Catholic, or Heretic (that I could ever yet read or
hear of) ever charged Pope John 22. with that blasphemy: it is true, some
Heretics, and amongst the rest Calvin (Just. li. 4. c. 7. Sect. 28.) have
charged this Pope, for affirming, that the souls of men were mortal, but most
injuriously, for he never taught, nor held the mortality of the soul; all that
he held contrary to the opinion of the world was, That the souls of the Just
should not see God before the Resurrection. This opinion was far from Heresy,
the Church never having defined the contrary, and diverse ancient Catholic
Fathers being of the same opinion; neither did he ever absolutely defend that
opinion, as an unquestionable truth. For as Jo. Villanus. Hisior. li. 11. cap.
19. reports, the day before his death he declared, that he never had any intent
to define it, and that whenever he discoursed of it, his end was to find out
the truth, and added withal, that he held the contrary opinion to be more
probable, and I am sure it is most improbable, that Ockam his bitter enemy
should charge him with this, and Calvin with the other, and yet neither of
these should make any mention of that blasphemous Heresy which D. Boughen one
of Stella lays to his charge; if either he had been guilty, or they could have
found any probable argument, or colorable ground, that he might be guilty of
that horrid blasphemy: but suppose this had been true, as it is far from all
probability of truth, what is this to the purpose? What if Liberius,
M^rcellinus, and John 22. all Bishops of Rome, had their private errors? what
is all this to the Church of Rome? your Intelligencer Stella (even in that
place by you cited) will tell you, they erred as private persons only, not as
bishops of Rome, or Heads of the Church; they never decreed, nor defined
Heresy; they never commanded any heretical Doctrine to be received as a divine
truth by the whole Church: They might fall into errors; so likewise did Peter,
(as Stella says) even after Christ had prayed for him, that his Faith should
not fail. But I suppose no man will be so unreasonable, or blasphemous, as to
say, Peter's Faith failed, after Christ had prayed that it should not fail,
though externally for fear of the Jews he denied it: Peter then denied his
Faith, what was this to the other Apostles, and the rest of Christ's Disciples?
Liberius, Marcellinus, and Pope John 22. had their errors, what was this to the
Church of Rome? had you read Stella but a very few lines further, you would
have found small encouragement to have cited his authority for your opinion;
for though he seems in some sense to grant your Minor Proposi^ion (as you call
it Sect. 18.) in your missh pen Syllogism, Sect. 17. viz. That Liberius,
Marcellinus, and John 22. erred in Faith, yet he there plainly denies your
conclusion, viz. That therefore in their times the Church of Rome became no
Church, but was an Antichristian Synagogue: His words in Luc. 22. 31. the very
place by you cited, are these, Ecclesia enim Autiochena, Alexandrina, and
Constantinopolitana, saepe defecerunt a fide; Ecclesia vero Romana nunquam
defecil; quia Christus ait Petro; ^ravi pro te, ut uon deficiat fides tua. The
Church (says he) of Antioch, Alexandria, and Constantinople, have often fallen
from their faith, but the Church of Rome never fell from her faith, because
Christ said to Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not.

You see Doctor what a plain testimony here is against you, out of the same
Author which you have cited for you: Stella was not so sharp-sighted as to see
your consequence, viz. That beause Marcellinus, Liberius, and John 22. had
fallen from the true faith, therefore the Church of Rome had forsaken her
faith; but the contrary he maintains exprefly, viz. That although Liberius,
Marccllinus, and John 22. all Popes of Rome, denied the true Faith, yet the
Church of Rome never failed, or fell from her faith: He could not draw your
Conclusion from such Premises as yours are; and yet doubtless he knew a
Syllogism, and a rational consequence as well as you.

27. But why should Vigilius be an Eutychian? was it because out of reverence
and respect to the Council of Calcedon, he could not be induc't, neither by the
persuasions, nor threatenings of the Emperor, to repeal an Act of that Council,
in condemning those Tria Capitula, which the Counccl had received as Orthodox,
nothing favoring the Heresy, either of Nestorius, or Eutyches, one whereof
was the Epistle of Ibas, who publicly in the Council renounced the Heresies,
both of Nestorius and Eutyches; another, the writings of Theodoret against
Nestorius, for which Theodoret had formerly been deposed by the Eutychian
Faction in that Latrocinal Council at Ephesus, and afterward restored by the
Catholics? I confess this is a very strong argument, that he was no
Eutychian: but that he was one, you only say it, you alledg no reason, you cite
no authority nor testimony, but that of Lyra, whom I cannot find making any
mention at all in the place by you cited in Mat. 16. either of this Vigilius,
or of any other Pope whatsoever, only in general terms he says, That some
Popes have apostatized, which is nothing to this purpose.

28. To the Question, where your Church was before the Reformation, Sect. 19.
(I suppose Mr. T. B. used not the word [ Reformation] but by it, I conceive,
youmean, your separation from the Roman Church) To this Question, you say, it
was answered; In the Catholic.

Answ. I confess the answer is most true, when you were a Church, you were in
the Catholic Church; so also were formerly the Arrians, Macedonians,
Pelagians, Nestorians, Entychians, Donatists, etc. all these before their
respective Reformation, that is, before they fell into Heresy and Schism, were
within the walls of the Catholic Church; before their separation, they were
all in communion with the Church of Rome, and therefore true members of the
Church Catholic; so likewise were you; and as the Arians, etc. by forsaking
the communion of the Church of Rome, and opposing her doctine and faith, cut
themselves off from the communion of the Catholic Church, and so ceast to be
members thereof, even so have you now ceast to be any Church at all, by
separating your selves from your Mother Church, the Church of Rome, with whom
you had been in communion for the space of almost a thousand years together,
even from the first conversion of this Nation to the Christian Faith by S.
Augustine, to K. Henry the Eighth's apostosie.

19. Before the Reformation (you say) we communicated with Rome, and since we
have not; that is no fault of ours, ye will not suffer us to communicate with
you, unless we communicate with your errors?

Answ. This is very fine: who, I pray, shall judge of those errors? Christ has
made his Church Judge of your errors? what Heretics ever were there in the
world, that did not, or might not have used the same Plea for their separation
from Gods Church? Was there ever any particular Church that presumed to censme
the doctrine of the Catholic Church? Or was it not excessive pride, if not
madness in you, to think that you were wiser then the whole Christian world had
been for 1500. years before you? Can you show, that in any age since the
Apostlos, the Catholic Church held and taught your doctrine? can you prove
that ever any particular Church, or Nation, taught or maintained the same? nay,
I will go further; can you produce any one man, in any age from Christ's Passion
to Luthers Apostasia, let him be of the Clergy or Laity, either Catholic, or
Heretic, that agreed with you in all points of your Faith and Doctrine,
wherein you now dissent from the Church of Rome? if you cannot, methinks your
selves should condemn your selves for separating from that Church; in whose
Faith and communion all your Ancestor^ for so many ages lived and died, and
embracing a new Doctrine (and that out of your own judgment and fancy only)
for which you have neither president nor authority.

30. And yet I must confess that your Religion is not altogether now, it is a
Religion, for the most part, patcht up of old condemned Heresies, though there
were never any Heretics before Luther, that held all your Doctrine. I know,
your ordinary pretense is to appeal ^o, and to be judged by the Scripture: but
do you not first make your selves Judges of the Scripture? do you not impose
new senses and interpretations on Gods holy Word, such as were never heard of
before your Apostasy? do you not, against all reason, interpret plain places
of Scripture by obscure, rather then the obscure by the plain? and when by your
corrupt translations, false glosses, and new interpretations, you have made the
Scripture speak what you please, then you cry out, The Scripture has given
sentence for you against the Church of Rome. I confess, since you have made
your selves Masters of the Holy Ghost, you were very unwise, if you would not
make him speak as you would have him; you have usurped a power, that we dare
not challenge; we tremble at that fearful curse denounc't by S. Paul (Gal.1.)
against all those that shall teach new Doctrines: We hearken to, not consure
the Church: We embrace her doctrine, not charge her with errors. But I would
ask any reasonable man (though there were no Obligation, yet) whether it were
not more prudential for a man to build his salvation on the authority of the
whole Church, then of some particular persons, not altogether agreeing amongst
themselves, and disagreeing from the whole world besides; or whether it were
not more reasonable to embrace the doctrines and interpretations of Scripture,
that were universally received by the whole Church for 1500. years, then those
new doctrines and interpretations of Luther and his followers. You confess,
that before your Reformation (as you call it) you communicated with the Church
of Rome, How came you to find that the Church wanted a Reformation, and that in
Doctrine? (for in matters of Discipline and manners you might have reformed
your selves, and yet still have been in communion with the Church of Rome) How
came you to discover those errors, which none in the whole Christian world
besides your selves could perceive? before your separation there was no
particular branch or member of the Catholic Church, but was in communion with
the Church of Rome, How then came you to see that light, which none besides
your selves could see? Was all the world besides you blind? Had you only the
Scripture? Or could you only interpret them? But why do I speak of you, as of a
company or multitude? For though Time has now made the difference to be between
the Protestants and the Church of Rome, yet originally it was between Luther
and the whole Church; you in England, as all other Protestants, are but Luthers
followers. The Church then went one way, and Luther another; and you very
wisely have forsaken the whole Church, and followed Luther. Do but examine this
according to the principles of common prudence, and then tell me, Doctor,
whether you have done discreetly. You have forsaken the whole Christian world,
and followed one man; who neither had, nor pretended to any extraordinary
calling. He never wrought miracle in confirmation of his new Doctrines; or to
manifest to the world that God had revealed that Truth unto him, which for many
ages had been totally obscured, and unknown to the world. It is then your fault
now, that you communicate not with the Catholic Church, since it was your
fault formerly that you forsook her, to follow one man. If you will forsake
that single Apostate, and return to your faith and obedience, you shall soon be
received; the Churches arms are always open to embrace you.

Before your pretended Reformation (according to your own confession, Sect. 19)
you communicated with Rome; that is, you acknowledged your subjection to the
Apostolic Sea of Rome. You confessed the Bishop thereof to be the supreme
visible Head of Christ's Church, appointed by Christ himself to be so; as St.
Peter's successor. For no particular Church, or person, ever was, or could be in
communion with the Church of Rome, that denied, or questioned this Doctrine, or
that refused to yield obedience to the Sea of Rome, as the Head and Mother of
all Churches, and to the Bishop thereof as Christ's Vicar General on Earth. How
then came you (in England) to find out that at last, which your Ancestors for
almost 1000. years could not discover? They all even from the first conversion
of this Nation to the Christian Faith, by St. Augustine, to K. Hen. eights
Defection, were subject to the Sea of Rome, and to the Bishop thereof, as
Christ's immediate Vicar, and under him, the supreme head of the Catholic
Church. How come you to be wiser then all your forefathers, and the whole
world besides? Can it be reasonably supposed, that those great Patriarchs of
the ^ast, the Patriarch of Constantinople, of Jerusalem, of Antiech, etc. with
all the Bishops of Asia, Africa and Europe, should profess and acknowledge
themselves subject to the Bishop of Rome, had they not thought, that his power
and Jurisdiction over the whole Catholic Church had been by Christ's especial
appointment and commission? What colorable plea then can you allege for your
separation?

31. But I perceive the Doctor is flying to his old fallacy, in taking for
granted, or rather indeed downright begging, that the Church of Rome can be no
more then a particular branch or member of the Church Catholic. For his words
immediately following are these. (And yet we shall ma^gre Satan communicate with
the Catholic Church; while with one mind and mouth we glorify God, etc.)
Good Doctor, deceive not your self, the Devil does but laugh at you for that
idle fancy You cannot truly glorify God either in mind or mouth, whilst you
separate your selves from Gods Church. Neither can you communica^e with the
Catholic Church, whilst you keep your selves out of the communion of the
Church of Rome. I told you before Sect. 2. that the Roman Church, and the
Catholic Church are in some sense Synonymaes, signifying one and the same
thing. The Church of Rome is that Catholic Church, out of whose communion
whosoever dies, shall never see the face of God.

Now in what s^nse the Roman Church is called the Catholic Church, though I
have already showed you, yet I will here somewhat farther explain it.

The Catholic Church may be considered; First, in respect of her Faith and
Doctrine; Secondly, in respect of her Government or Discipline.

According to the first consideration, all true particular Churches and
Christians, professing and united in one and the same Faith and Communion, are
truly and properly called, the Catholic Church; and this is formally the
Church Catholic. We say not, that the Roman Church is thus; that is, formally
Catholic: She is in this sense a part, or member only of the Catholic
Church. But if we consider the Catholic Church in respect of her Government,
then the Church of Rome may truly and properly be called Catholic; though not
formally, yet causally; because she being the Mother and Head of all other
particular Churches of the Christian world, in right of her Bishop, who is St.
Peter's successor, and appointed by Christ to be the supreme Head and Governor
of his whole Church, is the fountain and center of Unity, which she infuses
into the whole Catholic Church; causing all the particular members thereof to
be united in one and the same supreme earthly Head and Governor. Those then
that submit themselves to the Apostolic Sea of Rome, and are in communion
with the Bishop thereof, by subjecting themselves to his Authority and
Government, acknowledging him Christ's Vicar on earth, and the sole supreme Head
of his Church, may most properly be termed, Roman Catholics.

The Province of Canterbury consisted of many particular Churches, or Episcopal
Seas, all united in the Church or Sea of Canterbury, which gave denomination to
the whole Province. Canterbury it self was not the whole Province; but because
it was the Metropolitan Sea, the Head and Mother Church of the whole Province,
wherein all the particular Seas of that Province were united, and to whom they
yielded obedience; the whole Province received its Denomination from her: which
notwithstanding, being considered as a particular Church or Diocese, was but a
part or member of the Province of Canterbury. So likewise the Church of Rome
being the Metropolitan Sea of the whole world, the Head and Mother Church of
the Christian world, wherein all particular Seas and Churches whatsoever, that
are in communion with the Church Catholic, are united; every true Church in
particular, may be said to be within the universal Province, or Church of Rome.
And the Roman Church (comprehending under her all particular Churches
whatsoever, that are branches and members of the Catholic, to whom they all
owe obedience and subjection, and in whom they are all united, as in the grand
Metropolitan Church of the Christian world) may properly be styled the
Catholic Church.

As then there was the particular Sea, or Church of Canterbury, and the whole
Province of Canterbury; so also, there is the particular Sea, or Church of
Rome, and the universal Church of Rome. And as the particular Sea of
Canterbury, was a part of the Province of Canterbury; so likewise the
particular Church of Rome, is but a part of the universal, or Catholic Church
of Rome: the Church of Rome, as truly comprehending all particular Churches of
the Christian world; as the Province of Canterbury contained all the particular
Seas of that Province. In brief, as the Sea of Canterbury was to all the
particular Seas of that Province; so is the Church of Rome to all the
particular Churches of the whole world.

And by this you may perceive how frivoulous that trivial objection is, which
has been so often made against that expression, [ Roman Catholique] as if those
words employed a contradiction, in signifying Particular, and yet Universal.

32. And that the Roman Church has ever bin in this sense, the Catholic
Church, viz. as being the Head and Mother Church of all other Christian
Churches, appears as plainly as any other point of Faith or Doctrine whatsoever.

Neither the Scriptures themselves, nor any Doctrine or Article of Faith,
written, or unwritten, has descended unto us by a more full and ample
Tradition, then this Doctrine of the Primacy of the Apostolic Sea of Rome, and
Supremacy of the Bishop thereof over all Churches. So that he that shall deny
or question this, may as well doubt of the Scriptures, and consequently of
Christ's coming in the flesh, and dying for the sins of the world. Are no^ the
writings of the Ancient Fathers full of i^? has not the universal practice of
the Church in all ages made it shine bright, even at this day to the world?
Read the Fathers, examine the Councels, view the practice of Gods Church in all
ages, and you will soon con^ess this to be an apparent and unquestionable
Truth. Besides, consider that the Primacy and authority of St. Peter, and his
Successors, the Bishops of Rome, as it has been a Doctrine universally
received, so has it no known beginning since the time of the Apostles; and
therefore according to the principles of common Reason, we ought to embrace it
as an Apostolical Tradition. Were not all the churches in the world formerly
united and subject to the Sea of Rome? Does it not plainly appear in ancient
Records and Histories, when the Eastern churches first separated from her
communion, and denied obedience to the Bishop of Rome? Is it not apparent when,
and how often those pretended churches have been reconciled to the Roman
Catholic Church? Have not the Patriatchs of Constantinople themselves professed
and acknowledged their obedience and subjection to the Bishop of Rome, as S.
Peter's Successor, and Supreme Head of Christ's Church? Was there ever any
Society of men professing the name of Christ, and divided from the Church of
Rome, that did not first separate themselves from her communion?

He then that is no Roman Catholic, is none at all, since by his Schism he
has cut himself off from the communion of the Catholic Church,, and to
justify his Schism, he must necessarily fall into Heresy, by denying this
Doctrine of Faith, viz* That the Roman Church is the Mother and Head of all
churches, and the Bishop thereof appointed by Christ, as S. Peter's Successor,
to be the Supreme Pastor and Governor of his Catholic Church.

I know you will deny this to be a Doctrine of Faith, but you must then condemn
the Fathers that taught it, the Councels that declared it; The learned Fathers
of the Church (S. Irenaeus li. 3. c. 3.) S. Hierome Epist. 57. S. Cyprian de
Vnitat. Eccles. S. Basil concion. de penitent. S. Leo, Sermon. 1. in Natal.
Apostolor. Petr. and Paul. Gelasius. in decret. cum 70. Episcopis. S. Augustine.
Epist. 92. as also the reverend Pastors of the church assembled in diverse
General Councels: In the first General Council of Nice, Can. 6. in the Council
of Ephesus, Act. 3. in the Council of Calcedon, Act. 16. and in the Epistle, or
relation sent to Pope Leo from the whole Council; in the Council at Sardis,
Can. 3. could plainly see this Doctrine in Scripture, and so might you too, if
you would but open your eyes, and not only there, but in the Universal
Tradition and practice of the church. This Doctrine was received by the church
of England for almost a 1000. years together, without interruption; How then
come you to be wiser then all your Forefathe^s for so many ages? You received
the Scriptures from them, and to think that they could no^ inte^pret them as
well as you, is excessive pride, and insolent madness.

A world of testimonies might be brought in confirmation of this Doctrine, but
it has been already so fully, and so often proved by many learned Catholics,
that it may be altogether unnecessary for me to add any further proofs,
especially since my intention is to contain my self within the bounds of ^
short R^ply.

Wherefore the pretended Greek Church (though it abhor and de^^st your new
Doctrines, as damnable and H^retical, as appears evidently by the book
enti^^^led [^^remiae ^atriarchae (...), sententia definitiva ^^ Doctr^^a and
Religione Wittenberge^sium Theologorum, etc.] An. 1586.) is now no church at
all, as neither are you, but a dead branch lop'd off by Schism and H^resie
from the Tree of Life, a corrupt member cu^ off from Christ's mystical body.

33. But to justi^ie this your Schism, you alledg certain Canons of the
c^u^ches, which a^^u^e you, that every Provincial Synod, is to order all things
within the Province.

Answ. If you mean by [ All things] all things amiss in matters concerning
manners and Discipline, I can easily grant it; but this will not satisfy you.
The Church (you say) did usually reform, both in manners and faith, by
Diocesan, and Provincial Councels.

Answ. I confess the Pope has confirmed the Acts and Decr^es of diverse
Provincial Councels, even concerning matters of Faith, as when they have
condemned some apparent and notorious Heresy, and anathematized such
Heretics as have opposed, either a Doctrine universally known, and received
by the whole church, or else some Declaration and Definition of a former General
Council: and this is all that you can gather, either out of the African Code,
or the canons of any Council, either General o^ Provincial.

As for the Code of the Universal Church, by you cited, you must know Doctor,
that it was compiled by Schismatiques and Heretics, who to diminish and
derogate from the just Rights and Prerogatives of the Bishop of Rome, have
apparently fal^i^ied diverse canons of the Council of Sardi^.

But that General Doctrines universally received and taught by the whole
Catholic Church, as Doctrines descending by Universal Tradition from Christ
and his Apostles, and declared to be such by General Councels; should be
censured and condemned, first by one single person, and afterward by those
only that followed him in his Apostasy and Heresy, for damnable errors must
necessarily appear to any reasonable and impartial spirit, not only most
unreasonable and temerarious, but sacrilegious and damnable; yet this you have
done, charging the whole world with gross and damnable errors, and alleging
Scripture to prove them so, to which you appeal to justify your Apostasy,
making your selves the sole Judges and Interpreters thereof.

34. But I meet with a testimony of S. Hilary of Poicteurs, to prove, that Rome
was once not only distinct from, but not so much as a part of the Catholic
Church, his words cited are these; Quidam ex vobis firmissima fidei constantia
intra communionem se me am continentes; se a coeteris extra Gallias
abstinuerunt. And hence you conclude, that the Church of France at that time
communicated not with Rome, unless we can prove Rome to be in France.

Answ. This is much like your former consequences: S. Hilary was not so simple
as to think the whole Catholic Church was at that time confined to one
Country or Nation; he only commended the constancy of his Countrymen, in
persevering in the Catholic Faith, and not communicating with the Arrians,
which swarmed in diverse places out of France. If then by those words [ coeteris
extra Gallias] you would exclude all the world, besides France, from the
Catholic Church, you will but make your self ridiculous to the world, in
making that great Pillar of the Gallican Church speak that, which all the world
knows to be false; for at that time, neither the Church of Rome, nor any
Western Church was infected with Arrianism, as appears plainly by S. Basil,
who was S. Hilaries Cretanean, and a Bishop in the Eastern Church, viz. of
Cappadocia; his word^ are these, Vos par erat intelligere, quod per Dei gratiam
quamplurimi sint, qui sidem tuentur Orthodoxam a Patribus Nicaenis secundum
pic^^tis regulam traditam; neque vos per Orientem soli sitis relicti; at vero
universus quidem Occidens vobiscum unanimiter and nobiscum conspirat. Basil
Epist. 293. Here you see the whole Western Church vindicated from that Heresy,
which doubtless S. Hilary well knew: Those then in France that retained their
ancient Faith, kept themselves within the communion of the Roman Catholic
Church, from whose communion never yet any separated, but Schismatiques and
Heretics

34. The n^x^ Father of the Church that I m^et with is Archbishop Lawd (as you
are pleased to call him) whose authority you have often cited, which I cannot
but wond^r at, since he was so far from being a Father, that he neither liv^d
nor died a Son of the Church; but the Doctor, out of that pretended
A^ch-bishops book, charges ^h^ Church of Rome with four opinions ^^pugnant to
the pl^in words of Scripture, viz. 1. ^ransubstan^^ation. 2 Administration of
the blessed Sacrament to the Laity in one kind. 3. Invo^ation of Saints. 4.
Adoration of Images.

Answ. Though it be not much pertinent to our present purp^se to examine these
D^ct^ines according to Scripture; since the Doctor conf^ss^s that the Church of
Rome, n^twithstanding her errors, is a tr^^ Church, and a member of the one
Catholic, Sect. 12. yet because he b^lieves the Church of Rome is justly
charged with th^se ^nsound and un-Catholike Doctrines (as ^^ is pleased to ca^^
them) I could not pass them by; but shall endeavor as briefly as may be to
vindicate the Church of Rome from that foul and false c^lumnie.

35 First then, Transubstantiation (according to the Roman Catholic Doctrine)
is a true and real change of the total substance of Bread and Wine, after, and
by vi^^ue of the words of Consecration pronounced by the Priest, into the true,
real, and substantial Body and Blood of Christ. Let us now examine how this
Doctrine is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture.

Our blessed Savior says, Matthew. 26. 26 and Man. 14. 22. This is my Body;
and, This is my Blood. The words are plain, and being taken literally, must
necessarily import a change. For that which was before Bread and Wine, after
our Saviors consecration, is (according to the proper and literal sense of the
words) the very Body and Blood of Christ. Where is then the Repugnancy between
this Doctrine and the plain words of Scripture? Christ says of that which was
Bread and Wine; This is my Body; and, This is my Blood. The Church of Rome
says so ^oo. Instead then of a Repugnancy, here is a ful^ consent and
agreement between the plain word^ of our Savi^ur, and the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome. Well, but the words are not to be taken literally, but
figuratively. Be it so. Then is this Doctrine of the Church of Rome repugnant
(at the most) but to the figurative sense, not to the plain words, or literal
sense of Scripture. But to come closer; If the Doctor can produce any one Text
of Scripture, that shall be but half as plain for the Metaphorical or
figurative sense, or that the Creatures of 'Bread and Wine, are not really and
substantially changed into the very Body and Blood of Christ after
Consecration, but retain their former nature and substance of Bread and Wine,
as these words of Christ are for such a change; IN will then (for my part) give
the cause, and turn Protesiant too, or any thing else that Doctor Boughen shall
command me to be. But if he cannot produce any such Text (as most certainly he
cannot) then is the Doctrine of the Protestants, and not that of the Church of
Rome, repugnant to the plain words of Scripture.

36 But to justify your selves, and to avoid the Catholic Doctrine of the
real presence and Transubstatiation, you thus interpret those words; This is my
Body, etc. viz. This is a sign or figure of my Body: but what Scripture have
you for it? What authority? What Catholic Father, what Council did ever give
that interpetation of those words? I confess, if there be no true and real
change of Bread and Wine into the substance of the Body and Blood of Christ in
the blessed Sacrament, then will I also admit of that interpretation. For if
there be no such change, then of necessity those creatures of Br^ad and Wine
can be but bare signs and figures only of Christ's Body and Blood. But behold
Gods Providence over his Church. The Holy Ghost fore seeing the evasions and
shifts that some men would use to delude the world, and to poison the Church
with their Heretical Doctrines, in opposition to Gods sacred Truth, has in St.
Lukes Gospel, 22. 19, 20 utterly cut you off even from that very gloss and
interpretation. The words of the Evangelist, are these.

(...)

(...).

This is the Cup of the new Testament in my blood, which (Cup) is shed for you.
These are the words in the Original Language of St. Lukes Gospel. And though
both in the Latin and English translation the Relative [ which] may seem to
refer to [ Blood] as well as to ( Cup) yet in the Greek it is very plain, that
it must refer to ( Cup.) If then that which was c^^^ain'd in the cup, was that
which was sh^d for the sins of the world, how could it be Wine, o^ a sign or
figu^e ^^ly of Christ's blood, or any thing else, but the true and real blood of
Christ? For no sign o^ sigure of blood, but Christ's true and real precious
blood was shed for the sins of the world. I will endeavor to make this
Doctrine appear more plain by this Syllogism.

That which was shed for the sins of the world, was the true and real precious
blood of Christ.

But that which was in the cup was that which was shed for the fins of the
world. Ergo.

That which was in the cup was the true and real precious blood of Christ.

The Major Proposition cannot be denied without blasphemy, the Minor is most
plain by the words of the Text; and therefore the conclusion must necessarily
follow. Here is no Fallacy Doctor, in this Syllogism, no more terms then ought
to be in a Syllogism, but to utterly debar you of your sign or figure, I argue
thus:

That which was shed for the sins of the world, was not a sign or figure only
of Christ's blood.

But that which was in the Cup was shed for the sins of the world. Ergo.

That which was in the Cup was not a sign or figure only of Christ's blood.

Those words then, (...). This is the Cup, the New Testament in my Blood,
cannot admit of this interpretation; This Cup is a sign of my Blood; unless you
will grant that a bare sign of Christ's blood was shed for the sins of the
world, which is high blasphemy. For it is very plain by the express words of
the Text, That the very Cup which was the New Testament in Christ's Blood, was
shed for the sins of the world; whe^efore that Cup could not be a sign only,
but the true precious blood of our Savior.

Wh^t say you Doctor? who now maintains Doctrines repugnant to plain words of
Scripture? you, or the Church of Rome? you will say, perehance, that those
words (...) were formerly but Marginal Note, and are now crept into the Text,
and that all the Greek copies of S. Lukes Gospel are corrupted. This indeed is
the answer that one of your great and learned Reformers, Beza, has given,
though without any ground, or colorable proof: but he well knew, that the
words of the Text were so plain, that they could not admit of any other shift
or evasion; and by this shift you may evade any authority of Scripture that may
be brought against you; and (had truth no other way to defend it sel^) we also
might thus answer any text of Scripture, that can be alleged against any
Doctrine of the Church of Rome.

37. But let us now see what the ancient Fathers say concerning this fond
Doctrine, and repugnant to the plain words of Scripture.

S. Chrysostom speaking of Christ's presence in the blessed Sacrament, has
these words; Ecce eum vides, ipsum tangis, ipsum manducas. Et tu quidem
vestimenta cupis videre. Ipse vero tibi concedit, non tantum videre, verum and
manducare, and tangere, and intrate sumere* Hom. ^o. ad Pop. Antiochen. Behold
t^ou see him (Christ) thou touchest him, thou catest him, thou desire to
see his garments, and he is pleased that thou should not only see him, but
also eat him, touch him, and receive him within thy body. And that this seeing,
eating, touching and receiving Christ, is not in a bare figure only* appears
plainly by these words of the Father following in the same Homily; Quod Angeli
videntes horrescunt, neque libere audent intueri propter emic^ntem inde
splendorem, hoc nos pascimur. That which the Angels tremble to behold, and
scarce dare presume to look upon, by reason of i^s glorious splendour, even this
do we feed on. Mark this good Doctor; Angels tremble not at such mean creatures
as Bread and Wine, neither have these creatures as bare signs only of Christ's
body and blood, such glorious luster and splendour: Indeed Christ's true body,
which good Catholics feed on, is a glorious body, ten ^housand times more
glorious then the Sun, though the glory thereof, as being a spiritual body,
cannot appear to mortal eyes.

And that you may not fly to your other shift, and say, that we receive and
feed on Christ's body by Faith and love only, hear what the same Father says in
the same Homily, a little before the last words cited; Neque enim illi satis
fuit hominem fieri, colaphis caedi, and crucifigi, verum ut semetipsum nobis
commiscet, and nos fide tantum, verum and ipsa re, nos suum efficit corpus. He
(Christ) was not only contented to become man, to be buffeted and crucified,
but he also incorporates himself into us, and makes us to be his own body, not
by Faith only, but truly and really. And ( Hom. 61. ad Pop. Antio.) the same
Father thus says; Vnum corpus e^^icimur etc. Vt itaque non tantum per
charitatem hoc ^iamus, verum etiam ipsa re, in illam misceamur carnem; hoc
namque per escam efficitur quam largitus est nobis. We are become one and the
same body [with Christ, viz by the power of the blessed Sacrament] That then we
may be so not by charity only, but truly and really let us be incorporated into
that flesh, for this is brought to pass by that food which he has given us. And
now Doctor, how is it possible that Bread and Wine should incorporare us into
Christ's flesh; or that bare figures should make us become one body with him,
and that not only spiritually and mystically, but truly and really? But let us
hear the same Father speak once more; ( Hom. 60. ad Pop. Antioch.) Nos
Ministrorum tenemus locum, qui vero sanctificat ^a and immuta^ ipse est. We
supply the place of Minist^rs, but he that sanctifies and changes them is
(Christ) himself. Here is a change, and that by the power of Christ, not the^
by the Faith of the commu^icant.

38. Let us now hear what S. Ambrose says, ( de Sacram. ^i. 4. c. 4.) Panis
iste panis est ante verba Sacramentorum; ubi accesserit consecratio, de pane
fit caro Christi; quomodo potest qui panis est corpus esse Christi?
Consecratione. Before the words of Consecration it is bread; as soon as
Consecration comes, of bread, it is made the flesh of Christ. (Mark those
words. De pane, of, or from bread) How can that which is bread, become the Body
of Christ? by consecration. And a little after, Si ergo tanta vis est in
sermon Domini Jesu, ut inciperent esse quae non erant, quanto magis
operatorius est, ut quae erant, in aliud commutentur? If then there be so great
po^er in the word of our Lord Jesus, that those things which had no being,
should begin to have a being; how much rather does it effect, that those things
which had a being, should be changed into an other substance? Here then is a
change, a substantial or essential change, as appears plainly by those words (
in aliud commutentur) (And what does a substantial or an essential change
differ from Transubstantiation?) and this change is wrought principally by
Christ's omnipotent power, instrumentally by the words of Consecra^ion
pronounced by the Priest; then doubtless, not by the faith and charity of the
communicant.

39. Some of your Sect I know have been very forward to acknowledge Christ truly
and really present in the blessed Sacrament; nay, that Christ's body is really
present there, but how? by faith; but what you mean by that expression, [ by
Faith] I know not; howbelt I am sure you must understand either the manner, or
the means of Christ's body being really present there: If by those words you
understand the manner of Christ's body being present in the Sacrament, then is
his body present there apprehensively only; for by Faith the soul apprehends
Christ's body, which in that apprehension is spiritually present to the
faithful. and worthy communicant: but how then can this be cleared from a
contradiction? for to be present apprehensively only by faith, is
contradistinguisht from being truly and really present; so that to say, Christ's
body is truly and really in the blessed Sacrament by faith, is in effect to
say, Christ's body is truly and really in the Sacrament, and, Christ's body is
not truly and really in the Sacrament.

And if by Faith you understand the means, that is, either the meritorious
(pardon that word) or instrumental cause of Christ's body being really p^esent
in the Sacrament, or a necessary condition, without which Christ's body cannot
be really present there: then first you contradict the forecited Fathers, who
say, that Christ's body is really present in the Sacrament by the omnipotent
power of Christ in the words of Consecration pronounced by the Priest.
Secondly, this real presence of Christ's body, must be either by a change of
one substance into another, and so consequently by that which the Church calls
Transubstantiation; (and then you will not accuse that Doctrine for being
repugnant to the plain words of Scripture) or else by consubstantiation; and
then why do you not adore it? and why do you charge the Church of Rome with
Idolatry for adoring Christ wheresover he is corporally present, since his
Humanity is inseparably and Hypostatically united to his Divinity.

40. Let us now hear what Eusebius Emissenus says, Invisibilis sacerdos
visibiles creaturas in substantiam corporis and sanguinis sui, verbo suo
secreta potestate convertit: These words are cited out of the Author by
Gratian. (de consecrat. did. 2. c. quia corpus.) The invisible Priest (Christ)
converts the visible creatures into the substance of his body and blood by his
word, by his secret power. How can Transubstantiation be more plainly exprss't,
then in these words? Or what is Transubstantiation, but a change of creatures
into another substance? Many more testimonies might be brought both from the
ancient and modern Fathers in confirmation of this Doctrine, which to avoid
prolixity I have omitted.

41. This Doctrine of Transubstantiation being proved (as it has been both by
Scripture and Fathers) is a sufficient justification of the administration of
the blessed Sacrament to the Laity in one kind, (the blessed Sacrament being
integrally as well as essentially contained under either kind) which is the
second Doctrine repugnant (as you say) to the plain words of Scripture. But
where is it said in Scripture, You shall not administer the blessed Sacrament
to the Laity in one kind only? Or where is it said; You shall administer the
blessed Sacrament to the Laity under both kinds? If any such precept be
contained in plain words of Scripture, why has it never yet been discovered?
and if there be no such plain precept there, then the administration of the
blessed Sacrament to the Laity in one kind, cannot be repugnant to plain words
of Scripture; the unlawfulness thereof c^n b^ but (at the most) deducible from
some places of the Scripture^, which being obscur^ and a^biguous, cannot be
better interpreted then by the ancient and universal practice of the church,
which in former ages esteemed the administration of the blessed Sacrament to
the Laity, under one or both kinds, a thing indifferent, and upon several
occasions practiced both; as when the Mani^hees abstaining from wine, as a
thing unlawful, condemned the use of the Chalice in the blessed Sacrament,
diverse Catholic Bishops in opposition to those Herctiques, commended the
practice of communicating under both kinds: and afterward, when this error
was exploded, and a contrary succeeded, viz. an opinion of certain Heretics,
who maintained the necessity of communicating under both kinds, because (as
they said) Christ was not wholly and entirely comtain'd under either: Then the
church to prevent a farther Schism, declared the lawfulness and sufficiency of
communicating in one kind only, and did withal forbid the administration of
the blessed Sacrament under both. The indifferency of communicating in one or
both kinds, and the antien^ practice of the church in relation thereunto, I have
else where shown, Sect. 20 wherefore here I will only add those words of our
blessed Savior in confi^mation thereof, Jo. 6. 59. He that eats this bread
shall live for ever. If then the end of the institution of the blessed
Sacrament, which is eternal life, may be obtained by eating only the body of
Christ; it cannot be necessary for salvation to communicate in both kinds,
since salvation may be obtained by communicating under the Species of Bread
only; and these words are a plain exposition of those words precedent, so often
alleged against the Church of Rome by Heretics, Jo. 6. 54. Unless ye shall
eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in
you: whereby it appears that the conjunctive [ And] is to be taken
disjunctively for [ Or] as it is in those words of the Apostle, Act. 3. 6.
Silver and gold have I none; where the sense is, Silver or gold have I none.

Besides, Christ's body and blood being entirely contained under either Species,
whosoever receives his body, must also receive his blood: and since Blood is
properly the subject of drinking, not of eating, he that any way receives
Christ's blood, may be said to drink it, drinking being as properly referred to
the subject, as to the action: Wh^^^fore though that word [ And] were to be
taken conjunctively (as it is not) yet were it sufficient to communicate under
one Species only; because whosoever eats Christ's body, must also necessarily
drink his blood.

Those other Texts so much urged by Protestants, Mat. 26. 27. Drink ye all of
this: And Luc. 22. 19. Do this in remembrance of me, are very impertinent;
those words being spoken to the Apostles only, and to them as Priests and
Bishops, not in relation to the Sacrament only, but to the Sacrifice, which the
Apostles and their Successors, the Priests, were to offer up for a continual
commemoration of Christ's Passion. Besides, it is to be observed, that ou^
blessed Savior used not those words absolutely, [ Do this in remembrance of
me] but only when he gave his Body under the Species of Bread; and when he
administered the Cup, then he used them conditionally; Do this, as often as ye
shall drink, in remembrance of me.

42. The third fond Doctrine, and repugnant to the plain words of Scripture,
is, invocation of Saints. But where are those plain words of Scripture? I have
read the Old and New Testament, yet never could find any such precept as this,
Thou shall not, or, no man shall invocate Saints. Or, Thou shall not desire the
Saints to offer up thy prayers to God. Or, Thou shall not pray to the Saints to
pray for thee; and if no such precept can be found in Scripture, in plain terms
(as never any such was yet discovered there) then doubtless this Doctrine is
not repugnant to the plain words of Scripture. But on the contrary, I find this
Doctrine, viz. That the blessed Saints may be invocated, very probably (if not
necessarily) deducible from Scripture. For if Angels may be invocated, why may
not Saints, who see God as well as the Angels, and are in the same state of
bliss and glory with those blessed Spirits? but that the Angels may be
invocated, is most plain in diverse places of Scripture. As from the examples of
Abraham, Genesis 18. who in that one chapter prayed six times to the Angel: Of
Lot, Genesis 19. Of Jacob, Genesis 32. and Genesis 48. 15. where Jacob blessing the sons
of Joseph, after he had invocated his Angel Guardian, uses these words, And
let my name, and the name of my Fathers, Abraham and Isaac be invocated on
them. Which words are far more plain for Inv^cation of Saints, then any place
of Scripture that you or any other can alledg, can make against it.

And I desire you to take S. Augustives observation along with you upon those
words, Vnde notandum est (says he) nonsolum ex^u^itionem, sed and invocationem
dici aliquando, quae non Dei, sed hominum sunt. Aug. in Genesis to. 3. Whence we
may observe, that sometimes, not only hearing, but invocation also is spoken
of, as not belonging to God (only) but to men. So likewise from the example of
Moses, (Ex. 32.) where the Angel of God appeared to him in a flaming bush, S.
Stephen himself interpreting it so, Act. 7 30. Of Gedeon, Judge. 11. 6. Of
Iosuah, Ios. 5. 15. who prostrate adored an Angel, knowing him to be an Angel.
Of S. John, Rev. 19. and Rev. 22. which places some of you have most
ridiculously alleged against this Doctrine of Invocation of Saints and Angels.
For that blessed Apostle S. John, either knew him to be an Angel, or not; if he
knew him not to be an Angel, then he mistook the Angel for Christ, as probably
he might, because the Angel spoke in the person of Christ, saying; I am Alpha
and Omega, etc. and then the Apostle might offer to adore him with divine
worship, which the Angel discovering himself to be but an Angel, might justly
reprove: and this interpretation S. Augustine gives of it, q. 61. in Genesis Or
else S. John knew him to be but an Angel, and if so, then it cannot be
reasonably supposed, that the blessed Apostle could sin in worshipping the
Angel; because he having received the Holy Ghost, as well as the rest of the
Apostles, and being so dear to our blessed Savior, insomuch that he is styled
beyond all the rest of the Apostles, The beloved Disciple, Jo. 16. 23. could
not but know, even as the Angel himself, what worship was due to God, and what
to an Angel. Besides, if S. John's adoration of the Angel had been reproved by
the Angel, as in it self simply unlawful; can it be imagined that so great an
Apostle, so great a Prophet and Evangelist, would a second time fall into the
same error? If then upon a mistake the Apostle adored the Angel for God, those
words of the Angel may be a prohibition, or rebuke, otherwise it was but a
modest refusal of the Angel, who seeing how dear S. John was to Christ, and
what secret and sublime mysteries had been revealed unto him, more then to any
of the other Apostles, plainly foresaw that the blessed Apostle should one day
be exalted to an higher degree of glory in heaven, and should be nearer to God
then the Angel himself; so that, in brief, besides the lawfulness of adoring
Angels (and consequently Saints) there is nothing else from this place
observeable, but S. John's humility in adoring the Angel, and the Angels
modest^y in refusing the adoration.

If then Abraham, Lot, Jacob, Iosuah, Gedeon, and S. John that great Apostle,
and beloved Disciple, might lawfully adore and invocate Angels, why may not we
invocate the blessed Saints, who together with the Angels, see and praise God
continually? why may not we desire the assistance of their prayers to God for
us?

43. But perchance this Invocation of Saints is some new upstare Doctrine,
lately invented, and brought in by the Church of Rome. Answ. As new as it is,
if either you, Doctor, or any Protestant in the world, can show but as much
Antiquity for your Religion, as I can for this Doctrine, I will then shake
hands with you, and become a Protestant my self.

Let us then look back toward the Primitive times, and examine the ancient
Doctrine and practice of the Church. Theoderet, who lived An. Christi 430.
proves this Doctrine by the general practice of the Church in his time; Qui in
peregrinationem aliquam mittuntur (says he) petunt instanter hos (sanctos
Martyrs) sieri viae comites, and duces itineris; qui reditum nanciscuntur
afferunt confessionem gratiae, non ut Deos ipsos ad^untes, sed ut homines
divinos orantes, and intercessores pro ipsis fieri postulantes, Sermon. 8. de
curand. Graecor. affectionib. (sive) de Martyribus. Those that undertake any
journey earnestly, desire them (the holy Martyrs) to accompany and guide them
in their journey, and those that return in safety, offer up an acknowledgment
of their favors, making their addresses unto them, not as Gods, but praying
unto them as Divine men, and beseeching them to become intercessors for them.

Let us hear Cyril of Alexandria speaking in the Council of Ephesus, held An.
431. where himself was Pope Cel^stines Delegate; Salve a nobis D^ipara Maria,
per quam preti^sa Cru^ cel^bratur, and adoratur universo ^rbe. ^ail, O Mary,
Mother of God, by whom the precious Cross is reverenc't, and adored through ut
the whole world. Let us hear S. B^si^ (Epist, 205. ad Julian Apost.) who lived
in the year of Christ 370. Sanctos Apostolos Prophetas, and Martyrs i^^o^o,
ut apud Deum suppli^ent, and characteres imaginum ipsorum honoro and veneror
his traditis a sanctis Apostolis. I invocate the holy ^^postles, Prophets, and
Martyrs, that they may pray to God (for us) I honor and reverence their Images;
these things being delivered unto us by the holy Apostles. Here we find that
almost 1300. years since, this Doctrine of Invocation of Saints, and honoring
their Images, was received by the Church as an Apostolical Tradition: and
Calvin himself ( Instit. li. 3. c. 20. n. 22. speaking of the third Council of
Carthage, whereat S, Augustine was present, acknowledges, that at that time
Invocation of Saints was practiced by the Church. E^ tempestate (says he)
moris erat dicere; sancta Maria, aut, sancte Petre, or a pro nobis. At that
time it was a custom to say, Saint Mary, or Saint Peter, pray for us.

S. Hierom (Tom. 1. pa. 59. edit. Paris. and To. p. 122. edit. Basiliens.) and
S. Ambrose li. de viduis, deduce and prove this Doctrine out of Scripture; and
certainly these holy and reverend Fathers could interpret Scripture as well as
John Calvin. Neither is it imagineable, that either these Fathers, or
Theodoret, or S. Basil, would maintain a Doctrine, and that by Scripture, which
should be repugnant to plain words of Scripture.

Besides, that Doctrine which has been confirmed by the attestation of Divine
Miracles must be true; but this Doctrine of Invocation of Saints has been thus
attested, therefore it must be true. The major is proved out of Scripture, Mar.
6. 20. and cannot be denied or questioned without blasphemy: and if you deny
the minor, you must give Theodoret and S. Augustine the lie, the former proving
it in the forecited place, ( li. 8. de Martyrib.) the later ( De civitat. Dei
li. 22. c. 8.) where he recounts above a hundred Miracles (of some whereof he
was an eyewitness) wrought by God, upon the prayers at the Monument and
Relics of S. Stephen; and that prayers were made to the Saints, who also
heard and understood the prayers of such as prayed unto them, and the manner
how they understand our prayers, and that they grant savours to those that pray
unto them, S. Augustine will tell you plainly in his 15. and 16. chap. de cur.
pro. mort. bab^nd.

Thus is Invocarion of Scints vindicated, both from repugnancy to Scripture,
and novelty. I come now to the fourth and last fond Doctrine, wherewith the
Church of Rome stands charged; which is, Adoration of Images.

44. For the better clearing the Church from this charge, I thought it
necessary to declare the Doctrine of the Catholic Church concerning Images,
which is this, The Images of Christ, of the Mother of God, and other Saints,
may be had and kept, and due honor and reverence is to be given unto them; a^
appears by the Profession of Faith composed and authorized by the Council of
Trent. Where are the plain words of Scripture to which this Doctriue is
repugnant? Where is it said in Scripture; in plain and express words, Thou
shall not give any worship, honor, or reverence to the Images of Christ, or of
his Mother, or of other Saints? The Scripture in diverse places forbids Divine
worship to be given to Idols, or false Gods, as Exodus 20. Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 5.
Isay 40. etc. but where is it said, Thou shall not worship, honor, or reverence
the holy Images of Christ, or of his Saints? Those Texes of Scripture forbid
only, that the worship due to God, should be given to creatures, Idols, or
false Gods; where then is the repugnancy between the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, and plain words of Scripture? The Scripture forbids Idolatry, so does,
and ever did the Church of Rome. The Scripture forbids Divine worship to be
given to any thing but God, so does the Church of Rome. God forbids Graven
Images, that is Idols, to be set up and adored with Divine worship; and the
Church of Rome commands due honor and reverence to be given to holy Images of
Christ, and his Saints. I must again demand, where is the repugnancy between
this Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and the plain words of Scripture? If you
say, that those words Ex 20. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image,
etc. Thou shall not fall down and worship it, are plain against this Doctrine,
I will confess, that they are as plain against it, as any words of Scripture,
either of the Old or New Testament; but if you argue from these words, (as many
of your Sect have done) that therefore it is not lawful to honor or reverence
the holy Images of Christ, and his Saints; here is then a double fallacy, A
dicto secundum quod, ad dictum simpliciter. For neither are all Images, but
only Idols, nor all worship, but only Divine worship forbidden in those words.
I may as well conclude, that because it is said in Scripture, God only is to be
worshipped, therefore we must not worship Kings, Princes, and Magistrates. But
good Doctor, as there is a Divine worship due to God, and to him only, so there
is a civil worship due to Kings, Princes, and Magistrates; and another sort of
worship due to Angels and Saints: and so likewise there is a reverence and
honor due to the holy Images of Christ and his Saints, not a divine, or
absolute, but a certain far inferior worship, and merely relative. Is it a
greater sin in me to adore Christ in or before his image, then it was in Jacob
to adore Joseph in his Rod or Sccpter? S. Paul says, ( Heb. 11. 21.) that
Jacob adored the top of Joseph's Rod: wherein says S. Chrisost. Hom. 66. and
Theodoret q. 108. in Genesis Joseph's dream was fulfilled, viz. That his Father
should worship him. From Jacob under the Old, let us come to the Fathers under
the New Testament. You have already heard S. Basil Epist. ad Julian, 205.
publicly professing, that he adored the Images of the holy Apostles, Prophets,
and Martyrs; and that this kind of Adoration of Images, was an Apostolical
Tradition. You have heard what S. Cyril of A. lexandria delivered in his Homily
before the Council of Ephesus (the third General Council) where himself was
President under Pope Celestine; it will not be impertinent to repeat his words,
Hail Mary, mother of God, by whom the precious Cross is reverenc't and adored
throughout the whole world. Here is the Image of the Holy Cross adored
throughout the whole world (according to S Cyril) in relation to him that died
on it: and it is more then probable, that the whole Church then represented in
that Council, did practice that Adoration; otherwise, doubtless, the Council
would have declared their dissent from S. Cyril, and their dislike of his
expression. And now can any reasonable man imagine, that those holy and learned
Fathers, S. Basil, S. Cyril, and S. Chrysostom, Theodoret, should maintain,
and the whole Council of Ephesus approve of a Doctrine, or practice repugnant
to plain words of Scripture? Besides, it is not as lawful to adore the Images,
as the Relics of Saints? and is it not known to all the world with what holy
zeal and bitterness S. Hierome inveigh's against Vigilantius, for opposing and
condemning that practice? Does he not charge Vigilantius with Blasphemy, for
speaking against the Adoration of sacred Relics? Has not God by many apparent
Miracles approved this holy practice? ( August. de Civit. Dei lib. 22. c. 8.)

Tho testimonies that might be brought ^o confirm this Doctrine, would swell to
a large volume. I will only add this, that in the time of the second General
Council, it was a custom to adorn Churches with Images; as appears by S.
Gregory Nazi^nzen, (Epist. 49. ad Olympium) who sat in that Council: as also
by this testimony out of Eusebius, who sat in the first General Council of
Nice, held about the year of Christ 325. that in his time, and long before,
Images of Christ and his Apostles were made and adored, Hist. Eccles. li. 7. c.
14. his words are these; Et nos Apostolorum ipsius (Christi) imagines, Pauli,
and Petri, and ipsius etiam Christi vidimus per colores in picturis
conservat^s, antiquis, ut par est, immutabiliter solitis hoc modo honorare,
etc. We also have seen the Images of Christ's Apostles, Paul, and Peter, as also
of Christ himself, preserved in Pictures by colors, our Ancestors being wont,
as it is fit, to honor them after this manner.

I pass by the authority of S. Gregory, who very learnedly and copiously
defends this Doctrine ( li. 9. Epist. 9.) of Leontius, S. Gregory's Co^tanean,
Bishop of Neapolis in Cyprus, who purposely wrote in defense of this Doctrine:
As also of the second General Council of Nice, which defined and declared this
Doctrine to be an Apostolical Tradition, condemning and anathematizing the
Iconoclasts, or Imagebreakers, as Heretics. I omit also the present practice
of the pretended Greek Church, which you may plainly read in I^remias,
Patriarch of Constantinople; (Cersura Orient. Eccles. c. 21.) where he
maintains and vindicates this Doctrine of honoring and reverencing Images from
superstition and Idolatry, against the Protestants. All these I purposely pass
by, because I will contain my self within the first five hundred years, to
which you have appealed. You see then, Doctor, the practice and doctrine of the
Church within five hundred years after Christ's birth, in the Fathers and
Councels above cited. Be now as good as your word, submit to their sentence for
trial of the truth of Religion, and you will (by Gods grace) soon return to
your Mother, the Roman Catholic Church.

Thus is that charge, which you say ( Sect. 28. of your second answer) We know
not how to shift off, fully answered.

45. In the next Sect. 25. I meet with some Authorities against the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome. The first is of S. Irenaeus, who sharply
checked and reproved Bishop Victor for keeping such a stir about the
observation of Easter, and excommunicating diverse Churches, because they would
not stoop to his lure. Answ. That Pope Victor, who governed the Church about
200. years after the birth of our Savior, excommunicated the Churches of Asia
for their too much Judaizing in the observation of Easter, is a very strong
argument against you. For first, S. Victor was a pious and blessed man, and
therefore it cannot be reasonably imagined, that he would usurp a power which
Christ never gave him. Secondly, those Churches of Asia never protested against
his Jurisdiction over them, which certainly they would have done, had not the
Church in those days esteemed the Bishop of Rome the common Pastor of Christ's
Church, and appointed by Christ to be under him, the supreme Head thereof.
Thirdly, when S. Irenaeus expostulated with him for his severity in
excommunicating the Eastern Churches, he never charged him for transgressing
the bounds of his Jurisdiction, or for usurping a power which Christ never
delegated unto him, which in all probability he would have done, had he not
looked on the Bishop of Rome, as the supreme visible Head of Christ's Church.
But because he conceived not their offense so ^ainous, as to deserve so heavy a
censure; he therefore took upon him to reprove Pope Victor, by way of friendly
and fraternal correction, as S. Paul sometimes did S. Peter; and as S. Paul
never questioned S. Peter's Jurisdiction, nor denied him to be the chief and
Head of the Apostles; so neither did S. Irenaeus, nor any of the Eastern
Church, that were excommunicated by Pope Victor, question or protest against
the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome.

And those words of S. Cyprian in the Council of Carthage, are to be understood
of the African Bishops only, who being of equal authority, could not
excommunicate one another: They exclude not the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Rome; otherwise S. Cyprian had contradicted himself, who says plainly ( Epist.
ad Quintinum, and Sermon. de ^on. patient.) that Christ built his Church upon S.
Peter: and ( li. 4. ep. 8. ad Cornel.) that the Unity of the Catholic Church
consists in the communion with the Bishop of Rome: His words you shall find
hereafter. Sect. 58.

In the next place Sect. 26. enters an angry Bishop of Cappado^ia, Firmilianus,
speaking thus to Pope Stephen: Teipsum excidisti, noli te fallere, Mistake no^
thy self, thou Bishop of Rome, while thou go^st about to cast out others, by
this presumption thou have cast off thy self from the body of Christ, which is
his Church. Ans. By your leave, Doctor, you misunderstand Firmilianus, he
speaks not as you would have him. Indeed he was very angry with Pope Stephen,
because he excommunicated him for maintaining that Heretical Doctrine of
rebaptizing Heretics: He never told Pope Stephen, that he had cut himself
off from the Church, because he excommunicated Firmilianus, or any other
Bishop^* but he was willing the world should think that Pope Stephen, in
defending the Baptism of Heretics to be lawful, had sided with them in their
Heresies, and had therefore cut himself off from the Church, not because he had
excommunicated any Heretical Bishop of the East, but because (as Firmilianus
conceived) he too much complied with Heretics. And you know, Doctor, the very
same Doctrine, for which Firmilianus was excommunicated, was afterward, in the
first General Council of Nice, declared to b^ Heretical.

46. It is common (say you) in these days, even with t^^se that
conscientiously pretend to truth, not to be content with the Rule of Faith,
wh^^^ ^as once delivered to the Saints, and (...) from them by the Primitive
(...) transmitted ^o posterity; bu^ (...) after n^w invention^ (...) ^hese
courses I abhor with a (...).

Ans. Here D^ctor, you have directly given sentence against your self: If you
will but examine the Doctrines of the Roman Church, and your Doctrines, wherein
you oppose and differ from her: but according to S. Augustines Rule ( de
Baptis. li. 2. c. 23.) and the principles of common reason, you will soon
discover which is the Rule of Faith delivered to the Saints, received from them
by the Primitive Church, and so transmitted to posterity; and which are those
new inventions: For it is impossible, that either you, or any Protestant in the
world can show or prove, that any one Doctrine which the Roman Church at this
day maintains and teaches, had its beginning, or crept into the Church since
Christ and his Apostles: Whereas on the contrary, there is not one Doctrine
wherein you differ from the Roman Church, but may be, and has been often
already proved and demonstrated to have begun since the time of the Apostles.
How then do you abhor with a perfect hatred these courses, since you have
embraced new inventions, and totally forsaken the Rule of Faith delivered to
the Saints, received from them by the Primitive Church, and transmitted to
Posterity? If it can be clearly demonstrated, that all your Doctrines wherein
you differ from the Roman Church are new; and if it cannot be proved, that any
one Doctrine of the Roman Church had its beginning since the Apostles, either
you abhor not these courses with a perfect hatred (as you profess) or else you
must in all points embrace the Doctrine of the Roman Church.

47. But stay; Here I meet with a brace of fierce Syllogismes, that fly
furiously at the very throat of the poor Church of Rome. The first is this.

That Church which has erred, is not the Pillar and ground of truth. But The
Church of Rome has erred. Ergo: The Church of Rome is not the Pillar and
ground of Truth.
The minor is thus proved by the second Syllogism. That Church which has
professed Montanism, Arrianism, Eutychianism, has erred: But, The Church of
Rome has professed all these: Ergo, The Church of Rome has erred.


And this minor (you say) you have sufficiently proved Sect. 18. 27. But I have
more sufficiently proved, that you have there proved nothing at all, but are
forced to fly to most ridiculous shifts and fallacies; and those fallacies I
meet with here again, Sect. 3^. where the Church of Rome is charged with all
sins almost imagineable, and diverse Authors are cited to prove that charge. Let
us see then how they prove it.

Plarina and Onuphrius are produced to prove, that Schism was raised there.
What then? Was the Church of Rome therefore Schismatical, because some raised a
Schism there? I told you before, that the Authors only of the Schism, and those
that adhere to them are the Schismatiques, they have forsaken the Church, they
have cut themselves off from Christ's body; the Church it self remains still
sound and entire. But that Stella and Almain should charge the Church of Rome
with Heresy, to say no more, is most false. I must once more put you in mind
what Stella says in the place by you cited, Luc. 22. 31. Ecclesia Antiochena,
Alexandrina, and Constantinopolitana saepe defecerunt a fide, Ecclesia vero
Romana nunquam defecit. The Church of Antioch, Alexandria, and Constantinople
have often fallen from the Faith, but the Church of Rome (...) fell from the
Faith. Remember (...) and never produce Stella (...) purpose. And what if there
(...) many and great sinners in the Church (...) what is this to her Faith and
(...) What if She wanted Reformation (...) manners and Discipline? what is that
to Her belief? What if some Popes have been vicious? was the Church of Rome
therefore vicious? and what if some Popes of Rome had fallen from their Faith,
must the Church of Rome therefore forsake her Faith?

There was a time (you say, out of Baronius, An. Christi 908. n. 5. and An.
931. n. 1.) when Marozia, and her Daughter (a couple of lewd Strumpets)
disposed of the Popedom for many years, so that none possessed that Chair, but
Boys, Fools, and Kuaves Answ. I pray, tell me, Doctor, did the Church of Rome
at that time consist only of Boys, Fools, and Knaves? When the Popes were Boys,
wasthere not one man, woman, or child in the whole Church of Rome? Or when they
were Fools, or Knaves, were there then no wise or honest men in that Church?
These consequences must follow as well as the other. For if it follow, that
because some Popes have been vicious, therefore the whole Church of Rome in
those days was also vicions? or because Marcellinus, Liberius, and 10. 22.
denied Jesus Christ to be the true God and Eternal Life, therefore in those
days Rome was no Church, but an Antichristian Synagogue, as you infer, Sect.
17. It follows as necessarily; that because some Popes have been boys,
therefore in those times the Church of Rome consisted only of boys, and that
there were neither men, women, nor children in the whole Church: as likewise,
because some Popes have been fools and knaves, that therefore at that time
there were no wise nor honest men in the Church of Rome. To such miserable and
ridiculous shifts are Heretics driven, whose pride and obstinacy is such,
that they will rather damn their own souls, then confess their errors.

47. But by the way, Doctor, I must desire you to observe, that those Popes
whom B^ronius complains of, in the places by you cited, ( An. 908. nu. 5. and
An. 931. nu. 1.) were but Pseudo-Popes, not lawfully elected, but intruding
into the Papacy by the power of the Marquesses of Tuscany; his words are these,
Mortuo Stephano potentia Widonis Tusciae Marchionis, and Maroziae matris,
Sergii Pseudo-Popae exdicto scorto Marozia filius, etc. An. 931. where you find
Sergius mentioned in your former citation, An. 908. but a Pse^do-Pope; a mere
Usurper, and his Bastard John made Pope after Stephen, by the power Wido
Marquess os Tuscany: and a little after he has these words, It a plane tantae
vires Marchionibus Tusciae in urbe erant, ut pro arbitrio quos vellent, ^
Pontificiali sede deponerent, and alios intruderent. Here you see those Princes
so powerful in Rome, that they could dispose, and set up what Popes they
pleased. And I must desire you, good Doctor, to take this also along with you,
and that from Baronius, that in all the time of those wicked, usurping,
Schismatical Popes, Gods providence was over his Church, that notwithstanding
these distracted and calamitous times, yet the Roman Church was preserved free,
both from Schism and Heresy: For had you cast your eye but a little farther,
from nu. 5. to nu. 7. you should have found these words, Cum tanta ista
urgerent hoe saeculo mala, and scandala increbrescerent, tamen non est inventus
qui ea de causa se ab ip^a Ecclesia Romana abscinderet Schismate, aut Heresi
eandem impugnaret, sed omnes ubique ^entium eidem Fidei vinculo, and
obedientiae foedere juncti persistebant. An. 908. n. 7. You see then that
Baronius could not see your consequence, that because there were some
tyrannical, usurping, and Schismatical Popes, therefore the whole Church of
Rome must fail, or become Schismatical: and I am somewhat confident, that D.
Boughen was the first that ever discovered this undiscoverable consequence.

48. Those other words that you produce our of Baronius (An. 373. n. 21.)
whereby you would make the world believe, that Baronius held an opinion, that
the Pope by his own authority might make and alter Decrees in matters of Faith,
as he pleased, are to be understood only thus, That the Pops, with the advice
of his Bishops, may in a private Council for the peace and quietness of the
Church, till a General Council may be called, publish Decrees concerning
Doctrines of Faith; as also revoke, or alter such Decrees, according as it
shall be found necessary or convenient for the peace and unity of the Church:
But that the Pope can of himself revoke or alter the Decrees, determinations,
or definitions of General Councels concerning Doctrines of Faith, this Baronius
never taught: he was too great a Scholar, and too good a Catholic to maintain
such a temerarious (I might say Heretical) Doctrine: and that this is the
meaning of Baronius in that place, may appear by the context of his Narration,
where he declares the readiness of S. Gregory Nazianzen to acquiesce and submit
to the Decree of Pope Damasus, (who then governed the Church) upon a
supposition, that the Pope had admitted the Apollinarians to the Council at
Rome, which not withstanding was but a false pretense of the Apollinarians;
where you may observe Doctor, that this blessed man was a Bishop in the Eastern
Church, and had formerly wrote sharply against the Apollinarians; and yet upon
a supposition, (though false) that they were reconciled to the Pope, and
admitted to the Council at Rome, he professed, that he would in all submission to
the Pope, acquiesce, and not presume to censure, or question any Act or
determination of the Pope, though it were concerning Doctrines of Faith.

49. I have now past through your first answer, and purposed to have here
concluded; but I meet with an impertinent authority of Doctor Lawd, which
though I might justly have past by, without taking any notice thereof, as
having undertaken an answer to D. Boughen, not D. Lawd, especially since this
of D. Lawd is already sufficiently answered, Sect. 28. yet I have thought fit
to make this further examination of it.

To the question then; Where was your Church before Luther? D. Lawd answers,
Where ours is now. Answ. If by [ ours] he means the particular Church of Rome,
I must confess his answer to be true; for the particular Church of Rome is a
part or member af the Roman Catholic Church, and so were you before Luther;
but with him you have apostatized, and are fallen into Schism and He resie, and
instead of a Church, you are become an Heretical and Schismatical Congregation.
Luther forsook the whole Church, and those, that soon after his Apostasy
adhered to his Heresies, followed him also in his Apostasy, they having been
all members of that Church which Luther had forsaken. But this, you will say,
was no separation, but a reformation, for that D. Lawd drives at; One and the
same Church still (says he) one in substance, but not one in condition of
state and purity, your part of the same Church (by [your part] he means the
Church of Rome) remaining in corruption, and our part of the same Church under
Reformation. Good God, how can any society of men, professing themselves
Christians, be one and the same Church, and that in substante with that, from
which they separated both in Faith and communion? Or what can be a separation,
if this be not? If you have not separated your selves from the Catholic
Church, then were the Arrians, Nestorians, Macedontans, Pelagians, etc. no
Heretics; neither were they separated from the Catholic Church, but were
only under Reformation. Do not you oppose and deny Doctrines of Faith, as
anciently and as universally received by the Church, as those that the Arrians,
Nestorians, Macedonians, Pelagians, etc. opposed and denied? What difference
can you make between Arrius and Luther, in respect of their apostasy? Did not
Luther set himself against the whole world as well as Arrius? Did not the whole
Christian world, besides your selves, upon your first Reformation (as you call
it) detest your new Doctrines, and abhor your communion? Did not the pretended
Greek Church it self (into whose communion you were Petitioners to be admitted)
condemn your new Doctrines as Heretical, and refuse to receive you into their
communion? Read the book entitled, Censura Orientalis Ecclesiae; and you shall
there find the Greek Church maintaining (and that against the Protestants) the
Doctrine of seven Sacraments, cap. 7. of Transubstantiation, and real presence
of Christ's body in the blessed Sacrarmen^, c. 10. of auricular confession, c.
11. of the unbloudy propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, c. 13. of free will, c.
18. of Traditions, c. 20. of Invocation of Saints, and Veneration of Images, c.
21. Was there any one man in the whole world, that professed your Foctrine before
Luther? and yet, forsooth, yours was no separation from the Catholic Church,
but a Reformation, a blessed Reformation, that must necessarily justify all
former Heresies, that ever were condemned, and all Heretics and Schismatiques
that ever separated themselves from Gods Church. To say no more, where is your
succession of Bishops and Pastors, which are essential to Gods Church? If the
consecration of your pretended Bishops was never valid, then must also the
Ordination of your pretended Priests be invalid; and it never yet could, nor
ever can appear, that you had either Bishop consecrated, or Priest ordained,
either lawfully or validly, since Queen Marye's days. But I am sure there are
most strong and pregnant arguments for the contrary. I deny not, but that
perchance there might be some Priests ordained validly (though sacrilegiously)
by that Apostate Bishop of Spalato, in the time of his stay in England; but
what is that to a succession of Priests and Bishops?

I have now done with the first answer, and pass to the second; which because I
find to consist principally of scurrilityes, personal and malicious invectives,
and repetitions of former fallacies, my reply will be the shorter, since I
shall in many things refer the Reader to my former answers, and take notice
here only of that which I shall find to be new matter.

50. And here at the very first entrance I meet with an old fallacy, a
ridiculous argument already answered, Sect. 5. to which I must refer the
Reader. I will here add this only; That before S. Peter translated his Chair
from Antioch to Rome, the Catholic Church might be properly called the Church
of Antioch, which ever since has been called the Roman Church, and ever will
be, until S. Peter's Successor shall translate his Chair to some other place.

51. After this follows a most notorious falsehood, viz. That in the time of S.
Hilary of Poicteurs, there was at Rome no Church, no communion of Saints, She
and those in communion with her, were ^eretical, and complied with Arrius: This
is most apparently false by the Records of all Histories; for at that time the
Western Church was nothing so much infected with Arrianism, as the Eastern,
besides S. Hilary in that place by you cited Sect. ^3. has not so much as named
the Church of Rome, and therefore has not in particular excluded it from the
Catholic Church. But from those words of the Father [ caeteris extra Gallias]
you would prove, that all the world besides France was out of the Catholic
Church; for (say you) There was then no communion with Rome, unless it can be
proved, that Rome was in France, Sect. 23. But pray tell me Doctor, Was
Alexandria and Sardinia more in France, then Rome? and yet you here confess,
that at the very same time those were Catholic and Orthodox Churches; so that
it must necessarily follow, either that Alexandria and Sardinia were in France,
or else that some other Churches, besides France, were Catholic and Orthodox,
and if so, why not Rome? especially since that Father did not in particular
charge Rome with Arrianism, more then Alexandria and Sardinia; so that if you
by those general words of the Father will exclude Rome, I may also as well
exclude Alexandria and Sardinia from the Catholic Church: Wherefore you have
forced your self to interpret those words of the Father, as I have done, Sect.
34. or else you must unsay what you have said, and deny Alexandria and Sardinia
to have been at that time Catholic and Orthodox Churches, unless you can
prove, that Alexandria and Sardinia are in France.

52. Hitherto then you have showed no Church at all distinct from the Roman
Church in any age, though you were pleased to say Sect. 3. of this second
answer, That your learning is such, that you do know such a Church, and your
charity such, that you have shows it.

It seems you showed it so well, that M. T. B. was thereby fully satisfied,
that the Catholic Church never was, nor can be distinct from the Church of
Rome; and has thereupon embraced her communion, and is by Gods grace, become a
good Catholic. Thus has God been pleased to produce good out of evil, to work
his happiness out of your ignorance, and to strengthen him by your weakness.

53. I pass by your scurrilous speeches aagainst M. T. B. as your comparing him
to Seneca's wives fool; your charging him for not being able to search the
Scriptures, Councels, and Fathers, to discover the antiquity and succession of
your Doctrine there (where no man ever yet did, or can discover it) I will only
say this, that M. T. B. has shown more wit and judgment in one line, then you
have in all your Pamphlet, and has said more in one sentence, then you, or all
the Rabble of your Sect can answer in an age. But let us see how you prove the
antiquity of your Doctrine.

54. The Doctrine (you say) of the Church of England is clear in your Book of
Common Prayer, as for the positive part; and in your book of Articles, wherein
much is Negattve. Answ. A very ancient Doctrine then it must be, your Book of
Common Prayer being made not much above 100. years since, viz. 29. May 1549. in
the reign of K. Edward the Sixth; and your Book of Articles not much above half
an hundred. But was your book of Common Prayer intended for a Confession of
Faith, or for public Service and Devotion? Is there any point of Faith or
Doctrine absolutely declared and defined there* You will say, perchance, that
in the three Creeds are contained diverse Declaratious and definitions of Faith;
I confess it, but those Creeds are not inserted there merely as definitions of
Faith, with a precept under a curse, that all should believe whatsoever is
there declard, but as parts of your Public Service, that by frequent
repetition thereof, the vulgar people might know the principal points of Faith
necessary for salvation, I deny not; but some Doctrines may be deducible
thence, though nothing positively declared, it being a book which belongs
rather to the Discipline, then Doctrine of your pretended Church.

55. The positive Doctrine, you say, of your Church contained in that Book, was
ever professed, and is visible in all Catholic Writers. Answ. I confess, that
most (if not all) of the Doctrines deducible thence, were ever professed, and
are visible in all Catholic Writers, because they are the Doctrines of the
Roman Catholic Church, whence you have borrowed them, as you have your whole
book of Common Prayer, and the Scripture it self, only you have taken the
sacrilegious boldness to expunge out of both what your private phancies would
not admit: but if you can show any one of your negative or positive Doctrines
contained in your book of Articles, and which is opposite to the Doctrine of
the Church of Rome, in any one Catholic Writer, Father, or Council, from the
time of the Apostles to Luthers Apostasy, I here profess before all the world,
that I will then become a Protestant my self, or whatsoever else you will
command me to be.

56. But whereas you say, That the most skilful (of the Roman Catholic Party)
are not able to show a succession of men professing the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome, in the first 700. years of Christianity: I am so amazed, that I know
not whether I should charge you with gross ignorance, or hellish malice: In
plain terms, you must be either a most ignorant animal, or a malicious
deceiver. Is it possible that you should obtrude such a notorious falsehood to
the world, and not blush? certainly you never read the Fathers, nor Councels,
nor therein examined the ancient Doctrine and practice of the Church, or if you
have (as you pretend) your judgment is not sufficient to understand them; or
else malice and obstinacy has so blinded you, that you cannot see it there, as
the malicious and obstinate Jews could not see our blessed Saviors Divinity
through so many stupendous miracles. The Sun it self was never so clear at
noonday, as the succession of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and of men
professing the same, not only for the first 700. years of Christianity, but
from the time of the Apostles to this present day. Has it not been already
clearly shown by diverse learned Catholic Writers, by you yet un-answer'd? Has
not Bellarmine, Baronius, Cardinal Peron, D. Stratford, etc. most evidently
manifested it to the world? Were I not confined within the narrow precincts of
a Reply, I could most plainly demonstrate it my self; but it would require a
far larger volume then I have now time or opportunity to compose: It is
sufficient for me, since you have appealed to the first 500. years after our
Saviors birth, that I have proved (Sect. 44.) that the Doctrine of those times
is not different from, but the very same with the present Doctrine of the Roman
Catholic Church.

57. Your Church (of England) you say, has been visible since the first or
second Conversion, though not always under Reformation. Answ. Which you mean
by the first or second Conversion, I know not; but from the time of her last
Conversion by S. Augustine the Monk (which is commonly reputed her third
conversion) for almost 1000. years together, you were an apparent visible part
of the Church Catholic; but when you began your blessed Reformation, you then
ceast to be a Church, or a part of the Catholic Church. For in K. Hen.
eight's days you began your Schism, separating your selves from the communion
of your holy Mother the Church of Rome, and the Bishop thereof, the common
Pastor of Christ's Church; and in K. Edw. the Sixths Reign your Schism begat
Heresy, and under this happy Reformation you have ever since continued.

But now Doctor, where are your pretended Bishops? what is become of your book
of Common Prayer? who now subscribes to your 39. Articles? You cannot
reasonably deny, but those, who have lately reformed you, had more authority
and reason for it, then you had to reform the whole Church, or to censure
Doctrines of Faith universally taught by Gods Church, and received as such by
all your Forefathers, from the time of Englands conversion to the Christian
Faith, till after Luthers apostasy: You considered not, when under pretense of
Reformation you forsook the whole Church, that you did but leave a pattern to
your Successors, how they also, when they should think fit, might forsake you,
and reform this your blessed Reformation, as by Gods just judgments they have
lately done: For I am sure they walk by the same Rule of Scripture, and are as
competent Judges, and as able interpreters thereof, as ever you were, or can
be; only they are not so tyrannical as you were, who forced men against their
consciences to subscribe to your Doctrine and Discipline, which according to
your own principles, might be erroneous and superstitious.

58. But you say Sect. 9. That you never read in Fathers or Councels, That to
communicate with Rome, is either a sure, or any token of a good Catholic.
Answ. Then you never read S. Hieroms 57 Epist. to Pope Damasus, where you might
have seen these words, Ego Beatitudini tuae, id est Cathedrae Petri, commumione
cons^^ior, super illam Petram aedificatam Ecclesiam s^io, Mat. 16. 18.
quicunque extra hanc Domum agnum comederit, prophanus est; si quis in Arca No^
non fuerit, peribit regnante diluvio; quicunque tecum non colligit, spargit;
Hoc est, qui Christi non est, Anti-christi est. I am (says S. Hierom) joined
in communion to your Holiness, that is, to Peter's Chair, upon that Rock I know
the Church to be built, whosoever out of this House eats the Ldmb, is profane;
whosoever shall not be in Noah's Ark, shall perish in the Deluge; he that
gathers not with thee, scatters, that is, he that is not of Christ, is of
Antichrist. These are S. Hieroms own words, by which it is most plain, that he
that is not in communion with S. Peter's Chair, with the Church and Bishop of
Rome, is out of Gods Church, and therefore no Catholic.

Neither did you ever read S. Ambrose's Funeral Oration on the death of his
brother Satyrus, where you might have found these words, Advocavit ad se
Episcopum, etc. percontatusque ex eo est, utrumnam cum Episcopis Catholicis,
hoc est, cum Romana Ecclesia conveniret. He called unto him a Bishop, and aked
him, whether he were in communion with the Catholic Bishops, that is, with
the Church of Rome. And here take notice, Doctor, that this [ Hoc est, that is]
as likewise that [ id est, and hoc est] in the former citation out of S.
Hierom, are the Fathers own interpretation, not mine.

Had you read S. Augustin's 162. Epistle, you might have discovered these words
there: Hic (Caecilianus) contemnere potu it, etc. He (Caecilianus) might
despise the conspiring multitude of his enemies, when he perceived himself to
be united to the Church of Rome, where the principality of the Apostolic
Chair ever flourisht, by communicatory letters. These three learned Fathers,
and glorious lights of Gods church were Co^taneans, though S. Ambrose died in
the fourth century after Christ's birth, and S. Hierom and S. Augustine in the
fifth.

Had you read S. Cyprians second Epistle to Pope Cornelius, li. 4. who lived in
the year of Christ, 250. you might have found these words; Scripsisti etiam, ut
exemplum, etc. You wrote also unto me, to send a copy of those Letters to
Cornelius our Colleague, that he laying aside all care, might know that you are
in communion with him, that is, with the Catholic Church. This [ Hoc est,
that is,] also is not my addition, but S. Cyprians own words. It seems you were
a stranger to S. Irenaeus's Doctrine, who lived in the year of Christ 180.
which is this; Ad hanc enim (Romanam) Ecclesiam propter potentiorem
principalitatem necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam, hoc est ^os qui sunt
undique fideles; It is necessary that every Church, that is, all the faithful
from all parts, should range themselves to this Church (of Rome) for its more
powerful principality, li. 3. c. 3. And now Doctor, what can you say? Methinks
you look somewhat black upon it; you must withal take notice, that all these
Fathers lived within the first 500. years to which you have appealed, and there
is not one of all these testimonies but is plainly against you, evidently
proving it not only a sure, but a necessary and essential token of a good
Catholic, to communicate with the Church of Rome. A thousand testimonies more
might be alleged, but these are sufficient to publish D. Boughens ignorance to
the world. I thought it not impertinent to add one testimony more (in
confirmation of this, and what I said before, Sect. 32. of John Patriarch of
Constantinople, in his Epistle to Hormisda, who about the beginning of the
century, viz. An. 514. was elected Pope, that thereby the communion of the
Greek Church with the Roman, and her subjection to the Apostolic Sea of Rome,
may plainly appear. Promittentes in seque^te tempore, etc. We promise (says
he) hereafter not to commemorate those in the sacred mysteries, who have been
secluded from the communion of the Catholic Church, that is, who consent not
fully with the Sea Apostolic. Here is the opinion of the great Patriarch of
the East, above a 1100. years since, That those who were separated from the Sea
Apostolic, were out of the communion of the Catholic Church: and by this it
appears how true your following words are, viz. That faith which we received
from the Apostles, and Councels, and Fathers, we keep whole and undefiled,
without alteration, addition, or diminution. What but a shameless man could
have the face to publish such a notorious falsehood to the world? By this
appears also how evidently false that saying of yours is (at least as you apply
it) in the beginning of your 11. Sect. viz. That this National Church is as
much Catholic and Apostolic as can be desired.

I confess, this National Church (that is, those that preserve the ancient
Catholic and Apostolic Faith, and keep themselves within the communion of
the holy Catholic Church) is, God be praised, as much Catholic and
Apostolic, as can be desired: but I am sure, those of your Congregation, or
pretended church, are neither Catholic or Apostolic, unless to forsake the
communion of the Catholic Church, and the Doctrines and Traditions of the
Apostles, be to be Catholic and Apostolic, as I have already abundantly
proved. And that Rule which you cite out of Vincent Lyrinens. in the later end
of your 10. Sect. [ Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus, etc. That which
has been believed in all places, at all times, by all the Fathers, that is
truly Catholique] will rise up in Judgment against you. By this Rule you have
condemned your self of Schism and Heresy; for your Doctrine has been so far
from being believed in all places, at all times, and by all the Fathers, that
it is impossible for you to show any one place, any one time, or any one
Father; nay, any one man before Luthers Apostasy, that maintained the
Doctrines which are now comprised in your Book of Articles: neither can you
produce any one person at any time or place, that held any one point of
Doctrine, wherein you dissent from, and oppose the Church of Rome, except such
only, as were noted by the Church for Innovators in Religion, and condemned for
Heretics.

59. And whereas you are pleased to insult over Mr. T. B. Sect. 12. in these
high and daring speeches. [ Is not all true? Refute it if you can: deny it, if
you have the face] I, or any reasonable man, may have the face to tell you,
that you here show your self to be very ignorant, impudent, and impertinent.
For the Doctrine of that part of your 19. Article. viz. [ That the visible
Church of Christ is a congregation of faithful me^ in the which the pure Word
of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly administered, according to
Christ's ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the
same] Mr. T. B. never denied, or questioned; But denies that this doctrine of
your 19. Article can consist with your opinion, who hold, that the Church of
Rome is a true Church, a member of the Church Catholic, though according to
diverse of your Articles cited by Mr. T. B. n. 3. She neither preaches the pure
Word of God, nor duly administers the Sacraments, no, not in all those things,
that of necessity are requisite for the same. For how can that be essentially a
part of the Catholic Church, which observes not that which is essential to
the Catholic Church, as is the preaching of the pure Word of God, and the due
administration of the Sacraments, according to that definition of the Church in
your 19. Article?

Besides, how can you vindicate that Church from heresy, that for Doctrines of
Faith necessary to salvation teaches blasphemous fables? Art. 31. Or that
Sacrilegiously robs the Laity of Christ's blood* with which you charge the
Church of Rome, Sect. 11. of your first Answer: Or that maintains Doctrines
repugnant to plain words of Scripture? Sect. 24. ib. Or that erres in Doctrine
of faith, as you tax the Church of Rome^ Sect. 14. of your second Answer. Or
that gives divine worship to Images and Relics, wherewith you charge the
Church of Rome. Sect. 34. ib.? Can any Church be blasphemous, sacrilegious,
idolatrous, repugnant in her Doctrines to plain words of Scripture, erroneus
in Doctrines of Faith, and yet not be heretical, but continue still essentially
a true Church?

But because you are pleased to extend your Charity beyond Reason toward the
Church of Rome, I will not quarrel with you about it; only I must take notice
of the Argument, which you bring to prove it. God (say you) blames the Church
of Pergamos for enduring the seat of Satan within her Diocese, as also for
holding that ^didous Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, and yet grants her to be a
Church. Answ. Herein you are much mistaken, Doctor, for God blames not the
Church, but the Angel of the Church of Pergamos; which by many Catholic
Expositors both Ancient and Modern; as also by diverse of your own Sect and
Religion, is interpreted, The bishop of the Church. If the Church of Pergamos
had held the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, She had bin Heretical, and
consequently no Church: but it was the Bishop, not the Church, that was
heretical. And if God may charge the Bishop of the Church of Pergamos with
Heresy, and yet grant Pergamos to be a true Church; why may not the Church of
Rome continue a true Church, though the Bishop thereof fall into heresy?

60. your taking the Church of Rome for maiming the blessed Sacrament. Sect.
13. has been fully answered already. Sect. 18. 19. and. Sect. 41.

61. But the Doctor is very hot in proving, that the Church must err with her
Bishop; and therefore the Church of Rome was no Church, when her Bishops were
heretical. Such as the Bishop is (says he) such is the Church presumed to be.
Answ. I know none but Dr. Boughen, that was ever guilty of so silly a
Presumption. But S. Cyprians Authority is urged to prove it, who says, that as
the Bishop is in the Church, so is the Church in the Bishop. I consesse, I find
in S. Cyprian. (Epist. lib. 4. Ep. 9.) these words; Christiani sunt Ecclesiae
and plebs Sacerdoti adunata, and Pastori suo grex adhaerens; unde scire debes,
Episcopum in Ecclesia esse and Ecclesiam in Episcopo. Christians are a Church,
and Common people, united to the Priest, and a Flock adhering to its Pastor;
whence you must know, that the Bishop is in the Church, and the Church in the
Bishop. What is all this to the purpose? The Bishop is in the Church, as a King
is in his Kingdom, or a General in his Army; and the Church likewise is in
the Bishop, not formally, but communicative; all the particular members thereof
being in communion with the Bishop, as their Head. And this is all that can be
gathered from those words of the Father. Since then the Church cannot be
Formally in the Bishop, but only by way of communion, subjection, government,
or Discipline; why may not the Church be Catholic, though the Bishop be
Heretical?

But from this false ground the Doctor will prosecute his old fallacy, and will
still be endeavoring to prove, that the Church of Rome could not be
Catholic, when the Bishops thereof were heretics. Sect, 19. All Heretics
(says he) while such, both themselves and all that side with them, are
secluded from Ecclesiastical communion every way. But diverse Popes were
Heretics or Schismatiques; therefore the Church of Rome while her Bishops
were heretical was in an ill case. Answ. Is not this a sine conclusion from
those Premises? what form or consequence is this here of a Syllogism? And if
the conclusion did follow out of those Premises, what were this to the purpose?
The Church may be in an ill case, when the Bishop is in heresy, yet not
Heretical. But behold another argument to prove the Church of Rome not
Catholic: When all Episcopal Acts were void, the Church could not possibly be
Catholic. But when the Bishops were Heretics, all Episcopal Acts were void;
therefore the Church could not possibly be Catholic. Answ. This consequence
is much like the other: All the Acts of Heretical Bishops are void; therefore
the Church cannot possibly be Catholic; as if the Faith of the Church
depended on the Acts of the Bishop. But a confirmation thereof is brought from
S. Hilaries testimony, who professes, as you say. That (in these Western
parts) there was in his time no Christian communion, but in France. Answ. You
do well to put those words [ in these Western parts] in a parenthesis, for they
are yours, not S. Hilaries; as may appear by his words by you cited, Sect. 23.
where those words [ caeteris extra Gallias] may comprehend the Eastern as well
as the Western Churches. And if you read Ecclesiastical Histories, you shall
find, that in S. Hilaries time the Eastern Churches were far more infected with
Arrianism, then the Western.

62. Besides, you may remember, Doctor, that in the beginning of this second
answer, you confessed, that in S. Hilaries time, at that very time when Rome (as
you falsely say) was Arrian, Sardinia was a Catholic and Orthodox Church: How
can that agree with this which you here endeavor to prove out of S. Hilary?
Was not Sardinia part of the Western Church? How then could all the Western
parts be excluded from Christian communion, besides France, when Sardinia,
which is in these Western parts, was (as your self confess) a Catholic and
Orthodox Church? How can these two possibly consist together? It seems you have
forgot your self. Oportet mendacem esse memorem.

60. After all the other Popes. Faelix is brought in for communicating with
Arrians, and Socrates and Zozomen are alleged to prove, that therefore Rome it
self was then accounted Arrian. What then, says Socrates? that Liberius was
banished for his constancy in defending the Catholic Faith against the
Arrians, and that Faelix was appointed to succeed him in the Papacy, who was,
Arrianae Sectae addictus: but there is not one word there of Rome's being
Arrian. (Socrat. li. 2. c. ^9.) And if Faelix did perchance sometimes favor
the Arrian Faction, yet was it before he was elected Pope, not afterward; as
appears plainly by Sozomen in the very place by you cited, li. 4. c. 10.
Liberius Ecclesiae Romanae Episcopatu privatus est, cui praefuitur Faelix
illius Cleri Diaconus, quem aiunt Fidei Concilii Nicaeni semper consensisse,
and omnino, quantum pertinebat ad Religionem, reprehensione caruisse. Liberius
(says he) was deprived of the Bishopric of the Roman Church, to which Faelix,
a Deacon of that Clergy, was preferred, who is ^said to have always consented
to the Faith of the Nicene Council, and was never blameable for any thing that
concerned Religion. These are the very words of Sozomen, and in the very same
place cited by the Doctor. Nothing there concerning Faelix or Rome's being
Arrian. Thus the Reader may see how fraudulently the Doctor has dealt with the
world.

Well, but Faelix or dained diverse Arrians; what then? must he therefore be an
Arrian himself? or must he necessarily know them to be such?

But he communicated with Arrians; and must he therefore be an Arrian? Do not
Catholics at this time communicate with Heretics in England, France,
Germany, etc. in outward conversation and civil commerce, though not in their
Heresy? and you neither have proved, nor ever can prove, that Faelix
communicated with the Arrians in their heretical and blasphemous Doctrine, but
in outward conversation only, which is, and ever was lawful for any Catholic.

61. To pass by your impertinent distinction between a professed and a close
Heretic, as being nothing to the purpose: I come to your other passage,
wherein you say, and cite some Canons for it; That the communion of the Church
is estimated by communicating with the Bishop, and if any, whether Priest, or
other, shall sever themselves from the Canonical Bishop, they are censured to
be Heretics. Answ. This is to be understood when the Bishop is Catholic,
and keeps himself within the communion of the Catholic Church; but if the
Bishop be heretical, and the Church shall communicate with him in his Heresy,
the Church also becomes heretical, be the Bishop thereof a professed or close
Heretic, it matters not: but by this your own Rule you must confess your
selves Heretics, because you did originally s^ver your selves from your
Canonical Catholic Bishops, and followed your own, and other men's new
inventions; and when all your pretended bishops were heretical, you
communicated with them and their heresies.

62. But the bishop may be either a professed or close Heretic, and yet the
Church may be Catholic: and this your self expressly grant in your following
Sect. 22. where you say, That you believe that the King of England, and
Archbishop of Cauterbury, ^ither, or both of them, may be Heretics, and this
Church not so; since it is not their being, but our complying that makes us
heretical. Herein you have fully contradicted your self, and granted whatsoever
I have said concerning this point: For if the Church of England may be
Catholic, though both King and Metropolitan thereof be Heretics, why may
not the Church of Rome be Catholic, though the bishop thereof be heretical?

63. But (say you) if all our Bishops be of the same Religion with them, this
Church is in an ill case. Answ. I say so too; yet it may be Catholic. All
your pretended bishops may be heretical (as they were all for about these 100.
years together last past) and yet there may be a Catholic Church in England.
It is possible that the particular members of each Diocese may not comply with
their bishop in his Heresy; and then, according to your own saying, they are
not heretical. The inferior Priests and people may preserve their faith,
though all the bishops fall from it: but what is all this to the purpose? Were
ever all the bishops that were subject to the Patriarchal Sea of Rome, at one
and the same time, Heretics? I suppose, no man besides your self was ever
possessed with such a ridiculous imagination. What if your Archbishop of
Canterbury alone had been an Heretic, and all the other bishops within his
Province Catholic? will you therefore conclude, that the particular Church or
Diocese of Canterbury must necessarily have been heretical? If you say so, you
plainly contradict your self, who even now said, that it is not the Kings or
Archbishops being heretical, but our complying with them, that makes us
heretical, Sect. 22.

64. But the Doctor pursues this argument close, and endeavors to prove, that
when the King and Priest join together, it has a strange influence upon the
people, for good or bad. Answ. What then? must the people therefore of
necessity be good or bad, according as the King and Priest are? cannot Gods
grace overcome this influence, and preserve the people from infection? but you
say; When King Ahaz, and Urijah the Priest professed I dolatry, though many
good men were resident among them, yet was the City and people accounted
heretical. Answ. First, it appears not by the Text, that they were so
accounted. Secondly, if they were accounted heretical, does it herefore
necessarily follow, that they were so? Does truth and falsehood depend on the
opinions of men? if so, then every man in his own opinion would be Catholic,
and all the world besides, that concur not with him in his judgment, would be
Heretics. It is not necessary that every one must be good or bad, catholic,
or heretic, according as some men (perchance) out of error, either in
doctrine or fact, shall esteem him: but what if that city and people were (not
only accounted, but) truly and really heretical, must it therefore always
follow, that when the King and Priest are heretical, the city and people must
of necessity be so too? What if Constantius the Emperor, and Leon^ius the
bishop? What if Valens and Eudoxius by joining together in heresy withdrew
many, partly by power, pardly by example from the Catholic Faith; does it
therefore always necessarily follow, that when the Prince and Priest join in
heresy, the people also must be heretical? Must every thing come to pass,
because it may come to pass? No, Doctor, the young Sophisters will tell you,
that, a posse and esse non valet argumentum.

65. And whereas you say, that under King Edward VI. and Queen Mary, the
Religion of the church was judged of by the Governors: I answer, that the
Religion of this Nation (not of the church, for it is not the Religion of the
Prince, but the profession of the ancient Catholic Faith, that constitutes a
church) was judged of, not by the Governors, but by the Laws that were made
in K. Edw. VI. and Queen Maryes days respectively, either to establish a new
upstart Religion, never before heard of in the world, or to re-establish the
ancient Catholic Faith: So that in K. Edw. VI. days the Nation might be said
to be heretical, but the Church was even at that time Catholic, otherwise it
could not have been a church; and in Q. Maryes days both church and Nation
were Catholic. But you cannot prove that ever the Roman Nation, much less the
Roman Church was heretical, since their first conversion to the Christian
faith. And if the Pope, and with him all the bishops of Italy had at the same
time forsaken the Catholic faith, yet the Church of Rome might still have
retained her prerogative of being the Mother church, and Head of all particular
churches in the world. And though the Pope might have forfeited all his
Ecclesiastical power and Jurisdiction, and so ceast to be Head of the church,
yet the right of S. Peter's Chair had always remained in the Church of Rome; for
since the bishop is not the church formally, nor the church formally in the
bishop, the church cannot formally err with the bishop, neither must the
church formally taken, be there fore heretical, because the bishop thereof is
so. Now, I hope, I have done with this ^edious and frivolous argument.

65. That the Church of Rome imposes a new sense on the articles of the C^eeds,
is a mere calumny, spoken gratis, without any color or show of proof. That the
Church of Rome and you agree in the letter, not in the Exposition, is true; The
Church of Rome following the Exposition of the Universal Tradition and practice
of the church, and you your new fantastical and heretical Exposition: but
though you did agree with the Roman Church in the Exposition, as well as in the
letter, yet could you not be excused from heresy, because you oppose other
Doctrines of Faith that are not contained in the three Creeds: for not all
points of faith, that are necessary for all sorts of men to be believed, are
comprehended in the three Creeds, either jointly, or severally.

66. And whereas you charge the Church of Rome, with imposing a new Creed of
Pius 4. upon the church, against a canon of the Council of Ephesus. I answer,
first, That which you mean is but a profession of Faith, wherein are contained
certain Doctrines of faith that are not expressly comprehended in the Creeds. It
can no more properly be called a Creed, then your book of Articles, which is
your Profession of faith; and as not all, but some certain persons only amongst
you, were bound by your Statutes to subscribe to that Profession; so likewise
not every man, but some certain persons only are bound to subscribe to the
other. Secondly, that Profession was agreed upon by the whole Council, and
confirmed by Pope Pius 4. It was neither composed, nor commanded by the Pope
alone, but by him jointly wi^h the Council. Thirdly, there is not one Article
of that Profession contrary or repugnant to any one article of the former
Creeds: and although this had been a new Creed, as you call it, yet had it not
been against any canon of the Council of Ephesus; that Council, at the most,
for bidding only private persons to set forth, or publish any Creed, that
should contain in it any Doctrine contrary to any article of belief in those
former Creeds, Neither indeed could the church in the Council of Ephesus debar
the church in future ages of that power and authority, which the church in
former ages assumed and exercised. Why should it be more unlawful for the
church assembled in the Council of Trent, to set forth a new form of Profession
of Faith, then it was for the church assembled in the Council of Nice, or
Constantinople? No Council can rob the church of that power which Christ has
given her. And by this Profession of Faith the Roman Church has neither altered
the letter, nor sense of former Creeds; though you dare be bold to say, She has
strangely altered the sense. I confess, you are bold to say any thing, but you
have proved nothing.

67. And whereas you say, you take the Rule of Faith in the literal sense, let
us see (to give but one instance) since you make Scripture the sole Rule of
your faith, whether you take those words of our blessed Savior, Mat. 26. 26.
Mar. 14. 22. and Luc. 22. 19. in the literal sense. Our B Savior there takes
Bread and Wine, and says, This is my Body which is given (or broken) for you;
This is my Blood which is shed for you; which you thus interpret, This is a
sign only of my Body, and this is a sign only of my Blood. You deny, that the
bread and wine which our B. Savior took and blessed, was truly and substantially
converted into his body and blood, and are not ashamed to say, that the
doctrine of Transubstantiation is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture.

Let all the world judge, whether herein you take the Rule^ of Faith in the
literal sense. It is much more plain, that you go against the very letter of
the Gospel, against the expositions of the ancient Fathers, both Greek and
Latin, the Declarations of Councels, the ancient and universal practice of the
whole church, which always adored the B. Sacrament, after consecration, with
divine worship.

68. In Sect. 29. I meet with another absurd and impertinent distinction,
between error in Faith, and error in matters of Faith; as if errors in
Faith, and errors in matters of Faith were not all one. They have hitherto
been esteemed all one, and that by those who have been far beyond you both in
learning and judgment; though your sharp understanding be able to divide, and
put a difference between them.

69. Much like to this is that saying of yours Sect. 30. Every violation of the
Faith, cuts not off from the Catholic Church, but a false opinion of God
does. How then is that of S. Paul true, Heb. 11. 6. Without faith it is
impossible to please God. Can a man violate Faith, though but in some one
point, and yet be a Catholic? who ever thought so besides your ^elf? by the
same reason one and the same man may be at the same time both Catholic and
Heretic. But to prove your new opinion, you produce an ancient testimony of
S. Augustine, (de fid. and Symb. c. 20.) Haereti^i de Deo falsa sentiendo,
ipsam fidem violant, quapropter non pertinent ad Ecclesiam Catholicam.
Heretics by having a false opinion of God, violate Faith it self, wherefore
they belong not to the Catholic Church. Answ. Here is now a fine proof, if
well examined. You must know Doctor, that the word [ Quapropter] wherefore,
refers to the words immediately going before; and then it is plain, that this
testimony of the Father makes directly against you. For if men be therefore cut
off from the Catholic Church, because they have violated the Faith, then it
necessarily follows, that every violation of Faith cuts a man off from the
Catholic Church. But in favor to the Doctor, let us once grant against all
reason, that the word [ Quapropter] may refer to the former words, and that the
Father speaks as the Doctor would have him. What shall we discover then? even
this consequence, Heretics by having a false opinion of God are cut off from
the Catholic Church; therefore every violation of Faith cuts not off from the
Catholic Church. Most admirable! this is just like the rest. If this be a
good consequence, there was never any bad or fallacious. Just so will I prove,
that every damnable sin excludes not a man from Gods favor. Murder and
Adultery exclude a man from Gods favor; therefore not every damnable sin
excludes a man from Gods favor. You will say, this is no good consequence; I
say so too, but I am sure it is as good as yours, the very same with yours.

70. Now we come to examine who are in Schism, the Church, or Luthers
followers; or indeed, rather whether there be any Schism or no, between the
Church of Rome and the Protestants, which the Doctor seems to deny. The truth
is, M. T. B. has so gravel'd the poor Doctor, that he is forced to fly to most
miserable and ridiculous shifts. M. T. B. very rationally and judiciously
says, by way of objection, that Christ's mystical Body is but one; and although
the Body be made up of diverse members, yet all these members must communicate
one with another; for if a member be separated but by Schism, it is like an arm
cut off from the Body, or a branch from the Vine, which makes that arm or
branch no part of the Body or Vine. To this the Doctor answers thus, What
though all this be granted, will this make one of the two no Church? I believe
not. Reply. It Is very likely Doctor that you believe so, but what man of sense
or understanding can believe so? Can a particular church separate from the
whole Catholic Church, both in Doctrines of Faith and external communion, and
yet not be Schismatical, but still continue a Catholic Church? who ever
before D. Boughen could say or think so? Well, but S. Paul's authority is
alleged, 1 Cor. 12. 25. where it is said, that all the members of the body
must communicate one with another, in the same care one for another, in the
same sufferings and rejoycings one with another. What then? Is there no other
communion necessary to avoid Schism? This is just like your former
consequences, The members must communicate one with another in the same
sufferings and rejoycings one with another; therefore to avoid Schism, there is
no other communion necessary. I am sure, this is no necessary consequence; but
with such poor fallacies as these, Heretics have always endeavored to
deceive the world. Neither can that place of the Apostle advantage you at all;
for he there only compares Christ's mystical body, the Church, to the natural
body; and says, that as all the members of the natural body mutually assist
each other, and without any Schism, that is, any division, or discord, jointly
concur to preserve the body; so also in the Church, which is Christ's mystical
body, there are different orders, functions, and offices, all which ought
mutually to assist each other for the preservation of the whole church: this is
all that S. Paul intends in that place, as by the context of the whole cha. will
evidently appear to any indifferent Reader.

71. We are not bound (you say, Sect. 32.) to communicate with the Church of
Rome in the same ceremonies, gesture, superstition, or error. Answ. First, I
deny that the Roman Church is, or ever was, or can be guilty of superstition,
or error in faith. Secondly, I grant that you are bound not to communicate with
any Nation, or people in superstition, or error; As also, that you are not
bound to use the ceremonies of other Catholic Churches. There be diverse
particular Churches that differ from each other in some ceremonies, and yet are
in perfect charity, and communicate with each other. As for example, The
Western Church consecrates in unleavened bread, after the example of our B.
Savior, who first instituted the blessed Sacrament, and consecrated in
unleavened bread; but the Greek Church has always accustomed to consecrate in
leavened bread: besides, these two Churches differ in diverse ceremonies of the
Mass, though not in any substantial or essential part thereof. And yet these
two churches are in perfect charity and communion with each other. (I speak
here of the true Catholic Greek Church, not of those schismatiq^es and
Heretics, who have cut themselves off from the Catholic Church; whom
notwithstanding you are pleased to call the Greek Church.) Neither do those
churches abhor each others ceremonies as superstitious or unlawful, but the
particular members of each church are most ready to conform to the ceremonies
and discipline of each other, according as any of them shall travel or pass
from one church to the other. As when a bishop or Priest of the Eastern church
travells into any part of the Western, he then makes me scruple to consecrate
in unleavened bread, as formerly in his own church he consecrated in leavened;
but when any two churches shall abhor^e and detest the Doctrine and ceremonies
of each other, as heretical, sacrilegious, idolatrous, and repugnant to plain
Scripture, there is then a perfect schism. And since these two abhor each
others communion, charging each other with sacrilegious, idolatrous, and
damnable errors, they cannot both meet in the Catholic Church; and therefore
one of them must necessarily be cut off from Christ's mystical body, either by
heresy or schism, or both. Wherefore in granting that assertion of Mr. T. B.
you must also grant, that either the Church of Rome, or the Protestants, are
guilty of heresy, or schism, or both; and therefore no part of the Catholic
Church.

72. It is then now time to show who is the schismatique. And that you are
schismatic, I prove thus.

Those that have separated themselves from the communion of the Catholic
Church, are schismatic.

But you have separated your selves from the communion of the Catholic Church.

Ergo. You are Schismatic.

The Major is evident, and often granted by the Doctor; the minor is thus
proved.

Those that have separated themselves from the communion of the bishop and
Church of Rome, have separated themselves from the Catholic Church.

But you have separated your selves from the communion of the bishop, and
Church of Rome.

Ergo. You have separated your selves from the communion of the Catholic
Church.

The minor is acknowledged by the Doctor, Sect. 19. of his first Answer. The
major is sufficiently proved, Sect, 25. and Sect. 58. wherefore I will here
only add some few authentic testimonies more in proof thereof. S. Cyprian
says, ( li. 4. ep. 8. a d Corn^l. Pontif.) Placuit ut per Episcopos, reteni^ a
nobis rei veritate ad comprobandam ordinationem tuam, etc. ut te universi
Collegae nostri, and communicationem tuam, id est, Catholicae Ecclesiae
unitatem pariter and charitatem probarent firmiter and tenerent. We thought
fit, etc. that all our fellow bishops might steadfastly approve of and embrace
you, and your communion, that is, the Catholic Churches unity and charity. Is
it not plain by these words, that the unity of the Catholic Church consists
in the communion with the Bishop of Rome? And if there be no Catholic unity,
but in communion with the Bishop of Rome; it is apparently impossible, that any
one can be united to the Catholic Church, that is not in communion with the
Bishop and the Church of Rome. Besides, that the Church is built upon S. Peter
and his Successors, I have already fully proved. Sect. 25. and Sect. 58. to
which I will add one testimony more out of S. Cyprian. (Epist. ad Quintinum.)
Nam nec Petrus, quem primum elegit, and super quem aedificavit Ecclesiam suam
etc. For neither Peter, whom our Lord chose to be the first, and upon whom he
built his Church. etc. The like words he has ( Ser. 3. de bon. pat.) whosoever
then forsakes the foundation, cannot be part of the house or building. The
whole building rests upon the foundation; wherefore he that is separated from
the foundation, is separated also from the building, which is the house, the
Church of God. And you must remember, Doctor, that S. Cyprian lived in the
year of Christ 250. and therefore long within the first 500. years, to which
you have appealed, Sect. 27. so that you must either confess the Prorestants
to be out of the communion of the Catholic Church, and consequently
schismatic, at the least; or else you must revoke and renounce your appeal.

If you will say, that the sense of the whole Church appears not fully in the
writings of particular Fathers; you shall hear the confession and
acknowledgment of 520. Fathers assembled in the fourth General Council at
Calcedon, in the year of Christ 451. who all unanimously acknowledge Pope Leo
their head. Their words are; Quibus tu quidem sicut membris caput praeras, Over
whom (that is the Fathers assembled in the Council) thou were as the Head over
the members. And it is to be observed, that this Council was held in the
Eastern Church, and consisted for the most part of the Fathers of that Church;
wherein notwithstanding Pope Leo's Delegates sat in the uppermost Seat, and
took place of the Patriarch of Constant inople himself, even in his own
Patriarchate; which would never have been permited, had not the Pope's
Jurisdiction extended to the Eastern, as well as the Western Churches. About 50.
years after the Council, did not the Eastern bishops acknowledge that it was
necessary for all Christians to communicate with the bishop and Church of Rome?
you have heard, Sect. 58. that John Patriarch of Constantinople excluded al
from the communion of the Catholic Church, that were divided from the
Apostolic sea of Rome; which, doubtless, the great Patriarch of the East
would never have acknowledged, had it not descended by universal Tradition,
that the Bishop of Rome was appointed by Christ to be the supreme Pastor and
Governor of the whole Church. Examine all this Patriarch's letters written to
Pope Hormisda, and you shall find them all directed to the Pope, after this
manner. Domino m^o per omnia sanctissimo. And can any reasonable man imagine,
that so great a Patriarch would have styled the Pope, his Lord, if his power in
the Eastern Church had been absolute, and independent on the sea of Rome? In
like manner Dorotheus Bishop of Thessalonica in the Eastern Church, in his
Epistle to the same Pope has these words. Ista nunc scripsi Beato Capiti nostro
per Patricium. etc. These things have I now written by Patricius to our Blessed
Head.

By this it plainly appears, that in those days, within the first 600. years
of Christ, the Bishop of Rome was acknowledged the Head of the Eastern
Churches, as well as of the Western; and that by the Eastern Bishops
themselves, even by their chief, and Head-Bishop, the Patriarch of the East;
who likewise (as you have already heard) confessed, that all Catholic Communion
flows from the Apostolic sea of Rome, as the Head and Fountain thereof. And
what better interpreter of Scripture, or more faithful preserver of Apostolic
Traditions can therebe, then the ancient and universal practice of the Church?

To the practice of former Ages, and Declarations of ancient Councels, let us
join the defini^ions of later times, viz. of the Council of Florence, in the
year 1439. where the Patriarch of Constantinople was present in person, and all
the other Patriarchs, either personally, or by their Delegates. Let us then
hear the whole Church speaking in that Council.

Item definimus Sanctam Apostolicam sedem, and Romanum Pontificem in universum
Orbem tenere primatum, etc. (Council. Florent. Act. ult.) Also we declare, that
the holy Apostolic Sea and Bishop of Rome has the primacy over the whole
world, and that the Bishop of Rome is S. Peter's Successor, who was chief of the
Apostles, and that he is Christ's true Vicar, and Head of the whole Church, the
Father and Doctor of all Christians; and that in S. Peter full power was given
to him (the Bishop of Rome) by our Lord Jesus Christ, to feed, rule, and govern
the whole Church. To this definition subscribed all the Patriarchs of the
Church, and amongst the rest the Patriarch of Constantinople himself. You shall
have his subscription, as it is set down in the Acts of the Council. Joseph
miserations divina Constantinopolis, etc. Florent. An. 1439. I Joseph, by the
mercy of God, Archbishop of Constantinople, and new Rome, and universal
Patriarch, because my life is almost at an end, do therefore by the goodness of
God, according to my duty, publish this my opinion to my beloved sons in this
writing. For all those things which our Lord Jesus Christ's Catholic and
Apostolic Church of Old Rome believes and embraces, I profess that I also do
hold and believe, and fully consent unto them. And I grant, that the blessed
Father of Fathers, and chief Priest, the Pope of Old Rome, is our Lord Jesus
Christ's Vcar, and I deny not that there is a Purgatory for souls. And note,
that this is the profession of a dying man past hope of life. Here you see a
concurrence of the later ages with the former. Here you see all the churches of
the world consenting to the Primacy and Jurisdiction of the Church of Rome.
Here you have seen the practice of the ancient church, the Declarations of
former Councels, and the Definitions of later; then which nothing can better
interpret Scripture, or more faithfully preserve divine truths and Apostolical
Doctrines to posterity.

Since then the Church of Rome is the Head and Mother Church of the world, and
consequently the Fountain of Unity, whosoever shall separate himself from her
communion, cannot possibly be a member of the Catholic Church: And since the
Church of Rome by her power and Jurisdiction diffuses her self over all the
parts of the Christian world, and as being the great Metropolitan of the world,
infuses unity into all particular Churches and Christians, She is in this her
largest amplitude properly and truly called the Catholic Church. And because
the Catholic Church cannot fall into any error in faith, or any other
damnable error whatsoever, nor teach Doctrines superstitious, sacrilegious, or
repugnant to plain words of Scripture, because she is, and ever shall be guided
by Gods Holy Spirit, which hitherto has, and ever shall lead her into all
truth, therefore it cannot be truly said, that the Roman Church being this
Catholic Church, ever was, or can be guilty of errors in faith, or of
superstitious, sacrilegious, or any damnable Doctrines whatsoever.

73. Besides, when Luther first for sook the communion of the Roman Church, did
he not stand alone? was he not divided from the world, even from those that
were not in communion with the Church of Rome, as well as from those that were?
did he communicate in the Sacraments, or external worship with any particular
Church, Congregation, People, Nation, or Sect professing the name of Christ?
can any man separate himself from that church, in whose communion he once
lived, whose Faith and Doctrine he embraced, and join himself to no other
congregation in the whole world, professing the name of Christ, either in
doctrine or external communion, and yet be no Schismatique? If so, then there
never was, or can be any Schism. If then Luther was Schismatical in being
divided from the Whole Christian world in Faith and communion, it necessarily
follows, that all those who first adhered to him, forsaking the communion of
that church, whereof they had formerly been members, and all those who have
since followed Luther, and have not joined themselves to any church or
Christian Congregation whatsoever besides themselves, must be guilty of the
same Schism. How then is it possible for you to avoid the guilt of Schism,
since you have forsaken the communion of the Church of Rome, with whom you once
communicated, as you confess, Sect. 19. and have not joined your selves to any
other Christian Congregation whatsoever? You abhor the communion of the Roman
Church, and that which you call the Greek Church abhors you. Will you say, that
the Protestants are the whole Catholic Church? then you contradict your self,
who grant Sect. 12. that Rome her self is a Church, a member of the one
Catholic. You must also then confess, that the Greek Church (as you call it)
is no part of the Catholic Church, and the truth is, you have good reason so
to do, since she refused to receive you into her communion, abhorring and
detesting your new Doctrines, as heretical: If then all those of the Protestant
Sect be Schismatical (as it most plainly appears they are) certainly the
Protestants of England must necessarily be involved in the same Schism.

74. Let us now see how you can vindicate your selves from heresy. I will not
look beyond those four Doctrines wherewith you have charged the Church of Rome,
as being fond, sacrilegious, and repugnant to plain words of Scripture, viz.
Transubstantiation, Administration of the B. Sacrament to the Laity in one
kind; Invocation of Saints; Adoration of Images. And by your opposing these
doctrines as they are held and taught by the Roman Church, I shall endeavor to
make it appear to the world, that you cannot avoid the just imputation of
Heresy.

First then I demand, whether the Fathers assembled in the four first General
Councels were not competent and lawful Judges of the heresies of those times;
as the Arrian, Macedonian, Nestorian, Eutychian, etc. and whether they had not
power to condemn those heresies, and to anathematize those that held and taught
them as heretics. If they had no such power, then did they most injuriously
and tyrannically usurp a power and Jurisdiction, which of right belonged not
unto them. But this cannot be prudently supposed, that so many holy, reverend,
and learned Fathers should usurp an authority, or arrogate to themselves that
power, which was not lawfully derived upon them by Christ and his holy church:
They were the selected Pastors of the whole church, men renowned for their
piety and learning, and could not therefore be ignorant how far the
Jurisdiction and authority of a lawful Council might extend; neither would
their piety suffer them to transgress the limits of that authority. If then
those four first Councels had power to judge of, and to decla^e and define
doctrines of faith, and to anathematize all those that should oppose them; how
came the Councels in succeeeding ages to be deprived of this power? How came
the church to lose that authority wherewith she was once invested? was her
power but temporary, and after some few ages to expire? or did Christ foresee,
tha^ after some few ages his church would be no more infested with
Schismatiques, or heretics? but we plainly find, that such have molested the
church in all ages, and therefore doubtless in all ages has this power
continued in the church; and if so, why was it not as lawful for the second
Council of Nice (which was held above 800. years since) to judge and define what
reverence and honor is due to holy Images; and to condemn the Iconoclasts or
Image-breakers, as it was for the former Councels to condemn the Arrians,
Nestorians, etc? And why was it not as lawful for that great and glorious
Council of Lateran, wherein were present both the Patriarchs of Constantinople
and Jerusalem, to judge of, and declare the true, real, and substantial
conversion of the creatures of bread and wine after consecration, into the true
and real body and blood of Christ; and to declare the manner of that
conversion, as also to express the ancient doctrine of the church by the proper
signification of a new word [ Transubstantiation] as it was for the first
General Council of Nice to judge of, and declare Christ's consubstantiality with
the Father, and to invent that new word to express the ancient doctrine,
descending unto them by universal and in fallible Tradition of Christ's
coeternal and coequal Divinity with the Father? You will find in Vincentius
Lyrinesis. c. 32. that it was no new thing in his time for the church to invent
new words to express old doctrines.

Why was it not lawful for the Council of Constance (Sess. 13.) to define and
declare the indifferency and sufficiency of communicating the Laity under one
kind only, and to anathematize those that should pertinatiously oppose that
doctrine?

Lastly, why was it not lawful for the Council of Trent (Sess. 25.) to declare
the lawfulness of invocating the blessed Saints, and to denounce a curse
against all obstinate opposers thereof?

Thus you see those four fond and sacrilegious doctrines, and such as you say
are repugnant to plain words of Scripture, confirmed, declared, and defined to
be sacred truths, and Apostolical Traditions by four General Councels. You have
also seen them held and practiced by the ancient Fathers, that lived within the
first 500. years of Christianity, Sect. 35. 36. 37. 38. etc. what can you say
for your selves? what can you plead for your selves, that you, who deny the
Doctrines of the church, should not incur the penalty of the curse?

75. You will say, perchance, that these are not Doctrines and Declarations of
the whole Church Catholic, but of the Church of Rome only, and those in
communion with her, which you say is but part of the Catholic Church. But this
will not now serve your turn: whether the Church of Rome and those in communion
with her, be a part only of the Catholic Church, or the whole Catholic Church
it self, (as I have sufficiently proved it is) it matters not, you cannot be
excused from heresy. For when Luther was a Friar, before he set himself
against the church, what church? what congregation of Christians? what Nation?
what people? nay, what man was there in the whole world, professing the name of
Christ, that denied or opposed those, or any one of those forementioned
Doctrines? These were doctrines received, embraced, and publicly professed by
the whole Christian world. Not the Church of Rome and those in communion with
her only, but those also that were out of her communion (as the whole pretended
Greek Church) received and professed these doctrines in their universal, public
and daily practice; as appears by Jeremias Patriarch of Constantinople in his
sententia desinitiva de doctrina and Religione Wittenberg en sium
Protestanti^m: as also in his Censura Orientalis Ecclesiae; where you shall
find a detestation of your opposite doctrines.

76. But if those doctrine^ be fond, sacrilegious, and repugnant to plain words
of Scripture, where was the church, that pillar and ground of truth, when the
whole Christian world, before Luthers apostasy, received, held, and maintained
them? and if those that shall thus separate themselves from, and oppose the
whole church in doctrines of faith, received by the whole church as such, and
acknowledged by her to be of universal and Apostolical tradition, be not
heretics, there never was, neither is it possible that there ever should be
any heretic in the world. And yet yours was no separation, but a reformatson.
But what can be invented more absurd or ridiculous, then that one single
apostate in Germany, or a few avaricious and flattering Courtiers in England.
should first forsake the communion of that church wherein they had lived from
their Baptism, and wherein all their forefathers for almost 1000. years lived
and died, and afterward renounce doctrines of Faith universally received by
the church, and then take upon them to be Judges of the whole church, which
Christ has made the Supreme Judge of all controversies, and to reform the whole
church, and that in matters of doctrine? but you must know Doctor, that the
Catholic Church cannot teach, or maintain sacrilegious doctrines, or such as
are repugnaut to plain words of Scripture: For then she would cease to be holy,
and consequently to be a church, holiness being essential to Gods church; as
appears both by the Nicene and Apostles Creed: If then the church should
obtrude upon the world sacrilegious and idolatrous doctrines, and such as are
repugnant to plain words of Scripture, instead of sacred and divine truths, she
could not possibly be holy. Since then the whole Christian world, when Luther
was a Friar, taught and maintained those four forementioned Doctrines, which
you are pleased to style, sacrilegious, and repugnans to plain words of
Scripture, it must necessarily follow, that either at that time God had no
church at all (which your self confess to be impossible, or ^ls that those
doctrines are not sacrilegious, or repugnant to plain words of Scripture, but
sacred and Apostolical truths; and if so, what are those that oppose and
contradiet them?

77. Hence it appears, how false that is which you say, Sect. 32. That you
communicate with the Church of Rome in necessaries, in Faith, Hope and Charity,
etc. since you oppose her in doctrines of Faith; and by your schism (a sin
directly against Charity) have cut your selves off from her communion. With
what face then can you say, Sect. 34. That you abhor not mutual communion with
her in divine worship. Do you not abhor to communicate with her in the
Sacraments? Do you not call her adoration of Christ in the B. Sacrament
Idolatry? And whereas you say there, that you cannot endure that divine worship
be given to any other then to the B. Trinity; I would have you know, that the
Church of Rome gives not divive worship to any thing but God; and if you will
say that she does, you will but prove your self very malicious or very
ignorant.

78. In your 35 Sect. I find nothing, but what is either impertinent, or
already answered.

79. In the next Sect. I meet with a bold challenge. I challenge (says the
Doctor) the most able of your faction to show me any one passage in our
Common Prayer Book, that is not Catholic.

Answ. If your Book of Common Prayer be Catholic, yet you have no great
reason to boast of it; you may thank the Church of Rome for it, from whom you
borrowed it: which you know Doctor, was the principal reason, why those of the
Puritan faction refused and abhorred your Book of Common Prayer, as being Popish
and super stitious. But if all in that Book be Catholic, it is rather an
argument, that the Church of Rome is Catholic, from whence you took it, then
that you are so. For all in that Book may be Catholic, yet you may be
Heretical. You may oppose, as you do, other doctrines of Faith, that are not
contained in, nor deducible from your Book of Common Prayer. And if about the
beginning of your defection some Catholics frequented your Service; it was
because they esteemed it devout and pious, as being all taken out of the Office
and Missale of the Church of Rome. They had not fully considered, nor yet
clearly apprehended the unlawfulness thereof. Wherefore it behoved the common
Pastor of Gods Church to put them in mind, how impious and sacrilegious it was
for Catholics to communicate with those, who were guilty both of Schism and
Heresy, in divine Service.

80. And whereas you alledg S. Paul to prove that in meats and matters of
indifferency, we are not to judge one another; you must know, Doctor, that
Doctrines of faith, (such as are Declarations, and definitions of General
Counsels) the laws and Canons of the Universal Church, made, and generally
received by the Church, as the ancient Canons concerning Festivalls, and Fasts,
are not matters of indifferency; and cannot be violated without schism or
Heresy.

81. But I wonder with what face you can call your Congregation the
Mother Church of Catholics, Sect. 39. It Is you that have forsaken your
Mother Church, that Church wherein all your forefathers lived and died, for
about. 1000. years together. you confess that once you communicated with the
Church of Rome, and that since you have forsaken her communion. Is it fit that
the Church of Rome, whom you have forsaken, should stoop to you? Is she bound
to follow you that have forsaken her? who made you Judges of Gods Church, that
you should take upon you to charge the whole Church of Rome with errors, both
in faith and manners? by what rule have you done this? you pretend Sect. 37. to
walk by a sure rule; but I am sure you walk not according to the rule of
Christ's Catholic Church. For she walks according to the rule of Gods Word,
interpreted by universal and Apostolical tradition, which you contemn and
laugh at: but you, by the rule of Scripture interpreted by your own private
fancies, and deceiptfull imaginations.

82. Now the Doctor begins to quarrel with the Language of the Church of Rome
How do they (says he) pray with the people, who pray in a tongue, the people
understand not? Answ. And why may not Priest and people join in heart to God
in prayer, though the language of the Churches prayers be not understood by all
present? S. Paul confesses, 1. Cor. 14. 14. that a man may pray in spirit, in
an unknown tongue, though not with his understanding. The Priest and people of
the Jews could join together in prayer, and prayers to God, before Christ;
though their Service were performed in the Hebrew Tongue, a language no more
then understood by the vulgar Jews, then the Latin is now by the vulgar
Christians, why then may not the Christian Priest and people join together in
prayer, though the church Service be performed in a language, which some of the
vulgar Christians, that are present, understand not? The Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin Tongues, wherein only the church Service has been performed throughout
the whole Christian world ever since the time of the Apostles, are languages
well known to the world: all men may learn them. They are not such unknown
languages as those were, which S. Paul speaks of, 1. Cor. 14. which were
miraculously infused into many of the Primitive Christians, the end whereof was
the edification of the church, and the conversion of Infidells. Now those
tongues were neither understood by the people, nor always by those that spoke
them, as appears, 1. Cor. 12. and 1. Cor. 14. 13. These languages miraculously
infused by God, the Primitive Christians used in their public meetings; first
to instruct the ignorant; secondly to convert Infidells; where their
instructions and prayers were always extemporary, according as they were
immediately assisted by Gods holy Spirit. But the public prayers of the
church are not in such unknown languages. Secondly, they are said in the same
languages, wherein the public Service of the church was ever performed in all
ages since the Apostles, as appears by the ancient Hebrew, Greek, and Latin
Missales; which is an argument unanswerable, that such languages are not
against S. Paul's Doctrine, 1. Cor. 14. nor any other place of Gods Word.
Thirdly; the end of our present public meetings in the church, is not to
instruct, edify, or convert, as those meetings were, whereof S. Paul speaks
in that chapter; but to offer up to God the tribute of prayer and praises that
is due unto him; as also to draw down Gods blessings, both spiritual and
temporal upon the people. And to this end the people join with the Priest in
their exterior acts of devotion and Religion, thereby professing their assent
to the public prayers, and praises of the Church. And can it be thought
necessary for those ends, that all the people present should expressly
understand every word of the Churches Service, which though it were in the
vulgar language of every Nation, would notwithstanding be impossible?

83. Between the Eastern and Western Churches, you say, Sect. 40. there were
many differences etc. and yet for all these they grew up together comfortably,
and continued in the same body. Answ. When the differences between the Eastern
and Western Churches were concerning such Doctrines as were not declared in any
General Council, nor could appear by the universal tradition or practice of
the Church, they were then only errors, not heresies: but when any of the
Eastern Churches opposed the Western in such Doctrines as appeared either in
the practice of the Church, or by universal tradition, and consent of Nations,
or were declared and defined in a General Council, they then fell from error
into heresy; and were thereby cut off from the Catholic Church.

Your 41. Sect. is answered, Sect. 29. and Sect. 65. and Sect. 30. 84. In your
42. Sect. you say, That the keys were given to all the Apostles alike. Answ.
This I confess in some sense may be true, but makes nothing for you. That all
the Apostles had the keys of remitting and retaining sins, is true. I can
grant also, that they were all universal Bishops, yet they had not all equally
the keys of external government and Jurisdiction. S. John at Ephesus had not
that power, which S. Peter had at Antioch, or afterward at Rome. For
whatsoever S. Peter was, he had a Jurisdiction over the rest of the Apostles,
as well as the whole Church besides, which S. John never had.

Your, 43. Sect. has been already fully answered.

Sect. 58. In your, 44. Sect. you say, out of S. Paul to Timothy. 2. Timoth. 3,
15. That the Scripture is able to make us wise unto salvation; and that you are
resolved by Gods grace to accept of nothing, but what is deduced from thence,
or proved thereby, according to the interpretation of the ancient Fathers and
Counsels. That of S. Paul I confess; and withal very glad that you have made
so good a resolution. If you shall constantly persist therein, and shall
receive no interpretation of Scripture but from the ancient Fathers, Counsels,
and the tradition of the Church (as Vincentius Lyrinensis advises you, chapter 1^)
you will soon become Roman Catholics.

Your 45. and last Sect. contains nothing but what has been by you said
before, and by me sufficiently answered, Sect. 18. and. Sect. 21. 29. etc.

I have done with your Answer, and now crave leave to speak somewhat to you by
way of exhortation in the Spirit of meekness.

You have hitherto been a guide to others; let not a vain fear, or
apprehension of any dishonor that may eclipse your former reputation, by
confessing your errors, and that you have been a blind leader of the blind,
come between you and your eternal Salvation. Let not the deceitful luster of
vain glory tempt you to p^eserve your credit in the world, with the loss of
Heaven. You owe God your reputation as well as your life, or whatsoever else is
most dear unto you: consider at how dear a rate Christ purchased the
Redemption of your Soul: destroy not then that soul for which Chrict died. Let
not pride, prejudice, or or malice cast a mist before the eyes of your
understanding; and you shall soon behold that light, which will infallibly
guide you to your last end, God; and the eternal friution of the Beatificall
Vision. Gods candle, since it was first lighted by Christ and and his Apostles
was never put under a bushel; but from the candlestick wherein it was first
set, has given light to the world; and all eyes, that are not blinded with
malice or interest, must behold it. You seem to approve the Principles of
Vinceutius Lyrinensis; follow them, and you are safe. Let Antiquity and
Universality be your guide, and you cannot err. Let not some few scattered,
obscure, and mis-understood places of some Fathers prevail more with you, then
a thousand plain places, whole treatises and volumnes purposely penned in
defense of Catholic truth. Divest your soul of pride, malice, and interest,
and instead thereof let humility and impartiality take place, and then Gods
grace will sweetly invite you to a sincere and humble acknowledgment of your
errors, and you will with excessive joy and thankfulness of heart praise God
for your deliverance from the bonds of darkness, and the jaws of death.
Remember that the ancient Fathers and Doctors of the church have condemned you,
the Councels both Ecumenical and Provincial have declared against you; the
universal doctrine and practice of the church, both before and after Luthers
Apostasy, have given sentence against you. And as for those Canons, which you
have alleged in your book, you must needs know your self, that some of them
make against you, others are impertinent, but none of them impugn the power
and authority of Christ's Vicar* (the Bishop of Rome) over the whole Catholic
Church. Weigh all the Authorities of holy Scripture, and antiquity for both
sides; and see whether there be not a thousand plain places against you, for
one obscure (for plain you have none) for you, Your eternal salvation lies at
stake, rely not then on other men's, nor your own fallacious judgment, or fancy,
in those things that concern your salvation. Let Gods holy church be your guide
and interpreter of Scripture, lest you wrest it (as some did of whom S. Peter
complains, 2 Pet. 3. 16.) to your own damnation: consider that the best way to
appease Gods wrath against you for your former misguiding and seducing poor
ignorant souls to their eternal perdition, is now by your good example, in
returning to your holy Mother the Roman Catholic Church, to draw others after
you into the house of God, his Church Militant; that so hereafter ye may meet
in his Church Triumphant. Let not those trifles of popular applause, or worldly
reputation flatter you to hell, nor fear of the worlds censure fright you from
heaven; be but humble and impartial, and it is as impossible for you not to be
a Roman Catholic (at least in judgment and opinion) as it is for a man, that
has the benefit of sight to open his eyes, and not to see light at noon day,

And now, Doctor, If you have met with any tart language in this my answer, you
cannot justly be offended with me. It proceeded not from any malice that I can
bear your person. For I profess upon the word of a Christian, I never heard of
your name (to my remembrance) before I saw this your book; and I am still so
much a stranger to you, that I know neither the place of your abode, nor the
present condition of your life. But I was somewhat provoked by your blesphemous
speeches against Gods holy church by your unnecessary taunts, and causless
jeering of Mr. T. B. whose modesty in his letters to you was such, that I am
sure he gave you no just cause to break out into such scurrilous and unseemly
speeches against him.

I shall heartily pray, that instead of replying to this answer, you may be
reconciled to Gods holy Catholic Church.

Amen.
FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
IF the Doctor or or any of his Party, be yet unsatisfied in this Controversy,
I propose, that, rather then bestow a Reply to these cursory Papers of mine,
the most Learned of them would considerately examine Mr. Cressy's Exomologesis,
or Motives of his conversion, etc. and Rushworths Dialogues, in the last
Edition, as it is corrected and enlarged by Mr. Thomas White, in a 80, of the
Long-Primer letter; both which they must acknowledge to be as much
unanswerable, as these light papers of Dr. Boughons are fully answered.

ERRATA.
PAge 17. line 23. read, at Rome. p. 36. l. 18. r. were a great. p. 59. l. 18.
r. co^tanean. p. 63. l. 21. r. (...). p. 65. l. 23. r. but a. p. 67. l. 24. r.
verum and, and l. 25. non ^ide. p. 78. l. 7. r. as well as. p. 79 l. 27. r.
offerun^. p. 82. l. 8. r. prayers made at. p. 86. l. 10. r. is it. p. 114. l.
7. r. sixth Century. p. 115. l. 13. r. nor Apos* p. 118. l. 11. r. odious. and
l. last. r. your taxing. p. 119. l. 17. r. cl^fia. p. 126. l. 13. dele of. p.
127. l. 28. r. ad. p. 137. l. 27. r. makes no.


