MERCVRIVS AQVATICVS, OR, THE VVATER-POETS ANSWER TO ALL THAT has or shall be
Writ by MERCVRIVS BRITANICVS.

Ex omni ligno non fit MERCURIUS.

Printed in the Waine of the Moon Page 121, and Number 16, of Mercurius
Britanicus. 1643.

MERCVRIVS AQVATICVS Confuting the Fooleries of BRITANICUS.
BE it known to all People to whom these presents shall come, that I Thorny
Aylo Water-Poet Laureat (if my place be not sequestered for the use of Tho. May
for his Poetical relation of his Excellencies Victory at Newbury, and more
Poetical interpretation of TOUCH NOT MINE ANOINTED) whose Pegasus was a
Wherry, and whose Helicon the Thames, till all Wit and Honesty were banished
out of London, except what lies (...) in the Close-Committee) do resolve once
and but once to take into little consideration, one that calls himself by the
high and mighty title of Mercurius Britanicus, who by Order of the House is
made Receiver General of all Quibbles, Crops, Clinches, Puns, Halfe-jests,
jests, fine sentences, witty-sayings, rare truths, modest and dutiful
expressions that are to be found within the Line of Communication, to the utter
undoing of poor Mercurius Aulicus, did not such a doughty Squire as my self
daigne to take up that Paper which Aulicus scorns to touch for fear of fouling
his fingers.) And though I count the employment more fit for some Scavinger or
Gregory, then my self, yet that the City may no longer worship a Calfe (set up
since the demolishing of Cheapside-crosse) and that the Abettors of such
horrible empty Libells, may see that (...) is not safe wit. I shall for once
undertake him. And because I have as little skill in Judicial Astrology as
Booker, I have calculated his Nativity, and find the Moon (not Mercury) Lord of
the Ascendent. This makes the poor man's cold, thin, waterish Brain so subject
to ebbs and flows, which enclines him to Moon-fits, and Lunacy. This makes him
to rave and snap, to foam at Mouth, and drivell like a mad dog. And therefore
because I have some skill in Medicines (though I cannot cure the Lowsy disease)
I shall venture to cure his biting with a piece of his own Liver. But because
he admires his own language (having a very Unhappy Wit) he shall receive his
answer in That, the Persons and Scene only altered for my little Wit-cracker.

Mutato nomine de Te Fabula. You see I have gathered some scraps of Latin since
I came to the University; if it please the City, they may petition that the
Synod may be sent hither to learn some also. And now rumpantur ut ilia Codro,
here enters Mr Rhombus Britanicus, chief Pedagogue to all the Puisney
Newes-mongers, from the A. B. C. three days Informer, to the Liar of the first
form, the Scottish Dove, his face of late more plump and ruddy since
employment, but his hair somewhat shorter, his skull (or place where his
Brains should be) covered with half a dozen Night-caps; to keep it from
adling this Winter (how now man? if Sir John left Winter at Gloucester, who has
left it at London, there is a true Jest now, but just of thy strain.) Over
this a long crowned Hat (the last Legacy of a Lay elder of Amsterdam) a Geneva
band, Dublet and Hose, out of the Wardrobe for Ireland, which by a mistake and
contrary wind, was since carried into New England; his Gown well lined
Checquee, with Fox and Seal skin, and if after you have heard his Tale, and
Aquaticus's Answer, you find no wit in either, then laugh at Britanicus that is
such a dull piece to work on. See here he comes, just as he came from London.

Mercurius Britanicus: Communicating the affairs of Great BRITAIN: For the
better information of the people.
Numb. 16.
From Thursday the 7 of December. to Thursday the 14. December. 1643.
. 1. The ingredients whereof Mercurius Aulicus is composed.
THough I thought it beneath my pen to dip into the lies, and follies, and
Calumnies of such an Oxford Pamphlet, yet because I was informed it was not the
Act of one, but many: viz. Derkenhead the Scribe, (...) Nicholas the Informer,
George Digby the contriver, and an assessement of Wits is laid upon every
College, and paid weekly for the continuation of this thing called Mercurius
Aulicus, upon these considerations, and to vindicate the Honor of a
Parliament, I took my pen, I have discovered the Lies, forgeries, insolences,
impieties, prophanations, blasphemies, Popery of the two sheets, and now I have
done; and you most excellent Senators, that you may see how justly I replied,
and how unjustly ye are calumniated, I have summed up his last abused printed
at Oxford, formerly an University, now a Garrison of Popery, His Majesty's own
Royal Court for the recreation of their Nobility, and Gentry, and Clergy, and
other Liege People.

2. A Catalogue, etc.
A Catalogue of the Abuses, Reproaches, and Calumnies; against this present
Parliament, this last week in the first sheet.
1. Rebels at Westminster. 2. Pretended houses. 3. East-Indian Legislatours.
4. Turks. 5. Pretended Houses. 6. Pretended Houses. 7. A groundless horrid
Rebellion. 8. The Frauds and Pretenses of the Rebels at Westminster. 9. Their
bloody League at London. 10. Forswearers of all peace. 11. Faction. 12.
Rebels. 13. Rebels. 14. Rebels. 15. Rebels. 16. Rebels in England. 17.
Brownists. 18. Anabaptists. 19. An Order of the House to the eternal shame of
the Rebels at Westminster. 20. Pretended House of Commons. 21. Pretended
Houses. 22. The pretended two Houses. 23. The Faction. 24. The Rebels at
Westminster. 25. Faction and Pretended Houses.
. 3.
Reader this is a just account of the first shect of that idle, scurrilous,
ridiculous, treasonable, insolent Pamphlet, do you think this is written in
defense of the privileges of Parliament? Are not here a reasonable company of
abuses to be in the Preamble of the Pamphlet? What will these act abroad
amongst a credulous and seduced people, especially so religiously, and devoutly
begun upon Sundays, but I cannot stir till I Petition his Majesty.

. 4. Britanicus Petition to the King.
The Humble Petition of Britanicus to his Majesty.
MAy it please your Majesty, after so much bloodshed of your own Subjects,
after so many plundrings by your Royal Nephews, be pleased to remember your
(...) and (...) of your care and respect to your two Houses, that they should
be as dear to you, as your honor and (...), be pleased to (...) you called
them your Parliament in your late Treaty, and now there is a Pamphlet, a thing,
a (...) of sheets, a Mercurius Aulicus, abuses, rails, miscalls your Majesty's
Supreme Court, and your (...) too, in your political (...): I beseech your
Majesty if those Declarations or Protestations were of your Majesty's own
making, remember them and your Royal obligations, if not, Your Petitioners
shall ever pray, etc.

. 5. Small (...) to obtain his Petition, and (...) reason.
This is my Petition to his (...), but there are so many (...) Counselors about
him, I despair of prevailing, when his great Council the Parliament cannot be
heard; nay now when Davis the Barbar is turned privy Councellor too, I never
look to see his Majesty trimmed hereafter for the Protestant Religion, for I
am informed that fellow shaves with Popish Rasors, and cuts with (...) Sissars,
and washes in holy water, there are diverse bottles come (...) to the Court
sent from his holiness own Harbor.

. 6. The power that is given to the EastIndian Merchants.
Aulicus tells us, that the Parliament has given power to the East-Indian.
Merchants to impose new Laws; Aulicus, is not this a more precious Act to keep
up Trading, then to plunder it, and to give power for Laws, then to take away
all power and Laws too, as your Party, in all places they come, do; nor do they
give power to them to impose Laws, but to contrive and suggest, as no Council,
(...) estate in the world but will take hints at Inferiors, especially those
that are (...) and knowing men; but I must tell you, that the Merchants, though
they trade in East India, yet their Factors say that the Indians are better to
trade with, and converse with, then your (...), and have less Barbarism and
inhumanity.

. 7. Assembly to write to Foreign States.
He tells us of the Parliament that (...) ordered the Assembly to write Letters
to stir up the Netherlands, and other parts in the Cause: Aulicus it is time
I think, had they not need to write to (...) States, and all the Reformed
Churches, when you at Oxford have sent your Mendicant Epistles to the Pope and
Cardinal, and are at this time electing Doctor Cousins (...) (...)-flamen to
go a pilgrimage to the Monasteries, and Priories, and Popish States for their
assistance and Contributions, you have sent old Goring the Publican into
Holland, and so to France, he is excellent at an Embassage of Monopolizing, and
a very worthy Patriot at a Project of soape or Salt-peeter.

. 8. Lord Ormonds Warrants.
He tells us of the Lord of Ormonds Warrants for transporting the Regiment:
Reader this is Ormond the Apostate, who was hired from the Parliament and
Protestant Cause with the title of a (...), this is he that fought very well,
till he got his Jewel, and for the other Diamond the Parliament might have
bought him again.

. 9. Ormonds oath to them that come over.
He tells us of the oath that Ormond administers to all that comes over; (...)
you must know that is the old policy still, to swear them for the Protestant
Religion; and it is resolved on at the Cabinet or (...) in the Queens Closet,
that Popery be not named yet, till the Protestants be a little more cut of
their wits, which they hope will be soon effected by companying together, and
having Churches together, and by bringing the Mass and the Common Prayer a
little better acquainted, but the oath begins.

. 10. The oath.
I. A. B. resting fully assured; viz. (that his Majesty will ruin his Kingdom
of Ireland and England with running these courses) I will (...) the true
Protestant Religion established in the Church of England, viz (in York
Minister, or Saint Mary's in Oxford, or any such reformed (...) all:) against
all the Forces now under the conduct of the Earl of Essex: viz. (because they
fight for the Protestant Religion, and Laws, and Liberties:) and I will do my
utmost to procure the Peace and quietness of the Kingdom of England: viz. (by
(...) obbing, fighting, pillaging, and plundering, killing, and destroying)

. 11. One of Aulicus his victories.
He tells us of a Victory they had upon us at Stafford: and Reader, it was thus;
they had two Troops to charge us, and we took the most of them: and yet
Aulicus has the conceit they had the day, and we their men and horses; I know
not how to distinguish upon days and victories, but I think it is not usual
to conquer, and be routed both at a time, but this is not the first victory
they have given thanks for, witness Edgehill and Newbury, two places in which
they were soundly beaten into a day of thanksgiving.

. 12. Sir William Breretons Letter.
He tells us of Sir William Breretons Letter to the Irish Commanders to leave
fighting, and expounds every line ofit as he did a Chapter in the (...), where
he took his Text it seems last Sunday in (...) sorenoon, and expounded Sir
William Breretons Epistle in the afternoon, and so he divided the Sabbath.

He tells us of the Letter which the Irish Commanders returned to Sir Williams.

. 13. The Answer to Sir Williams Letter.
Gentlemen we were not engaged to the service of Ireland otherwise then by the
Kings Commission: no, did you fight neither for God, nor your Country? the
service we have done; in leaving the Kingdom of Ireland to the mercilesle
bloody Rebels, and making a base, dishonorable, and irreligious Peace: envy it
self dares not extenuate, why do you threaten her? it is pity such deserving
Gentlemen were not landed in a richer Teritory then Wales: and though we are
very sensible, of the good plunder in England, and of every thing but Popery:
how worthily we have carried our selves, in coming (...) from fighting against
the (...) in Ireland, to fight for them in England: by your preteneded
Parliament, a very old title; Aulicus taught you (...) yet we are not returned
hither without his Majesty's special Commission: we are more sorry to hear
his Majesty has such a hand in it, you do well to confess the truth: If you
have the like Commission (...) the King: no, we should be sorry we had, nor
could we ever get so near him for evil Counselors, that have stood in the
way: we shall Treat with you: you are good at (...), you came lately from a
bloody pacification in Ireland, and the drops of so much innocent blood sticks
upon your clothes yet, otherwise you must give us leave: What to do, to
murder his Majesty's Subjects, to bring in Popery and (...) to carry our selves
like (...) and Loyal Subjects, in killing and plundring

Michael Earnele, Francis Butler. Richard Gibson, Edward Hamond. George (...).
These are the names, if any man can charge them with more then I have done.

. 14.
(...), if I say no more to thee at this time, thank the (...) of Master Pym.

. 15. Gloucester news.
The Intelligence.
I Shall begin at Gloucester with news, that very place where Colonel Massey
(...) against the whole Army, against all their shot, and oaths, and
execrations, that very place where his Excellency arrived with no less honor
then he returned, it being (...) a question, whether of his Laurels were the
best, that of Gloucester, or that of Newbury: Not far from this City, at
Newnam, Colonel Sir John Winter would needs set up a new Government, and had
some Forces from the Lord Herbert, as many as he could well spare, to be beaten
at one time; but Colonel Massey, I mean that same Colonel that was attended
by his Majesty's Army so long, went with a Party from his Garrison, and
dissolved Sir John Winters Government, and dis-garrisoned his Army Royal, and
his plundered cattle, so as they all run away, crying, all was lost, after Sir
John's own example: but I conjecture the cause was, for that Colonel Winter was
of too cold a constitution for Colonel Masseys hot Alarm: but that which is
strangest in that defeat, Sir John run away, and yet left Winter behind him.

I should tell you more Intelligence, but I am not able at this time to write
beyond Master Pym, and this Elegy I shall sacrifice to his Hearse.

An Elegy on Master Pym.
NO immature or sullen Fate
Did his immortal soul translate,
He passed gravely hence even
Kept the old pace, from earth to heaven;
He had a soul did always stand
Open for (...), like his hand,
He took in so much, I could call
Him more then individual,
And so much business waited by,
Would scarcely give him leave to dye;
He knew the bounds, and every thing
Betwixt the people and the King;
He could the just Proportions draw
Betwixt Prerogative and Law;
He lived a Patriot here so late,
He knew each syllable of State,
That had our Charters all been gone,
In him we had them every one;
He durst be good, and at that time
When innocence was half a crime;
He had seen death before he went,
Once had it as a token sent:
He surfeted on State affairs,
Di'd on a Plurisie of cares,
Nor does he now his mourners lack,
We have few souls but go in black,
And for his sake have now put on
A solemn Meditation.
Tears are too narrovv drops for him,
And private sighs, too strait for Pym;
None can completely Pym lament,
But something like a Parliament,
The public sorrow of a State,
Is but a grief commensurate,
We must enacted passions have,
And Laws for weeping at his grave.
Printed according to Order, for G. B. and R. W.

Mercurius Aquaticus his Answer to BRITANICUS.
. 1.
Though I thought it beneath my pen to dip into the lies, (...), and
Calumnies of such a foolish London pamphlet, yet because I was informed, it was
(...) the (...) of one but many, which for a while made me think this
monster-piece of vanity was the abortive issue of Mr Saltmarsh the Scribe,
'till I remembered he had spent more then all his own Wit upon his
Epigrammatasacra: the Close-Committy the Informer, till I considered that it
stood not with the Policy of their State, that they should inform any but the
Close-Committee of the^ Common Council, that should inform Captain Ven, that
should inform the Prentises and Butchers when 'twas fit to make a tumult at
(...), and the Brownists when at Westminster, and also the Women and
Schoole-boyes to petition against Popery and evil Counselors; Tom May the
Contriver and chief Engineer, but that I thought he was better at Translation
then Invention) and especially because I heard an assessement of (...) was laid
upon the Synod, and every Lecturer, and private conventicler, from Mr Marshall
at Margarets to Green the Feltmaker in the Tub, and paid weekly for the
continuation of this thing called (...) Britanicus, upon these considerations,
and not to vindicate Aulicus, (who is only unhappy in that he must weekly write
to their capacity who have no more Brains then Britanicus) I resolved to take
(...) Pen, (...) discover the Fooleries, (...), (...), (...), (...), (...),
(...), Brownism, (...) of the one sheet; and now I have done, and you most
worthy Patriots and Noble (...), whose valor and loyalty are the constant
(...) of Aulicus, that you may see how (...) reply, and how uniustly you and
Anlicus are calumniated, I have summed (...) last (...) abuses, painted at
(...) ((...) a scene of Loyalty, and never tainted till now (...) was betrayed
into a Garrison of (...) and tame Citizens, that are their own Masters and
their own Slaves) wherein once (...) (...) Palace, al ways open for the free
(...) all Petitioners, and His Great Council of (...), and (...), and a safe
harbor for His Liege People, (...) of Cobblers and Prentises, prodigious
Covenants, and (...) of Taxes for the propagation of Rebellion, forced all
Honest (...) thence.

. 2.
A catalogue of the abuses, (...), calumnies, traitereous and Rebellious
speeches against His sacred Majesty, the Nobilily, Gentry, and other Liege
People this last Week, by which it is evident the Authors (for they style
themselves your Petitioners, pa. 122) are rather a lunto of Belins-gate Oyster
wives, (whose daughters write short hand, and frequent M. Calamy, Case,
Peeters, to furnish out the railing Conventicle with sanctfied Blasphemies,
Treasons, Forgeries, hot from the Pulpit) then any that favored of the
ingenuity and education of a Scholar, or a Soldier.

1. Secretary Nicholas the Informer, George Digby contriver of the Lies, (...),
and Calumntes of an Drford Pam, phlet. 2. Lies, forgeries, insolences,
impieties, prophanations, blasphemies of the two sheets. 3. Drford formerly a
University now a Garrison of Popery. 4. (...), Scurrilous, ridiculous,
treasonable, insolent Pamphlet. 5. Credulous and seduced People to belive
Aulicus. 6. If the Parliament are offended at any thing in Aquaticus, let them
consider what it is to suffer such treasonable blasphemies against the Lords
Anointed to be priated according to Order.
Your Dasesties so much bloodshed of your own Subjects. 7. So many Plunderings
by Your Royal nephews. 8. If your Declarations and Protestations were of your
Dajesties own making, 9. Evil Counselors about his Dajesty. 10. His Majesty
not (...) for the Protessant Religion. 11. Irimd with Popish (...), consecrated
sissars, and holy water. 12. (...) bottles of it sent to Court from his
holiness own Barber. 13. Indians have less Barbarisine and inhumanity then
his Maajestes best Subjects. 14. Mendicant Epistles sent to the Pope and
Cardinals. 15. Doctor Couns the Arch flamin sent to Popish States for
assistance. 16. (...) the Publican excellent at monopolizing, a Projector. 17.
Drmond the Apostate.
A catalogue of other notable Passage.
1. Truths, God bless us. It Is high time for the Parliament, and they had never
more need to write for help to foreign States. 2. Politic (...). No
Council nor estate in the World but will take hints at inferiors, especially
those that are scientificall and knowing men. 3. Politic discourses. As that
of the Cast India Merchants, far beyond Sir Pol. Onyons, and Tar. Paulin. 4.
Subtle distinctions. Of His Majesty's Royal Person from His political
capacity, which savours of the subtle Logic of Goodwin the Socinian, creature
to my Lord Say. 5. Gross forgeries beyond that of the Danish fleet, and the
men's Training under ground. As the intelligence from (...). 6. Imitations of
Aulicus. As the descanting and Paraphrase on the Irish Oath, and the Commanders
letter. 7. Jests, halfe-jefts, Puns, clinches, and Quibbles. I dare throw
Winter or Summer with you that there is none of these in the whole book. 8.
Downeright Popery. The Canonization of Mr. Pym before his going into Purgatory,
and sacrificing at his hearse. 9. Good Popery. As (...) Pyms Clegy.
To which add three tales of a Tub, or three blew beans in a bladder, and you
have the ingredients of the last weeks Britanicus.

. 3.
And Reader this is the just account of the one sheet, of that idle,
scurrilous, treasonable, insolent Pamphlet, do you think this was written to
procure the peace of the Kingdom in defense of His Majesty's Honor and
Prerogative, and to make Him the gloriousest Prince in Christendom. Are not
here a treasonable company of abuses, and in the substance of the Pamphlet?
What will these act at home amongst a credulous and seduced people, especially
so Religiously Lectured and Trained to Rebellion upon Sundaies? But I cannot
(...) till I Petition the New Assembly.

. 4. (...) (...). Petition to the NewAssembly.
The humble Petition of Aquaticus to A NEW ASSEMBLY, prophetically
Anagrammatized and called at their Anabaptisme in the River of Bow
MANY BLEW ASSES.
MAy it please you, Religions, learned, and reverend Men, fathers, and brethren
(I cry your fatherhoods mercy, if I miscall you, I had the title from Fr:
Cheynells discovery, one of the mad Fathers of your fraternity) after so long
sitting to no purpose; So many Sermons and discourses writ in defense of this
present Rebellion, after so many encouragements of the Brownists in all their
wild plunderings, after so long (...) to the prayers and prayers, and sighs
and prayers, and prayers and Sermons of the Lady (...), against the final
falling away of her Knight, be pleased to remember your so often taken oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, not to be dispensed with all even by pope Calamy and
pope Burges, and be sure to take into your misunderstanding the established
protestant Religion, and because you intend to alter the Articles of the Church
of England, be sure first you send to your Deacon, Sir Harry Vain the younger,
to treat with the Reformed Churches, that this may be done, the Harmony of
consessions not withstanding. And because you intend to banish the Common
prayer Book out of England, because it is popishly affected, you were best also
silence the use of the Lords prayer, for the same reason, because it is found in
the Masse-book and Ladies Psalter, besides it is a set form of prayer, and
therefore a stinter of the spirit; and besides you and your disciples are
resolved never to forget trespasses, nor remember benefits. And since you are
upon the correcting the Creed, for the cause sake which might be much
prejudiced by the Opinion that there is a Hell, let the article of Christ's
descent for the word Hell's sake be struck out. Furthermore (because the
lesuits make great use of your Schisms and Factions, saying, that you have
more Factions, then Conventicles, more Religions then men) be pleased in the
next place to undertake the reconciliation of the Presbyterians and
Independents, the Sabbatarians and Covenanters, with the Antinomians and
Libertines, the rigid Calvinists with the Socinians, the protestation and
Covenant with the oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and last of all your
selves with your selves, a work of very easy Task, especially when the Houses
shall recover their power from the Common Council. Furthermore, I beseech you
justify your selves from the scandal of the Papists, who say, our Religion is
but merely Parliamentary, and subject to translation, for some politic turn,
every third year, and for proof, they urge the Lay Elders of the House of
Commons, a ruling part of your Conventicle, and that you dare not think of any
Religion, but what they shall dictate to you. Next I desire you to neglect the
true staring of the question of (...), and to consider whether this everlasting
Parliament may not be rather proved to be jure divino, from the example of the
Jewish or LXX
Sanhedrim, then this present Rebellion justified by the example of David; and
that you would also furnish the Brethren, and the (...) of the
Philistim-writers against Dr Fearne with better arguments and answers, or else
wholly to suppress them (for this is the Jesuits policy, whose footsteps you
follow, though you go back wards) lest the people reading the Doctors
arguments, though mangled and abused in their Pamphlets, should at last be
undeceived. Lastly, I desire you to state the question affirmatively, that the
same person may be a Clergyman and Layman at the same time, because otherwise
me thinks Mr Marshall and Mr Nigh, could not be admitted of the Close
Committee, nor employed in Embassage to Farraigne States, because a late act
this Parliament, forbids Clergy men to intermedle in secular affairs, and if
they were Laymen only, me thinks your grave Fatherhoods would exclude them the
pulpit at Margarets.

And because you are never like to find Scripture or Reason or Fathers to
persuade your Religion, I beseech you to consider of setting the Inquisition up
in London, which is already made feasible by the merciful dealing of the
Committee for Religion. Mr. Burton is able to justify it from Scripture, and
Mr Prinne will establish it by Law, and Mr St John's show a President for it,
out of the Records in Lowlards Tower. And because you are not to determine any
thing, but what is resolved at the Close Committee, and they, at this present
have more weighty affairs to consider of then Religion, be pleased at this
your leisure (because you have little else to do, and you must not go forward
with the notes upon the Bible) to write a weekly comment upon Britanicus, that
men may the better understand his hidden wit, or else instead of confuting the
lesuits, pray undertake in his behalf the confutation of Aquaticus.

And because studying and long prayers, especially disputations in Mood and
figure, will extremely wast your spirits, and haften your death, to the
eternal loss of ignorance and Faction, the parents of this zealous Rebellion,
be pleased to take a Dose of this Cordial Fasting. It will preserve your
brain and lungs, and keep you from the danger of the Plague plaster, or the
infection of an Answer from Oxford to your grave determinations. Pray send the
Bill to Mr Pyms Apothecary, who will very carefully compound it.

R.
Of Sir Harry Vanes Memory. Of Hollands gratitude. Of Martines Continence. Of
Wallers Valor. Of the Close Committees honesty. 2 grains. ana. One good look
from Mr Perd.
Two arguments at Law of Sergeant Wild own making. Two ounces of the shavings
of his Excellencies Horns, and an ounce and half of the fat of his black
Calfe at Chartley. 1 Scruple of conscience of Mr Marshall. 1 Headfull of
jealousies of Say and Seal. 1 Heartfull of fears of Nath: Fiennes. 1 Pound of
the City slavery, and half a dram of your own Divinity and Logic, ana: 3
Gallons of Orphans and Widdowesteares.
Boil all these the length of a Fast Sermon at Margarets in Balneo, close
stopped with a past made of Pembrookes discretion. Your firing by no means must
be of New castle Coal, ('twill send all up in Fumo) but of Char-cole made out
of the Parliaments own woods in their politic capacity. Let it be constantly
blowed with the curses of the Excise. And if any one believe the Apostasy of
the Saints, and therefore doubts his own standing to the Cause, you may infuse
three drams of Dr Burges his falling from the Sense, and also grace of the
House till his late submission. You may take a spoonful of it Fasting, to the
enflaming of your zeal, as well as the peserving of your health, which I
beseech your grave Fatherhoods to have especial care of, and

Your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

. 5. Small hopes to abtaine his Petition, and the reason.
This is my petition to the Synod, (a little longer I confess then Britanicus
his, but his was made for the Court, and mine for the Roundheads, who love all
long, but their hair, especially long ears, that may have wherewithal to
suffer Martyrdom, long meals, long graces to help digestion, but there are so
many of the Committee for Religion, that watch over them, that (...), spaire of
(...), when the great serviceable Rabbie of the (...) cannot be heard; (...),
now when Sir Benjamin Rudyeard is turned Assembly man too, I never look to see
our Church (...) according to the ancient Primitive Form of Doctrine and
discipline, which is the same with the (...) Religion her established. (...) I
am informed that Gentleman (...) Parsons (...) with Brownisticall (...), and
cuts Episcopacy with sanctified-presbyterian (...), and (...) in holy water of
the lake Lemannus. There are (...) bottles come lately to the new Assembly, and
more are daily expected from the Close Committees own (...), for the shaving
from the face of the Church those superfluous excrements of Cathedral Lands;
height Mounsieur Salmasius, if the Scholars spell his name right.

. 6. The power that is given to Marshall and Nigh.
Aquaticus tells you, that the Parliament did give power to Marshall, and Nigh,
to contract with the Scots by new Covenants for the ruin of the English
Nation, if God prevent not. For shall we think the Scots are such fools, if
they conquer, to return back again to their Whig and Scotch porredge, Frost
and snow (and little wood) from good fetherbeds, gallant houses, English beef,
ale, and broad-cloth? No, Britanicus, if that day once come, the Brotherhood
shall find their Brethren of Scotland will be the Elders, and carry away the
Land. And is not this a more treasonable Act to destroy Trading, advance
Plundering, and ruin the whole Nation, only to secure the five Members (which
yet you see cannot escape Gods vengeance) from a legal trial, rather then
that of furthering an honest modest petition for peace? Is not this to give
power for license, and to take away all power and Laws too, as your party in
all places where they come do; (...) they only give power to them to impose
new Covenants to another Nation, but to contrive and suggest them, as no
Council (...) in the world ever did to such contemptible inferiors,
especially to those that are so little Scientificall (...) knowing men. But I
must-tell my Merchants of London, though they (...) greedily trade into
Scotland for the present, whatsoever their (...) and Lecturers tell them, the
Cavaliers are far better to trade with and converse with then your Round
heads, and have a thousand times less barbarism and inhumanity. But they will
believe this too lat.

. 7.
He tells you of the Parliament that has ordered the Assembly, that have
odrered their Deacon, Sir Harry (...) to carry Letters to Zurick, and to (...)
up the (...) and other parts, that in case the Synod should be dissolved they
may have a place assigned them to sit in safety, to determine of rules that
shall never guide the Brownists and Anabaptists two days together. And it
seems it is high time; when they have sent their (...) (by their two Legates a
Latere) to the Family of Love, their Brethren in Scotland, when old Fines the
Publican who has sat so long at the Receipt of Custom ( so excellent at the
contriving and managing a Rebellion, as also at an (...) of more contribution
to the common Council, and a very worthy Patriot at a Project of Public
Faith, Land in Ireland, Newcastle Coals and Excise) now begins as much to
despair of the success of the Cause, as of freeing Nath: Fiennes, or getting
Goodwin, that Arch-Socinian to be admitted into the New Assembly,

. 8. Lord Lessyes Warrants.
He tells you of Leslyes Warrants for transporting his fellow Rebels: Reader
this is Lesly the same man still, who though he were honored by His Majesty
with the title of an Carle, most unlike a Soldier and a Gentleman basely and
ingratefully draws his sword against his Prince, to whom he was so obliged for
his favor, and Pardon.

. 9. Leslyes Covenant to them that come into England.
He tells you of the Covenant Lesly administers to all that come over: for you
must know it was the old policy still to swear them for the (...) Religion; and
it was long since (...) on at the Cabinet (...) in Sir Gilbert Gerards Parlour
at Harrow oth' Hill, that Brownisme be not named yet, till the (...) be a
little more out of their (...), by companying together and having Conventicles
together, (where the Candle sometimes most unfortunately is put out,) and by
bringing extemporary nonsense and Blasphemy in fashion, to the dishonor of all
Religion, and the contempt of Common Prayer, but the Covenant begins.

. 10. (...)
I (Ananias Bodkin) resting fully assured that His Majesty labors to preserve
His two Kingdoms of England and Ireland from ruin, by Lawful and (...)
courses) will endeavor to overthrow the true Protestant Religion established
in the Church of England, (to let up a new nothing not yet hatched at the Close
Committee, nor yet thought of by the assemlly, or any Reformed Lecturer)
against all the forces now raised by Commission from his Majesty (because they
fight for the true Protestant Religion Laws and Liberties) and I will do my
utmost to destroy the Peace and quietness of this Kingdom of England, by
robbing, fireing, pillaging, plundring, killing and destroying.

. 11.
Aquaticus (...) a great Victory Sir William Waller had upon us at Basing
house, whence he carried no lesle then forty or fifty carts of our Wounded
prisoners in Triumph, and no less then four or five hundred more dead. Which
made the Trained Bands so willing to return home, that they might proclaim
the cowardice of the Cavaliers, and the Valor of Sir William with weeping eyes
to their Wives and Children. And yet Aulicus conceits that they had the day,
though you carried home the men in Carts. I know not how to distinguish upon
days and (...), but I think it is not usual to conquer and be routed both at
a time, but this is not the first Victory they have given thanks for, witness
Edgehill, Brainceford, and (...), three places in which they were (...) beaten
into a day of (...).

. 12. Sir William (...) Letter.
He tells you of wise Sir William (...) Letter to the Irish Commanders to leave
fighting, and erpounded it as seriously as the Assembly will do the Covenant,
or M. Marshall did this piece of Scripture, The good man is perished out of the
earth, at the hideing of (...) Pym, where he did not as he ought, divide the
(...) Scripture from the Apochrypha, but tied the Text and Sermon both
together, which was no Sabbaths exercise to the Auditors patience.

. 13. Deest the answer of the Irish commanders.
He tells you of the Letters which the Irish commanders returned to Sir
William, which because Britanicus has printed according to Sir Williams Copy
which he sent to the Parliament, and not according to that which was sent to
Sir William, I shall forbear to trouble my self and the Reader, by making the
man here eat his own words. This piece is so extreme dull and heavk, that it is
a task unfit for a Schooleboy to reply to. But you must pity the man's
heaviness, for alas he tells us, his Wit run all out at his eyes and nose, at
the Funeral of V. Pym.

. 14.
And therefore Reader, if I trouble thee not with this piece of Britanicus,
thank the Funerals of V. Pym. But yet I am sorry, I must tell you, the poor
fellow had so good an excuse to be dull and heavy; and though I cannot make
Elegies, yet I pity poor John Pym, that he fell not by the hand of Justice,
because more (says the Help to Discourse, a book I commend to your careful
perusal) go to heaven from the Gallows then the Churchyard, and now for our
Intelligence a little truer then Britaxicus his.

. 15. Gloucester news.
I shall begin at Gloucester with news, that very place whence his Excellency
with his whole army run away with no less dishonor then he came thither with
Fear, it being yet a question whether of his Lawrells were the best, that of
Gloucester or that of Pewbury, or Edgehill, or Brainceford, or Oxford, where he
was well Tamed (there is a Pun half a dram better then yours upon Sir John
Winter.) Pot far from this City, yet without the distance of a Mile (for
within that compass through the merciless oppression and cruel plundering of
the Rebels in the Town, the (...) were forced to burn down their own
houses) are Quartered on one side 16. or 1800. old Irish Soldiers, on the
other side, the Loyal Welsh, and elsewhere the oppressed inhabitants of the
County of Gloucester, who arc all resolved to be revenged for the cruelty of
that Rebellious City, which will put Masser, now a Factor for Rebellion, there
to his Familiar Epistles, and humble supplications to his Excellency before
Winters done. For Sir John is resolved to stay behind in despite of all (...)
hot allarmes.

. 16.
Reader this tale upon Sir John was framed at the Staple of News, to bring in
the Quibble of Winter, and so I leave my pretty Wit-Harmophrodite made up of
Orator and Poet, to sacrifice his Elegy at the Hearse of John Pym. But Sir
before you go to your devotions, you must tell me whether he was Canonized by
the New Assembly (for some doubt whether a Synod has that power) or Pope
Marshall. And I shall tell you in requital that you must sacrifice no lame
things, and shall therefore advise you to send your third Verse,

He passed gravely hence, even to M. John Sedgiwicke, the number of whose
fingers will make it commensurate. And so having cost my Reader half an hour,
and my self an afternoon (my little City Poet) I leave you as I found you,
fit only to write Verses on the Death of Mr PYM.

FINIS.

