THE DEVIL TURNED ROUNDHEAD: OR, PLVTO become a BROWNIST.

Being a just comparison, how the Devil is become a Roundhead? In what manner,
and how zealously (like them) he is affected with the moving of the Spirit.

With the holy Sisters desire of Copulation (if he would seem Holy, Sincere,
and Pure) were it with the Devil himself.

As also, the Amsterdammian definition of a Familist.

THE DEVIL TVRN'D ROVND HEAD, OR, PLUTO become a BROWNIST.
DEMON having sufficiently viewed the Epedemicall Spectacles of the World, and
withal perceiving men, which exceeded him in knavery, resolved himself to
equiparate them in emulation. Yet notwithstanding there were so many Sects,
that Pluto himself knew not which to elect to himself, or be conformable unto.
First, he began with the Puritans, but they were all in preparation for beyond
Sea, into new Plantations, especially into New England; that he thought most of
them were safe enough under his tuition: then he proceeded on with the
Brownists, but some were so employed in Barnes and Stables, others (the Spirit
moving them) were so occupied among the holy Sisters, that he likewise reputed
them secure in his own custody. Then thirdly, he calumniously appropinquated to
the Roundheads, but they also were bufied about Cheap Side Cross, so that he
consequently ennumerated all into his own Catalogue: Till at length they became
so obstinate, that all the interest, which before he presumed to challenge in
them, was totally oblitterated.

Then he palpably began to sycophantize, and in a parasiticall pretense
supposed to introduce them to his own Satanicall opinions. Thus he began to
assimulate himself unto a Roundhead, and (like them) although he could not
swear, yet he could lie most damnably. He did initiate with his Yea's and
Verily's so conformably, as if he were a perfect Roundhead. Then he proceeded
to prune his horns, but he thought that their horns were long enough and
continued therefore in that apparent similitude: secondly, he began to prune
his hair, and cut it so close to his skull, that it seemed like the Characters
of an Amsterdammian print: thirdly, he began to frequent the Woods, for he was
sure that he should find many of them in some hollow trees: fourthly, he
followed Conventicles for there he had some confidence to meet the holy
Brethren, and Sisters together. Fifthly, he denied the Book of Common Prayer,
because he would be correspondent unto the Roundheads in every particular
degree. But to have a more reciprocal affinity with them, he would exclude
the Bishops, and all those who were of the Sacerdotall Function; as also, those
who were commonly called Cavaliers: He likewise desired to be in the community
of the holy Sisters, to the fructification of one another, and to their better
edification. Moreover, he conformed himself to hate all good manners, all
orders, rule, Orthodoxe Divinity, rule and government in the Commonwealth and
Church, for in their opinion they were all superstition and Popery; he denied
likewise, all good works, Academian Learning, Charity, and the public
Liturgy of the Church of England, for he with them, conceived them all to be
Idolatry, profaneness, and mere Ceremonies. He also confined himself to the
audience of the He and she Lecturers, whose sanctified Divinity in plain
sincerity is inspired from the holy spirit. He moreover cropped his hair close to
his ears, that he might more easily hear the blasphemy, which proceeded from
them, and he might increase a more eager appetite of concupiscence at the
aspect of a younger Sister: And lastly, that he might be in a perfect
opposition to the Cavalier. He loved the sharpness of the nose, because it was
prone to smell out the savor of some rich Saints Feast: and that he might more
sincerely pronounce the holy Word. He refused all good works; because he knew
them to be so invisible, that they could neither be seen in this world, nor
known in the world to come.

Thus the Devil in every respect did assimulate himself to the absolute
comparison of a Roundhead, and became so conformable in every Degree unto
them, that for his little Faith he seemed Really so to be. He seemed only to
differ in this, for he broke his horns and the Roundheads grew as long as
their ears. Thus we may perspicuously conceive, the diffusive distraction in
our Church, and although Schism abounds in such a redundant superfluity; Yet
we hope the Parliament will judiciously consider the same, and let the
Disturbers of the Time suffer exemplary and condign punishment, according to
their demerits.

FINIS.

