GRAND PLVTOES Remonstrance, OR, The Devil Horn-mad at Roundheads and
Brownists. Wherein his Hellish Majesty (by advice of his great Counsel,
Eacus, Minos and Radamanthus, with his beloved Brethren, Agdistis, Beliall,
Incubus and Succubus) is pleased to declare, 1. How far he differs from
Roundhead, Rattle-head, or Prickeare. 2. His Copulation with a Holy Sister. 3.
His dear affection to Romish Catholics, and hate to Protestants. 4. His
Oration to the Rebels.



Printed for the (...), in the year 1643.

Plutos Remonstrance, OR, The Devil Horn-mad at Roundheads and Brownists.
I Grand PLVTO, Chief Metropolitan in my Demoniack Kingdom, have by the
advice of my Infernal Counsel, thought fit to publish this my Devilish
Declaration, to all my welbeleved children, as well Brownists as Papists.

His Professed hate to the Roundheads.
1. THat whereas his Hellish Majesty has by some of his ill-affected and
factious Children, been termed Roundhead or Brownist, as being converted by
the moving spirit of a Regenerate Sister, and begetting of her a numerous issue
of Roundheads, Prickeares, Brownists, etc. We therefore fearing that the said
scandal might prove very dangerous to our infernal Government, by the great
disheartning of our obedient and well-affected chilldren the Romish Catholics,
in their plots and practices against their lawful Sovereign, has thought fit
to declare, that he never sided with, or tempted any the said Brownists in any
design against his dearest Children the Catholics, their Church or
Ceremonies, but that it has ever been our greatest care to animate both
Brownist as well as Papist against our own and your common enemy the
Protestants, their Church, King, and Parliament, which is likely to prove the
overthrow of me and my infernal Kingdom.

His Copulation with a Holy Sister.
2. That whereas our infernal Majesty has been thought to have had carnal
copulation with one Ruth Incontinence, a Sister in the Family, be it known to
our dear children the Romanists, that though we have wished well to the said
Sister Incontinence, and have bestowed on her some gifts of our Diabolical
spirit, yet had no intention to violate our vow made to our deer Spouse
Superstition dwelling in Blind-devotion, in the parish of Ignorance, in the
Kingdom of Popery, of whom We have begotten many obedient Children to effect
our great design for Ireland, and are in further hope, by her yet unperfect
issue, to work some way or plot for the confusion of this present Parliament,
to which end we have presented her with many tokens of our great love and
favor, viz. One of the Blessed Virgins slippers, and many Images of her Son,
likewise an Agnus Dei, made of Virgins wax, that by virtue of our Diabolical
Coniurations, has power to preserve from fire water, sickness, and the
deliverance from numberless perils, likewise many books of Ave-Maries,
Imprecations and prayers to Saints, also one book fairly gilt, with Crucifixes
on the lids, wherein is contained the Price that his Holiness has set on all
sin whatsoever, murder of Kings, father or mother, Rapes committed on sister,
etc. whereunto is annexed a most excellent Epitaph wiritten by a Most Reverend
Cardinal, and great Champion for the Romish Church, on his most deerly beloved
Bitch, for whose sake, he built a new monument in his garden, on which he writ
as follows, This Tomb for thee Dear Bitch I builded have,
That worthier were of Heaven then of a grave.
And for the further good of our Dear Sister Superstition, we have spared no
pains to inspire with our Diabolical spirit of obstinacy and error, all
manner of Brownists, Anabaptists, and many other Sects, which shall the more
illustrate your Religion, dear Romanists, and that you all drawing several
ways, may* like Sampsons Foxes, fire the Cornfieldsd, or Church of our common
enemy the Protestants.

His affection and care for his best-beloved sons the Romish Catholics.
3. Wherereas we have expressed our dear affection to our Catholic Children,
in tempting the said Roundheads and Rattle-heads to reproach and vilify the
Sacred Person of their Lawful King, and his Ministers of Justice, and to speak
all manner of Opprobious language against the Prophets of the Highest, nay even
to glory in their falls, and pu^t them up with sulphurous Timpanies of
preposterous zeal and malice; so that one of my dear daughters dwelling in
Sobeit, at hearing of the Bishops commitment to the Tower, presently caused a
Bonfire to be made, wherein she expressed her great joy at their fall, and
fired the same by her own hot zeal, and afterward affirmed that her Kitchen
was more holy then the Church, because she had a sink in it. And is not this
dear Romanists worth my labor, in tempting them to what my naturall-born-Son
the Turk does scorn; to justify your own Rebellious plots or Treasons
whatsoever, have not I made them make Orthodox Scripture Apocrypha, to make
your Apocrypha Orthodox; say my dear Popelings, does not all this make for
you, and to the furtherance of you and your actions, have not I made their
Common - Service almost as odious as your Masse-book, and for their Church,
ready to be flung out at the windows.

His Oration to the Rebels in Ireland.
4. Lastly, my dear sons of Tumult, have I been unmindfull to bear the
Cross in your victorious Army, under which you have achieved victory, to the
amazemement of your enemies the Protestants, in recompense of which favor, have
you not drank healths to my Infernal Majesty in the blood of your enemies,
making their sculls your quaffing-bowls, to the glory of your religion, and the
freeing of many souls out of Purgatory; has not his Holiness given you
authority so to do. Then take courage, and think not on those that have
miscarried in such glorious Actions, let no reward of Treason trouble you, so
long as his Holiness bids you on, and I your chief Captain bid you on; On
then, regard no tears of Infants, nor Rapes of Virgins, Your reward shall be
in my infernal Kingdom for your just Merits in unheard of Cruelties, which
shall eternize you and your Religion, and give full content to our infernal
Majesty, who to your aid will send Legions of his Infernal crew to
accomplish your desires on your and my enemies the Protestants.

VALE, Signed by Don Antonio Demonibus, Secretary to his Infernal Majesty

FINIS.

