THE ANATOMY OF THE Separatists, alias, Brownists, the factious Brethren in
these Times. WHEREIN This seditious Sect is fairly dissected, and
perspicuously discovered to the viewof World.

With the strange hub-bub, and formerly unheard of hurly-burly, which those
phanatick and fantastic Schismatiks made on Sunday in the afternoon, being
the 8 of May, in the Parish of S. Olaves in the Old-Iury, at the Sermon of the
Right Rev. Father in God, Henry, Bishop of Chichester,In the presence of the
Right Honorable the Lord Major of this renowned Metropolis, and diverse worthy
Members of the Honorable House of COMMONS.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1642.

The Anatomy of the Separatists, Alias, Brownists, the factious Brethren in
these Times.
SVch is the all-daring and Lewd Licentiousness of these last and perilous
days of the World, that with their Faction, Schism and confusion of
contradicting and dissenting Sectaries, the Church of England (not long since
the Reformed Religion) is promiscuously shaken, deplorably enervated, miserably
torn and distracted. Religion it self is now crucified, as Christ was between
two thieves, viz, Superstition and Irreverence, which is a spice of Atheism,
and of the two extremes is worse peccant in the defect, than in the excess.
The World is grown into a new confused Chaos, full of new wine lately come
from New England, a new Spirit, new Revelations, and new Forms of Prayer.
There is such a giddiness in the profession of Religion, that every one almost
is led by his own opinion, and most men in matters of judgment are divided one
against another. It Is too true, that many places in the Kingdom of England, and
in this City of London are too much Amsterdamnified by brainelesse opinions,
and several senses, which indeed are senseless senses in Religion. Religion
is become common Table-talke, the ordinary discourse at very our Commons and
Ordinaries, where a man shall hardly find four together of one mind. The
Papists will have their way; the Atheists will have their way; the Brownists
their way; the Anabaptists their way, the Familists their way; and the Sisters
of the Fraternity their way: So that in these various and irregular ways, they
make such an intricate Labyrinth of Religion, that few or none scarce can find
out the right way. A man may with more facility reckon up all the species and
kinds of Nature, then describe all the Sects, Divisions and Opinions in
Religion that are at this time amongst us. Some approve of Popery, because
Ignorance is the mother of Devotion; Others affect nothing but their own silly
fancyes, esteeming all things else profanation and superstition. One at the
receiving of the holy Communion will not kneel, another will not stand, a
third will sit down, a fourth will not bow; One holds reverence to be Popery,
another that Rayles before the Communion Table are Romish, and that all decency
is Superstitious. Some say it is lawful to kneel at receiving the Elements of
the sacred Eucharist, others argue and plead for it, as expedient; some again
do press it as necessary; and there are others (indeed too many of that Sect
amongst us) who abhor it as Idolatrous. One out of zeal, somewhat
inconsiderate, cries down Episcopacy, as Antichristian: Another very moderate,
wishes earnestly Episcopacy were reformed and purged from the Romish and
Tyrannical government, that incumbers it: A third kind of men carried by a
contrary wind, maintain Episcopacy to be Iure Divino: Thus quot homines, tot
Sententiae, So many men, so many minds. From these premises of Discord and
Faction, needs must there proceed much tumult and distraction to the great
disgrace and scandal to the true Protestant Religion, to the encouragement of
the wicked, who seeing that there are so many Sects and Separatists, will
therefore be of no Religion:

O Deus bone, in quae tempora reservasti nos^
Polycarp. Well may we take up that exclamation of the Roman Orator, O tempora!
O mores! Bad times, wherein there are worse men, and worst of all manners.
Plenitudo hominum, sed solitudo bonorum; a plenty of men, but a scarcity of
good men. There is such a multitude of Sectaries in all places, both in our
Cities and Countries, that we may justly fear this little Island will be
turned into a great Amsterdam.

Hinc illae lacrymae, One would reconcile Popery and our Religion together,
another would introduce faction and innovations into the Church: So that
between the Papists and Separatists, the Church strangely suffers. This latter
sort of late days has been very impudent and turbulent, both to the Church and
Commonwealth. They were never more insolent at any time, then they are now at
this time, and never more frequent and resident in any place then in the two
famous Cities, Amsterdam, and this of London. They are the Separatists, or
Brownists; the Libertines or Anabaptists; who are grown to a great head, (for
indeed they are Bellua multorum capitum) a giddy headed multitude, and are so
common amongst us, that they are commonly called the Roundheads. The
Fraternity at Amsterdam, and the Brownists in Town, are brethren of the same
Tribe. They are nominated Brownists from one Brown; as we usually term the
Lutherans from Luther, the Calvinists from Calvin, and the Arminians from
Arminius. These are the late up-start Sectaries of this age, the new crept in
Caterpillars of our Kingdom, that do more mischief daily, than any sect
whatsoever. These are the Ionahs that have raised the tempest; these are the
Achaxs that do trouble our Israel. They are so many for their multitude, that
like Bees they swarm amongst us. Indeed the time was when they crept in
corners, but now they are like the Egyptian Locusts, covering the whole land, ye
may know them by their frequent and far fetched sighs, the continual elevation
of their eyes, their meager physiognomies, solitary countenances, sharp noses,
by the cut of their hair, made even with the top of their prick-eares, (for
their hair is as short as their eyebrows, though their consciences be as vast
as the Ocean) ye may further discern them by their broad hats and narrow
^ufs, which they usually wear, the putting of their gloves under their
girdles, and the folding of their hands one within another. Indeed they are
painted sepulchers, whited walls, whose Religion consists in frequent fasting,
and long prayers, which devour widows houses, the outside of whose vessels
are pure and washed, but within full of filth and corruption, under sheepskins
are ravenous Wolves. They hold that Religion ought to be guided by the motion
of the Spirit, not reason; therefore they will rule Religion, Religion shall
not rule them, or else they will go against Religion, as the Jews did in
meeting Christ with swords and staves. They pretend sanctity, but intend
impiety; much they profess, but little good they express: Their Piety is
altogether dissembled, and what that is, it is sufficiently known; for simulat a
sanctitas est duplex iniquitas. Religion is of it self pure, unspotted,
immaculate, and undefiled; but they by their private malice, do endeavor to
pollute and contaminate the purity thereof. They say they would have Religion
reformed, but their aim is to have it deformed. These were called in Greek
(...) in Hebrew Paratzim; viz. Separatists, for other men they accounted
profane people of the earth, but themselves the only holy men in the Land;
therefore with others they would not converse for fear of defilement. In a
precise manner they look down with their eyes, when inwardly a whore is not
more deceitful. They are double-minded, hollow-hearted, and will as nimbly
swallow up at a bit, another man's estate, as our Dutch will pills of butter,
and never purch for it, All is fish that comes to their net. Vnde habeant nemo
quaerit, sed oportet habere. They make it no matter how they come by it, so
they have it. Their mouths are replenished with yeas, and very lies, but their
tongs and hearts do as much differ as truth and error: though they do seldom
damnably swear, yet they will most abominably lie. For lying, falsehood, and
hypocrisy, these are their familiar experssions. They are much addicted to
prayer and fasting; for they frame a long Babel-like prayer, made up with hums
and hawes; and though they affect fasting well, yet they love their flesh
better, They much delight in private conventicles, and secret and obscure
places, in which voluptuous wantonness has her meeting, where the Spirit
enlightens the understanding to see a sister in the dark: though they are
superciliously rigid and censorious, yet they seem very charitable, for rather
then their sisters shall want food, they will fill their bellies, and rather
then they shall be naked, they will cover their bodies. Brothers they are, but
not of the blade; for they cannot endure our Cavaleers; yet they are lovers of
the sisters of the scaberd. Brethren they are, not of the Corporation, but the
separation; like Simeon and Levi, they are fratres in malo. They are altogether
ignorant, therefore they despise all learning: for the tongues and languages,
they utterly abhor and detest them as profane, and for our ordinary Latin,
they (...) it is the language of the beast. They are resolved still to be as
they are, ignorant, for they bold it Idolatry and superstition to learn to
re^d because the very first letter begins with a Cross.

The Cross they account the mark of the beast, and though it be the ancient
ensign of Christianity, yet by them it is contemned, All Crosses they dosie as
may-poles; the one they hold profane, and the other they aver to be
superstitious. They can endure no Cross but that on Silver or Gold; and for
the Cross in Cheapeside, it is the pillar of golden superstition, the
abomination of the City, the City Idol, and a supporter of Idols, having so
many images about it, which is as displeasing to their sight as the Counter in
Woodstreet is to an indebted Citizen. All Ceremonies they account Popish, a
Surplesse the snock of the whor of Babylon, the sight whereof is as terrible to
them in a Church at noone, as the apparition of a Ghost in a Churchyard at
midnight, An orthodox and lawfuly called, and allowed Minister is not minded
amongst them; for they hold it as lawful for Artificers, and Laymen, to preach
in public, and those that are most inferior, as Cobblers, Weavers,
Leather-sellers, Box-makers, Iron-mongers, Felt-makers, and such mechanic
fellows. These and their holy sisters (for they may well be linkt together) are
they, who by their unreverent gestures in the Church disesteeme of
Church-Prayers; These are they who contemn the public service of God, and cry
down the Lyturgie of the Church of England; that solemn Lyturgie, celebrous by
the piety of Bishops, and Martyrs, hallowed with the blond of some of them who
composed it, established by the Laws of this Land, by several Acts of
Parliament in this Kingdom, attested and approved by the best of all foreign
Divines, confirmed by the subscription of all the Clergy, accepted of by the
most and best of all the Laity, and has continued since in the reigns of
Queen Elizabeth, King lames, and our gracious King Charles, in the Church of
England, for the service of God these 90. years; that this holy exercise of
Religion should be by them vilified, interrupted, and depraved, what does it
tend to, but the advancing of Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, Libertinisme,
Anabaptisme, and Atheism?

We acknowledge, that some parts of our public Liturgy, may be very well
corrected, (and thanks be to God the great Counsel of the King, and the
Kingdom have consulted and determined about it) but the clamours now go very
high: Impudence or Ignorance is at this time grown so frontlesse, that it is
confidently expected by many, that all forms of public worship should be
utterly abrogated, and that our book of Common Prayer should be quite
abolished, as they would have Episcopacy everlastingly extirpated.

They affirm that that which is called the Liturgy is the same with the Mass,
either a Lethargy of worship, or a Mass of Idolatry; wherein is no purity, but
all papistry. In the Service-booke they say there are foppish and foolish
Tautologies, as in these words, The Lord be with you and with your Spirit: And
in the Letany, there are vain and ^^ivolous repetitions of words, as Good Lord
deliver us, and We bese^^^ to hear us good Lord; which they are not ashamed to
say are ridiculous Invocations like magic spells, and no better than conjuring.
These modern Zealots (forsooth) are offended at the vestments and habits of
the Clergy; every thing though never so laudable, decent, and necessary, if
contrary to their opinion, is by them accounted profane, or superstitious. They
make no reckoning of the Church of God, than of a barn, or a stable, either of
these is all alike to them. Barnes and Stables are for threshers and hostlers:
the Church is the House of God: yet they are so base minded, as to conjecture a
barn or stable good enough for him, whom the heaven of heavens cannot
contain, the high and lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity. They account their
own houses as holy as the Church; It Is strange Divinity, and yet I hold no
inherent holiness in either. I have read of a sort of Heretics about the
year of our Lord 1126. who would have all Churches defaced and demolished as
needless Fabrics, and unnecessary structures; for God dwells not in temples
made with hands. Sure these Separatists are of their minds; If they were not,
they would mind the Church better then they do; But these love to stand without
at the Church door: I am sure they have no president for it out of the Word of
God, that whilst the preacher and people are praying, within, they should stand
prating without. That description of S. Paul may be properly predicated of
them: they are lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
disobedient, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers,
false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of others, heady, high minded,
(...), magis quam, (...) lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God, having a
form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4. Tha
likewise of S. Jude may be truly applied to them, they defile the flesh,
despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities, 8 ver. These are they who
separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit, 19 ver. And who these
persons are, who say they have the Spirit, the subject of this small Tract does
sufficiently declare, the Separatists. They are offensive to God in the
contempt of his Ordinance, whose commandment is, that every soul should be
subject to the higher powers; and they are injurious to the King and State,
whose power they despise, and government they affront. Their lives are
hypocritical, their positions schismatic, their thoughts perilous, their
words malicious, their Acts mischievous, and their opinions impious. They hold
it a matter arbitrary or indifferent, which they dispense with at their own
wills and pleasures, to behave themselves irreverently, unmannerly, undecently,
and disorderly in Gods House, in his presence, and that under pretense of
avoiding superstition, Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt: what is
this, but to avoid Scylla, and fall upon Charybdis? to run from one extreme to
a worse, ex fuma^io flammam, out of the smoke into the flame. This is the
reason they have made so many uproares, the like in pristine ages unparalleld
motions and commotions in our Churches of late days, in the Cathedral of S.
Paul, within these few months, and in S. Olaves Church in the old Iewry, on
Sunday in the afternoon being the 8. of May, I know not by what unhappy fate,
there was at that present congregated a company of rude Rascals, to the number
of above 100, who as soon as the right Rev. pious and learned Bishop came up
into the Pulpit in his Lawn sleeves and other vestments suitable to a Prelate,
they presently like an unmannerly and ill-bred crew of unruly curres, made such
a hideous clamor in the Church of God, crying jointly, most impudently and
with one accord, A Pope, a Pope, a Pope, to the astonishment of the man of God,
and to the admiration and amazement of the L. Major, the Parliament Gentlemen,
and other noble and worthy auditors that were then present. Some of the varlets
ran out of the Church, others by the L. Majors officers were thrust out of the
Church, and the door shut upon them: And I wish this cursed Sect may beever
excluded as from our Churches so from our Cities, Assemblies and societies: I
am sure, in the purest times of the Primitive Church, there were Ostiarit,
Doore-keepers, to debar from ingresse into the Church notorious Heretics,
obstinate Idolaters and profane livers. I would not be accounted uncharitable,
therefore my opinion is, that these sons of tumult bare no violent malice to
the Right Reverend Bishops person, (for he is the object of every man's love)
only I imagine their inveterate spleen aymd at his function. A Pope and a
Bishop are all one with them, when these turbulent Schismatickes were in the
street, they fell to picking of quarrels, and broke many glass windows in the
Church, in the time of the Sermon, they were so audacious and impudent as to
say, that they who were in the Church were at Mass, and that the Lord Major
was a Papist, whom God and the world knows to be a Gentleman of an approved
and unblemished integrity and an unfeigned Protestant of the Church of England.
One thing I have more to relate, that on of the rascals was the same day
apprehended, and examined by some of the Parliament Gentlemen after Sermon in
the Lord Majors house, and was by his Lordship committed, of whom hereafter ye
shall hear more; for the present, I am sorry that such an occasion is offered
me to trouble the Readers patience so much, with the relation of this viperous
generation, and with such unsanctified sons of mischief as these are; Only
give me leave, before I leave them, to leave this wish to them, that these
Brothers of Schism and Sedition, with their Sisters of Faction and
insurrection (for they of that sex are as bad, being of the same sect) may in
due time (as I hope shortly they will) suffer exemplary and condign punishment
according to their demerits.

FINIS.

