A Cluster of COXCOMBES; OR, A Cinquepace of five sorts of Knaves and Fools:
Namely, The Donatists, Publicans, Disciplinarians, Anabaptists, and Brownists;
Their Originals, Opinions, Confutations, and (in a word) their Heads Roundly
jolted together. Also showing how in the Reigns of sundry Kings, and in the
late Q. Elizabeth's Reign the Anabaptists have bin burnt as Heretics, and
otherwise punished. And that the Sect of the Brownists is so new, that many
are alive who knew the beginning of it. With other Sects displayed.

By John Tailor.



July 13. Printed for Richard Webb, 1642.

Donatists.
THe Author of this Heresy was one Donatus born in Numidia a Province of
Africa, their opinion was that they and none but they were the only pure
Christian Congregation and that they (especially) were the true Church, such as
embraced their Discipline and come to them, they baptized again of what age or
sect soever, they affirmed that the Church consisted all of good people, and
that no bad Christian was a member of it, this Heresy was in An. 353. look
Bishop Coopers Dictionarie.

Publican.
In the 9. year of the Reign of K. H. 2. Anno 1163, there came into this
Kingdom one Gerrard, a German, with 30 more with him, and they called themselves
Publicans, they denied Matrimony and both the Sacraments. Gerrard himself had
some Learning, the rest were ignorant persons whom he missed; they were
examined and found guilty, and obstinate Heretics, for which they were marked
in the foreheads with a hot Iron, their leader was marked in the chin and
forehead; after that they were all sharply whipped, which punishments they
seemed to receive joyfully. Lastly, by command of the King and State, they were
turned out of prison, and all people were forbidden either to harbor or
relieve them, so that with the extremity of the cold winter, and want of food
and harbor they all dyed, miserably starved with cold, and famished with
hunger, Stow page 151.

Disciplinarians.
There came 100 and 20 persons from Holland, Zealand, and those parts, through
Flanders to London, where it was their daily exercise to pray and whip
themselves twice a day in Paul's, and ^n the streets, their body being naked
from the waste upwards, the whip being 3 whipcords with knots, so that the
blood ran down their shoulders, arms and sides, and as they marched in this
bloody procession, every one of them had a red cross in his hat and 4 of their
companions went singing before them, this sect was in the Reign of King E. 3.
Anno 1349. Stow Chronicle.

Anabaptists of these latter times.
On the 29. of April, in the 32. year of the Reign of Henry the 8. Anno 1541.
one Mandevill and one Collins (both Anabaptists) were examined at Saint
Margaret, Church at the Hill in Southwarke, and there they were condemned and
judged to be burned as Heretics; which was executed on them accordingly, in
the High way betwixt Southwarke and Newington.

In the 17. year of Queen Elizabeth's reign, Anno 1574. there was one man and
10. women judged to be burned for being Anabaptists, but after much suit made
one woman recanted and all the rest were banished. And in the same year, the
12. of June 5. Englishmen of the sweet Sect called, The Family of Love, did
penance at Pauls-Crosse, and there confessed and detested their wicked and
damnable Heresies. And on the 22 of July following two, Dutchmen Anabaptists
were burnt in Smithfield. Also the same year (in May ^5.) 27. Anabaptists were
taken and imprisoned, and 4. of them bare faggots for penance at Pauls-Crosse,
and recanted. Stow, page 679, 680.

And in these our days the said Anabaptisticall sect is exceeding rise, for
they do swarm here and there without fear of either God or man, Law or Order.

In the 33. year of Queen Elizabeth's reign, Anno 1591. one Edmund Copinger
Gent. and Henry Arthington Gent. these two on the 16. of July in the morning in
the year aforesaid went to one John Walkers house at Broken-wharfe, London,
where they found a Yeoman of Northamptonshire in the parish of Oundle, named
William Hacket, to whom the said Copinger and Arthington said, that they were
come to anoint him King, but Hacket replied again that they needed not so to
do, for he was already anointed in Heaven by the Holy Ghost; the said Hacket
caused Copinger and Arthington to believe that he was Jesus Christ, and to
proclaim him so in London, and at last for these horrible blasphemies and some
wicked Treasons against the Queen, Hacket was hanged and quartered in
Cheap Side, 1595. his two prophets, one of them starvd himself to death
wilfully, in Bridewell, the other lay a long time languishing and repenting in
the Counter in Woodstreet: he that list to read more of this at large, shall
find it truly related in Mr. Stowes Chronicle, page 761, 762.

Also one Francis Ket was burnt at Norwich, in the 31. year of Queen
Elizabeth, 1589. he was a Master of Art, and justly dyed for holding most
wicked opinions of our Savior Jesus Christ.

In the 16. year of the rsigne of King James, Anno 1618. one John Traske
denied and despised our Church Government, refused our Christian Sabbath, and
affirmed that Brawne, Porke, Bacon Pigge, and all swines flesh was abominable,
for which Errors the said Traske was on the 19 of June in the year aforesaid,
mounted to the pillory at Westminster, and from thence whipped to the Pleet,
where (repenting and recanting) he was beneficed, and became an honest,
diligent, and painful Preacher, Stow 1029. page

Brownists.
This Sect sprung from one named Brown, who is of that Antiquity, that many
(yet alive) did know him when he was a Schoolmasters to the Free School in
Saint Olaves in Southwarke: This man (Brown) in his brown study, did plod to
preach, and did practice and exercise in Woods, thickets, fields and under
hedges, to a great many of poor people, whom he seduced to be as wise as
himself: he said that the Church of England was not a Church (perhaps his
meaning was it was not a true Church) but when he was preferred to the Benefice
of a parsonage in Northamptonshire, the parish being called A Church, then the
Church of England was a Church with him, and his parish Church of A Church, was
a conformable and a true Canonicell Church, and he lived till within these 7
years there, and dyed a conformable church man, but he has left a most
pernicious and seditious train of his sect behind him, of all trades, ages,
sexes, and conditions, and when all trades fail they can make a shift to be
all preachers

Amongst all these heretics and heresies, sects and sectaries, and
schismatickes, I have not meddled or mentioned the Puritan. the reason is, that
I do not know any that either deserves or dares to take the name or title of
Puritan upon them.

It is an Epithet of reproach, which rash or malicious men do cast upon many
persons who do strive to live in Gods fear, and desire to dye in his favor,
and it is likewise a name which covers a great deal of craft and villainy under
the veil and vizard of Hypocritical sincerity, and my opniion is, that if
there be any that are to be so called, they must be such Roman Catholics that
do presume to be saved by their own good works, which pure, most impure,
Doctrine is one of the grounds and Tenent of the popish Religion, and of no
Church else in the world, so that my conclusion is that none deserves the name
of a Puritan, but such as dare presume by their purity to save themselves and
others: Thus have I briefly showed that the Church of Christ has in all ages
been opposed and oppressed by Heretics and Schismatics, I could name many
more opinions of men, who were all great and glorious lights in the Church, and
most illustrious instruments for the advancement of Christian Relig^on; and yet
they have in some points differed one from the other, as Wickliffe, Luther,
Beza, Calvin, Bucer, Melancton, Oeclampadius; yet for all other great
diversities, they have always agreed in the main Fundamental points of
Christian Doctrine, so that the outsides of Ceremonies of Religion did not
shake the peace of the Church.

But in these times the Church and Church Government is not only shaken, but
shattered in pieces, almost for nothing else but outward indifferent
Ceremonies, such as in themselves seemed offencelesse Handmaids for their
order and decency, to wait and attend the Church as Ornaments, and not for
superstious Adoration These shaddows have not only bin with violence pu^'d
down, but the substance which is Gods Ordinance has bin sacrilegiously
intruded and usurped upon by an imdudent rabble of ignorant Mechanics, who
have dared to prefume to preach, not being called or sent, nor knowing how, or
when, either to speak or hold their peace.

I have read that the Grand Senior, or great Turk at Constantinople, did demand
due of an English Ambassador, this question, Quoth he, if I would be a
Christian, there are so many sorts and sects of them, which Christian should I
be, to whom the Ambass^dour replied, that it was the only safe way to be a
Protestant; but a French Nobleman standing by, being a Roman Catholic, and he
demanded of the Englishman that if he would be a Protestant, that he would
tell him which Protestant he should be, by this may be perceived, that the
Turk takes notice of the divisions of Christian Religion, and the Papists do
take advantages at our d^sunion and contentions; yet the Protestant Religion in
it self is in a most sweet harmonious Uniformity, but the crew of Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, have done, daily do, and will do, their uttermost malice
and mischief to rend all in pieces, whilst he is accounted the best member in
a Commonwealth, that can either Libell most scandalously, revile most
despightfully, or tear and spoil most courageously, and villanously.

And it is to be wondered at the many unlicenced licentious Pamphlets that have
been scattered about the Kingdom within these 23. months, wherein neither
Religion, Church, King, Peers, Priest, or people have escaped Railing,
Libelling, and transcendent traducing, so that it may be supposed, that the
paper that has been wasted by those pestiferous pamphleteeres, would go
near (if it were laid sheet by sheet) to cover the whole Kingdom; and this is
certain, that they have drawn many thousands of poor idle people from all
parts of England to London, where without serving any Apprentiship, they take a
freedom to sell Books, so that the Booksellers are increased ten fold in
number within these two years: And what stuff do they sell (for sooth)
things New Lie come forth and things either of no worth, or else Speeches
fathered upon men that never knew of them, or News out of Scotland or Ireland,
made over night in an Alehouse, and printed in the morning Cum privilegio,
1642. then are the streets embroidered with lies, lice, and Beggars, to the
great abuse of true Writers, the scandal of this Honorable City of London,
and the universal injury to the whole Kingdom, for that such numberless
numbers of lies and Fables are scattered and dispersed (not ouely here in our
owu Couutrey, but in all parts else they are transported over the Christian
World.

To conclude this Book of Errors and Heresies, seeing there have been, are,
and will be such to the end of the world, and that amongst all these ways
there is but one Right way. It is a grief to any Christian heart to consider
how many thousands are out of the way, that do dare to presume to call
themselves Christians; some are so far blinded, that they hold all manners,
Decency, Order, comely Gesture, or Ceremony, as standing at the Bel^efe,
kneeling at the Lords Prayer, or at the receiving of the Sacrament, Bowing at
the Name of Jesus, or Reverence in being uncovered at the entering into the
house of God, all these are accounted Superstition, Idolatry, and Popery: but
to come to the Church boldly or rudely as into a Tavern, an Alehouse or
stable; I am sure there is no Popery in that, and for Christianity a man may
find as much amongst the barbarous Canniballs.

So that some men are jeered out of true and sincere Religion, for fear of
being called Puritans, and too many have laid by all Order, Manners, and
Decency in the Church, because they will not be accounted Papists.

Besides all these ways of Heresy (which are all out of Gods way) let us
consider the infinite numbers of Atheists, Heathens, Pagans, Jews, Turks,
Infidels, and divellish Idolators, that are upon the Face of the Earth; If
these things be but ponders in a man's heart that fears God, it will strike
terror and amazement into him, to consider how little service the Almighty
has from Ungrateful mankind, for that he by his power, Providence and
Mercy, made all, conserves all, and Redeemed all true Believers, yet for all
these Alls, that good God has not the tithe of half, either in mere
thankfulness or acknowledgement.

FINIS.

