Englands Comfort, and Londons Joy:

Expressed in the Royal, Triumphant, and Magnificent Entertainment of our
Dread Sovereign Lord, King Charles, at his blessed and safe return from
Scotland on Thursday the 25. of Nouemb. 1641.

By the Right Honorable Sir Richard Gurney Knight, Lord Major, and the
Recorder, Sir Thomas Gardner, who were at that present both Knighted, who
attended his Majesty with the other Right Worshipful Knights and Aldermen,
Sheriftes, and Companies of this famous City of London:

Together with the manner and form how the State was to be observed and
performed, by the several Companies on Horseback and foot; for the
Conducting of his Majesty t^^ Queen, the Prince, and all the Royal Progeny,
to the Guild Hall, London, to dinner, and from thence to his Majesty's Palace
at White Hall: Also the several Speeches, and other Verses presented to his
sacred Person at that time.

Printed at London for Frcncis Coules. 1641.

Englands comfort, and Londons joy.
NOt to delude my Reader with a long Preface to a short and brief Relation, I
will first begin (as near as true intelligence and eyesight informed me of
this great days most magnificent and honorable Triumph and entertainment of
our most Gracious Sovereign, at his return from Scotland to this Honorable
City of London. How some other Kings and Princes, of our own and other nations
have been formerly entertained by the Lord Major and Citizens of London, it is
(as I have read in our English Histories) set down by me in short; toward the
end of this Discourse.

On thursday the 25. of this instant November, 1641. Mr. Alderman Garret, and
his brother in office Mr. Alderman Clarke being both Sheriftes of London, with
72. of their men in Scarlet Liveries, road four miles toward Theobalds to meet
his Majesty, with the City Trumpets 14. in number, and they conducted his
Majesty in state until such time as they came where the Lord Major, did
attend, and was attended to welcome his Majesty as follows. About eight of
the clock in the morning, the Aldermen, with Mr. Recorder of London, all in
Scarlet Gowns, with the City Council, came all on horseback to the Lord
Majors house in the old Jury, and there they attended his Lordship some little
time, till being all ready they road in brave Equipage to Moore-fields (the
Lord Major being in a most sumptuous Gown of Crimson velvet) where 500. of the
Companies all in coats of Velvet, every man of them having a Chain of gold;
Also every Horseman had a footman to attend him clad in a footmans Jacket and
breeches according all trimmed and set out with the colors that belonged to
those Companies which they were free of. Also every Company had a horseman
which road severally in the front of each of them, which horseman did likewise
bear the Arms of such a one Company as he attended, he being in all parts
suited Cap ape accordingly.

All these attended his Lordships coming and then they all road in order to
the further grounds joining upon Kingsland, where they met his Majesty, with
the Queen, the Prince Charles, the Duke of York, with the Princesses, Prince
Palatine, Dukes, Marquesles, Earls, Viscounts, Barons, Lords, Knights,
Gentlemen-Pentioners, Ladies of Honor, together with 20. Scottish Lords and
others; with his Majesty's Guard, and others of his followers, with the
spectators of all degrees, sexes, Ages, and sizes, were innumerable: The banks
hedges, highwayes streets, stalls, and windows were all embroydered with
millions of people, of all sorts and fashions.

And all the way the boys did climb up trees,
And clung close to the boughs like swarms of Be.
When his Majesty came near to a house of Sir George Whitmores called Balm^s,
where there was a Tent erected, in which the King lighted and refreshed
himself, and a learned Speech made by Sir Thomas Gardner the Recorder, which
done, his Sacred Majesty without delay of time Knighted the Lord Major and the
Recorder; the said Horsemen humbly saluted his Majesty, and in a most
commendable and worthy manner brought his Majesty into the City at Moore-gate,
where all along by London Wall as far as from thence to Bishopsgate: some of
the Companies stood in their Livery, within places Gracious Sovereign
conveniently railed with Timber, their standings being adorned with Flags,
Banners, Pendants, and Escouchions, and other hatchments, with blew cloth on
the railes until such time as they came as far as St. Laurence Lane end in
Cheape-side, down which Lane his Majesty turned to the Guild Hall, where he
dined in a most Royal manner, where no cost was spared, and where his
Majesty's gracious Presence and acceptance was acknowledged by the Lord Major,
and the whole City to the best cheer.

The rest of the Companies of London were all placed in their standings from
the west end of St. Lawrence Lane through Cheape-side, and up Pleer-street to
Temple Bar, adorned and set forth with such accoutrements as was done by the
other Companies before.

After his Majesty was passed to the Guild Hall, the 500. men and horse, with
their footmen, they passed up Cheap Side, and there in Paul's Churchyard they
did set themselves in their former order; and attended till his Majesty had
dined.

Note that the Kings Majesty with the Queen, the Prince, and the rest of the
Royal offspring that were there, did dine at the east end of the Guild Hall,
in a place called the Hustings Court: The rest of the Lords, Ladies, and others
also dined in the Hall.

After dinner, the Lord Major, with his brethren the Aldermen and the 500.
Horse conducted his Majesty from the Guild Hall, with 14. Trumpets with Banners
in Scalet Cloaks, Sac-Buts, Cornets, and all instruments of music usual, with
bells ringing at 121 parish Churches where there was no failings in expressions
of love and loyalty by the people, as appeared by their shouts and
acclamations: As also all the Conduits in the City as his Majesty passed by ran
with Claret wine and Sack with drinking of innumerable healths to his Majesty
(which healths I hope will not prove sickness to any.) In this magnificent
manner (the Lord Major, with the rest before mentioned, every one of the 500.
footmen that attended the 500. horsemen having a gilded Truncheon in the one
hand, and two Torches in the other; they brought his Majesty to his Palace of
white Hall, where the Lord Major and the rest most humbly took their leaves of
his Majesty, who gave them all hearty thanks for their so large demonstrations
of their loves and loyalties. This being done, the said 500, horsemen, with
footmen and torches returned back, attending the Lord Major to his house, of
whom his Lordship most kindly took his leave, and every man retired to his home.

Entertainments given to Kings in former times by the foresaid City.
SIr Henry Picard, Knight Lord Major of the City of London, did in the year of
our Lord, 1357. at one time entertain and feast 4. Kings, ( viz.) Edward the
third King of England, John King of France, David King of Scotland, and William
King of Cyprus; Also Edward the black Prince of Wales, the Prince Daulphin of
France with all the Nobility and Gentry of Lords, Knights, Ladies and others,
were worthily entertained by the said Lord Major, to their great contentments,
and memorable Honor of this famous City.

But to come to nearer times, I find in Master Stowes Chronicle that Queen
Elizabeth in Anno 1585. the 27. of her Reign that she having been on
progress, and coming to her palace of Saint James, was entertained by the
Lord Major, his Brethren the Aldermen and Citizens, 200. of the Commoners being
in Velvet Coats, with Gold chains, on horseback, 1000. of the Companies on
foot, and 100. more that bare Torches, Sir Wolstan Dixey Knight Skinner, being
then Lord Major.

King James (of blessed memory, at his return from Scotland, in the fifteenth
year of his Reign, Anno 1517. was met at Hyde Park by the Lord Major (Sir
George Bols Knight Lord Major) and the Aldermen, and more then 400. Commoners
of the City, with chains of gold, and Velvet coats, and a present (a purse
with five hundred pound presented to his Majesty. The like entertainment his
Majesty (King James had at his coming to the Cathedral Church of St. Paul's in
London, in the 18. year of his Reign 1620 when Sir William Cockain was Lord
Major where also all the Companyes stood within places in the way with Banners
ann Escouchions, and the streets railed, with Rich presents given.

In the 5. year of the Reign of our now gracious King Charles, 1629. Sir James
Cambell Knight (then Lord Major) feasted eleven Lords, all Knights of the
Garter, and each of them fifty men with Chains of Gold, and Liveries besides
many other of the Nobility Gentry and Commoners then there nobly entertained.

Verses Presented to his Majesty.
WHen Israel with Judah did contest,
Which of them ought to love King David best;
Judah claimed Kindred of the King, and said 2 Samuel 19. 41, 42.

That he (by Right) should still with them have staid:
But Israel boldly to them strait replied,
That Davld (only) was with them to abide;
And that in him they had ten parts, (at least)
And therefore had most Right and Interest.
These words caused wicked Sheba, (Bichri's Son)
Most madly to rebellious Arms to run;
But Sheba's head, which first contrived those jarrs) Chap. 20.

Was lop'd, and so was ended all the wars.
I wish Great Britain the like Song to sing
In love, who best shall love and serve the King:
Let Sheba's head be lost, and let us be,
England, and Scotland, both in Unity.
He Is Ours and Theirs, and he is Theirs and Ours,
Let Us love and serve him, with our Prayers, and Powers;
That as the King is one, so we as one
May praise God, for establishing his Throne.
When He, (our SVNNE of joy) from us set forth
His Rays illustrious, lightened all the North:
Whilst sighs like Clouds, and showers of Tears and Cares,
Was Londons, and fair Englands Southern shares.
But this return our sadness does destroy,
Our Tears of grief arc turned to Tears of joy;
Our Night of woe, we patiently endured,
Our Mornings joy is come we are assured.
He Is come to salve this Kingdoms discontents,
To cure all wrenches, fractures, spraines and rents,
Where Church, and Common Wealth is dislocated;
And all good men amazed and amated.
Gods Great Lieutenant, four great Kingdoms King,
No doubt but he those mischifes down shall ding
To Hells black Vault, from whence they first assended,
And with a blessed peace, all strife be ended.
Now follows the speech spoken to his Majesty.
Dread Sovereign,
WHose Royal presence does now again revive our once dejected hearts, being
overwhelmed with sorrow for your Majesty's so long absence: Behold, behold most
royal Sovereign, how your loyal subjects, and well affected people triumph,
making such acclamations of joy, as not only happy of your Majesty's return,
but safe returning; their hearts, hands, and countenances speak that which
their tongues are not able to express. True subjects are joyful whilst
ill-affected Traitors, bullrush like, bow down their heads, as being fearful
to behold so sacred a Majesty, as your royal self, whose pious and religious
actions are no less then quotidian Lectors to be read to all Christian Princes
abroad, and a pattern to all your Subjects at home, Pompey is forced to fly,
when mighty Caesar once does come in place, so let all your enemies fly and be
consumed before your sacred person. Welcome, welcome, dread Sovereign, upon
which words should my tongue for ever harp, yet would my heart still confess
that expression were wanting unto my loyal desire: Blessed, and for ever let
them be happy, those loyal, and our well affected brethren, the Scots I mean,
which gave so good entertainment to so royal a Prince, whose Reign, your
well-affected Subjects here present; do pray to the Heavenly Jehovah, who
hither to has been your Majesty's Protector and defender, may be as long as
happy, which Conjunction will prove a happy Union. So the great God of heaven
bless your sacred Majesty, your royal Consort, and our most hopeful Prince,
and the rest of the Royal Progeny with health, peace, and happiness in this
World, and eternal joys in the next.


IN Ovids Metamorphosis I find Verses presented to the Kings own hand by John
Tailor.

Transformed forms, and strange misshapen Shapes;
Of humane transmutations from their Kind
To Wolves, to Bears, to Dogs, to Pyes, to Apes;
Yet these were but poetical escapes,
(Or Moralizing of uxnat'rall deeds)
To show that Treasons, Murders, Incests, Rapes,
From Beastiall minds, (in humane forms) proceeds
But through thy power (which my poor Muse inflames)
A greater wonder is peform'd by me:
I have transformed a Boat from off the Thames,
Unto a horse, to come to welcome thee.
And now thy Gracious sight I do attain,
I Will turn that Horse into a boat again:
And all whom thy return does not delight,
Let them be hanged, and then they have their right.
FINIS.

