New VERSES concerning the PLOT, Londons Fire, and Godfreys Murder.
Given into his Majesty's hand, the second of September last, by E. R
Whereto is added the Papists Attempts upon Justice Arnold, Mr. Thomkins, and
lately on Sr. William Waller. Which also may be Sung to the Tune, Stone Walls
cannot a Prison make, etc.
The Plot.
GIVE ear, O King, and Nobles all, to this my new true Song,
The Living God is all in all, his Truth is very strong,
Truth will defend, world without end, those that are Innocent.
The Man that walks in the Truth has no cause to repent.
A mighty Wonder has bin wrought by God in fair England,
He has delivered the King by his almighty Hand,
Traitors did seek to take away his LIFE, as is made known,
But their damned Treason is found out, GOD has them overthrown.
Their dark design is brought to light, for all Traitors must fall;
Their is no Treason in the Truth, for truth is Lord of All:
Its Truth that makes Treason fly, truth is a noble thing,
The Devil's in that man indeed that would destroy a King.
O Charles! rejoice, and praise the Lord for your Deliverance,
He made you King of fair England, I see your life advance:
Your secret Foes God will beat down, and break them all asunder:
Your preservation stands in God, who will bring traitors under.
How often has the Lord bin pleased your Body to deliver:
Then praise the living God, o King, that you may live for ever:
Great has his Kindness bin to you, he is your strong Defender,
Give up your Mind unto the Lord, that Kingdom he does tender.
When you was compassed about with Fiery Enemies,
The Lord appeared in great power, and did their Host surprise.
He led you by a gentle hand, sent you out of their way,
And at his pleasure brought you home, remember such a day!
The Kindness of the Lord to you is not to be forgot,
Remember this my Sovereign, how fair has been your Lot.
The hand of Divine Providence, has guided you along,
Then blame me not, my Sovereign, to greet you with a Song.
True men, of old, were very bold they sung with heart and hand,
They lived and walked in the Truth, the pearl of every Land:
They praised God, and loved the King bearing the Truth within,
They had no Treason in their hearts, but in true Love did spring.
Fire of London.
No Man that ever yet knew God: was known for to conspire,
To kill a King, or set a Land in burning flames of Fire.
O dreadful Treason, God will be thy everlasting Death:
Those that are Found to walk therein, the Lord will stop their breath.
Charles by the Grace of GOD, I say, lift up your Heart to GOD:
Then he will give Traitors unto you: and you shall be their Rod;
By you God will chastise them all, they shall become your Prey,
Give glory to the living God, he is your strength and stay.
Godfreys Murder.
The King is safe, but Godfreys slain, now Traitors look about ye;
You are afraid of every Bush, the Truth of God will rout ye.
Your safeguard you have lost indeed, your Salt has lost its favor;
You seek for holes to hide you in, for want of the Kings favor.
Come, Traitors come, with shame sit down, destruction is your lot:
Be sorry now with all your Hearts, for this your cursed Plot;
Had not your Market been forestald, and you brought into Chains,
The Devil had bewitched you all, its he that in you Reigns.
Justice Arnold.
Another Justice was beset, they thought him for to Murder:
The Lion he is in a Net, he cannot go no further:
His Kingdom it is numbered, and now it shall be finished:
They are all Traitors to their Head, that have the Truth deminisht.
Mr Thomkins, Esquire Arnold's friend.
A Lawyer that in Monmouth shire, did live, has been assaulted,
By one that will go to the Church, but yet belike he halted:
He knew not God to be his God, for Baals Priest they do blind them,
All Murderers shall feel the Rod, with Judgments God will find them.
Sir William Waller.
Sir William Waller he is fled, for fear that he should follow
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, dead, the Huntsmen they do hollow,
And closely follow on their Game, over all Hills and Mountains,
But yet they shall not hurt the Lambs, that feeds by the Fountains.
Then keep Christ's new Commandment, and truly love each other,
And then you never shall be shent, for he that hates his Brother:
He is a Murderer I know, and walks not in the Spirit,
Which is the free gift of the Lord, that none can ever Merit.
Therefore O King, show mercy then, to me a Worm in Prison:
I am your Prisoner God does know, in this I speak no Treason:
Might I enjoy my Liberty, I let you understand,
I could not hurt, nor yet disturb, no person in your Land.
O King, you can command the Press, it stands good with reason:
O King, let this be put in Print, in truth, here is no Treason.
They are the Dictates of my Mind: the Lord, he gave them me,
And I do freely give them to your Royal Majesty.
O blame me not, my Sovereign, for this poor drop of water:
It is exceeding good indeed, and from the Divine Nature.
Charity is a noble spring, in Love there is no Treason,
For Charity does guide the mind, a long in Divine reason.
Farewell, farewell, my Master dear; consider me at leisure:
Hear I must lie asuredly, until it be your Pleasure,
To set me free, then it would be, to us a great refreshing,
To see you enter into Love, and so receive Gods blessing.
Written by J. Tailor, a Singer of Israel, Prisoner in the Kings Bench.
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1680.


