MISSELANIES Or, fifty Years GATHERINGS, Out of Sundry Authors in Prose and
Verse.

Being the studious Readings, painful Collections, and some of them are the
Composings of the Writer and Publisher heerof.

To the Reader.
All these things here collected, are not mine,
But diverse Grapes, make but one sort of Wine:
So I from many Learned Authors took
The Various Matters Printed in this Book.
What Is not mine own, by me shall not be Fathered,
The most part, I in 50. Years have gathered;
Some things are very good, pick out the best,
Good Wits compiled them, and I wrote the Rest:
If thou do buy it, it will quit thy cost,
Read it, and all thy labor is not lost.
JOHN TAILOR.
LONDON,

Printed in the Year, 1652.

MISSELANIES.
A Christians Crosses do begin his Glory, but not end his Misery: The Crosses
figure is the letter Tau; it is the last and lowest letter in the Hebrew
Alphabet, it is an Emblem or mark of Humility, and all that were not marked
with that mark, were slain by the Angel, Ex. 9. 4.

Adam was not created an Infant, he was made of full strength and vigor, as at
40 or 50 years of age, of perfect stature, with an able body, fit for
Generation, because he was to be the common Father by whom Mankind should be
propagated; his soul was furnished with all natural Sciences; he was the first
Doctor to whom all Mankind was to go to School, to learn of him (as of a
Master) the secrets of Nature, the Inventions of Art, the knowledge of God, and
the mysteries of Faith.

Inveterate and dispitefull malicious Enemies have oftentimes seemed to be
reconciled, but it has been for the plotting, contriving, or attempting some
perfidious and mischievous actions; but they seldom or never did combine for
any love which they bare either to the persons, Manners, Laws, or Conditions of
each other: For the Heathen Nations had diverse several damnable gods, and
detestable Religions, and by reason of their diversities of opinions, they
hated one another deadly, with implacable and irreconcilable hatred, yet, in
wickedness they could join and agree together, against the true God and his
Church, as all times, Ages, and Histories have found and declared; and most
excellently has the Kingly Prophet and Prophetical Psalmist described the
doings and qualities of these various people, in the 83. Psalm, where he says,
that,

Edomites, Moabites, Ishmalites, Ammonites, Amalekites, Gebalites, the
Philistims, Tirrians, and Assyrians, Ephraim against Manesses, Manasses against
Ephraim; and in the New Testament, there are described the sundry Opinions and
disagreements of Saduces, Pharisees, Herodians, Libertines, Cilicians,
Cirenians, Alexandrians, and Asians,; Herod against Pilate, Pilate against
Herod, yet all friends from the teeth outward, and all agree against God,
against the Lords anointed Christ and his Church; this they have done, this
they do, and this they will do in all Ages, and Generations; and if we have
but common sense and reason, we may perceive that those times which we now live
in, and Sectaries of these times, may parrellel the worst of times,

Sin is of the Devils Creation,
The wicked man's Recreation.
The Fools immitation, the Courts Ambition, the Cities surfeit, and the
Countries poison, Divinity has opposed and threatened it, Morality has
condemned it, Epigrams has Jeefd it, Satyrs have whipped it, and if we do not
truly Repent it, God will justly Judge it.

Books and Epistles, (or Letters) if they treat of Virtue, they are not only
good, but the best company a man can keep; but they are the wisest Counselors
for direction of men's lives and actions; they have no fearful hearts, or
hearts to fear; they have no blushing faces, or faces to blush; they dare
boldly call Nero a bloody Tyrant, Midas a covetous Ass, Sardanapalus a
lascivious Effeminate fool, Heliogabalus a wastfull profuse Whoremaster, and
Messalina an insatiate and imperious Strumpet; for Books do never alter their
intended purpose, nor break off their discourse in hope of favor, or fear of
men's anger or displeasure.

A man that loves me well, and a friend that is firm unto me, they are both
rare in these days, but if I were put to my choice, which of those I would
first lose, or part withal, then I would leave my Lover, and keep my Friend:
For he that loves may not always be a friend, but it is certain that he that
is a Friend always loves.

God in pardoning of a sinner shows his great mercy, his not pardoning is no
injustice; for if I do forgive one Debtor and sue another, I have showed
kindness to one, and no wrong to the other.

Let us do our best, to do our best; and if power be not able, let good
endeavor not be idle; let us be as wise as the unjust Steward, if we cannot
pay all that we owe, let us pay all that we are able, for God is so gracious,
that with him our good wills are taken for good deeds.

Our first miseries came by Eating, and our Savior suffered 40 days fasting
for it; then as our Parents did eat themselves and us soul-sick, so we must
fast for our souls health; for as eating with delight expulst us out of the
Paradise Terrestrial, so fasting and contrition must be our punishment and
practice and helps to bring us to the Heavenly Jerusalem: the Prodigal, by
fasting, said, I dye with hunger, and that hunger made him say, I will go to my
Father, etc.

The Epicures belly is his God, his Kitchen is his Church, his Priest is his
Cook, his Sacrifices are his lushious Dishes, and delicate Sauces, his
Prayers, Graces, Psalms, Hymns, and Anthems, are profane speeches, obscean
Rimes, Baudy Songs, lascivious Tunes, and foul impieties.

Earth made no account of poor Lazarus when he was alive, and Heaven made (...)
Dives when he was dead, for the misery of the one ended when the torments of
the other began.

When the Devil had taken all Job's earthly goods, insomuch that to the
appearance of men, he had nothing left him but extreme poverty, Botches and
Scabs; some may suppose that the Devil was kind in leaving him his Wife, but
the subtle Serpent had a further aim then to leave Job's Wife to be a helper
or comfort unto him, he saw that all that had been done to his body, or
children, or estate, could not make him impatient to blaspheam, and he knew
that the Law was that the Blaspheamer was to be stoned to death; therefore he
left his Wife to vex him, and to tempt him to curse God and die, whereby he had
not only lost his life by the Law, but also hazzarded his soul to the Devil
for his impatiency and blasphemy. This is the Devils kindness to leave a man a
wicked Wife to work his confusion.

Though Churches have the Names of Saints, yet they are the houses of the Lord;
they are dedicated or given to God, therefore they are Gods houses. Bethel was
the house of God, Genesis 28. Judge. 18. And before the Temple was built, when
David's son was dead, he went into the house of the Lord, 2. Sam. 12. The
Temple is the house of Prayer, Isa. 56. 7. Mat. 21. 13. Christ cast out and
whipped forth of the Temple all the buyers and sellers. Mark. 11. Luke 19. Jo. 2.
All Churches, or houses of Prayer are material Temples. The Temple of
Jerusalem was as the Cathedral, yet there were in that City 480. Synagogues
besides; all those Synagogues were as material Churches for the people to
congregat together to serve God; in many of those Synagogues our Savior
preached often and openly, Joh. 18. 20. Those Houses, which we Christians do
call Churches, were to shelter and defend the people in them that did assemble,
from the injury and violence of wind and weather. And the people that were,
are, or ever shall assemble and meet in the fear of God, in true faith in Jesus
Christ, in those material Temples or Churches made with hands, those true
Believers are all in all places, tongues, languages, and Nations, the true
Church and spiritual spouse of Christ built upon the Rock. And although
material Churches of lime and stone may be ruined and spoiled by all consuming
Time, or want of repair, or the fury of War, as Jerusalems magnificent Temple
and many other Churches have been and are defaced and defiled. Yet the Church
that is not made with hands, that is true, Catholic, and Apostolically founded
upon the Rock; that Church, the Holy Ghost is with always to the end of the
World, and the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against her, Math. 16. But
concerning our material Churches, they be Gods school-houses, the Preachers
(that are called and sent from God) are the Schoolmasters and Gods Ushers; and
we are, or should be the Scholars, but we have madly broke up School, played
the michers and truants, abused the Schoolmasters, and spoiled the
School-house.

Gentle and good counsel or reprehension are profitable if well bestowed, and
humbly accepted; Apollo was a man endued with eloquence, and mighty in
knowledge, and expounding the Scriptures, Acts 18 yet he came for instruction
and counsel to Aquila and Priscilla, a poor simple mechanic man and his wife.
For so that good may be done, it matters not how mean, or unlearned, how young
or old the parties are that do it. I do believe the Resurrection, though weak
women were the first that reported it, Mark 16.9. Joh. 20. 18. Timothy and John
were both very young when they were called to be Preachers: And Peter, the elder
Apostle, was contented to be rebuked by Paul which was the younger, Gal. 2.

Many good men have had children of contrary natures, dispositions, and
qualities; Adam had a cursed Cain, and innocent Abel; Noah had good Sem, and
wicked Cham; Abraham had carnal Ishmael, and spiritual Isaac; Isaac had
hated Esau and beloved Jacob; David had wise Solomon, and proud Absalom.

One, (who was accounted a good Protestant) did absent himself from the
Church, or Congregation, 5. or 6. years, for which he was accused to be
turned from his Religion, and fallen into Papistry. And being examined by a
Bishop and some other Divines, they found him fast and firm in the Protestant
Doctrine: then he was asked, what was the cause that he refrayned to come to
Church in so long a time: to which he answered, that when he was last at
Church, then he heard a most sufficient Lesson for him to practice and follow;
and when he had well learned that one good Lesson, he would go to Church and
fetch another; they demanded what were the words contained in that Lesson? he
replied: it was in the 39. Psalm, I have said I will take heed to my ways,
that I offend not with my tongue. By this one Text we are excited and exhorted,
to say well and do well; wherein are included all the Rules and Grounds of
Christianity and Christian Religion.

It is a question whether are more in number, either people or sheaves of corn;
every sheaf does not yield much above half a peck one with another: the least
Child does spend the quantity of a peck every year, and it may be thought that
every man or woman do eat at the least a bushel: In this may be seen the
miraculous and merciful providence of God, in feeding so many. Let these
mercies be with thankfulness considered, that the ox, calf, sheep, buck, all
Beasts on the Earth feeding, Fowls of the Air, Fishes of the Sea, Fruits of the
Field, Orchard, or Garden; they are running, flying, swimming, growing this
day, and the next day they are translated into the sustenances and substances
of the flesh and blood of every man and woman.

A ship is a right emblem, hieroglyphick of Gods Church Militant: the world is
the sea she sails in, the storms and tempests that assault and beat against her
are persecutions, the haven she steers to anchor in, is Heaven, the Pilot is
Christ, the mariners are Prophets, Apostles, godly Ministers, and painful
Pastors; the passengers are all true believing Christians; the main Mast of
this ship is Christ's Cross, the sails are pious profession, the fair and
prosperous wind is the spirit of God, the contrary winds are Satan's blustering,
or false doctrine, the Card and Compass is Gods word, to sail as that directs,
the Needle to the fixed North Pole is Faith, the cables, ropes, sheats, tacks,
braces, and boleins, and other cords are Love, the Anchor is hope, prayers,
tears, and penitential sighs are the Ordnance, the food (or victuals) are the
Sacraments, and Gods good pleasure is the Rudder.

We have to do with a merciful God, that will make the best of our intents
and actions, who hates all captious rigorous sophistry and Sophisters; that
misinterpret and construe all things to the worst; for God has a touchstone to
try Faith, whether it be right or counterset, he weighs it not in the Balance,
he esteems the purity of the quality more then the heaviness of the
quantity. Christ bids us be holy, as he is holy, which though we cannot attain
to, yet let us do our good will. Though we cannot fast and pray, and please God
as he did, yet it is our best and safest way to do our endeavors to follow him
as near as we can.

If we sow the seed of Sin, we may expect a Harvest of Judgment, for such seed
as we sow, such fruit we shall reap; as we measure to others, such shall be
measured unto us: for in the 1. Chapter of Judges, Adonibezeck is Recorded,
that he caused the fingers and toes of 70 Kings to be cut off, and afterward he
was so served himself. Absalom killed his Brother Ammon, and Joab killed
Absalom; also Joab killed Abner and Amasa cowardly, and Joab was killed for
killing: The Amalekite that belied himself, in bringing word to David that Saul
was dead, and that he had slain him, David caused him to be slain, because he
confessed himself to have killed the King. These ex-amples are in the sacred
Scriptures plentifully Related: Because of unrighteous dealing and wrong, and
riches gotten by deceit, Kingdoms have been turned and translated from one
People to another, for the rash and harsh answer of Roboham caused 10 Tribes of
Israel to fall from him to Jeroboam, and after that the whole house of
Jeroboam were rooted out by Baasha, the house of Baasha was destroyed by Zimri,
the house of Ahab utterly overthrown by Jehu; and 31 Kingdoms were taken from
bad Kings and wicked Rulers, and given to the Israelites. Therefore let us
measure to others as we expect to be measured unto.

There are 5 strange things, first I chiefly observe, God became Man for Man's
salvation. Secondly, a Fisherman was called to preach to the Jews. Thirdly, a
Persecuter was the first Preacher to the Gentiles. Fourthly, a Publican was the
first Evangelist. Fifthly, that a Thief first entered the Celestial Paradise.

Most men's Constancies are like Camelions, variable; like the Wind, Flexible;
like the Sea, Unstable; like the Elements, at strife Inexpiable; like a
Labyrinth, Intrincicable; like the Moon, Changeable; like Women, Mutable; like
any thing Miserable.

I have read of 7 Orders or Degrees amongst Devils, and that 7 of them have
particular Offices, as first:

Lucifer is Lord of Pride, Presumption, and Ambition, Isay. 14. Secondly,
Beelzebub, is for Envy, and Malice, Mat. 12. He is also called God of Flies, God
of Eckron, or Acheron. Thirdly, is for wrath and disdain, Luke 22. Fourthly,
Abaddon is Master of Sloth and Idleness, Apoc. 9. Fifthly, Mammon is Prince of
Covetousness, Mat. 6. Sixthly, Asmodeus for Lust or Lechery, Toby 3. The
seventh is Belphegor, for Gluttony and Drunkenness. It has always been the
practices of the Devil to strive to be honored as God, for he would have been
God, but because he could not, he has played the Ape with counterfeit
imitation, to be honored with and in such manner as God was adored and
worshipped withal, for when God was served with Sacrifices by true Believers,
the Devil was served, by Pagans and Infidels, with Hecatombs of Beasts, and
sacrificed children, even by Emperors, Kings and Princes; and as God had and
has his Priests, the Devil had his Archflammings, and Flammings; and in these
days he has Hypocritical Ministers, more then a good many: God has his
Sacraments, the Devil has his Expiations and Ceremonies; God promises a
Heaven to his servants, and threatens a Hell to wilful and impenitent
sinners, the Devil promises his servants Elysium fields, and threatens with
his Stygian Lake.

The Pagans had a wicked, foolish, and abominable number of strange Gods, some
worshipped the Sun, some adored the Moon, some reverenced the Stars; in the
ship (when Jonas was in the storm) they had almost as many ungodly Gods to pray
to, as there were persons; for every one prayed or cried to his own God, and
they did bid Jonas pray to his God. At Athens they had so many Temples wherein
they adored several damnable Gods, that they were fain to erect one Temple to
the unknown God, Act. 17. 23. The Tirians and Lacedaemonians did fetter and
chain their Gods, and imprison them, because they should not run or fly from
them; so also did other Nations. Some held the fire to be the greatest God,
others honored the water, as greater in power then the fire, because water
will quench fire. Some others worshipped the Earth, for her fruitfulness, for
breeding, feeding, and being the common mother of All. Some thought the Air to
be God, for its purity and subtilty, for its ubiquitary, being in all places,
because where there is no Air there is no life. Some bad the Sea, and Sea Gods
in great adoration, Thetis, Neptune, Proteus, Driades, Hammadriades, and some
attributed Divinity to well deserving men and women, as Janus, Hercules, Ceres;
some esteemed the 7. Planets for Gods; others had Dogs, Cats, Rats,
Crocodiles, Serpents, Fruits, Garlicks, Onions, and the Devil himself, to be
their Gods.

The people were so zealous in their irreligious Religions, that they built
stately and magnificent Temples; in Ephesus there was a Temple of Diana, which
with the labor of 100000 men, was 20. years a building; the Ammonites and
Moabites, they built high places to Baal, in the valley of Benhinnom; there
they sacrificed their sons and daughters to Molech, Jer. 32. 35 Baal, Molech,
or Milcom, are all one Idol. It had the form of the face of a Bullock, it was
hollow, made of Brass; at the sacrificing of their children, they used to bear
Drums, and make noyses with diverse sorts of loud Instruments, because the
parents, kindred, or friends of the sacrificed children, should not hear the
cries and shrieks that they roared in their tortures. The Israelites had a
molten Calfe in Horeb, the more Calves they. The Philistims had their Dagon.
Many Nations of the Gentiles worshipped BaalPeor, or Priapus, Numb. 25. 3.
Baalzeebub, a Lord of flies, God of Ekron, or Acheron; this Idol King Ahaziah
sent to for help when he was sick. And thus the Devil has in all ages and
places bewitched and blinded the people with hellish heathenish Idolatry and
superitition, and it is too true, as lamentable experience shows us, that all
our Divisions, Breaches, Rents, Sects, and seperations, do most clearly show
and manifest that the inveterate malice that the Devil has ever borne against
God and his Church is as violent now as ever it was.

Such servants as do sow good services do deserve to reap good wages for their
labor; wherefore should I expect more respectfull services from my servant
then I do to my God? if God should mark, or remember, all my faults, what a
miserable wretched thing were I! Though servants be the feet, yet the feet are
as necessary to go, as the eyes are to see; all have Adam for their earthly
Father, and God for their heavenly; we are all Brethren, we have all one God,
all one Father, therefore we do not say, when we pray, My Father, or Thy
Father, or His Father, Her Father, or Their Father; but we are commanded to
say, Our Father, etc.

I have read in a Book containing 42 Sermons upon Lent, Written and Preached
by Charles de Fonseca, in his 14. Sermon, page 222. Printed by Adam rslip, Anno
1629. this following Relation, word for word, truly copied.

The Remarkable Relation that Pilate made to Tiberius the Emperor, concerning
Christ, full of admiration and pity.
IN this Kingdom there was a wonderful strange man, his behavior and beauty
beyond all other in the world; his discretion and wisdom celestial, his
gravity and soberness of carriage beyond all comparison, his words mystical,
the grace wherewith he delivered them struck his Enemies with astonishment.
Never man saw him laugh, weep they have. His works savoured of more then Man.
He did never any harm, but much good has he done to many: he healed by
hundreds such as had been sick of incurable diseases: he cast out Devils, he
raised the dead, and his miracles, being numberless, they were done all for
others good. He did not work any miracle wherein was to be seen the least
vanity or boasting in the world. The Jews, out of envy, laid hold on him, and
with a kind of hypocrisy and outward humility, (rather seeming then being
Saints) trampled him under foot, and mard his cause. I whipped him to appease
their fury, and the people being about to mutiny, I condemnd him to the death
of the Cross. A little before he breathed his last he desired of God that he
would forgive those his Enemies which had nailed him to the Cross. At his death
there were many prodigious signs, both in Heaven and Earth; the Sun was
darkened, the Graves were opened, and the dead arose. After he was dead, a
foolish Jew thrust a spear into his side, showing the hatred in his death,
which the Jews bore unto him in his life.

Contraries never did agree, nor ever will be brought to any conformity.
Michael and the Dragon, the Ark and Dagon, Nehemiah and Sanballat, God and
Belial, Cain and Abel, Jacob and Esau, Isaac and Ishmael, John and Cerinthus,
fire and water, good and bad, vice and virtue, light and darkness. Amongst all
these, there never was, is, or ever will be any unity or friendship, either in
Heaven, in Earth, in the City, in the Church, in the Bath, in the Family, in
the Womb, or in the World.

Four of man's best friends have brought forth four wicked Daughters; the first
friend is Virtue, and she has been the mother of Envy. The second is Peace,
and she brought Idleness into the World. The third is Truth, and she has
brought forth a wicked Brat called Hatred. The fourth is Familiarity, and she
has brought amongst us a forgetful, proud, saucy Knave, called Contempt.

Although a Coward will not willingly stand the brunt, shock, and hazard of a
Battle, yet every one that runs from danger is not a Coward: he that flies may
return and fight, he that dies cannot. Jacob fled from Esau, Moses from
Pharaoh, Elias from Jezabel, and Saint Paul escaped away when he was let down in
a Basket from the Walls of Damascus. The virtue of Fortitude, is always
between two extremes, Daring and Dreading; David who killed a Lion and a Bear,
who vanquished and slew the Giant Goliath, who brought 200. foreskins of the
Philistines to King Saul, who was valiant and victoriously glorious and
renowned, yet he fled from Saul to Achish King of Gath, 1. Sam. 21. 10. 13. He
also did fly from the fury of the sword of his disobedient and rebellious son
Absolon, 2. Sam. 17. 21. 22. also he fled at other times. Christ, who conquered
sin, death, and hell, fled into Egypt, Matthew. 2. 14. And Christ does counseil
such as are persecuted in one City, to fly into another, Matthew. 10. 23.

The tongue is double walled, fenced, and entrenched with teeth, gummes, and
lips, (which are rampires and bulwarks;) the two eyes are centinells, and the
ears do lie perdue; which shows that we should hear and see twice as much as
we speak. There has been many a man ruined by too much talking, but very few
have received any great damage by being silent: the tongues chief office
should be to pray, and to praise God, but it is a treacherous retestable part
for the tongue of any man to pray or wish the damnation of his own body and
soul, (as too many Roarers do every day and hour) with impious execrations,
as God damn, sink, renounce, consume, forsake, con found, etc. The tongue of
man was not crea ted for such damnable purposes: it was a custom amongst the
ancient Romans to learn first to be silent, and secondly to speak; but there
are a generation of tautallogicall tongue men, who do neither know how to
speak, or when to hold their peace. A wise man's tongue is in his heart, but a
fools heart is in his tongue, Eccl. 21. For he that does nothing but talk,
does talk nothing. To speak against the Truth is the Devils Rhetoric; and to
talk against Reason is vain babbling and prating, more fit for a Parrot then a
man: Salomons counsel is, Let thy words be few, Eccles. 5. 1. Jesus the son of
Syrach says, Make not much babbling when thou prayest, Eccl. 7. 14. Christ, the
son of God, wiser then Solomon, or the son of Syrach, he counsels us to use no
vain Repetitions when we pray, Matthew. 6. If Tyrants should sit and devise
tortures and strange torments to inflict upon men, there can b^^ none more
cruel and grievous, then to bind ^ Wise man in a Chair, and let a Fool
talk him to Death.

The confidence and diffidence of Men, the keeping or breaking of Oaths, there
are many various Relations in diverse Histories, which shows the mutability of
men. In the space of nine months, those Peers and People that swore obedience
to King Henry the sixth forsook him, and swore the like to King Edward (...)
fourth: and the same Peers and People received Henry for their King again, and
expulst Edward; and shortly after that, the same Peers and People, fell from
Henry again, and crowned Edward, within the time of half a year, ^^e Parliament
Proclaimed Henry to be their lawful King, and Edward an usurper: and also that
with another Proclamation, the same men, Proclaimed Henry an usurper, and
Edward their lawful King. By this it may be perceived that it is vain to trust
in man.

The Arian Heretics denied the Eternity of Christ, and that there was a time
when Christ was not. But all faithful true believing Christians do know
Christ to be Eternal and Coequall with the Father; for Christ is the wisdom
of God the Father, therefore Eternal. For it is Blasphemy, in the highest
degree, to hold the opinion of Arius; for if Christ at any time had been from
God the Father, then had the wisdom of God been also absent from God, for
Christ is the wisdom of the Father.

Though a Priest or Preacher do live a licentious life, yet if his Doctrine be
good, it is our safest way to receive it. The Prophet Eliah did thankfully
accept that food which God sent him by a Raven. If a Fountain of wholesome
clear water, be adorned ^^^h spowts in the shapes of Dragons, Serpents,
Crocodiles, Basilisks, Cockatrices, or any other hideous forms of monstrous
Creatures, yet the water that passes through the said spowts is the same, pure
as the Fountain, not a jot the worse.

As our manifold sins do extremely cry to God for Vengeance, so our
miserable estate and condition should always incite and move us uncessantly to
cry for mercy.

When the Israelites had, as God commanded them, marched seven times about the
Jericho, then at the blowing of their Trumpets the Walls fell down; so the
Apostles, with the blasts of their mouths, with a few Disciples, were the
golden Trumpets that promulgated and propagated the Gospel, which ransacked the
C^^^^ Idolatry, which was then as big as the whole world, which made the
barbarous Heathen, and unbelieving Infidells subjects to Christ's Church, and
Philosophy a Handmayd.

The Prophets and Sibils that Prophesied of Christ, were many of them strangers
one to another, they were of sundry Countries, Nations, and Languages, they
lived a^ sundry times, and different Ages: they were also of differings
callings and qualities; as some were Kings, some were Princes, some were
Priests, some were shepherds, some were heardsmen; they prophesied of several
passages and actions of our Savior and his sufferings: one wrote of his being
promised, another of the time, when the Scepter should depart from Judah; some
foretold his conception, others spoke of his Birth, his Circumcision, his life,
his stripes, buffetings, patience, silence, passion, death, burial,
Resurrection, and Ascension; all these Prophets and Seers, were directed by one
and the same Spirit, the Holy Ghost: he 70. Interpreters were of sundry Nations
and Languages, many of them having never conversed, or spoke to, nor scarce saw
each other; yet they were all guided and inspired by the same Spirit, that they
miraculously interpreted and in an unity collected an uniform and exact
Original Translation of the sacred Scriptures, both Mystical and Historical.

Imitations are sometimes dangerous to follow; for when the Israelites past
into the Red Sea, Pharaoh was none of the wisest to follow them, for their high
way was a Grave to him, and all his army.

The 7. Sleepers were brethren, born in Ephesinum, they lived in the tyrannous
Reign of the Emperor Decius, Ann. 447. their names were, 1. Marcus, 2.
Maximilianus, 3. Martinianus, 4. Dionysius, 5. Johannes, 6. Serapion, and the
seventh was Constantius. These brothers fled from the great Persecution which
was then, and hid themselves in a Cave, where they slept 200. years. This
story is related by many Authors, of whom I will instance but one, which is Mr.
Thomas Heywood, in his Tractate of Angels, the 9. Book, page 606. Also the
Church has ordained that their memories should be celebrated on the 27. of
July, as appears in the Almanacke.

If we compare the times past with the days wherein we live, we shall find
much alteration: for I read that in the 11. year of the Reign of King Edward
the third, that a quarter of Wheat was but at the price of 2s. a far Ox 6s.
8d. a fat sheep 6d. 6. Pigeons 1d. a fat Goose 2d. a fat Pig 1d. and the Rates
of all Rents and all other necessaries were at Prices according. And it is
probable that there were as many people in those days as are now; for in the
22 year of the same King, there was a great Plague and mortality of People in
England, so that in less then 6. months, from the 12. of January to the last
of June, there died in London, and the Liberties 57374. persons; and in
Yarmouth, there died 7052. So likewise the Infection was so hot spread over the
Kingdom, that it swept many thousands away in many places: by which may be
perceived how populous England was 400. years ago. Also Ireland did then pay
30000. yearly tribute to the English crown. See Sir Richard Bakers Chronicle.

God is more mercifuil then Man can be sinful, if Man can be truly
sorrowful. Nor can Man commit any sin, but, against it, the Father of
Mercies has provided many ways and means to restrain it; he has given us
a Law of Nature, and a reason to obey that Law he has printed and graved in
the hearts and bodies of men; and this Law does show and teach us what to do,
and what not to do; it makes us to know good and evil, it directs us to
virtue, it resists vices; and this much the very law of Nature has dictated
into the reasonable souls of men.

But to this unwritten law of Nature, Almighty God was pleased to add a
supernatural written Law, declared in the Decalogue, (or ten Commandments.)
But when time was fulfilled, and Prophesies accomplished of Christ's coming,
(he being come) from him we had a new Law to guide us to that perfection as
becomes Christians.

And because this Law is petpetuall and unalterable, our great and gracious Law
giver has appointed Pastors and Preachers to direct us in the observation
thereof, and he has also ordained Magistrates to have power and command to see
the Law put in execution, and to inflict punishment upon the contemners and
transgressors of the same.

For the further direction and observation of this Law, God has placed a
sharp and just Judge, called Conscience, in the breast of every man or woman,
which Judge does impartially accuse or excuse the unjust or just.

This Judge Conscience, deters and affrights us from many unclean and
unlawful words and works; it binds us, as it were, to the good behavior, it
keeps us in aw, it is both a schoolmaster and a Corrector, it teaches us our
duties, it tells us our faults without flattery, it is the eye of the soul,
for as the body is ruled and directed by the eye, so is the soul guided,
comforted, and corrected by the Conscience.

It tells us what is lawful, what is illegal; it is a witness that accuses
and evidenceth against us, it is a Judge that condemns or acquits us, as it
finds us guilty or not guilty; it is also a terrible Executioner of Justice,
and justly it torments with due punishment all our misdoings.

In Natural reason we may perceive Confcience to be a binding Law, for when a
man is about to put in practice any wicked act, either of profaneness against
God, or abuse toward men, presently Conscience forbids it, and commands him to
remember that God sees his thoughts and actions, and to have that just precept
in his mind, Whatsoever thou would that men should do unto thee, do thou
the same unto them; for Conscience is a Law wherein no excuse is to be
admitted, no evasion or illusion, no bribe, cloak, cover or dispensation can
make this Evidence mute, for it will declare the Truth, and the whole Truth,
without the abatement of a tittle.

Thus is Conscience not only a Law; but a witness against us for all our open
and secret transgressions, whether we be on Sea, or on Land, sleep or awake,
at bed or board, at home or abroad, in company or alone, Conscience still cries
out against the guilty.

This Witness is a true and a stout Preacher, diligent in his function, he is
no idle non Resident, and though a man be never so secret and silent, yet his
Conscience will not be put to silence. Thou can not stop the cars of thy
soul, but it will ever hear thy Conscience cry out, and it will be ever
telling thee such things as thou could wish were not; our first Parents after
their great sin of disobedience, their Conscience so accused them, that for
fear and shame they hid themselves amongst Bushes.

Cains Conscience was so shrill and vehement in crying out against him for his
murdering of his innocent brother Abel, that he cried out, and in despairing of
mercy from God, confessed his crime to be more then God would or could forgive.
The sons of Jacob when they were in distress, their Consciences plainly told
them that their afflictions fell on them for their false unnatural selling of
their Brother Joseph: Conscience is twice 500 Witnesses.

And as Conscience is a Law to guide us, and a Witness to accuse us, so it is
an impartial Judge to condemn us if we be faulty, and to acquit us if we be
clear and innocent; if Cain had appealed from the sharp judgment seat of his
own Conscience, to the high Tribunal of Gods mercy, then instead of destroying
desperation, he had found Remission and Salvation. The Centurion humbly did
acknowledge himself to be so unworthy a Sinner, that he was not worthy Jesus
should come under his Roof; that meek and faithful acknowledgement caused
Christ in compassion to cure his sick servant, for there was never any sinners
that by penitent appealing from the rigorous sentences of their own
Consciences, to the Throne of Grace, but their appeals procured their pardons,
as appears in the sacred Stories of David, Manasses, Mary Magdalen, and other
penitent and blessed Souls. Thus though we flatter our selves in our follies,
yet our Consciences will neither be bribed nor flattered.

Confcience being a just Law, a true Accuser, and an upright incorrupt Judge;
it follows in the last place, that it is a terrible Executioner, who with a
Vermin called the Worm os Conscience, does continually gnaw the souls of
impenitent sinners, for though there may be some fruitless shadow of painted
pleasure in the conceiving of sin, yet that conception is presently checked,
reproved, grudged, and grumbled at by the Conscience; but when the soul is
delivered of this impious Imp, then the Worm gnaws most tormentingly: for
instance of this, there needs no more proofs then the accursed case of Judas,
who after he had conceived and brought forth the damnable Treason of betraying
his gracious and innocent Master, his Conscience so tormented him, that he
thought Hell would yield him more ease and less terror, and therefore he
despairing hanged himself, to be freed from the horror of the continual sting
of a gnawing Conscience.

It is a perpetual torture that will never suffer a sinner to take rest, till
such time as by true Repentance and amendment of life, he be cleansed from his
former transgressions; if he be waking or sleeping, it frets and galls him
with bitter remorse, or affrights and scares him with fearful dreams,
wheresoever he goes, it make(...) hell to seem in his sight, and Gods
judgment(...) against him; it makes him afraid of Tree(...) Bushes, and
Shaddows, nay, himself is afrai(...) of nothing, or that is worth nothing, his
own shadow; for sin is the only food that do(...) nourish and feed the Worm
of Conscience; (...) as the celestial Bread of Life is the food of ev(...)ry
faithful soul, and terrestrial food maintai(...) the life and vigor of the
body, so is sin t(...) only life and nourishment of the Worm(...)
Conscience: He that will have the Worm(...) leave gnawing, let him avoid and
hate sin, a(...) then the Worm will dye with famine.

But the joy and contentment of a clear guiltless conscience is such an
inward p(...) which few attain to, and none do or can express but such as
enjoy it. A good Conscience will acquit a man when all the world condemns him.
There is no true Recreation (or all Recreations) can yield so great content, or
any content at all without a good Conscience. It is so void of Earthly cares
and Worldly perturbations, that as the Wise man said, Proverb. 15. It is a
continual Banquet: and St. John in his first Epistle does call it the Heart,
saving; If the heart reprehend us not, we have a great confidence in God. St.
Paul in the first to the Corinths, chap. 1. says, that our glory is the
testimony of a good Conscience; for if men judge and think never so hardly of
us, yet if our Consciences do not accuse us before God, we are at peace within
our selves, because the peace of God is in every good man or woman's Conscience.
And thus I have (...)hewed, in part, what Power and Command Conscience has
over all our thoughts, words, works, and lives, from our births to our death,
(...)nd at our departure and last gasp.

Great Kings, and mighty Lords, Magistrates, (...)nd Governors of
Commonwealths, they do (...)e most, and hear most with the eyes and ears
(...)f other men, themselves have no knowledge (...)f men's actions, unless
their Officers and In(...)ument do certify and inform them how (...)atters
and businesses do pass under their go(...)rnments, and they judge no further
then exterior or outward proofs does manifest unto them, and yet for all their
testimonies and evidences, they so often err in their judgments: But
Conscience bears sway over our outsides and insides both, it governes, rules,
approves, reprooves, clears, and punishes all our interior and exterior
thoughts, words, and actions, (as is before declared) for Conscience is clear
sighted, and sees all.

Conscience has sundry divisions and definitions; for we use to say that such
as do rake, scrape, and ravenously devour men's lives and livelyhoods, in
joining house to house, land to land, either by oppression, extortion, fraud,
or force, they care not how so they have it. Some men will say that all such
Caterpillars have large Consciences, and some are in the mind that they have no
Conscience at all. To put a medium, or mean, betwixt these two extremes, of too
large (or large Conscience) and no Conscience, let every man examine himself,
and they will quickly find that each of them has a Conscience (though not
visible, yet invisible) that will tell him how it is with him, either well or
ill according as he has used his Conscience.

Every man's Conscience is an accusing book, which shall be opened at the last
day, Revelat. 20. 12. The Conscience of unjust men is in continual fear, but a
righteous man's Conscience makes him bold as a Lion. Wisdom. 7. 10. and Prove.
28. 1. He that does any thing against his Conscience is condemned, Romans 14. 20.
He that has a contented quiet Conscience is rich, whether he be in a
sufficient estate, or in worldly necessity, but he that has a troubled
Conscience is discontented in robes of Royalty, and formented amidst his
greatest pleasures, and delicious fare and banqueting, for his very Table is a
share unto him. He that makes his belly his God, his kitchen his Church, his
Cook the Priest, and his Sacrifices the lushious delicate Dishes, let his
teeth gnaw earchly dainties never sog reedily gluttonous, the worm of
Conscience is feasting and gnawing him within, that all his pleasures are
painful perplexities unto him, for, A wounded Conscience who can bear?

Earth, and earthly minded Dives, made no account of poor Lazarus, nor had any
compassion on him whilst he lived.

And Heaven made less esteem of Dives when he was dead, for the Glutton would
not give a few crummes to releeve and save the life of the poor Beggar, who
was received into Glory, so the other was denied one small drop of cold water
in his grievous torments, and greatest necessity.

For the painted felicities of unmerciful men do end when their lives end, so
the miseries of the poor and oppressed are as mortal as themselves; but their
joys, and the others pains, are both immortal and everlasting.

I write not in Envy or Emulation of riches, for (as they may be employed)
riches are the blessings of God, there have been in all Ages good and
charitable rich men; Abraham, Lot, Jacob, Joshua, Job, David, Solomon, and many
others were rich, charitable, and blessed of God here on Earth, and for ever in
Heaven. And our England has produced many pious, honorable persons of both
sexes, and of all estates and degrees, whose names and memories are famous, and
their monumentall Erections and Foundations of Colleges, Churches, Schools,
Hospitalls, Almes-houses, and gifts and Legacies to Orphans, and Prisoners, are
testimonies of their Charities and Compassion.

But I speak of uncharitable Muck-wormes, whose minds are too empty of pity,
their souls disfurnished of a good Conscience, and their Bags too full of ill
gotten, accursed, and damnable unrighteous Mammon.

To conclude this case of Conscience with the saying of the Wise man, Eccles.
14. 2. Blessed is he that is not condemned in his own Conscience.

Verses never Printed till now (as I am certified) of the Misery of Man.
THE world's a Bubble, and the life of Man
Less then a span:
In his conception wretched, from the Womb
So to the Tomb:
Cries in his Cradle, and brought up in Tears
With cares and fears:
Who then to frail Mortality does trust
But limbs the Water, or else writes in Dust.
Yet, since with sorrows here, we live oppressed
What life is best?
Courts are but only superficial Schools
To dandle Fools:
The Countrey's almost turned into a den
Of Savage Men:
And where is a City from all Vice so free
But may be termed the worst of all the three.
Domesticke cares afflict the Husbands bed
Or pains his head:
Some would have children, those that have them moan
Or wish them gone:
Those that live single, count it for a curse
Or do things worse:
What is it then to have, or not have Wife
But single thraldom, or a double strife?
Our own affections, still at home to please
Is a Disease:
To cross the Seas to any foreign soil
Peril and toil:
Wars, with their rumors fright us, when they cease
Wee're worse in peace:
What then remains, but that we still should cry
Not to be born, or being born, to die?
Another to the same purpose: Life's brevity, and Man's frailty.
CAN he be Fair, that withers with a blast?
Or he be Strong, that ayery breath can cast?
Or he be Wise, that knows not how to live?
Or he be Rich, that nothing has to give?
Or he be Young, that is feeble, weak and wan?
So Fair, Strong, Wise, so Rich, so Young is man.
So Fair is man, that Death (a parting blast)
Blasts his fair Flower, and makes him Dust at last.
So Strong is Man, that with a gasping breath
He totters, and bequeaths himself to Death.
So Wise is Man, that if with Death he strive,
His Wisdom cannot teach him how to live.
So Rich is Man, that all his debts being paid,
His wealth's the winding sheet wherein he is laid.
So Young is Man, that, broke with care and sorrow,
He Is old enough to day to die to morrow.
Why bragct thou then, thou worm of 5 foot long?
You Are neither Fair, Wise, Young, nor Rich, or Strong.
A good Conscience more worth then the World.
TO shine in silk, to glister all in gold,
To flow in wealth, to feed on dainty fare,
To build our houses stately, to behold
The Princes favor, and the peoples care:
Although those gifts be great, and very rare,
The groaning Gowt, the Colic, and the Stone,
Will mar the mirth, and turn it all to moan.
But be it that the Body subject be
To no such sickness, or the like annoy,
Yet if the Conscience be not firm and free,
Riches are Trash, and Honor but a Toy.
The Peace of Conscience is that perfect Joy
By which Gods Children in this life are left;
To want the which, better want all the rest.
Conscience for good and bad is mill testis
A Conscience clear, a sweet continual feast is.
A Sonnet of Henry Duke of Gloucester.
WHat is my fault? alas! what have I done?
Is it for Treason that I am Captived?
Or is it that I was my Fathers Son,
That I am of my liberty deprived?
My Infant innocence no Plot contrived
Against the Army, State, or Parliament:
But all my fa^^^ is that I am derived
From mighty Kings and Princes eminent.
To me it seems a bitter consequent,
I am a Prisoner, 'cause I was begot:
Alas I could not help it, or prevent
My being born, or my unlucky lot.
Could I have helped my self, or any other,
I would have helped my Father and my Mother.
A Prudent Man.
THe highest pitch of Cesars soaring spirit,
Was but to win the World, whereby t'inherit
The aerie purchase of a transitory,
And glozing title of an ages glory.
Would thou by conquest win more fame then be?
Subdue thy self, thy selfe's a World to thee:
Earth's but a Ball that Heaven has quilted over
With wealth and honor, bandied on the flore
Offickle fortunes false and slippery Court,
Sent for a Toy to make us Children sport:
And he whose merits mount to such a Joy,
Gains but the honor of a mighty Toy.
Brave minds oppressed, should (in despite of Fate)
Shine greatest (like the Sun) in lowest state.
Upon the word MORE.
ALthough the World be old, God knew before
Who should be his Elect, he will have no More.
Good Angels guard men, as they did of yore,
As Michael, Raphael, Gabriel, many More.
One Raphael did old Tobies sight restore, Tob. 11
Gabriel, that brought best tidings, was no No Blackmore.
More.
The Devil and his Angels, rage and rore,
Devouring many, yet still gape for More.
Lords, Ladies, Lawyers, he has swallowed store,
And Doctors, yet would have one Doctor More.
In the air, the fire, upon the seas and shore,
He labors night and day to purchase More.
He has laid Churches level with the floor,
But if this world last, he will knock down More.
Of peace and wealth, he made us sick and sore,
Yet has he still some damned Dog-tricks More.
Abiram, Dathan, and their Cousin Core,
He swallowed quick, and every day does More.
False hypocrites have reverend habits wore,
So has the Devil himself, and so has More.
Brave men are glad with one suit, torn and tore,
When every base Time-serving Knave has More.
My self, with spectacles, do peep and pore,
And write for little, am in hope of More.
The Miser does his golden God adore,
And though he has too much, would fain have More
The frosty bearded Churl, with head all hoar,
Lives poor in plenty, and destreth More.
There Is many a sin earing Hector loves a Whore,
So do all Bawdy Knaves, and so does More.
There Is many a Pascall call rich, lives like a Bore,
That feeds in his Trough, so does one More.
Abundance run to hell, and there is no door
To keep men out, the Devil will have More.
And many a rustic Clown is gilded over
With Reverend Titles, and so is one More.
The Usurer on his bed does snort and snore,
And, in his sleep, dreams how he may have More.
Mine Hosts gladly would be paid her score,
And it is my daily Drink that makes it More.
Extortion and Oppression, make men poor,
And every day of Beggars we have More.
For virtuous living now, and Learnings lore
Like toys, worth nothing, are esteemed no More.
I wish my soul with sorrow may deplore,
Because my sins increase still more and More.
All men have vainly, too often, lid and swore
Let Us all endeavor to do so no More.
And humbly God for pardon lets implore,
For though our crimes are great, his mercy's More.
Some small occasion, I scarce know wherefore,
Did make me, merrily, write this of More.
Which I have now concluded, and therefore
On More, at this time, I will write no More.
And he that of the word More, More can make,
Let him, in hand, pen, ink, and paper take.
I have done with MORE, and yet there is more behind.

