The Brownists Conventicle:

Or an assemble of Brownists, Separatists, and Non-Conformists, as they met
together at a private house to hear a Sermon of a brother of theirs near
Algate, being a learned Felt-maker.

Containing the whole discourse of his Exposition, with the manner and form of
his preaching, praying, giving thanks before and after Dinner and Supper, as
it was lately heard and now discovered by a brother of theirs who is turned out
of their Society upon some discontent, to be buffeted by Satan.

His Auditors were Button-makers, Translaters, Weavers, Box-makers, with diverse
other holy Brethren and Sisters.



Printed 1641.

The Brownists Conventicle.
Containing their manner and form of their preaching, praying, eating, and
drinking, etc.

Heretics, Schismatics, Novellists, Seperatists, have been in all ages, and
long before the Gospel was preached: there were amongst the Jews a Sect who
called themselves Abel^sts, of Abel the Proto-Martyr of the world, who required
such chastity in marriage, that they would admit of no congresse, or mutual
consociety betwixt man and wife: but it was an Heresy suddenly set up, and as
soon suppressed. The Essees, or Esseans, retired themselves to solitude, and
separated themselves from the Congregations, who were abstemious in their diet,
and strict and austere in all their deportments, harmless to others, only
rigid to themselves, in so much that it is observed, that our Savior was
silent concerning them, when he so severely reproved the Scribes, Pharisees,
and Sadduces. The Pharisees strived to come near to the Law, and were a strict
and exact Sect, but corrupt both in their doctrine, demeanor, and
conversations. The Sadduces were but few, but those great and rich men, who
were of a more obtuse and stupid apprehension, denying the resurrection.

To come to our own home, almost in every domesticke Diocesian Parish, we have
Novellists, some Thraskites, or Sabbaterians, Banisterians, Brownists, and
Anabaptists, which puts me in mind of a young Lubber of that Sect, who being
brought as a witness to take his oath in Court, and the Judge by accident
asking of what age he was? who answered him, that he was 3 years old. Three
years old (replied the Judge) and no more? how can that possibly be, seeing
thou art of that full growth and bigness? Who answered him gain Uerily I
reckon mine age but from the time since I was last baptized. Then we have your
Familists: but of all the rest which is of greatest remark, there is sprung up
a new Sect of Adamists, who take their denomination from our first father Adam,
and these with men and women promiscuously mingled, have their private
meetings, where they will not hear the Word preached, nor have the Sacrament
administered unto them, but naked, not so much as fig-leave breeches upon them,
thinking thereby to imitate our first Parents in their innocence. Some of these
Separatists have their Conventions within the walls of the City. Others have
made their assembly in the fields, some in woods, and upon Hye-gate and Hamsted
hills, and such like places. In some families the women catechize and preach,
making the back side of her gro^ning Chair the Pulpit, their prayers being
unpremeditate and without president; for nothing can pass muster, which
proceeds from their mouths, which is not extravagant ex tempore. Nay, some most
profanely, I may say blasphemously, have been heard to say, that they could
make a better prayer than that which our Savior himself taught to his
Disciples.

Further, these our Sectaries will endure no degrees in Schools, all learning
must be laid by, Academyes are to them abominable, thereby cohering with the
grand Adversary of our Christian says the Turk, who will suffer no University
through his whole Deminions: All his Creatures must be Soldiers, no Scholars,
nor suffered to meddle with the Alcaron, but the Mufti, and those idolatrous
Flamins belonging to the Order: nay, herein they punctually comply with the
Papists, whose doctrine they pretend utterly to abhor; who hold that Ignorance
is the mother of Devotion. And of these opinions was How, the notorious
Predicant Cobbler, whose body was buried in the high way by Dame Agnes a Clear,
and his Funeral Sermon preached by one of his Sect in a Brewers Cart. Such an
Anti-Bishop was Eaton, the famous Button-maker in Saint Martins, and a
Shoemaker that dwelt betwixt Paul's Chain and Old Fish-street, whose name I
remember not, and now the only famous seeming Predicants are one Green a
Felt-make, and a fellow who was once a Serving-man. To rip up all the whole
rabble, would take up too great time, and blot too much paper.

Hence come those violent outrages, and sacrilegious disorders committed in the
Church, even in the time of Divine Service, and hubbub, and strange tumults
raised, where nothing but reverent silence ought to be used, by laying violent
hands upon the Minister, rending his Master of Arts hood from his neck, and
tearing the Surplice to filters upon his back, he hardly scaping from being
torn piece meal in his own person, and this even when the Psalm was
singing, and the Preacher ready to go up to deliver his Sermon, as like wise
rending the railes from before the Communion Table, and then chopping them in
pieces, and burning them in the Churchyard, and this to be ryotously done
wit^out authority, commission, or order. But when any man shall take upon him a
further power than peaceable Justice requires, he perishes from the Church;
and whilst he proudly lifts up himself, branded with his own arrogant
presumption, he is bereft of the light of the truth.

And now of late lest these supermysticall Sectists should be wanting in the
Land, there is lately come over from New England, as from a New Jerusalem, one
Samuel Eaton a Minister, who preached at Saint John's Church in Chester, that
the very names of Parsons and Uicars were Antichristian, that Pastors and
Teachers of particular Congregations, must be chosen by the people, that all
humane inventions, in which he comprehends the Book of Common Prayer, etc. are
to God unsavory and loathsome, that all Ecclesiastical censures of
Excommunication, and the like, ought to be exercized by particular
Congregations within themselves: He further denies all National, Provincial,
and Diocesian Churches, etc. And further, at Knutsford, a Market Town in the
same County, that every particular Congregation is an absolute Church, and it
is to have all Ordinances and Officers within it self, that the members
thereof must be only Saints, who must enter into covenant amongst themselves,
and no covenant no Church, and that it was a grievous sin to be present where
Prayers were read out of any book whatsoever, either by the Minister or any
other, etc. Two or three hours did our learned Felt-maker preach, and declare
himself to his dear brethren and good sisters, which expressions took very
well. And these are they that prate, not preach, like men raptured with their
own spiritual nonsense. I cannot stand upon the miserable inconveniences
depending upon this fantastical doctrine, of which I could wish there were not
so many simple seduced Disciples.

Now all these Innovators in general, are Arch-enemies to Lent, Saints Eves,
Ember weeks, Fast days, and Good Fridayes. Imagine their Exercise is done, and
high time to go to refresh themselves; this holy brother which preached this
and the like sort of Doctrine, was envited to another brothers house to dinner,
which was there present, and being come and meat set upon the table, and all
the Saints set at board, he began to say Grace, which is to this effect,
having first surveyed every dish, and in what order it was placed at the board,
he began his thanksgiving as follows.

The Grace before Dinner.
COrroborate these thy good gifts unto our use, I beseech thee good Father, and
make us thankful for all these thy bountiful blessings upon this board, to
nourish our corrupt bodies. These are boiled Chickens (I take it) let this dish
of Chickens put us in mind of our Savior, who would have gathered Jerusalem
together as an Hen gathers her chickens, but she would not: but let us praise
God for these chickens, which are set before us, being six in number. Let this
leg of Mutton call us to remembrance, that King David was once a Shepherd; and
so was Christ the son of David. that good Shepherd, who having an hundred
sheep, and losing one, to find that left ninety and nine in the wilderness.
Here is an excellent Loyne of Ueale, let that prompts us to remember the
Parable of the Prodigal child, whom to welcome home, the Father caused the fat
calfe to be killed, which I think could not yield a better rump and kidney
than is now visible before our eyes. And by this crammed and well fed capon,
let us be mindful of the cock, which crowed three times, when Peter had as
often denied his Master, for which he went out and wept bitterly. These Rabbets
re collect us to think (having worn fur upon their backs) of the two wicked
Elders, that lay in wait to betray the chastity of Susanna: but I fear I have
too much over-shot my self in alleging any example out of the profane
Apocrypha. What see I there? a Potato pie, and a Sallad of Sparagus, these are
stirring meats, and provocations to procreation, by which good God, we desire
thee that according to thy blessings to our first parents in Paradise, we may
increase and multiply. And when that Gamond of Westphalia Bacon comes to be cut
up, let us think of that herd of Swine, into which by the permission of our
Savior the Devils entered, and from an high rock hurried them headlong into
the sea. And as for these thy good blessings that are from the land, so
likewise make us thankful for this thy bounty sent us from the sea, and first
for this ^ole of Sturgeon, and let it so far edify in us, as to think how
great that Whales head was, which swallowed the Prophet Jonas, and kept him
three days and nights in his belly. And though these Lobsters seem to be in
red coats like Cardinals, having claws like Usurers, and more horns than the
Beast of Rome, which is the Whore of Babylon; yet having taken off their
Papisticall copes and cases, let us freely feed upon what is within; for God
regards not the outside, but the inside of man. I conclude with the fruit,
which may it by thy grace so fructify in our hearts, that these Pippins may
put us in mind of the Apple of the forbidden Tree, which our Grand mother Eve
(by the temptation of the Serpent) tasted in the middle of the Garden. For had
she not, vild wretch, eaten ye forbidden apple, all our Crabs had bin very good
Pippins, and all our Thistles had been very good Harti-choaks. And these
Carawayes call to our remembrance that Manna which was like Coriander seed, by
which the children of Israel were fed forty years together in the wilderness.
Thus as briefly as I can, I have gone through every dish on the board, for every
sundry dish ought to have a several blessing. And now let us fall too, and
feed exceedingly, that after our full repast, we may the bettor prophecy.

Then falling to, and feeding lustily, and dinner being ended, another began
his Grace after meat, as follows.

The Grace after meat.
We thank thee, good Lord, that as thou have sufficiently satisfied these our
bodies with the blessings of the earth, so thou have the like care to feed our
souls with the spiritual food of Heaven: And in this our thanksgividing, let
us remember all the blessed Pastors and Professors, whether in Amsterdam or
elsewhere: but especially the Ministers of the Church in New England, the New
Jerusalem, as Master Samuel Eaton, lately come from thence, and the rest, with
all our brethren and sisters, the Saints there, that little flock, of which our
Savior speaks in the Gospel, Fear not little flock, who forsoking, and
utterly renouncing all the profane and Papisticall ceremonies here at home,
have left the Land, to profess the more pure and sincere truth and doctrine
abroad; as also for the separated Saints here amongst us, the Elders and
Deacons of our Cougregations wheresoever assembled, whether in any private
houses within the city, or in any Cow-house, Barn, or Stable without the walls
or whether in the fields, woods, or groves, wheresoever the holy Assembly is
convented and gathered. As for the profane Churches, in which Idols have been
formerly worshipped, and Copes and Surplices (the garments of the great
Babylonish Whore) are still worn, we utterly abhor them: Neither let us forget
that holy and good man's precepts, who never spoke unto us but with a great
measure of the Spirit, I mean Master How the Cobbler; nor those Christian
admonitions which were broken unto us by the breath of Master Eaton, the
Button-maker in Saint Martins: nor those godly instructions which issued from
the mouth of Master Green the Felt-maker, with all the rest of their
sanctified Society: As also for all our she Fellow Laborers in this our holy
and good work, I mean those blessed and fruit-bearing women, who are not only
able to talk on any Text, but search into the deep sense of the Scripture, and
preach both in their owns families and else where. Whom though Saint Paul
forbade to preach in the Church, yet he left them liberty to preach in the
chambers: nay, we all therefore, both brethren and sisters, so use our Talents
together, that the brethren may be daily regenerate and newborn, and the
sisters so labor in their several vocations, that it may be the increase and
multiplying of these thy Saints, Amen.

After which they prepared for their after-noons Exercise. You have heard what
doctrine has been preached by Master Samuel Eaton and others in the country,
now you shall hear part of a Sermon preached, which was by one of the Elders,
who was picked out for that days Exercise, who took his Text the 12. of the
Revelation, the 7 verse: And there was a battle in heaven, Michael and his
Angels fought against the Dragon, etc. Grace and peace be multiplied. This Text
dearly beloved brethren, and most dearly beloved sisters, may not unproperly be
applied to these present times, and to acts late in agitation, here is a combat
spoken of betwixt Michael and the Dragon: now my dear brethren and sisters;
first, to enquire who is personated in Michael and his Angels, and who pointed
at in the Dragon and his Angels. To save you men your looking, and you women
your longing, I will tell you both, and that briefly thus. By this Michael and
his Angels in my Text, is meant one particular Church, and peculiar Church: and
you dear Saints of both sexes have bin sensible, you know many years we have
most miserably suffered in all servitude and slavery: Now by the Dragon, the
holy Ghost labors to delineate unto the great Dragon and Devil of Lambeth. I
say unto you again brethren, wicked Angels are the Bishops Deanes, Arch
Deacons, Prebends, non residents, which live without the care and charge of
souls; I could have expressed it in Latin, but I hold it to be the language
of the beast of Rome, and therefore omit it as a Heathenish language: besides
his other Procters, Prosectors, Pursuivants, Pariters, and all other his
Ecclesiastical Ministers and Officers. I had almost forgot his Advocates,
Surrogates, with the Judges of his spiritual and Prerogative Courts, all which
(brethren) are abhonomination in the eyes of the Lord and their very names
stink in his nostrils: The Bishops function, dear brethren, is an
Antichristian calling; and the Deanes and prebends are the frogs and the
locusts mentioned in the Revelation: There is none of these Bishops but has a
pope in their bellies: I will tell you, dear brethren, they be papists in
grain; they are all of them unleavin'd souls, and now, I say, we have turned
them over to be buffeted by ye ugly fin Satan. What then shall we say of all
his toys and popish trincats? his invention and innovations? Or what shall we
think of their Altars, Images, unhallowed hoods, Surpleces and Coaps, with
their unchristian cornerd Caps: their Palls, Albs, Rochets, Crosiers, Miters,
Crosses, with all their traditions, Ceremonies, and unsanctified Superstitions?
What my brethren (my sisters not forgotten) are but as the very rags dropped from
the whore of Babylons rotten garments: nay, their cleanest washed Surpleses are
at the best but like Po^ters Frocks, which they wear when they carry burdens;
and they appear in our eyes more slovenly and sluttish, than the very fulsome
and foul smock she puts off when she shifts her self: nay, my dear brethren,
there is another cross which stands in our way, and is an eyesore to our
uprightness, that gilded idolatrous Cross in Cheap side, which so many adore
and reverence when they pass by it: then there is another cross, which is our
eare-sore, as well as our eyesore, dear brethren, that is, those pipes, or
Organs, as the reverend Scots Ministers call them; which makes more noise with
their roaring, than all the Bulls of Basin did, when Og their King passed by
them in triumph.

What further may we liken that dogmaticall Dragon to: this litigious Arch
Priest of Lambeth, than to a tyrannical Nimrod, a proud Pharaoh, a politic
Achitophel a wicked Haman, a cunning Caiphas, a iugling Pilot, a bloody minded
Herod, a persecuting Saul, and though he were a Batchelour, yet for a long time
bore him as proudly as that Apocallypticall Beast of Rome with seven heads of
impiety and ten horns of iniquity: for how has he persecuted this little
flock of ours? and when he would not be seen in it himself, be employed his
apostaticall agents to disturb us in our Conventicles, and debar us the
liberty of our Consciences: and my dear brethren and beloved sisters, was not
this the very device ofan old D^gon, nay of a venemoous dragon? and are not the
Archbishops and Bishops, the very Bulls of Bashan, their superior and inferior
Officialls, and Officers, the great and little Foxes? Those that wait on them,
are the Wolves that would worrie the sheep and Lambs: and yet you see how in
the end we that may be called the Michaelists, or Michaelitains, have in this
great battatle late fought since the time of the Parliament, have subdued and
overcome the Dragon and his Angels, so that their Court is no longer to be
found at Lambeth^: so it is (according to my Text) no more to be found in
Heaven.

This Dragon, I say dear brethren, and beloved sisters, is that Nimrod of
Lambeth, the great hunter, who with his bloud-hounds hunted and chaced us from
one place to another. This was that proud Pharaoh, who would have us deliver up
to the task masters the full tale of Brick, and yet would not allow us straw
nor stubble to burn it. This is that politic Achitophel, who having mist of
his designs, would saddle his Ass (if he had it) and ride home to his house
at Lambeth and hang himself. This is that wicked Haman, that would make havoc
of all us poor Mordecais, and the whole Nation of us distressed Jews: (for I
know there be some Christians and Sabaterians amongst us) but as he has
Idolatriz'd in the high places, we hope to see him, like that Haman, mounted
upon something fifty Cubits high. This is that cruel Herod, but more bloody
hearted: he only slew the Babes and Sucklings but this Dragon would make
slaughters of all of you, dear brothers and sisters, for which he shall be
eaten up with the worms of his own Conscience. This is that Caiphas, that
would cousen us of our lives. That Pilot that would give partial sentence
against us; and that Saul before he was Paul) that would bring persecution
amongst us, who are taken for the Olive-branches of the House of the Lord.

And now where is their Starre-parlour, for Star Chamber I cannot call it:
Chambers (as we all know) were made for rest and pleasure; but this was only
for rigor and punishment: and where is now their High Commission Courts, by
which the Saints hearts could not rest quiet in their bodies, nor their ears
safe upon their heads? But some of his servants report that he was clear of
all these; but dear brethren, and best beloved sisters, I will tell you of
what he was clear: clear from all sincerity, virtue, and piety; clear from
all charity, verity, and honesty: but he, with all the rest of the
Archiepiscopacy, much contaminated with gormundizing and Hypocrisy: But where
are his full and surfeting Tables, where he safe plentifully feeding, with his
Chaplins, gaping one at another: some gaping after fat bits, others after fat
Benefices, they aspiring to the highest degrees after the Prelacy, and he alike
ambitious after the Papacy.

But what is now (my dear brothers, and sweet sisters) become of their
vehement Orations, their demonicall disputations? their syllogisticall
examinations? their Logical Interpretations? their erroneous Equivocations?
their mental Reservations? and their iniust Condemnations of us that are the
flock of the faithful, and the only reserved to eternal Salvation? what I
say, but that this great Dragon, and his Angels shall be precipitated to
perdition, be hurryed to the inferior parts of the earth, which is also called
Hell, and Gehimon, and the tormenting Tophet, to which we also leave them, with
all their Prelaticall trash and popish trumperles.


