Heads of all Fashions, Being, A Plain Desection or Definition of diverse, and
sundry sorts of heads, Butting, Jetting, or pointing at vulgar opinion. And
Allegorically showing the Diversities of Religion in these distempered times.
Now very lately written, since Calves-Heads came in Season.



London Printed for John Morgan, to be sold in the Old Bailey. 1642.

The Contents.
1. A Roundhead, both at random and couched. 2. A Square head. 3. A Solid
head. 4. An Empty head. 5. An Hollow-head. 6. A Full head. 7. A Deep head. 8.
A Great head. 9. A little head. 10. A long head. 11. A short head. 12. A Tall
head. 13. A Flat head. 14. A Strong head. 15. A weak head. 16. A Thick head.
17. A Thine head. 18. A Plain head. 19. A Forked head. 20. A Smooth head. 21.
A Rugged head. 22. A Logger head. 23. A Narrow head. 24. A Broad head. 25. A
Block head. 26. A Light head. 27. A Heavy head with some other whole and half
heads.
To the gentle Reader,
DIstracted fame throughout the world so spreads,
That monster-like, she now has many heads,
A man can go to no place, but shall hear
Things that may make him hope, and make him fear:
But I do hope, and hope I will do still,
All shall be well in spite of little Will,
Or any of his Crew, far off or near,
Whose practices do every day appear
Still more and more, the Lord sees how they deal,
And does their Plots and Projects all reveal:
Each City and each Town, yea every village,
Can fill us now with news, we need not pillage.
Tom Long and's men, rare tidings will relate,
Some of high Powr's and Peers, some of the State,
Some of Religion, or Church Discipline,
Some of this Bishop, some of that Divine;
Some of a Knot of villains late found out,
Heavens mend or end that base conspiring rout.
Some brings us news from Ireland, false or true,
How ever all is called both true and new,
Within one day a man may undertake
Brief notes or thousands several things to make,
It he writes half what he shall hear or see,
Newes-mongers now have such variety,
That let them make reports, till tired or dumb,
Their last news scarce is told, but news is come
To wait their next attendance to be spread,
By this means fame has got a monsters head,
Yea many heads, whereof I found a few,
And here have laid them open to thy view,
Peruse them all, in earnest or in jest,
And tell me which amongst them is the best.
If Roundhead should be found the best to be,
Farewell all other heads, Roundhead for me.
But gentle Reader, give me thy good word,
And then I care not what Roundheads afford.
Thine without hypocrisy. I. M.
A Roundhead at random.
When as the worlds foundation first was laid,
A Roundhead was the first head that was made,
Adams head and Eves head were both as one,
So all, each following Generation.
That since the time of Adam has ensued,
Has formed been to that similitude,
All Nations far or near, ere known or found,
Like English men have had their heads still round,
Why then should any at Rounds-heads admire?
Since all from Adam come our Great-grand-sire?
To answer this: these times are full of Gall,
And there is no head, no man that can please all.
But as this head is understood of late,
Some hold it scarce a friend toth' King and State.
And some suppose it, whereso er'e it lurch,
To be a great disturber of the Church
I can say nothing, but as people say,
One might this Roundhead otherwise display,
And if you will have't more couched, more concisely,
More punctual, more briefly, and precisely.
Then thus;

1
A Roundhead is a man whose brains compact,
Whose Verilies and Trulies are an Act
Infallible, beyond the vain compare
Of or^^nary men, what ere they are.
This head, though sometimes owned by a widgion,
Can make new moulds to shape a strange Religion.
2
A Square-head is exact in many rules,
Knows Horses, Asses, very well from Mules,
He is in Aglebra, and Music skilled,
His braine-pans with a thousand crotchets filled;
And yet of late as I have heard some say,
He cant endure to hear the Organs play.
3
A Solid-head is one whose every part,
Is furnished with nature and with Art,
Has all the fair endowments can be given
By the auspicious Stars or powers of Heaven:
If this head be well guarded with Gods grace,
Tit fit for Church or State, or any place.
5
An Empty-head has still a shallow brain,
Yer good enough to bear a Bishops Train,
For that is now fallen full low, even to the ground,
Old Canterburies pride has pulled all down:
That little Will, together with the VVren,
Has plucked the Pope almost from out his den.
4
An Hollow-head is one that is concave,
Joined to an hollow-heart makes up a Knave,
This Hollow-head comes near the empty Pate,
Good wit does seldom enter in thereat.
He that the name of Hypocrite knows well,
This Hollow-head or Hollow-heart may spell.
6
A Full-head is full fraught with brains or guts,
Whose teeth are found, can crack the hardest nuts,
His grinders are at best, his ears and eyes
Are firm and good, free from infirmities:
His nose is perfect, pure, and he can tell
Which men are knaves, which honest by the smell.
7
A Deepe-head ^ead has an apprehensive brain,
Dives far into the plots of Pope and Spain,
If well affected to the King and State.
And to the Gospel, who can blame this pate?
Yet there are many now which nere knew Schools
Would raise up self-conceit, make wise men fools.
8
A Great-head may contain a world of wit,
For there is room enough to harbor it,
Some mighty-headed pleaders I have known,
And yet their Great-heads little Law have shown:
But what talk I of heads? it is the brain
Enables them there cases to explain.
9
A Little-head (if not with madness gored)
May with much wit enriched be, and stored,
And then if well inclined toward God and King,
How many great things may this small head bring:
But ill disposed (as many such there be)
It brings the body to disgrace we see.
10
A Long-head cannot wear a little cap,
The forehead is so distant from the nap,
This head has many whimsies in the Brain,
Yet wonders much at Rome, at France, and Spain.
These many plots have wrought against our Land,
But this Long-head hopes they shall nere long stand.
11
A Short-head has a kind of Brittle wit,
Can understand and break Jests for a fit,
His Pericranium being thin and tender.
It follows his Inge^^e must needs be slender:
He is not strong enough to be a Baker,
Yet he may serve to be a Comfit-maker.
12
A Tall-head like a Pyramide or Steeple,
Ore tops the common sort of vulgar people,
It Is often on a Pimps broad shoulders placed,
And thinks it self with bushy locks much graced.
This head is mounted up so in the Air,
That there can nothing grow (I fear) but hair.
13
A Flat-head is not puffed up with fat,
But yet it is a downright head that is flat,
It has no brains strange projects to devise,
Nor will be drawn aside by Toys or lies:
It wants a bulk for mischieves there to swarm,
It does small good, and it does little harm.
14
A Strong-head though it be not made of brass,
Remembers every thing that comes to pass
Within the reach of's eye, his ear or knowledge,
His Skull for skill, and strength may be a college
If he had been a Fencer by his fate
He would have scorned to fear a broken pate.
15
A Weake-head may ingenuous be and witty,
Adorned with sundry graces, but it is pity,
The frailty of this head does now and than
Make him forgo the best parts of a man:
Bacchus into his brains may sometimes steal
And rob his senses of their commonweal.
16
A Thicke-head is an head consolidated
Quite opposite, unto the hollow pated,
The Frontispice it had from Taurus brows,
More thick and wrinkled far then any Cowes.
This head is so substantial, that a man
May count it for an Ox head now and than.
17
A Thin-head be it empty, be it full,
It Is but composed of a Paper skull,
The eyes are hallow and the cheeks are thin,
The jaw-bones threaten to run through the skin:
This head if you the face do well examine,
Like Pharoahs seven lean Kine, protends a famine.
18
A plaine-head is a plain well-meaning head,
Who as he thinks no harm, no hurt does dread,
So quickly may be gul'd, for honest men
Are often cheated every now and then:
This head is often free unto its friend,
Yet many times it is cozened in the end.
19
A Forked-head (if you the same could uote)
Is like the head of any Bull or Goat,
Yet some affirm that most men of this kind
Do wear their horns (Ram-like) reverst behind:
Heads of this sort in and about the City
There are a multitude, the mores the pity.
20
A Smooth-head is his Daddies dainty boy,
His mother calls him still her only joy,
His amiable coantenance is clad
With many seeming virtues; nothing bad:
This Smooth-head has an oylely tongue likewise,
Can sooth, and gloze, and monstrous things devise,
21
A Rugged-head is like a craggie mountain,
Whence churlishness proceeds as from a fountain,
This rugged, crooked, crabbed, ill made mazzard
Is obstinate, cares not for any hazard.
A world of follies this head lives in,
But yet presumption is his greatest sin.
22
A Loger-head alone cannot well be,
At Scriveners windows many times hangs three
A Country Lobcocke, as I once did hear,
Upon a Penman put a grievous jeare;
If I had been in place, as this man was,
I should have called that Country-Coxecombe Ass.
23
A Narrow head is one whose brains are couched,
Into a little room, may not be touched,
With any Beer or Ale, or Wine, or Water,
For then his wits forthwith abroad will scatter,
He is a silly simple, puling fool,
Knows not the name of Learning, nor a Schole.
24
A Broad head (if on broader shoulders placed)
Thinks not himself by any jeares disgraced,
Scoff, scorn, and flout him, so you picks not's Purse,
This head conceives he is nere the worse,
It were a sin to call him Cuckold thoe,
Because he does believe he is not so.
25
A Blocke-head (to make his assertion good)
Is not so called, because it is made of wood,
This head consists not of many parts,
Nor is it capable to learn the Arts,
Yet give me leave, now I do all things scan,
This head in time may serve an honest man.
26
A light head is full fraughgt with pleasant Air,
Thinks well of every one that's speaks him fair,
He Is given to leaping, much, and much to dancing,
Curverting, jumping, vaulting and prauncing,
This nimble head whose father was no ^umbler.
May make a Dancer on the ropes, or Tumbler.
27
A Heavy head is naught for complement,
So full it is of grief and discontent,
The pensive thoughts that this head does conceive,
May make the best man all his meat to leave,
He that is full of trouble, pain and sorrow,
May see his dinner dressed, but eat to morrow.
The Conclusion.
A world of heads more I could name to you,
An Hogs head, Pigs head, and a Calves head too,
A Jowle of Salmon too, is half a head,
Which any man may well digest with bread,
And next unto this Jowle of Salmon fish,
A Swines^ Cheek is esteemed an ex'lent dish:
An Ox cheek likewise is a dish of meat
Which many an old, younger, wived man may eat.
These heads and halfe-heads all are known for food,
And I do hold them to be very good:
There also is a Sheeps head and an Asses,
But this last head most of the rest surpasses,
For this in time by friends and loves increase,
May be chief Clarke t'a Justice of Peace.
But stay rash Muse, why do thou so far fly,
Thou must not me^^le with Authority.
FINIS.

