XXVIII SERMONS PREACHED AT GOLDEN GROVE; Being for the Summer half-year,
BEGINNING ON WHIT-SVNDAY, And ending on the xxv. Sunday after TRINITY.

TOGETHER WITH A Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness,
and Separation of the Office Ministerial.

BY JER. TAILOR, D. D.

QVI SEQVITUR ME NON AMBULAT IN TENEBRIS
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane. 1651.

(...) a recorder, how prudent an observer, how sedulous a practiser of holy
discourses she was, and that therefore it was, that what did slide through her
ear, she was desirous to place before her eye, that by those windows they might
enter in and dwell in her heart But because by this truth I shall do advantage
to the following discourses, give me leave (my Lord) to fancy, that this Book
is derived upon your Lordship almost in the nature of a legacy from her, whose
every thing was dearer to your Lordship, then your own eyes, and that what she
was pleased to believe apt to minister to her devotions, and the religions of
her pious and discerning soul, may also be allowed a place in your closet, and
a portion of your retirement, and a lodging in your thoughts, that they may
encourage and instruct your practice and promote that interest, which is and
ought to be dearer to you then all those blessings and separations with which
God has remarked your family and person.

My Lord, I confess the publication of these Sermons can so little serve the
ends of my reputation, that I am therefore pleased the rather to do it, because
I cannot at all be tempted, in so doing, to minister to any thing of vanity.
Sermons may please when they first strike the ear, and yet appear flat and
ignorant when they are offered to the eye, and to an understanding that can
consider at leisure. I remember that a young Gentleman of Athens being to
answer for his life, hired an Orator to make his defense, and it pleased him
well, at his first reading; but when the young man by often reading it that he
might recite it publicly by heart, began to grow weary and dspleased with it,
the Orator bade him consider that the Judges and the people were to hear it but
once, and then it was likely, they at that first instant might be as well
pleased as he. This has often represented to my mind the condition and fortune
of Sermons, and that I now part with the advantage they had in their delivery,
but I have sufficiently answered my self in that, and am at rest perfectly in
my thoughts as to that particular, if I can in any degree serve the interest of
souls, and (which is next to that) obey the piety, and record the memory of
that dear Saint, whose name and whose soul is blessed: for in both these
ministeries, I doubt not but your Lordship will be pleased, and account as if I
had done also some service to your self: your religion makes me sure of the
first, and your piety puts the latter past my fears. However, I suppose in the
whole account of this affair, this publication may be esteemed but like
preaching to a numerous Auditory, which if I had done, it would have been
called either duty, or charity, and therefore will not now so readily be
censured for vanity, if I make use of all the ways I can to minister to the
good of souls: But because my intentions are fair in themselves, and I hope are
acceptable to God, and will be fairly expounded by your Lordship, (whom for so
great reason I so much value) I shall not trouble you or the world with an
Apology for this so free publishing my weaknesses; I can better secure my
reputation by telling men how they ought to entertain Sermons, for if they that
read or hear, do their duty aright, the Preacher shall soon be secured of his
fame, and untouched by censure.

1. For it were well, if men would not inquire after the learning of the
sermon, or its deliciousness to the ear or fancy, but observe its usefulness,
not what concerns the preacher, but what concerns themselves, not what may make
a vain reflection upon him, but what may substantially serve their own needs,
that the attending to his discourses may not be spent in vain talk concerning
him, or his disparagements but may be used as a duty and a part of religion, to
minister to edification and instruction. When S. John reckoned the principles
of evil actions, he told but of three, The lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life. But there was then also in the world (and now it
is grown into age, and strength, and faction) another lust, the lust of the
ear, and a fifth also, the lust of the tongue. Some people have an insatiable
appetite in hearing, and hear only that they may hear, and talk and make a
party: They enter into their neighbors house to kindle their candle, and
espying there, a glaring fire, sit down upon the hearth and warm themselves all
day, and forget their errand, and in the mean time, their own fires are not
lighted, nor their families instructed, or provided for, nor any need served,
but a lazy pleasure, which is useless and imprudent. Hearing or reading
sermons is, or ought to be in order to practice, for so God intended it, that
faith should come by hearing, and that charity should come by faith, and by
both together we may be saved. For a man's ears (as Plutarch calls them) are
virtutum ansae, by them we are to hold and apprehend virtue, and unless we use
them as men do vessels of dishonor, filling them with things fit to be thrown
away, with any thing that is not necessary, we are by them more nearly brought
to God, then by all the senses beside. For although things placed before the
eye affect the mind more readily then the things we usually hear, yet the
reason of that is, because we hear carelessly, and we hear variety; the same
species dwells upon the eye, and represents the same object in union and single
representment, but the objects of the ear are broken into fragments of periods,
and words, and syllables, and must be attended with a careful understanding;
and because every thing diverts the sound, and every thing calls off the
understanding, and the spirit of a man is truantly, and trifling; therefore it
is that what men hear, does so little affect them, and so weakly work toward
the purposes of virtue, and yet nothing does so affect the mind of man as
those voices to which we cannot choose but attend, and thunder and all loud
voices from Heaven rend the most stony heart, and makes the most obstinate pay
to God the homage of trembling, and fear, and the still voice of God usually
takes the tribute of love, and choice, and obedience. Now since hearing is so
effective an instrument of conveying impresses and images of things, and
exciting purposes, and fixing resolutions, (unless we hear weakly and
imperfectly) it will be of the greater concernment that we be curious to hear
in order to such purposes, which are perfective of the soul, and of the spirit,
and not to dwell in fancy and speculation, in pleasures and trifling arrests,
which continue the soul in its infancy and childhood, never letting it go forth
into the wisdom and virtues of a man. I have read concerning Dionysius of
Sicily, that being delighted extremely with a Ministrel that sung well, and
struck his Harp dexterously, he promised to give him a great reward, and that
raised the fancy of the Man, and made him play better. But when the music was
done and the man waited for his great hope, the King dismissed him empty,
telling him, that he should carry away as much of the promised reward, as
himself did of the Music, and that he had paid him sufficiently with the
pleasure of the promise for the pleasure of his song: both their ears had been
equally delighted and the profit just none at all: So it is in many men's
hearing Sermons, they admire the Preacher, and he pleases their ears, and
neither of them both bear along with them any good, and the hearer has as
little good by the sermon, as the Preacher by the air of the peoples breath,
when they make a noise, and admire, and understand not. And that also is a
second caution I desire all men would take.

2. That they may never trouble the affairs of preaching and hearing
respectively, with admiring the person of any man. To admire a preacher is such
a reward of his pains or worth, as if you should crown a Conqueror with a
garland of roses, or a Bride with Laurel; it is an undecency, it is no part of
the reward which could be intended for him. For though it be a good natured
folly, yet it has in it much danger, for by that means, the Preacher may lead
his hearers captive, and make them servants of a faction, or of a lust; it
makes them so much the less to be servants of Christ, by how much they call
any man Master upon earth; it weakens the heart and hands of others, it places
themselves in a rank much below their proper station, changing from hearing the
word of God, to admiration of the person and faces of men, and it being a fault
that falls upon the more easy natures and softer understandings, does more
easily abuse a man; and though such a person may have the good fortune to
admire a good man and a wise, yet it is an ill disposition, and makes him
liable to every man's abuse: Stupidum hominem quavis oratione percelli, said
Heraclitus. An undiscerning person is apt to be cozened by every oration: And
besides this, That Preacher whom some do admire, others will most certainly
envy, and that also is to be provided against with diligence, and you must not
admire too forwardly, for your own sake, lest you fall into the hands of a
worse preacher, and for his sake, whom when you admire you also love, for
others will be apt to envy him.

3. But that must by all men be avoided; for envy is the worst counselor in
the world, and the worst hearer of a wise discourse. I pity those men who live
upon flattery and wonder, and while they sit at the foot of the Doctors chair,
stare in his face, and cry (...), rarely spoken, admirably done, they are like
callow and unfeathered birds, gaping perpetually to be fed from another mouth,
and they never come to the knowledge of the truth, such a knowledge as is
effective, and expressed in a prudent and holy life. But those men that envy
the preacher; besides that they are great enemies of the Holy Ghost, and are
spitefully evil because God is good to him, they are also enemies to
themselves. He that envies the honors, or the riches of another, envies for
his own sake, and he would fain be rich with that wealth which sweats in his
neighbors coffers, but he that envies him that makes good sermons, envies
himself, and is angry because himself may receive the benefit, and be improved,
or delighted or instructed by another. He that is apt fondly to admire any man's
person must cure himself by considering, that the Preacher is Gods minister and
servant, that he speaks Gods word and does it by the Divine assistance, that he
has nothing of his own but sin and imperfection, that he does but his duty and
that also hardly enough, that he is highly answerable for his talent, and
stands* deeply charged with the cure of souls, and therefore that he is to be
highly esteemed for the work sake, not for the person; his industry and his
charity is to be beloved, his ability is to be accounted upon another stock,
and for it, the preacher and the hearer are both to give God thanks, but
nothing is due to the man for that, save only, that it is the rather to be
employed, because by it we may better be instructed, but if any other reflection
be made upon his person, it is next to the sin and danger of Herod and the
people, when the ^sine Oration was made (...), with huge fancy, the people were
pleased, and Herod was admired, and God was angry, and an Angel was sent to
strike him with death and with dishonor. But the envy against a preacher is to
be cured by a contrary discourse, and we must remember that he is in the place
of God, and has received the gift of God, and the aids of the holy Ghost, that
by his abilities God is glorified, and we are instructed, and the interests of
virtue, and holy religion are promoted, that by this means God who deserves
that all souls should serve him for ever, is likely to have a fairer harvest of
glory and service, and therefore that envy is against him: that if we envy
because we are not the instrument of this good to others, we must consider tha
we desire the praise to our selves not to God. Admiration of a man supposes him
to be inferior to the person so admired, but then he is pleased so to be, but
envy supposes him as low, and he is displeased at it, and the envious man is
not only less then the other man's virtue, but also contrary: the former is a
vanity, but this is a vice, that wants wisdom, but this wants wisdom and
charity too, that supposes an absence of some good, but this is a direct
affliction and calamity.

4. And after all this, if the preacher be not despised, he may proceed
cheerfully in doing his duty, and the hearer may have some advantages by every
Sermon. I remember that Homer says the woers of Penelope laughed at Ulysses,
because at his return he called for a loaf, and did not, to show his gallantry,
call for swords and spears; Ulysses was so wise as to call for that he needed,
and had it, and it did him more good then a whole armory would in his case: so
is the plainest part of an easy, and honest sermon, it is the sincere milk of
the word, and nourishes a man's soul, though represented in its own natural
simplicity, and there is hardly any Orator, but you may find occasion to
praise something of him. When Plato misliked the order and disposition of the
Oration of Lysias, yet he praised the good words, and the elocution of the man.
Euripides was commended for his fullness, Parmenides for his composition.
Phocilides for his easiness, Archilochus for his argument, Sophocles for the
unequalnesse of his style: So may men praise their Preacher, he speaks
pertinently, or he contrives wittily, or he speaks comely, or the man is pious,
or charitable, or he has a good text, or he speaks plainly, or he is not
tedious or if he be he is at least industrious, or he is the messenger of God
and that will not fail us, and let us love him for that; and we know those that
love can easily commend any thing, because they like every thing: and they say,
fair men are like angels, and the black are manly, and the pale look like honey
and the stars, and the cro^^ nosed are like the sons of Kings, and if they be
flat they are gentle and easy, and if they be deformed they are humble, and
not to be despised because they have upon them the impresses of divinity, and
they are the sons of God. He that despises his Preacher, is a hearer of arts
and learning, not of the word of God, and though when the word of God is set
off with advantages and entertainments of the better faculties of our humanity,
it is more useful and of more effect, yet when the word of God is spoken
truly, though but read in plain language, it will become the disciple of Jesus
to love that man whom God sends, and the publik order, and the laws have
employed, rather then to despise the weakness of him who delivers a mighty
word.

Thus it is fit that men should be affected and employed when they hear and
read sermons coming hither not as into a theater, where men observe the
gestures and noises of the people, the brow and eyes of the most busy
censurers, and make parties, and go aside with them that dislike every thing,
or else admire not the things, but the persons: But as to a sacrifice, and as
unto a school, where virtue is taught and exercised, and none come but such as
put themselves under discipline, and intend to grow wiser, and more virtuous,
to appease their passion, from violent to become smooth and even, to have their
faith established, and their hope confirmed and their charity enlarged. They
that are otherwise affected do not do their duty but if they be so minded as
they ought, I and all men of my employment shall be secured against the tongues
and faces of men who are ingeniosi in alieno libro, witty to abuse and
undervalue another man's book: And yet besides these spiritual arts already
reckoned, I have one security more, for (unless I deceive my self) I intend
the glory of God sincerely, and the service of Jesus in this publication, and
therefore being I do not seek my self, or my own reputation, I shall not be
troubled if they be lost in the voices of busy people, so that I be accepted
of God, and found of him in the day of the Lords visitation.

My Lord, It was your charity and nobleness that gave me opportunity to do
this service (little or great) unto religion, and whoever shall find any
advantage to their soul, by reading the following discourse, if they know how
to bless God, and to bless all them that are Gods instruments in doing them
benefit, will (I hope) help to procure blessings to your Person and Family, and
say a holy prayer, and name your Lordship in their Letanies, and remember, that
at your own charges you have dug a well, and placed cisterns in the high
ways, that they may drink and be refreshed, and their souls may bless you. My
Lord, I hope this, even because I very much desire it, and because you
exceedingly deserve it, and above all, because God is good and gracious, and
loves to reward such a charity, and such a religion as is yours, by which you
have employed me in the service of God, and in ministeries to your Family. My
Lord, I am most heartily, and for very many Dear obligations

Your Lordships most obliged, most humble, and most affectionate servant TAILOR.

Titles of the Sermons, their Order, Number, and Texts.
SErmon 1. 2. Of the Spirit of Grace. Folio 1. 12. Romans 8. ver. 9, 10. But ye
are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell
in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. * And
if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life,
because of righteousness.

Sermon 3. 4. The descending and entailed curse cut off. fol. 27. 40. Exodus
20. part of the 5. verse. I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation
of them that hate me:

6. And showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
commandments.

Sermon 5. 6. The invalidity of a late, or deathbed repentance. fol 52. 66.
Jerem. 13. 16. Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains: and while ye look for light,
or, (lest while ye look for light) he shall turn it into the shadow of death,
and make it gross darkness.

Sermon 7. 8. The deceitfulness of the heart. fol. 80. 92. Jerem. 17. 9. The
heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it?

Sermon 9. 10. 11. The faith and patience of the Saints: Or the righteous cause
oppressed. fol. 104. 119. 133. 1 Pet. 4. 17. For the time is come that
judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at us, what
shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God?

18. And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the
sinner appear?

Sermon 12. 13. The mercy of the Divine judgments; or Gods method in curing
sinners. fol. 146. 159. Romans 2. 4. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness
of God leads thee to repentance?

Sermon 14. 15. Of grows in grace, with its proper instruments and signs.
fol. 172. 183 2 Pet. 3. 18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory both now and for ever. Amen.

Sermon 16. 17. Of grows in sin, or the several states and degrees of
sinners, with the manner how they are to be treated. fol. 197. 210. Jude Epist.
ver. 22, 23. And of some have compassion, making a difference: * And others
save with fear, pulling them out of the fire.

Sermon 18. 19. The foolish exchange. fol. 224. 237. Matthew. 16. ver. 26. For
what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

Sermon 20 21. 22. The Serpent and the Dove, or a discourse of Christian
Prudence. fol. 251. 263. 274. Matthew. 10. latter part of ver. 16. Be ye
therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.

Sermon 23. 24. Of Christian simplicity. 289. 301. Matthew. 10. latter part of
ver. 16. And harmless as doves.

Sermon 25. 26. 27. The miracles of the Divine Mercy. fol. 313. 327. 340. Psalm.
86. 5. For thou Lord art good and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy to
all them that call upon thee.

A Funeral Sermon, preached at the Obsequies of the Right Honorable the
Countess of Carbery. fol. 357. 2 Samuel 14. 14. For we must needs die, and are
as water spilt on the ground which cannot be gathered up again: neither does
God respect any person: yet does he devise means that his banished be not
expelled from him.

A Discourse of the Divine Institution, necessity, sacredness, and separation
of the Office Ministerial.
SERMON. I.

But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of
God, dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his. * And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit
is life, because of righteousness.
[The Lord gave his Spirit] or [the Lord gave his word] and great was the
company of the Preachers. For so I make bold to render that prophecy of David.
Christ was the word of God, verbum aeternum but the Spirit was the word of God,
verbum Patefactum: Christ was the word manifested in the flesh; the Spirit was
the word manifested to flesh, and set in dominion over, and in hostility
against the flesh. The Gospel and the Spirit are the same thing; not in
substance; but the manifestation of the Spirit is the Gospel of Jesus Christ;
and because he was this day manifested, the Gospel was this day first preached,
and it became a law to us, called Romans 8. 2.
the law of the Spirit of life, that is, a law taught us by the Spirit, leading
souls into minds, our minds into Spirit, our Spirit into glory: that he who
can give us all things, who is Lord of Men and Angels, and King of all the
Creatures should pray to God for us without intermission: that he who reigns
over all the world, should at the day of judgment give up the Kingdom to God
the Father, partakers of the Divine nature; of the Nature, the infinite nature
of God, and, must dwell in Christ and Christ must dwell in them, and they must
be in the Spirit, and the Spirit must be for ever in them; these are articles
of so mysterious a Philosophy, that we could have inferred them from no
premises, discoursed them upon the stock of no natural, or scientificall
principles; nothing but God, and Gods spirit could have taught them to us: and
therefore the Gospel is Spiritus patefactus, 1 Cor. 12. 7.
the manifestation of the Spirit ad aedificationem (as the Apostle calls it)
for edification and building us up to be a Holy Temple to the Lord.

Animalis homo, (...), that is, as S. Jude expounds the word (...), the animal,
or the natural man, the man that has not the Spirit cannot discern the things
of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
for they are spiritually discerned, that is, not to be understood but by the
light proceeding from the Sun of righteousness, and by that eye whose bird is
the Holy Dove, whose Candle is the Gospel;


Non posse coecis mentibus mysterium Prudent.

Haurire nostrum: nil diurnum nox capit.
He that shall discourse Euclids elements to a swine, or preach (as Venerable
Bede's story reports of him) to a rock, or talk Metaphysics to a Bore, will as
much prevail upon his assembly as S. Peter, and S. Paul could do upon
uncircumcised hearts and ears, upon the indisposed Greeks, and prejudicate
Jews. An Ox will relish the tender flesh of Kids with as much gust and
righteousness, and judgment to come, then we put it off to another time, or
we forget it, and think we had nothing to do but to give the good man a
hearing, and (as Anacharsis said of the Greeks, they used money for nothing but
to cast account withal; so) our hearers make use of sermons and discourses
Evangelical, but to fill up void spaces of our time; to help to tell an hour
with, or without tediousness: The reason of this is a sad condemnation to such
persons; they have not yet entertained the Spirit of God, they are in
darkness: they were washed in water, but never baptized with the Spirit; for
these things are spiritually discerned. the spirit of Manifestation is not yet
upon them; and that is the first effect of the Spirit, whereby we can be called
sons of God, or relatives of Christ. If we do not apprehend, and greedily suck
in the precepts of this holy Discipline as aptly as Merchants do discourse of
gain, or Farmers of fair harvests,

Spirit, because it consists of Spiritual Promises, and Spiritual precepts, and
makes all men that embrace it, truly to be Spiritual men: and therefore S. Paul
adds an Epithete beyond this, 2 Cor. 3. 6.
calling it a quickening Spirit, that is, it puts life into our Spirits, which
the law could not. The law bound us to punishment, but did not help us to
obedience, because it gave not the promise of Eternal life to its Disciples.
The Spirit, that is, the Gospel only does this: and this alone is it which
comforts afflicted minds, which puts activenesse into wearyed Spirits, which
inflames our cold desires, and does (...) blows up sparks into live coals, and
coals up to flames, and flames to perpetual burnings: and it is impossible that
any man who believes, and considers the great, the infinite, the unspeakable,
the unimaginable, the never ceasing joys, that are prepared for all the sons
and daughters of the Gospel should not desire them; and unless he be a fool,
he cannot but use means to obtain them, effective, hearty pursuances. For it is
not directly in the nature

Gospel is called the Spirit, because by, the Spirit of manifestation, that is,
of instruction and of Catechism, of faith and confident assent; but the Spirit
of Confirmation or obsignation to all them that believe and obey the Gospel of
Christ; that is, the power of God is come upon our hearts, by which in an
admirable manner we are made sure of a glorious inheritance; made sure (I say)
in the nature of the thing; and our own persuasions also are confirmed with an
excellent, a comfortable, a discerning and a reasonable hope: in the strength
of which, and by whose aid, as we do not doubt of the performance of the
promise: so we vigorously pursue the spirit of obsignation, or the confirming
spirit, because it confirms our hope, and assures our title to life eternal;
and by means of it, and other its collateral assistances, it also confirms us
in our duty, that we may not only profess in word, but live lives according
to the Gospel. And this is the sense of [the Spirit] mention^d in the Text: ye
are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell
in you: That is, if ye be made partakers of the Gospel, or of the spirit of
manifestation, if ye be truly entitled to God, and have received the promise of
the Father, then are ye not carnal men; ye are spiritual, ye are in the
Spirit: if ye have the Spirit of manifestation will but upbraid you in the
shame and horrors of a sad eternity, if you have not the Spirit of
obsignation: if the Holy Ghost be not come upon you to great purposes of
holiness, all other pretenses are vain, ye are still in the flesh, which shall
never inherit the kingdom of God.

In the Spirit] that is, in the power of the spirit; so the Greeks in God, when
God is in him: and it is a similitude taken from persons encompassed with
guards; they are in custodia, that is, in their power, under their command,
moved at their dispose, they rest in their time, and receive laws from their
authority, and admit visiters whom they appoint, and must be employed as they
shall suffer; so are men who are in the Spirit, that is, they believe as he
teaches, they work as he inables, they choose what he calls good, they are
friends of his friends, and they hate with his hatred; with this only
difference, in libera custodia, the will is where it ought to be, and where it
desires to be, and it cannot easily choose any thing else, because it is
extremely in love with this: as the Saints and Angels in their state of
Beatific vision, cannot choose but love God: and yet the liberty of their
choice is not lessen^d, because the object fills all the capacities of the will,
and the understanding. Indifferency to an object is which draws to God, and
loves the fetters that confine us to the his service is perfect freedom; and
the more we are subjects, the more we shall reign as Kings; and the faster we
run, the easier is our burden, and Christ's yoke is like feathers to a bird, not
loads, but helps to motion, without them the body falls: and we do not pity is
in the Spirit is under Tutours and Governors, until the time appointed of the
Father, just as all great Heirs are; only, the first seizure the Spirit makes,
is upon the will. He that loves the yoke of Christ, and the discipline of the
Gospel, he is in the Spirit, that is, in the spirits power.

Upon this foundation, the Apostle has built these two propositions. 1.
Whosoever has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, he does not belong
to Christ at all: he is not partaker of his Spirit, and therefore shall never
be partaker of his

2. Whosoever is in Christ, is dead to sin, and lives to the Spirit of Christ,
that is, lives a Spiritual, a holy and a sanctified life. These are to be
considered distinctly.

1. All that belong to Christ have the Spirit of Christ, Immediately before the
ascension, our blessed Savior bid his Disciples tarry in Jerusalem till they
should receive the promise of the Father, Whosoever stay at Jerusalem, and are
in the actual Communion of the Church of God shall certainly receive this
promise. For it is made to you and to your children (says S. Peter) and to as
many as the Lord our God shall call, All shall receive the Spirit of Christ,
the promise of the Father, because this was the great instrument of distinction
between the Law and the Gospel, In the Law God gave his Spirit, 1. to some; to
them 2. extraregularly, 3. without solennity, 4. in small proportions, like the
dew upon Gideons filia^ voois, the daughter of a voice, still, and small, and
seldom, and that by secret whispers, and sometimes inarticulate by way of
enthusiasme, rather then of instruction, and God spoke by the Prophets
transmitting the sound, as thorough an Organ pipe, things which themselves
oftentimes understood not. But in the Gospel, the spirit is given without
measure; first powered forth upon our head Christ Jesus; then descending upon
the beard of Aaron, the Fathers of the Church, and thence falling like the
tears of the

In the wisdom of the Ancient it was observed, that there are four great cords
which tie the heart of Man to inconvenience and a prison, making it a servant
of vanity, and an heir of corruption 1. Pleasure and 2. Pain. 3. Fear, and 4.
Desire.

(...)

(...).
These are they that exercise all the wisdom and resolutions of man, and all
the powers that God has given him.

(...)
(...). said Agathon.
These are those evil Spirits that possess the heart of man and mingle lust by
pleasure, or 2. to baser arts by covetousness, or 3. to impatience by sorrow,
or 4. to dishonorable actions by fear: and this is the state of man by nature;
and under the law; and for ever till the Spirit of God came, and by four
special operations cur^d these four inconveniences and restrained, or sweetened
these unwholesome waters.

1. God gave us his Spirit that we might be insensible of worldly

A man that has tasted of Gods Spirit can instantly discern the madness that
is in rage, the folly and the disease that is in envy, the anguish and
tediousness that is in lust, the dishonor that is in breaking our faith, and
telling a lie; and understands things truly as they are; that is, that charity
is the greatest nobleness in the world; that crown of righteousness; and the
patient persons shall be rewarded with Job, and the meek persons with Christ
and Moses, and all with God; the very expectation the spirit of manifestation,
and bred up and strengthened by the spirit of obsignation is so delicious an
entertainment of all our reasonable appetites, that a spiritual man can no
more be removed, or intied from the love of God, and of religion, then the Moon
from her Orb, or a Mother from loving the son of her joys, and of her sorrows.

This was observed by S. Peter, 1 Ep. 2. chap. ver. 5.
[As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow
thereby; if so be that ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious] When once we
have tasted the grace of God, the sweetnesses of his Spirit; then, no food but
the food Divining cup, in which we drink Salvation to our God, and call upon
the Name of the Lord with ravishment and thanksgiving; and there is no greater
external testimony that we are in the spirit, and that the spirit dwells in us,
then if we find joy and delight, and spiritual pleasures in the greatest foo^
of Angels, the wine of elect souls, is fit to succeed the Prodigal at his
banquet of sin and husks, and to be partaker of the ta^le of Devis; but all
they who have Gods Spirit, love to feast at the supper of the Lamb, and have no
appetites but what are of the spirit, or servants to the spirit. I have read of
a spiritual person who saw heaven but in a dream, Read mihi campos meos
floridos, columnam auream, comitem Hieronymum, assistentes Angelos; Give me my
fields again, my most delicious fields, my pillar of a glorious light, my
companion S. Jerome, my assistant Angels; and this lasted till he was told of
his duty, and matter of obedience, and the fear of a sin had disincharmed

And if it were given to any of us to see Paradise, or the third heaven (as it
was to S. Paul) could it be that ever we should love any thing but Christ, or
follow any Guide but the Spirit, or desire any thing but Heaven, or understand
any thing to be pleasant but what shall lead thither? Now what a vision can do,
that the Spirit does certainly to them that entertain him. They that have him
really and not in pretense only, are certainly great despisers of the things
of the world. The Spirit does not create, or enlarge our appetites esteem all
things as l^sse, and as dung so that we may gain Christ; No gain then is
pleasant but goal^nesse, no ambition but longings after heaven, no revenge but
against our selves for sinning; nothing but God and Christ; Deus meus and
omnia; and date nobis ammas, caetera vobis tollite (as the king of Sodom said
to Abraham) Secure but the souls to us, and take our goods. Indeed this is a

S. John spoke a hard saying, but by the spirit of manifestation we are also
taught to understand it. 1 Ep. 3. 9.
Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him,
and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. The seed of God] is the spirit
which has a plastic power to efform us in similitudinem filiorum Dei, into the
image of the sons of God; and as long as this remains in us, while the Spirit
dwells in us We cannot sin; that is, it is against our natures, our reformed
they cannot sin; cannot without trouble, and doing against our natures, and
their most passionate inclinations. A man, if you speak naturally, can
masticate gums, and he can break his own legs, and he can sip up by little
draughts, mixtures of Aloes and Rhubarb, of Henbane, or the deadly Nightshade:
but he cannot do this naturally, or willingly, cheerfully or with delight.
Every sin is against a [For it is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, Hebr. 6. 4.
and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy
Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to
come, etc.] First we are enlightened in Baptism, and by the Spirit of
manifestation, the revelations of the Gospel: then we relish and taste
interior excellencies, and we receive the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of
confirmation, and he gives us a taste of the powers of the world to come; that
is, of the great efficacy that is in the Article of eternal life to persuade
us to religion and holy living: then we feel that as the belief of that Article
dwells upon our understanding and is incorporated into our wills and choice, so
we grow powerful to resist sin by

2. The Spirit of God is given to all who truly belong to Christ as an anidote
against sorrows, against impatience, against the evil accidents of the world,
and against the oppression and sinking of our spirits under the cross. There
are in Scripture noted two births besides the natural; to which also by
analogy we may add born of water and the Spirit. It is (...) one thing
signified by a divided appellative, by two substantives, Spiritus aqueus, the
Spirit moving upon the waters of Baptism. The second is to be born of Spirit
and fire, for so Christ was promised to baptize us with the Holy Ghost and with
fire; that is, cum spiritu igneo, with a fiery spirit, the Spirit as it
descended in Pentecost in the shape of fiery tongues. And as Romans 15. 13.
or spiritus exultans, spiritus laetitiae. Now the God of hope fill you with
all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope through the power of
the Holy Ghost. There is a certain joy and spiritual rejoicing, that
accompanies them in whom the Holy Ghost does dwell; a joy in the midst of
sorrow; a joy 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6.
This S. Paul notes to this purpose. [And ye became followers of us and of the
Lord, having received the word in much af^liction with joy of the Holy Ghost.]
Worldly afflictions and spiritual joys, may very well dwell together; and if
God did not supply us out of his storehouses, the sorrows of this world would
be mere and unmixt, and the troubles of persecution would be too great for
natural considences. For who shall make him recompense that lost his life in a
Duel, fought about a draught of wine, or a cheaper woman? What arguments shall
invite a man the Spirit of comfort. Now this Spirit of comfort is the hope and
confidence, the certain expectation of partaking in the inheritance of Jesus.
This is the faith and patience of the Saints, this is the refreshment of all
wearied travelers, the cordial of all languishing sinners, the support of the
scrupulous, the guide of the doubtful, the anchor of timorous inopis nos,
atque pusilli finxerunt animi; we have little souls, little faith, and as
little fills us with joy in believing: and a man that is in a great joy cares
not for any trouble that is less then his joy; and God has taken so great
care to secure this to us, that he has turned it into a precept, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
16.
Rejoice evermore; and Rejoice in the Lord always, and again, SERMON. II.
I say rejoice. But this rejoicing must be only in the hope Romans 12. 12.
(...); so the Apostle. Rejoicing in hope. For although God sometimes maks a
cup of sensible comfort to overflow the spirit of a man, and thereby loves to
refresh his sorrows; yet that is from a secret principle, not regularly given
not to be waitd for, not to be prayed for, and it may fail us if we think upon
it: but the hope of life eternal can never fail us, and the joy of that is
great enough to make us suffer any thing, or to do any thing -- ibimus, ibimus
utcunque praecedes, supremum
Carpere iter comites parati


To death, to bands, to poverty, to banishment, to tribunals, any whither in
hope of life eternal: as long as this anchor holds, we may suffer a storm but
cannot suffer shipwreck: And I desire you by the way to observe, how good a God
we serve, and how excellent a Religion Christ taught, when one of his great
precepts is, that we should rejoice and be exceeding glad? and God has given
as the spirit of rejoicing, not a sullen, melancholy spirit, not the spirit of
bondage or of a slave, but the Spirit of his Son, consigning us by a holy
conscience to joys unspeakable and full of And from hence you may also infer
that those who sink under a persecution, or are impatient in a sad accident
they put out their own fires, which the Spirit of the Lord has kindled, and
lose those glories which stand behind the cloud.

Part II.
3. THe Spirit of God is given us, as an antidote against evil

The Jews were better taught, for God was their teacher, and he gave the spirit
to them in single rays. But as the spirit of obsignation seal, and within a
veil; so the spirit of Manifestation or patefaction was like the gem of a
vine, or the bud of a rose, plain indices and significations of life, and
principles of juice and sweetness: but yet scarce out of the doors of their
causes; they had the infancy of knowledge; and revelations to them were given
as Catechism is taught to our children; which they read with the eye of a
bird, and speak with the tongue of a be, and understand with the heart of a
child, that is, weakly and imperfectly: and they understood so little; that 1.
They David was their Great office, and the Avenger, on GOD the Lord of Hosts,
on God the Enemy of their Enemies; and they desired their Nation to be
prospered, and themselves blessed, and distinguished from all the world, by the
effects of such desires. This was the state of prayer in their Synagogue; save
only that it had also this allay. 4. That their addresses great things the
Lord has done for us, God has powered his spirit into our hearts, the spirit
of prayer and supplication, and now. 1. Christians pray in their spirit, with
sighs and groans, and know that GOD who dwells within them, can as clearly
distinguish those secret accents, and read their meaning in the Spirit as
plainly as he knows the voice of his own thunder, or could discern the letter
of the law written in the tables of stone by the finger of God. 2. likewise the
spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we
ought. That is, when God sends an affliction or persecution upon us, we are
indeed extreme apt to lay our hand upon the wound and never take it off but
when we lift it up in prayer to be delivered from that sadness; and then we
pray fervently to be cured of a sickness, to be delivered from a Tyrant, to be
snatched from the grave, not to perish in the danger. But the spirit of God
has from all sad accidents drawn the veil of error the spirit having helped
our infirmities, that is, comforted our weaknesses and afflictions, our sorrows
and impatience by this proposition, that [All things work together for the good
of them that fear God] he has taught us to pray for grace, for patience under

Moses, or a Samuel, a David, or a Daniel, a John the Baptist, or the Messiah
himself could describe and indite forms of prayer and thanksgiving to the time
and accent of Heaven, now every wise and good Man is instructed perfectly in
the Scriptures (which are the writings of the spirit) what things he may, and
what things he

spirit of Sanctification; and then we pray with the Spirit when we pray with
Holiness, which is the great fruit, the principal gift of the spirit. And this
is by Saint James called [the prayer of faith] and is said to be certain that
it shall prevail. Such a praying with the spirit, when our prayers are the
spirit himself makes intercession for us: that is, has enabled us to do it
upon his strengths, we speak his sense, we live his life, we breath his
accents, we desire in order to his purposes, and our persons are Gracious by
his Holiness, and are accepted by his interpellation and intercession in the
act and offices of Christ. This is praying with the spirit. To which by way of
explication I add these two annexes of holy prayer, in respect of which also,
every good man prays with

Paul calls [serving of God in his spirit (...) that is, Romans 1. 9.
with a willing mind; not as Jonas did his errand, but as Christ did die for
us, he was straightened till spirit which makes intercession for the Saints: but
he that delights in his prayers, not by a sensible or phantastic pleasure,
but whose choice dwells in his prayers, and whose conversation is with God in
holy living, and praying accordingly, that man has the spirit of Christ, and
therefore belongs to Christ; for by this spirit it is that Christ prays in
Heaven assa faetida, or the raw flesh of a murdered man upon the altar of
incense.

6. The spirit of Christ and of prayer helps our infirmities, [in all the world
the true that is, with a pure mind, with holy desires, for spiritual things
according to the mind of the spirit in imitation of Christ's intercession, with
perseverance, with charity, or love. That is the spirit of God, and these are
the spiritualities of the Gospel, and the formalities of prayer as they are
Christian and Evangelicall.

7. Some men have thought of a seventh way, and explicate the spirit of
manifestation and intercession; it is to return to the materiality and
imperfection of the law, it is to worship God in outward forms, and to think
that Gods service consists in shells and rinds, in lips and voices, in shadows
and images of things: it is to retire from Christ to Moses, and at the best, it
is a going from real graces to imaginary gifts: and when praying with the
spirit has in it so many excellencies, and gift of speaking to which the
nature of many men, and the art of all learned men, and the very use and
confidence of ignorant men is too abundantly sufficient. Let us not so despise
the spirit of Christ as to make it no other then the breath of our lungs. * For
though it might be possible that at the first, and when forms of prayer were
few and seldom, the spirit of God Besaleel and Aholiab:) But then every weaver
or worker in brass may by the same reason pretend that he works by the spirit,
as that he prays by the spirit, if by prayer he means forming the words. For
although in the ease of working it was certain that the spirit did teach: in
the ease of inditing or forming the words it is not certain whether he did or
no; yet because in both it was extraordinary (if it was at all) and ever since,
in both it is infinitely needless; to pretend the Spirit in forms of every
man's making (even though they be of

The Jews in their declensions to folly and idolatry did worship the stone of
imagination, that is, certain smooth images in which by art magic pictures and
little faces were represented, Levit. 26. 1.
declaring hidden things and stolen goods; and God severely forbad this
baseness: but we also have taken up this folly, and worship the stone of
imagination: we beget imperfect that he that glories, may glory in the Lord.

Thus I have (as I could) described the effluxes of the Holy Spirit upon us in
his great channels. But the great effect of them is animalis homo is the same
with carnalis, that is, his soul is a servant of the passions and desires of
the flesh, and is flesh in its operations and ends, in its principles and
actions: So on the other side, by the Grace of God, and the promise of the
Father, and the influences of the Holy Ghost, our souls are not only recovered
from the state of flesh, and reduced back to the entireness of animal
operations, but they are heightened into spirit, and transform^d into a new
nature: And

S. Hierom tells of the Custom of the Empire; When a Tyrant was overcome, they
us^d to break the head of his Statues, and upon the same Trunk, to set the head
of the Conqueror, and so it passed wholly for the new Prince: So it is in the
kingdom of Grace: As soon as the Tyrant sin is overcome, and a new heart is put
into us, or that we serve under a new head, instantly we have a new Name given
us, and we are esteemed a new Creation; and not only changed in manners, but
we have a new nature within body, and soul, and spirit. My Text is plain for
it. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: and by
[Spirit] is not meant only the graces of God, and his gifts enabling us to do
holy things: there is more belongs to a good man the spirit of life, and he was
made in animam viventem, into a living soul; then he was made a man: So in the
new creation, Christ by whom God made both the worlds, intends to conform us to
his image, and he has given us the spirit of adoption, by which we are made
sons of God; and by the spirit of a new life we are made new creatures, capable
of a new state, entitled to another manner of duration, enabled to do new and
greater actions in order to higher ends; we have new affections, new
understandings, new wills: Vetera transierunt, and ecce omnia nova facta sunt;
All things are become new: And this is called the seed of God when it relates
to the principle and cause of this production: but the thing that is produced
is a spirit, and that is as much in nature beyond a soul, as a soul is beyond a
body. This great Mystery I should not utter but upon the greatest authority in
the world, and from an infallible Doctor, I mean S. Paul, who from Christ
taught the Church more secrets, then all the whole College besides: 1 Thessalonians.
5. 23.
[And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God that your
whole spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ.] We are spirit also be kept blameless. This distinction
nice, Hebr. ^. 12.
and infinitely above humane reason: but the word of God (says the same
Apostle) is sharper then a two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder the soul and the spirit: and that has taught us to distinguish the
principle of a new life, from the principle of the old, the celestial from the
natural; and thus it is.

This spirit (as I now discourse of it) is a principle infused into us by God,
when we become his children, whereby we live the Be ye holy as I am; be pure,
be perfect, as your heavenly Father is pure, as he is perfect: which because it
cannot be a perfection of degrees, it must be in similitudine naturae, in the
likeness of that nature which God has given us in the new birth, that by it,
we might resemble his excellency, and 2 Epist. 1. 4.
And this I conceive to be the meaning of S. Peter [According as his divine
power has given unto us all things that pertain to life and godliness, (that
is, to this new life of godliness) through the knowledge of him that has
called us to glory and virtue, whereby are given unto us exceeding great and
precious promises, that by these you might be partakers of the Divine nature
(so we read it) But it is something mistaken; it is not (...), [The Divine
nature] for Gods nature is indivisible, and incommunicable; but it is spoken
participative, or per analogiant, [partakers of a Divine nature] that is, of
this new and God-like nature, given to every person that serves God, whereby he
is sanctified and made the child of God, and framed into the likeness of
Christ. The Greeks generally call this (...), a gracious gift, an extraordinary
superaddition to nature, not a single gift in order to single purposes; but an
universal principle, and it remains upon all good white stone spoken of in the
Revelation; Apoc. 2. 17.
and in it a new name written, which no man knows but he that has it: And by
this, Gods sheep at the day of judgment shall be discerned from goats: If
their spirits be presented to God pure and unblameable, this great (...), this
talent which God has given to all Christians to improve, in the banks of grace
and of Religion, if they bring this to God increased and grown up to the
fullness of the measure of Christ (for it is Christ's Spirit, Philip. 1. 19.
and as it is in us, it is called, the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ)
then we shall be acknowledged for sons,

I need not to apply this Discourse: The very mystery it self is in the whole
world the greatest engagement of our duty that is imaginable, by the way of
instrument, and by the way of thankfulness.

Quisquis magna dedit voluit sibi magna rependi; He that gives great things to
us, ought to have great acknowledgements; and Seneca said concerning wise men;
That he that does benefit to others, hides those benefits as a man lays up
great treasures Irenaeus had a proverbiall saying, Perfecti sunt qui tria sine
querela Deo exhibent; They that present three things right to God, they are
perfect; that is, a chaste body, a righteous soul, and a holy and the event
shall be this, which Maimonides expressed not amiss, (though he did not at all
understand the secret of this mystery:) The soul of a man in this life, is in
potentia ad esse spiritum, it is designed to be a spirit, but in the world to
come, it shall be actually as very a spirit as an Angel is: and this state is
expressed by the Apostle, calling it, [the earnest of the spirit] that is, here
it is begun, and given us as an antepast of glory, and a principle of Grace;
but then we shall have it in plenitudine -- regit idem spiritus artus
Orb alio --
Here, and there, it is the same; but here we have the earnest, there the
riches and the inheritance.

But then, if this be a new principle, and be given us in order to the actions
of a holy life, we must take care that we receive not the Spirit of God in
vain, but remember it is a new life; and as no man can pretend, that a person
is alive, that does not always do the works of life; so it is certain, no man
has the Spirit of God, but he that lives the life of grace, and does the works
of the Spirit, that is, in all holiness, and justice, and sobriety.

Spiritus qui accedit animo, vel Dei est, vel Daemonis (said Tertullian.)
[Christian. It is generally supposed, that unclean spirits walk in the night;
and so it used to be; for they that are drunk, are drunk in the night, said the
Apostle: but Suidas tells of certain Empusae, that used to appear at Noon, at
such time as the Greeks did celebrate the Funerals of the Dead; and at this day
some of the Russians fear the Noonday Devil, which appears like a mourning
widow to reapers of hay and corn, and uses to break their arms and legs,
unless they worship her. The Prophet David speaks of both kinds: Psalm. 91.
Thou shall not be afraid for It were happy if we were so; but besides the
solemn followers of the works of darkness, in the times and proper seasons of
darkness, there are very many who act their Scenes of darkness in the face of
the Sun, in open defiance

Here therefore I have a greater Argument to persuade you to holy living, then
Moses had to the sons of Israel. Behold, I have set before you life and death,
blessing and cursing: so said Moses; but I add, that I have upon the stock of
this Scripture, set before godliness is his gain, and this man understands the
things of God, and is ready to die for Christ, and fears nothing but to sin
against God, and his will is filled with love, and it springs out in obedience
to God, and in charity to his brother: and of such a man we cannot make
judgment by his fortune, or by his acquaintance, by his circumstances, or by
his adherencies, for they are the appendages the spiritual is judged of no
man: that is, the rare excellencies that make him happy, do not yet make him
illustrious, unless we will reckon Virtue to be a great fortune, and holiness
to be great Wisdom, and God to be the best Friend, and Christ the best
Relative, and the Spirit the hugest advantage, and Heaven the greatest Reward.
He that knows how to value these things, may sit down and reckon the felicities
of him that has the Spirit of God.

The purpose of this Discourse is this; That since the Spirit of God is a new
nature, and a new life put into us, we are thereby sins of infirmity. Whosoever
has the Spirit of God, lives the life of grace; The Spirit of God rules in
him, and is strong according to its age and abode, and allows not of those
often sins which we think unavoidable, because we call them, natural
infirmities.

[But if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is
life because of righteousness.] The state of sin is a state of death; the
state of a man under the law, was a state of bondage, and infirmity, (as S.
Paul largely describes him in the seventh Chapter to the Romans) but he that
has the Spirit is made alive, and free, and strong, and a conqueror over all
the powers, and violencies of sin; such a man resists temptations, falls not
under the assault of sin, returns not to the sin which he last repented of,
acts no more that error which brought him to shame and sorrow: but he that
falls under a crime, to which he still has a strong, and vigorous inclination,
he that acts his sin, and then curses it, and then for where the Spirit of God
is, there is liberty, there is no such bondage and a returning folly to the
commands of sin. But because men deceive themselves with calling this bondage,
a pitiable and excusable infirmity, it will not be useless to consider the
state of this question more particularly, lest men from the state of a
pretended infirmity, fall into a real death.

1. No great sin is a sin of infirmity, or excusable upon that a sin of
infirmity. When a man is in the state of spiritual sickness or death, he is
in a state of infirmity, for he is a wounded man, a prisoner, a slave, a sick
man, weak in his judgment, and weak in his reasoning, impotent in his
passions, of childish resolutions, great inconstancy, and his purposes untwist,
as easily as the rude conjuncture of uncombining cables, in the violence of a
Northern tempest: and he that is thus in infirmity, cannot be excused; for it
is the aggravation of the state of his sin; he is so infirm that he is in a
state unable to do a servant of sin, a slave of the Devil, an heir of
corruption, absolutely under command; and every man is so, who resolves for
ever to avoid such a sin, and yet for ever falls under it: for what can he be
but a servant of sin, who fain would avoid it but cannot; that is, he has not
the Spirit of God within him; Christ dwells not in his soul, for where the Son
is, there is liberty: and all that are in the Spirit are sons of God, and
servants of righteousness, and therefore freed from sin. But then there are
also sins of infirmity, which are single actions, intervening seldom, in little
instances, unavoidable, or through a faultlesse ignorance. malice, that is, of
want of Grace, in the absence of the Spirit; they destroy where ever they come,
and the man dies if they pass upon him.

It is true, there is flesh and blood in every regenerate man, but they do not
both rule: the flesh is left to tempt, but not to prevail. And it were a
strange condition, if both the godly and the ungodly were captives to sin, and
infallibly should fall into temptation, and death, without all difference, save
only, that the unwillingly, and the ungodly sins willingly. But if the same
things be done by both, and God in both be dishonored, and their duty
prevaricated, the pretended unwillingnesse is the sign of a greater, and a
baser slavery, and of a condition less to be endured. For the servitude which
is against me is intolerable, but if I choose the state of a servant, I am
free in my mind, -- Libertatis servaveris umbram
Si quicquid jubeare velis --
-- Tot rebus iniquis Paruimus victi: veniaest haec sola pudoris, Degenerisque
metus, nil jam potuisse negari. Lucan.
and there is no other difference, but that the mistaken good man feels his
slavery, and sees his chains, and his fetters; but therefore it is certain that
he is, because he sees himself to be a slave. No man can be a servant of sin,
and a servant of righteousness at the same time, but every



a sin of infirmity, since they have been taught so to abuse themselves, by
sowing fig leaves before their nakedness: but because Joseph had a strength of
God within him, the strength of chastity, therefore it



The sum is this. An animal man, a man under the law, a carnal man (for as to
this, they are all one) is sold under sin, he is a servant of corruption, he
falls frequently into the same sin to which he is tempted, he commends the Law,
he consents to it that it is good, he does not commend sin, he does some little
things against it, but they are weak and imperfect, his lust is he is led by
the Spirit, he lives in the Spirit, he does the works of God cheerfully,
habitually, vigorously: and although he sometimes slips, yet it is but seldom,
it is in small instances: his life is such as he cannot pretend to be justified
by works, and merit, but by mercy, and the faith of Jesus Christ; yet he never
sins great sins: If he does, he is for that present fallen from Gods favor; and
though possibly he may recover, (and the smaller, or seldomer the sin is, the
sooner may be his restitution) yet for the present (I say) he is out of Gods
favor. But he that remains in the grace of God, sins not by any deliberate,
consultive, knowing act; he is incident to such a surprise as may consist with
the weakness, and judgment of a good man: but whatsoever is, or must be
considered, if it cannot pass without consideration, it cannot pass without
sin; and therefore cannot enter upon him, while he remains in that state. For
he that is in Christ, in him, the body is dead by reason of sin; and the the
promise of eternal life is such an argument to them that consider it, that it
must needs be of force sufficient, to persuade a man to use all his faculties,
and all his strength, that he may obtain it: God exacted all upon this stock;
God knew this could do every thing: Nihil non in hoc praesumpsit Deus (said
one.) This will make a satyr chaste, and the fruits of the Spirit, then we are
in Christ, and Christ in us, then we walk in the spirit, and the Spirit dwells
in us, and our portion shall be there, where Christ by the Spirit makes
intercession for us, that is, at the right hand of his Father for ever, and
ever. Amen.

SERMON. III.

Exodus 20. part of the 5. verse. I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting
the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me:




IT is not necessary that a Commonwealth should give pensions to Orators, to
dissuade men from running into houses infected with the plague, or to entreat
them to be out of love with violent torments, or to create in men evil opinions
concerning famine, or painful deaths: Every man evils, that which turns good
into evil, and every natural evil into Ad natos natorum, and qui nascentur ab
illis, to the third and fourth generation: and therefore if a man should
despise the eye, or sword of man, if he sins he is to contest with the
jealousy of a provoked God: If he does not regard himself, let him pity his
pretty children: If he

God is a jealous God] that is the first great stroke, he strikes against sin,
he speaks after the manner of men, and in so speaking we know, he that is
jealous is suspicious, he is inquisitive, he is implacable. 1. God is pleased
to represent himself a person very suspicious, both in respect of persons and
things. For our persons we give him cause enough: for we are sinners from our
Mothers womb; we make solemn vows and break them instantly; we cry for pardon
and still renew the sin; we desire God to try us once more, and we provoke him
ten times further: we use the means of grace to cure us, and we turn them into
vices and opportunites suspected persons. 2. And therefore God is inquisitive;
he looks for that which he fain would never find; we are not thereby
justified: For, as Moses accused the Jews; so do Christ and his Apostles accuse
us, not in their personss, but by their works; and by their words, by the thing
it self, by confronting the laws of Christ, and our practices. Sometimes the
Angels who are the observers of all our works carry up sad tidings to the Court
of Heaven against us. Thus, two Angels were the informers against Sodom; but
yet these were the last; for before that time the cry of their iniquity had
sounded loud and sadly in Heaven; and all this is the direct and proper effect
of his jealousy; we are made a spectacle to God, to Angels, and to Men: God
has set so many spies upon us, the blessed Angels and the accursed Devils,
good men and bad men, the eye of Heaven, and eye of that eye, God himself, all
watching lest we rob God of his Honor, and our selves of our hopes; For by his
prime intention he has chosen so to get his own glory, as may best consist
with our felicity: His great design is to be glorified in our being saved. 3.
Gods jealousy has a sadder effect then all this. implacable, that is, he is
angry with us to eternity unless we return in time: and if we do, it may be
he will not be appeased in all instances: and when he forgives us he will make
some reserves of his wrath; he will punish our persons, or our estate; he will
chastise us at home, or abroad, in our bodies, or in our children; for he will
visit our sins upon our children from generation to generation: and if they be
made miserable for our sins, they are unhappy in such parents; but we bear the
curse and the anger of God, even while they bear his rod: God visits the That^s
the second Great stroke he strikes against sin, and is now to be considered.

That God does so is certain; because he says he does; and

1. No man is made a sinner by the fault of another man without his own
consent. For to every one God gives his choice, and sets life and death before
every of the sons of Adam: and therefore this death is not a consequent to any
sin, but our own. In this sense it is true, that if the fathers eat sour
grapes, the childrens and therefore the sin of Adam which was derived to all
the world; did not bring the world to any other death but temporal, by the
intermediall stages of sickness, and temporal infelicities: And it is not said
that sin passed upon all men, but death, and that also no otherwise but (...),
in as much as al men have sinned; as they have followed the steps of their
father, so they are partakers of this death. And therefore it is very
remarkable; that death brought in by sin, was nothing superinduced reduced to
his own natural condition, from which before Adams fall he stood exempted by
supernatural favor; and therefore although the taking away that extraordinary
grace, or privilege was a punishment; yet the suffering the natural death,
was directly none; but a condition of his creation, natural, and therefore not
primarily evil; but if not good, yet at least indifferent. And the truth and
purpose of this observation will extend it self, if we observe that before any
man died, Christ was promised, by whom death was to lose its sting, by whom
death did cease to be an evil, and was, or might our own sin; not of Adams: for
although his sin brought death in, yet it is only our sin that makes death to
be evil: And I desire this to be observed, because it is of great use in
vindicating the Divine justice in the matter of this question. The material
part

2. For the fault of others many may become miserable, even all or any of
those, whose relation is such to the sinner, that he in any sense may by such
inflictions be punished, execrable, or oppressed. Indeed it were strange, if
when a plague were in Ethiopia, the Athenians should be infected: or if the
house of Pericles were visited, and Thucydides should die for it. For although
there are some evils which (as Plutarch says) are ansis and propagationibus
praedita incredibili celeritate in longinquum penetrantia,



1. It is so in kingdoms, in Churches, in families, in political, artificial,
and even in accidental societies.

When David numbered the people, God was angry with him; but he punished the
people for the crime; seventy thousand men died of the plague: and when God
gave to David the choice of three plagues, he chose that of the pestilence, in
which the meanest 2 Samuel 21. 14.
and God being inquired of, said it was because of Saul his killing the
Gibeonites. What had the people to do with their Kings fault? or at least, the
people of David with the fault of Saul? That we shall see anon: But see the way
that was appointed to expiate the crime, and the calamity. David took seven of
Saul's sons and hanged them up against the Sun, and after that God was entreated
for the land. The story observes one circumstance more: that for the kindness
of Jonathan, David spared Mephibosheth. 1 King. 21. 29.
I will not bring the evil in his days, but in his sons days will I bring the
evil upon his house. Thus did God slay the child of Bathsheba for the sin of
his father David: and the whole family of Eli, all his kindred of the nearer
lines were thrust from the priesthood, and a curse made to descend upon his
children that all the males should die young, and in the flower of their youth.
The boldness and impiety of Cham made his posterity to be accursed, and
brought slavery into the world. Because Amalek fought with the sons of Israel
at Rephidim, God took up a quarrel against the nation for ever. And above all
examples is that of the Jews, who put to death the Lord of life, and made their
nation to be an anathema for ever, until the day of restitution. His blood be
upon us, and upon our children. If we shed If we crucify the Lord of life
again and put him to an open shame, the wrath of God will be upon us and upon
our children, to make us a cursed family, and who are the sinners, to be the
stock and original of the curse; the pedigree of the misery shall derive from
us.

This last instance went further then the other of families and kingdoms. For
not only the single families of the Jews were made miserable for their Fathers
murdering the Lord of life, nor also was the Nation extinguished alone for the
sins of their Rulers, but John) and almost all the Churches of Africa, where
Christ was worshipped, and now Mahomet is thrust in substitution, and the
people are servants, and the religion is extinguished, or where it remains, it
shines like the Moon

-- Vetabo, qui Cereris sacrum
vulgarit arcanae, sub ijsdem
sit trabibus, fragilemque mecum
solvat phaselum, Hor. l. 3. od. 2.
saepe Diespiter
Neglectus, in cesto addidit in tegrum
And it happened to the Mariners who carried Jonah, to be in danger with a horrid
storm, because Jonah was there who had sinned against the Lord. Many times the
sin of one man is punished by the falling of a house or a wall upon him, and
then all the family are like to be crushed with the same ruin; so dangerous, so
pestilential, so infectious a thing is sin, that it scatters the poison of its
breath to all the neighborhood, and makes that the man ought to be avoided

The honor of a King is in the multitude of his people; and children are a
gift that comes of the Lord; and happy is that man that has his quiver full
of them: and Lo thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord; his wife
shall be like the fruitful vine by the walls of his house, his children like
olive branches round about his Table. Now if children be a blessing, then to
take them away in anger is a curse: and if the loss of flocks and herds, the
burning of houses, the blasting of fields be a curse; how much greater is it to
lose our children, and to see God slay them before our eyes, in hatred to our
persons, and Jobs Messengers told him the sad stories of fire from Heaven, the
burning his sheep, and that the Sabeans had driven his Oxen away, and the
Chaldeans had stolen his Camels; these were sad arrests to his troubled spirit:
but it was reserved as the last blow of that sad execution that the ruins of a
house had crushed his Sons and Daughters to their graves. Sons and daughters
are greater blessings then sheep and Oxen: they are not servants of profit as
sheep are, but they secure greater ends of blesssing; they preserve your Names;
they are so many titles of provision and providence; every new child is a new
title to Gods care of that Does God take care for Oxen? (said our blessed
Savior) much more for you: yea all and every one of your children are of more
value then many Oxen: when therefore God for your sin strikes them with
crookedness, with deformity, with foolishness, with impertinent and caytive
spirits, with hasty or sudden

2. But as this is a punishment to us, so it is not un^ust as to them, Adams
sin: but it is no evil to those single persons that die in the Lord; for they
are blessed in their death. Jonathan was killed the same day with his Father
the King; and this was a punishment to Saul indeed; but to Jonathan it was a
blessing: for since



call the proud happy. No man can

neither he nor his parents have sinned; much more may it do so, when his
parents have, though he have not. For

3. I am now to consider in what degree, and in what cases, this is usual, or
to be expected. It is in the Text instanced in the matter of worshipping
images. God is so jealous of his honor, that he will not suffer an image of
himself to be made, lest the image dishonor the substance; nor any image of a
creature to be worshipped, though with a less honor, lest that less swell up
into

This one thing I desire to be strictly observed: That it is with much error,
and great indiligence usually taught in this question, in tertiam and quartam
generationem eorum qui oderunt me; to the third generation of them, of those
fathers that hate me: that is, upon the great-grand-children of such parents.
So that if the great-grandfathers be haters of God, and Antigonus was punished
for the tyranny of his father Demetrius; Phyleus for his father Augeas; pious
and wise Nestor for his father Neleus: And it was so in the case of Jonathan,
who lost the Kingdom and his life upon the stock of his fathers sins; and the
innocent child of David was slain by the anger of God, not against the child,
who never had deserved it, but the fathers adultery. I need not here repeat
what Tiresias was esteemed unfortunate because he could not see his friends and
children: the poor man was blind with age: But Athamas and Agave were more
miserable, who did see their children, but took them for Lions, and Stags; The
parents were miserably frantic: But of all, they deplored the misery of
Hercules; who when he saw his children, took them for a man's enemies were they
of his own house, was accounted a great calamity: but it is worse, when we love
them tenderly, and fondly, and yet do them all the despite we wish to enemies;
But so it is, that in many cases we do more mischief Medea did her brother
Absyrtus; For to leave them to inherit a curse, to leave them an intaild
calamity, a misery, a disease, the wrath of God for an inheritance, that it may
descend upon them, and remark the family like their coat of arms, is to be the
parent of evil, the ruin of our family, the causes of mischief of them, who
ought to be dearer to us then our own eyes. And let us remember this, when we
are tempted to provoke the jealous God: let us consider that his anger has a
progeny, and a descending

The Intail of Curses cut off. SERMON. IV.

Part II.
4. I Am to consider what remedies there are for sons to cut off this intail of
curses; and whether, and by what means it is possible for sons to prevent the
being punished for their fathers sins? And since this thing is so perplexed and
intricate, has so easy an objection, and so hard an answer, looks so like a
cruelty, and so unlike a justice, (though it be infinitely just, and very
severe, and a huge enemy to sin) it cannot be thought but that there are not
only ways left to reconcile Gods proceeding to the strict rules of justice,
but also the condition of man to Ex tarditate si Dij sontes praetereant, and
insontes plectant, justitiam suam non sic recte resarciunt. If God be so slow
to punish the guilty, that the punishment be deferred till the death of the
guilty person; and that God shall be forced to punish the innocent, or to let
the sin quite escape unpunished* it will be something hard to join that justice
with mercy, or to join that action with justice. Indeed it will seem strange,
but the reason of its justice, I have already discoursed: If now we can find
how to reconcile this to Gods mercy too, or can learn how it may be turned into
a mercy,

1. The first means to cut off the intail of wrath and cursings from a family,
is for the sons to disavow those signal actions of Si quis paterni vitij
nascitur haeres, nascitur and poenae: The heir of his fathers wickedness, is
the heir of his fathers curse; and a son comes to inherit a animum leprosum in
cute munda, a leprous and a polluted mind even for nothing, even for an empty
and ineffective

2. The son may inherit his fathers wickedness by imitation and direct
practice, and then the curse is like to come to purpose; a curse by
accumulation, a treasure of wrath: and then the children as they arrive to the
height of wickedness by a speedy passage, as being t^rust forward by an active
example, by countenance, by education, by a seldom restraint, by a remiss
discipline;

3. Sons inherit their fathers crimes, by receiving, and enjoying the purchases
of their rapine, injustice, and oppression, by rising upon the ruin of their
fathers souls, by sitting warm in the furs which their father stole, and
walking in the grounds which are watered with the tears of oppressed orphans,
and widows. Now in all these cases the rule holds. If the son inherits the sin,
he cannot call it unjust, if he inherits also his fathers punishment. But to
rescind the fatal chain and break in sunder the line of Gods anger, a son is
tied in all these cases to disavow his fathers crime. But because the cases are
several, he must also in several manners do it.

1. Every man is bound not to glory in, or speak honor of the powerful and
unjust actions of his Ancestors* But as all the sons of Adam are bound to be
ashamed of that original stain which they derive from the loins of their
abused Father, they say to corruption, thou art my father, and to rottenness,
thou art my mother. I do not say that sons are bound to publish, or declaim
against their father crimes, and to speak of their shame in Piazza's and before
Tribunals; that indeed

Children are bound to pray to God, to sanctify, to cure, to forgive their
parents: and even concerning the sins of our forefathers, the Church has
taught us in her Letanies, to pray that God would be pleased to forgive them,
so that neither we, nor they may sink under the wrath of God for them.
[Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: Ours] in common and conjunction: And David
confessed to God, and humbled himself for the sins of his Ancestors and
Decessors: Our fathers have done amiss, and dealt wickedly, So did good King
Josiah, 2 King 32. 13.
Great is the wrath of the Lord which is kindled against us, because our
fathers have not hearkened unto the words of this book. But this is to be done
between God and our selves: or if in public, then to be done by general
accusation; that God only may read our particular sorrows in the single shame
of our families registered in our hearts, and represented to him with
humiliation, shame and a hearty prayer.

2. Those curses which descend from the Fathers to the children Woe unto you*
for ye build the sepulcher of the Prophets and your Fathers killed them: Luke.
11. 47.
truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fathers: for they
killed them and ye build their sepulchers: that is, the Pharisees were colebant
mortuos quos nollent Superstites: In charity to themselves some men wish their
enemies in Heaven, and would be at charges for a monument for them, that their
malice and their power and their bones might rest in the same grave: and yet
that wish, and that expense is no testimony of their Charity but of their
anger. 2. These men were willing that the monuments of those Prophets should
remain and be a visible affrightment to all such bold Chrysostom gave of the
place. 3. To which also the circumstances of the place concur. For they only
said, if they had lived in their Fathers days they would not have done as they
did; but it is certain they approved it, because they pursued the same courses:
and therefore our blessed Savior calls them (...), Mat. 23. 31.
Not only the children of them that did kill the Prophets, but a Killing
generation; the sin also descends upon you, for ye have the same killing mind,
Dion said of Caracalla (...) The man was troublesome to all good men when they
were alive, but did them honor when they were dead: And when Herod had killed
Aristobulus, yet he made him a most magnificent funeral; and because the
Pharisees were of the same humor, therefore our blessed Savior bids them to
fill up the measure of their Fathers iniquity; for they still continued the
malice, only adorning of the Prophets sepulchers have been just cause of a woe
from Christ; this being an act of piety, and the other of nature, inevitable,
and not chosen by them; and therefore not chargable upon them. He therefore
that will to real purposes disavow his Fathers crimes; must do it heartily
Isaiah, or Jeremy, and himself shall ki^l Aristobulus and John the Baptist; he
that is angry because the old Prophets were murdered, and shall imprison, and
beggar and destroy the new ones; He that disavows the persecution in the
primitive times, and honors the memory of the dead Martyrs, and yet every day
makes new ones; He that blames the oppression of the Country by any of his
predecessors, and yet shall continue to oppress his Tenants, and all that are
within his gripe, that man cannot hope to be eased from the curse

3. But concerning the third; there is yet more difficulty. Those sons that
inherit their Fathers sins by possessing the price of their Fathers souls, that
is, by enjoying the goods gotten by their Fathers rapine, may certainly quit
the inheritance of the curse, if they quit the purchase of the sin, that is, if
they pay their Fathers debts; his debts of contract, and his debts of justice;
his debts of intercourse, and his debts of oppression. I do not say that every
man is bound to restore all the land which his Ancestors have unjustly
snatched: bonae fidei possessor, and may enjoy it justly: and the reasons of
this are great, and necessary; for the avoiding eternal suites, and perpetual
diseases of rest and conscience: because there is no estate in the world that
could be enjoyed by any man honestly, if posterity were bound to make
restitution of all the wrongs done by their progenitors. But although the
children of the far removed lines, are not obliged to restitution, yet others
are; and some for the same, some for other reasons.

1* Sons are tied to restore what their Fathers did usurp, or to make
agreement, and an acceptable recompense for it, if the case be visible, evident
and notorious, and the oppressed party demands it; because in this case the law
has not settled the possession in the new tenant: or if a judge has, it is by
injury; and there is yet no collateral accidental title transferred by long
possession, as it is in other cases: and therefore if the son continues to
oppress the same person, whom his Father first injured, he may well expect to
be the heir of his Fathers curse, as well as of his cursed purchase.

2. Whether by law and justice, or not, the person be obliged, nay although by
all the solemnities of law the unjust purchase be established, and that in
conscience the Grandchildren be not obliged to restitution in their own
particulars, but may continue to enjoy it without a new sin; yet if we see a
curse descending upon the family res transit cum suo onere. All lands and
possessions pass with their proper burdens. And if any of my Ancestors was a
Tenant, and a servant, and held his lands as a Villane to his Lord, his
posterity also must do so, though accidentally they become noble. The case is
the same If my Ancestors entered unjustly, there is a curse and a plague that is
due to that oppression and injustice; and that is the burden of the land, and
it descends all along with it: And although I by the consent of laws am a just
possessor, yet I am obliged

The sum is this. As Kingdoms use to expiate the faults of others by acts of
justice: and as Churches use to remove the accursed thing from sticking to the
communities of the faithful, and the sins of Christians from being required of
the whole Congregation,

Secondly, But after all this, many cases do occur, in which we

sin does abound, and evils by sin are derived from his Parents, much more
shall grace super abound, and mercy by grace. If he was in danger from the
crimes of others, much rather shall he be secured by his own piety: For if God
punishes the sins of the fathers to four Abraham were persons not noted for
religion; but suffered in the public impiety, and almost universal idolatry of
their ages; and yet all the evils that could thence descend upon the family,
were wiped off; and God began to reckon with Abraham upon a new stock of
blessings and piety; and he was under God, the Original of so great a blessing,
that his family for 1500. years together had from him a title to many favors;
and what ever evils did chance to them in the descending ages, were but single
evils, in respect of that treasure of Esau proved a naughty man, and he lost
the great blessing which was intailed upon the family; but he got, not a curse,
but a less blessing: and yet because he lost the greater blessing, God
excluded him from being reckoned in the elder time; Esau into a great Nation,
and made him the Father of many Princes. Now the line of blessing being
reckoned in Jacob, God blessed his family strangely, and by miracle, for almost
five generations; he brought them from Egypt by mighty signs and wonders; and
when for sin they all died in their way to Canaan, two only excepted, God so
ordered it, that they were all reckoned as single deaths, the Nation still
descending still God remembered his promise which he made with their
forefathers, and that breach was made up After still God remembered his covenant
with Abraham, and left two Tribes; but they were restless in their provocation
of the God of Abraham; and they also were carried captive: But still God was
the God of their fathers and brought them back, and placed them safe, and they
grew again into a Kingdom and should have remained for ever but that they
killed one that was greater then Abraham, even the Messiah; and then they were
rooted out, and the old covenant cast off, and God delighted no more to the God
of Abraham; but the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. As long as God kept that
relation, so long for the fathers sakes they had a title and an inheritance to
a blessing: for so says Saint Paul [As touching the election they are beloved
for the Fathers sakes.] Romans 11. 28.


I did insist the longer upon this instance that I might remonstrate how great
and how sure, and how persevering mercies, a pious Father of a family may
derive upon his succeeding generations: And if we do but tread in the footsteps
of our Father Abraham, we

1. If a great impiety, and a clamorous wickedness has stained the honor of
a family, and discomposed its title to the Divine mercies and protection, it is
not an ordinary piety that can restore this family. An ordinary, even course of
life, full of sweetness, and innocence will secure every single person in his
own eternal interest: but that piety which must be a spring of blessings, and
Eli, upon whom a sad curse was intailed that there should not be an old man of
the family for ever, and that they should be beggars, and lose the office of
Priesthood: by the counsel of R. Johanan the son Zacheus all the family betook
themselves to a great, a strict and a severe religion; and God was entreated to
revoke his decree, to be reconciled to the family, to restore them to the
common condition of men, from whence they stood separate by the displeasure of
God against the crime of Eli, and his Sons Hophni and Phinehas. This course is
sure either to take off the judgment, or to change it into a blessing; to take
a way the rod, or the smart and evil of it; to convert the punishment into a
mere natural, or humane chance, and that chance to the opportunity of a
virtue, and that virtue to the occasion of a crown.

2. It is of great use for the securing of families, that every Master of a
family order his life so that his piety and virtue be as communicative as is
posible; that is, that he secure the religion of his whole family, by a severe
supravision and animadversion, and by cutting off all those unprofitable and
hurtful branches I know that Abraham will teach his sons to fear me. When a man
teaches his family to know and fear God, then he scatters a blessing round
about his habitation. And this helps to illustrate the reason of the thing as
well as to prove a believing wife, an unbeleeving husband; and either of them
makes the children to be sanctified* else they were unclean, and unholy; that
is, the very designing children to the service of God is a sanctification of
them; and therefore S. Hierom calls Christian children Candidatos fidei
Christianae: and if this very designation of them makes them holy; that is,
acceptable to God, entitled to the promises, partakers of the Covenant, within
the condition of sons; much more shall it be effectual to greater blessings a
chosen generation, an elect family; and then there can no evil happen to them,
but such which will bring them nearer to God; that is, no cross, but the
cross of Christ; no misfortune, but that which shall lead them to felicity:
and if any semblance of a curse happens in the generations it is but like the
anathema of a sacrifice; not an accursed, but a devoted thing: for so the
sacrifice upon whose neck the Priests knife does fall, is so far from being
accursed, that it helps to get a blessing to all that join in the oblation: so
every misfortune that shall whose branches are Holiness unto the Lord. If any
leaf, or any boughs shall fall untimely, God shall gather it up, and place it
in his Temple, or at the foot of his throne; and that family

3. If a curse be feared to descend upon a family for the fault of their
Ancestors; pious sons have yet another way to secure themselves, and to
withdraw the curse from the family, or themselves from the curse; and that is,
by doing some very great and illustrious act of piety, an action in gradu
heroico (as Aristotle calls it) an heroical action. If there should happen to
be one Martyr in a family, it would reconcile the whole kindred to God, and make
him who is more inclined to mercy then to severity, rather to be pleased with
the Relatives of the Martyr, then continue to be angry with the Nephews of a
deceased Behold I give unto him my covenant of peace, Numb. 25. 12.
and he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant of an
everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his God, and made an
atonement for the children of Israel. Thus the sons of Rechab obtain^d the
blessing of an enduring and blessed family, because they were most strict and
religious observers of their fathers precept, and kept it after

One thing more I have to add by way of advice; and that is, that all parents
and fathers of families, from whose loins a blessing or a curse usually does
descend, be very careful, not only generally in all the actions of their
lives (for that I have already pressed) but, particularly in the matter of
repentance; that they be curious that they finish it, and do it thoroughly: for
there are certain (...), leavings of repentance, which makes that Gods anger is
taken from us so imperfectly: and although God for his sake who died for us,
will pardon a returning sinner, and bring him to heaven through tribulation
Ahab; he humbled himself and went softly, and lay in sackcloth, and called for
pardon and God took from him a judgment which was falling heavily upon him:
but we all know his repentance was imperfect and lame: The same evil fell upon
his sons; for so said God; I will bring the evil upon his house in his sons
days. Leave no arreares for thy posterity to pay; but repent with an integral,
a holy and excellent repentance, that God being reconciled to thee thoroughly,
for thy sake also he may bless thy seed after thee.

[God bless thee] will not outweigh the load of a great vice; and the curse
that scatters from thee by virtual contact, and by the channels of relation, if
thou be a vicious person: Nothing can issue from thy fountain but bitter
waters. And as it were a great impudence for a condemned Traitor to beg of his
injured Prince a province for his son, for his sake so it is an ineffective
blessing for them, what we have no title to for our selves, Nay, when we can
convey to them nothing but a curse. The prayer of a sinner, the unhallowed wish
of a vit^ous Parent is but a poor donative to give to a child who sucked
poison from his nurse, and derives cursing from his Parents. They are punished
with a double torture in the shame and pains of the damned, who dying Enemies
to God have left an inventary of sins and wrath to be divided amongst their
children. But they that can truly give a blessing to their children, are such
as live a blessed life, and pray holy prayers, and perform an integral
repentance, and do separate from an evil eye, and are infectious; some look
healthfully as a friendly planet, and innocent as flowers: and as some fancies
convey private effects to confederate and allayed bodies; and between the very
vital spirits of friends and Relatives there is a cognation, and they refresh
each other like social plants, and a good man is a * friend to every Good man;
and (they say) that an usuter knows an usurer, (...). Aris^ot.
and one rich man another, there being by the very manners Amen.

Sermon. V. SERMON. V.

13. Jeremy 16. Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains: and while ye look for light,
or, (left while ye look for light) he shall turn it into the shadow of death,
and make it gross darkness.
GOd is the eternal fountain of honor, and the glorifications to laugh at,
and rejoice in the destruction of a sinner, because he is pleased with the
Economy of his own laws, and the excellent proportions he has made of his
judgments, consequent to our sins. But above all, God rejoiced in his Holy
Son, for he was the image of the Divinity, the character and express image of
his person, in him he beheld his own Essence, his wisdom, his power, his
justice, and his person, and he was that excellent instrument, designed from
eternal ages to represent as in a double mirror, not only the glories of God
to himself, but also or becoming penitent; for this also is called in the Text

For he that has dishonored God by sins, that is, has denied, by a moral
instrument of duty, and subordination, to confess the glories of his power,
and the goodness of his laws, and has dishonored, and despised his mercy,
which God intended as an instrument of our piety, has no better way to
glorify God, then by returning to his duty, to advance the honor of the
Divine Attributes in which he is pleased to communicate himself, and to have
intercourse with man. He that repents, confesses his ownerrour, Whither shall
we go? for thou have the words of eternal life: and by humbling himself,
exalts God by making the proportions of distance more immense, and vast: and as
repentance does contain

But I shall no longer discourse of the Philosophy of this expression; certain
it is, that in the style of Scripture, repentance is the great glorification of
God; and the Prophet, by calling the people to give God glory, calls upon them
to repent; and so expresses [Glory to God on high, and peace on earth, and good
will toward men] by the sole instrument of repentance. And this was it which
Joshuah said to Achan, Joshuah 7. 19.
[Give I pray thee glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto
him: that one act of repentance is one act of glorifying God: Psalm. 51. 4.
and this, David acknowledged, Against the only have I sinned, ut tu
justificeris, that thou might be justified, or cleared, that is, that God
may have the honor of being righteous, and we, the shame of receding from so
excellent a perfection: Romans 3. 4.
or as S. Paul quotes and explicates the place. Let God be true, and every man
a liar, as it is written, that thou might be justified in thy sayings, and
might overcome when thou art judged. But to clear the sense of this
expression of the Prophet, observe the words of S. John: Revel. 16. 9.
and men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God who has
power over those plagues, and they repented not to give him glory.

So that having strength and reason from these so many authorities, I may be
free to read the words of my Text thus, [Repent of all your sins before God
cause darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains] and then
we have here the duty of repentance, ut dum dies est operemini, that ye may
work while it is to day, lest if we stumble upon the dark mountains, that is,
fall into the ruins of

This exhortation of the Prophet was always full of caution and prudence, but
now it is highly necessary; since men who are so clamorously called to
repentance that they cannot avoid the necessity of it, yet that they may
reconcile an evil life with the hopes of

1. First therefore, Repentance implies a deep sorrow, as the beginning and
introduction of this duty; not a superficial sigh, or tear, not a calling our
selves sinners, and miserable persons; this is far from that godly sorrow that
works repentance; and yet I wish there were none in the world, or none
amongst us, who cannot remember that ever they have done this little toward
the abolition of their multitudes of sins; but yet if it were not Ezekiel. 27. 31.
clamorous and sad: it is called [a weeping sorely] in the verse next after my
text, Joel: 2. 13.
[a weeping with the bitterness of heart; a turning to the Lord with weeping,
fasting, and mourning; a weeping day and night; the sorrow of heart; the
breaking of the spirit; Jeremy when he wept for the sins of his Nation, the
heart-breakings of David when he mourned for his adultery and murder, and the
bitter tears of Saint Peter when he washed off the guilt and baseness of his
fall, and the denying his Master; we shall be sufficiently instructed in this
praeludium or introduction to repentance; and that it is not every breath of a
sigh, or moisture of a tender eye, not every crying [Lord have mercy upon me]
that is such a sorrow as begins our restitution to the state of grace and see
Rule of II. living. D. of repentance. p. 335.
and accidental tenderness) yet it is not a Godly sorrow unless it really
produce these effects; that is, 1. That it makes us

But I desire that it be observed, that sorrow for sins, is not Repentance;
Paul: 2 Cor 7.
[Godly sorrow works repentance] sorrow is the Parent, and repentance is the
product; and therefore it is a high piece of ignorance to suppose that, a
crying out and roaring for our sins upon our deathbed can reconcile us to God;
our crying to God must be so early, and so lasting, as to be able to teeme, and
produce such a daughter, which must live long, Judas had so great a sorrow for
betraying the innocent blood of his Lord, that it was intolerable to his
Spirit, and he burst in the middle: and if mere sorrow be repentance, then
[there is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth for evermore.

Let us therefore beg of God (as Calebs daughter did of her Father) dedisti
mihi terram aridam, da etiam and irrig^am, thou have given me a dry land, give
me also a land of waters, a dwelling place in tears, rivers of tears, ut
quoniam non sumus digni oculos orando ad coelum levare, at simus digni oculos
plorando caecare, as Saint Austins expression is, that because we are not
worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven in prayer, yet we may be worthy to weep
our selves blind for sin, the meaning is, that we beg sorrow of excellent; and
that although her sin had abounded, yet Gods grace at dole Saltem quod dolere
non possis, grieve that thou can not grieve: and so must we, always fear
that our trouble for sin is nor great enough, that our sorrow is too remiss,
that our affections are indifferent; but we can only be sure that our sorrow
is a godly sorrow, when it works repentance; that is, when it makes us hate
and leave all our sin, and take up the cross of patience or penance: that is,
confess our sin, accuse our selves, condemn the action by hearty sentence; and
then, if it has no other emanation but fasting and prayer for its pardon, and
hearty industry toward its abolition, our sorrow is

For, sorrow alone will not do it; there must follow a total dereliction of our
sin; and this is the first part of repentance. Concerning which, I consider,
that it is a sad mistake amongst many that do some things toward repentance,
that they mistake the first addresses, and instruments of this part of
repentance for the whole duty it self. Confession of sins is in order to the
dereliction of them; but then confession must not be like the unlading of a
ship to take in new stowage; or the vomits of intemperance, which ease the
stomach that they may continue the merry meeting: but such a confession Saul
reserved after the spoil of Agag: they proclaim the sin, but do nothing toward
its cure; they serve Gods end to make us justly Homer, laid in the mids as the

(...) This is the murderer, this is the Achan, this is he that troubles
I^rael;

surprise, and never sinks into it by deliberation; that fights

From hence we are to take our estimate, whence our resolutions of piety must
commence. He that resolves not to live well till the time comes that he must
die, is ridiculous in his great design, as he is impertinent in his
intermedial purposes, and vain in his hope. Can a dying man to any real effect
resolve [Oh spare me a little, that I may recover my strength before I go hence
and be no more seen:] And something like it was the saying of the Emperor
Charles the fifth, Inter vitae negotia and mortis diem oportet spacium
intercedere: When ever our holy purposes are renewed, unless God gives us time
to act them, to mortify and subdue our lusts, to conquer and subdue the whole
kingdom of sin, to rise from our grave and be clothed with nerves and flesh and
a new skin, captive by the Devil at his will, he is fast bound as a slave
tugging at the oar, that he is grown in love with his fetters, and longs to be
doing the work of sin, is it likely that [Confession of sins, praying for their
pardon, and resolutions to lead a new life] should begin, [before our feet
stumble upon the dark mountains,] lest we leave the work only resolved upon to
be begun, which, it is necessary we should in For that we should actually
abolish the whole body of sin and death, that we should crucify the old man
with his lusts, that we should lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so
easily beset us, that we should cast away the works of darkness, that we
should awake from sleep, and arise from death, that we should redeem the time,
that we should cleanse our hands and purify our hearts, that we should have
escaped the corruption, (all the corruption) that is in the whole world through
lust, that nothing of the old leaven should remain in us, but that we be wholly
a new these are the perpetual precepts of the Spirit, and the certain duty of
man; and that, to have all these in purpose only, is merely to no purpose,
without the actual eradication of every vicious habit, and the certain
abolition of every criminal adherence, is clearly and dogmatically decreed
every where in the Scripture; Gal. 5. 24.
For (they are the words of Saint Paul) they that are Christ's have crucified
the flesh, with the affections and lusts: the work is actually done, and sin is
dead, or wounded mortally, before they can in any sense belong to Christ, to be
a portion of his Gal. 6. 15.
And He that is in Christ is a new creature. For in Christ Jesus nothing can
avail but a new creature: Gal. 5. c.
nothing but a Keeping the Commandments of God: 1 Cor. 7. 9.
Not all our tears, though we should weep like David and his men at Ziklag,
till they could weep no more, or the women of Ramah, or like the weeping in the
valley of Hinnom, could suffice, if we retain the affection to any one sin, or
have any unrepented of, or unmortified. It is true that a contrite and broken
heart, God will not despise. No, he will not. For if it be a hearty and
permanent sorrow, it is an excellent beginning of repentance; and God will to a
timely sorrow

Lastly, suppose all this be done, and that by a long course of strictness and
severity, mortification and circumspection we have Having escaped the
corruption that is in the world thorough lust: And besides this, giving all
diligence, add to your faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, to knowledge
temperance, to temperance patience, and so on, to godliness, to brotherly
kindness, and to charity: These things must be in you and abound: This is the
sum total of repentance; We must not only have overcome sin, but we must
after great diligence have acquired the habits of all those Christian graces
which are necessary in the transaction of our affairs, in all relations to God,
and our neighbor, and our own person. It is not enough to say, Lord, I thank
thee I am no extortioner, no adulterer, not as this Publican; all the reward of
such a poenitent escaped the corruption of the world, he has also escaped
those heavy judgments which threatened his ruin.

Nec furtum feci, nec fugi, si mihi dicat
Servus; habes precium; loris non ureris, aio.
Non hominem occidi; non pasces in cruce corvos.
If a servant have not rob^d his Master, nor offered to fly from his bondage,
he shall escape the Furea, his flesh shall not be exposed enter into the joy of
our Lord, unless after we have put off the old man with his affections and
lusts, we also put on the new man in righteousness and holiness of life. And
this we are taught in most plain doctrine by S. Paul [Let us lay aside the
weight that does so easily beset us;] that is the one half; and [then Let us
run with patience the race that is set before us. Heb. 12. 1.
These are the fruits meet for repentance, spoken of by S. John Baptist; that
is, when we renew our first undertaking in baptism, and return to our courses
of innocence.

Parcus Deorum cultor, and infrequens,
Insanientis dum sapientiae consultus erro
Nunc retrorsum vela dare, atque iterare cursus
Cogor relictos --
The sense of which words is well given us by S. John; Revel. 2.
Remember whence thou art fallen, repent; and do thy first works. For all our
hopes of heaven rely upon that Covenant which God made with us in Baptism;
which is, That being redeemed from our vain conversation, we should serve him
in holiness and righteousness all our days. Now when any of us has
prevaricated our part of the Covenant, we must return to that state, and redeem
the intermedial time spent in sin by our doubled industry in the ways of
grace: we must be reduced to our first estate, and make If the righteous
scarcely be saved, (if it be so difficult to overcome our sins, and obtain
virtuous habits: difficult (I say) to a righteous, a sober, and well living
person) where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? What shall become of him
who by his evil life has not only removed himself from the affections, but
even from the possibilities of virtue? He that has lived in sin will die in
sorrow.

The Invalidity of a deathbed SERMON. VI.

Part II.
BUt I shall pursue this, great and necessary truth, first; by showing what
parts and ingredients of repentance are assigned, when it is described in holy
Scripture. Secondly, by showing the necessities, the absolute necessities of a
holy life, and what it means in Scripture to [live holily]. Thirdly, by
considering what directions or intimations we have concerning the last time of
beginning to repent; and what is the longest period that

First, That repentance is not only an abolition, and extinction of the body
of sin, a bringing it to the altar, and slaying it before God and all the
people; but that we must also (...) mingle gold and rich presents, the oblation
of good works, Faith and Repentance are the whole duty of a Christian. Faith is
a sacrifice of the understanding to God: Repentance sacrifices the whole will:
That, gives the knowing; this, gives up all the desiring faculties: That, makes
us Disciples; this, makes us servants of the Holy Jesus. Nothing else was
preached by the Apostles, nothing was enjoined as the duty of man, nothing else
did build up the body of Christian religion. [Repentance toward God, Acts. 20.
21.
and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ] so that whosoever believes in Jesus
Christ, and repents toward God must make his accounts according to this
standard, that is, to believe all that Christ taught him; and to do all that
Christ commanded: and this is remarked in Saint Paul's Hebr. 6. 1.
Catechism where he gives a more particular Catalogue of fundamentals: he
reckons nothing but Sacraments and faith; of which he enumerates two principal
articles [resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgement] whatsoever is
practical, [repentance from dead works] which, if we observe the singularity of
the phrase, does not mean [sorrow] For sorrow from dead works, is not sense;
but it must mean mutationem status, a conversion from dead works, which (as in
all motions) supposes two terms; from dead works, to living works, from the
death of sin to the life of righteousness.

I will add but two places more, out of each Testament one; in which I suppose
you may see every lineament of this great duty But if the wicked will turn
from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that
which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.] or as it is
more fully described in Ezekiel. 33. 14 [When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall
surely die; If he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right; if
the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed; walk in the
statutes of life without committing iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall
not die.] Here only is the condition of pardon; to leave all your sins, to
keep all Gods statutes, to walk in them, to abide, to proceed, and make
progress in them; and this, without the interruption by a deadly sin, [without
committing iniquity] to make restitution of all the wrongs he has done, all
the unjust money he has taken, all the oppressions he has committed, all that
must be satisfied for, and repayed according to our ability: we must make
satisfaction for all injury to our Neighbors fame, all wrongs done to his
soul; he must be restored to that condition of good things thou did in any
sense remove him from: when this thou shall surely live, thou shall not die for
thy old sins thou have formerly committed. * Only be pleased to observe this
one thing; that this place of Ezekiel is it which is so often mistaken for that
common saying, At what time soever a sinner repents him of his sins from the
bottom of his heart I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says
the Lord] For although at what time soever a sinner does repent (as repentance
[At what time soever] not upon a man's deathbed; yet there are no such words in
the whole Bible, nor any nearer to the sense of them then the words I have now
read to you, out of the Prophet Ezekiel. Let that therefore no more deceive
you, or be made a color to countenance a persevering sinner, or a deathbed
penitent.

Neither is the duty of Repentance to be bought at an easier rate in the New
Testament. You may see it described in the 2 Cor. 7. 11. Godly sorrow works
repentance. Well? but what is that Behold the self same thing that ye sorrowed
after a godly sort, what carfulness it wrought in you, yea what clearing of
your selves, yea what indignation, yea what fear, ye what vehement desire, yea
what zeal, yea what revenge. These are the fruits of that sorrow that is
effectual: these are the parts of repentance; clearing our selves of all that
is past, and great carfulness for the future, anger at our selves for our old
sins, and fear lest we commit the like again, vehement desires of pleasing God,
and zeal of holy actions, and a revenge upon our selves for our sins, called by
Saint Paul in another 1 Cor. 11. 31.
a judging our selves lest we be judged of the Lord. And in pursuance of this
truth, the primitive Church did not admit a sinning person to the public
communions with the faithful, till besides their sorrow they had spent some
years in an (...) in doing good works and holy living; and especially in such
actions which did contradict that wicked inclination which led them into those
sins whereof they were now admitted to repent. And therefore we find that they
stood in the station of penitents seven years, 13 years, and sometimes till
their death, before they could be reconciled to the peace of God, and his

Scelerum si been poenitet
eradenda cupidinis pravi sunt elementa
and tenerae nimis mentes asperioribus
Formandae studijs -- Horat. Hierocles. (...). See life of H. Jesus part. 2.
disc. of Repentance.

Repentance is the institution of a philosophical and severe life, an utter
extirpation of all unreasonablenesse and impiety, and an address to, and a
final passing through all the parts of holy living.

Now Consider whether this be imaginable or possible to be Cogimur a suetis
animum suspendere Atque Atque ut vivamus, vivere desinimus. Co^^^l. Gal.
These men then sin not because they dare not, Nec ad rem ^^^tinet ubi in
^^^pevet, quod (...) ut s^cret.
but if the man dies then, dies when he only declaims against and curses his
sin, as being the author of his present fear, and apprehended calamity; It is
very far from reconciling him to -- moriensque recepit
Quas nollet victurus aquas --


He curses sin upon his deathbed and makes a Panegyric of virtue

Quae men's est hodie, Hor. l. 4. od. 10.
cur eadem non puero fuit?
vel cur his animis incolumes non redeunt genae?
I shall end this first Consideration, with a plain exhortation; that since
repentance is a duty of so great and giant-like bulk; let no man crowd it up
into so narrow room, as that it be strangled in its birth for want of time and
air to breath in. Let

And now when any of you is tempted to commit a sin, remember, that sin will
ruin you unless you repent of it. * But this (you say) is no news, and so far
from affrighting you from sin, that God knows) it makes men sin the rather. For
therefore they venture to act the present temptation, because they know, if
they repent, God will forgive them; and therefore they resolve upon both, to
sin now, and to repent hereafter.

Against this folly I shall not oppose the consideration of their danger, and
that they neither know how long they shall live, nor great fear and tremblings
of heart, lest God should never forgive

And now, suppose that you can repent when you will, that is, that you can
grieve when you will, (though no man can do it, no man can grieve when he
please) though he could shed tears when he list, he cannot grieve without a
real, or an apprehended infelicity, but, suppose it, and that he can fear when
he please, and that he can love when he please, or what he please; that is,
suppose a man to be able to say to his palate, though I love sweet meats, yet
to morrow I will hate and loath them, and believe them bitter and distastful
things; suppose (I say) all these impssibilities, yet since, repentance does
suppose a man to be in a state of such real misery

The sum is this. He that commits sins shall perish eternally if he never does
repent. And if he does repent and yet untimely, he is not the better; and if he
does not repent with an entire, a perfect

2. The second general consideration is, The necessity, the absolute necessity
of holy living, God has made a Covenant with us, Romans 12. 1.
that we must give up our selves, bodies and souls, not a dying, but a living,
and healthful sacrifice. He has forgiven all our old sins, and we have
bargained to quit them, from the time [through Christ which strengthens me, I
can do all things, says S. Paul,] however, we can do to the utmost of our
strength, and beyond that we cannot take thought; impossibilities enter not
into deliberation, but according to our abilities, and natural powers,
assisted by Gods grace, so God has covenanted with us to live a holy life.
[For in Christ Jesus nothing avayleth but a new creature, nothing but faith
working by charity, nothing but keeping the Commandments of God.] They are all
the words of S. Paul before quoted; to which he adds. [and as many as walk
according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy.] This is the Covenant,
[they are the Israel of God] upon those peace and mercy shall abide; if they
become a new creature, wholly transformed in the image of their mind; if they
have faith, and this faith be an operative working faith, a faith that produces
a holy life, a faith that works by charity; if they keep the Commandments of
God, then they are within the Covenant of mercy, but not else; for, in Christ
Jesus nothing else avayleth. * To the same purpose are those words Hebr. 12.
14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see
the Lord.] Peace with all men] implies both justice and charity, Holinesse]
implies all our duty toward God. universal diligence; and this must be
followed, that is, pursued with diligence, in a lasting course of life and
exercise, and without this, we shall never see the face of God. I need urge no
more authorities to this purpose; these two are as certain and convincing as
two thousand, and since thus much is actually required, and is the condition of
the Covenant; it is certain that sorrow for not having done what is commanded
to be done; and a purpose to do what is necessary to be actually performed,
will not acquit us before the righteous judgment of God. For the grace of God
has appeared to all men, Tit. 2. 12.
teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live godly,
justly, and soberly in this present world.] for upon these terms alone we must
[look for the blessed hope, the glorious appearing of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ]. * I shall no longer insist upon this particular, but
only propound it to your consideration, To what purpose are all those
Commandments in Scripture, of living holily, and according to the
Commandments of God, of adorning the Gospel of God, of walking as in the day,
of walking in light, of pure and undefiled religion, of being holy as God is
holy, of being humble and meek, as Christ is humble, of putting on the Lord
Jesus, of living a spiritual life,] but that it is the purpose of God, and the
intention and design of Christ dying for us, and the Covenant made with man,
that we should expect heaven upon no other terms in the world, but of a holy
life, in the faith and obedience of the Lord Jesus.

Now if a vicious person, when he comes to the latter end of his

Peleos and Priami transit, vel Nestoris aet as
and fuerat serum jam tibi desinere.
Eja age, rumpe moras, quo te spectabimus usque
Dum quid sis dubitas, Mart. l. 2. ep. 64.
jam potes esse nihil.
And now it will be a vain question to ask, whether or no God cannot save a
dying man that repents after a vicious life? For it is true, God can do it if
he please; and he can raise children to Abraham out of the stones, and he can
make ten thousand worlds if he sees good, and he can do what he list, and he
can save an ill living man though he never repent at all, so much as upon his
deathbed. All this he can do; but Gods power is no ingredient into this
question: burden is so light, his yoke is so easy, that it is a shameless
impudence to expect so great glories at a less rate then so little a service,
at a lower rate then a holy life. It cost the Eternal Son sow in the flesh,
and would reap in the spirit, live to the Devil, and die to God, and therefore
it is but just in God that their hopes should be desperate, and their craft be
folly, and their condition be, the unexpected, unfeared inheritance of an
eternal sorrow.

Lastly. Our last inquiry is into the time, the last or latest time Luke 1. 74.
He has [sworn this oath to us, that he would grant unto us, that we being
delivered from fear of our enemies, might serve him without fear in holiness
and righteousness before him [all the days of our life]. Now although God
will not (...) forget our infirmities, but pass by the weaknesses of an honest
a watchful, and industrious person; yet the Covenant he makes with us is from
the day of our first voluntary profession, to our grave: and according as we

2. Scripture describing the duty of repenting sinners, names no [today. To day
if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts. 3. The duty of a Christian is
described in Scripture, to be such as requires length of time, and a continued
industry. [Let us run with patience the race that is set before us. Hebr. 12.
1. Ver. 3.
] and [Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself,
lest ye be wearied, and faint in your minds.] So great a preparation is not
for the agony and contention of an hour, or a day, or a week, but for the whole
life of a Christian, or for great parts of its abode. 4. There is a certain
period and time set for our repentance, and beyond that all our industry is
ineffectuall. There is a day of visitation, our own day, and there is a day of
visitation, that is Gods day. This appeared in the case of Jerusalem. [O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, if thou had known the time of thy visitation, at least
in this thy day.] Well! they neglected it, and then there was a time of Gods
visitation which was his day; called in Scripture, [the day of the Lord] and
because they had neglected their own day, they fell into inevitable ruin: No
repentance could have prevented their final ruin. And this which was true in
a Nation, is also clearly affirmed true in the case of single persons. [ Look
diligently lest any fail of the grace of God, Heb. 12. 16.
lest there be any person among you as Esau, who sold his birthright, and
afterward when he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected, for he
found no place for his repentance though he sought it carefully with tears.]
Esau had time enough to repent his bargain as long as he lived; he wept sorely
for his folly, and carfulness sat heavy upon his soul, and yet he was not
heard, nor his repentance accepted; for the time was past: And [take heed]
says the Apostle, lest it come to pass to any of you to be in the same case.
Now if ever there be a time in which repentance is too late, it must be the
time of our deathbed, and the last time of our life: And after a man is fallen
into God will laugh at them when their calamity comes; they shall call, and the
Lord shall not hear them. * And this was the case of the five foolish virgins
when the arrest of death surprised them: they discovered their want of oil,
they were troubled at it, they begged oil, they were refused, they did

Therefore concerning the time of beginning to repent, no man Mortem venientem
nemo hilaris excipit nisi qui se ad eam diu composuerat, Epist. 30.
said Seneca. He only dies cheerfully who stood waiting for death in a ready
dress of a long preceding preparation. He that repents to day, repents late
enough that he did not begin yesterday: But he that puts it off till to morrow
is vain and miserable.

-- hodie tam posthume vivere serum est Martial. l. 2. ep 90.
Ille sapit quisquis posthume vixit heri.
sin of despair, but the misery of despair. A man has no ground to hope that
ever he shall be made an Angel, and yet, that not hoping, is not to be called,
despair: and no man can hope for heaven without repentance; And for such a man
to despair, is not the sin, but the misery. If such persons have a promise of
heaven, let them show it, and hope it, and enjoy it; if they have no promise,
they must thank themselves, for bringing themselves into a condition without
the Covenant, without a promise, hopeless

But will not trusting in the merits of Jesus Christ save such a man? For that
we must be tried by the word of God: In which there is no contract at all made
with a dying person that has lived in Name a Christian, in practice a Heathen:
and we shall dishonor the sufferings and redemption of our blessed Savior, if
we make them to be a Umbrello to shelter our impious and ungodly living. But
that no such person may after a wicked life repose himself in [Our Savior
Jesus Christ who gave himself for us] what to do? Titus. 2. 14.
that we might lives as we list? and hope to be saved by his merits? No But
[that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar
people zealous of good works. These things speak and exhort,] says Saint Paul.
But more plainly yet, in S. Peter [Christ bare our sins in his own body on the
tree. 1 Pet. 2 24.
] To what end? [that we being dead unto sin should live unto righteousness.]
since therefore our living a holy life is the end of Christ's dying that sad and
holy death for us, he that trusts on it to evil purposes,

But why may not we be saved as well as the thief upon the cross? See life of
Jesus. Disc. of Repentance. part. 2.
even because our case is nothing alike. When Christ dies once more for us, we
may look for such another instance; not till then. But this thief did but then
come to Christ; he knew him not before; and his case was as if a Turk or
heathen should be converted

And therefore let no Christian man who has covenanted with God to give him the
service of his life, think that God will be answered with the sighs and prayers
of a dying man; for all that great obligation which lies upon us cannot be
transacted in an instant, when we have loaded our souls with sin, and made them
empty of virtue; we cannot so soon grow up to a perfect man in Christ Jesus.
Arrian. Epictet l. 1. c. 15.
(...) you cannot have an apple, or a cherry, but you must stay its proper
periods, and let it blossom and knot, and grow and ripen, [and in due season we
shall reap if we faint not] (says the Apostle) far much less may we expect
that the fruits of repentance, and the issues and degrees of holiness shall

Suffer therefore not your selves to be deceived by false principles, and vain
confidences; for no man can in a moment root out the long contracted habits of
vice, nor upon his deathbed make use of all that variety of preventing,
accompanying and persevering grace, which God gave to man in mercy; because man
would need it all, because without it he could not be saved; nor upon his
deathbed can he exercise the duty of mortification; nor cure his drunkenness

Hunc volo laudari qui sine morte potest.
Mart. ep. l. 1.
Vivere quod propero pauper, nec inutilis annis
Da veniam, properat vivere nemo satis.
Differat hoc, patrios optat qui vincere census
Atriaque immodicis arctat imaginibus.
Mart. l. 2. ep 90.
Sermon. VII. SERMON. VII.

17. Jeremy 9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked;
FOlly and subtlety divide the greatest part of mankind, and there is no
other difference but this, that some are crafty enough to deceive; Others
foolish enough to be cozened and abused: And yet the scales also turn, for they
that are the most crafty to cozen others, are the veriest Fools and most of
all abused themselves. They rob their neighbor of his money, and

For a man is helpless and vain; of a condition so exposed to calamity, that a
raisin is able to kill him* any trooper out of the Egyptian army, a fly can do
it, when it goes on Gods errand; the most contemptible accident can destroy
him, the smallest chance affright him, every future contingency, when but
conside^ed as possible, can amaze him; and he is encompassed with potent and
malicious ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the Princes. Who then
shall we trust in? in our Friend? Poor man! he may help thee in one thing, and
need thee in ten; he may pull thee out of the ditch* and his foot may slip and
fall into it himself; he gives thee counsel to choose a wife, and himself is to
seek how prudently to choose his religion* he counsels thee to abstain from a
duel, and yet slayes his own soul with drinking, like a person void of all
understanding he is willing enough to preserve their friendships, and
contracted also their hatred and quarrels; Heart of a man a man's own heart is
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? And who
can choose but know it?

And there is no greater argument of the deceitfulness of our Hearts, then
this, that no man can know it all; it cosens us in the very number of its
cosenage: But yet we can reduce it all to two heads. We say concerning a false
man, trust him not for he will deceive you, and we say concerning a weak and
broken staff, lean not upon it, for that will also deceive you. The man
deceives because he is false, and the staff because it is weak, and the heart

1. The heart is deceitful in its strength; and when we have the unable to
continue in it, so backward to return to it; so without

And yet this weak heart is strong in passions, violent in desires,
unresistable in its appetites, impatient in its lust, furious in anger; here
are strengths enough, one would think: But so have I seen a man in a fever,
sick and distempered, unable to walk, less able to speak sense, or to do an
act of counsel; and yet when his fever Arrian.
but furiousness and disease; (...), It is weakness another way; And so are
the strengths of a man's heart; they are fetters and manacles; strong, but they
are the cordage of imprisonment, so strong, that the heart is not able to stir.
And yet it cannot but be a huge sadness, that the heart

This, if it be examined, will prove to be a deceit indeed, a pretense, rather
then true upon a just cause, that is, it is not a natural, but a moral and a
vicious weakness; and we may try it in one or two familiar instances. One of
the great strengths, shall I call it? or weaknesses of the heart is, that it is
strong, violent and passionate in Chastity and Temperance be so easy, that a
man may be brought to either of them with so ready and easy instruments; Let
us not suffer our hearts to deceive us by the weakness of its pretenses, and
the strength of its

But thus it is in every thing else; take an Heretic, a Rebel, a person that
has an ill cause to manage; what he wants in the strength of his reason, he
shall make it up with diligence; and a person that has Right on his side is
cold, indiligent, lazy, and unactive, trusting that the goodness of his Cause
will do it alone; But so, wrong prevails, while evil persons are zealous in a
Bad matter, and others are remiss in a Good; And the same person shall be very
industrious always when he has least reason so to

2. The Heart of man is deceitful in making judgment concerning its own Acts.
It does not know when it is pleased or displeased, it is peevish and trifling,
it would and it would not, and it is in many Cases impossible to know whether a
man's heart desires such a thing or not. Saint Ambrose has an odd saying,
Facilius inveneris innocentem, quam qui poenitentiam ^^gne egerit. It is easier
to find a man that has lived innocently, then one that repents; Alas! he so
hates it, that he dares not, if he be wise, we be not lead into temptation? but
because we hate the sin, and yet love it too well; we curse it, and yet follow
it; we are angry at our selves, and yet cannot be without it; we know it undoes
us, but we think it pleasant; And when we are to execute the fierce anger of
the Lord upon our sins, yet we are kinde-hearted, and spare the Agag, the
reigning sin, the

These are but ill signs How then shall I know by some infallible token, that
I am a true Penitent? What and if I weep for my sins? will you not then give me
leave to conclude my heart right with God, and at enmity with sin? It may be
so. But there are some friends that weep at parting; and is not thy weeping a
sorrow of affection? It is a sad thing to part with our long companion* Or it
may be thou weepest, because thou would have a sign to cozen thy self
withal; for some men are more desirous to have a sign, then the thing
signified; they would do something to show

Nay our heart is so deceitful in this matter of Repentance, that the Masters
of spiritual life are fain to invent suppletory Arts and stratagems to secure
the duty. And we are advised to mourn, because we do not mourn, to be
sorrowful because we are not sorrowful. Now if we be sorrowful in the first
stage, how happens it that we know it not? Is our heart so secret to our
selves? But if we be not sorrowful in the first period, how shall we be so, or
know it in the second period? For we may as well doubt concerning the sincerity
of the second or reflex act of

Thus many persons think themselves in a good estate, and make no question of
their salvation, being confident only because they are confident; and they are
so, because they are bidden to be so;

3. The heart is deceitful in its own resolutions and purposes: for many times
men make their resolutions only in their understanding, not in their wills;
they resolve it sitting to be done, not decree that they will do it; And
instead of beginning to be reconciled to God, by the renewed and hearty
purposes of holy

But suppose our resolutions advanced further, and that our Will and Choices
also are determined; see how our hearts deceive us. 1. We resolve against those
sins that please us not, or where temptation is not present, and think by an
over-acted zeal against some sins to get an indulgence for some others. There
are some their Heart: for it is not love of the virtue; if it were, they would
love Virtue in all its Instances; for Chastity is as much a virtue as
Temperance, and God hates Lust as much as he hates Virtutem unam si amiseris
etsi^an^ui non potest virtus, sed si unam consessus fueris te non habere,
nullam te esse ha^i^urum ^an nes^is? Cicer.
But this sin is against my health, or it may be it is against my lust, it
makes me impotent, and yet impatient, full of desire, and empty of strength. Or
else I do an act of Prayer, lest my conscience become unquiet, while it is not
satisfied or cozened with some intervals of Religion: I shall think my self a
damned wretch, if I do nothing for my soul; but if I do, I shall call the one
sin that remains nothing but my Infirmity; and therefore it is my excuse: and
my Prayer is not my Religion, but my Peace, and my Pretense, and my Fallacy.

2. We resolve against our sin, that is, we will not act it in those
circumstances as formerly: I will not be drunk in the streets; but I may sleep
till I be recovered, and then come forth sober; or if I be overtaken, it shall
be in Civil and Gentile company; Or it may be not so much; I will leave my
intemperance and my Lust too, but I will remember it with pleasure, I will
revolve the past action in my mind, and entertain my fancy with a moros
delectation in it, and by a fiction of imagination will represent it present,
and so be satisfied with a little esseminacy, or fantastic pleasure, Beloved,
suffer not your hearts so to cozen you,

3. We resolve against it when the opportunity is slipped, and Epictetus tells
us of a Gentleman returning from banishment, in his journey toward home called
at his house, told a sad story of an Imprudent life, the greatest part of which
being now spent, he was resolved for the future to live Philosophically, and
entertain no business, to be candidate for no employment, not to go to the
Court, not to salute Caesar with ambitious attendancies, but to study, and
worship the gods, and die willingly, Epictetus did not. And he had reason. For
(...). Letters from Caesar met him at the doors, and invited him to Court, and
he forgot all his promises, which were warm upon his lips, and grew pompous,
secular, and ambitious, and gave the gods thanks for his preferment. Thus many
men leave the world, when their fortune has left them, and they are severe and
philosophical, and retired for ever, if for ever it be impossible to return:
But let a prosperous Sunshine warm and refresh their sadnesses, and make it but
possible to break

4. The heart is false, deceiving and deceived in its intensions and designs.
A man hears the precepts of God injoyning us to give Alms of all we possess;
he readily obeys with much cheerfulness and alacrity; And his charity, like a
fair spreading tree, looks beauteously: But there is a Canker at the heart; The
man blows a Trumpet to call the poor together, and hopes the neighborhood
will take notice of his Bounty. Nay he gives Alms privately, Instance, and to
seek Gods glory in a particular, which will also

Here a man would think were enough to abate our confidence and the spirit of
pride, and to make a man eternally to stand upon his guard, and to keep as
strict watch upon his own heart, as upon his greatest enemy from without.
Custodi, libera me de meipso, Deus. It was S. Augustines prayer, Lord keep me,
Lord deliver me from my self. If God will keep a man, that he be not Felo de
se, that he lay no violent hands upon himself, it is certain nothing else can
do him mischief, (...), as Agamemnon said, Neither Pray that ye enter not into
Temptation, said our Blessed Savior, and Count it all joy when you enter into
diverse Temptations, said one of Christ's Disciples. The case is easy. When God
suffers us to be tempted, he means it but as a trial of our faith, as the
exercise of our virtues, as the opportunity of reward, and in such cases we
have reason to count it all joy; since the Trial of our faith works Patience
and Patience experience, and experience causes hope, and hope makes not
ashamed: But yet for all this, pray against temptations: for when we get them
into our hands, we use them as blind men do their clubs, neither distinguish
person nor part; as soon they strike the

Nolite, inquit, hospites adire adme, ilico istic;
Ne contagio mea umbrave obsit,

There is so much falsenesse and iniquity in man's heart, that it defiles all
the members; it makes the eyes lustful, and the tongue slanderous; it fills the
head with mischief, and the feet with blood, and the hands with injury, and the
present condition of man with folly, and makes his future state apt to inherit
eternal misery. But this is but the beginning of those throws, and damnable
impieties, which proceed out of the heart of man and defile the whole
constitution. I have yet told but the weaknesses of the heart; I shall the
defile it to the ground, and make it desperately, wicked, that is,

The deceitfulness of the Heart. SER. VIII.

Part II.
2 (...): Epict. Arrian.
and failings in things of greatest necessity; and we have here so many
objects to furnish out this knowledge, that we find it with the longest and
latest before it be obtained. A man does not begin to know him self till he be
old, and then he is well stricken in death: A man's heart at first being like a
plain table, unspotted indeed, but then there is nothing legible in it. As soon
as ever we ripen toward the imperfect uses of our reason, we write upon this
table such crooked characters, such imperfect

meekness, and never consider concerning Long suffering? and if you talk to
them of growth in Grace, or the spirit of obsignation, or the melancholy
lectures of the Cross and imitation of, and conformity to Christ's sufferings;
or adherences to God, or rejoicing in him, or not quenching the spirit; you are
too deep learned for them. And yet these are duties set down plainly for our
practice, necessary to be acted in order to our Salvation. We brag of light,
and reformation, and fullness of the spirit: in the mean time we understand not
many parts of our duty. We enquire into something that may make us talk, or be
talked of, or that we may tro^ble a Church, or disturb the peace of minds; but
in things that concern Holy living and that wisdom bring the 13. Chapter to the
Romans to prove the lawfulness of

But that I may be more particular; the heart of man uses devices that it may
be ignorant.

1. We are impatient of honest and severe reproof; and order the circumstances
of our persons and address that we shall never come to the true knowledge of
our condition. Who will endure to hear his curate tell him, that he is
Covetous, or that he is proud? (...). It is Calumny and Reviling if he speak it
to his head, and relates to his person: and yet if he speak only in general,
every man neglects what is not recommended to his particular. But yet if our
Physician tell us* you look well, Sir; but a Fever lurks in your spirits,
(...) drink Julips and abstain from flesh; no than thinks it shame or calumny
to be told so: but when

2. In order to this, we heap up teachers of our own, and they guide us, not
whither, but which way they please: for we are curious to go our own way, and
careless of our Hospital or Inn at night. A fair way, and a merry company,
and a pleasant easy guide will entice us into the Enemies quarters; and such
guides we cannot want. Improbitati occasio nunquam defuit. If we have a mind
to be wicked, we shall want no prompters; and false teachers at first creeping
in unawares have now so filled the pavement of Cicero l. 7. ad Atticum,
undertakes to bargain with them that kept the Sybils books, that for a sum of
money they shall expound to him what he please; and to be sure, ut quidvis
potius, quam Regem proferrent. They shall declare against the government De
Divinat. l. 2
Ad opinionem imperitorum fictas esse Religiones. Men shall have what Religion
they please, and God shall be entitled to all the quarrels of covetous and
Ambitious persons, (...), as Demosthenes wittily complained of the Oracle, An
answer shall be drawn out of Scripture to countenance the design, and God made
to Rebel against

3. But the heart of man has yet another stratagem to secure its iniquity by
the means of ignorance; and that is, Incogitancy or Inconsideration. For there
is wrought upon the spirits of many men great impression by education, by a
modest and temperate nature, by humane Laws, and the customs and severities of
sober persons, and the fears of religion, and the awfulnesse of a reverend man,
his eloquence was stronger then their anger and design: But suddenly super
totam materiam, at all, and does the thing, not because it thinks it fit to do
so, but because it will not consider whether it be or no: it is enough that it
pleases a present appetite, and if such incogitancy comes to be habitual, as it
is in very many men; (first by resisting the motions of the holy spirit, then
by quenching him,) we shall find the consequents to be, first an Indifferency,
then a dullness, then a Lethargy, then a direct Hating the ways of God; and
it commonly ends in a wretchlessenesse of spirit to be manifested on our
deathbed; when the man shall pass hence not like the shadow, but like the
dog, that departs, without when we will not hear our king speak and plead,
not to save himself, but us, to speak for our peace, and innocence and
Salvation, to prevent our ruin, and our intolerable calamity: certainly we are
much in love with the wages of death, when we cannot endure to hear God call us
back; and stop our ears against the voice of the charmer, charm he never so
wisely.

Nay further yet; we suffer the Arguments of Religion to have so little
impression upon our spirits, that they operate but like Theocritus tells of a
Fisherman that dreamed he had taken (...), a Fish of gold, upon which being
over-joyed he made a vow, that he would never fish more: But when he waked, he
soon declared his vow to be null, because he found his golden Fish was escaped
away through the holes of his eyes, when he first opened them. Just so we do in
the purposes of Religion; sometimes in a good mood we seem to see Heaven
opened, and all the streets of Heavenly Jerusalem paved with gold and precious
stones,

The effect of all is this, That we are ignorant of the things of God; we make
Religion to be the work of a few hours in the whole year; we are without fancy
or affection to the severities of holy Living; we reduce Religion to the
Believing of a few Articles, and doing nothing that is considerable; we Pray
seldom, and then but very coldly and indifferently; we Communicate the night,
over Rivers and Rocks, and Precipices without Sun or

Heart is Hard too. Not only Folly, but Mischief also is bound up in the Heart
of man. If God strives to soften it with sorrow and sad Accidents, it is like
an Ox, it grows callow, Pharaohs. When God makes the clouds to gather round
about us, we wrap our heads in the clouds, and like the malcontents in
Galba^s time, Tristitiam simulamus Contumaciae propiores. We seem sad and
troubled, but it is doggednesse and murmur. Or else if our fears be pregnant,
and the heart yielding, it sinks low into pusillanimity and superstition; and
our hearts are so childish, so timorous, or so impatient in a sadness, that
God is weary of striking us, and we are glad of it. And yet when the Sun shines
upon us* our hearts are hardened with that too, and God seems to be at a loss,
as if he knew not

(...)
(...); Aristoph: (...): Act. 5. Scen. 4.

No fortune can save that City to whom neither Peace nor War can do
advantage. And what is there left for God to mollify our hearts, whose temper
is like both to wax and dirt; whom fire hardens, and cold hardens; and
contradictory Accidents produce no change, save that the heart grows worse and
more obdurate

1. The Heart of man is strangely Proud; If men commend us we think we have
reason to distinguish our selves from others, since the voice of discerning men
has already made the separation. If men do not commend us, we think they are
stupid, and understand us not, or envious and hold their tongues in spite. If
we Vox populi, vox Dei. Fame is the voice of God. If we be praised but by few,
then Satis unus, satis nullus. We cry, these are wise, and one wise man is
worth a whole herd of the People. But if we be praised by none at all, we
resolve to be even with all the world, and speak well of no body, and think in
effigy. And Aesops picture was sold for two talents, when himself was made a
slave at the price of two Philippicks. And because Humility makes a man to be
honored; Therefore we imitate all its garbs and postures, its civilities and
silence, its modesties and condescensions. And to prove that we are extremely
proud in the midst of all this pagentry, we should be extremely angry at any
man, that should say, we are proud; And that's a sure sign we are so. And in
the midst of all our Arts to seem Humble,

The Heart of man is deeply in love with wickedness, and with nothing else:
Against, not only the Laws of God, but transient; that it leaves bitterness
upon the tongue, before it is

For when the heart of man is bound up by the grace of God, and tied in golden
bands, and watched by Angels, tended by those Nurse-keepers of the soul; it is
not easy for a man to wander; Vice first is pleasing, then it grows easy,
then delightful, then frequent, then habitual, then confirmed, then the man
is impenitent, then he is obstinate, then he resolves never to Repent, and then
he is Damned. And by that time he is come half

Although I can say nothing greater; yet I had many more things to say, if the
time would have permitted me to represent the Falsenesse and Baseness of the
Heart. 1. We are false our selves, Chrysippus did the oracular Lies of Apollo
into a Table; I fear they would seem Remediless, and beyond the cure of
watchfulness and Religion. Indeed they are Great and Many: But the Grace of
God is Greater; and if Iniquity abounds, then does Grace superabound, and that's
our Comfort and our Medicine, which we must thus use.

1. Let us watch our hearts at every turn.

2. Deny it all its Desires, that do not directly or by consequence end in
godliness: At no hand be indulgent to its fondnesses, and peevish appetites.

3. Let us suspect it as an Enemy.

4. Trust not to it in any thing.

5. But beg the grace of God with perpetual and importunate prayer, that he
would be pleased to bring good out of these evils, and that he would throw the
salutary wood of the Cross, the merits

And in order to the mannaging these advises, and acting the purposes of this
prayer; let us strictly follow a rule; and choose a Prudent and faithful guide,
who may attend our motions, and watch our counsels, and direct our steps, and
prepare the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight, apt and imitable. For
without great watchfulness, and earnest devotion, and a prudent Guide, we
shall find that true in a spiritual sense, which Plutarch affirmed of a man's
body in the natural; that of dead Bulls arise Bees; from the old serpent the
devil, for whom is provided the everlasting burning.

Sermon. IX. SERMON. IX.

1 Peter. 4. 17. For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of
God: and if it first begin at us what shall the end be of
SO long as the world lived by sense, and discourses of natural reason, as they
were abated with humane infirmities, and not at all heighted by the spirit and
divine revelations, So long men took their accounts of good and bad by their
being prosperous


and colefelices, miseros fuge sidera terra
ut distant and flamma mari, sic utile recto.
But because God sent wise men into the world, and they were treated rudely by
the world, and exercised with evil accidents, and this seemed so great a
discouragement to virtue, that even these wise men were more troubled to
reconcile virtue, and misery, then to reconcile their affections to the
suffering; God was pleased to enlighten their reason with a little beam of
faith, or else heightened lives by faith and not by sense, in the same degree
they might be able to live in virtue even while she lived in trouble, and not
reject so great a beauty because she goes in mourning, and has a black cloud
of cypress the contradiction of sinners and the immission of the sharpnesses
of providence and divine Economy.

First Adam was placed in a Garden of health and pleasure, from natural sorrows
which he and all his posterity till the flood run through: but in all that
period they had the whole wealth of the earth before them, they need not fight
for empires or places for their cattle to grase in; they lived long and felt no
want, no slavery, no tyranny, no war: and the evils that happened were single,
personal, and natural, and no violences were then done, but they were like
those things which the law calls rare contingencies; for free and rich and
long, and they exercised no virtues but natural, and knew no felicity but
natural: and so long their prosperity was, just as was their virtue, because it
was a natural instrument toward all that which they knew of happiness, * But
this public easiness and quiet, the world turned into sin; and unless God
did compel men to do themselves good they would undo themselves: and then God
broke in upon them with a flood and destroyed that generation, that he might
begin the government of the world upon a new stock, and bind

Then God made new laws and gave to Princes the power of the sword, and men
might be punshed to death in certain cases, and man's life was shortened, and
slavery was brought into the world and the state of servants; and then war
began, and evils multiplied upon the face of the earth; in which it is
naturally certain, that they that are most violent and injurious prevailed upon
the weaker and more innocent; and every tyranny that began from Nimrod to this
day, and every usurper was a peculiar argument to show that God began Tyrannies
and usurpations, to be in the world, and to be prosperous, and the rights of
men to be snatched away from the owners, that the world might be established in
potent and settled governments and the sufferers be taught all the passive
virtues of the soul. For so God brings good out of evil, turning Tyranny into
the benefits of Government, and violence into virtue, and sufferings into
rewards: and this was the second change of the world: personal miseries were
brought in upon Adam and his posterity, as a punishment of sin in the first
period: and in the second, public evils were tyrants and usurpers, and God
suffered them as the first elements of virtue, men being just newly put to
school to infant sufferings. But all this was not much.

Christ's line was not yet drawn forth: it began not to appear in what family
the King of sufferings should descend till Abraham's time, and therefore till
then there were no greater sufferings then what I have now reckoned. But when
Abraham's family was chosen from among the many nations, and began to belong to
God, by a special right, and he was designed to be the Father of the Messiah,
then God found out a new way to try him, even with a sound affliction, Isaac;
but this was accepted and being intended by Abraham was not intended by God:
for this was a type of Christ, and therefore was also but a type of sufferings,
excepting the sufferings of the old periods and the sufferings of nature and
accident, we see no change made, for a long while health, and peace, and
victory, and plenty, and riches: and so long as they did not prevaricate the
law of their God, so long they were prosperous: but God kept a remnant of
Cananites in the land like a rod held over them to vex or to chastise them into
obedience, in which while they persevered, nothing could hurt them; and that
saying of David needs no other sense, but the letter of its own expression, I
have been young and now am old, and yet saw I never the righteous forsaken nor
his seed begging their bread: The godly generally were prosperous, and a good
cause seldom Isaiah, Jeremy, and Zachary were martyrs of the law; but these
were single deaths; Shadrac, Meshec, and Abednego were thrown into a burning
furnace, and Daniel into a den of lions, and Susanna was accused for adultery;
but these were but little ar^ests Antiochus raised up a sharp persecution in
the time of the Maccabees, in which many passed through the red sea of blood
into the bosom of Abraham; and then Christ came: and that was the third period
in which the changed method of Gods providence was perfected: for Christ was to
do his great work by sufferings, and by sufferings was to enter into
blessedness; and by his passion he was made prince of the Catholickchurch, and
as our Head was, so must the members be: God made the same covenant with us,
that he did with his most holy the servant must not be above his master, it is
well if he be as his Master: if the world persecuted him, they will also
persecute us; and from the days of John the Baptist, the kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force: not the violent doers, but
the sufferers of violence for though the old law was established in the
promises of temporal prosperity, yet the gospel is founded in temporal
adversity. It is directly a covenant of sufferings and sorrows; for now the
time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God: that's the sense and
design of the text; and I intend, prosperous: for though that proposition had
many degrees of truth in the beginning of the law, yet the case is now altered;
God has established its contradictory: and now every good man must look for
persecution, and every good cause must expect to thrive by the sufferings and
patience of holy persons; and as men do well, and

1. Then, the state of the Gospel is a state of sufferings, not of temporal
prosperities, this was foretold by the prophets; a fountain shall go out of the
house of the Lord, Joel. 3.
and irrigahit torrentem spinarum; (so it is in the vulgar latin) and it shall
water the torrent of thorns; that is, the state or time of the gospel. which
like a torrent shall carry all the world before it, and like a torrent shall be
fullest in ill weather; and by its banks shall grow nothing but thorns Isaiah.
23. 3.
upon the ground of my people shall thorns and briers come up, how much more in
all the houses of the city of rejoicing; which prophecy is the same in the
style of the prophets, that my text is in the style of the Apostles: the house
of God shall be watered with the dew of heaven, and there shall spring up
briers in it: judgment must begin there: but how much more in the houses of
the city of rejoicing how much more amongst them that are at ease in Sion; that
serve dwell in the city of rejoicing; they are like Dives whose portion was in
this life, who went in fine linen and fared deliciously every day; they indeed
trample upon their briers and thorns and suffer them not to grow in their
houses; but the roots are in the ground, and they are reserved for fuel of
wrath in the day of everlasting burning. Thus you see it was prophesied, now
see how it was performed: Christ was the captain of our sufferings and he
began.

He entered into the world with all the circumstances of poverty; he had a star
to illustrate his birth but a stable for his bed chamber, and a manger for his
cradle: the angels sang hymns when he was born, but he was cold and cried,
uneasy and unprovided; he lived long in the trade of a carpenter, he by whom
God made the world had in his first years the business of a mean and an
ignoble trade; he did good where ever he went, and almost where ever he went
was abused; he deserved heaven for his obedience, but found a cross in his way
thither; and if ever any man had reason to expect fair usages from God, and to
be dandled in lap of ease, softnes the Lamb slain from the beginning of the
world: For he was massacred in Abel, (says Saint Paulinus) he was tossed upon
the waves of the Sea, in the person of Noah; It was he that went out of his
Country, when Abraham was called from Charran, and wandered from his native
soil: He was offered up in Isaac, persecuted in Jacob, betrayed in Joseph,
blinded in Sampson, affronted in Moses, sawed in Esaias, cast into the dungeon
with Jeremy. For all these were types of Christ suffering; and then his passion
continued even after his resurrection; for it is he that suffers in all his
members; it is he that endures the contradiction of it is he that is the Lord
of life, and is crucified again, and put to open shame in all the sufferings of
his servants, and sins of rebels, and defiances of Apostates, and renegados,
and violence of Tyrants, and injustice of usurpers, and the persecutions of his
Church. It is he that is stoned in Saint Stephen, flayed in the person of Saint
Bartholomew, he was roasted upon Saint Laurence his Cridiron, exposed to lions
in Saint Ignatius, burned in Saint Polycarpe, frozen in the lake where stood
forty Martyrs of Cappadocia; Vnigenitus enim Dei ad peragendum mortis suae
sacramentum consummavit omne genus humanarum passionum said Saint Hilary. The
Sacrament of Christ's death is not to be accomplished, but by suffering all the
sorrows of humanity.

All that Christ came for, was, or was mingled with sufferings: For all those
little joys which God sent, either to recreate his person, or to illustrate
his office, were abated, or attended with afflictions; God being more careful
to establish in him the Covenant of sufferings, then to refresh his sorrows:
Presently after the Angels had finished their Halleluiahs, he was forced to fly
to save his life; and the air became full of shrikes of the desolate Jerusalem.
For this Jesus was like the rain-bowe which God set in the clouds as a
sacrament to confirm a promise, and establish a grace, he was half made of the
glories of the light, and half of the moisture of a cloud; in his best days he
was but half triumph, and half sorrow; he was sent to tell of his Fathers
mercies, and that God intended to spare us; but appeared not but in the
Doctrines were such as expressly and by consequent enjoyne and suppose
sufferings, and a state of affliction; His very promises were sufferings, his
beatitudes were sufferings, his rewards, and his arguments to invite men to
follow him, were only taken from sufferings in this life, and the reward of
sufferings hereafter.

For if we summon up the Commandments of Christ, we shall humility,
mortification, self-denial, repentance, renouncing the world, mourning, taking
up the cross, dying for him, patience and poverty, to stand in the chiefest
rank of Christian precepts, and in the direct order to heaven: He that will be
my Disciple must deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me. We must
follow him that was crowned with thorns and sorrows, him that was drench^d in
Cedron, nailed upon the Cross, that deserved all good, and suffered all evil:
That is the sum of Christian Religion, as it distinguishes from all the
Religions of the world. To which we may add the express Precept recorded by
Saint James, James 4. 10.
[Be afflicted and mourn, and weep, let your laughter be turned into mourning,
and your joy into weeping.] You see the Commandments: Will you also see the
Promises? These they are. In the world ye shall have tribulation; in me ye
shall have peace: and through many tribulations, ye shall enter into heaven:
and he that loses father and mother, wives, and children, houses, and lands
for my Names sake and the Gospel, shall receive a hundred fold in this life,
with persecution: that's part of his reward. [And he chastises every son that
he receives; and if you be exempt from sufferings, ye are bastards and not
sons: These are some of Christ's promises: will blessings, Matthew. 5.
that he gives his Church: Blessed are the poor: Blessed are the hungry and
thirsty. Blessed are they that mourn. Blessed are the humble. Blessed are the
persecuted: Of the eight Peatitudes, five of them have temporal misery and
meannesse, or an afflicted condition for their subject. Will you at last see
some of the reward, which Christ has propounded to his servants, to invite
them to follow him. When I am lifted up, I will draw all men after me: when
Christ is lifted up, as Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, Phil. 1.
28.
that is lifted upon the Cross, then he will draw us after him. To you it is
given for Christ (says Saint It is not only given that you believe in Christ,
(though that be a great matter) but also that you suffer for him, that's the
highest of your honor. James 5. 10.
And therefore says Saint James, My brethren, count it all joy when ye enter
into diverse temptations. And Saint Peter, Communicating with the sufferings of
Christ rejoice: 1 Pet. 4. 13.
And Saint James again, We count them blessed that have suffered: And Saint
Paul when he gives his blessing to the Thessalonians, he uses this form of
prayer: Our Lord direct our hearts in the charity of God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
and in the patience and sufferings of Christ. So that if we will serve the
King of sufferings, whose crown was of thorns, whose scepter was a reed of
scorn, whose imperial robe was a scarlet of mockery, whose throne was the
Cross; Heb. 2. 10.
We must serve him in sufferings, in poverty of spirit, in humility, and
mortification, and for our reward we Atque hoc est esse Christianum.

Since this was done in the green-tree, what might we expect should be done in
the dry: Let us in the next place consider how God has treated his Saints and
servants, and the descending ages of the Gospel; That if the best of Gods
servants were followers of Jesus in this covenant of sufferings, 1 Pet. 4. 12.
we may not think it strange concerning the fiery trial, as if some new thing
had happened to us. For as the Gospel was founded in sufferings, we shall also
see it grow in persecutions: and as Christ's blood did cement the corner

If I begin with the Apostles, who were to persuade the world to become
Christian, and to use proper Arguments of invitation, we shall find that they
never offered an Argument of temporal prosperity: they never promised Empires
and thrones on earth, nor riches, nor temporal power, and it would have been
soon confuted, if they who were whipped and imprisoned, banished and Tertul. S.
Hieron.
and did he escape? Yes: But he was put into a Cauldron of scalding lead and
oil, before the Port Latin in Rome, and escaped death by miracle, though no
miracle was wrought to make him escape the torture: And besides this, he lived
long in banishment, and that was worse then Saint Peter's chains: Sanctus Petrus
in vinculis, and Johannes ante portam latinam, were both days of Martyrdom and
Church Festivals: and after a long and full of days and sufferings: And when
Saint Paul was taken into the Apostolate, his Commissions were signed in these
words; I will show unto him how great things he must suffer for my Name: Acts
9. 15.
and his whole life was a continual suffering: Quotidie morior was his Motto,
I die daily; and his lesson that he daily learned was to know Christ Jesus and
him crucified; and all his joy was to rejoice in the Cross of Christ; and the
changes of his life were nothing but the changes, of his sufferings, and the
variety of his labors. For though Christ has finished his own sufferings for
expiation of the world, yet there are (...), portions that are behind of the
sufferings of Christ which must be filled up by his body the Church; and happy
are they that put in the greatest symbol: for in the same measure you are
partakers of the sufferings of Christ, in the same shall ye be also of the
consolation. And therefore concerning S. Paul, as it was also concerning
Christ, there is nothing or but very little in

And now began to work the greatest glory of the divine Providence: here was
the case of Christianity at stake. The world was rich and prosperous, learned
and full of wise men, the Gospel was preached with poverty and persecution, in
simplicity of discourse, and in demonstration of the Spirit: God was on one
side, and the Devil on the other; they each of them dressed up their city;
Babylon upon Earth, Jerusalem from above; the Devils city They bound Kings in
chains, and the Nobles with links of iron, and the inheritance of the Earth was
theirs: the Romans were Lords over the greatest parts of the world; and God
permitted to the Devil the Firmament and increase, the wars and the success of
that people, giving to him an entire power of disposing the great changes of
the world, so as might best increase their greatness and power: and he
therefore did it, because all the power of the Roman greatness was a
professed enemy to Christianity: and on the Jerusalem, and the kingdom of the
Gospel: and he chose to build it of hewn stone, cut and broken: the Apostles
he chose for Preachers, and they had no learning; women and mean people were
the first Disciples, and they had no power: the Devil was to lose his kingdom,
and he wanted no malice: and therefore he stirred up, and as well as he could,
he made active all the power of Rome, and all the learning of the Greeks, and
all the malice of Barbarous people, and all the prejudice and the obstinacy of
the Jews, against this doctrine and institution; which preached and promised,
and brought persecution along with scandalum crucis, on the other patientia
sanctorum, and what was the event? They that had overcome the world, could not
strangle Christianity. But so have I seen the Sun with a little ray of distant
light challenge all the power of darkness, and without violence and noise
climbing up the hill, has world into Christian, and persecution into victory.

For Christ who began, and lived and died in sorrows, perceived for suffering
death, he was crowned with immortality, resolved to take all his Disciples and
servants to the fellowship of the same suffering, that they might have a
participation of his glory; knowing, God had opened no gate of heaven but the
narrow gate, to which the Cross was the key: and since Christ now being our
High Priest in heaven, intercedes for us by representing his passion, and the
dolours of the Cross, that even in glory he might still preserve the mercies
of his past sufferings, for which the Father did so delight in him: he also
designs to present us to God, dressed in the same the marks of the Lord Jesus:
He has predestined us to be conformable to the image of his Son: And if
under a head crowned with thorns, we bring to God members circled with roses,
and softness, and delicacy, triumphant members in the militant Church God will
reject us; he will not know us who are so unlike our elder brother: For we are
members of the Lamb, not of the Lion, and of Christ's suffering part, not of the
triumphant part: and for three hundred years together, the Church lived upon
blood, and was nourished with blood; the blood of her own children: Thirty
three baptized into the death of Christ, their very profession and institution
is to live like him; and when he requires it, to die for him; that is the very
formality, the life and essence of Christianity. This I say lasted for three
hundred years, that the prayers and the backs, and the necks of Christians the
arm of Martyrs was vast and numerous, and the number of sufferers blunted the
hangmans sword: For Christ first triumphed over the princes and powers of the
world, before he would admit them to serve him; he first felt their malice
before he would make use of their defense, to show that it was not his
necessity that required it, but his grace Kings and Queens to be nurses of the
Church.

And now the Church was at ease, and she that sucked the blood of the Martyrs
so long, began now to suck the milk of Queens: Indeed it was a great mercy in
appearance, and was so intended, but it proved not so. But then the Holy Ghost
in pursuance of the design of Christ, who meant by sufferings to perfect his
Church, as himself was by the same instrument, was pleased now that persecution
did cease, to inspire the Church with the spirit of mortification and
austerity; and then they made Colleges of sufferers, persons who to secure
their inheritance in the world the burden of the Lord, by self denial, by
fastings and sackeloth, and pernoctations in prayer, they chose then to
exercise the active part of the religion, mingling it as much as they could
with the suffering.

And indeed it is so glorious a thing to be like Christ, to be dressed like the
prince of the Catholic church, who was so a man of sufferings, put on the
armor of righteousness, on the right hand, and on the left, that is, in the
sufferings of persecution, or the labors of mortification, in patience under
the rod of God, or by election of our own; by toleration, or self denial, by
actual martyrdom, or by aptness or disposition toward it, by dying for Christ
or suffering for him; by being willing to part with all when he calls for it,
and by parting with what we can, for the relief of his poor members. For know
this, there is no state in the Church, so serene, no days so prosperous, enmity
with the world, that you may preserve friendship with God, to deny the
importunity and troublesome kindness of a drinking friend, to own truth in
despite of danger or scorn, to despise shame; to refuse worldly pleasure when
they tempt your soul, beyond duty or safety; to take pains in the cause of
religion, the labor of love and the crossing of your anger, peevishness and
morosity; these are the daily sufferings of a Christian; and if we perform
them well, will have the same reward and an equal smart and greater labor then
the plain suffering the hangmans sword. This I have discoursed, to represent
unto you, that you cannot be exempted from the similitude of Christ's
sufferings; that God will shut no age nor no man from his portion of the
cross; that we cannot fail of the result of this predestination, nor without
our own fault be excluded from the covenant of sufferings: judgment must begin
at Gods house, and enters first upon the sons and heirs of the kingdom;

1. Let no Christian man make any judgment concerning his condition, or his
cause by the external event of things: for although in the law of Moses, God
made with his people a covenant of temporal prosperity, and his Saints did
bind the kings of the Am^rites, and the Philistines in chains, and their
nobles with links of iron, that was the honor which all his Saints had; yet in
Christ Jesus he made a covenant of sufferings: most of the graces of
Christianity are suffering graces, and God has predestined us to sufferings:
and we are baptized into suffering, and our very communions are symbols of our
duty, by being the sacrament of Christ's death and passion; and Christ foretold
to us tribulation, and promised only that he would be with us in tribulation,
that he would give us his spirit to assist us at tribunals, and his grace to
despise the world, and to contemn riches, and boldness to confess every
article of the Christian faith, in the face of armies and armed tyrants; all
things should work together for the best to his servants, that is, he would out
of the eater bring meat, and out of the strong issue sweetness, and crowns and
scepters should spring from crosses, and that the cross it self should stand
upon the globes and scepters of Princes; but he nev^r promised to his servants,
that they should pursue Kings and destroy armies, that they should reign over
the nations, and promote the cause of Jesus Christ by breaking his
commandments: The shield of faith and the sword of the spirit, the armor of
righteousness, and the weapons of spiritual warfare, these are they by which
christianity swelled from a Christ's kingdom was not of this world, and that
their Master should die a sad and shameful death; though that way he was to
receive his crown, and enter into glory: and after Christ's time, when his
Disciples had taken up the cross and were marching the Kings high way of
sorrows, King of sufferings: But now a days we find a generation of men, who
have changed the covenant of sufferings into victories, and triumphs, riches
and prosperous chances, and reckon their Christianity by their good fortunes,
possess their souls by patience.

God was fain to multiply miracles to make Christ capable of being a man of
sorrows* and shall we think he will work miracles to make us delicate? He
promised us a glorious portion hereafter, to which if all the sufferings of the
world were put together, they are not worthy to be compared, and shall we with
Dives choose our portion of good things in this life? If Christ suffered so
many things only that he might give us glory, shall it be strange that we
shall suffer who are to receive this glory? It is in vain to think we shall
obtain glories at an easier rate, then to drink of the brook in the way in
which Christ was drenched. When the Devil appeared to Saint Martin in a bright
splendid shape and said he was Christ, he answered, Christus non nisi in cruce
apparet suis in hac vita. And when Saint Ignatius was newly tied in a chain to
be led to his martyrdom, he cried out, nunc incipio esse Christianus: And it
was observed omnes viri fortes quos Gentiles praedicabant, in exemplum,
aerumnis suis inclytistoruerunt. The Gentiles in their whole religion never
propounded any man imitable, unless the man were poor or persecuted: Brutus
stood for his countries liberty, but lost his army and his life; Socrates was
put to death for speaking a religious truth: Cato chose to be on the right
side, but happened to fall upon the oppressed and the injured; he died together
with his party.

Victrix causa Deis placuit sed victa Catoni; And if God thus dealt with the
best of Heathens to whom he had made no clear revelation faithful unto the
death. Faith is useless, if now in the midst of so great pretended lights we
If we be planted into the likeness of his death, we shall be also of his
resurrection, else on no terms; Christ took away sin from us, but he left us
our share of sufferings; and the cross which was first printed upon us in the
waters of baptism, must for ever be born by us in penance, in mortification,
in self-denial and in martyrdom, and toleration according as God shall require
of us by the changes of the world, and the condition of the Church.

For Christ considers nothing, but souls, he values not their estate or bodies,
supplying our want by his providence, and being secured that our bodies may be
killed, but cannot and sit anima mea cum Christianis, I pray God my soul may be
among the Christians; and yet the Turks have prevailed upon If the LORD be with
us why have these evils apprehended us? for if to be afflicted be a sign
oppresses the widow, and murders the innocent, and puts the fatherless to
death, and follows providence by doing all the evils that he can, that is, all
that God suffers him, he I say is the only Saint and servant of God: and upon
the same ground the wolf and the fox may boast when they scatter and devour a
flock of lambs and harmless sheep.

SER. X.

Part II.
IT follows now that we inquire concerning the reasons of the Divine
Providence, in this administration of affairs, so far as he has been pleased
to draw aside the curtain, and to unfold the leaves of his counsels and
predestination: and for such an inquiry we have the precedent of the Prophet
Jeremy: Righteous art thou O Lord, Jerem. 12. 1, 2.
when I plead with thee, yet let us talk to thee of thy judgments: wherefore
does the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they happy that deal very
treacherously? Thou have planted them, yea they have taken root: they grow, yea
they bring forth fruit Concerning which, in general the Prophet Malachy gives
this account Mala. 3. 14.
And now we call the proud happy, and they that work wickedness are set up,
yea they that tempt God are even delivered. They that feared the Lord spoke
often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard, and a book of
remembrance was written before time for them that feared the Lord, and thought
upon his Name, and they shall be mine (says the Lord of Hosts) in that day
when I bind up my jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his own son
that serves him: Then shall ye return and discern between the righteous, and
the wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not. In this
interval which is a valley of tears, it is no wonder if they rejoice, who shall
weep for ever; and they that sow in tears shall have no cause to complain, when
God gathers all the mourners into his kingdom, they shall reap with joy.

For innocence and joy were appointed to dwell together for ever. And joy went
not first but when innocence went away, sorrow and sickness dispossessed joy
of its habitation; and now this world Adam planted in the hedges of Paradise;
and that sorrow which was brought in by sin,

God afflicts the godly that he might manifest many of his attributes, and his
servants exercise many of their virtues.

Nec fortuna probat causas sequiturque merentes,
sed vaga percunctos nullo discrimine fertur:
scilicet est aliud quod nos cogatque rogatque
Majus, and in proprias ducat mortalia leges.
For, without sufferings of Saints God should lose the glories of 1. Bringing
good out of evil: 2. Of being with us in tribulation, 3. Of sustaining our
infirmities, 4 Of triumphing over the malice of his enemies: 5. Without the
suffering of Saints, where were the exaltation of the cross, the conformity of
the members to Christ their Head, the coronets of Martyrs? 6. Where were the
trial of our faith? 7. Or the exercise of long suffering? 8. Where were the
opportunities, to give God the greatest love? which cannot be but by dying and
suffering for him? 9. How should that which the world calls folly prove the
greatest wisdom: 10. and God be glorified by events contrary to the probability
and expectation of their causes: By the suffering of Saints, Christian religion
is proved to be most excellent whilst the iniquity and cruelty of the
adversaries proves the illecebra sectae as Tertullians phrase is, it invites
men to consider the secret excellencies of that religion, for which and in
which men are so willing to die: for that religion must needs be worth looking
into, which so many wise and excellent men do so much value above their lives
and fortunes; 12. That a man's nature is passible, is its best advantage: for by
it we are all redeemed: by the passivenesse and sufferings of our Lord and
brother we were all rescued from the portion of Devils; and by our suffering we
have a capacity of serving God beyond that is ascended far above all Angels,
and is Heir of a greater glory. 13. Do this, and live, was the covenant of the
Law; but in the Gospel it is, suffer this, and live: He that forsakes house
and land, friends and life, for my sake is my disciple. 14. By the sufferings
of Saints God chastises their follies and levities, and suffers not their
errors to climb up

-- (...) Alteration makes a fool leave his folly. If David numbers the people
of Judea, God punishes him sharply and loudly: But if Augustus Caesar numbers
all the world he is let alone and prospers.

Ille crucem pretium sceleris tulit, hic diadema. And in giving physic we
always call that just, and sitting that to the wicked, how much more is he to
the godly? And if sparing For if in this life only we had hope, then we were
of all men the most miserable. It is Sain Paul's argument to prove a beatificall
resurrection: And we therefore may learn to estimate, the state of the
afflicted godly to be a mercy great, in proportion to the greatness of that
reward, which these afflictions come to secure and to prove.

Nunc and damna juvant, sunt ipsa pericula tanti,
Stantia non poterant tecta probare Deos.
It is a great matter, an infinite blessing to escape the pains of hell; and
therefore that condition is also very blessed which God sends us to create and
to confirm our hopes of that excellent mercy. 17. The sufferings of the saints
are the sum of Christian Philosophy; they are sent to wean us from the van^les
and affections of this world, and to create in us strong desires of heaven,
whiles God causes us to be here treated rudely, that we may long to be in our
Country, where God shall be our portion, and Angels our companions, and Christ
our perpetual feast, and a never ceasing joy shall be our condition and
entertainment. Ecclus. 40. 1.
O death, how bitter art thou to a man that is at ease and rest in his
possessions: but he that is uneasy in his body, and unquiet in his
possessions, vexed in his person, discomposed in his designs, who finds no
pleasure, no rest here, will be glad to fix his heart, where only he shall
have what he can desire, and what can make him happy. As long Matthew. 5. 1^, etc.
It being a double favor, first to be innocent like Christ, and then to be
afflicted like him. 20. Without this, the miracles of patience, which God has
given to fortify the spirits of the saints would signify nothing. Nemo enim
tolerare tanta velit sine causa, nec potuit sine Deo, as no man would bear
evils without a cause, so no man could bear so much without the supporting hand
of God; and we need not the Holy Ghost to so great purposes, if our lot were
not sorrow and persecution; and therefore without this condition of suffering,
the Spirit of God should lose that glorious attribute of The Holy Ghost the
Comforter. 21. Is there any thing more yet? Yes They that have suffered or
forsaken any lands for Christ, shall sit upon thrones and judge the twelve
tribes of Israel, so said Christ to his Disciples. Nay the saints shall judge
Angels, (says saint Paul) well therefore might Saint Paul say, I rejoice
exceedingly in tribulation. It must be some great thing that must make an
afflicted man to rejoice exceedingly; and so it was. For since patience is
necessary that we receive the promise, and tribulation does work this: For a
short time it works the consummation of our hope, even an exceeding weight of
glory. We have no reason to think it strange concerning the fiery trial, as if
it were a strange thing. It can be no hurt; the Church is like Moses bush, when
it is all on sire, it is not at all consumed, but made full of miracle, full of
splendor, full of God: and unless we can find love is the soul of
Christianity, and suffering is the soul of love. To be innocent, and to be
persecuted, are the body and soul of Christianity. I John your brother, and
partaker of tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus, said Saint
John: those were the titles and ornaments of his profession; that is, I John
your fellow Christian; that's the plain song of the former descant. He therefore
that is troubled, when he is afflicted in his outward man, that his inward man
may grow strong, like the birds into glory; That man knows nothing of nature,
or providence, Christianity, or the rewards of virtue, or the nature of its
constitution, or the infirmities of man, or the mercies of God, or the arts and
prudence of his loving kindness, or the rewards of heaven, or the
glorifications of Christ's exalted humanity, or the precepts of the Gospel, who
is offended at the sufferings of Gods dearest servants, or declines the honor
and the mercy of sufferings in the cause of righteousness; For the securing of
a virtue, for the imitation of Christ, and for the love of God, or the glories
of immortality. It cannot, it ought not, it never will be otherwise, the world
may as well cease to be measured by time, as good men to suffer affliction.
Phil. 3. 15.
Let as many as are perfect, be thus minded, and if any man be otherwise
minded, God also will reveal this unto you, this, of the covenant of
sufferings, concerning which the old Prophets, and holy men of the Temple had
many thoughts of heart; but in the full sufferings of the Gospel, there has
been a full revelation of the excellency of the sufferings. I have now given
you an account of some of those reasons, why God has so disposed it, that at
this time, that is, under the period of the Gospel, judgment must begin at the
house of God, and they are either, (...), or imitation of Christ's

But now besides all the premises, we have another account to make concerning
the prosperity of the wicked: For if judgment first begin at us? what shall the
end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? that is the question of the
Apostle, and is the great instrument of comfort to persons ill treated in the
actions of the world. The first ages of the Church lived upon promises, and
prophecies; and because some of them are already fulfilled for ever, and the
others are of a continual and a successive nature, and are promises and
experience: and although the servants of God have suffered many calamities,
from the tyranny and prevalency of evil men their enemies, yet still it is
preserved as one of the fundamental truths of Christianity; That all the fair
fortunes of the wicked are not enough to make them happy, nor the persecutions
of the godly, able to make a good man miserable; nor yet their sadnesses
arguments of Gods displeasure against them. For when a godly man is afflicted
and dies, it is his work and his business; and if the wicked prevail, that is,
the things of God relate to the world to come: and for our own particulars we
are to be guided by rule, and by the end of all, not by events intermedial,
which are varied by a thousand irregular causes. For if all the evil men in the
world were unprosperous (as most certainly they are) and if all good persons
were temporally blessed (as most certainly they are not) yet this would not
move us to become virtuous: If an angel should come from heaven, or one arise
from the dead and preach repentance,

For why should God work a sign to make us to believe that we ought to do
justice; if we already believe, he has commanded it, no man can need a miracle
for the confirmation of that which he already believes to be the command of
God: And when God has expressly bidden us to obey every ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, the King as supreme, and his deputies as sent by him: It is a
strange infidelity to think, that a rebellion against the ordinance of the
authority, and the person, and the law, and the religion: The sin cannot grow
to its height if it be crushed at the beginning; unless it prosper in its
progress, a man cannot easily fill up the measure of his iniquity: but then
that the sin swells to its fullness by prosperity, and grows too big to be
suppressed without a miracle, it is so far from excusing, or lessening the sin,
that nothing does so nurse the sin as it: It is not virtue, because it is
prosperous, but if it had not been prosperous, the sin could never be so great.


Non impune licet, nisi dum facis.
A little crime is sure to smart, but when the sinner is grown rich, and
prosperous, and powerful, he gets impunity.

Jusque datum sceleri -- But that's not innocence, and if prosperity were the
voice of God to approve an action, then no man were vicious, but he that is
punished, and nothing were rebellion, but that which cannot be God has long
suffered it, and with patience in vain expecting the sin that thrives not the
man: and that is the mistake upon this whole question: for the sin cannot
thrive, unless the man goes on without apparent punishment, and restraint. And
all that the man gets by it is, that by a continual course of sin, he is
prepared for an intolerable ruin. The Spirit of God bids us look upon the end
of these men; not the way they walk or the instrument of that pompous death.
When Epaminondas was asked, which of the three was happiest, himself, Chalrias,
Augustine withal his prayers and vows could not obtain peace in his own days,
not so much as a reprieve for the persecution, and then had observed S.
Augustine die with grief that very night, would have perceived his calamity
more visible then the reward of his piety and holy religion. When Lewis
firnamed Pius went his voyage to an afflicted truth, and a prevailing sin: For
I will never more call that sinner prosperous, who after he has been permitted
to finish his business, shall die, and perish miserably:

And what is the prosperity of the wicked? to dwell in fine houses, or to
command armies, or to be able to oppress their brethren,

^ias said well to a vicious person, Non metuo ne non sis daturus paenas, sed
metuo neid non sim visurus, He was sure the man should be punished, he was not
sure he should live to see it: and though the messenians that were betrayed and
slain by Aristocrates in the slay them not O Lord lest my people forget it
(says David) if punishment were instantly and totally inflicted, it would be
but a sudden and single document: but a slow

We know that when in Henry the eighth, or Edward the sixth the holy Jesus;
and it was so long, that when it did happen, many men attributed it to their
killing S. James their Bishop and seemed to forget the greater crime, but non
eventu rerum sed fide verborum stamus: we are to stand to the truth of Gods
word not to the event of things. Because God has given us a rule but has left
the judgment to himself; and we die so quickly, (and God measures althings by
his standard of eternity, and 1000 years Job. 21.
We are dead before the arrow comes, but the man scapes not, unless his soul
can die, or that God cannot punish him. Ducunt in bonis dies suos and in
momento descendunt ad infernum, that's they spend their days in plenty, and in
a moment descend into hell: in the mean time they drink and forget their
sorrow; but they are condemned they have drunk their hemlock, but the poison
does not work yet: the bait is in their mouths, and they are sportive; but the
hook has struck their nostrils, and they shall never escape the ruin; And let
no man call the man fortunate, because his execution is deferd for a few days,
when the very deferring shall increase, and ascertain the condemnation.

But if we should look under the skirt of the prosperous and prevailing Tyrant,
we should find even in the days of his joys, presently miserable, besides
his final infelicities. For I have seen a young and healthful person warm and
ruddy under a poor and a thin garment, when at the same time, an old rich
person has been cold, and paralytick, under a load of sables and the skins of
foxes; it is the body that makes the clothes warm, not the clothes the body:
and the spirit of a man makes felicity and content, not any spoils of a rich
fortune wrapped about a sickly and an uneasy soul. Apollodorus was a Traitor,
and a Tyrant, and the world wondered to see a bad man have so good a fortune;
But knew not that he come to judgment; and such a man is not to be feared, nor
at all to be envied: and in the A^robibitur venenum, No man goes about to
poison a poor man's pitcher, nor lays plots to forage his little garden made
for the hospital of two be hives, and the feasting of a few Pythagorean herb
eaters.

(...)
(...)
They that admire the happiness of a prosperous, prevailing Tyrant,

A Christian so long as he preserves his integrity to God and to religion is
bold in all accidents, he dares die, and he dares be poor; but if the
persecutor dies, he is undone. Riches are beholding to our fancies for their
value; and yet the more we value the riches, the less good they are, and by an
overvaluing affection, they become our danger and our sin: But on the other
side, death and persecution loose all the ill, that they can have, if we do not
set an edge upon them by our fears and by our vices. From our selves riches
take their wealth, and death sharpens his arrows at our forges and we may set
their prices as we please; and if we judge by the spirit of God, we must
account them happy that suffer; And therefore that the prevailing oppressor,
Tyrant, or persecutor is infinitely miserable, only let God choose by what
instruments he will govern the world, by what instances himself would be
served, a sinner by a sinner And if David made use of villains and profligate
persons to frame an army; and Timoleon destroy^d the Carthaginians by the help
of soldiers, who themselves were sacrilegious; and Physicians use the poison
to expel poisons; and all commonwealths Assyrians to punish the Israelites, and
the Egyptians to destroy the Assyrians, and the Ethiopians to scourge the
Egyptians, and at last his own hand shall separate the good from the bad in the
day of separation, in the day when he makes up his Jewels.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...). Soph. Elect.
God has many ends of providence to serve by the hands of violent and vicious
men, by them he not only checks the beginning errors, and approaching sins of
his predestinate, but by them he changes governments and alters kingdoms, and
is terrible among the sons of men: for since it is one of his glories, to
convert evil into good, and that good into his own glory, and by little and
little to open and to turn the leaves and various folds of providence; it
becomes us only to dwell in duty, and to be silent in our thoughts, and wary
in our discourses of God; and let him choose the time when he will pr^^e his
vine, and when he will burn his thorns: how long he will smite his servants,
and when he will destroy his enemies. In the days of the primitive
persecutions, what prayers, how many sighings, how deep groans, how many
bottles of tears did God gather into his repository, all praying for ease and
deliverances, Halcyon days and fine sunshine, for nursing fathers and nursing
mothers, for public assemblies, and open and solemn sacraments: And it was 3
hundred years before God would hear their prayers: and all that while the
persecuted people were in a cloud, but they were safe and knew it not: and God
kept for them the best wine until the last; they ventured for a crown and
fought valiantly, they were faithful to the death, and they received a crown of
life, and they are honored by God, by angels, and by men; whereas in all the
prosperous ages of the Church, we hear no stories of such multitudes of Saints
no record of them, no honor to their memorial, to accident persecuted, and the
persecutors shall be shut out amongst dogs and unbelievers.

the yoke of Christ, from the burden of the Lord, upon his deathbed will have
cause to remember, that by that time all his persecutions would have been past,
and that then there would remain nothing for him, but rest and crowns and
scepters. When Lysimachus, impatient and overcome with thirst gave up his
kingdom to the Getae, and being a captive and having drank a lusty draught of
wine, and his thirst was now gone, he fetched a deep sigh and said, Miserable
man that I am, who for so little pleasure, the pleasure of one draught lost so
great a Kingdom such will be their case, who being impatient of suffering,
illiberali^ and ingrate voluptatis causa as Plutarch calls it, for illiberal
and ungrateful pleasure, in which when a man has entered, he loses the rights
and privileges and honors of a good man, and gets nothing that is profitable
and useful to holy purposes, or necessary

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
I end with the advice of Saint Paul, In nothing be terrified of your Phil.
(...)


SER. XI.

Part III.
(...) from dishonor. As long as they belong to God, it is necessary that they
suffer persecution, or sorrow, no rules can teach them to avoid that; but the
evil of the suffering, and the danger, must be declined, and we must use such
spiritual arts as are apt to turn them into health and medicine: For it were a
hard thing, first to be scourged, and then to be crucified; to suffer here, and
to perish

1. They that suffer any thing for Christ, and are ready to die for him, let
them do nothing against him. For certainly they think too highly of martyrdom,
who believe it able to excuse all the evils of a wicked life. A man may give
his body to be burned, for God is love: And when those who fought in the days
of the Maccabees, for the defense of true Religion, and were killed in those
holy wars, yet being dead, were found having about their necks, (...), or
pendants, consecrated to idols of the Jamnenses, it much allayed the hope,
which by their dying in so good a cause was entertained concerning their
beatificall resurrection. He that overcomes his fear of death does well;
baptism of blood will not wash him clean. Many things may make a man willing
to die in a good cause: Public reputation, hope of reward, gallantry of
spirit, a confident resolution, and a masculine courage; or a man may be vexed
into a stubborn and unrelenting suffering: But nothing can make a man live
well, but the grace and the love of God. But those persons are infinitely
condemned by their last act, who profess their religion to be worth dying for,
and yet are so unworthy, as not to live according to its institution. It were a
rare felicity, if every good cause could be labor to zeal, through all the
regions of duty, to the perfections of sufferings; and therefore it is a sad
thing to observe, how some empty souls will please themselves with being of
such a religion, or such a cause, and though they dishonor their religion, or
weigh down the cause with the prejudice of sin, believe all is swallowed up by
one honorable name, or the appellative of one virtue: If God had forbid a
loyal man, or of a good belief, had been enogh; but he that forbad rebellion,
forbids also swearing, and covetousness, rapine, and oppression, lying, and
cruelty: And it is a sad thing to see a man not only to spend his time, and
his wealth and his money, and his friends upon his lust, but to spend his
sufferings too, to let the canker-worm of a deadly sin, devour his Martyrdom:
He therefore that suffers in a good cause, let him be sure to walk worthy of
that honor, to which God has called him; Let him first deny his sins, and
then deny himself, and then he may take up his cross and follow Christ;

2. He that suffers in a cause of God, must be indifferent what the instance
be, so that he may serve God. I say, he must be indifferent in the cause, so it
be a cause of God, and indifferent in the

3. Whoever suffer in a cause of God, from the hands of cruel who endured the
cross, and despised the shame; but let us not take upon us the office of God,
who will judge the Nations righteously, and when he has delivered up our
bodies will rescue our souls from the hands of unrighteous judges. I remember
in the story that Plutarch tells concerning the soul of Qui bonus cum sit,
tyrannide vitam finiet: An excellent Prince, and a good man should be put to
death by a rebel and usurping power; and yet that Prophetic soul could not
tell that those rebels should within three years die miserable and accursed
deaths; and in that great prophecy recorded by Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 1.
That in the last days perilous times should come, and men should be
traitors, and selvish, having forms of godliness, and creeping into houses,]
yet could 2 Timothy 3. 9.
But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be manifest to all
men: that is, at long running they shall shame themselves, and for the elects
sake those days of evil shall be shortened. But you and I may be dead first:
And therefore only remember, that they that with a credulous heart, and a
loose tongue are too decretory, and enunciative of speedy judgments to their
enemies, turn their religion into revenge, and therefore do believe it will be
so, because they vehemently desire it

4. Do not trouble your self by thinking how much you are afflicted, but
consider how much you make of it: For reflex acts upon the suffering it self,
can lead to nothing but to pride, or to impatience to temptation, or apostasy.
He that measures the grains and scruples of his persecution, will soon sit down
and call for ease, or for a reward; will think the time long, or his burden
great; will be apt to complain of his condition, or set a greater the crown
that is set before thee; and then consider, if the loss of thy estate has
taught thee to despise the world? whether thy poor fortune has made thee poor
in spirit? and if thy uneasy prison sets thy soul at liberty, and knocks off
the fetters of a worse captivity. For then the rod of suffering turns into
crowns and scepters, when every suffering is a precept, and every change of
condition produces a holy resolution, and the state of sorrows makes the
resolution actual, and habitual, permanent, and persevering. For as the fiat
voluntas tua is our daily prayer, and that is of a passive signification; thy
will be done

5. Let our suffering be entertained by a direct election, not by collateral
ayds and fantastic assistances. It is a good refreshment to a weak spirit to
suffer in good company: and so Phoeion encouraged a timorous Greek condemned to
die; and he bid him be confident because that he was to die with Phocion; and
when 40. Martyrs choice, his patience, and considence in the causes of virtue
and religion, like beams, and warmth, and influence, from the body of the Sun.
Some there are that fall under the burden, when they patience and resignation,
but endeavor to lighten the burden in imagination; and when these temporary
supporters fail, the building that relies upon them, rushes into coldness,
recidivation, and lukewarmnesse: and among all instances, that of the main
question of the Text is of greatest power to abuse imprudent and less severe
persons.

Nullos esse Deos, inane coelum
Affirmat Selius, probatque
Quod se videt dum negat haec beatum.
When men choose a good cause, upon confidence that an ill one cannot thrive,
that is, not for the love of virtue, or duty to God, but for profit and secular
interests, they are easily lost when they see the wickedness of the enemy to
swell up by impunity and success to a great evil: for they have not learned to
distinguish a great growing sin, from a thriving and prosperous fortune.

Vlla si juris tibi pejerati
Poena Barine noeuisset unquam:
Dente si nigro fieret vel uno turpior ungui Crederem.
They that believe and choose because of idle fears, and unreasonable fancies,
or by mistaking the accounts of a man for the measures of God, or dare not
commit treason, for fear of being blasted, may come to be tempted when they see
a sinner thrive, and are scandalized all the way, if they begin with choice,
and be confirmed with knowledge, and rely upon love, and the aids of God, and
the expectations of heaven, and the present sense of duty, and then the action
will be as glorious in the event, as it is prudent in the enterprise,

6. Lastly, when God has brought thee into Christ's school, and entered thee
into a state of sufferings, remember the advantages of that state: consider how
unsavory the things of the world appear to thee, when thou art under the
arrest of death; remember with what comforts the Spirit of God assists thy
spirit; set down in thy heart all those entercourses, which happen between God
and thy own soul; the sweetnesses of religion, the vanity of sins appearances,
thy newly entertained resolutions; thy longings after heaven, and all the
things of God, and if God finishes thy persecution with death proceed in them;
if he restores thee to the light It is good for me that I have been afflicted,
for thereby I have learned thy commandments: and Paphnutius did not do his soul
more advantage when he lost his right eye, and suffered his left knee to be cut
for Christianity, and the cause of God, then that in the days of Constantine
and the Churches peace, he lived, (not in a confessor of the faith only, but
of the charity of a Christian: we may every one live to have need of these
rules; and I do not at all think it safe to pray against it, but to be armed
for it: and to whatsoever degree of sufferings God shall call us, we see what
advantages God intends for us, and what advantages we our selves may make of
it. I now proceed to make use of all the former ^^scourse, by removing it a
little further even into its utmost spiritual sense; which the Apostle does in
the last words of the text [If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
wicked and the sinner appear.]

These words are taken out of the proverbs * according to the translation of
the 70. 11. cha^^ 31.
If the righteous scarcely ^s safe* where the word (...) implies that he is
safe; but by intermed^^ difficulties: and (...)] he is safe in the midst of his
persecutions they may disturb his rest, and discompose his fancy, but they are
like the fiery chariot to Elias; he is encircled with fire and rare
circumstances, and strange usages, but is carried up to Heaven in a robe of
flames: and so was Noah safe when the flood came; and was the great type and
instance too of the verification of this proposition, he was judges, of fears
and sadder apprehensions are but like the loud

2. But (...) may also signify raro: If the righteous is seldom safe; which
implies that sometimes he is, even in a temporal sense: God sometimes sends
Halcyon days to his Church, and when he promised Kings and Queens to be their
nurses, he intended it for a blessing; and yet this blessing does of te^imes so
ill succeed that it is the greater blessing of the two, not to give us that
blessing too freely: but (...) this is scarcly done, and yet sometimes it is,
and God sometimes refreshes languishing piety with such arguments, as comply
with our infirmities, and though it be a shame to us to need such allectives
and infant gauds, such which the heathen world and the first rudiments of the
Israelites did need, God who pitties us and will be wanting in nothing to us,
as he corroborates our willing

-- (...)
(...)
(...).
Sometimes God destroys their armies, or their strong holds, Sometimes breaks
their ships, but this happens either for the weakness of some of his servants,
and their too great aptness to be offended at a prosperous iniquity, or when
he will not suffer the evil to grow too great, or for some end of his
providence; and yet if this should be very often, or last long, God knows the
danger, and we should feel the inconvenience. Of all the types of Christ only
Joshuah and Solomon were noted to be generally prosperous,

And yet the vvorst of evils that happen to the godly is better, If the
righteous scarcely be saved where shall the ungodly appear? if it be hard with
good men, with the evil it shall be far worse. But see the difference. The
godly man is timorous and yet safe, tossed by the seas, and yet safe at anchor,
impaired by evil accidents and righted by divine comforts: made sad with a
black cloud, and refreshed with a more gentle influence, abused by the world,
and yet an heir of heaven, hated by men, and beloved by God, loses one house
and gets an hundred, he quits a convenient lodging room he sighs deeply; he
heapeth up riches and cannot tell who shall gather them; he commands an army

(...)
(...). Hesiod

their defense against this man; he is unsafe in his rest, amazed in

(...). Hesiod.
He leaves a generation of blacker children behind him; so the

Andire est operae pretium procedere recte
Qui maechis non vultis, ut omni part laborent:
vt que illis multo corrupta dolor voluptas
Atque haec rara cadat dura inter saepe pericla.
And let but a sober answer tell me if any thing in the world be more distant
either from goodness or happiness, then to scatter the plague of an accursed
soul, as upon our dearest children; to make an universal curse; to be the
fountain of a mischief, to be such a person, whom our children and nephews
shall hate, and despise and If the righteous scarcely be saved, or escape Gods
angry stroke, the wicked must needs be infinitely more miserable;

(...)
(...)
(...) --
Neither I, nor my son (said the oldest of the Greek poets) would be virtuous,
if to be a just person were all one as to be miserable. No, not only in the
end of affairs, and at sun set, but all the day long the Godly man is happy,
and the ungodly and the sinner is very miserable.

Pellitur a populo victus Cato, tristior ille est,
Qui vicit, facesque pudet rapuisse Catoni
Namque hoc dedecus est populi, morumque ruina
Non homo pulsus erat: sed in uno victa potestas
Romanumque decus.
And there needs no other argument to be added, but this one great testimony;
that though the Godly are afflicted, and persecuted, yet even they are blessed
and the persecutors are the most unsafe. They are essentially happy whom
affliction cannot

Quis curam neget esse te Deoruni
propter quem fuit innocens ruina?
But turns into their advantages, and that's the state of the Godly: and they
are most intolerably accursed, who have no portions in the blessings of
eternity, and yet cannot have comfort in the present purchases of their sin, to
whom even their sunshine brings a drought, and their fairest is their foulest
weather; and that's the portion of The godly are not made unhappy by their
sorrows: and the wicked are such whom prosperity it self cannot make fortunate.

4 And yet after all this it is but (...) not (...) he scapes but hardly here:
it will be well enough with him hereafter Isaac dug three wells: the first
was called contention, for he drank the waters of strife and dug the well
with his sword: the second well was not altogether so hard a purchase, he got
it with some trouble, but that being over, he had some room and his fortune
swelled, and he called his well [enlargement] but his third he called
[abundance] sowes in tears, he first drinks of the bottle of his own tears,
sorrow and trouble, labor and disquiet, strivings and temptations: But if they
pass through a torrent, and that virtue becomes easy and habitual, they find
their hearts enlarged and made spritely by the visitations of God and
refreshment of his spirit; and then their hearts are enlarged, they know how to
gather the down and softnesses from the sharpest thistles.

(...),

(...).
At first we cannot serve God, but by passions and doing violence to all our
wilder inclinations, and suffering the violence of tyrants and unjust persons.

-- (...)
(...).
The second days of virtue are pleasant and easy in the midst of all the
appendant labors; but when the Christians last pit is diged; when he is
descended to his grave, and finished his state of sorrows and suffering, then
God opens the river of abundance, the rivers of life and never ceasing
felicities. And this is that which God promised to his people. Esaias. 54. 8.
I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I
have mercy on thee says the Lord thy redeemer; so much as moments are exceeded
by eternity and the sighing in the cross of the Lord Jesus. Every chain is a
raie of light, and every prison is a palace, and every loss is the purchase of
a kingdom, funes ceciderunt mihi in praeclaris, the cords of my tent, [my ropes
and the sorrow of my pilgrimage] fell to me in a good ground, and I have a
goodly heritage; and when persecution Where shall the ungodly and sinner
appear? Even there where Gods face shall never shine, where there shall be O my
God let my soul never come into their counsels, nor lie down in their sorrows.

Sermon. XII. SER. XII.

2. Romans. 4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance,
and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance?
FRom the beginning of Time till now, all effluxes which have come from God,
have been nothing but emanations of his goodness, clothed in variety of
circumstances. He made man as excellent in himself, and profitable to us. For
as the Sun sends forth a benign and gentle influence on the seed of Plants,
that it may invite forth the active and plastic power from its recesse and
secrecy, that by rising into the tallnesse and dimensions of a tree, it that
do well, but to all men that they may do well: he is good to make us good; he
does us benefits to make us happy: and if we by despising such gracious rays
of light and heat, stop their progress and interrupt their design, the loss
is not Gods but ours,; we shall be the miserable and accursed people: This is
the sense and paraphrase of my Text. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, etc. Thou do not know, that is, thou considerest not that it is
for further benefit that God does thee this; the goodness of God is not The
goodness of God leads thee to repentance.

Here then is Gods method of curing mankind, (...). First goodness, or
inviting us to him by sugared words, by the placid arguments of temporal
favor, and the propositions of excellent promises. Secondly (...) at the same
time, although God is provoked every day, yet he does (...), he tolerates our
stubbornness, he forbears to punish, and when he does begin laxamentum, and
inducias too. Thirdly (...) still, a long putting off, and deferring his final
destroying anger, by using all means to force us to repentance; and this
especially, by the way of judgments; these being the last reserves of the
Divine mercy, and how ever we esteem it, is the greatest instance of the divine
long sufferance that is in the world. After these instruments, we may consider
the end, the strand upon which these land us, the purpose of this variety, of
these laborious and admirable arts, with which God so studies and contrives the
happiness and the treasure of the Divine goodness, the great and admirable
efflux of the eternal beneficence; the (...), the riches of his goodness,
which whosoever despises, despises himself and the great interest of his own
felicity; he shall die in his impenitence, and perish in his folly.

1. The first great instrument, that God chooses to bring us to him is (...),
profit, or benefit, and this must needs be first, for those instruments whereby
we have a being are so great mercies, paulo minores angelis, a little lower
then the angels: and yet from the meanest of them God can perfect his own
praise; The deeps and the snows, the hail and the rain, the birds of the air,
and the fishes of the sea, they can and do glorify God, and give him praise in
their capacity; and yet he gave them no speech, no reason, no immortal spirit,
or capacity of eternal blessedness; but he has distinguished us from them by
the absolute issues of his predestination, and has given us a lasting and
eternal spirit, excellent organs Chorus with the Angels of light, to sing
Alleluiah to the great Father of men and Angels.

But was it not a huge chain of mercies that we were not strangled in secreto
terrae, told our bones, and kept the order of nature, and the miracles of
creation; and we lived upon that which in the next minute after we were born
would strangle us if it were not removed: but then God took care of us, and his
hands of providence clothed us and fed us. But why do I reckon the mercies of
production which in every minute of our being are alike and continued, and are
miracles in all senses but that they are common and usual? I only desire you
to remember, that God made to lead us to repentance, but was a design of
innocence: he intended we should serve him as the Sun and the Moon do; as fire
and water do: never to prevaricate the laws he fixed to us, that we might have
needed no repentance. But since we did degenerate, and being by God made better
and more noble creatures then all the inhabitants of the air, the water and the
earth besides, we made our selves baser and more ignoble then any: For no dog,
crocodile, or swine was ever Gods enemy, as we made our selves: yet then from
thence forward, God began leading us to repentance, by the riches of his
goodness. He causes us to be born of Christian parents, under whom we were
taught the mysteriousnesse of its goodness and designs, for the redemption of
man: And by the design of which religion repentance was taught to mankind, and
an excellent law given for distinction of good and evil; and this is a blessing
which though possibly we do not often put into our eucharisticall Letanies to
give God thanks for, yet if we sadly consider, what had become of us, if we had
been born under the dominion of a Turkish Lord, or in America where no
Christians do inhabit, where they worship the laws, and examples, and
promises, and threatenings do many things he ought to be ashamed of, and needs
to repent of, we can understand the riches of the Divine goodness best, by
considering that by second thoughts, to have our infirmities excused, and our
his goodness did not lead them to repentance: but to us it was that he made
this largess of his to be sorrowful, and to leave all our sins, and to make
amends by a holy life. For that we might be admitted and suffered to do so, God
was fain to pour forth all the riches of [He sits at the right hand of God
making intercession for us.] And that we may know what he prays for, he has
sent us Ambassadors to declare the purpose of all his design, for Saint Paul
says, [We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though he did beseech you by us, we
pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God.] The purpose of our Embassy
and

And therefore here consider, if it be not infinite impiety to despise the
riches of such a goodness, which at so great a charge, with such infinite
labor, and deep mysterious arts, invites us to repentance; that is, to such a
thing which could not be granted to us unless Christ should die to purchase
it; such a glorious favor, that is

After the enumeration of these glories, these prodigies of mercies and loving
kindnesses, of Christ's dying for us, and interceding for us and merely that we
may repent, and be saved; I shall less need to instance those other
particularities whereby God continues, as by love and obedience, the twinne
daughters of holy repentance; but the poorest person amongst us, besides the
blessing and graces already reckoned has enough about him, and the accidents
of every day to shame him into repentance. Does not God send his angels to keep
thee in all thy ways? are not they ministering spirits sent forth to wait upon
thee as thy guard? art not thou kept from drowing, from fracture of bones, from
madness, from deformities, by the riches of the divine the riches of the
divine goodness which preserves us from such evils which would be full of
horror and amazement if they should happen to us.

meat and drink, health and sleep, proper seasons of the year, entire senses
and an useful understanding, what a great unworthiness it is to be unthankful
to so good a God so benign a Father, so gracious a prosperity makes a man love
God, supposing men to have so much humanity left in them, as to love him from
whom they have received so many favors. And Hippocrates said, that although
poor men use to murmur against God, yet rich men will be offering sacrifice to
their Diety whose beneficiaries they are. Now since the riches of the divine
goodness are so poured out upon the meanest of us all, if we shall refuse to
repent, which is a condition so reasonable, that God requiers

(...)
(...)
(...);
If here we have good things and a continual shower of blessings to soften our
stony hearts, and we shall remain obdurat against those sermons of mercy which
God makes us every day, there will come a time when this shall be upbraided to
us that we had not (...) a thankful mind, but made God to sow his seed upon
the sand or upon the stones, without increase or restitution. It was a sad
alarm which God sent to David by Nathan to upbraid I anointed thee king over
Israel, I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, I gave thee thy masters house
and wives into thy bosom, and the house of Israel and Judah, and if this had
been too little, I would have given thee such and such things, wherefore have
thou despised the name of the Lord? but how infinitely more can God say to all
of us then all this came to? he has anointed us kings and priests in the royal
pri^sthood of Christianity; he has given us his holy spirit to be our guide,
his angels to be our protectors, his creatures for our food and raiment; he
has delivered us from the hands of Satan, has conquered death for us, has
taken Am I a dry tree to the house of Israel? that is, do I bring them no
fruit, do they serve me for naught, and he expects not our duty till first we
feel his goodness, we are now infinitely inexcusable to throw away so great
riches, to despise such a goodness.

However that we may see the greatness of this treasure, of goodness God
seldom leaves us thus: for he sees [be it spoken to the shame of our natures,
and the dishonor of our manners] he felicitate corrumpimur, we become worse
for Gods mercy: and think it will be always holiday, and are like the Crystal
of Arabia hardened not by cold, but made crusty and stubborn, by the warmth of
the divine fire, by its refreshments and mercies; therefore to demonstrate that
God is good indeed, he continues his mercise still to us; but in another
instance* he is merciful to us in punishing us, that by such instruments we may
be led to repentance which will scare us from sin; he delivers us up to the
paedagogy of the divine judgments, and there begins the second

2. (...) forbearance, it is called in the text, which signifies laxamentum or
inducias, that is, when the decrees of the divine judgments temporal are gone
out, either wholly to suspend the execution of them, which is induciae, or a
reprieve; or else when God has laxamentum, an ease of remission of his
judgment, in both these, although in judgment God remembers mercy, yet we are
under discipline, we are brought into the paenitential chamber; at least we are
showed the rod of God* and if like Moses rod it turns us into serpents, and
that we repent not but grow more Devils, yet, then it turns into a rod again
and finishes up the smiting or the first designed affliction.

But I consider it first in general, the riches of the divine goodness is
manifest in beginning this new method of curing us, by severity and by a rod.
And that you may not wonder that I expound this forbearance to be an act of
mercy punishing, I observe that besides that the word supposes the method
changed, and it is a mercy about judgments, and their manner of execution; it
is also in the nature of the thing, in the conjunction of circumstances and the
designs of God, a mercy when he threatens us or strike us into repentance.

We think that the way of blessings and prosperous accidents is Benefactor and
Patron God; and we are apt to dream that God will make his Saints reign here
as kings in a millenary kingdom, and give them the riches and fortunes of this
world, that they may rule over men and sing psalms to God for ever. But I
remember what Xenophanes says of God.

(...). God is like to men neither in shape nor in counsel, he knows that his
mercies confirm some, and encourage, more but they convert but few; alone they
lead men to dissolution of manners and forgetfulness of God, rather then
repentance: not but that mercies are competent and apt instruments of grace, if
we would; but because we are more dispersed in our spirits and by a prosperous
accident are melted into joy and garishness, and drawn off from the sobriety of
recollection. Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked. Many


Namque ut opes nimias mundo fortuna subacto
Intulit, et rebus mores cessere secundis
-- Cultus gest are decoros
vix nuribus rapuere mares: totoque accersitur orb
Quo gens quaeque perit.
Lucan.

And let me observe to you that though there are in the new to rich men our
blessed Savior was pleased to make none at all, but to leave them involved in
general comprehensions and to have a title to the special promises, only by
becoming poor in spirit, and in preparation of mind, though not in fortune
and possession. How ever; it is hard for God to persuade us to this, till we
are taught it by a sad experience, that those prosperities which we think will
make us serve God

Repentance is a duty that best complies with affliction, (...) is a symbolical
estate, of the same complexion and constitution; half the work of repentance is
done by a sad accident, our spirits are made sad, our gayeties mortified, our
wildness corrected, the water springs are ready to run over: but if God should
grant our desires, and give to most men prosperity, with a design to lead them
to repentance, all his pomp and all his employment, and all his affections and
passions, and all his circumstances are so many degrees of distance

And because God knows this well and loves us better then we do our selves,
therefore he sends upon us the 1. scrolls of vengeance, the hand writing upon
the wall to denounce judgment against us: for God is so highly resolved to
bring us to repentance some way or other, goodness he cannot shame us into it,
he will try if by his judgments he can scare us into it* not that he strikes
always as soon as he has sent his warrants out, (...) said Philo. Thus God
sent Jonas and denounced judgments against Niniveh; but with the (...), with
the forbearance of forty days for the time of their escape if they would
repent. When Noah the great preacher of righteousness, denounced the flood to
all the world, it was with the (...) with the forbearance of 120. years, and
when the great extermination of the Jewish nation, and their total

Indeed many times this forbearance makes men impudent, it was I will harden
the heart of pharaoh, that is, I will forbear him, smite him, and then take the
blow off, Sic enim Deus induravit Pharaonis cor, said Saint Basil. For as water
taken off from fire will sooner congeale and become icy, then if it had not
been attenuated by the heat: so is the heart of some men, when smitten by God,
it seems soft and pliable, but taken off from the fire of affliction, it
presently becomes horrid, then stiff and then hard as a rock of Adamant, or as
the gates the riches of Gods goodness; this is to be evil because God is
good; to burn with flames, because we are coold with water; this is to put out
the lamps of heaven, or (if we cannot do it) to put our own eyes out, least we
should behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and be enamoured of his goodness,
and repent and live. O take heed of despising this goodness; for this is one
of Gods latest arts to save us; he has no way left beyond this, but to punish
us with a lasting judgment and a poinant affliction. In the tomb of Terentia
burning and shining lamps, but when God forbearance and lifts us up from the
gates of death and carries us abroad into the open air, that we converse with
prosperity and temptation, we go out in darkness: and we cannot be preserved
in heat and light but by still dwelling in the regions of sorrow: And if such
be our weaknesses, or our folly, it concerns us to pray against such
deliverances, to be afraid of health, to beg of God to continue a persecution,
and not to deny us the mercy of an affliction.

And do not we find all this to be a great truth in our selves? in God that
shall convert him; and he whom fear and sense of pain cannot mend, can never
find any from himself that shall make him wise; This is sad, that nothing from
without, and nothing from within shall move us; nothing in Heaven and nothing
in Hell, neither love nor fear* gratitude to God, nor preservation of our
selves shall make us to repent, (...), that shall be his final sentence: He
shall never escape that ruin from which the greatest art of God could not
entice, nor his terror scare him: he loved cursing therefore shall it happen
to him, he loved not blessing, therefore shall it be far from him.

Let therefore every one of us take the account of our lives still voice from
Heaven consider what voices of thunder you have heard, and presently that noise
ceased and God was heard in the still voice again; What dangers have any of you
escaped, were you ever assa^^^ed by the rudeness of an ill natured man? have
you never had a dangerous fall, and escaped it? did none of you ever escape
drowning, and in a great danger saw the forbearance of God? goodness and
forbearance, did interpose and abate, or divert a mischief, which was falling
on thy head, it must needs cover thy head with a cloud of shame and blushing at
that ingratitude, and that folly, that neither will give God thanks, nor secure
thy own well

Had thou never any dangerous fall in thy intemperance? then God showed thee
thy danger, and that he was angry at thy sin, but yet did so pity thy person,
that he would forbear thee a little longer, else that fall had been into thy
grave.

When thy gluttony gave thee a surfeit, and God gave thee a remedy, his meaning
then was, that thy gluttony rather should be cured then thy surfeit; that
repentance should have been thy remedy, and abstinence and fasting should be
thy cure: Did ever thy proud or revengefull spirit engage the upon a Duel, or
a vexatious finger of judgment (for as yet his whole hand is not laid on)
either is consigned to eternal ruin, because God will no more endeavor his
cure, or if his mercy still continues and goes on in long-suffering, it shall
be by such vexatious instruments, such causticks, and corrosives, such
tormenting and desperate medicaments, such which in the very cure will soundly
punish thy folly and ingratitude. For deceive not your selves, Gods mercy
cannot be made mercies of his mercies, or by the mercies of his judgments: he
will either break our hearts into a thousand fragments of contrition, or break
our bones in the ruins of the grave and hell: And since God rejoices in his
mercy the riches of that goodness which is essential, and part of his glory,
and is communicated to us, to bring us to repentance, that we may partake of
that goodness, and behold that glory.

SER. XIII.
The mercies of the Divine Judgments.

(...)] long-suffering; in this one word are contained all the treasures of the
Divine goodness: here is the length and extension of his mercy, pertrahit
spiritum super nos Dominus, so the Syrian Interpreter reads, Luke 18. 7. God
holds his breath: He retains his anger within him, lest it should come forth
and blast us: and here is also much of the Divine justice: For although God
suffers long yet he does not let us alone: he forbears to destroy us, but not
to punish us; and in both, he by many accidents Wisd. 11. 24.
Thou art merciful toward us all because thou can do all things, and thou
passedst by the sins of men that they may repent. And that, God shall support
our spirit, and preserve our patience, and nourish our hope, and correct our
stubbornness, and mortify our pride, and bring us to him whether we will or
no, by such gracious violences, and merciful judgments which he uses toward
us as his last remedies, is not only the demonstration of a the fiery trial,
the last purgatory fire, which God uses to burn the thistles, and purify the
dross: When the gentle influence of a Sunbeam will not wither them, nor the
weeding Quicunque non purgatus migrat ad inferos, jacebit in luto: quicunque
vero mitratus illuc accesserit, habitabit cum Deis: He that dies in his
impurities shall lie in it for ever, but he that descends to his grave purged
and mitred, that is, having quitted his vices, and superinduens justitiam,
being clothed with righteousness, shall dwell in light and immortality. It is
sad that we put God to such extremities, and as it happens in long diseases,
those which Physicians use for the last remedies seldom prevail; and when
consumptive persons come to have their heads shaven, they do not often

However, although I say this, and it is highly considerable, to the purpose
that we never suffered things to come to this extremity, yet if it be upon us,
we must do as well as we can: But then we are to look upon it as a design of
Gods last mercy, beyond which, if we protract our repentance, our condition is
desperately miserable. The whole state of which mercy we understand by the
parable of the King reckoning with his servants that were in arrears to him:
One was brought to him, which owed him ten thousand talents: but forasmuch as
he had not to pay, his Lord commanded him The man you see was under the arrest;
the sentence was passed upon him, he was a condemned man; but before the
execution of it, he fell down and worshipped and said, (...), Lord suffer me
longer a while; have patience with me and I will pay thee all. This tells its
meaning: this is a long-sufferance, by being a forbearance only of execution
of the last sentence; a putting off damnation upon a longer trial of our
emendation; but in the mean time it implies no other ease, but that together
with his long-sufferance God may use all other severities and scourges to break
our untamed spirits, and to soften them with hammers; so death be put off, no
matter else what hardship and loads of sufferance we have. Hic ure, hic seca,
ut in aeternum parcas, so Saint Austin prayed, Here O Lord cut me, here burn
me, spare me not now, that thou may spare me for ever: And it is just like
the mercy used to a mad man,

I remember what Bion observed wittily of the punishment inflicted upon the
daughters of Danaeus, whom the old Poets fained to be condemned in hell to fill
a bottomless tub with water, and to increase the pain (as they fancied) this
water they were to carry in sieves, and never to leave work till the tub were
full; It is well (says he) since their labor must be eternal, that it is so
Omnes enim poenae non exterminantes sunt medici^ales: All punishments
whatsoever which do not destroy us, are intended to save us; they are lancets
which make a wound but to let forth

the (...), or forbearance; but if he smites single persons with a small
judgment, a long-suffering not of him, but toward others: and God has
destroyed my neighbor to make me repent, my neighbors time being expired and
the date of his possibility determined. For a man's deathbed is but an ill
station for a penitent, and a final judgment is no good monitor to him, to
whom it is a severe executioner. They that perished in the gainsaying of Corah
were out of the conditions of repentance; but the people that were affrighted
with the neighborhood of the judgment and the expresses of Gods anger
manifested in such visible remonstrances, they were the men called unto
repentance. But concerning

2. And I desire you to observe this, that you may truly estimate the arts of
the Divine justice and mercy: For all the world being one continual and entire
argument of the Divine mercy, we are apt to abuse that mercy to vain
confidences and presumption; First, mistaking the end, as if Gods mercy would
be

3 For if God suffers men to go on in sins and punishes them not, it is not a
mercy, it is not a forbearance; it is a hardening them, a consigning them to
ruin, and reprobation; and themselves give the best argument to prove it; for
they continue in their sin, they multiply their iniquity, and every day grow
more enemy to when he slew them, that sought him, and turned them early and
enquired after God: but as long as they prevailed upon their enemies then they
forgot that God was their strength and the high God was their redeemer. It was
well observed by the Persian Ambassador of old, when he was telling the King a
sad story of the overthrow of all his army by the Athenians; he adds this of
his own; that the day before the sight, the young Persian gallants being
confident they should destroy their enemies, were drinking drunk, and railing
at the timerousnesse and fears of religion, strymon, which was so frozen, that
their boats could not lanch, and yet it began to thaw, so that they feared the
ice would not bear them. Then you should see the bold gallants that the day
before said there was no God, most timorously and superstitiously fall upon
their faces and begged of God that the river strymon might bear them over from
prophet was the most gentle, and God began to forgive, and the and the mourners
go about the streets, this is nothing but the pompa misericordiae, this is the
funeral of oursins, dressed indeed with emblems of mourning, and proclaimed
with sad accents of death, but the sight is refreshing, as the beauties of the
field, which God has blessed, and the sounds are healthful

This is that riddle spoken of in the psalm, Psalm. 74. 9.
Calix in manu Dom, vini meri plenus misto; the pure impure, the mingled
unmingled cup; for it is a cup in which God has poured much of his severity
and anger, and yet it is pure and unmingled; for it is all mercy: and so the
riddle is resolved, and our cup is full and made more wholesome lymphatum
crescit, dulcescit, laedere nescit, it is some justice and yet it is all mercy;
the very justice of God being an act of mercy, a forbearance of the man, or the
nation, and the punishing the sin. Psalm. 98. 8.
and forgave their sin upon them. And this was David's observation of the manner
of Gods mercy to them; Thou wast a God and forgavest them, though thou tookest
veangeance of their inventions: for Gods mercy is given to us by parts; and to
certain purposes; sometimes God only so forgives us, that he does not cut us
off in the sin, but yet lays on a heavy load of judgments: so he did to his
people, when he sent them to school under the discipline of 70 years
captivity; sometimes he makes a the Lord has taken away thy sin, thou shall not
die, nevertheless the child that is born unto thee that shall die: sometimes
he puts the evil off to a further day, as he did in the case of Ahab, and
Hezekiah: to the first he brought the evil upon his house, and to the second he
brought the evil upon his kingdom, in his sons days; God forgiving only so as
to respite the evil, that they should have till we chatter like a swallow (as
David's expression is) and though David was an excellent penitent, yet after he
had lost the child begotten of Bathsheba, and God had told him he had forgiven
him, yet he raised up his darling son against him, and forced him to an
inglorious flight, and his son lay with his Fathers concubins in the face of
all Israel: so that when we are forgiven, yet it is ten to one, but GOD will
make us to smart and roar for our sins, for the very disquietnesse of our
souls.

For if we sin and ask God forgiveness and then are quiet, we


Sic luitur juvenis culpa dolor senis.
It may be thy sore eyes are the punishment of thy intemperance seven years
ago, or God cuts thy days shorter and thou shall die in a florid age, or he
raises up afflictions to thee in thine own house, in thine own bowels, or has
sent a gangren into thy estate, or with any arrow out of his quiver he can
wound thee, and the when a man has repented, no man can say that God has
forgiven

But sometimes we find a severer judgment happening upon a people, and yet in
that sad story, Gods mercy sings the triumph which although it be much to Gods
glory, yet it is a sad story to sinning people* 600000. sighting men besides
women and children, and decrepit persons, came out of Egypt and God destroyed
them Gods mercy prevailed over his justice, that he did not destroy the nation;
but still preserved a succession to Jacob, to possess the promise. God drowned
all the world except eight persons his mercy there also prevailed over his
justice, that he preserved a remnant to mankind; his justice devoured all the
world, and his mercy which preserved but eight, had the honor of the
prevailing attribute. God destroyed Sodom, and the five cities of the plain,
and rescued but four from the flames of that sad burning, and of the four lost
one in the flight and yet his mercy prevailed over

And in these senses we are to understand the excellency of the divine mercy
even when he smites, when he rebukes us for sin, when he makes our beauty to
fail and our flesh to consume away like a moth fretting a garment, yet then his
mercy is the prevailing ingredient. If his judgments be but sines set upon our
heads accordto the mercy of our old laws, Salvo contenemento, so as to
preserve our estates, to continue our hopes and possibilities of heaven; and
all the other judgments can be nothing but mercies, excellent instruments of
grace arts to make us sober and wise, to that the spirit may be saved; the
result of all this, is, that Gods mercies are not, ought not, cannot
quotusq^isque reperitur qui impunitate proposita abstinere possit injurijs?
Impunitas est maxima peccandi illecebra said Cicero, Ossic. 3.
and therefore the wisdom of God has so ordered the actions of the world that
the most fruitful showers shall be wrapped up in a cover of black clouds, the
long suffering of God, the last remedy to our diseased souls, and (...), said
Phalaris, unless we be senseless we shall be brought to sober courses, by all
those sad accidents and wholesome, but ill tasting mercies, which we feel in
all the course and the ^^ccession of the divine long sufferance.

The use of all the premises is, that which Saint Paul expresses we do not
despise all this* and he only despises not, who serves the ends of God in all
these designs of mercy, that is, he that repents him of his sins. But the^e
are a great many despisers, all they that live in their sins, they that have
more blessings then they can reckon hours in their lives, that are courted by
the divine favor and woed to salvation, as if mankind were to give, not to
receive so great a blessing* all they that answer not to so friendly summons,
they are despisers of Gods mercies: and although God overflows with mercies and
does not often leave us to the only hopes of being cured by ^^^ctions and
gentle incurabili, Plutarch reports concerning swine that their optic nervs
are so disposed to turn their eyes downwards that they cannot look upwards nor
behold the face of heaven

But if this despite runs further, and when the mercies look on us with an
angry countenance, and that God gives us only the mercy of a punishment, if we
despise this too, we increase

But some of these despisers are such as are unmooved when God smites others;
like Gallio when the Jews took Softhenes and beat him in the pleading place, he
cared for none of these long sufferance to strike others to make us afraid. But
however, we sleep in the midst of such alarums, yet know, that there is not one
death in all the neighborhood, but is intended to thee; every crowing of the
cock is to awake thee

That Italian Gentleman was certainly a great lover of his sleep, who was angry
with the lizard that wak't him, when a because they have ill stomachs and
cannot keep the medicine: Isai. 1. 4, 5.
This was the desperate estate of Judah. Ah sinful nation, a people laden with
iniquity, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of
Israel; why should ye be siricken any more? This is the (...), the most bitter
curse, the greatest excommunication, when the delinquent is become a heathen
and a publicane, without the covenant, out of the pale of the Church; for what
have I to do with them that are without? said Saint Paul: It was not lawful
for the Church any more to punish them; and this court Christian is an
imitation and parallel of the justice of the court of heaven: When a sinner is
not mended by judgments at long running, God cuts him off from his inheritance
and the lot of sons, he will chastise him no more, but let him take his course
and spend his portion of prosperity, such as shall be allowed him in the great
Economy of the world. Thus God did to his Vineyard which he took such pains to
fence, to plant, to manure, to dig, to cut, Isai. 5. 5.
Auferam sepem ejus, God had fenced it with a hedge of thorns, and God would
take away all that hedge, he would not leave a thorn standing, not one
judgment to reprove or admonish them, but all the wild beasts, and wilder and
more beastly lusts, may come and devour it, and trample it down in scorn.

And now what shall I say, but those words quoted by Saint Peter in his Sermon:
Acts 13. 14.
Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish; perish in your own folly by
stubbornness and ingratitude. For it Curavimus Babylonem and non est sanata, we
dressed and tended Babylon, but

Sermon. XIV. SER. XIV.

2 Pet. 3. 18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory both now and for ever. Amen.
WHen Christianity like the day spring from the East, with a new light did not
only inlighten the world, but amazed the minds of men, Saint Paul, that if a
brother walked disorderly, the Christians should avoid his company: He forbad
them not, to accompany with the Heathens that walked disorderly; for then a man
must have gone out of the world. But they were not to endure so much as to eat
with, or to salute a disorderly brother, an ill living Christian: But now if we
should observe this canon of Saint Paul, and refuse to eat, or to converse with
a fornicatour, or a drunkard, or a perjured person, or covetous, we must also
go out of the world; for a pious or a holy person In pontificibus nemo hodie
sanctitatem requirit, optimi putantur si vel leviter mali sint, vel minus boni
quam caeteri mortales esse solent. No man looks for holiness in the Bishops of
Rome; those are the best Popes who are not extremly wicked: the same is too
true of the greatest part of Christians: Men are excellent persons if they be
not traitors, or adulterous, oppressors, or injurious, drun^ards, or
scandalous, if they be not as this publican, as the vilest person Nunc si
depositum non inficiatur amicus
Si reddat veterem cum tota aerugine fllem
Prodigiosa fides and Thuscis digna libellis
Quaeque coronata lustrari debeat agna. Juven. Sat. 13.



He that is better then the dregs of his own age, whose religion is [God help]
whose alms are contemptible, and his devotion infrequent, yet as things are
now, he is unus e milibus, one of a thousand, and he stands eminent and
conspicuous in the valleys and lower grounds of the present piety; for a bank
is a mountain upon a level: but what is rare and eminent in the manners of men
this day would have been scandalous, and have deserved the rod of an Apostle,
if it had been confronted with the fervours and

Men of old looked upon themselves as they stood by the examples and precedents
of Martyrs, and compared their piety to the life of Saint Paul, and estimated
their zeal by the flames of the Boanerges, Saint James and his brother: and the
Bishops were thought reproveable as they fell short of the ordinary government
of Saint Peter, and Saint John; and the assemblies of Christians were so holy,
that every meeting had religion enough to hallow a house and convert it to a
Church; and every day of feasting was a Communion, and every fasting day was a
day of repentance and alms; and every day of thanksgiving was a day of joy, and
alms: and religion begun all their actions, and prayer consecrated them, and
they ended in charity, and were not polluted with design: they despised the
world heartily, and pursued after heaven greedily; they knew no ends but to
serve God, and to be saved; and had no designs upon their neighbors, but to
lead them to God, and to felicity; till Satan full of envy to see such
excellent days, mingled covetousness, and ambition within the throngs and
conventions of the Church, and a vice crept into an office, and then the
mutual confidence grew less, and so charity was lessened; faith began to be
sullied, and pride crept in; and then men snatched at offices, not for the
work, but for the dignity; and then they served themselves more then God and
the Church; till at last it came to the pass where now it is, that the Clergy
live lives no better then the Laity, and the Laity are stooped to imitate the
evil customs of strangers and enemies of Christianity; so that we should think
Religion in a good condition, so that men did offer up to God but the actions
of an ordinary, even, and just life, without the scandal and allayes of a
great impiety: But because such is the nature of things, that either

But grow in grace] That's the remedy, and that would make us all wise and
happy, blessed in this world, and sure of heaven: Concerning which, we are to
consider first; what the estate of grace is, into which every one of us must be
entered, that we may grow in it; secondly the proper parts, acts and offices of
growing in grace, 3. The signs, consequences, and proper significations, by
which if we cannot perceive the growing, yet afterward we may perceive that we
and so judge of the state of our duty, and concerning our final condition of
being saved.

1. Concerning the state of grace, I consider that no man can be said to be in
the state of grace, who retains an affection to any one sin. The state of
pardon and the divine favor, begins at the first instance of anger against our
crimes, when we leave our fondnesses and kind opinions, when we excuse them
not, and will not endure their shame; when we feel the smarts of any of their
evil consequents; for he that is a perfect lover of sin, and is sealed up to a
reprobate sense, endures all that sin brings along they come to spy the good
things of that way that leads to heaven, a fellow worker with God, he must
entertain the spirit, attend his inspirations, receive his whispers, obey all
his motions, invite him further, and utterly renounce all confederacy with his
enemy, sin; at no hand suffering any root of bitterness to spring up, not
allowing to himself any reserve of carnal pleasure, no clancular lust, no
private oppressions, no secret covetousness, no love to this grow in grace and
in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. And now the first part of this duty is to make religion to be the business
of our lives; for this is the great instrument, which will naturally produce
our growth in grace, and the perfection of a Christian. For a man cannot after
a state of sin be instantly a Saint: the work of heaven is not done by a flash
of lightning, or a dash of affectionate rain, or a few tears of a relenting
pity; God the price of our high calling; while our eatings are actions of
temperance, our labors are profitable our humiliations are acts of obedience,
and our alms are charity: our marriages are cha^^, and whether we eat or
drink, sleep or wake we may do all to the glory of God, by a direct intuition
or by a reflex act, by design or by supplment, by fore sight or by an after
election: and to this purpose

I will not turn this discourse into a reproof, but leave it represented up
in avaritious and vain attendances, and we shall not attend wise men, the
second year, Philosophers, the third, Orators, and the fourth were but
Plebeians and understood nothing but their own ignorance.

And just so it happens to some in the progresses of religion: at first they
are violent and active; and then they satiate all the appetites of religion;
and that which is left, is, that they were soon weary, and sat down in
displeasure, and return to the world and dwell in the business of pride, or
money; and by this time they understand that their religion is declined, and
passed from the heats and follies of youth, to the coldness and infirmities of
old age; The remedies of which is only a diligent spirit and a busy religion*
a great industry and a full portion of time in holy offices; that as the Oracle
said to the Cirrheans, noctes diesque belligerandum,

2. The second step of our growth in grace is, when virtues grow habitual, apt
and easy in our manners, and dispositions. For although many new converts have
a great zeal, and a busy spirit, apt enough as they think to contest against
all the difficulties of a

(...)
(...).
It is an easy thing to commit a wickedness, for temptation and infirmity are
always too near us: But God has made care and sweat, prudence and diligence,
experience and watchfulness, wisdom

The way is long and difficult at first; but in the progress and pursuit we
find all the knots made plain, and the rough ways made smooth.

Now, the spirit of grace is like a new soul within him, and he has new
appetites and new pleasures, when the things of the world grow unsavory and the
things of religion are delicious; when his temptations to his old crimes return
but seldom, and they prevail not at all, or in very inconsiderable instances,
and stay not at all, but are reproached with a penitential sorrow, and speedy
amendment; when we do actions of virtue quickly, frequently, Sextius Romanus
resigned the honors and offices of the city, and betook himself to the
severity of a Philosophical life. But when his unusual diet and hard labor
began to pinch his flesh, and he felt his propositions smart, and that which
was fine in discourse at a Symposiack, or an Academical dinner, began to sit
uneasily upon him in the practice; he so despaired that he had like to have
cast himself into the sea, to appease the labors of his religion; Because he
never had gone further then to think it a fine thing to be a wise man: he would
commend it, but he was loath to pay for it at the price that God and grown (...)
grace and has made religion habitual to his spirit, is not at ease but when he
is doing the works of the new man, he rests in religion and comforts his
sorrows with thinking of his prayers, and in all crosses of the world he is
patient, because his joy is at hand to refresh him when he list, for he cares
not so he may serve God: and if you make him poor here, he is rich there, and
he counts that to be his proper service, his work, his recreation, and reward.

3. But ^^cause in the course of holy living, although the duty affectionate,
the labor be more cheerful and more active; and if

4. To discern our growth in grace, we must inquire concerning our passions,
whether they be mortified and quiet, complying with our ends of virtue and
under command. For since the passions are the matter of virtue and vice
respectively, he that has brought into his power all the strengths of the
enemy, and the forts from whence he did infest him, he only has secured his
holy walking with God. But because this thing is never perfectly a good man may
be incident to a violent passion, and that without sin, yet a perfect man is
not; a well-grown Christian has seldom such sufferings; to suffer such things
sometimes may stand with the being of virtue, but not with its security: For if
passions range up and down and transport us frequently and violently, we may
keep in our forts, and in our dwellings, but our enemy is master of the field,
and our virtues are restrained, and apt to be starved, and will not hold out
long; a good man may be spotted with a violence, but a wise man will not: and
he that does not add wisdom to his virtue, the knowledge of Jesus Christ to
his virtuous habits, will be a good man but till a storm comes. But beyond
this, inquire after the state of your passions, in actions of religion: Some
men fast to mortify their just, and their fasting makes them peevish: some
reprove a vice

And although no man must take accounts of his being in, or out of the state of
grace, by his being dispassionate, and free from all the assaults of passion,
yet as to the securing his being in the state of grace, he must provide that he
be not a slave of passion, so to declare his growth in grace, he must be sure
to take the measures of his affections, and see that they be lessened; more apt
to be suppressed; not breaking out to inconvenience and imprudencies, not
rifling our spirit and drawing us from our usual and more and knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ: This only; in the seruting and consequent judgment
concerning our passions, it will concern the curiosity of our care, to watch
against passions in the reflex act; against pride, or lust, complacency, and
peevishness attending upon virtue. For he was noted for a vain person, who
being overjoyed for the cure of his pride (as he thought) cried out to his
wife, Cerne Dionysia deposui fastum, behold I have laid aside all my pride: and
of that very dream the silly man thought he had reason to boast; it was an act
of pride, and levity besides. If thou have given a noble present to thy friend,
if thou have rejected the unjust desire of thy Prince; if thou have endured
thirst and hunger for religion or continence; if thou have refused an offer
like that which was made to Joseph, sit down and rest in thy good conscience,
and do not please thy self in opinions, and fantastic noises abroad, and do
not despise him that did not do so as thou have done; and reprove no man with
an upbraiding circumstance: for it will give thee but an ill return, and a
contemptible reward, if thou shall over-lay thy infant-vertue, or drown it with
a flood of

SER. XV.

Part II.
patient, and even, not apt to excuse his fault, that is less apt to anger, or
to scorn him that snatches him rudely from the flames of hell, he is virtues
Confessor, and suffers these lesser stripes for that interest which will end in
spiritual and eternal benedictions.

They who are furious against their monitors are incorrigible: but it is one
degree of meekness to suffer discipline: and a meek man cannot easily be an
ill man, especially in the present instance: he appears, at least, to have a
healthful constitution* he has natural, easy, and habitual, Some men chide
themselves for all their misdemeanors, because they would be represented to
the censures Sion, or at the gates of the temple; never pleased but in virtue
and religion: Then he knows the state of his soul, and the state of his danger,
he reckons it no objection to be abased in the face of man, so he may be
gracious in the eyes of God: And that is a sign of a good grace, and a holy
wisdom; That man is grown in the grace of God, and in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Justus in principio sermonis est accusator sui, said the Wise
man, The righteous that is, quickly, lest he be prevented: And certain it is,
he cannot be either wise or good that had rather have a real sin within him,
then that a good man should believe him to be a repenting sinner; that had
rather keep his crime, then lose his reputation; that is, rather to be so, then
to be thought so, rather be without the favor of God, then of his neighbor.
Diogenes once spied a young man coming out of a Tavern, or place of
entertainment; who perceiving himself observed by the Philosopher, with some
confusion stepped back again, that he might (if possible) preserve his fame
with that severe person. But Diogenes told him, Quanto magis intraveris tanto
magis eris in caupona: The more you go back, the longer you are in the place
where you are ashamed to be seen; and he that conceals his sin, still retains
that which he counts his shame, and his burden. Hippocrates was noted for an
ingenious person, that pious, for writing his book of retractations, in which
he published his former ignorances and mistakes, and so set his shame off to
the world, invested with a garment of modesty, and above half changed before
they were seen. I did the rather insist upon this particular, because it is a
consideration of huge concernment, and yet much neglected in all its instances
and degrees. We neither confess our shame, nor endure it; we are privately
troubled, and

When God sent his Prophets to the people, and they stoned them with stones,
and sawed them asunder, and cast them into dungeons, and made them beggars, the
people fell into the condition of Babylon, Quam curavimus and non est sanata;
We healed her (said But she would not be cured: Derelinquamus eam, that is her
doom; let her enjoy her sins and all the fruits of sin laid up in treasures of
wrath against the day of vengeance and retribution.

6. He that is grown in grace, and the knowledge of Christ esteems no sin to be
little or contemptible; none fit to be cherished or indulged to. For it is not
only inconsistent with the love of God, to entertain any undecency or
beginning of a crime, any thing that displeases him, but he always remembers
how much it cost him to arrive at the state of good things, whether the grace
of a state of life contrary to that which with so much danger Alas Lord, is it
not a little one and my soul shall live? And it is not therefore to be
entertained because it is little; for it is the more without excuse, if it be
little; the temptations to it are not great; the allurements not mighty; the
promises not insnaring, the resistance easy; a greater danger (I say) not
directly, but accidentally; not in respect of the crime, but in relation to the
person: for he that cannot overcome a small crime, is in the state of
infirmity, so great, that he perishes infallibly, when he is arrested by the
sins of a stronger temptation: But he that easily can, and yet will not; he is
in love with sin, and courts his danger, that he may at least kiss the apples
of Paradise, or feast himself with the parings: since he is by some displeasing
instrument affrighted from glutting himself with the forbidden fruit, albes of
baptism are sullied in many places with the smoke and filth of Sodom and
uncleanness, cares not in what paths he treads, and a shower of dirt changes
not his state, who already lies wallowing in the puddles of impurity; It makes
men negligent and easy, when they have an opinion or certain knowledge that
they are persons extraordinary in nothing; that a little care will not mend
them; that another

7. He that is grown in grace pursues virtue for its own interest, purely and
simply without the mixture and allay of collateral designs, and equally
inclining purposes; God in the beginning of our returns to him entertains us
with promises and threatenings, the apprehensions of temporal advantages, with
fear and shame, and with reverence of friends and secular respects, with
reputation and coercion of humane laws and at first men snatch at the lesser
and preach Christ out of envy, or to lessen the authority and fame of others:
some wax and his bag with honey; that is, with the useful parts of virtue not
babes, but men in christ Jesus. In this progress of grace I have not yet
expressed, that perfect persons should serve God all that, is but heaven in
another sense, and under another name; just as the mystical Theology

8. Some men there are in the beginning of their holy walking with God, and
while they are babes in Christ, who are presently amoris at morsum qui vere
senserit, he that has felt the stings of a sharp and very dear affection is
impatient in the absence of his beloved object, the soul that is sick and
swallowed up with holy fire loves nothing else; all pleasures else seem
unsavory, company is troublesome, visitors are tedious, homilies of comfort are
flat and useless. The pleasures hunger and thirst it must be satisfied or we
die; and when we feel great longings after religion and faintings for want of
holy nutriment, when a famine of the word and sacraments is more intolerable;
and we think our selves really most miserable, when the Church doors are shut
against us, or like the Christians in the persecution of the Vandals, who
thought it worse then death, that there Bishops were

in peace, or in the strength of the spirit. It is good that we will not seek
out opportunities to sin; but are not we too apprehensive of it, when Naphtha
or prepared Nitre? or can we like the children of the captivity walk in the
midst of slames and not be scorched or consumed,? Many men will (not like
Judah) go into high ways and untie the girdles of harlots; But can you reject
the importunity of a beauteous and an imperious Lady, as Joseph did we had need
pray that we be not led into temptation; that is, not only into the
possession, but not into the allurements and neighborhood of it, least by
little and little our strongest resolutions be untwist, and crack

10. No man is grown in grace but he that is ready for every index of a good
proficient in the ways of Godliness. The heart of a man is like a wounded
hand or arm, which if it be so cured that it can only move one way and cannot
turn to all postures and natural uses it is but imperfect, and still half in
health, and half wounded: so is our spirit; if it be apt for prayer and close
fisted in alms, if it be sound in faith and dead in charity, if it be
religious to God and unjust to our neighbor, bonum ex integra causa malum
exqualibet particulari, every fault spoils a grace. But one grace alone cannot
make a good man. But as to be universal in our obedience is necessary to the
being in the state of grace: so readily to change employment from

This is not to be expected of beginners; for they must be enticed with apt
employments; and it may be, their office and work so fits their spirits, that
it makes them first in love with it, and then with God for giving it; and many
a man goes to heaven in the days of peace, whose faith, and hopes, and
patience would have been dashed in pieces, if he had fallen into a storm or
persecution. Oppression will make a wise man mad (says Solomon): there are
Nero durst not die, yet when his servants told him that the Senators had
condemned him to be put to death more Majorum, that is, by scourging like a
slave, he was forced into a preternatural confidence, and fell upon his own
sword; but when God so changes thy estate that thou art fallen into accidents
to which thou art no otherwise disposed, but by grace and a holy spirit, and
yet thou can pass through them with quietness, and do the work of suffering
as well

11. Lastly, some there are who are firm in all great and foreseen changes and
have laid up in the storehouses of the spirit (reason and religion) arguments
and discourses enough to defend them against all violencies and stand at watch
so much, that

These are the parts, acts, and offices of our growing in grace, and yet I have
sometimes called them signs; but they are signs, as eating and drinking are
signs of life, they are signs so as also parts of life; and these are parts
of our growth in grace, so that a man can grow in grace to no other purpose but
to these or the like improvements.

Concerning which I have a caution or two to interpose. 1. The growth of grace
is to be estimated as other moral things are, not in single instances, or in
single graces. all single acts are to be done after the manner of men, and
therefore are not always capable of increasing; and they have their terms
beyond which easily they cannot swell: and therefore if it be a good act and
zealous, it may proceed from a well grown grace, and yet a younger and weaker
person may do some acts as great and as religious as it; But neither do single
graces always greater love then this no man has, that he lay down his life
for God: he cannot easily grow in the substance of that act; and if other
persons, or himself, in process of time do it more cheerfully, or with fewer
fears, it is not always a sign of a greater grace, but sometimes of greater
collateral assistances, or a better habit of body, or more fortunate
circumstances: for he that goes to the block tremblingly for Christ; and yet
endures his death certainly, and endures his trembling too, and runs through
all his infirmities to improve every grace; and the passive virtues of a
Christian are not to be expected to grow so fast in prosperous, as in suffering
Christians: but in this case we are to take accounts of our selves by the
improvement of those graces which God makes to happen often in our lives; such
as are charity and temperance in young men, liberality and religion in aged
persons, ingenuity and humility in scholars, justice in merchants and
artificers, forgiveness of injuries in great men, and persons tempted by
lawsuits; for since virtues grow like other moral habits, by use, diligence,
and assiduity, there where God has appointed our work and in our instances,

3. Be careful to observe that these rules are not all to be understood
negatively, but positively, and affirmatively, that is, that a man may conclude
that he is grown in grace if he observes these characters in himself, which I
have here discoursed of; but he must not conclude negatively, that he is not
grown in grace, if he cannot observe such signal testimonies: for sometimes
God covers the

4. In considering concerning our growth in grace, let us take more care to
consider matters that concern justice, and charity, then that concern the
virtue of religion; because in this there may much, in the other there cannot
easily be any illusion, and cosenage. That is a good religion that believes,
and trusts, and hopes in God through Jesus Christ, and for his sake does all
justice, and all charity, that he can; and our Blessed Lord gives no other
description of love to God, but obedience and keeping his commandment: Justice
and charity are like the matter, religion is the form of Christianity; but
although the form be more noble and the principle of life, yet it is less
discernable, less material, and less sensible; and we judge concerning the
form by the matter, and by material accidents, and by actions: and so we must
of our religion,

I am much prevented in my intention for the perfecting of Proh! quam virtute
praeditos omnia decent! thinking all things becomes a good man; even his
gestures not understand his own condition, must be content to work on super
totam materiam, without considerations of Particulars; he must pray earnestly,
and watch diligently, and consult with prudent Guides, and ask of God great
measures of his Spirit, and hunger and thirst after righteousness: for he that
does so, shall certainly be satisfied: and if he understands not his present
good condition, yet if he be not wanting in the down right endeavors of piety,
and in hearty purposes, he shall then find that he is grown in grace when he
springs up in the resurrection of the just, and shall be ingrafted upon a tree
of Paradise, which bears fruit for ever, Glory to God, rejoicing to Saints
and Angels, and eternal

Prima sequentem, honestum est in secundis
aut tertijs consistere. Cicero.
SER. XVI.

And of some have compassion, making a difference: * And others save with fear,
pulling them out of the fire.
MAn has but one entrance into the world, but a thousand ways to pass from
thence; and as it is in the natural, so it is in the spiritual; nothing but the
union of faith and obedience habits and degrees of perverseness, that the very
kinds of them Vt omnium misereatur, that he might have mercy upon all; that
light may break forth from the deepest enclosures of darkness, and

1. [Of some have compassion] and these I shall reduce to four heads or orders
of men and actions; all which have their proper cure proportionable to their
proper state, gentle remedies to the lesser irregularities of the soul. The
first are those that sin without observation of their particular state; either
because they are uninstructed in the special cases of conscience, or because
they do an evil against which there is no express commandment. It is a sad
modesty is sometimes abused by a false name and called clownishnesse, and want
of breeding; and contentedness and temperate living is suppressed to be want
of courage and noble thoughts; and severity of life is called imprudent and
unsociable; and simplicity and hearty honesty is counted foolish and
unpolitick, they are easily prodigality and foolish dissolution of their
estates with the title of liberal and noble usages, timorousness is called
caution, rashness is called quickness of spirit, covetousness, is fragality,
amorousnesse is society, and gentile; peevishness and anger is courage,
flattery is humane, and courteous; and under these false vails virtue slips
away (like truth from under the hand of the^ that fight for her) and leave
vices dressed up withthe same imag^^y, and the fraud not discovered, till the
day of recompenses, when men are distinguished by their rewards. But so men
think they sleep freely when their spirits are laden with a Lethargy and they
call diet; their consciences must be made tender and their Catechism

But the other in this place are more considerable; Men sin without observation
because their actions have no restraint of an express Commandment, no letter
of the law to condemn them by an express sentence. And this happens, when the
crime is comprehended under a general notion without the instancing of
particulars; for if you search over all the Scripture you shall never find
incest named and marked with the black character of death; and there are
diveres sorts of uncleanness, to which Scripture therefore gives

2. Men sin without an express prohibition when they commit a thing that is
like a forbidden evil. And when Saint Paul had reckoned many works of the
flesh, he adds [and such like.] all that have the same unreasonablenesse and
carna^^ty. For thus, poligamy is unlawful; for if it be not lawful for a
Christian to put away his wife and marry another (unless for adultery) much
less may he keep a first and take a second, when the first is not put away; If
a Christian may not be drunk with wine, neither may he be drunk with

3. A man is guilty, even when no law names his action, if he does any thing
that is a cause or an effect, a part or unhandsome adjunct of a forbidden
instance; he that forbad all intemperance, is as much displeased with the
infinite of foolish talk that happens at such meetings, as he is at the
spoiling of the drink and the destroying the health. If God cannot endure
wantonness, how can he day of salvation also, are against God and against
religion. He that is commanded to be charitable it is also intended he should
not spend his money vainly, but be a good husband and provident that he may be
able to give to the poor, as he would be to purchase a Lordship, or pay his
daughters portion: and upon this stock it is that Christian religion forbids
jeering, and immoderate laughter and reckon jestings amongst the things that
are unseemly. This also would be considered.

4. Besides the express laws of our religion, there is an universal line and
limit to our passions and designs, which is called the anology of
Christianity; that is, the proportion of its sanctity and strictness of its
holy precepts. This is not forbidden, but does this become you? Is it decent to
see a Christian live in plenty and ease and heap up money and never to partake
of Christ's passions, there is no law against a Judge, his being a dresser of
gardens or a gatherer of Sycamore fruits, but it becomes him not, and deserves
a reproof. If I do exact justice to my neighbor and cause him to analogy of
our religion; It does not become a Disciple of so gentle a master to take all
advantages that he can. Christ, that quitted all the glories that were
essential to him, and that grew up in his nature when he lodged in his Fathers
bosom, Christ that suffered all the evils due for the sins of mankind, himself
remaining most innocent, Christ, that promised persecution, injuries and
affronts as part of our present portion, and gave them to his Disciples as a
legacy, and gave us his spirit to enable us to suffer injuries; patience of
fortitude of longanimity and perseverance; he that of eight beatitudes made
that five of them should be instanced in the matter of humiliation and
suffering temporal inconvenience, that blessed Master was certainly desirous
that his Disciples should take their crowns from the cross, not from the
evennesse and felicities of the world; He intended swallowed up but nothing can
fill it but God, who has no bound. Christianity is a law for sons, not for
servants; and God that gives full measure, shaken together, pressed down,
heaped up, and running over; for God does so to us; and when we have done so to
him, we are infinitely short of the least measure of what God does for us; we
are still unprofitable servants. And therefore as the breaking any of the laws
of Christianity provoks God to anger, so the prevaricating in the of
Christianity stirs him up to jealousy: He has reason to suspect our hearts
are not right with him, when we are so reserved in the matter and measures of
our services: and if we will give God but just what he calls for by express
mandate, it is just in him to require all of that at our hands without any
abatement and then we are sure to miscarry. And let us remember that when God
said he was a jealous God he expressed the meaning of it to be, he did punish
to the third and fourth generation. Jelousie is like the rage of a man: but if
it be also like the anger of God, it is insupportable and will crush us into
the ruins of our

But because these things are not frequently considered, there are very many
sins committed against religion, which because the commandment has not marked
men, refuse to mark, and think God requires no more. I am entered into a sea of
matter, which I must not now prosecute; but I shall only note this to you that
it is the proportions as well as by the express rules, of our religion;
because in humane and civil actions all the nations of the world use so to call
their subjects to account. For that which in the accounts of men is called
reputation and public honesty, is the same which in religion we call analogy
and proportion; in both cases there being some things, which are besides the
notices of laws, and yet are the most certain consignations of an excellent
virtue. He is a base person that does any thing against public honesty and yet
no man can be punished if he marries a wife the next day after his first wives
funeral: and so without zeal, and without love: and unless care be taken of
him he will quickly be without religion. But yet these I say are a sort of
persons which are to be used with gentleness, and treated with compassion; for
no man must be handled roughly to force him to do a kindness: and coercion of
laws and severity of Judges, sergeants and executioners are against offenders
of commandments; But the way to cure such persons is the easiest and gentellest
remedy of all others. They are to be instructed in all the parts of duty, and
invited forward by the consideration iron bands of laws and yet to break the
golden chains of love but all those instruments which are proper to enkindle
the love of God and to turn fear into charity are the proper instances of that
compassion which is to be used toward these men.

2. The next sort of those who are in the state of sin, and yet to with
compassion are those who entertain themselves with the beginnings and little
entrances of sin, which as they are to be more pitied because they often come
by reason of inadvertancy, and an unavoidable weakness in many degrees, so
they are more to be taken care of, because they are undervallued and
undiscernably run into inconvenience; when we see a child strike a servant
rudely, or jeere a silly person, or wittily cheat his play-fellow, or talk
words light as the skirt of a summer garment, we laugh and are delighted with
the wit and confidence of the boy; Nemo simul malus fit and malus esse
cernitur; sicut nec scorpijs tum innascuntur stimuli cum pungunt No man is
discerned to be vicious so soon as he is so, and vices have their infancy and
their childe-hood and it cannot be expected that in a child's age should be the
vice of a man; that were monstrous as if he wore a beard in his cradle; the
thorns of Dauphine will never fetch blood if they do not scratch the first
day: and we shall find that the little undecencies and riflings of our souls,
the first openings and disparkings of our virtue differ only from the state of
perdition, as infancy does from old age, as sickness from death; It is the
entrance into those regions whether whosoever passes finally, shall lie down
and groan with

He that means to be temperate and avoid the crime and dishonor Baie and
bathed often in Avernus, and from thence hurried to the companies and dressings
of Lucrinus, she quenched her honor, and gave her virtue and her body as a
spoil to the follies and intemperance of a young gentleman. For

Those men are in a condition in which they may if they please pity themselves;
keep their green wounds from festering and uncleanlinesse and it will heal
alone, non procul absunt, they are not far from the kingdom of Heaven, but they
are not within its portion; and let me say this, that although little sins have
not yet made our condition desperate but left it easily recoverable, yet it is
a condition that is quite out of Gods favor: although they are not far
advanced in their progress to ruin, yet they are not at all in the state

3. There are some very much to be pitied and assisted because they are going
to hell and (as matters stand with them) they cannot, Seneca.
or they think they cannot avoid it. Quidam ad alienum dormiunt somnum ad
alienum edunt appetitum: amare and odisse (res omnium maxim liberas) jubentur.
There are some persons whose life is so wholly in dependence from others, that
they sleep when others please; they eat and drink according to their Masters
appetite, or intemperance: they are commanded to love or hate, and are not
Miserum est servire sub Dominis parum felicibus, for suppose the Prince or the
Patron be vicious, suppose he calls his servants to bathe their souls in the
goblets of intemperance: if he be also imperious (for such persons love not to
be contradicted in their vices) it is the loss of that man's fortune, not to
lose his soul: and it is the servants excuse and he esteems it also his glory,
that he can tell a merry tale, how his Master and himself did swim in drink,
till they both talked like fools, and then did lie down like beasts.

Facinus quos inquinat aequat. There is then no difference, but that the one is
the fairest bull and the master of the heard. And how many Tenants and
Relatives are known to have a servile conscience and to know no affirmation or
negation but such as shall serve their Landlords interest? Alas the poor men
live by it, and they must beg their bread if ever they turn recreant, or shall
offer to be honest. There are some trades whose very foundations is laid in the
vice of others; and in many others if a thread of deceit

Those persons which cause these vicious necessities upon their brethren will
lie low in hell; but the others will have but small comfort in feeling a lesser
damnation.

Of the same consideration it is, when ignorant people are Catechized into
false doctrine, and know nothing but such principles which weaken the nerves,
and enfeeble the joints of holy living; they never heard of any other; those
that follow great and evil qua itur, non qua eundum est, there where the
popular misery has made the way plain before their eyes, though it be uneven
and dangerous to their consciences. In these cases I am forced to reckon a
Catalogue of mischiefs; but it will be hard to cure any of them. Aristippus in
his discourses was a great flatterer of Dionysius of Sicily, and did own
doctrines which might give an easiness to some vices, and knew

1. Let every man consider that he has two relations to serve, If you be freed
by the blood of the Son of God, then you are free indeed: and then consider how
dishonorable it is to lie,

2. The next advise to persons thus tempted is, that they would learn to
separate duty from mistaken interest; and let them be both served in their just
proportions, when we have learned to make a difference. A wife is bound to her
husband in all his just designs, and in all noble usages and Christian
comportments: But a wife is no more bound to pursue her husbands vicious
hatreds, then to serve and promote his unlawful and wandering loves: friend is
turned a flatterer if he does not know, that the limits of Ecclus. 4. 22.
Accept no person against thy soul, and let not the reverence of any man cause
thee to fall.

3. When passion mingles with duty, and is a necessary instrument of serving
God, let not that passion run its own course and pass on to liberty, and
thence to license and dissolution: but let no more of it be entertained, then
will just do the work. For no zeal of duty will warrant a violent passion to
prevaricate a duty. I have seen some officers of War in passion and zeal of
their duty, have made no scruple to command a soldier with the dialect

4. Let every such tempted person remember, that all evil comes from our selves
and not from others; and therefore all pretenses and prejudices, all commands
and temptations, all opinions and necessities, are but instances of our
weakness, and arguments of our [He that knows not how to dissemble, knows not
how to reign. [He that will not do as his company does, must go out of the
world, and quit all society of men: We create necessities of our own, and then
think we have reason to serve their importunity. Non ego sum ambitiosus, sed
nemo aliter Romae potest vivere, non ego sumptuosus, sed urbs The place we live
in makes us expensive, the state of life I have chosen renders me ambitious, my
age makes me angry or lustful, proud or peevish. These are nothing else but
resolutions never to mend as long as we can have excuse for our follies, and
until we

Sermon. XVII. SER. XVII.

Part II.
4. THe last sort of them that sin, and yet are to be treated with compassion,
is of them that interrupt the course of an honest life with single acts of sin,
stepping aside and starting like a broken bow; whose resolution stands fair,
and their hearts are toward God, and they sojourn in religion, or rather,
dwell there; but that like evil husbands they go abroad, and enter into places
of dishonor and unthriftinesse. Such as these, all stories remember with a sad
character; and every narrative Bathsheba: and the Holy Ghost has called him a
man after Gods own heart, save in the matter of Vriah; there indeed he was a
man after his own heart; even then when his reason was stolen from him by
passion, and his religion was sullied by the beauties of a fair woman. I wish
we lived in an age in which the people were to be treated with, concerning
renouncing the single actions of sin, and the seldom interruptions of piety:
Men are taught to say, that every man sins in every action he does; and this is
one of the doctrines, for the believing of his confession when he prayed to God
in his sickness and said he had walked uprightly before God, * and he might
keep his conscience void of offense both toward God and toward man, * and one
of Christ's great purposes is to present his whole Church pure and spotless to
the throne of grace, and * Saint John the Baptist offended none but Herod, *
and no pious Christian brought by the grace of God and yet not persuaded, and
then persuaded conquerours till by the long possession of virtues it is a
strange and unusual, and therefore an uneasy and unpleasant thing to act a
crime. When Polemon of Athens by chance coming into the schools of Xenocrates
peregrinatus est hujus animus in nequitia, non habitavit, his mind wandered in
wickedness and traveled in it, but never dwelt there; the same is the case of
some men; they make inroads into the enemies country, not like enemies to
spoil, but like Dinah to be satisfied with the stranger beauties of the land,
till their virtues are defloured and they enter into tragedies, and are
possessed by death, and intolerable sorrows; but because this is like the fate
of Jacobs daughter and happens not by design, but folly, not by malice, but
surprise, not by the

First let us consider, that for a good man to be overtake in a single crime is
the greatest dishonor and unthriftinesse in the whole world. As a fly in a box
of ointment, so is a little folly to him who is accounted wise, said the Son of
Sirach: No man chides a fool for his weaknesses, or scorns a child for playing
with flies and preferring Socrates ride upon a cane; and when Solomon laid his
wisdom at the foot of Pharaohs daughter, and changed his glory for the interest
of wanton sleep, he became the discourse of heaven and earth: and men think
themselves abused, and their expectation cousened when they see a wise man do
the actions of a fool, and a good man seized upon by the dishonours of a crime.
But the loss of his reputation is the least of his evil. It is the greatest
improvidence in the world to let a healthful constitution be destroyed in the
surfeit of one night. the acceptance of the grace, and makes the man naturally,
but the value of it is wholly taken away: and in this sense is that of Josephus
(...) which Saint James well renders. 2 Chap. 11.
He that keeps the whole law and offends in one point is guilty of all; that
is, if he prevaricates in any commandment, the transgression of which by the
law was capital, shall as certainly die as if he broke the whole law; and the
same is the case of those single actions which the school calls deadly sins,
that is, actions of choice in any sin that has a name, and makes a Kind and
has a distinct matter. And sins When the righteous man turns from his
righteousness and commiteth iniquity, Ezekiel. 18. 24.
all his righteousness that he has done shall not be remembered, in the
trespass that he has trespassed, and in the sin that he has sinned, in them
shall he die. Now then consider how great a fool he is who when he has with
much labor and by suffering violence contradicted his first desires; when his
spirit has been in agony and care, and with much uneasinesse has denied to
please the lower man, he hopes when he dies to go to God, and that he shall
never enter into the possession of Devils; and this state, which then when he
is ready to reap the fruits of his labors, by one indiscreet action, to set
fire upon his corn fields, and destroy all his dearly earned hopes, for the
madness and loose wanderings of an hour; This man is an indiscreet gamester;
who doubles his stake as he thrives, and at one throw is dispossessed of all
the prosperities of a luckie hand.

becoming none but such persons who are to be kept under Tutors

-- (...)
(...). Hom. Ili. ^

These men sow much, and gather little, stay long and return empty, and after
a long voyage they are dashed in pieces when their vessels are laden with the
spoils of provinces. Every redeemed them from their vain conversation and from
death, and from hell, and consigned them to the inheritance of sons and given
them his grace and his spirit, and many periods of comfort* and a certain hope
and visible earnests of immortality; nothing is baser then that such a person
against his reason, against his interest, against his God, against so many
obligations, against his custom, against his very habits and acquired
inclinations should do an action.

Quam nisi Seductis nequeas committere Divis Which a man must for ever be
ashamed of, and like Adam must run from God himself to do it, and depart from
the state in which he had placed all his hopes, and to which he had designed
all his labors. The consideration is effective enough, if we sum up the
particulars; for he that has lived well and then falls into a deliberate sin,
is infinitely dishonored, is most imprudent, most unsafe, and most unthankful.

2. Let persons tempted to the single instances of sin in the midst
drunkenness has a little honesty derived unto it by the examples of Noah, and
Adultery is not so scandalous and intolerably dishonorable, since Bathsheba
bathed, and David was defiled and

Pompeio fugiente timent Well might all the gowned Romans fear when Pompey
fled, and who is there that can hope to be more righteous then David, or
stronger then Samson, or have less hypocrisy then Saint Peter, or be more
temperate then Noah? These great examples bear men of weak discourses and
weaker resolutions from the severity Si quid Socrates, aut Aristippus contra
morem et consuetudinem fecerunt, idem sibi ne arbitretur licere. Magnis enim
illi and divinis bonis hanc licentiam assequebantur. If Socrates did any
unusual thing, it is not for thee who art of an ordinary virtue to assume the
same license; For he by a divine and excellent life has obtained leave or
pardon respectively, for what thou must never hope for, till thou have arrived
to the same glories. First be as devout as David, as good a Christian as Saint
Peter, and then thou will not dare with design to act that, which they fell
into by surprise; and if thou do fall as

3. Remember, that since no man can please God or bE partakers of any promises,
or reap the reward of any actions in the taught, and so tempted, and so
assisted, such a person must be curious that he be not cozened with the duties
and performances of any one relation, 1. Some there are that think all our
religion consists in prayers and public or private offices of devotion, and
not in moral actions or entercourses of justice and temperance, of kindness
and friendships of sincerity and liberality, of chastity and humility, of
repentance the power of Godliness, and the energy and vivacity of a holy life.
God will not suffer us to commute a duty, because all is his due; and religion
shall not pay for the want of temperance: if the devoutest Hermit be proud, or
he that fasts thrice in the week be uncharitable once; or he that gives much to
the poor, gives also too a rare judge and a good commonwealths man in the
streets, and public meetings, and a just man to his neighbor, and charitable
to the poor; for in all these places the man is observed and kept in awe by the
Sun, by light and by voices; But this man is a Tyrant at home, an unkind
husband and ill Father, an imperious Master, Hic ubi dissuetae sylvis in
carcere clausae
and such men are like prophets in their own countries, Mansue vere serae, and
vultus posuere minaces
Or that any of his servants shall take pensions of the Devil, and in the
profession of his service do his enemy single advantages. Atque hominem
didicere pati si torrida parvus


4. He that has past many stages of a good life to prevent his being tempted
to a single sin must be very careful that he never entertain his spirit with
the remembrances of his past sin, Venit in ora cruor, redeunt rabiesque,
furorque.
nor amuse it with the fantastic apprehensions of the present. When the
Israelites fancied the sapidnesse and relish of the flesh pots they longed to

So when a Libian Tiger drawn from his wilder forragings is shut up and taught
to eat civil meat and suffer the authority of a man, he sits down tamely in his
prison and pays to his keeper fear and reverence for his meat: But if he
chance to come again

Admonitae tument gustato sanguine fauces,
Feruet and a trepido vix abstinet ira Magistro.
He scarce abstains from eating those hands that brought him discipline and
food: so is the nature of a man made tame and gentle by the grace of God, and
reduced to reason, and kept in awe by religion and laws and by an awful
virtue is taught to forget those alluring and sottish relishes of sin: but if
he diverts from his path, and snatches handfuls from the wanton vineyards, and
remembers

By these and all other arts of the Spirit, if we stand upon our guard, never
indulging to our selves one sin, because it is but o^e; as knowing that one sin
brought in death upon all the world, and one sin brought slavery upon the
posterity of Cham: and alwa^es fearing lest death surprise us in that one sin;
we shall by the gr^^e of God, either not need, or else easily perceive the
effects and blessings of that compassion which God reserves in the secrets of
his mercy, for such persons whom his grace has ordained and disposed with
excellent dispositions unto life eternal.

making a difference] so says the Text, and it is of high concernment that we
should do so, that we may relieve the infirmities of the men, and relieve their
sicknesses, and transcribe the copy of the Di^^ne mercy, who loves not to
quench the smoking flax, nor break (...) bruised reed. For although all sins
are against Gods Commandments, directly, or by certain consequents, by line,
or by analogy, yet they are not all of the same tincture and mortality.


Qui teneros caules alieni fregerit horti
Vt qui nocturnus Diuum sacra legerit.
He that robs a garden of Coleworts, and carries away an armfull of Spinach,
does not deserve hell as he that steals the Chalice from the Church, or
betrays a Prince; and therefore men are distinguished accordingly:

Est inter Tanaim quiddam socerumque Viselli. The Poet that Sejanus condemned
for dishonouring the memory of Agamemnon, was not an equal criminal with
Cataline, or Gracchus: and Simon Magus and the Nicolaitans committed crimes
which God hated, more then the complying of S. Barnabas, or the dissimulation
of S. Peter; and therefore God does treat these persons severally: Some of
these are restrained with a fit of sickness, some with a great loss; and in
these there are degrees, and some arrive at death. And in this manner God
scourged the Corinthians for their irreverent and disorderly receiving the Holy
Sacrament.

-- assit
Regula quae poenas peccatis irroget aequas,
Nec seutica dignum horribili sectere flagello.
Let us be sure that we neglect no sin, but repent for every one, and judge our
selves for every one, according to the proportion of the malice, or the
scandal, or the danger. And although in this there is no fear that we would be
excessive; yet when we are to reprove a brother we are sharp enough, and either
by pride, or by animosity, by the itch of government, or the indignation of an
angry mind, we run beyond the gentleness of a Christian Monitor; we must
remember that by Christ's law some are to be admonished privately, some to be
shamed and corrected publicly, and beyond these, there is an abscission, or a
cutting off from the communion A delivering over to Satan. And to this purpose
is that old reading of the words of my Text, which is still in some Copies,
(...); Reprove them sharply, when they are convinced, or separate by sentence.
But because this also is a design of mercy, acted with an instance of
discipline, it is a punishment of the flesh, that the soul may be saved it
means the same with the usual reading, and with the last words of the Text,
and teaches us our usage toward the worst of recoverable sinners.

Others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire.] Some sins there are,
which in their own nature are damnable, and some are such as will certainly
bring a man to damnation; the first are curable, but with much danger; the
second are desperate and irrecoverable; when a man is violently tempted, and
allured with an object that is proportionable and pleasant to his vigorous
appetite, and his unabated, unmortified nature, this man falls into death,

Nemo repent fuit turpissimus -- and although such actions may have in them
the malice and the mischief, the disorder and the wrong, the principle and the
permanent effect, of a habit and a long course of sin, yet because they never
or Lift up your hands to Almighty God, and pray him to be merciful to you in
all things when you sin unwillingly; that is, in which you sin with an
imperfect choice: for no man sins against his will directly, but when his
understanding is abused by an inevitable, or an intolerable weakness, our
wills follow their blind every day. For in many things we offend all, said
Saint James, that is, in many smaller matters, in matters of surprise, or
inevitable infirmity: And therefore Posidices said, that Saint Austin was used
to say, That he would not have even good and holy Priests go from this world
without the susception of equal and worthy penances: and the most innocent
life I am guilty of nothing, (said Saint Paul) that is, of no ill intent, or
negligence in preaching the Gospel, yet I am not hereby justified, for God it
may be knows many little irregularities, and insinuations of sin: In this case
we are to make a difference; but humility, and prayer, and watchfulness, are
the direct instruments of the expiation of such sins.

But then secondly, whosoever sins without these abating circumstances,

1. I say his pardon is uncertain, because there are some sins which are
unpardonable, (as I shall show) and they are not all named in particular, and
the degrees of malice being uncertain, the salvation of that man is to be
wrought with infinite fear and trembling. Acts 7. 22.
It was the case of Simon Magus, Repent and ask pardon for thy sin, if
peradventure the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee. If peradventure;]
it was a new crime, and concerning its possibility of pardon no revelation had
been made, and by analogy to other crimes it was very like an unpardonable sin;
for it was a thinking a thought against the Holy Ghost, and that was next
speaking a word against him. Cains sin was of the same nature; It is greater
then it can be forgiven, his passion and his fear was too severe and decretory:
it was pardonable, but truly we never find that God did pardon it.

thy day is past, as was Jerusalems in the day that they crucified the Savior
of the world.

3. Pardon of such habitual sins is uncertain, because life is uncertain;
necessario mortifera, that is, unpardonable, yet by consequence they become
deadly, because our life may be cut off before we have finished or performed
those necessary parts of repentance, which are the severe great single crime,
but the habit of any sin is dangerous; and therefore these persons are to be
snatched from the fire, if you mean to rescue them, (...) if you stay a day, it
may be you stay too long.

4. To which I add this fourth consideration, that every delay obstinacy, or
confirmation, they are in hell already, and can never return back. For so the
Pannonian

But as the pardon of these sins is uncertain, so the conditions of restitution
are hard, even to them who shall be pardoned: their pardon and themselves too,
must be fetched from the fire; water will not do it, tears and ineffective
sorrow cannot take off a habit, or a great crime.

O nimium faciles, qui tristia crimina cadis,
Tolli fluminea posse putatis aqua.
indices, Chap. 4. 1, 3.
but no perfect instruments of restitution. Saint James plainly declares the
possibilities of pardon to great sins, in the cases of contention, adultery,
lust, and envy, which are the four great indecencies that are most contrary to
Christianity; and in the 5. Chap. he implies also a possibility of pardon to an
habitual sinner, whom one that erres from the truth, that is, from the life of
a Christian, the life of the Spirit of truth: and he adds, that such a person
may be reduced and so be pardoned, Cha. 4. ver. ult.
though he have sinned long; he that converts such a one, shall hide a
multitude of sins: But then the way that he appoints for the restitution of
such persons is humilty, and humiliation, penances. and sharp penitential
sorrows, and afflictions, resisting the Devil, returning to God, weeping and
mourning, confessions and prayers, as you may read at large in the 4. and 5.
Chapters; and there it is, that you shall find it a duty, that such persons
should be afflicted, and confess to their brethren; and these are harder
conditions then God requires in the former cases; these are a kind of fiery
trial.

I have now done with my Text, and should add no more but that the nature of
these sins is such that they may increase in their weight, and duration, and
malice, and then they increase in mischief, and fatality, and so go beyond the
Text. Cicero said well, Ipsa consuetudo assentiendi periculosa esse videtur and
lubrica. l. 4. Acad. Qu. The very custom of consenting in the matters of
civility is dangerous and slippery, and will quickly engage us in error, and
then we think we are bound to defend them, or else we they tread under foot the
blood of the everlasting covenant; those persons are in the fire too, but they
will not be pulled out: concerning whom Gods Prophets must say as once
concerning Babylon, Curavimus and non est sanata, derelinquamus eam, We would
have healed them, but they would not be healed, let us leave them in their
sins, and they shall have enough of it; Only this, those that put themselves

But besides all this, I shall name one thing more unto you; for

-- nunquam adeo foedis adeoque pudendis,
Vtimur exemplis, ut non pejora supersint.
There are some single actions of sin of so great a malice, that in their own
nature they are beyond the limit of Gospel pardon: they are not such things for
the pardon of which God entered into covenant; because they are such sins which
put a man into perfect indispotisions, Atheism was of that nature; it was
against their whole religion; and the sin is worse now, against the whole
religion still, and against a brighter light. In the ages after the flood
idolatry was also just such another: for as God was known first only creator,
then he began to manifest himself in special contracts with men, and he quickly
was declared the God of Israel and idolatry perfectly destroyed all that
religion, and therefore was never pardoned entirely; but God did visit it upon
them that sinned; and when he pardoned it in some degrees yet he also punished
it in some; and yet rebellion against the supreme power of Moses and Aaron was
worse; for that also is a perfect destruction of the whole religion, because it
refused to submit to those hands upon which God had placed all the religion,
and all the government. And now if we would know in the Gospel what answers
these precedent Apostasy or or a voluntary malicious renouncing the faith: The
Church has often declared that sin to be unpardonable: witchcraft or final
impenitence, and obstinacy in any sin are infallibly desperate: and in general,
and by a certain parity of reason, whatsoever does destroy charity or the good
life of a Christian with the same general venom and deletery as Apostasy
destroys faith; and he that is a Renegado from charity, is as unpardonable as
he that returns to solemn Atheism or infidelity: for all to speak a word
against the holy Ghost in the Pharisees, was declared unpardonable, because it
was such a word which if it had been true, or believed, would have destroyed
the whole religion; for they said that Christ wrought by Beelzebub, and by
consequence did not come from God: He that destroys all the whole order of
Priesthood, destroys one of the greatest parts of the religion, and one of the
greatest effects of the holy Ghost: He that destroys government destroys
another part; but that we may come nearer to quench the spirit of God is worse
then to speak some words against him; to grieve the spirit of God is a part of
the same impiety, to resist the holy Ghost is another part; and if we consider,
that every great sin does this in its proportion, it wo^^d concern us to be
careful, lest we fall into presumptuous sins, lest they get the domini^^ over
us; out of this that I have spoken you may easily gather what sort of men those
are, who cannot be snatched from the fire; for whom as S. John says, we are
not to pray, and how near men come to it that continue in any known sin; if I
should descend to particulars, I might

Sermon. XVIII. SER. XVIII

Matthew 16. Ver. 26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul?
WHen the eternal mercy of God had decreed to res^ue


vitam quae faciunt beatiorem.
These are the measures of good and evil, the object of our hopes and fears,
the securing our content and the portion of this world; and for the other, let
it be as it may. But the Blessed Jesus having made revelations of an immortal
duration, of another world; and of a strange restitution to it, even by the
resurrection of the body, and a new investiture of the soul, with the same
upper garment, clarified, and made pure so as no Fuller on earth can whiten it;

What shall it profit a man? or what shall a man give? is there any

The blood of the son of God was given to recover it or as an (...) to God; and
when our souls were forfeit to him, nothing less then the life and passion of
God and man could pay the price (I say) to God, who yet was not concerned in
the loss save only that such was his goodness, that it pitied him to see his
eye for eye, tooth for tooth, and all that a man has will he give for his
life: and this

Here then first we will consider the propositions of the exchange the world
and a man's soul, by way of supposition, supposing all that is propounded were
obtained; the whole world. Secondly we will consider what is likely to be
obtained really, and indeed of the world, and what are really the miseries of a
lost soul? For it is propounded in the text by way of supposition: If a man
should gain the world which no man ever did, nor ever can; and he that gets
most, gets too little to be exchanged for a temporal life. And thirdly I shall
apply it to your practice and make material considerations.

1. First, then suppose a man gets all the world, what is it that he gets? It
is a bubble, and a Phantasme, and has no reality beyond a present transient
use; a thing that is impossible to be enjoyed, because its fruits and usages
are transmitted to us, by parts and by succession; (He that has all the world,
(if we can suppose

2. I consider that he that is the greatest possessor in the world enjoyes its
best and most noble parts and those which are of most excellent perfection but
in common with the inferior persons, and the most despicable of his kingdom.
Can the greatest Prince enclose the Sun, and set one little star in his cabinet
for his own use? or secure to himself the gentle and benign influence of any
one constellation? Are not his subjects fields bedewed with the same

Nay those things which he esteems his ornament and his singularity of his
possessions, are they not of more use to others then to himself. For suppose
his garments splendid and shining like the robe of a cherub or the clothing of
the fields, all that he that wears them enjoyes, is that they keep him warm,
and clean and modest; and all this is done by clean and less pompous
vestmer^s; and the beauty of them which distinguishes him from others, is made
to please the eyes of the beholders; and he is like a fair bird or the
meretricious painting of a wanton woman made wholly to be

The poorest Artizan of Rome walking in Caesar's gardens, had the same pleasures
which they ministered to their Lord: and although province, which the poor man
had for nothing.

3. Suppose a man Lord of all the world, (for still we are but in supposition)
yet since every thing is received, not according to its own gteatnesse and
worth, but according to the capacity of the receiver, it signifies very little
as to our content; or to the riches of our possession. If any man should give
to a Lion a fair meadow full of hay, or a thousand quince trees, or should give
to the goodly Bull, the master and the fairest of the whole heard, a thousand
fair Stags; If a man should present to a child a ship laden with Persian
carpets, and the ingredients of the rich scarlet, all these being either
disproportionate to the appetite or to the understanding,

4. The greatest vanity of this world is remarkable in this, that all its joys
summed up together are not big enough to counterpoise the evil of one sharp
disease, or to allay a sorrow. For imagine a man great in his dominion as
Cyrus, rich as Solomon, victorious as David, beloved like Titus, learned as
Trismegist, powerful as all the Roman greatness, all this, and the results of
all this, give him no more pleasure in the midst of a fever, or the tortures
of the stone, then if he were only lord of a little dish, and a dishfull of

For what can all the world minister to a sick person? If it represents all the
spoils of nature and the choicest delicacies of land and sea. Alas his appetite
is lost, and to see a pibble stone is more pleasing to him: For he can look
upon that without loathing, but not so upon the most delicious fare that ever
made famous the Roman luxury. Perfumes make his head ache; if you load him with

5. Suppose a man lord of all this world, an universal Monarch, as some princes
have lately designed, all that cannot minister content to him; not that content
which a poor contemplative man by of his condition in having a proud and
indiscreet and a vicious

And if we consider the supposition of the Text, the thing will demonstrate it
self. For he who can be supposed the owner and purchaser of the whole world,
must either be a King or a private person. A private person can hardly be
supposed to be the man. For if he be subject to another, how can he be Lord of
the whole world? But if he be a King, it is certain, that his cares are greater

Privatusque magis vivam te Rege beatus. Her. l 1. sat. 3.
Servants live the best lives; for their care is single, only how to please
their Lord; but all the burden of a troublesome providence, and ministration,
makes the outside pompous and more full of ceremony; but they intricate the
condition and disturb the quiet of the great possessor.

And imagine a person as blessed as can be supposed upon the stock of worldly
interest; when all his accounts are cast up, he Rare volte h^ fame chista
sempre a tavola
And then let him consider how much of felicity can this condition contribute
to him. In which he is not further gone beyond

And that is a sad condition when like Midas all that the man touches shall
turn to gold: and his is no better to whom a perpetual full table not recreated
with fasting, not made pleasant with intervening scarcity ministers no more
good then a heap of gold does, that is, he has no benefit of it, save the
beholding of it with his eyes. Cannot a man quench his thirst as well out of an
Urn or Chalice, as out of a whole River? It is an ambitious thirst,

-- eo fit
Plenior ut si quos delectet copia justo,
Cum ripa simul vulsos ferat Aufidus acer.
For so I have heard of persons whom the river has swept away, together with
the Turf they pressed when they stopped to drown

6. But this supposition has a lessening term. If a man could be born heir of
all the world, it were something: But no man ever was so; except him only who
enjoyed the least of it, the Son of man, that had not where to lay his head:
but in the supposition it is; [If a man could [gain] the whole world,] which
supposes labor and sorrow, trouble and expense, venture and hazard, and so
much time expired in its acquist and purchase, that besides the possession is
not secured to us for term of life, yet our lives are almost expired, before
we become estated in our purchases. And indeed that the unhappy party is but to
begin a new game, then to see

But I told you all this while, that this is but a supposition Regalia beyond
the rest; But the feudall right of subjects does Regalia does the Prince more
honor; and these that hold the fees in subordinate right, transmit it also to
their Tenants, and beneficiaries, and dependants to public uses, to charity,
and hospitality; all which is a lessening of the lords possessions and a
cutting his river into little streams, not that himself alone, but that all his
relatives may drink and be refreshed. Thus the Well where the woman of Samaria
sat was Jacobs Well, and he drank of it, but so did his wives, and his
children, and his cattle; so that what we call ours, is really ours, but for
our portion of expense and use; we have so little of it, that our

But secondly, consider how far short of the whole world the greatest Prince
that ever reigned did come. Alexander that wept because he had no more worlds
to conquer, was in his knowledge deceived, and brutish, as in his passion; he
overrun much of Asia, but he could never pass the Ganges, and never thrust
his sword in the bowels of Europe, and knew nothing of America. And the

But why do I talk of great things in this Question of the exchange of the soul
for the world? Because it is a real bargain, which many men (too many God
knows) do make, we must consider it as applicable to practice. Every man that
loses his soul for the purchase of the world, must not look to have the
portion

3. Although these premises may suffice to show that the supposed

Dives eget gemmis, Cereali munere pauper,
Sed cum egeant ambo pauper egens minus est.
If the greatness of the worlds possessions produce such fruits, vexation, and
care, and want, the ambitious requiring of great estates, is but like the
selling of a fountain, to buy a fever, a parting with content, to buy
necessity, and the purchase of an unhandsome condition, at the price of
infelicity.

4. He that enjoyes a great portion of this world has most commonly the allay
of some great cross, which although sometimes

5. And lastly, his soul so gets nothing that wins all this world, if he loses
his soul, that it is ten to one but he that gets the one, therefore shall lose
the other; For to a great and opulent fortune

I omit to speak of the habitual intemperance, which is too commonly annexed to
Festival and delicious tables, where there is no other measure or restraint
upon the appetite, but its fullness and satiety, and when it cannot or dare not
eat more. Oftentimes it happens, that the intemperance of a poor table is more
temperate and has less of luxury in it, then the temperance of a rich. To
this are consequent all the evil accidents and effects of fullness; pride,
lust, wantonness, softnesses of disposition and dissolution of manners, huge
talking, imperiousness, despite and contempt of poor he soapes burning, that
is inflamed from within and set on fire from without it is a greater miracle

And although the grace of God is sufficient to great personages, and masters
of the world, and that it is possible for a young man to be tied upon a bed of
flowers and fastened by the arms and band of a curtesan and tempted wantonly and
yet to escape the danger and the crime, and to triumph gloriously: (for so
Saint Hierome

Add to this last, that most men get so little of the world that it is all
together of a trifling and inconsiderable interest, that they who have the most
of this world, have the most of that but in

SER. XIX

Part II.
ANd lose his own soul or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul] And
now the question is finally stated, and the dispute

De morte hominis nulla est cunctatio longa.
And therefore when the soul is at stake, not for its temporal, but for its
eternal interest, it is not good to be hasty in determining, without taking
just measures of the exchange. Solomon had the good things of the world
actually in possession, and he tried the touchstone of prudence and natural
value and found [lose] for he gives gold for cloth or precious stones for bread

But we shall better understand the nature of this bargain if we consider the
soul that is exchanged, what it is in it self, in order not of nature but to
felicity and the capacities of joy, secondly what price the Son of God paid
for it, and thirdly what it is to lose it, that is, what miseries and tortures
are signified by losing

First if we consider what the soul is in its own capacity to happiness, we
shall find it to be an excellency greater then the sun; of an angelical
substance, sister to a cherubin, an image of the divinity, and the great
argument of that mercy, whereby God did distinguish us from the lower form of
beasts and trees and minerals.

For so it was the scripture affirms, that God made man after his own, image,
that is, secundum illam imaginem and ideam quam concepit ipse, not according to
the likeness of any of those creatures

But the soul is all that whereby we may be, and without which we

In the mean this consideration is gone high enough when we understand the soul
of a man to be so excellently perfect, that we cannot understand how
excellently perfect it is: that being the best way of expressing our
conceptions of God himself; and therefore I shall not need by distinct
discourses to represent that the will of man is the last resort and sanctuary
of true pleasure, which in its formality can be nothing else but a conformity
of possession or of being to the will; that the understanding being the ch^nel
and it would follow that to lose a soul, which is designed

Secondly if we consider the price that the Son of God paid for the redemption
of a soul, we shall better estimate of it, then from the weak discourses of our
imperfect and unlearned Philosophy: not the spoil of rich provinces, not the
aestimate of kingdoms, not the price of Cleopatra's draught, not any thing that
was corruptible or perishing; for that, which could not one minute retard a
soul, which is the glory of the creation; a soul, with whom God had made a
contract, and contracted excellent relations, it being one of Gods
appellatives, that he is [the lover of souls.]

When God made a soul, it was only, faciamus hominem ad He spoke the word and
it was done; but when man had lost this soul which the spirit of God breathed
in him, it was not so soon recovered. It is like the resurrection which has
troubled the faith of many who are more apt to believe, that God made a man
from nothing, then that he can return a man from dust and finite, yet there
were many infinites which an infinite excellence could satisfy for a soul who
was lost to infinite and eternal ages, who was to be afflicted with
insupportable and indetermined that is next to infinite pains, who was to bear
the load of an infinite anger from the provocation of an eternal God: and yet
if it be possible that infinite can receive degrees, this is but one half of
the abyss, and I think the lesser: for that this person who was God eternal,
should be lessened in all his appearances, to a span, to the little dimensions
of a man, and that he should really become essential, natural and necessary
felicity should turn into an intolerable, violent and immense calamity to his
person, that this great God should not be admitted to pay the price of our
redemption unless he would suffer that horrid misery, which that lost soul
should suffer, as it represents the glories of his goodness, who used such
rare and admirable instruments in actuating the designs of his mercy: so it
shows our condition to have been very desperate, and our loss invaluable.

A soul in Gods account is valued at the price of the blood, and yet there is
something to be pretended in the bargain,

3. But it may be some natures, or some understandings care not for all this,
therefore I proceed to the third and most material consideration, as to us; and
I consider what it is to lose a soul? An immortal substance can die, not by
ceasing to be, but by losing all being well, by becoming miserable. And it is
remarkable, when our blessed Savior gave us caution, that we should not fear
them that can kill the Matthew. 10. 27.
him that is able to destroy the body, and soul in hell; which word signifies
not death but tortures. For some have chosen death for sanctuary, and fled to
it to avoid intolerable shame, to give a period to the sense of a sharp grief,
or to cure the earthquakes of fear; and the damned perishing souls shall wish
for death, with a desire impatient as their calamity; But this shall be denied
them, because death were a deliverance, a mercy, and a pleasure, of which these
miserable persons must despair of for ever.

Hell fire] is the common expression; for the Eastern nations accounted
burnings the greatest of their miserable punishments: and burning malefactors
was frequent, [brimstone and fire] to Saint John Revel. 14. 10. calls the state
of punishment, prepared for the Devil and all his servants, he adding the
circumstance of brimstone, for the outer darkness, that is, not only an
abjection from the beatifick regions, where God, and his Angels, and his Saints
dwell for ever, but then there is a positive state of misery expressed by
darknesses, (...), as two Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Jude call it, The
blackness of darkness for ever. In which although it is certain, that God
whose Justice there rules,

But I shall choose to represent this consideration in that expression Mark the
9. the 44. verse; which himself took out of the Prophet Esaias, the 66. verse the
24. Where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched; this is the (...),
spoken of by Daniel the Prophet; for although this expression was a prediction
of that horrid calamity and abscision of the Jewish Nation, when God poured out
a full vial of his wrath upon the crucifiers of his Son, and that this which
was the greatest calamity which ever did or ever shall happen to a Nation,
Christ with great reason took to describe the calamity of accursed souls, as
being the greatest instance to signify the greatest torment: yet we must
observe

And that we may understand it fully, observe the places. In the 34. Esa. 8.
The Prophet prophecies of the great destruction of Jerusalem for all her great
iniquities. It is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompenses,
for the controversy of Sion, and the streams thereof shall be turned into
pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become
burning pitch. It shall not be quenched night nor day, the smoke thereof shall
go up for ever, from generation to generation. It shall lie wast, none shall
pass through it for ever and ever. This is the final destruction of the Nation;
but this destruction shall and all the sons of God. And this also was the
period of their worm, as it is of their fire, The fire of the Divine vengeance
upon the Nation; which was not to be extinguished till they were destroyed, as
we see it come to pass. And thus also in Saint Jude, the Angels who kept not
their first state, are said to be reserved by God in everlasting chains under
darkness: which word [everlasting] signifies not absolutely to eternity, but
to the utmost end of that period, for so it follows [unto the judgment of the
great day] that [everlasting] lasts no longer; and in verse the seventh, the
word [eternal] is just so used: The men of Sodom and Gomorrha are set forth for
an example suffering the vengeance of [eternal fire,] that is, of a fire, which
burned till they were quite destroyed, and the cities and the country

That these words [for ever, everlasting, eternal, the never-dying worm, the
fire unquenchable,] being words borrowed by our blessed Savior and his
Apostles from the style of the old Testament, must have a signification just
proportionable to the state in which they signify; so that as this worm when
it signifies a temporal infliction means a worm that never ceases, giving
torment, till the body is consumed: So when it is translated to an immortal
[eternal,] that everlasting, has no end at all: because the soul cannot be
killed in the natural sense, but is made miserable and perishing for ever; that
is, the worm shall not die so long as the soul shall be unconsumed: the fire
shall not be quenched, till the period of an immortal nature comes, and that
this shall be absolutely for ever without any restriction, appears unanswerably
in this, because the same (for ever) that is, for the blessed souls, the same
for ever, is for the accursed souls; but the blessed souls that die in the
Lord, henceforth (says Saint Paul) and there shall be no more death, says
Saint John, Revel. 21. 4. So that because for ever has no end, till the thing
or the duration it self have end, in the same sense in which the Saints and
Angels give glory to God for ever, in the same sense the lost souls shall
suffer the evils of their sad inheritance; and since after this death of
nature, which is a separation of soul and body, there remains no more death,
but this second death, this eternal perishing of miserable accursed souls,
whose duration must be eternal; It follows that the worm of conscience, the
unquenchable fire of hell have no period at all; but shall last as long as God
lasts, or the measures of a proper eternity; that they who provoke God to
wrath, by their base, unreasonable, and sottish practices, may know what their
portion shall be in the everlasting habitations: and yet suppose that Origens
opinion had been true; and that accursed souls should have ease and a period to
their tortures after a thousand years; I pray let it be considered, whether it
be not a great madness to choose the pleasures, or the wealth of a few years
here, with trouble, with danger, with uncertainty, with labor, with intervalls
of a small candle, or a drop of water amounts to in a fever, is a

If a man were condemned but to lie still, or to lie a bed in one posture
without turning, for seven years together, would he not buy it off with the
loss of all his estate? If a man were to be put upon the rack, for every day,
three months together, (suppose him able to live so long) what would he do to
be quit of his torture? Wouldany man curse the King to his face, if he were
sure to have both his hands burnt off, and to be tormented with torments three
years together? Would any man in his wits accept of a thousand years. But then
when we cast up the minutes, and years, and ages of eternity, the consideration
it self is a great hell to those persons who by their evil lives

A thousand years is a long while to be in torment; we find a fever of 21.
days to be like an age in length: but when the duration of an intolerable
misery is for ever in the height, and for ever beginning, and ten thousand
years has spent no part of its term, but it makes a perpetual efflux, and is
like the center of a circle, which ever transmits lines to the circumference;
this is a consideration so sad that the horror of it and the reflection upon
its abode and duration, make a great part of the hell; for hell could not be
hell without the despair of accursed souls; for any hope were a refreshment,

And I desire you to consider that although the Scripture uses the word [fire]
to express the torments of accursed souls, yet fire can no more equal the
pangs of hell then it can torment a material substance; the pains of perishing
souls being as much more afflictive then the smart of fire, as the smart of
fire is troublesome beyond the softness of Persian carpets, or the sensuality
of the Asian Luxury: for the pains of hell; and the perishing or losing of the
our God is a consuming fire: that is the fire of hell, when God takes away all
comfort from us, nothing to support our spirit is left us, when sorrow is our
food and tears our drink; when it is eternal night without Sun or star, or
lamp, or sleep; when we burn

We may guess at it by the terrors of a guilty conscience, those verbera and
laeniatus, those secret lashings and whips of the exterminating Angel, those
thorns in the soul, when a man is haunted by an evil spirit; those butcheries
which the soul of a Tyrant, or a violent, or a vicious person, when he falls in
to fear or any there is enlarged by the greatness of infinite and ^he aboads
of eternity. How great these tormens of conscience are here, let any man
imagine that can but understand what despair means: despair upon just reason:
let it be what it will, no misery can be greater then despair: and because I
hope none here have felt those horrors of an evil conscience, which are
consignations to eternity, you may please to learn it by your own reason, or
else by the sad are which here I have heard with an insupportable amazement:
this

That you take care, lest for the purchase of a little, trifling,
inconsiderable portion of the world you come into this place and state of
torment. Although Homer was pleased to complement the beauty of Helena to such
a height as to say it was a sufficient price for all the evils which the Greeks
and Trojans suffered in ten years.

(...) (...). Yet it was a more reasonable conjecture of Herodotus, that during
the ten years siege of Troy Helena for whom the Greeks fought was in Egypt, not
in the city, because it was unimaginable but that the Trojans would have thrown
her over the walls rather then for the sake of such a trifle, have endured so
great calamities, we are more sottish then the Trojans, if we retain our
Helena, any one beloved lust, any painted Devil, any sugared temptation with,
(not the hazard but) the certainty of having such horrid miseries, such in
valuable

But let not us have such a hardiness against the threats and representments
of the divine vengeance as to take the little imposts

There is a sort of men who because they will be vicious and Atheistical in
their lives, have no way to go on with any plaisance and without huge
disturbances, but by being also Atheistical in their opinions and to believe
that the story of hell is but a bugbear to affright children and fools, easy
believing people to make them

Our youth, and our manhood and old age are all of them due to God, and
justice and mercy are to him equally essential, and as this life is a time of
the possibilities of mercy so to them that neglect it, the next world shall be
a state of pure and unmingled justice.

[it is appointed to all men once to die and after death comes judgement] and
if any of us were certain to die next morning, with what earnestness should we
pray, with what hatred should we remember our sins, with what scorn should we
look upon the licentious pleasures of the world; then nothing could be welcome
unto us but a prayer book, no company but a Comforter and a Guide of souls, no
employment but repentance, no passions but in order to religion, no kindness
for a lust that has undone us; and if any of you have been arrested with
alarmes of Lo this is the goodly change you have made, you had your good things
in your life time, and how like you the portion that is reserved to you for
ever? The old Rabbis those Poets of religion report of Moses that when the
courtiers of Pharaoh were sporting with the child Moses in the chamber of
Pharaohs daughter, they presented to his choice an ingot of gold in one h^^d,
and a cole of fire in the other; and that the child snatched at the coal,
thrust it roar and blaspheme, blaspheme and roar for ever. And suppose God
surgite mortui, and venite ad judicium, place your selves by meditation every
day upon your deathbed, and remember what thoughts shall then possess you;
and let such thoughts dwell in your understanding for ever, and be the parent
of all your resolutions and actions. The Doctors of the Jews

Hell is wide open to every impenitent persevering sinner, to every unpurged
person.

Noctes atque dies patet atri Janua Ditis. And although God has lighted his
candle and the lantern of his word and clearest revelations is held out to us,
that we can see hell in its worst colors, and most horrid representments yet
we run greedily after bables into that praecipice which swallows up the
greatest part of mankind; and then only we begin to consider, when all
consideration is fruitless.

He therefore is a huge fool that heaps up riches, that greedily heaps of wrath
to himself against the day of wrath; when sickness and death arrests him, then
they appear unprofitable and himself extremely miserable: and if you would know
how great that misery is you may take account of it by those fearful words and
killing Rhetoric of Scripture, It is a fearful things to fall into the hands
of the living God and who can dwell with the everlasting burning? That is, No
patience can abide there one hour where they must dwell for ever.

SER. XX.

Matthew 10. latter part of Ver. 16. Be ye therefore wise as serpents and
harmless as doves.
sent forth as sheep among wolves, innocent and silent, harmless, and
defencelesse, certainly exposed to sorrow, and uncertainly guarded in their
persons; their condition seemed nothing else, but a designation arts of Orators
and informers nor break prisons, nor any thing but wit and violence, prudence
and rudeness, learning and the sword, the strong hand took it first, and the
strong head possessed it last: the strong man first governed, and the witty man
succeeded him, and lasted longer; it came to pass that the wisdom of prudence
and innocence should become the mightiest guards; and the Christian although
exposed to persecution, yet is so secured that he shall never need to die But
when the circumstances are so ordered that his reason is convinced that then it
is fit he should; fit (I say) in order to Gods purposes and his own.

For he that is innocent is safe against all the rods and the axes of all the
Consuls of the world, if they rule by justice; and he that is prudent will also
escape from many rudenesses and irregular violences, chance and irregularities
there is no provision less then infinite, that can give security; and although
prudence alone cannot do this; yet innocence gives the greatest title to that
providence which only can if he pleases, and will if it be fitting. Here then
are the two arms defensive of a Christian: Prudence against the evils of men,
Innocence against the evils of Devils and all that relates to his kingdom.

Prudence fences against persecution, and the evil snares, against

But in order to the following discourse and its method, we are first to
consider whether this be, or indeed can be a commandment, or what is it? For
can all men that give up their names in baptism, be enjoined to be wise and
prudent? It is as if God would command us to be eloquent, or witty men, fine
speakers, or strait bodied, or excellent scholars, or rich men: If he please
to make us so, we are so; and prudence is a gift of God, a blessing of an
excellent nature, and of great leisure, and a wise opportunity,

To this I answer, That Christian prudence is in very many instances a direct
duty; in some an instance and advice, in order to degrees and advantages: where
it is a duty, it is put into every man's power; where it is an advice it is
only expected according to what a man has, and not according to what he has
not: and even do prudent things, though not to be prudent persons; if they have
not the prudence advice, and conduct, yet they may have the prudence of
obedience, and of disciples: and the event is this; without prudence their
virtue is unsafe, and their persons defenselesse, and their interest is
unguarded; for prudence is a handmaid waiting at the production, and birth of
virtue: It is a nurse to it in its infancy, its patron in assaults, its guide
in temptations, its security in all portions of chance and contingency: And he
that is imprudent, if he have many accidents and varieties, is in great danger
of being none or if he be, at the best he is but a weak and an unprofitable
servant, useless to his neighbor, vain in himself, and as to God, the least
in the kingdom: his virtue is contingent, and by chance, not proportioned to
the reward of wisdom, and the election of a wise religion.

(...)
(...).
No purchase, no wealth, no advantage is great enough to be

1. It is the duty of Christian prudence to choose the end of a Christian, that
which is perfective of a man, satisfactory to reason, the rest of a Christian,
and the beatification of his spirit; and that is, to choose and desire, and
propound to himself heaven, and the fruition of God, as the end of all his acts
and arts, his designs and purposes. For in the nature of things that is most
eligible, and delivers from death; and temperance though it be in the matter of
meat, and drink, and pleasures, yet has an effect upon the understanding,

And now let the voluptuous person go and try whether putting his wanton hand
to the bosom of his Mis^^s will get half such honor as Scaevola put upon his
head, when he put his hand into the fire. Let him see whether a drunken meeting
will cure a fever, or make him wise? A hearty and a persevering prayer will.
yesterday, that is in forgetfulness, and annihilation, unless its only
child, sorrow, shall marry, and breed much to be preferred before little,
certainty before danger, public good things, before private evils, eternity
before moments, then let us set down in religion, and make heaven to be our
end, God to be our Father, Christ our elder Brother, the Holy Ghost the earnest
of our inheritance, Malim prudentiae guttam quam foecundioris fortunae pelagus:
One drop of prudence is more useful, then an ocean of a smooth fortune; for
prudence is a rare instrument toward heaven; and a great fortune is made
oftentimes the highway to hell and destruction. However, thus far, prudence
is our duty; every man can be so wise; and is bound to it, to choose heaven and
a cohabitation with God, before the possessions and transient vanities of the
world.

2. It is a duty of Christian prudence to pursue this great end, with apt means
and instruments in proportion to that end. No wise man will sail to Ormus in a
cock-boat, or use a child for his interpreter; and that General is a Cyclops
without an eye, who chooses the sickest men to man his Towns, and the weakest
to fight his battles. It cannot be a vigorous prosecution unless the means
have an efficacy or worth commensurate to all the difficulty, and something of
the excellency of that end which is designed. And indeed men use not to be so
weak in acquiring the possessions of their temporals; But in matters of
religion they think rise up early, and sit up late, and eat the bread of
carfulness, to become richer then their neighbors; and are amazed at every
loss, and impatient of an evil accident, and feel a direct strom of passion,
if they suffer in their interest: But in order to heaven they are cold in their
religion, wisdom, delivery from sickness, his holy Spirit, the forgiveness of
sins, the grace of chastity, restitution to his favor, or the like, do we hope
to obtain them without a high opinion of the things we ask? and if we value
them highly, must we not desire them earnestly? and if we desire them
earnestly, must we not pray for them fervently? and whatsoever we ask for
fervently, must not we beg for frequently? and then because prayer is but one
hand toward the reaching a blessing, and God requires our cooperation and
endeavor; and we must work with both effectual, fervent, frequent,
continual, holy, passionate, that must get a grace, or secure a blessing: The
love that we must have to God must be such as to keep his commandments, and to
make us willing to part with all our estate, and all our honor, and our life
for the testimony Our charity to our neighbors must be expressive in a
language of a real friendship, aptness to forgive, readiness to forbear, in
pitying infirmities, in relieving necessities, in giving our goods and our
lives, and quitting our privileges to save his soul, to secure and support his
virtue. Our repentance must be full of sorrows and care, of diligence and
hatred against sin, it must drive out all, and leave no affections toward it;
it must be constant and persevering, fearful of relapse, and watchful of all
accidents: Our temperance must sometimes turn into abstinence, and most
commonly be severe, and ever without reproof: He that striveth for masteries is
temperate (says Saint Paul) in all things; he that does all this, may with
some pretense and reason say, he intends to go to heaven: But they that will
not deny a lust, nor refrain an appetite, they that will be drunk when their
friends do merrily constrain them, or love a cheap religion, and a gentle and
lame prayer, short and soft, quickly said, and soon passed over, seldom
returning, and but little observed, How is it possible that they should think
themselves persons disposed to receive such glorious crowns and scepters, such
excellent conditions, which they have not faith enough to believe, nor
attention heaven upon conditions, which we can perform with greatest diligence;
a reward, but a gift, and an infinite favor: but yet it is not reached forth
but to persons disposed by the conditions of God; which conditions when we
pursue in kind, let us be very careful we do not fail of the mighty price of
our high calling, for want of

3. It is an office of prudence so to serve God that we may at the same time
preserve our lives and our estates, our interest and reputation for our selves,
and our relatives, so far as they can consist together. Saint Paul in the
beginning of Christianity was careful to instruct the forwardness and zeal of
the new Christians into good husbandry, and to catechize the men into good
trades, and the women into useful employments, that they might for the mighty
price of our salvation: and this is that part of prudence, which is the
defensative and guards of a Christian in the time of persecution; and it has
in it much of duty. He that through an indiscreet zeal casts himself into a
needless danger, has betrayed his life to tyranny and tempts the sin of an
enemy, provision for them of his own house, and he that fails in this duty by
his own fault, is worse then an infidel, and denies the faith, by such
unseasonably dying, or being undone, which by that testimony he did intend
gloriously to confess; he serves the end of ambition and popular services, but
not the sober ends of religion, he Quem fata cogunt, ille cum venia est miser,
He whom God by an inevitable necessity calls to sufferance, he has leave to be
undone, and that ruin of his estate or loss of his life shall secure first a
providence, then a crown.

At si quis ultro se malis offert volens.
seque ipse torquet, perdere est dignus bona

But he that invites the cruelty of a Tyrant by his own follyes or the
indiscretions of an unsignificant and impertinent zeal, suffers as a wilful
person, and enters into the portion and reward of fools. And this is the
precept of our Blessed Savior, next after my text: Beware of men: use your
prudence to the purposes of avoiding their snare. (...) Man is the most harmful
of all the wild beasts: ye are sent as sheep among wolves, be therefore wise
as serpents; when you can avoid it suffer not men to ride over your heads, or
trample you under foot; that's the wisdom of Serpents; and so must we; that is
by all just complyances, and toleration of all indifferent changes in which a
duty is not destroyed and in which we were not active, so to preserve our
selves that we might be permitted to live, and serve God, and to do advantages
to religion; so purchasing time to do good in, by bending in all those flexures
of fortune, and condition, which we cannot help, and which we do not set
forward, and which we never did procure; and this is the direct meaning of
Saint Paul; Ephesians. 5. 16.
see then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools but as wise, Redeeming the
time because the days are evil; that is, we are fallen into times that are
troublesome, dangerous, persecuting and afflictive, purchase as much respite as
you can: Buy or redeem the time by all honest arts, by humility, by fair
carriage and sweetnesses of society, by civility, and a peaceful conversation,
by good words, and all honest offices, by praying for your persecutors, by
patient sufferance of what is unavoidable: And when the Tyrant draws you forth
from all these guards and retirements, and offers violence to your duty or
tempts you to do a dishonest act, or to omit an act of obligation, then come
forth into Col. 4. 5.
Thus we are to walk in wisdom toward them that are without redeeming the
time: for so Saint Paul renewes that permission, or commandment: Give them no
just cause of offense; with all humility and as occasion is offered represent
their duty, who was the God of the Christians? answered (...); If you be
disposed with real and hearty desires of learning, what you ask you shall
quickly know; But if your purposes be in direct, I shall not preach to you, to
my hurt and your no advantage. Thus the wisdom of the primitive Christians was
careful not to profane

(...)
(...)
As knowing that even in this sense, time was very precious and the
opportunity of giving glory to God by the offices of an excellent religion,
was not too dear a purchase at that rate. But then when the wolves had entered
into the folds and seized upon a lamb the rest fled, and used all the innocent
arts of concealment. Saint Athanasius being overtaken by his persecutors, but
not known, and asked whether he saw Athanasius passing that non long abest
Athanasius; the man is not far off; a swift footman will easily overtake him.
And Saint Paul divided the council of his Judges, and made the Pharisees his
parties by a witty insinuation of his own belief of the resurrection, which was
not the main question, but an incident to the matter of his accusation. And
when Plinius secundus in the face of a Tyrant court was pressed so invidiously
to give his opinion concerning a good man in banishment and under the
disadvantage of an unjust sentence he diverted the snare of Marcus Regulus by
referring his answer to a competent judicatory

For in this case the rule is easy; If we are commanded to be wise and redeem
our time, that we serve God and religion, we must not use unlawful arts which
set us back in the accounts of our time, no lying Subterfuges, no betraying of
a truth, no treachery to a good man, no insnaring of a brother, no secret
renouncing of any part or proposition of our religion, no denying libellatici,
Libellers; and were excommunicate and cast off from the society of Christians
and the hopes of Heaven, till they had returned to God by a severe repentance;
optanduum est ut quod libenter facis diu facere possis. It is good to have time
long to do that which we confession of Christ, of which Saint Paul says, by
the mouth confession is made unto salvation. And our Blessed Savior, he that
confesses me before men. I will confess him before my Heavenly Father; and if
here he refuses to own me, I will not own him hereafter: it is also expressly
against Christian fortitude and nobleness; and against the simplicity and
sincerity of our religion, and it turns prudence into craft, apostasy: and it
is well that the man is tempted no further; for if the persecutors could not be
corrupted with money, it is ods but the complying man would, and though he
would with the money hide his shame, yet he will not with the loss of all his
estate redeem his religion (...): some men will lose their lives rather then a
fair estate: and do not almost all the armies of the world (I mean) those
that fight to die; and he was a fool that being in Portugal run to God has no
pleasure in fools, to the latter, If you gain the whole world and lose your
own soul: your loss is infinite and intolerable.

SER. XXI.

Part II.


But as our necessary duty is bound upon us by one ligament more people that
are liberal in their excommunications make men think

Thus Christ reproved the Pharisees, for straining at a gnat and swallowing a
Camel; the very representation of the manner and matter of fact discovers the
vice by reproving the folly of it. They the Jew spends all in his passover,
the Moore in his marriage, and the Christian in his law suits? that, what the
first sacrifice to religion, and the second to public joy, we should spend
Pudet haec opprobria nobis and dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli. But
among our selves also, we serve the Devils ends, and minister to an eternal
disunion, by saying and doing things which look unhandsomely. One sort of men
is superstitious, fantastical, greedy of honor, and tenacious of propositions
to fill the purse, and his religion is thought nothing but policy, and opinion.
Another says he has a good religion, but he is the most indifferent and cold
person in the world, either to maintain it, or to live according to it; the one
dresses the images of Saints with fine clothes, the other lets the poor go

One thing I desire should be observed, that here the Question being concerning
prudence, and the matter of doing reputation to our religion, it is not enough
to say, we can with learning justify all that we do, and make all whole with
3. or 4. distinctions; for possibly the man that went to visit the Corinthian
Lais, if he had been asked why he dishonored himself with so unhandsome an
entrance, might find an excuse to legitimate his act, or ^t least to make
himself believe well of his own person; but he that intends to do himself
honor, must take care that he be not suspected,

To this rule appertains that we be curious in observing the circumstances of
men, and satisfy all their reasonable expectations, undecencies rather then
sins, such which may become a just Heathen, but not a holy Christian; a man of
the world, but not a man professing godliness. Because when the greatness of
the man, or the excellency of the Law, engage us upon great severity, or an
exemplar virtue, whatsoever is less then it renders the man unworthy of the
religion, or the religion unworthy of its fame: Men think themselves abused,
and therefore return shame for payment. We never read of an Apostle that went
to law; and it is

But above all things those sects of Christians whose professed doctrine brings
destruction and diminution to government, give the most intolerable scandal,
and dishonor to the institution; and it had been impossible that Christianity
should have prevailed over the wisdom and power of the Greeks and Romans, if it
had not been humble to superiors, patient of injuries, charitable to the
needy, a great exactour of obedience to Kings, even to heathens, that they
might be won, and convinced; and to persecutours that they Ivy suck

There are some persons whose religion is hugely disgraced, because they change
their propositions according as their temporal necessities or advantages do
return. They that in their weakness at first they were pusillanimous, or at
last outrageous* that their doctrine at first served their fear, and at last
served their rage, and that they did not at all intend to serve God: and then
who shall believe them in any thing else? Thus some men declaim against the
faults of Governors, that themselves necessity; as if a sin could be hallowed
for coming into their hands. Some Greeks at Florence subscribed the Article of
Purgatory, and condemned it in their own Diocesses: And the Kings supremacy in
causes Ecclesiastical, was earnestly defended against the pretenses of the
Bishop of Rome, and yet when he was thrust out, some men were, and are v^olent
to submit the King to their Consistories, as if he were Supreme in defiance of
the Pope, and yet not Supreme over his own Clergy. These Articles are managed
too suspitiously.

You lose all the advantages to your cause, if you lose your reputation.

5 It is a duty also of Christian prudence that the teachers of others by
authority, or reprovers of their vices by charity, should also make their
persons apt to do it without objection.

Lori pedem rectus derideat, Aethiopem albus. Gracchi preaching against
sedition, nor Verres prating against theevery, or Milo against homicide: and if
Herod had made an oration of humility, or Antiochus of mercy, men would have
thought, it had been a design to evil purposes. He that means to gain a soul,
must not make his Sermon an ostentation of his Eloquence, but the law of his
own life. If a Gramarian should speak solaecismes, or a Musician sing like a
bittern, he Gorgias went about to persuade the Greeks to be at peace, he had
eloquence enough to do advantage to his cause, and reason enough to press it:
But Melanthius was glad to put him off, by telling him that he was not fit to
persuade peace, who could not agree at home with his wife, nor make his wife
agree with her maid; and he that could not make peace between three single
persons, was unapt to prevail for the reuniting fourteen or fifteen
Commonwealths: And this thing Saint Paul remarks by

-- Facinus quos inquinat, aequat, to reprove, belongs to a Superior; and as
innocence gives a man

Hither also it appertains that in public or private reproofs, we observe
circumstances of time, of place, of person, of disposition. The vices of a King
are not to be opened publicly; and Princes must not be reprehended as a man
reproves his servant; but

A zealous man has not done his duty, when he calls his brother

6. It is a duty of Christian prudence not to suffer our souls to Vae soli and
singulari, said the Wise man, Woe to him that is alone: and if we consider how
much God has done to secure our souls, and after all that, how many ways
there are for a man's soul to miscarry, we should think it very necessary to
call to a spiritual man to take us by the hand, to walk in the ways of God,
and to lead us in all the regions of duty, and through the labyrinths of danger.
For God who best loves, and best knows how to value our souls, set a price no
less upon it then the lifeblood of his

But because we are in the question of prudence, we must consider whether it be
necessary to do so: For every man thinks himself wise enough as to the conduct
of his soul, and managing of

But then is the soul the only safe and the only trifling thing about us? Are
not there a thousand dangers, and ten thousand difficulties, and innumerable
possibilities of a misadventure? Are not all the congregations in the world
divided in their doctrines, and all of them call their own way necessary and
most of them call all the his duty and renew his holy principle, and actuate
his spiritual pleasure and pain, the two great fountains

But what advantage shall we receive by a spiritual Guide? much every way. For
this is the way that God has appointed who in every age has sent a succession
of spiritual persons, whose office is stewards of Gods household, shepherds of
the flock, dispensers of the mysteries, under mediators, and ministers of
prayer, preachers of the law, expounders of questions, monitors of duty,
conveiances of blessings, and that which is a good discourse in the mouth of
another man is from them an ordinance of God; and besides its natural efficacy
and persuasion, it prevails by the way of blessing, by the reverence of his
person, by divine institution, by the excellency of order, by the advantages of
opinion and assistances of reputation, by the influence of the spirit who is
the president of such ministeries, and who is appointed Sophocl.
(...). Holy men ought to know all things from God, and that relate to

Sermon. XXII. SER. XXII.

Part III.
7. AS it is a part of Christian prudence to take into the conduct

Concerning which it will be impossible to give characters and significations
particular enough to enable a choice without the interval assistances of
prayer, experience and the Grace of God; He that describes a man can tell you
the color of his hair, his stature and proportions, and describe some general
lines, enough to distingush him from a Cyclops or a Saracen, but when you
chance

When Saint John was to separate false teachers from true, he took no other
course but to remark the doctrine which was of God, and that should be the mark
of cognizance to distinguish right shepherds from robbers and invaders: every
spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: He
that denies it is not of God By this he bids his scholars to avoid the
present sects of Ebion, confess Jesus Christ come in the flesh, and the
following sects did avoid that rock over which a great Apostle had hung out so
plain a lantern.

In the following ages of the Church men have been so curious to

1. Some men distinguish error from truth by calling their adversaries
doctrine, new, and of yesterday; and certainly this is a good era for our
faith and parts of religion by the period of their preaching: our account
begins then, and whatsoever is contrary to what they taught is new and false,
and whatsoever is besides, what they taught, is no part of our religion (and
then no man can be prejudiced for believing it or not) and if it be adopted
into the confessions of the Church, the proposition is always so uncertain,
that its not to be admitted into the faith; and therefore if it be old in
postliminium, if it was from the first* though the Holy fire has been buried,
or the river ran under ground, yet that we do not call that new; since newness
is not to be accounted of by a proportion to our short lived memories, or to
the new though it be pressed with a new zeal and discoursed of by unheard of
arguments; that is, though men be ignorant and need to learn it, yet it is not
therefore new or unnecessary.

2. Some would have false teachers sufficiently signified by a name or the
owning of a private Appellative as of Papist, Lutheran, Calvenists Zuinglian,
Socinian; and think it is enough to denominat them the flock of God, and the
Novatians called the Catholics traditors, and the Eustathians called
themselves Catholics and the worshippers made Iconoclast to be a name of
scorn, and men made names as they listed, or as the fate of the market went.
And if a Doctor preaches a doctrine which another man likes not, but preaches
the contradictory, he that consents and he that refuses have each of them a
teacher by whose name, if they please to wrangle, they may be signified. It was
so in the Corinthian Church with this only difference that they divided
themselves by names which signified the same religion. I am of Paul, and I of
Apollo and I am of Peter, and I of Christ; these Apostles were ministers of
Christ; and so does every teacher new or old among the Christians pretend
himself to

3. Amongst some men a sect is sufficiently thought to be reproved, if it
subdivides and breaks into little fractions, or changes its own opinions:
indeed if it declines its own doctrine, no man has reason to believe them upon
their word, or to take them upon the stock of reputation, which (themselves
being judges) they have forfeited and renounced in the changing that which at
first they obtruded passionately. And therefore in this case there that
doctrine is certainly true, in which the generality that doctrine is also
sufficient since it is certain that because in all Communions and Churches
there are some very good men, that do all their duty to the getting of truth,
God will not fail in any thing that is necessary to them that honestly and
heartily desire to obtain it: and therefore if they rest in the heartinesse of
that, and live accordingly, and superinduce nothing to the destruction of that,
they have nothing to do but to rely upon Gods goodness: and if they perish, it
is certain they cannot help it, and that is demonstration enough that they
cannot perish,

4. Whoever break the bands of a Society, or Communion, and go out from that
Congregation is whose Confession they are baptized, do an intolerable scandal
to their doctrine and persons, and give suspicious men reason to decline their
Assemblies, and not to choose them at all for any thing of their authority, or
outward circumstances: and Saint Paul bids the Romans to mark But the following
words make their caution prudent and practicable, [contrary to the doctrine
which ye have learned and avoid them] they that recede from the doctrine which
they have learned, they cause the offense, and if they also obtrude this upon
their congregations, they also make the division. For it is certain, if we
receive any doctrine contrary to what Christ gave, and the Apostles taught, for
the authority of any man, then we call men Masters, and leave our Master which
is in heaven; and in that case we must separate from the Congregation and
adhere to Christ; but this is not to be done, unless with their mouths not to
confess unto salvation, what with their hearts they believe unto
righteousness. The best way of remedying both the evils is, that Governors
lay no burden of doctrines or laws but what are necessary, or very profitable:
and that Inferiors do not contend for things unnecessary, nor call any thing
necessary that is not: till then there will be evils on both sides; and his
authority destroy his truth. But in this case also, although separating be a
suspicious thing and intolerable, unless it be when a sin is imposed, yet to
separate is also accidental to truth: for some men separate with reason, some
men against reason; therefore here all the certainty that is in the thing, is
when the truth is secured, and all the security to the men will be in the
humility of their persons, and the heartinesse and simplicity

5. The ways of direction which we have from holy Scripture All that confess
Jesus incarnate are of God said Saint John; those men that deny it are
heretics; avoid them: and Saint Paul bids to observe them that cause divisions
and offenses against the doctrine delivered. Them also avoid, that do so. And
we might do so as easily as they, if the world would only take their
depositum, that doctrine which they delivered to all the Creed, and superinduce
nothing else, but suffer Christian faith to rest in its own perfect simplicity,
unmingled with arts, and opinions, and interests. This course is plain and
easy, and I will not intricate it with more words, but leave it directly in
its own truth and certainty, with this only direction. That when we are to
choose our doctrine, or our side, we take that which is in the plain
unexpounded words of Scripture; for in that only our religion can consist.
Secondly choose that which is most advantageous to a holy life, to the proper
graces of a Christian, to humility, to charity, to forgiveness and alms, to
obedience* and Let our be careful to maintain good works for necessary uses,
for he that heartily pursues these proportions cannot be an ill man, though he
were accidentally and in the particular applications deceived.

6. But because this is an act of wisdom, rather then prudence, and supposes
science or knowledge rather then experience, therefore it concerns the prudence
of a Christian to observe the practice,

7. Therefore those teachers that pretend to be guided by a private spirit are
certainly false Doctors. I remember what Simmias in Plutarch tells concerning
Socrates, that if he heard any man say he saw a divine vision, he presently
esteemed him vain and proud* but if he pretended only to have heard a voice or
the word of ye saw no figure, but ye heard a voice, said Moses to the people
concerning God: and therefore if any man pretends to speak the word of God, we
will enquire concerning it; the man may the better be heard, because he may be
certainly reproved if he speaks amiss: visions and revelations, to a private
spirit and a mission extraordinary, the man is proud and unlerned, vicious and
impudent. No Scripture is of private interpretation (says S. Peter) that is,
of private emission or declaration. Gods words were delivered indeed by single
men, but such as were publicly designed Prophets, remarked with a known
character, approved of by the high Priest, and Sanhedrim, endued with a public
spirit, and his doctrines were always agreeable to the other Scriptures. But
if any man pretends now to the spirit, either it must be a private or public;
if it be private, it can but be useful to himself If I bear witness of my
self, my witness is not true, said Truth it self, our Blessed Lord. But
secondly, they that intend to teach by an extraordinary spirit, if they pretend
to teach according to Scripture must be examined by the measures of Scripture,
and then their extraordinary must be judged by the ordinary spirit, and stands
or falls by the rules of every good man's religion, and public government; and
then we are well enough. But if they For if an Angel from heaven (he certainly
is a spirit) preach any other doctrine, let him be accursed.

But this pretense of a single and extraordinary spirit is nothing else but the
spirit of pride, error, and delusion, a snare to catch easy and credulous
souls, which are willing to die for a gay word and a distorted face; it is the
parent of folly, and giddy doctrine, impossible to be proved, and therefore
useless to all purposes of religion, reason, or sober counsels; it is like an
invisible color, or music without a sound, it is, and indeed is so intended
to be, a had declared the whole truth of God, and told all the will of God: and
it is an affront to the Spirit of God, the Spirit of wisdom, and knowledge, of
order and public ministeries. But the will furnishes out malice, and the
understanding sends out levity, and they marry, and produce a fantastic
dream, and the daughter sucking wind instead of the milk of the word, grows
up to madness and the spirit of reprobation. Besides all this, an
extraordinary Apostles and Evangelists, Prophets and Pastors, Bishops and
Priests, the spirit of Ordination, and the spirit of instruction, Catechists,
and Teachers, Arts and Sciences, Scriptures and a constant succession of
Expositors, the testimony of Churches, and a constant line of tradition, or
delivery of Apostolical Doctrine in all things necessary to salvation. And
after all this, to have a fungus arise from the belly of mud and darkness, and
nourish a gloworm, that shall the stars in Christ's right hand, is to annull
all the excellent, established, orderly, and certain effects of the Spirit of
God, and to worship the false fires of the night. He therefore that will follow
a Guide that leads him by an extraordinary spirit, shall go an extraordinary
way, and have a strange fortune, and a singular religion, and a portion by
himself, a great way off from the common inheritance of the Saints, who are all
led by the Spirit of God, and have one heart, and one mind, one faith, the
earnest of their inheritance.

Concerning the pretense of a private spirit, for interpretation of the
confessed doctrine of God (the holy Scriptures) it will not so easily come into
this Question of choosing our spiritual Guides; Because every person that can
be Candidate in this office, that can be chosen to guide others, must be a
public man, that is, of a holy calling, sanctified or separate publicly to
the office; and but the more holy and the more learned the man is, his
interpretation

8. Those are to be suspected for evil guides, who to get authority among the
people pretend a great zeal, and use a bold liberty in reproving Princes and
Governors, nobility and Prelates; for such homilies cannot be the effects of a
holy religion, which lay a snare for authority, and undermine power, and
discontent the people Tempter have insinuated privately.

But if ever you enter into the seats of those Doctors that speak reproachfully
of their Superiors, or detract from government, 2 Timothy 3. 4. 5.
false guides and bringers in of strange doctrines, still they reckon treason
and rebellion; so S. Paul, In the last days perilous times shall come, the
men shall have the form of Godliness, and deny the power of it; they shall be
Traitors, heady, high minded: 2 Pet. 2. 10.
that's their characteristic note. So Saint Peter* the Lord knows how to
deliver the Godly out of temptations and to reserve the unjust unto the day of
judgment to be punished. But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the
lust of uncleanness and despise government; presumptuous are they, self willed
they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities. verse. 8. ep. Jude.
The same also is recorded and observed by Saint Jude, likewise also these
filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion and speak evil of dignities.
These three testimonies are but the declaration of one great contingency; they
are the same prophesy declared by three Apostolical men, that had the gift of
prophecy: and by this character the Holy Ghost in all ages has given us
caution

9. But the Apostles in all these prophecies have remarked lust to they are
filthy dreamers, they defile the flesh; so Saint Jude: they walk after the
flesh in the lust of uncleanness, so Saint Peter they are lovers of pleasure
more then lovers of God, incontinent and sensual. So Saint Paul and by this
part of the character, as the Apostles remarked the Nicolatians, and Gnostics,
the Carpocratians and all their impure branches which began in their days and
multiplied after their deaths, so they prophetically did foresignifie al such
sects to be avoided who to catch silly women laden with sins preach doctrines
of ease and licenciousnesse, apt to countenance and encourage vile lust and
treason together; because the former is so shameful a crime and renders a man's
spirit naturally averse to government that if it falls upon the person of a
Ruler, it takes from him the spirit of government, and render, him diffident,
pusillanimous, private, and ashamed; if it happen in the person of a subject,
it makes him hate the man that shall shame him and punish him: it hates the
light and the Sun, because that opens him, and therefore is much more against
government because that Eloquia Domini casta eloquia
by its own experience, and for its own interest. But Christian religion is so
pure and holy that chastity is sometimes used for the whole religion, and to do
an action chastely signifies purity of intention, from the world and separation
from low and secular ends, the virginity of the soul, and its union with God;
and all deviations and estrangements from God and adhesion to forbidden objects
is called fornication and adultery. Those sects therefore that teach,
encourage, or practice impious or unhallowed mixtures and shameful lusts are
issues of the impure spirit and most contrary to God who can behold no unclean
thing.

10. Those prophets and Pastors that pretend severity and live loosely, or are
severe in small things and give liberty in greater, or forbid some sins with
extreme rigor, and yet practice or teach those that serve their interest or
constitute their sect, are to be suspected and avoided accordingly. Nihil est
hominum inepta persuasione falsius, nec ficta severitate ineptius. All ages of
the Church were extremely curious to observe when any new teachers did arise,
what kind of lives they lived: and if they pretended severely and to a strict
life, then they knew their danger doubled: for it is certain all that teach
doctrines contrary to the established religion, delivered by pride, or their
revenge, their envy or their detraction, their scorn or their complacency in
themselves, their desire of pre-eminence and their impatience of arrival, shall
place carnal sinner, whom they shall load with censures and an upbraiding
scorn; but themselves are like Devils, the spirits of darkness the spiritual
wickednesses in high places. Some sects of men are very angry against servants
for recreating and easing their labors with a less prudent and an unsevere
refreshment; but the patron of their sect shall oppress a wicked man and an
unbelieving person; they shall chastise a drunkard and entertain murmurrers;
they shall not abide an oath and yet shall force men to break three or four.
This sect is to be avoided, because although it is good to be severe against
carnal or bodily sins, yet a bodily sin to make way for a spiritual, or reprove
a servant, that his Lord may sin alone, or punish a stranger and a beggar that
will not approve their sins, but will have sins of his own. Concering such
persons Saint Paul has told us that they shall not proceed far, but their
folly shall be manifest. (...) said Lysias. Cito ad naturam ficta reciderunt
sua. They that dissemble their sin and their manners, or make severity to serve
loosnesse, and an imaginary virtue to minister to a real vice; they that abhor
Idols and would commit sacrilege: chastise a drunkard and promote sedition,

11. The substance of al is this, that we must not chose our doctrine by our
guide; but our guide by the doctrine, and if we doubt concerning the doctrine
we may judge of that by the lives and designs of the Teachers: By their fruits
you shall know them, and by the plain words of the scripture, by the Apostles
Creed, and by the commandments, and by the certain known and established forms
of government; These are the great indices, and so plain, apt and easy; that he
that is deceived is so because he will be so; he is betrayed into it by his own
lust and a voluntary chosen folly.

Colos. 2
as in the Church of Rome to this day they do to Saints: to these add, 6. that
we observe bad life with the hopes of heaven, you have reason to suspect the

Here indeed is the great necessity that we should have the prudence and
discretion, the (...) of serpents,

-- ut cernamus acutum
Quam aut aquila aut serpens Epidaurius.
For so serpents as they are curious to preserve their heads from contrition or
a bruise, so also to safeguard themselves that they be not charmed with sweet
and enticing words of false prophets; who charm not wisely, but cunningly,
leading aside unstable souls; against

1. We cannot expect that by these or any other signs we shall be enabled to
discover concerning all men whether they teach an error or no. Neither can a
man by these reprove a Lutheran, or a Zuinglian, a Dominican or a Franciscan, a
Russian or a Greek, a Muscovite or a Georgian, because those which are certain
signs of false teachers, do signify such men, who destroy an article of faith
or a commandment; God was careful to secure us from

2. In all discerning of sects, we must be careful to distinguish the

Multos Thyrsigeros, paucos est cernere Bacchos: Many men of holy calling and
holy religion that are of unholy lives; homines ignava opera But these must be
separated from the institution: and the evil of the men is only to be noted,
as that such persons be not taken to our single conduct, and personal
ministry; I will be of the man's religion if it be good, though he be not; but
I will not make him my confessor (...). If he be not wise for himself, I will
not sit down at his feet lest we mingle filthiness instead of being cleansed
and instructed.

3. Let us make one separation more and then we may consider and act according
to the premises: If we epsy a design or an evil mark upon one doctrine let us
divide it from the other that are not so spotted, Try all things and retain
that which is good: from every sect and community of Christians take any thing
that is good, that advances holy religion, and the Divine honor; For one has
a better government, a second a better confession, a third has excellent
spiritual arts for the conduct of souls, a fourth has fewer errors, and by
what instrument soever a holy

These are the general rules of Christian prudence which I have chosen to
insist upon; there are many others more particular indeed, but yet worth not
only the enumerating, but observing also, and that they be reduced to
practice. For the prudence of a Christian does oblige and direct respectively
all the children of the institution; * and vigorous in our prosecutions, that
we suffer not good nature to Christian prudence is accounted folly by humane
prudence, and so it is ever accounted when our duty leads us into a
persecution. * Hither also appertain; that we never do a thing that we know we
must repent of, * that we do not admire too many things, nor anything too much,
* that we be even in prosperity * and patient in adversity; but transported
with neither into the regions of despair or levity, pusillanimity or Tyranny,
dejection or Garishnesse, * always has four ears, Reason Religion, wisdom and
experience, * rather to lose a benefit then to suffer a detriment and an evil,
* to stop the beginnings of evil, * to pardon and not to observe all the faults
of friends or enemies; * of evils to choose the least, * and of goods to choose
the greatest, if it be also safest; * not to be insolent in success, but to
proceed according to the probability of humane Insignis enim est prudentiae, ut
quod non facere non possis, id facere ut libenter fecisse videaris, * not to
pursue difficult uncertain and obscure things with violence and passion. These
if we observe we shall do advantage to our selves and to the religion, and
avoid those evils which fools and unwary people suffer for nothing, dying or
bleeding without cause and without pity. I end Socrates. (...) Virtue is but a
shadow and a servile employment unless it be adorned and instructed with
prudence which gives motion and conduct, Plat. Phaedon
spirits and vigourousnesse to religion, making it not only humane and
reasonable but Divine and caelestial.

SERMON XXIII.

Matthew 10. latter part of Ver. 16. And harmless as doves.]
OUR Blessed Savior having prefac'd concerning Prudens simplicitas, is
Martial's character of a good man: a wary and cautious innocence, a harmless
providence, and provision: Vera simplicitate bonus, a true simplicity, is that
which leaves to a man arms defensive; Et homines simplices, minime malos, the
Romans called parum cautos, saepe unwary fools, and defenselesse people were
called simple: and when the innocence of the old simple Romans in Junius Brutus
time, in Fabritius, and Camillus began to degenerate, and to need the Aquilian
law to force men to deal honestly, quickly the mischief increased, till the
Aquilian law grew as much out of power, as honesty was out of countenance. And
there, and every where else men thought they got a purchase, when they met with
an honest man, and (...) Aristotle calls (...), and (...). A fool is a
profitable person, and he that is simple is little better then mad: And so it
is, when simplicity wants prudence. Orat. 21.
(...). The Princes simplicity, so he calls it for reverence, but indeed it was
folly, for it was zeal without knowledge: But it was a better temper, which he
observed in his own father, (...), such a simplicity which only wanted craft,
or deceit, but wanted no Christian simplicity, or the sincerity of an honest;
and ingenious, and a fearlesse person; and it is a rare band, not only of
societies, and contracts, but also of friendships, and advantages of mankind.

We do not live in an age in which there is so much need to bid men be wary, as
to take care that they be innocent: Indeed in religion we are usually too
loose, and ungirt, exposing our selves to temptation, and others to offense,
and our name to dishonor, and the cause it self to reproach, and we are open
and ready to every evil but persecution: from that we are close enough, and
that Leporina

Tuta frequensque via est -- Dissett. ^. de regno.
a vice fit for slaves; (...), as Dio Chrysostomus calls it; (...); for the
most timorous and the basest of beasts and every man else; and above all,
lying, or craftiness, and unfaithful Every soul loses truth very unwillingly:
Every man is so great a lover of truth, that if he has it not he loves to
believe he has, and would fain have all the world to believe as he does;
either presuming that he has truth, or else hating to be deceived, or to be
esteemed a cheated and an abused person. Non licet suffurari mentem hominis
etiam Samaritani, Can. Eth.
said R. Moses, sed veritatem loquere atque age ingenue, If a man be a
Samaritan, that is, Qui ignotos laedit, latro appellatur, qui amicos, paulo
minus quam parricida. He that hurts strangers is a thief, but he that hurts his
friends is little better then a parricide: That Is the brand and stigma of
hypocrisy and lying: it hurts our friends, mendacium in damnum potens, and
makes the man that owns it guilty of a crime, that is,

1. The first office of Christian simplicity consists in our religion and
manners: that they be open and honest, public and justifiable, the same at
home and abroad; for besides the ingenuity and honesty of this, there is an
indispensable, and infinite necessity it should be so, because whoever is a
hypocrite in his religion, mocks God, presenting to him the outside, and
reserving

Vita fallax, abditos sensus gerens,
Nimisque pulchram turpibus faciem induens.
It is a crafty life that men live, carrying designs, and living upon secret
purposes; Pudor impudentem celat, audacem quies, pietas Men pretend modesty,
and under that red vail are bold against Superiors, saucy to their betters
upon pretenses of religion, invaders of others rights by false propositions in
Theology, pretending humility they challenge superiority above all orders of
men, and for being thought more holy, think that they have title to govern the
world; they bear upon their face great religion, and are impious in their
relations, false to their trust, unfaithful to their friend, unkind to their
dependants; (...), turning up the white of their eye, and seeking for Asperum
cultum, and intonsum caput and negligentiorem barbam and nitidum argento odium,
and cubile humi positum and quicquid aliud ambitionem via perversa sequitur:
being the softest persons under an austere habit, the loosest livers under a
contracted brow; under a pale face, having the reddest and most spritely
livers; these kind of men have abused all ages of the world, and all
religions, it being so easy in nature, so prepared and ready for mischiefs,
that men should creep into opportunities of devouring the flock upon pretense
of defending them, and to raise

Introrsum turpes speciosi pelle decora. Men that are like painted sepulchers,
entertainment for the eye, but images of death, chambers of rottenness, and
repositories of dead men's bones. It may sometimes concern a man to seem
religious; Gods glory may be showed by fair appearances, or the edification of
our brother, or the reputation of a cause; but this is but sometimes; but it
always concerns us that we be religious, and we may reasonably think, that if
the colors of religion so well do advantage to us, the substance and reality
would do it much Nunquam est peccare utile qu^^ semper est turpe, said Cicero.
It is never profitable to sin because it is always base and dishonest: and if
the face of religion could do a good turn, which the heart and substance does
destroy, then re^igion it self were the greatest hypocrite in the world, and
promises a blessing which it never can perform, but must be beholding to its
enemy to verify its promises. No. We shall be sure to feel the blessings is,
conversing with men as in the presence of God, and in our private Ornat hunc
magnitudo animi quae nihil ad ostentationem, omnia ad conscientiam refert:
recteque facti, non ex populi sermon mercedem, sed ex facto petit. And this
does well state the question of a sincere religion, and an ingenuous goodness;
It requires that we do nothing for ostentation, but every thing for conscience;
and we may be obliged in conscience to publish our manner of lives, but then it
must be, not that we may have a popular noise for a reward, but that God may

Neither does the sincerity of our religion require that we should not conceal
our sins, for he that sins and dares to own them publicly may become impudent:
and so long as in modesty we desire our shame should be hid, and men to think
better of us then we deserve, I say for no other reason, but either because we
would not derive the ill examples to others, or the shame to our selves, we are
within the protection of one of virtues sisters, and we are not far from the
gates of the kingdom of heaven; easy and apt to

But if any other principle draws the vail, if we conceal our vices because we
would be honored for sanctity, or because we would not be hindered in our
designs, we serve the interest of pride and ambition, covetousness, or
vanity; if an innocent purpose hides the ulcer, it does half heal it; but if it
retires into the secrecy of sin and darkness, it turns into a plague, and
infects the heart, and it dies infallibly of a double exulceration. The
Macedonian boy that kept the coal in his flesh, and would not shake his arm,
lest he should disturb the sacrifice, or discompose the ministry before

Quid quod olet gravius mistum dia pasmate virus.
Atque duplex animae longius exit odor.
When Fescenia perfumed her breath that she might not smell of wine, she
condemned the crime of drunkenness: but grew ridiculous when the wine broke
through the cloud of a tender perfume

Notas ergo nimis frauds, deprensaque furta
Jam tollas, and sis ebria simpliciter.
A simple drunkard has but one fault, But they that avoid discovery, that they
may drink on without shame or restraint add hypocrisy to their vicious
fullness: and for all the amazements of their consequent discovery have no
other recompense, but that they pleased themselves in the security of their
crime, and their undeserved reputation: Sic quae nigrior est cadente moro;
Cerussata sibi placet Lycoris: for so the most easy and deformed woman, whose
girdle no foolish young man will unloose, because she is blacker then the
falling mulbery; may please her self under a skin of Cerusse, and call her self
fairer then Pharaohs daughter, or the hinds living upon the snowy mountains.

One thing more there is to be added as an instance to the simplicity neque
enim id est celare cum quid reticias, sed cum quod tuscias* ^d ignorare
emolumenti tui causa velis eos, So Cicero. lib. 3. offic.
quorum inter est id scire: So Cicero determins the case of prudence and
simplicity. The discovery of pious frauds, and the disclaiming of false but
profitable and rich propositions; it is the breath of God, and as it is purer
then the beams of the the faith read at Nice, and used all arts and all
violence, and all lying, and all diligence to discountenance it, yet it could
not be, it was the truth of God and therefore it was stronger then all the
gates of hell, then all the powers of darkness: and he that tells a lie for
his religion or goes about by fraud and imposture to gain proselytes, either
dares not Emperor Verus) it is morum simplicium and quae adumbrare nihil
possit: it covers indeed a multitude of sins by curing them, and obtaining
pardon for them, but it can dissemble nothing of it self, it cannot tell or do
a lie: but it can become a sacrifice; a good man can quit his life but never
his integrity. That's the first duty; the sum of which is that which Aquilius
said concerning fraud and craft, bona fides cum aliud simulatum aliud actum
sit, when either we conceal what we ought to publish, or do not act what we
pretend.

2. Christian simplicity or the innocence of prudence relates to laws both in
their sanction and execution; that they be decreed with equity and proportioned
to the capacity and profit of the subjects and that they be applied to practice
with remissions and reasonable interpretations agreeable to the sense of the
words and the mind of the lawgiver; but laws are not to be cosened and abused
by contradictory glosses, and fantastic elusions as knowing that

3. Christian simplicity relates to promises and acts of grace and favor; and
its caution is, that all promises be simple, ingenuous, agreeable to the
intention of the promiser, truly and effectually expressed and never going
less in the performance, then in the promise, secundum aequum and bonum: and
though they may oblige to some small inconvenience, yet never to a great one:
and I will visit you to morrow morning, because I promised you, and therefore.
I will come etiamsi non concoxero, although I have not slept my full sleep, but
Si febricitavcro if I be in a fever or have reason to fear one, I am
disobliged. For the nature of such promises bears upon them no bigger burden,
then can be expounded in matters of justice or in matters of grace as from a
superior to they should sit upon twelve thrones, they presently thought they
had his bond for a kingdom, and dreamt of wealth, and honor, power and a
splendid court: and Christ knew they did, but did not disintangle his promise
from the enfolded and intricate sense of which his words were naturally
capable; but he performed his promise, to better purposes, then they hoped for;
they were presidents in the conduct of souls, Princes of Gods people, the chief
in sufferings stood nearest to the cross, had an elder brothers portion in the
Kingdom of grace, were the founders of Churches, and dispensers their names
were written in heaven; and this was infinitely better, then to groan and wake
under a head pressed with a golden crown and pungent cares, and to eat alone,
and to walk in a crowd and to be vexed with all the public and many of the
private evils of the people, which is the sum Total of an earthly Kingdom.

When God promised to the obedient that they should live long in the land,
which he would give them, he meant it of the land of

But in this part of simplicity we Christians have a most especial obligation,
for our religion being ennobled by the most and the greatest promises, and our
faith made confident by the veracity bigger mischief, to cozen the more: for so
does the Devil: He

SERMON XXIV.

Part II.


(...). There are men in the world who love to smile, but that smile is more
dangerous then the furrows of a contracted brow, or a storm in Adria; for their
purpose is only to deceive; they easily speak what they never mean, they heap
up many arguments to persuade that to others, which themselves believe not;
they praise that vehemently which they deride in their hearts, they declaim
against a thing which themselves covet, they beg passionately for banquets, and
the good natured kindnesses of festival chalices, for [De asciscendis
principibus de pace and bello in conviviis consultant, tanquam nullo magis
tempore ad simplices cogitationes pateat animus, aut ad magnas incalescat: as
if then they were more simple when they were most valiant, and were least
deceitful, when they were least themselves.

But it is an evil condition that a man's honesty shall be owing to his wine,
and virtue must live at the charge and will of a vice. The proper band of
societies and contracts is, justice and necessities, religion and the laws; the
measures of it are equity and our selves and our own desires in the days of
our need, natural or forced; But the instruments of the exchange and conveyance
of the whole intercourse is, words and actions, as they are expounded by
custom, consent, or the understanding of the interested person; in which if
simplicity be not severely preserved, it is impossible that humane society can
subsist, but men shall be forced to snatch at what they have bought, and take
securities that men swear truly, and exact an oath, that such is the meaning of
the word, and no man shall think himself secure, but shall fear he is robbed if
he has not possession first; and it shall be disputed who shall trust the
other, and neither of them shall Lib. 8. instit.
(...), said Cyrus in Xenophon. A man though he desires it, yet cannot be
confident of the man that pretends truth yet tells a lie and is deprehended to
have made use of the sacred name of friendship or religion, honesty or
reputation to deceive his brother.

But because a man may be deceived by deeds and open actions as well as words;
therefore it concerns their duty, that no man by an Pythius the Sicilian had a
mind to sell his garden to Cannius he invited him thither, and caused
fisherman (as if by custom) to fish in the channel by which the gardens stood,
and they threw a great store of fish into their arbours, and made Cannius
believe it was so every day, and the man grew greedy of that place of pleasure,
and gave Pythius a double price, and the next day perceived himself abused.
Actions of pretense and simulation are like snares laid, into which the beasts
fall though you pursue them not, but walk in the inquiry for their necessary
Vir bonus est, qui prodest quibus potest, nocet nemini, when we do all the good
we can, and do an evil to no man, then only we are accounted good men. But
this pretense of an action signifying otherwise then it looks for, is only
forbidden in matter of contract, and the material interest of a second person.
But when actions are of a double signification, or when a man is not abused or
defeated of his right by an uncertain sign, it is lawful to do a thing to
other purposes then is commonly understood. Flight is a sign of fear; but it
is lawful to fly when a man fears not. Circumcision was the seal of the Jewish
religion, proper and natural, by an offer to give an occasion to another to do
a good action; and in case it succeeds not, then to do what we intended not,
and so the offer was conditional. But in all cases of bargaining, although the
actions of themselves may receive naturally another sense, yet I am bound to
follow that signification which may not abuse my brother, or pollute my own
honesty, or snatch, or rifle his interest: Because it can be no ingredient into
the commutation, if I exchange a thing

But secondly, as our actions must be of a sincere and determinate
signification in contracts, so must our words: in which the rule of the old
Roman honesty was this: Vterque si adeloquendum venerit non plus quam semel
eloquetur; Every one that speaks is to speak but once; that is, but one thing;
because commonly that is truth; truth being but one; but error and falsehood
infinitely various and changeable; and we shall seldom see a man so s^iffned
into little particles, and swallowed the lie by crumbs, so that no truth, with
a collateral design to cozen and abuse; and therefore at no hand can it be
permitted to lie or equivocate, to speak craftily, or to deceive by
smoothness, or intricacy, or long discourses.

But this precept of simplicity in matter of contract has one step of severity
beyond this: In matter of contract it is not lawful Caveat emptor is a good
caution for him that buys, and it secures the seller in public Judicature,
but not in court of conscience; and the old laws of the Romans were as nice in
this affair, as the conscience of a Christian. Titus Claudius Centimalus was
commanded by the Augures to pull down his house in the Coelian mountain,
because it hindered their observation of the flight of birds; he exposes his
house to sale, Publius Calpurnius buys it, and is forced to pluck it down; But
complaining to the Judges had remedy, because Claudius did not tell him the
true state of the inconvenience. He that sels a house infected with the plague,
or haunted with evil spirits, sels that which is not worth such a price which
it might be put to if it were in health and peace: and therefore cannot demand
it but openly and upon publication of the evil. To which also this is to be
added, that in some great faults and such as have danger, (as in the cases now
specified) no diminution of the price is sufficient to make the Merchant just
and sincere, unless he tells the appendant mischief; Marcus Gratidianus bought
a house of Sergius Orata, which himself had sold before; But because Sergius
did not declare the appendant vassalage and service, he was recompensed
Gratidianus knew it, because it had been his own, yet Oportuit ex bona fide
denunciari said the law; it concerned the ingenuity of a good man to have
spoken it openly. In all cases it must be confessed in the price, or in the
words; But when the evil may be personal, and more then matter of interest and
money, it ought to be confessed, and then the goods prescribed, lest by my act
I do my neighbor injury, and I receive profit by his damage. Certain it is,
that ingenuity is the sweetest and easiest way, there is no difficulty or cases
of conscience in that, and it can have no objection in it but that

God sent justice into the world, that all conditions in their several
proportions should be equal; and he that receives a good, should pay one, and
he whom I serve is obliged to feed and to defend me in the same proportions as
I serve; and justice is a relative term, and supposes two persons obliged, and
though fortunes are unequal, and estates are in majority and subordination, and
men a wise man to snatch a plank from a drowning fool, or if the Master of the
ship should challenge the board upon which his passenger swims for his life, or
to obtrude false moneys upon others, which we first took for true, but at last
discovered to be false; or not to discover the gold which the merchant sold for
alchimy: The reason of all these is, because the collateral dearer to himself,
and to be preferred before Kings, and republics, in the kingdom of the just,
who shall call us to judgment for every word, and and what is the hope of the
hypocrite though he has gained, when the Lord takes away his soul, Tollendum
esse ex rebus contrahendis omne mendacium. That Is the sum of this rule: Cicero.
no falshod or deceit is to be endured in any contract.

5. Christian simplicity has also its necessity and passes obligation upon us
toward enemies in questions of law or war. Plutarch commends Lysander and
Philopaemen for their craft and subtilty in war; but commends it not as an
ornament to their manners, but that which had influence into prosperous events;
just as Ammianus nullo discrimine virtutis ac doli prosperos omnes laudari
debere bellorum eventus: whatsoever in war is prosperous, men use to commend:
But he that is a good soldier is not always a good man. Callicratidas was a
good man and followed the old way of downright hostility, (...): But Lysander
was (...), a crafty man, full of plots but not noble in the conduct of his
arms. I remember Euripides brings in Achilles commending the ingenuity of his
breeding and the simplicity and nobleness of his own heart (...). The good old
man Quae. 10. super Joshuam lib. 1. de sacerdotio.
Saint Austin allows it to be lawful; and Saint Chrysostom commends it. These
Good men supposed that a crafty victory was better then a bloody war; and
certainly so it is, if the power gotten by craft be not exercised in blood: But
this business (as to the case of conscience) will quickly be determined.
Enemies are no persons bound by contract and society, and therefore are not
obliged to open hostilities and ingenuous prosecutions of the war; Hist l. 16.
cap. 6
In this because it was a particular and private quarrel, there is no rule of
conscience but that it be wholly laid aside, and appeased with charity; for the
opennesse of the quarrel was but the rage and indiscretion of the It is just
and pleasant, profitable and glorious, but to call a parley and fall in upon
the men that treat; to swear a peace and watch advantage; to entertain Heralds
and then to torment them, to get from them notices of their party; these are
such which are dishonorable and unjust, condemned by the laws of nations and
essential justice, and by all the world and the Hungarian army was destroyed by
a divine judgment at the prayer and appeal of the Mahumet an enemy for their
violating their faith and honor and profaning the name of Christ by using it
in a solemn oath to deceive their enemies, (...): that is to despise some few
persons have been found so noble as to scorn to steal a

6. Thus we see how far the laws of ingenuity and Christian simplicity have put
fetters upon our words and actions and directed them in the paths of truth and
nobleness, and the first degrees of permission of simulation is in the arts of
war, and the cases of just hostility. But here it is usually inquired whether
it be lawful to tell a lie, or dissemble to save a good man's life, or to do him
a great benefit? a Question which Saint Austine was much troubled

1. It is certain that children may be cozned into goodness, and sick men to
health, and passengers in a storm into fafety; and the reason of these is,
because not only the end is fair and charitable and just, but the means are
such which do no injury to the persons which are to receive benefit: Because
these are persons who

2. Sinners may not be treated with the liberty we take to children and sick
persons, because they must serve God with choice



4. And now upon the grounds of this discourse, we may more before or besides
the commandment, not at all against it: and since the law of Moses forbad lying
in judgment only, by that law we are to judge of those actions in the old
testament which were committed after its publication: and because in the
sermons of the prophets and especially in the new testament Christ has
superadded or enlarged the law of ingenuity and hearty simplicity, we are to
leave the old scripture precedents upon the ground of their own permissions,
and finish our duty by the rules of our religion: Let every man speak the truth
to his neighbor, putting away lying, for we are members one of another: Ephesians.
4. 25.
and be as harmless as doves says our blessed Savior in my text: which
contain the whole duty concerning the matter of truth and sincerity; in both
which places truth and simplicity

These cases are intricate enough, and therefore I shall return plainly to
press the doctrine of simplicity which ought to be so sacred alieni facinoris
munus culum non repudiaverunt, refused not to receive a present made them by
another crime; but so they entered upon a moiety of the estate and the biggest
share of the dishonor: we must not be crafty to another injury so much as by
giving countenance to the wrong; for Tortoises and the Estrich hatch their
eggs with their looks only; and some have designs which a dissembling face
or an acted gesture can produce; but as a man may commit adultery with his eye
so with his eye also he may tell a lie, and steal with one finger and do injury
collaterally and yet design it with a direct intuition upon

7. One thing more I am to add, that it is not lawful to tell a lie in jest.
It was a virtue noted in Aristides and Epaminondes that they would not lie
(...) not in sport: and as Christian simplicity forbids all lying in matter of
interest and serious rights: so there is an appendix to this precept forbidding
to lie in mirth: for of every idle word a man shall speak he shall give account
in the day of judgment: and such are the jestings which S. Paul reckons amongst
things uncomly; But amongst these; fables, apologues, parables or figures of
Rhetoric, and any artificial instrument of instruction, or innocent pleasure
are not to be reckoned; But he that without any end of charity or institution
shall tell lies only to become ridiculous in himself or mock another, has set
some thing upon his doomsday book which must be taken off, by water or by fire,
that is, by repentance

Nothing is easier then simplicity and ingenuity, it is open and ready without
trouble and artificial cares, fit for communities and the proper virtue of men,
the necessary appendage of useful speech, without which language were given to
men as nails and teeth to Lions, for nothing but to do mischief; it is a rare
instrument of institution, and a certain token of courage, the companion of
goodness dignus quicum in tenebris mices to whom in respect of his fair
treatings, the darkness and light are both alike: But he that bears light upon
the face and a dark heart, is like him that transforms himself into an Angel of
light. when he means to do most mischief. Remember this only; that false
colors laid upon the face besmear the skin and durty it, but they neither make
a beauty nor mend it.

Apocal: 22. 15. For without shall be dogs and sorcerers, and whoremongers and
and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

SERMON. XXV.

Psalm. 86. 5 For thou Lord art good and ready to forgive, and plenteous in
mercy to all them that call upon thee.
India, and turned his face and his prayers toward Gods power was armed
against him; and poor man, whom a fly, or a fish could kill, was assaulted and
beaten with a sword of fire in the hand of a Cherubim. Gods eye his omniscience
was man's accuser, his severity was the Judge, his justice the executioner. It
was a mighty calamity that man was to undergo, when he that made him, armed
himself against his creature, which would have died or turned to nothing, if he
had but withdrawn the miracles and the Almightinesse of his power. If God had
taken his arm from under him, man had perished; but it was therefore a greater
evil when God laid his arm upon him and against him, and seemed to support him
that he might be longer killing him. In the midst of these sadnesses God
remembered his own creature, and pitied it, and by his mercy rescued the hand
of his power, and the sword of his justice, and the guilt of his punishment,
and the disorder of his sin, and placed him in that order of good things where
he ought to have stood: It was mercy that preserved the noblest of Gods
creatures here below; he who stood condemned and undone under all the other
attributes of God, was only saved and rescued by his mercy: that it may be
evident that Gods mercy is above all his works, and above all ours, greater
then the creation, and greater then our sins; as is his Majesty, so is his
mercy, that is, without measures, and without rules, sitting in heaven and
filling all the world, calling justice bowed down to his mercy, and all his
power passed into mercy, and his omniscience converted into care and
watchfulness, into providence, and observation for man's avail, and Heaven gave
its influence for man, and rained showers for our food and drink, and the
Attributes and Acts of God sat at the foot of mercy, and all that mercy
descended upon the head of man: For so the light of the world in the morning of
the creation was spread abroad like a curtain, and dwelt no where, but filled
the expansum with a dissemination expansum and a huge Ocean, from eternal ages
it dwelt round about the throne of God, and it filled all that infinite
distance and space, that has no measures but the will of God; until God
desiring to communicate that excellency and make it relative, created Angels,
that he might have persons capable of huge gifts, and man, who he knew would
need forgiveness; for so the Angels our elder Brothers dwelt for ever in the
house of their Father, and never brake his commandments; but we the younger
our life is repentance, and forgiveness is all our portion: and though Angels
were objects of Gods bounty, yet man only is (in proper speaking) the object
of his mercy. And the mercy which dwelt in an infinite circle, became confined
to a little ring, and dwelt here below, and here shall dwell below,

But for him that considers Gods mercies, and dwells a while in that depth, it
is hard not to talk wildly and without art, and order of discoursings: Saint
Peter talked he knew not what, when he entered into a cloud with Jesus upon
mount Tabor, though it passed over him like the little curtains that ride upon
the North-winde, and pass between the Sun and us: And when we converse with a
light greater then the Sun, and taste a sweetness more delicious run over,
though they be not much in themselves, yet they tell that the vessel was full,
and could express the greatness of the shower no otherwise, but by spilling,
and inartificiall expressions and runnings upon us, and toward us, and
concerning us, which we neither feel, nor see, nor understand as yet; but yet
we are blessed by them, and are preserved and secured; and we shall then know
them, when we come to give God thanks in the festivities of an eternal
sabbath. But that I may confine my discourse into

1. That mercy being an emanation of the Divine goodness upon us, and supposes
us, and found us miserable; In this account concerning the mercies of God, I
must not reckon the miracles and graces of the creation, or any thing of the
nature of man; nor tell how great an endearment God passed upon us that he made
us men, capable of felicity, apted with rare instruments of discourse, and
reason, passions, and desires, notices of sense, and reflections

Our excellent bodies, and useful faculties, the upright motion, and the
tenacious hand, the fair appetites, and proportioned satisfactions, our speech
and our perceptions, our acts of life, the rare invention of letters, and the
use of writing, and speaking at distance, the intervals of rest and labor,
(either of which if they were perpetual would be intolerable) the needs of
nature, and the provisions of providence, sleep, and business, refreshments of
the body, and entertainment of the soul; these are to be reckoned as rack is
changed into an ax, and the ax into an imprisonment, and the imprisonment
changed into an enlargement, and the enlargement into an entertainment in the
family, and this entertainment passes on to an adoption, these are steps of a
mighty favor, and perfect redemption from our sin: and the returning back our
own goods is a gift, and a perfect donative, sweetened by the apprehensions of
the calamity, from whence every lesser punishment began to free us; and thus it
was, that God punished us and visited the sin of Adam upon his posterity. He
threatened we should die, and so we did, but not so as we deserved; we waited
for death and stood sentenced, and are daily summoned by sicknesses and
uneasinesse; and every day is a new reprieve, and brings a new that death, is
changed into a sleep, and that sleep is in the bosom of Christ, and there dwells
all peace and security, and it shall pass forth into glories and felicities.
We looked for a Judge, and behold a Savior; we an accuser, and behold an
Advocate; we sat down in sorrow, and rise in joy; we leaned upon Rhubarb and
Aloes, and our aprons were made of the sharp leaves of Indian fig trees, and so
we fed, and so were clothed: But the Rhubarb proved medicinal, and the rough
leaf of the tree brought its fruit wrapped up in its foldings; and round about
our dwellings was planted a hedge of thorns, and bundles of thistles, the
Aconite, and the Briony, the Nightshade, and the Poppy, and at the root of
these grew the healing Plantain, which rising up into a tallness, by the
friendly invitation of a heavenly influence, turned about the tree of the
cross; and cured the wounds of the thorns, and the curse of the thistles, and
the malediction of man, and the wrath of God. Si sio irascitur, quomodo
convivatur? If God be thus kind when he is Angry, what is he when he feasts us
with caresses of his more tender Kindness? All that God restored to us after
the forfeiture of Adam grew to be a double Kindness; for it became the
expression of a bounty which knew not how to repent, a graciousnesse that was
not to be altered, though we were, and that was it which we needed. That Is the
first general: all the bounties of the creation became mercies to us, when God
continued them to us

2. But as a circle begins every where, and ends no where, so do the mercies of
God: after all this huge progress, now it began anew: God is good and
gracious, and God is ready to forgive. Now that he had once more made us
capable of mercies God had what he desired, and what he could rejoice in,
something upon which he might pour forth his mercies; and by the way, this I
shall observe, (for I cannot but speak without art, when I speak of that which
has no measure) God made us capable of one sort of his mercies, and we made
our selves capable of another: God is good and gracious, that is, desirous to
give great gifts; and of this, God made us receptive, first by giving us
natural possibilities, that is, by giving those gifts he made us capable of
more; and next, by restoring us to his favor, that he might not by our
provocations be hindered from raining down his mercies. But God is also ready
to forgive] and of this kind of mercy we made our selves capable, even by not
deserving it; Our sin made way for his grace, and our infirmities called upon
his pity; and because we sinned, we became miserable, and because we were
miserable, we became pitiable, and this opened the other treasure sin abounds,
his grace may superabound. In this method we must confine our thoughts;

1. Giving, 2. Forgiving, Thou Lord art good. and ready to forgive, plenteous
in mercy to all them that call upon thee.


3. Gods mercies, or the mercies of his giving, came first upon us by mending
of our nature: For the ignorance we fell into is the liberty of the sons of
God, and Christ has done us more grace and advantage then we lost in Adam; and
as man lost Paradise and got Heaven, so he lost the integrity of the first, and
got the perfection of the second Adam: his living soul is changed into a
quickening spirit; our discerning faculties are filled with the spirit of faith,
and our passions and desires are entertained with hope, and our election is
sanctified with charity; and his first life of a the tree of life. But I
instance in two great things in which humane nature is greatly advanced, and
passed on to greater perfections; The first is, that besides body and soul,
which was the sum total of Adams constitution, God has superadded to us a
third principle, the beginner of a better life; I mean, Vide Sermon. II.
the Spirit; so that now, man has a spiritual and celestial nature breathed
into him, and the old man, that is, the old constitution is the least part and
in its proper operations is dead, or dying, renewed in us day by day. But
secondly, Humane nature is so highly exalted, and mended by that mercy which
God sent immediately upon the fall of Adam, the promise of Christ, that when he
did come, and actuate the purposes of this mission, and ascended up into
heaven, he carried humane nature above the seats of Angels; to the place
whither Lucifer the son of the morning aspired to ascend, but in his attempt
fell into hell. For (so said the Prophet) the son of the morning said, I will
ascend into heaven, and sit in the sides of the North, a relative dignity
greater, and an equal honor of being fellow servants. This mystery is plain
in Scripture, and the real effect of it we read in both the Testaments. Judges
13.
When Manoah the the testimony of Jesus. And therefore when an Angel appeared
to Saint John, and he according to the Custom of the Jews fell down and
worshipped him, as not yet knowing or not considering any thing to the
contrary, John Revel. 22. 9. de bono patientiae
the Angel reproved him, saying, see thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant
and of thy brethren the prophets and of them which keep the sayings of this
book: worship God; or as Saint Cyprian reads it, worship Jesus. God and man are
now only capable of worship: Homil. 8. in Evange.
Quid est quod ante Redemptoris adventum adorantur ab hominibus [Angeli] and
tacent, postmodum vero adorarirefugiunt: why did the Angels of old receive
worshippings and were silent, but in the new testament decline it and fear to
accept it? Nisi quod naturam nostram quam prius despexerant, postquam hanc
super se assumptam aspiciunt prostratam sibi videre pertimescunt, nec jam sub
se velut infirmam contemnere ausi sunt, quam super se viz. in caeli Rege
venerantur: the reason is, because they seeing our nature which they did so
lightly value raised up above them they fear to see humbled under them, neither
do they any more despise the weakness which themselves worship in the King of
heaven. The same also is the sense of the Gloss, of Saint Ambrose, Ansbertus,
Haymo, Rupertus and others of old; and Ribera, Salmeron, and Lewis of Granada
of late; which being so plainly consonant to the words of the Angel and
consigned by the testimony of such men, I the rather note, that those who
worship Angels and make religious addresses to them, may see their King is our
Brother.

4. To this for the likeness of the matter I add, that the divine distances,
or characters of fame and nobleness. Christ is the great while all that follow
the lamb, and that are accounted worthy of that resurrection shall be assessors
in the judgment. 1 Cor. 6. 3.
Know ye not, (says, S. Paul) that ye shall judge Angels? And Tertullian
speaking concerning Devils and accursed spirits [de cultu foeminarum] says, Hi
sunt Angeli quos judicaturi sumus, Hi sunt Angeli quibus in lavacro
renunciavimus. Those Angels which we renounced

5. The next order of Divine mercies that I shall remark is also an improvement
of our nature or an appendage to it: for whereas our constitution is weak, our
souls apt to diminution and impedite faculties, our bodies to mutilation and
imperfection, to blindness and crookedness, to stammering and sorrows, to
baldness in sorrow they shall bring forth children, yet God has so attempe^ed
that sorrow, that they think themselves more accursed if they want that sorrow,
and they have reason to rejoice in that state, the trouble of which they shall
be saved in bearing children. He that wants one eye has the force and
vigorousnesse of both united in that which is left him; and when ever any man
is afflicted with sorrow his reason and his religion, himself and all his
friends, persons that are civil, and persons that are obliged, run into comfort
him, and he may, if he will observe wisely, find so many circumstances of ease
and remission, so many designs of providence and studied favors, such
contrivances of collateral advantage and certain reserves of substantial and
proper comfor^, that in the whole sum of affairs, it often happens that a
single cross is a double blessing, it is better to go to the house of
mourning, then of joys and festival egressions. Is not the affliction of
^overty better then the prosperity of a great and tempting fortune? does not
wisdom dwell in a mean estate and a low spirit* retired thoughts and under a
sad roof? and is it not generally true that sickness it self is appayed with
religion and holy thoughts with pious resolutions and penitential prayers, with
returns to God and to sober councels? and if this be true, that God sends
sorrow to

God has sent no greater evil into the world, then that in the sweat of our
brows we shall eat our bread, and in the difficulty and agony, in the sorrows
and contention of our souls we shall work out our salvation. But see how in the
first of these God has out done his own anger and defeated the purposes of his
wrath by mercy; for this labor and sweat of our brows is so far from being a
curse that without it our very bread would not be so great a blessing. It is
not labor that makes the Garlic and the pulse, the Sycamore and the Cresses,
the cheese of the Goats and the butter of the sheep to be savoury and pleasant,
as the flesh of the Roe-buck or the milk of the Kine, the marrow of Oxen or the
thighs of birds? If it were not for labor, men neither could eat so much, nor
relish so pleasantly, nor sleep so soundly nor be so healthful, nor so useful,
so strong nor so patient, so noble, or so untempted, and as God has made us
beholding to labor for eat their bread in the sweat of their brows, yet this
is but an overrunning and an excess of the divine mercy; God did more for us
then we did absolutely need; for he has disposed of the circumstances of this
curse, that man's affections are so reconciled to it, that they desire it, and
are delighted in it; and so the Anger of God is ended in loving Kindness, and

But then for the other part of the severe law and laborious imposition, that
we must work out our spiritual interest with the labors of our spirit, seems
to most men to be so intolerable, that rather then pass under it they quit
their hopes of heaven, and pass into the portion of Devils; and what can there
be to alleviate this sorrow, that a man shall be perpetually solicited with an
impure tempter, and shall carry a flame within him, and all the world is on
fire round about him, and every thing brings fuel to the flame, and choice and
election, and nothing can enoble the choice but love, and nothing can exercise
love but difficulty, and nothing can make that difficulty but the contradiction
of our appetite and the crossing of our natural affections; and therefore
whenever any of you is tempted violently or grow weary in your spirits with
resisting the petulancy of temptation, you may be cured if you

So that whoever can complain that he serves God with pains and mortifications,
he is troubled because there is a distinction of things such as we call virtue
and vice, reward and punishment, and if he will not suffer God to distinguish
the first he will certainly

6. As an appendage to this instance of divine mercy, we are to account that
not only in nature; but in contingency and emergent events of providence, God
makes compensation to us, for all the evils of chance, and hostilities of
accident and brings good out of evil, which is that solemn triumph which mercy
makes over justice, when it rides upon a cloud and crowns its darkness with a
robe of glorious light. God indeed suffered Joseph to be sold a bondslave into
Egypt, but then it was that God intended to crown and reward mercy, it was to
make way to bring him to Pharaohs court; and God brought famine upon Canaan,
and troubled all the souls of Jacobs family, and there was a plot laid for
another mercy; this was to bring them to see and partake of Joseph's glory: and
then God brought a great evil upon their posterity and they groaned under
taskmasters, but this God changed into the miracles of his mercy, and suffered
them to be afflicted that he the mercies of God which then will be made
public, when we shall hear such afflicted people sing Inconvertendo
captivitatem Sion with the voice of joy and festival eucharist, among such as
keep holy day; and when peace shall become sweeter and dwell the longer; and in
the mean time it serves religion, and the affliction shall try the children

Had not David suffered more if he had suffered less, and had he not been
miserable unless he had been afflicted? he understood It is good for me that I
have been afflicted. He that was rival to Crassus, when he stood candidate to
command the Legions in the Parthians war was much troubled that he missed the
dignity, but he saw himself blessed that he escaped the death, and the dishonor
of the overthrow, by that time the sad news arrived at Rome. The Gentleman at
Marseilles cursed his stars that he was absent when the ship set sail to sea,
having long waited for a wind, and missed it; but he gave thanks to the
providence that blessed him with the cross, when he knew that the ship perished
in the voyage, and all the men were drowned: And Blessed is the womb that never
bare, and the paps that never gave suck. And the world being governed with a
rare variety, and changes of accidents, and providence; that which is a
misfortune in the particular, in the whole order of things becomes a blessing
bigger then we hoped for, then when we were angry with God for hindering us, to
perish in pleasant ways, or when he was contriving to pour upon thy head a
mighty blessing. Do Stand still and see how it will be in the whole event of
things; let God speak his mind out; for it may be, this sad beginning is but
an art to bring in, or to make thee to esteem, and entertain, and understand
the blessing.

They that love to talk of the mercies of the Lord, and to recount He is the
Father of the fatherless, and an avenger of the widows cause, he stands at
the right hand of the poor to save his soul from unrighteous Judges, and he is
with us in tribulation: And upon this ground, let us account whether mercy be
not the greater ingredient in that death and deprivation, when I lose a man and
get God to be my Father; and when my weak arm of flesh is cut

SERMON XXVI.

Part II.
endearment, and tie, and expression, of a natural, unalterable, and
essential kindness, he next makes provisions for us to supply all those
necessities which himself has made. For even to make necessities, was a great
circumstance of the mercy, and all the relishes of wine, and the savourinesse
of meat, the sweet and the fat, the pleasure and the satisfaction, the
restitution of spirits, and the strengthening of the heart, are not owing to
the liver of the vine, or the kidneys of wheat, to when desire fails,
presently Eccles. 12.
the mourners go about the streets. But then, that these desires are so
provided for by nature and art, by ordinary and extraordinary, by foresight and
contingency, according Eden, which were permitted to feed our miserable father:
Is not all the earth our orchard, and our granary, our vineyard, and our garden
of pleasure? and the face of the Sea is our traffic, and the bowels of the
Sea is our vivarium, a place for fish to feed us, and to serve some other
collateral appendant needs; and all the face of heaven is a repository for
influences and breath, fruitful showers and fair refreshments; and when God
made provisions for his other creatures, he gave it the food of Angels, and the
dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth; and every part of his body has a
provision made for it, and the smoothness of the olive, and the juice of the
vine refresh the heart and make the face cheerful, and serve the ends of joy,
and the festivity of man, and are not only to cure hunger or to allay thirst,
but to appease a passion, and allay a sorrow. Benjamin, we Own labor, and our
Brothers charity; and our faith in this affair is confirmed by all our own, and
by all the

But that which I shall observe in this whole affair is, that there are both
for the provision of our tables, and the relief of our sicknesses, so many
miracles of providence that they give plain demonstration what relation we bear
to heaven: and the poor man need Manna of Calabria, the medicinal waters of
Germany, the Musles at Sluice at this day, and the Egyptian beans in the
marshes of Albania, and the salt at Troas of old; which God to defeat the
covetousness of man, and to spread his mercy over the face of the indigent, as
the Sun scatters his beams over the bosom of the whole earth, did so order
that as long as every man was permitted to partake, the bosom of heaven was
open; but when man

8. But because such is the bounty of God, that he has provided a better life
for the inheritance of man, if God is so merciful in making fair provisions
for our less noble part, in order to the transition toward our Country, we
may expect that the mercies of God has rare arts to secure to us his designed
bounty, in order to our inheritance, to that which ought to be our portion for
ever. And here I consider, that it is an infinite mercy of the Almighty Father
of mercies that he has appointed to us such a religion that leads us to a huge
felicity, through pleasant ways. If you will obey, ye shall eat the good
things of the land: Ye shall possess a rich country, ye shall triumph over
your enemies, ye shall have numerous families, blessed children, rich
granaries, overrunning wine-presses; for God knew the cognation of most of
them was so dear, between their affections and the good rich, and pleased, and
healthful and wise and beloved in the whole world. Life of H. Jesus. part 3
Disc. 14.
I shall now remark only two or three instances; for the main body of this
truth I have other where represented.

1. The whole religion of a Christian as it relates to others is nothing but
justice and mercy, certain parents of peace and benefit: injury and violence,
our religion has also made as good provisions against that too, as the nature
of the thing will suffer; for by patience we are reconciled to the sufferance,
and by hope and faith we see a certain consequent reward; and by praying for
the persecuting man we are oured of all the evil of the mind, the envy and the
fretfulnesse that uses to gall the troubled and resisting man; and when we turn
all the passion into do good works for necessary uses, that is to be able to be
beneficial to the public and not to be burdensome to any, where it can be
avoided, what can be wished to man in relation to others, and what can be more
beneficial to themselves then that they be such whom other men will value for
their interest, such whom the public does need, such whom Princes and Nobles
ought to esteem, and all men can make use of according to their several
conditions; that they are so well provided for that unless a persecution
disables them they cannot only maintain themselves, but oblige others to their

This is a temporal good which all wise men reckon as part of that felicity
which recompenses all the labors of their day, and sweetens the sleep of their
night, and places them in that circle of neighborhood and amity where men are
most valued and most secure. 4. To this we may add this material
consideration. That al those graces which oblige us to do good to others are
nothing else but certain instruments of doing advantage to our selves. It is a
huge nobleness of charity to give alms not only to our Brother, but for him,
It is the Christian sacrifice, like that of Job who made Partic^ps sum omnium
timentium te; I am a partner, a companion of all them that fear thee, I share
in their profits. If I do but rejoice at every grace of God which I see in my
Brother, I shall be rewarded ^or that grace; and we need not envy the
excellency of another; It becomes mine as well as his: and if I do rejoice, I
shall have ^ause to rejoice; so excellent, so full, so artificial is the mercy
of God in making and seeking and finding all occasions to do us good. 5. The
very charity and love and mercy that is commanded in our religion is in it self
a great excellency, not only in order to heaven, but to the comforts of the
earth too, and such without which revels of the Sirian star; but two torches do
not divide but increase

And now upon this account which is already so great I need not reckon
concerning the collateral issues, and little streams of comfort which God has
made to issue from that religion to which God has obliged us; such as are
mutual comforts, visiting sick people, instructing the ignorant and so becoming
better instructed and fortified and comforted our selves by the instruments of
our Brothers ease and advantages; the glories of converting souls, of rescuing
a sinner from hell, of a miserable man from the grave the honor and nobleness
of being a good man, the noble confidence, and the bravery of innocence, the
ease of patience, the quiet of contentedness, the rest of peacefulnesse, the
worthiness of forgiving others, the greatness of spirit that is in despising
riches, and the sweetness of spirit that is in meekness and humility; these
are Christian graces in every sense; favors of God and issues of his bounty

9. God that he might secure our duty and our present and consequent felicity
has tied us with golden chains and bound us not only with the bracelets of
love, and the deliciousness of hope, but with the ruder cords of fear and
reverence, even with all the restraining grace. For it is a huge aggravation of
humane calamity to consider that after a man has been instructed in the love
and advantages of his Religion, and knows it to be the way of honor and
felicity, and that to prevaricate his holy sanctions is certain death and
disgrace to eternal ages, the flood of water. But thus God suffers but few
adulteries in the world in respect of what would be if all men that desire to
be a dulterers had power and opportunity; and yet some men and very many women
are by modesty and natural shamefacednesse chastised in their too forward
appetites: or the laws of man or public reputation or the undecency and
unhandsome circumstances of sin check the desire and make it that it cannot
arrive at act: for so have I seen appendant mischiefs and its constituent
disorder and irregularity;

And the mercy of God is not less then infinite in separating men from the
occasions of their sin, from the neighborhood and temptation; for if the
Hyaena and a dog should be thrust into the same Kennel, one of them would soon
find a grave, and it may as far as the East is from the West not only putting
away the guilt, but setting the occasion far from us, extremely far; so far
that sometimes we cannot sin and many times, not easily, has magnified his
mercy, by giving us safety in all those measures in which we are untempted, It
would be the matter of new discourses, if I should consider concerning the
variety

10. The next order of mercies is such, which is of so pure, and unmingled
constitution, that it has at first no regard to the capacities and disposition
of the receivers, and afterward when it has, it relates only to such
conditions, which it self creates and produces in the suscipient, I mean the
mercies of the divine predestination. bring me up in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord, and I was not exposed to the carelessness of an irreligious
guardian, and taught to steal, we sitting in glory, shall see some of the
partners of our sins carried into despair and the portions of the left hand,
and roaring

11. Lastly, All the mercies of God are concentred in that which is all the
felicity of man; and God is so great a lover of souls that he provides
securities and fair conditions for them, even sins, is taught a way not to fear
the doing of an act, for which he soon, so certainly, and so easily performed:
But these are not^^ious doctrines in the Roman Church, and yet God so loves the
souls of his creatures that many men who trust to these doctrines in their
discourses, dare not rely upon them in their lives. But while they talk as if
they did not need to live strictly, many of them live so strictly as if they
did not believe so foolishly. He that tells, that antecedently God has to all
humane choice decreed man to heaven or to hell, takes God has provided better
things for them, that they without us, that is, without our assistances, shall
be made perfect.

Sermon. XXVII. SERMON XXVII.

Part III.
THere are very many more orders and conjugations of mercies, a few more, and
them also without order; for that they do descend upon us, we see and feel, but
by what order of things, or causes, is as undiscerned as the head of Nilus, or
a sudden remembrance of a long neglected and forgotten proposition. 1. But upon
this account it is, that good men have observed, that the providence of God is
so great a provider for holy living, and does so certainly minister to
religion, that nature and chance, the order of the world, and the influences of
heaven are taught to serve the the Spirit of God, and the spirit of a man. I do
not speak of the miracles that God has in the several periods of the world
wrought for the establishing his laws, and confirming his promises, and
securing our obedience; though that was all the way the overflowing and
miracles of mercy as well as power: but that which I consider is, that besides
the extraordinary emanations of the Divine power upon the first and most solemn
occasions of an institution and the first beginnings of a religion, such as
were, the wonders God did in Egypt and in the wilderness, preparatory to the
sanction of that law, and the first covenant; and the miracles wrought the new
covenant: God does also do things wonderful and miraculous, for the promoting
the ordinary and less solemn actions of our piety, and to assist and accompany
them in a constant and regular succession. It was a strange

To this observation the Jews add, that in Jerusalem no man ever had a fall
that came thither to worship; that at their solemn festivals there was
reception in the Town for all the inhabitants of a beggar, but all the variety
of humane chances, were overruled to the purposes of providence, and
providence was measured by the ends of the religion, and the religion which
promised them plenty, performed the promise till the Nation and the religion
too began to decline, that it might give place to a better ministry, and a
more excellent dispensation of the things of the world.

But when Christian religion was planted and had taken root, and had filled all
lands, then all the nature of things, the whole creation became servant to the
kingdom of grace, and the Head of the religion is also the Head of the
creatures, and ministers all the things of the world in order to the Spirit of
grace: and now Angels are ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for the
good of them that fear the Lord, and all the violences of men, and things of
nature* and choice, are forced into subjection and lowest ministeries, and to
it self is one, as in the case of repentance; and death ministers to life, and
bondage is freedom, and loss is gain, and our enemies are our friends, and
every thing turns

2. But that which is next to this, and not much unlike the design of this
wonderful mercy, is, that all the actions of religion, though mingled with
circumstances of differing and sometimes of contradictory relations are so
concentred in God their proper center, and conducted in such certain and pure
channels of reason and rule, that no one duty does contradict another; and it
can never be necessary for any man in any case to sin. They that bound
themselves whatsoever is not of faith is sin; But yet Gods mercy has taken
care to break this snare in sunder, so that he may neither sin against the
commandment, nor No man can serve two Masters, but therefore he must hate the
one and cleave to the other. But then if we consider what infinite
contradiction there is in sin, and that the great long suffering of God is
expressed in this, that God suffered the contradiction of sinners, we shall
feel the mercy of God in the peace of our consciences and the unity of
religion, so long as we do the work of God. It is a huge affront to a covetous
man that he is the further off from

3. After all this we may sit down and reckon by great sums and conjugations of
his gracious gifts, and tell the minutes of eternity by the number of the Divine
mercies: God has given his laws to rule us, his word to instruct us, his
spirit to guide us, his Angels to protect us, his ministers to exhort us; he
revealed all our duty concealed whatsoever can hinder us, he has affrighted
our follies with fear of death and engaged our watchfulness by its secret
coming; he has exercised our faith by keeping private the state of souls
departed, and yet has confirmed our faith by a promise of a resurrection and
entertained our hope by some general significations of the state of interval:
His mercies make contemptible means instrumental to great purposes, and a small
herb the remedy of the greatest diseases; he impedes the Devils rage and
infatuates, his counsels, he diverts his malice, and defeats his purposes, he
binds him in the chain of darkness and gives him no power for asking, and
commands us to ask, and theatens us if we will not ask, and punishes us for
refusing to be happy. This is that glorious attribute that has made order, and
health, and harmony and hope, restitutions and variety, the joys of direct
possession, and the joys, the artificial joys of contrariety and comparison;
he comforts the poor, and he brings down the rich, that they may be safe in
their humility and sorrow, from the transportations of an unhappy and
uninstructed prosperity; he gives necessaries to all, and scatters the
extraordinary provisions so, that every nation may traffic in charity, and
commute for pleasures; He was the Lord of hosts, and he the God of peace,
because he was terrible in that, but he is delighted in this. His mercy is his
glory, and his glory is the light of heaven; his mercy is the life of the
creation, and it fills all the earth, and his mercy is a sea too; and it fills
all the abysses of the deep; it has given us admire and love and worship, and
magnify this mercy for ever and ever; that we we may dwell in what we feel, and
be comprehended by that which is equal to God, and the parent of all felicity.

And yet this is but the one half. The mercies of giving I have now told of,
but those of forgiving are greater, though not more. [He is ready to forgive]
and upon this stock thrives the interest of our great hope, the hopes of a
blessed immortality; for if the mercies of giving have not made our
expectations big enough to entertain forgiving, we may with more readiness
hope to escape hell, and then we cannot but be blessed by an eternal
consequence: we have but small opinion of the Divine mercy, if we dare not
believe concerning it, that it is desirous and able and watchful and passionate
to keep us or rescue us respectively from such a condemnation the pain of which
is insupportable, and the duration is eternal, and the extension is misery upon
all our faculties, and the intension is great beyond patience or natural or
supernatural abilities, and the state is a state of darkness, faith be pure
and our love unfeigned, if the degree of it be great God will accept it into
glory: if it be little he will accept it into grace, and make it bigger. For
that is the first instance of Gods readiness to forgive: he will upon any
terms, that are not unreasonable and that do not suppose a remanent affection
to sin keep us from the intolerable pains of hell. And indeed if we consider
the constitution of the conditions which God requires, we shall soon lust, to
drunkenness and anger, and pride and covetousness, and unthankefulnesse and
disobedience: Most men that are tempted with lust, could easily enough
entertain the mortification and self denial.

Certain it is; There are very many men in the world that would fain commute
their severity in all other instances for a license in their one appetite; they
would not refuse long prayers after a drunken meeting, or great alms to gether
with one great lust; but then consider how easy it is for them to go to
heaven; God demands of them for his sake and their own to crucify but one
natural lust, or one evil habit, (for all the rest they are easy enough to do
themselves) and God will

in whose only power it is to give pardon, and in whose desire it is that we
should be pardoned, and who commands us to lay hold upon the offer; he has
done all that belongs to God; that is all that concerns the pardon: there it
lies ready, it is recorded in the book of life, it wants nothing, but being
exemplified and taken forth, and the Holy spirit stands ready to consigne and
pass the privy signet, that we may exhibit it to devils and evil men when they
tempt

3. Nay God is so ready in his mercy that he did pardon us even thought it no
robbery to be equal with God: he came to satisfy himself, to pay to himself
the price for his own creature: and when he did this for us that he might
pardon us, was he at that instant angry with us? God, the Son of God, should
die for us: here was reconciliation before pardon: and God that came to die for
us did love us first before he came this was hasty love. But it went further
yet.

4. God pardoned us before we sinned; and when he foresaw our Redeemer to Adam,
in the beginning of the worlds sin; and the lamb slain from the beginning of the
world; and the covenant of the Gospel though it was not made with man yet it
was from the beginning performed by God as to his part, as to the ministration
of pardon; The seed of the woman was set up against the dragon as soon as ever
the Tempter had won his first battle; and though God laid his hand, and drew a
vail of types and secresy before the manifestation of his mercies, yet he did
the work of redemption, and saved us by the covenant of faith, and the
righteousness

Adam fell by his folly and did not perform the covenant of one little work, a
work of a single abstinence; but he was restored by faith in the seed of the
woman; and of this righteousness Noah was a preacher; and by faith Enoch was
traslated, and by faith a remnant was saved at the flood: and to Abraham this
was imputed for righteousness and to all the Patriarks, and to all the
righteous seed of the woman by God incarnate by the lamb slain from the
beginning of the world; not by works, for we all failed of them; that is, not
by an exact obedience, but by by sincere, hearty endeavors and believing God
and relying upon his infinite mercy, revealed in part, and now fully manifest
by the great instrument and means of that mercy Jesus Christ. So that here is
pardon before we asked it; pardon before Christ's coming, pardon before
redemption, and pardon before we sinned: what greater readiness to forgive us
can be imagined? yes: there is one degree more yet; and that will prevent a
mistake in this.

by turning every one of us away from our iniquities; that's the purpose of
Christ, that he might safely pardon us before we sinned; and we might not sin
upon the confidence of pardon, he pardoned us not only upon condition we would
sin no more, but he took away our sin, cured our cursed inclinations,
instructed our understanding, rectified our will, fortified us against
temptations, and now every man whom he pardons he also sanctifies, and he is
born of God, and he must not, will not, cannot sin, so long as the seed of God
remains within him, so long as his pardon continues. This is the consummation
of pardon. For if God had so pardoned us, as only to take away our evils which
are

6. And yet there is a necessity of having one degree of pardon the Author, and
finisher of our faith and pardon, sits in heaven in a perpetual advocation for
us, that this pardon once wrought may be for ever applied to every emergent
need, and every tumor of pride, and every broken heart, and every disturbed
conscience, and upon every true and sincere return of a hearty repentance: And
now upon this title no more degrees can be added: it is already greater, and
was before all our needs, public miseries by secret grace, into eternal
glories. But now upon other circumstances it is remarkable and excellent, and
swells like an hydropick cloud when it is fed with the breath of the morning
tide, till it fills the bosom of heaven, and descends in dews and gentle
showers, to water and refresh the earth.

7. God is so ready to forgive that himself works our dispositions preventing
grace, is a mercy of forgiveness contrary to that severity by which some
desperate persons are given over to a reprobate sense; that is, a leaving of
men to themselves, so that they cannot pray effectually, nor desire holily, nor
repent truly, nor receive any of those mercies which God designed so
plenteously, and the Son of God purchased and these crimes must be ministered to
by their lesser relatives, by preventing grace; and if there be but a necessity
of it, that is enough to ascertain us we shall have it: But unless God should
begin to pardon us first, for nothing, and against our own dispositions, Salvus
sum quia pereo, si non peream plane inteream, we may say of some of Gods
judgments: We perish when we are safe, because our sins are not smitten, and
if they be, then we are worse undone; because we grow worse for being
miserable; but we can be relieved only by a free mercy; for pardon is the way
to pardon: and when God gives us our penny, then we can work for another, and a
gift is the way to a grace, and all that we can do toward the pardon, and the
way to find it, and the hand to receive it, and the eye to search it, and the
heart to desire it; being busy and effective as Elijah's fire, which intending
to convert the sacrifice into its own more spiritual nature of flames and
purified substances; stood in the neighborhood of the fuel, and called forth
all its enemies, and licked up the hindering moisture, and the water of the
trenches, and made the Altar send forth a fantastic smoke before the
sacrifice was enkindled: So is the preventing grace of God, it

These are the great degrees of Gods forwardness and readiness to forgive,
for the expression of which no language is sufficient is great, his mercies are
many, his mercy reaches unto the heavens, it fills heaven and earth, it is
above all his works, it endures for ever, God pitieth as a Father does his
children; nay he is our Father, and the same also is the Father of mercy, and
the God of all comfort: So that mercy and we have the same relation; and well
it may be so, for we live and die together; for as to man only, God shows the
mercy of forgiveness, so if God takes away his mercy, man shall be no more, no
more capable of felicity, or of

1. God is long-suffering, that is, long before he be angry, and God is
provoked every day, by the obstinacy of the Jews, and the folly of the
Heathens, and the rudeness and infidelity of the Mahumetans, and the
negligence and vices of Christians; and he that can behold no impurity is
received in all places with perfumes of mushromes, and garments spotted with
the flesh, and stained souls, and the actions and issues of misbelief, and an
evil conscience, and with accursed sins that he hates, upon pretense of
religion which he loves; and he is made a party against himself by our
voluntary mistakes, and men continue ten years, and 20. and 30. and 50. in a
course of sinning, and they grow old with the vices of their

2. Besides this long-sufferance and for-bearing with an unwearied But I found
mercy of the Lord because I did it in ignorance, says S. Paul; he pities our
infirmities and strikes off much of the account upon that stock; the violence
of a temptation and restlesnesse of its motion, the perpetuity of its
solicitation, the weariness of a man's spirit, the state of sickness, the
necessity of secular



himself, saying, See thou not how Ahab humbles himself? What was the event
of it? I will not bring the evil in his days, but in his sons days the evil
shall come upon his house.





But these suppletories are but seldom, and they are also great troubles, and
ever without comfort, and dispensed irregularly, and that not in the case of
habitual sins that we know of, or very great sins, but in single actions, or
instances of a less malignity;

Samuel to Zecharias: And Jonas thought he had reason on his side, to refuse to
go to threaten Nineveh; he knew Gods tenderness in destroying his creatures,
and he should be thought to be but a false Prophet; and so it came to pass
according to his belief. Jonah 4. 2.
Jonah prayed unto the Lord and said, I pra^ thee Lord was not this my saying
when I was yet in my country; therefore I fled for I knew thou were a gracious
God and merciful, s^ew to anger, and of great kindness and repentest thee of
the evil: He told before hand what the event would be; and he had reason to
know it; God proclaimed it in a cloud before the face of all Israel, and Exodus
34. 6.
Miscrator and misericors Deus. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious,
etc.

You see the largeness of this treasure; but we can see no end, for we have
not yet looked upon the rare arts of conversion^ nor that God leaves the
natural habit of virtues, even after the acceptance is interrupted; nor his
working extraregular miracles besides the sufficiency of Moses and the
Prophets, and the New Testament, and thousands more which we cannot consider
now.

But this we can, when God sent an Angel to pour plagues upon the earth, there
were in their hands Phialae aureae, golden phials: is precious and costly, and
it is an expense that God delights not in; but they were Phials, that is, such
vessels as out of them no great evil could come at once; but it comes out with
difficulty, sobbing and troubled as it passes forth; it comes through a narrow
neck, and the parts of it crowd at the port to get forth, and are stifled by
each others neighborhood; and all strive to get out, but few can pass, as if
God did nothing but threaten, and draw his judgments to the mouth of the Phial
with a full

The result of this consideration is, that as we fear the Divine judgments, so
that we adore and love his goodness, and let the golden chains of the Divine
mercy tie us to a noble prosecution of our duty and the interests of religion;
For he is the worst of men whom Kindness cannot soften, nor endearments
oblige, whom gratitude cannot tie faster then the bands of life and death: He
is an ill natured sinner if he will not comply with the sweetnesses of heaven,
and be civil to his Angel guardian, or observant of his Patron God, who made
him, and feeds him, and keeps all his faculties, Fear is stronger then death,
and Love is more prevalent then Fear, and kindness is the greatest endearment
of Love; and yet to an ingenuous person gratitude is greater then all these,
and obliges to a solemn duty when love fails, and fear is dull and unactive,
and death it self is despised: but the Let us take heed: for Mercy is like a
rainbowe, which God set in the clouds to remember mankind; it shines here as
long as it is not hindered; but we must never look for it after it is night,
and it shines not in the other world; if we refuse mercy here, we shall have
justice to eternity.

SERMON XXVIII.

To the right Honorable, and truly Noble, RICHARD Lord VAVGHAN, Earl of
Carbery, Baron of Emlim and Molinger, Knight of
My Lord,
I Am not ashamed to profess that I pay this part of service to your Lordship
most unwillingly: for it is a sad office to be the chief Minister in the house
of mourning, and to present an interested person with a branch of Cypress and
a bottle of tears. And indeed, my Lord, it were more proportionable to your
give me leave to present you with her picture; drawn in little and in I think I
shall, so long as I live, that is so long as I am

Your Lordships


WHen our blessed Savior and his Disciples viewed the Temple, some one amongst
them cried out, Magister aspice, quales lapides! Master behold what fair, what
great stones are here! Christ made no other reply but foretold their
dissolution and a Adam [the time shall come, that there shall not be left one
stone upon another.] The whole Temple and the Religion, the ceremonies ordained
by God, and the Nation beloved by God and the fabric erected for the service
of God, shall run to their own period and lie down in their several graves.
Whatsoever Adam in his artificial immortality: Immortality was not in his
nature, but in the hands, and arts, in the favor and superadditions of God.
Man was always the same mixture of heat and cold, of dryness and moisture;
ever the same weak thing, apt to feel rebellion in the humors, and to suffer
the evils of a civil war in his body natural: and therefore health and life was
to descend upon look like health and beauty, and in the evening, they are sick,
and we might have died if we had not been preserved by the continual flux of a
rare providence: so now that we are reduced to the laws of our own nature, we
must needs die. It is natural, and therefore necessary; It is become a
punishment to us, and therefore it is unavoidable, and God has bound the evil
upon us by bands of natural and inseparable propriety, and by a supervening
unalterable decree of Heaven: and we are fallen from our privilege, and are
returned to the condition, of beast, and buildings, and common -- Phario
nutantia pondera saxo
Quae cineri vanus dat ruitura labor,
and becomes as friable and uncombined dust as the ashes of the Sinner or the
Saint that lay under it, and is now forgotten in his bed of darkness: And to
this Catalogue of mortality Man is enrolled with a [Statutum est] It is
appointed for all men once to die, and after death comes judgment; and if a
man can be stronger then nature, or can wrestle with a degree of Heaven, or can
escape from a Divine punishment by his own arts, so that neither the power nor
the providence of God, nor the laws of nature, nor the bands of eternal
predestination can hold him, then he may live beyond the fate and period of
flesh, and last longer then a flower: But if all We must needs die] That Is our
sentence. But that is not all.

We are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again] Stay.
1. We are as water, weak and of no consistence, always descending, abiding in
no certain place, unless where we are detained with violence: and every little
breath of wind makes us rough and tempestuous, and troubles our faces: every
trifling

2. But besides the weaknesses and natural decayings of our bodies, Lepidus and
Ausidius stumbled at the threshold of the Senate and fell down and died, the
blow came from heaven in a cloud but it struck more suddenly then upon the poor
Quod quisque vitet, nunquam homini satis cautum est in horas. There are
sicknesses that walk in darkness, and there are exterminating Angels that fly
wrapped up in the curtains of immateriality and an uncommunicating nature; whom
we cannot see, but we feel their force and sink under their sword, and from
heaven the vail descends that wraps our heads in the fatal sentence. There is
no age of man but it has proper to it self some posterns and outlets for
death, besides those infinite and open ports out of which myriads of men and
women every day pass into the dark Infancy has life but in effigy, or like
a spark dwelling in a pile of wood: the candle is so newly lighted, that every
little shaking of the taper, and every ruder breath of air, puts it out, and it
dies. Childhood is so tender, and yet so unwary; so soft to all the impressions
of chance, and yet so forward to run into them, that God knew there could be no
security without the care and vigilance of an Angel-keeper: and the eyes of

the case is altered. Nature is strong, and art is apt to give ease and remedy:
but still, there is no security; and there, the case is not altered. 1 For
there are so many diseases in men that are not understood. 2 So many new ones
every year. 3 The old ones are so changed in circumstance, and intermingled
with so many collateral complications. 4 The Symptoms it falls away and runs
apace; if its current be stopped, it swells and grows troublesome, and spils
over

4. In all the process of our health we are running to our grave: we open our
own sluices by vitiousnesse, and unworthy actions; we pour in drink, and let out
life; we increase diseases and know not how to bear them; we strangle our
selves with our own intemperance; we suffer the fevers and the inflammations
of lust, and we quench our souls with drunkenness; we bury our understandings
in loads of meat and surfets: and then we lie down upon our beds and roar with
pain and disquietnesse of our souls: Nay, we new mortality upon our selves;
wars and vexatious cares, and private duels, and public disorders, and every
thing that is unreasonable, and every thing that is violent: so that now we may
add this fourth gate to the grave: Besides Nature and Chance, and the mistakes
of art, men die with their own sins, and then enter into the grave in haste and
passion, and pull the heavy stone of the monument upon their own heads. And
thus we make our selves like water spilt on the ground: we throw away our lives
as it cannot be gathered up again. There is no redemption from the grave. --
inter se mortales mutua vivunt
Et quasi cursores vitai lampada tradunt.


Lazarus, and the widows son of Naim, and Tabitha, and the Saints that appeared
in Jerusalem at the resurrection of our blessed Lord, arose; they came into
this world, some as strangers only to make a visit, and all of them to
manifest a glory: but none came upon the stock of a new Dives would fain have
returned to his brothers house; but neither he, nor any from him could be sent:
but all the rest in the New Testament (one only excepted) were expressed to
have been holy persons, or else by their age were declared innocent. Lazarus
was Tabitha raised by Saint Peter was a charitable and a holy Christian: and
the maiden of twelve years old, raised by our blessed Savior, had not entered
into the regions of choice and sinfulness: and the only exception of the
widows son, is indeed none at all; for in it the Scripture is wholly silent;
and therefore it is very probable that the same process was used, God in all
other instances having chosen to exemplify his miracles of

This consideration I intend to you as a severe Monitor, and an advice of
carfulness, that you order your affairs so that you may be partakers of the
first resurrection, that is, from sin to grace, from the death of vicious
habits, to the vigor, life and efficacy of Blessed are they that have part in
the first resurrection, upon them the second death shall have no power: meaning
that they who by the power of Christ and his holy Spirit were raised to life
again, were holy and blessed souls, and such who were written in the book of
God; and that this grace happened to no wicked and vicious person: so it is
most true in the spiritual and intended sense: You only that serve God in a
holy life; you who are not dead in trespasses the resurrection of the body to
everlasting life. The wicked indeed shall be haled forth from their graves,
from their everlasting prisons, where in chains of darkness they are kept unto
in sensu favoris, a resurrection, but the solennities of the eternal death; It
is nothing but a new capacity of dying again; such a dying as cannot signify
rest; but where death means nothing but an intolerable and never ceasing
calamity: and therefore these words a gathering, but a scattering from the face
and presence of God. But the godly also come under the sense of these words.
They descend into their graves, and shall no more be reckoned among the living;
they have no concernment in all that is done under the Sun. Agamemnon has no
more to do with the Turks armies invading and possessing that part of Greece
where he reigned, then Cicero has no more interest in the present evils of
Christendom, then we have to do with his boasted discovery of Catilines
conspiracy. What is it to me that Rome was taken by the Gauls? and what is it
now to Camillus if different religions be tolerated amongst us? These things
that now happen concern the living, and they are made the scenes of our duty or
danger respectively: and when our wives are dead and sleep in charnel houses,
they are not troubled when we laugh loudly at the songs sung at the next
marriage feast; nor do they envy when another snatches away the gleanings

It is true they envy not, and they lie in a bosom where there can be no
murmr, and they that are consigned to Kingdoms, and to the feast of the
marriage-supper of the Lamb, the glorious and eternal Bridegroom of holy
souls, they cannot think our marriages here, our lighter laughings, and vain
rejoycings considerable as to them. And yet there is a relation continued
still. Aristotle said, that to affirm the dead take no thought for the good of
the living is a disparagement to the laws of that friendship which in their
state of separation they cannot be tempted to rescind. And the Ambrose gave
some things in charge to his dying brother Satyrus, that he should do for him
in the other world: he gave it him (I say) when he was dying, not when he was
dead. And certain it is that though our dead friends affection to us is not to
be estimated according to our low conceptions, yet it is not less, but much
more then ever it was; it is greater in degree, and of another kind.

But then we should do well also to remember, that in this world communion, by
actions of intercourse with them, and yet proper Paul prayed in behalf of
Onesiphorus) that God would show them 2 Timothy 1. 18.
mercy in that day, that fearful, and yet much to

But we are not yet passed the consideration of the sentence: This descending
to the grave is the lot of all men. [neither does God respect the person of any
man] The rich is not protected for favor, nor the poor for pity, the old man
is not reverenced for his age, nor the infant regarded for his tenderness;
youth and beauty, learning and prudence, wit and strength lie down equally in
the dishonours of the grave. All men, and all natures, and all persons resist
the addresses and solennities of death, and strive to preserve a Donec certa
dies omni compage soluta
Ipsum cum rebus subruat auxilium,
till the determined day comes, and then the burden sunk upon the pillars, and
disordered the aids and auxiliary rafters into a common ruin and a ruder
grave: so are the desires and weak arts of man, with little aids and
assistances of care and physic we strive to support

Let not us think to be excepted or deferred. If beauty, or wit, or youth, or
Nobleness, or wealth, or virtue could have been a defense, and an excuse from
the grave, we had not met here to day to mourn upon the hearse of an excellent
Lady; and God only knows for which of us next the mourners shall go about the

(...)
(...). Il. (...).

We have lived so many years; and every day and every minute we make an escape
from those thousands of dangers and deaths that encompasse us round about: and
such escapings we must reckon to be an extraordinary fortune, and therefore
that it cannot last long. Vain are the thoughts of Man, who when he is young or
healthful, thinks he has a long thread of life to run over, and that it is
violent and strange for young persons to die; and natural and more natural
for young Men and Women to die, then for old; because that is more natural
which has more natural causes; and that is more natural which is most
common: but to die with age is an God regards no man's person.

Well! but all this you will think is but a sad story. What? we be gathered no
more. Is there no comfort after all this? shall we go from hence, and be no
more seen, and have no recompense.

Miser, o miser, aiunt, omnia ademit
Vna die infausta mihi tot praemia vitae.
Shall we exchange our fair dwellings for a coffine, our softer beds [yet] in
the Text: [For all this, yet does God devise means that his banished be not
expelled from him.] All this sorrow and trouble is but a phantasme, and
receives its account and degrees from our present conceptions and the
proportion to our relishes and gust.

When Pompey saw the Ghost of his first Lady Julia, who vexed his rest and his
conscience for superinducing Cornelia upon her bed within the ten months of
mourning, he presently fancied it, either

Aut nihil est sensus animis in morte relictum,
Aut mors ipsa nihil --
Either my dead wife knows not of my unhandsome marriage, and forgetfulness of
her; or if she does, then the dead live.

-- longae, canitis si cognita, vitae
Mors media est --
Death is nothing but the middle point between two lives between this and
another: concerning which comfortable mystery the holy God of Abraham, Isaak,
and Jacob; for all do live to him: and the souls of Saints are with Christ: I
desire to be dissolved (says S. Paul) and to be with Christ, Vide 1 Cor. 15.
18.
for that is much better: and, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; they
rest from their labors, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.
and their works follow them: Revel. 14. 13.
For we know, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, John
5. 24.
we have a building of God, a house not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5. 8. and 6.
eternal in the heavens: and this state of separation S. Paul calls, a being
absent from the body, and being present with the Lord: This is one of Gods
means which he has in the hands of Christ; they are in his presence; they are,
or shall be clothed with a house of Gods making; they rest from all their
labors; all tears are wiped from their eyes, and all discontents from their
spirits;

I will not venture to determine what are the circumstances of the abode of
Holy Souls in their separate dwellings; and yet possibly that might be easier
then to tell what or how the soul is and works in this world, where it is in
the body tanquam in aliena domo, as in a prison, in fetters and restraints: for
here the soul is discomposed and hindered, it is not as it shall be, as it
ought to be, as it was intended to be; it is not permitted to its own freedom,
and proper operation; so that all that we can understand of it here, is that it
is so incommodated with a troubled and abated instrument, that the object we
are to consider cannot be offered to us in a right line, in just and equal
propositions or if it could, yet because we are to understand the soul by the
soul, it becomes not only a troubled and abused object, but a crooked
instrument; and we here can consider it, just as a weak eye can behold At cum
exierit and in liberum coelum quasi in domum suam venerit, when the soul is
entered into her own house, into the free regions of the rest and the
neighborhood of heavenly joys, then its operations are more spiritual,
proper, and proportioned to its being; and though we cannot see at such a
distance, yet the objects is more fitted if we had a capable

Certain it is, that the body does hinder many actions of the soul: it is an
imperfect body, and a diseased brain, or a violent passion that makes fools: no
man has a foolish soul; and the reasonings of men have infinite difference and
degrees by reason of the bodies constitution. Among beasts which have no
reason, there is a greater likeness then between men, who have: and as by
faces it is easier to know a man from a man, then a sparrow from a sparrow, or
a squirrel from a squirrel: so the difference is very great in our and if it
has any any act of life, it is much more noble and

That the soul is alive after our death, S. Paul affirms [Christ died for us, 1
These. 5. 10.
that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him.] Now it were
strange that we should be alive, and live with Christ, and yet do no act of
life: the body when it is asleep does many: and if the soul does none, the
principle is less active then the instrument; but if it does any act at all in
separation, it must necessarily be an act or effect of understanding; there is
nothing else it can do. But this it can. For it is but a weak and an unlearned
proposition to say, That the Soul can do nothing of it self, nothing the Spirit
of grace, which is a principle of life and action and in many instances does
not all at communicate with matter, as in the infusion, superinduction and the
creation of spiritual graces. 2. As nutrition, generation, eating and drinking
are actions proper to the body and its state: so, ecstasies, visions, raptures,
intuitive knowledge, and consideration of its self, acts of volition, and
reflex acts of understanding are proper to the soul. 3. And therefore it is
observable that S. Paul said that he knew not whether his visions and raptures
were in or out of the body: for by that we see his judgment of the thing, that
one was as likely as the other, neither of them impossible or unreasonable; and
therefore that the soul is as capable of action alone as in conjunction. 4. If
in the state of blessedness there are some actions of the soul which do not
pass through the body, such as contemplation of God, and conversing with
spirits, and receiving those influences and rare immissions which coming from
the Holy and mysterious Trinity make up the crown of glory; it follows that the
necessity of the bodies ministry is but during the state of this life, and the
operations of the soul by reason of its dependence on the body are animal,
natural and material: so in the resurrection, the body shall be spiritual by
reason of the preeminence, influence, and prime operation of the soul. Now
between these

To all which I add this consideration. That our souls have the same condition
that Christ's soul had in the state of separation; because he took on him all
our nature, and all our condition; and it is certain, Christ's soul in the three
days of his separation did exercise acts of life, of joy and triumph, and did
not sleep, but visited the souls of the Fathers, trampled upon the Prisoners of
hope; and from all this we may conclude that the souls of all the servants of
Christ are alive, and therefore do the actions of life, and proper to their
state; and therefore it is highly probable that the soul works clearer, and
understands brighter, and discourses wiser, and rejoices louder, and loves
noblier, and desires purer, and hopes stronger then it can do here.

But if these arguments should fail, yet the felicity of Gods Saints cannot
fail. For suppose, the body to be a necessary instrument but

2. God will restore the soul to the body, and raise the body to such a
perfection, that it shall be an Organ fit to praise him upon; Simonides and
Theodectes, of Hortensins and Seneca, of Sceptius Metrodorus and Carneades, of
Cyneas the Ambassador of Pyrrhus, are only the Records better kept, and less
disturbed by accident and desease. For even the memory of Herod's son of Athens,
of Bathyllus and the dullest person now alive is so great, and by God made so
sure a record of all that ever he did, that as soon as ever God shall but tune
our instrument, and draw the curtains, and but light up the candle of
immortality, there we shall find it all, there we shall see all, and all the
world shall see all; then we shall be made fit to converse with God after the
manner of Spirits, we shall be like to Angels.

In the mean time, although upon the persuasion of the former Paul said)
whether present or absent, whether sleeping or waking, whether perceiving or
perceiving not, we may be accepted of him: that when we are banished this
world, and from the light of the sun, we may not be expelled from God, and from
the light of his countenance, but that from our beds of sorrows, our souls may
Amen

I Have now done with my Text, but yet am to make you another Sermon. I have
told you the necessity and the state of death; it may be too largely for such a
sad story; I shall therefore now Martha and Mary went to weep over

I chose, not to declare her extraction and genealogy. It was indeed fair and
Honorable; but having the blessing to be descended from

2. She had a strict and severe education, and it was one of Gods graces and
favors to her. For being the Heiresse of a great fortune, and living amongst
the throng of persons in the sight of vanities and empty temptations, that is,
in that part of the Kingdom where greatness is too often expressed in great
follies, and great vices, God had provided a severe and angry education to
chastise the forwardnesses

3. She was married young; and besides her businesses of religion seemed to be
ordained in the providence of God to bring to this Honorable family a part of
a fair fortune, and to leave behind her a fairer issue worth ten thousand
times her portion: and as if this had

4. In passing through which line of providence, she had the art to secure her
eternal interest, by turning her condition into duty and expressing her duty in
the greatest eminency of a virtuous, prud^nt and rare affection, that has been
known in any example. I will not give her so low a testimony, as to say only
that she was chaste; She

5. But that which I shall note in her, is that which I would have exemplar to
all Ladies, and to all women. She had a love so great for her Lord, so entirely
given up to a dear affection, that she thought the same things and loved the
same loves, and hated according to the same enmities, and breathed in his soul,
and lived in his presence,

Si gaudet, si flet, si tacit, hunc loquitur.
Coenat, propinat, poscit, negat, innuit, unus
Naevius est: -- and although this was a great enamel to the beauty of her
soul, yet it might in some degrees be also a reward to the virtue of her Lord:
For she would often discourse it to them that conversed with her; that he would
improve that interest which he had in her affection to the advantages of God,
and of religion: and she would delight to say, that he called her Solomon:
Prove. 2. ^7.
She forsook not the guide of her youth, nor brake the Covenant of her God.

6. As she was a rare wife: so she was an excellent Mother. For in so tender a
constitution of spirit as hers was, and in so great a

7. But if we examine how she demeaned her self toward God, there also you
will find her, not of a common, but of an exemplar piety. She was a great
reader of Scripture, confining her self to great portions every day; which she
read, not to the purposes

8. She was a very constant person at her prayers, and spent all a very great
love to hear the word of God preached; in which because I had sometimes the
honor to minister to her, I can give this certain testimony, that she was a
diligent, watchful and attentive hearer: and a constant Reader of Sermons, and
readily furnished and instructed to every good work, But God prevented that,
and has filled her desires not out of cisterns and little aquaeducts, but has
carried her to the fountain, where she drinks of the pleasures of the river,
and is full of God.

9. She always lived a life of much Innocence, free from the violences of
great sins: her person, her breeding, her modesty, her honor, her religion,
her early marriage, the Guide of her soul, and the Guide of her youth, were as
so many fountains of restraining Bonum est portare jugum ab adolescenti: it is
good to bear the yoke of the Lord from our youth; and though she did so, being
guarded by a mighty providence, and a great favor and grace of God from
staining her fair soul with the spots of hell, yet she had strange fears and
early cares upon her; but these were not only for her self, but in order to
others, to her nearest Relatives. For she was so great a lover of this
Honorable family of which now she was a Mother, that she desired to become a
chanel of great blessings to it unto future ages, and was extremely jealous
lest any thing should be done, or lest any from her thoughts, and delighted to
see her estate of a clear and disintangled interest: she would have no mingled
rights with it; she would not receive any thing from the Church, but religion
and a blessing: and she never thought a curse and a sin far enough off, but
would desire it to be infinitely distant; and that as to this family God had
given much honor and a wise head to govern it, so he would also for ever give
many

10. And though her accounts to God was made up of nothing

But in this course of hers there were some circumstances, and some appendages
of substance, which were highly remarkable.

1. In all her Religion, and in all her actions of relation toward God, she
had a strange evennesse and untroubled passage, sliding toward her Ocean of God
and of infinity with a certain and silent motion. So have I seen a river deep
and smooth passing with a still foot and a sober face, and paying to the
Fiscus, the great Exchequer of the Sea, the Prince of all the watery bodies, a
tribute

2. The other appendage of her religion, which also was a great ornament to all
the parts of her life, was a rare modesty and humility of spirit, a confident
despising and undervaluing of her self. For though she had the greatest
judgment, and the greatest experience of things and persons that I ever yet
knew in a person of sullies the beauty of the fairest virtues, and makes our
understanding like one that hides the wind, and covers the ointment of her
right hand.

I know not by what instrument it happened; but when death drew near, before it
made any show upon her body, or revealed it self by a natural signification,
it was conveyed to her spirit: she had a strange secret persuasion that the
bringing this Child should be her last scene of life: and we have known, that
the soul when she is Magnifica verba: mors prope admota excutit; sometimes it
is prophetical; sometimes God by a superinduced persuasion wrought by
instruments, or accidents of his own, serves the ends of his own providence and
the salvation of the soul: But so it was, that the thought of death dwelt long
with her, and grew from the first steps of fancy and fear, to a consent, from
thence to a strange credulity, and expectation of it; and without the violence
of sickness she died, as if she had done it voluntarily, and by design, and
for fear her expectation should have been deceived, or that she should Cato)
sic abiit e vita ut causam moriendi nactam se esse gauderet, she died, as if
she had been glad of the opportunity.

And in this I cannot but adore the providence and admire the wisdom and
infinite mercies of God. For having a tender and soft, a delicate and fine
constitution and breeding, she was tender to pain and apprehensive of it as a
child's shoulder is of a load and burden: Grave est tenerae cervici jugum; and
in her often discourses of death, which she would renew willingly and
frequently, she would tell, that she feared not death, but she feared the sharp
pains Emori nolo, me esse mortuam non curo: The being dead, and being freed
from the troubles and dangers of this world, she hoped would be for her
advantage; and therefore that was no part of her fear: But she believing the
pangs of death were great, and the use and aids of reason little, had reason to
fear lest they should do violence to her spirit and the decency of her
resolution. But God that knew her fears, and her jealousy concerning her self,
fitted her with a death so easy, so harmless, so painlesse, that it did not
put her patience to a severe trial. It was not (in all appearance) of so much
trouble, as two fits of a common ague; so careful Blessed he that goodness of
God, who does so careful actions of mercy But this one instance was a great
demonstration that the apprehension of death is worse then the pains of death:
and that God loves to reprove the unreasonablenesse of our fears, by the
mightiness, and by the arts of his mercy.

She had in her sickness (if I may so call it, or rather in the solemnities, and
graver preparations toward death) some curious and well-becoming fears,
concerning the final state of her soul. But from thence she passed into a
deliquium, or a kind of trance, and as soon as she came forth of it, as if it
had been a vision, or that she had conversed with an Angel, and from his hand
had received a label or book of life, and there seen her name enrolled, she
cried out aloud, [Glory be to God on high: Now I am sure I shall be saved.]
Concerning which manner of discoursing we are wholly ignorant, what judgment
can be made: but certainly there are strange things in the other world; and so
there are in all the immediate preparation to it; and a little glimps of
heaven, a minutes conversing with an Angel, any ray of God, any communication
extraordinary from the spirit of comfort which God gives to his servants in
strange and unknown manners, are infinitely far from illusions; and they shall
then be understood by us, when we feel them, and when our new and

But I must be forced to use summaries and arts of abbreviature in the
enumerating those things in which this rare Personage was dear to God and to
all her Relatives.

If we consider her Person, she was in the flower of her age, Jucundum cum
aetas florida ver ageret; of a temperate, plain and natural diet, without
curiosity or an intemperate palate; she spent less time in dressing, then many
servants; her recreations were little and seldom, her prayers often, her
reading much: she was of a most noble and charitable soul; a great lover of
honorable actions and

If we look on her as a Wife, she was chaste and loving, fruitful and discreet
humble and pleasant, witty and complyant, rich and fair, and wanted nothing to
the making her a principal and a precedent to the best Wives of the world, but
a long life, and a full age.

If we remember her as a Mother, she was kind and severe, careful and prudent,
very tender, and not at al fond, a greater lover of her childrens souls, then
of their bodies, and one that would value them more by the strict rules of
honor and proper worth, then by their relation to her self.

Her servants found her prudent, and fit to Govern, and yet open-handed and apt
to reward; a just Exactor of their duty and a great Rewarder of their
diligence.

She was in her house a comfort to her dearest Lord, a guide to her children, a
Rule to her Servants an example to all.

But as she related to God in the offices of Religion, she was even and
constant, silent and devout, prudent and material: she loved what she now
enjoyes, and she feared what she never felt, and God did for her what she never
did expect. Her fears went beyond all her evil; and yet the good which she has
received was, and is, and ever shall be beyond all her hopes.

She lived as we al should live, and she died as I fain would die -- Et cum
supremos Lachesis perneverit annos,
Non aliter cineres mando jacere meos.
I pray God I may feel those mercies on my deathbed that she felt, Nemo parum
diu vixit qui virtutis perfectae perfecto functus est munere: and as now in the
grave it shall not be enquired concerning her, how long she lived, but how
well? so to us who live after her to suffer a longer calamity, it may be some
ease to our sorrows, and some guide to our lives, and some security to our
conditions, to consider that God has brought the piety of a young Lady to the
early rewards of a never ceasing, and Mors illos consecrat, quorum exitum and
qui timent, laudant: Death consecrates and makes sacred that person whose
excellency was such, that they that are not

The end.

