A late Weary, Merry Voyage, And Journey: OR, JOHN TAILORS Months Travells,

By Sea and Land, from London to Gravesend, to Harwich, to Ipswich, to Norwich,
to Linne, to Cambridge, and from thence to London:

Performed and written on purpose to please his Friends, and to pleasure
himself in these unpleasant and necessitated Times.

Printed in the Year, 1650.

To the Judicious, or Ignorant Reader, the Author sends this loving
advertisement.
Gentlemen and Yeomen:
LET me entreat you not to use my Book as you do your Oysters, (which you
open in the middle) it is not so handsome entering into a house through a
window, or the backside, as it is in the front or foredoore: He Is no good
Courtier that falutes a fair Lady behind, nor can that Reader find the true
sense of any Book or Pamphlet that begins at Finis: It is a prepostrous kind
of feeding for a man to eat his Cheese before his Rostmeat, and after that to
sup up his Broth. So much for Introduction and Instruction. I thank my
Dictionary I am furnished with as much broken Latin as declares my
perambulating condition; Vado, bids me to go, Vadens, commands me to be
going, and Vagu^, puts me in mind of wandering, but quo Gentium fugiam, to
what place or corner of the World shall I go or fly to, there lies the
question: To stay at home I was in a starving condition, and to go from home, I
was in a Dillemma or wavering betwixt Hope and Diffidence, to what place,
whither, to whom, why, wherefore, and how my resolution was constantly
inconstant, and my determinations so slippery, that I could find no steadfast
footing in my mind, which ways to bend my course: But considering that I had
made eleaven Vagaries, Voyages, and Journies before; and that one fling more
would make my Labors a douzen (much like the twelve Labors of Hercules in
number, though far unequal in quantity, quallity, weight, and measure) To
make my uncertain Travells a complete Jury, I framed this following humorous
Bill, which I gave to diverse persons of sundry Functions, Callings,
Dispositions, and Humors.

Anno Domini, 1650.

Whereas John Tailor does intend to make a Progress this Summer (he knows
not when, or whither) to see some Friends in the Country, (he knows not
who,) being certain that his Journey and entertainments will be (he knows
not how;) and that he purposes to return again to London (he knows not
what time;) and that he intends to write a Relation of his perambulations (he
knows wherefore:) That when he does give me (or cause to be delivered to
me) the said Relations aforesaid, that then I will freely give to him for the
same, in good English money, the sum of somewhat; though neither my self, or
he, knows how much or little, that somewhat may be: To the which engagement
I have subscribed my name and dwelling: where, if at his return, he do
kindly find me, he shall friendly feel me.

TO this unfellowed matchless Bill, there are many men that have subscribed to
pay me money for this Book at my return. I thank God I am not so light of
Belief as to believe that they will all pay me; nor will I despair (...)
some are as willing to pay as they were to subscribe. The Countries that I have
footed, have been fruitful, plenteous, with abundance of most good things
(except News and Cuckolds) but such stuff as my Observations collected, I
ambled to distribute to delight my Friends, to please mine Enemies, and
pleasure my self.

John Tailor.

A late Weary, Merry Voyage, etc.
TIme was, this Land was sick of Peace and Wealth,
And War, and Poverty must give her Health:
Grave Reformation, Physic did apply,
And Mars himself used much Phlebotomy;
I will not say our Land was full of Witches
To charm us to contemn our Peace and Riches;
But my belief is fixed, my thoughts are pich'd;
One half were Witches, the other half bewitched.
Stern War has let us bloodith' Master vain,
And many a pursie purse did purge and draine.
Thus Plenty made us proud, and War does show
How good Peace was, and how our selves to know.
Affliction is the Line, the Hook the Net
To catch us from the World, they new beget
Our souls to Heaven, and by a gracious Birth
Lifts up our minds to slight this sordid Earth.
And I do wish all Sects, strifes, contradictions,
Would make such use of England's sad afflictions.
And now a short discourse of traveling
Of Travelers, and of my wandering:
The Sun's a Traveller (and a great one too)
In twice twelve hours, he round the World does go;
The Moon surrounds us in her changing sphere,
Three hundred sixty and five times a year.
But yet the thoughts of man more quick does run
Then flashing lightning, or the Moon or Sun.
My restless thoughts can in a moment leap
To Heaven, and thence to the infernal deep.
To Europe, Asia, and America,
To the orient Indies, to hot Africa;
The Summer, Autumn, Winter, and the Spring
Are in perpetual motion, traveling.
And though my thoughts (like other men's are vain,
Winds, Seas, nor Storms, my thinking can restrain.
At Travelers, let no man carpe or cavil,
Our Mothers (at our births) were all in travel.
And from our birth unto our burial,
In diverse Functions we do travel All.
The Footman's feet, the Statesman's working brain,
In travel, labor, and continual pain
Do spend themselves, and all their courses bend
For private ends (to no end) till they end.
The Lawyer travells, his tongue (swift with slight)
Sells his words dear, by measure, tale, and weight:
And those that buy them dear, do often find
They paid well for good words, but words are wind.
All men are born to travel, each man must
With pain and travel, turn unto his dust:
Then happy is the man that can go right,
Who does his paths with David's Lantern light.
And all my life time it has been my fate
To be a traveller legitimate:
From head to heel, by either Land or Sea
I am a Traveller, Right Cape a Pe^.
Now Clothoe, my poor vital thread has spunne,
And Lachesis, her r^eling work's near done:
Now Atropos is ready with her Knife
To cut the uncertain feeble twist of life;
Now in my Autumn, or my fall o'th leaf
Half dead, half living, half blind, lame, half deaf,
Now all these five halves can not make one whole
(From m' head unto my body bearing sole)
Now at this time, with brains, and feet, and pen,
I am an old new Traveller again.
It Is not the greatness of Golias can
Persuade me to be lesser then a man:
She Is called a ship, whose burthen's but four score,
And one that's fifteen hundred is no more.
Though Folio be our learned Vollums, yet
Decimo sexto, may express some wit.
A generous mind respects the poor man's Mite,
It Is said, a Lark is better then a Kite.
Nor would I have the Reader to mistake,
That odious bold comparisons I make:
Pamphlets must not compare with Reverend Writings
Of Theologues, or Historians grave enditings.
The Owl must not as high as the Eagle flee,
Yet Owls are Fowls, as well as Eagles be.
So I, that am poor, weak, Aquatticus,
A Traveller, and Poet Minnimus,
The honor, wholly, humbly I ascribe
TO the Worthies of most sacred Levies Tribe,
And the learned servants of the triple Trine,
Whose verses make mortallity divine:
Your genius high Illuminations are
Transcending mine, as Titan does a Star;
Yet your refulgence does not blind me so,
But that my silly Glowormes light does glow.
I scribble, and I walk, I walk and scribble,
I give and take Jests, Bull, and clinch, and quibble.
Amongst good Poets I have played at Crambo,
And I have found men's words and deeds not Ambo.
The last year (sixteen hundred forty nine)
I went to Cornwall, and some foes of mine
Did certify a Lie, maliciously,
That I was subtle, and a dangerous spy;
And did with travel, and a faign'd pretense
With the Enemy have some Intelligence.
For which three days in prison I was closed,
With sleep reposed, and my mind composed:
I knew my conscience clear, and well disposed,
By Truths my accusations were opposed,
And I (not found the man I was supposed)
Without a Fee or Fine, on me imposed,
And unto misery and want exposed
(Not guilty found) from Prison I was losed.
But if I had a thought, or bad intent
When I from London, into Cornwall went,
Against the Army, State, or Parliament,
Let torments both my soul and corpse torment.
No man can blame me much that I have grumbled,
That I, for no cause was thus to tos'd and tumbled;
And that I never could m' Accuser see,
My Books and Bills took, and detained from me:
The Books declared my Journey too and fro,
The Bills, were names of men, and where to go
To find the men, to pay me for my pain,
My loss of those, made all my labor vain;
And for that loss, I once more try my friends,
Hope tells me, Time will make me some amends.
False Fortunes frowns, makes me not fear or shrink,
And evil fall on him that ill does think.
My Muse shall now sing, though she be no Singer,
For (Reader with thee) I Will no longer linger:
My brain Enthusiastic holds it meet
To make the feet of Verse, tell how my feet
Did travel gauling gravel, and surbated,
Sometimes by day, sometimes by night belated.
To write my acts my self, as it is most fit,
Caesar himself his Commentaries writ:
And solid Johnson made his Muse his Cock
To crow his savoury Voyage up Fleet Dock:
So I do hold it worthy imitation,
To follow them, and write mine own Relation.
The fourteenth day of August, London, London
I left, O what has many a mothers This kind of Verse or Rhyme, is hard to
make, and when they are made they are not worth any thing, especially when they
are in the hands of an ignorant Reader.
son don?
What has the mad and furious sword and gun don?
But killed some, made some rich, and some are undon.
That I may say of London, what a Town is it,
There lives the Seeker, Dipper, and the Brownist:
There Is room for Ranters, and alas how apt is it
To harbor the ungoverned Annabaptist?
Thou Have played thy Game home, like a cunning Gamester,
Thou more Religions have, then has damned Amster.
I down the Thames the day aforesaid went,
(On one side Essex, on the other Kent)
Until at last, to Gravesend I was borne,
And lodged in Milton, at the plenteous Horn.
That Horn, was Cornucopia unto me
Two days meat, drink, and lodging, I thank a B^ker. I thank John Brafferson
the Master of a Tilt-boat there for my four days entertainment.
quarter free.
From thence unto a private house I went,
And there (with small charge, and much discontent)
Four days I stayed, and every tide did watch
To have some Ship, or Hoigh, Boat, Bark, or Katch,
To carry me to Norfolk or some place
Where I might foot it, and jog on my Race.
In all this time I never wanted drink,
And for their drink, I give 'em thanks in Ink:
No otherwise my thanks I can express,
But verbally, and with the Pen and Press.
The twentieth day of August, Kent and I
Took leave, and to the Fort of Tilberry
I past, and ere I there an hour had bin,
A lucky ship of Ipswich took me in.
She quickly spread abroad her canvas wings,
The whistling wind in shrowdes and taklin sings:
That next day following, near the hour eleaven
We came t'an Anchor safe in Harwich Haven:
My thanks unto the Master I must utter,
He Is owner of the ship, his sirname's Butter:
His ship and self both named the Jonathan,
And I have seldom found a kinder man.
My fare was as he fared, and well he fared,
And (in his Cabin) I my lodging shared;
For which he would not take one mite of me,
Thus was my Passage, Meat, and Lodging free
For which I would requite him, if I could,
And till I can, let him take what I would.
From Harwich Harbor, with the wind and tide,
In a small Boat, we up to Ipswich slide:
At the White Horse, I there was entertained
So well (for nothing) that they nothing gained.
For which among my worthy friends I rank them,
Kind Master Atkins, and his Wife, I thank them.
Ipswich, is the chief Town of the County of Suffolk, it has twelve Parish
Churches in it: There has been more in former times, it may be called a City
for the large bounds and extent of it: It is from the North to the South a
large mile in breadth, and from East to West it is two miles in length: our
famous unfortunate Cardinal, Thomas Wolsey was borne there, where he had
caused to be laid the foundation of a Magnificent stately College, the ruins
whereof are now scarce to be found; but in memory of his birth and birth place,
there he built a large and strong Shambles (for Butchers to sell, and others
to buy flesh) the like of it is not in England; the Town has been walled
strongly, but spoiled and demollished by the Danes nor was (nor is like to be)
^ever repaired; it is governed by two Bayliffes, and ten Portmen, who do wear
Scarlet Gowns when occasion is, their Common Counsel (being many) are very
substantial men, read more in Mr. Cambden or Mr. Speed.

August the two and twentieth, thence went I
Eight miles to Stanhum, and lodged at the Pie.
The next day, was an extreme rainy Friday,
Wet (through my clothes) unto my skin, or hyde, a
Tedious and weary Journey twenty miles,
Bedabbled, dirty, clambring many styles,
I came at night unto a Town called Newton,
And there I had a dry house, and wet suit on.
On Saturday (the day called Bartholmew)
I rose, and trampled through the mire and dew;
My tired feet the rotten highway beat on
Unto a Village, or a Bridge called Eaton:
There at the Lion, (red as any Stammell)
Is harbor good, for man, or Horse, or Cammell:
There dwells my cousin Will Heart, and's good wife Bridgid
By them two nights, I was well fed and lidged.
I stayed with them the Saturday and Sunday,
And he with me to Norwich went on Monday:
There did my Cousin Heart, prove more kind hearted,
And there we merry were, s^ooke hands and parted.
One Master Edward Martin there does dwell,
Who both divine Books, and profane, does sell:
We (till that time) never saw each others face,
Yet there he freely kept me three days space;
From Monday until Thursday morning there
He thought no cost too heavy, or too dear:
He brought me out of Town: a mile at least,
And there I freed him from a troublous Guest.
Norwich, is a famous ancient City, built many years before the Norman
Conquest; it had a strong Castle in it double ditched, out of the ruins or
corruption of the Castle, a Jayle (or Goal) was engendered, to which use it is
now put: It was spoiled by Hugh Bigot Earl of Norfolk, in the reign of K, Henry
the second, and a greater mischief befell the City in King Henry the thirds
time, for the Citizens (in a tumultuous fury) spoiled it with fire, and withal
burnt the goodly Priory Church, which afterward they were caused to rebuild in
a fairer manner. Lastly, Norwich was won and fired by Ket and his Army of
Rebels, since when it has been well repaired, and in a flourishing condition;
the walls of the City are of more circuit or bounds then the walls of London: But
it is to be considered, there are Pasture Grounds, Gardens, and waste Lands
(not built upon) more then half the ground within the walls; it has 12. gates
to issue in and out 12. several ways, whereby it may be conceived that it is
large in circuit, (for London has not fo many) there are 30. fair Parish
Churches, there were five more, but they are ruined besore these present
troubles; the goodly Cathedral is much defaced in these late times of
Reformation. It was governed by 2 Bailiffs, till King Edward the fourth
empowered them to choose a Mayor, and gave Privileges to them, and Charters of
honorable and memorable regard: The Low Dutch (or Netherland Nation) being
frighted from their Country by the cruelty of the Duke D' Alva, who was
Livetenant Governor there under the King of Spain, (who for his Tyranny the
people called Duke Diabota) they fled in multitudes into England, and thousands
of them came to Norwich, where they have so thrived, and withal much enriched
the City, that it is thought there are 10000. Weavers, Spinners, and other
Artificers, daily employed for the making of sundry sorts of Says, with other
Stuffs innumerable, either for wearing or ornaments; to adorn houses with
Hangings, Carpets, or Curtains, of innumerable sorts, colors, varieties, and
more hard names then any Apothecary has upon his Boxes or Gallypots, and so
much for Norwich, with my further thanks to Mr. Edward Martin, with Mr. Richard
Thacker, Mr. Vowte, Cum multis aliis, Omnium Gathrum, All ta Mall.

The County of Norfolk has in some parts found a strange alteration, since the
last year, 1649. in the price of Hay, for it is fallen from 4s. 4d. the
hundred weight, to one groat the hundred; this I thought worthy of relating to
show the fertility of the Soil, by the Almighties blessings.

Angust the nine and twentieth I went forth
From Norwich City ten miles further North,
To Worsted, well Wet, with a heavenly shower,
Mine Hostess entertained me, to her power;
Although the weather frowned, she did not lower,
Her looks were sweet, but yet her Ale was sower.
My lodging good, my reckoning was not dear,
For ten pence, Supper, Bed, and Breakfast there.
I arose as soon as day began to show,
And (two miles thence) did unto Honing go;
There, to the Minister I welcome was,
And merrily one day and night did pass:
And there we made a shift that Friday night
To eat a well fed, fat Tith Pig outright.
Next day I Honing left, and did begin
To cross the North of Norfolk, toward Lyn:
That day I chanced a gallant house to find
A Master bountiful, and servants kind:
I need not tell my Reader where, or who,
The name of Oxnet, all does plainly show.
Sir William Paston: there I found and spoke with the Apelles of our Age, Mr.
Edward Pierce Painter, and Mr. John Stone was there, whose rare Arts are most
exquisitly manifested both in painting, limming, and cunning carved Statues in
stone.

That Saturday I went t'a Town called Reepham,
And as amongst great sinners, I the chief am:
I grieve to see the Churches there demollish'd,
Sects plenty, and true Piety abollish'd.
This Town of Repham (or Reepham) has three fair Churches, were standing in
one Churchyard, it is said they were built by three Sisters; one of them has
been long decayed and fallen to the ground, only the Tower stands fair and
strong; the other two Churches do serve four Parishes, and I could hear no more
but three Bells on Sunday there: So that the reckoning is one Churchyard, three
Bells, two Chreches, three Steeples, four Parishes, and one broken Church for
Lumber.

The second of September (being Monday) I left Reepham, and traveled 18. miles
to a Village called Gayton; but by the way (at a place called Brissley) I was
told of a Holy Sister, who by falling back, had risen forward, to the increase
of the faithful: she being reproved falling and rising, said it was pure zeal
that pricked her on, and that it was done with a Brother, he and she, and every
one being bound to do for, and with one another, and I hearing of her kindness
bestowed this short Epigram on her.

Has Lust defiled her pureness, never matched?
No 'twas deceit, she has been cunny-catch'd:
It was a rule, she learned of her Mother,
That 'twas no sin to couple with a Brother.
But to return again where I left: at Gayton there are 2 plain Alehouses, and
one Wine Alehouse; these houses were distant one from the other a furlong, or
two flight shoot: at the first house (where the Wine was) there were fellows
swaggering, and ready to draw their fists, there I would not lodge; at the
second I would have lodged, but could not, their beds were all taken up; at the
third the doors were locked and the windows shut, no body at home, the folks
not come home from Harvest work; forward I knew not whether, and backward I
would not go, and to stand still there was cold comfort for an old weary
Traveller, there being no harbor, but a wild Common, nor any company to pass
the time withal but 3 or 4 flocks of Geese; in this extremity I espied an
old-old, very old, neat handed little ancient man, to him I went, and told him
that I would have lodged at that house, but it was shut up; quoth he the folks
will come home by and by, but I do not know whether they have any lodging or
no, and sure me think you be a clean man, and it is pity you should lie on the
Common, if you will go home and lie with me, I am an old Widdower, and one bed
shall hold us both.

I thankfully embraced his courteous offer, and went with him, where I supped
and log'd well, and would take nothing of me; his name is Sampson Warrington,
in remembrance of whose kindness I have written this thankful expession.

I was told there of a precise holy man in those parts, who sent his man unto a
Pasture ground to see his horse, the fellow went, and brought word to his
Master that his horse was Dead, dead quoth he, how dare thou tell me my
horse is dead? the fellow answered, I pray you be not angry, sure I am that if
he be not dead, that he is either deceased, or changed his life; well said the
Master, if my horse be departed, I have lost a good one, for he was so sure of
his feet, that I would have put my life into his hands.

Tuesday September 3. I went 4 miles to a Village called North-Wooton, 3 miles
from Linn, there I was much beholding to my Kinsman Mr. John Clark, he gave me
large and free welcome, for which to him with his good Wife, my gratitude is
manifested; also my thanks to Mr. Swift.

Wednesday I went to Linn, where a good old Joviall Lad named John Scarborow
entertained me sumptuously (for my Cozen John Clarks sake) and also he was
somewhat the kinder to me, because he had often heard of me, besides of his own
dispo^ition is free from discourtesie to strangers, I thank him for my fresh
fish, my Duck, or Mallard, my lodging, Ale, and Oysters, with the
appurtenances. etc.

Linn was much honored by King John for their Loyalty, for which that King
gave them his own word, and a fair gilt Bole, which they keep as honorable
memorialls to this day: it is a fair large strong Sea Town, it is now a
Garrison, the River hat the Sea does flow thereinto, disperseth it self into
many Branches, for the commodious enriching of diverse Shires, Counties, Towns,
and Places, as Rutlandshire, Huntingdonshire, Cambridge, and Cambridgeshire,
the Isle of Ely, etc. those Rivers do carry and re-carry all manner of goods
and Merchandise, so that Linn with all those Countries are furnished with more
Sea-coales then do come up the River of Thames, wood being so scarce that the
Rich might blow their nails, and the poor would be starved in the Winter for
want of fiting in all those Counties, if the Rivers were not.

...Thursday the 5. of September I left Linn, and took an open passage Boat,
being bedewed all day and night, and almost all the Friday with rain without
ceasing, so that, on Friday I came to Cambridge sufficiently pickled: there I
took up my lodging at the sign of the Rose (one of the best Innes) where I
thank Mr. Brian and his Wife (my old acquaintance) I had good cheer and
lodging gratis and welcome; I took notice of the Colleges, they stand as fair
and stately as ever, and (for any thing that I know) there may be as much
learning as ever was, but I saw but few Scholars or Gown men.

On Saturday the 7. of September, I was determined to see Sturbridge Fair, but
by fortune I espied an empty Cart returning toward London 17 miles to a Town
called Baldock; by which means I left Cambridge without taking my leave of Mr.
Brian, for which I crave his and his Wive's pardon.

That day I was uncarted at Baldock, and footed it 7 miles more to Steevenedge,
there (at the Faulcon) I stayed Saturday and Sunday, and on Monday I traveled
to Hatfield, and to Barnet 17 miles, where I was discreetly wet and dirty, and
took up my lodging at the Bell with a silent Clapper. The next day (being
Tuesday) I came home to my house wet and weary in Phoenix Alley, at the sign
of the Crown, near the Globe Tavern, about the middle of Long-Acre or Covent
Garden.

Thus having touched no State, or State Affairs,
Or mentioned men that sit in Honors Chaires:
I dare declare him of a base condition,
That of my Lines or Travels has suspicion.
I formerly have falsely been accused,
And therefore now I hope to be excused.
This time I traveled (for my life's preserving)
To get some money, to prevent a starving:
And every one that for my Book does pay me,
Does love me, lodge me, feed me, and array me.
With feet and pen, my walk and work is done,
And ( Caesar like) the Conquest I have won:
And though I never shall have Caesar's Fame,
Tet I did see, I came, and overcame.
FINIS.

