MAD FASHIONs, OD FASHIONS, All out of Fashions, OR, The Emblems of these
Distracted times.

By John Tailor.



LONDON, Printed by John Hammond, for Thomas Banks, 1642.

Mad fashions, od fashions, all out of fashions, OR, The Emblems of these
distracted times.
THe Picture that is Printed in the front
Is like this Kingdom, if you look upon it
For if you well do note it as it is,
It is a Transformed Metamorphasis.
This Monstrous Picture plainly does declare
This land (quite out of order) out of square.
His Breeches on his shoulders do appear,
His doublet on his lower parts does wear;
His Boots and Spurs upon his Arms and Hands,
His Gloves upon his feet (whereon he stands)
The Church over turned (a lamentable show)
The Candlestick above, the light below,
The Cony hunts the Dog, the Rat the Cat,
The Horse does whip the Cart (I pray mark that)
The Wheelbarrow does drive the man (oh Base)
And Eeles and Gudgeons fly a mighty pace.
And sure this is a Monster of strange fashion,
That does surpass all Ovids Transformation.
And this is Englands case this very day,
All things are turned the Clean contrary way;
For Now, when as a Royal Parliament,
(With King, and Peers, and Commons whole consent)
Have almost sat two years, with pains and Cares,
And Charge, to free us from our Griefs and fears,
For when many a worthy Lord and Knight,
And good Esquire (for King and Countries Right)
Have spent so much time with Great Toil, and Heed,
All Englands, Vicious garden how to weed,
So like a Wilderness 'twas overrun,
That though much has been done; All is not done.
The Devil does persuade, entice and lurk,
And force bad men to set good men aworke.
That whilst the Worthies strive to right our wrongs,
And give to each man, what to him belongs;
Whilst they take pains to settle all things here,
And Irish Devil, does madly domineere.
From Hells black Pit, begirt with Romish Arms,
Thous^nds of Locusts are in Troops and Swarms,
More Barbarous then the Heathen, worse then Jews,
No Turk or Tartars would such Tortures use.
Sure that Religion can no ways be good,
That so inhumanly delights in Blood:
Nor does that doctrine from the Scriptures spring,
That Subjects should Rebel against their King.
Nay (further) murder, ravish, spoil, deflowre,
Burn and lay waste, depopulate, devour,
Not sparing Infants at the Breast or womb,
(To die where first they lived, their Birth, their Tomb)
It Is said no Serpent, Adder, Snake, or Toade,
Can live in Ireland, or has there aboade:
It Is strange that she those Vipers does not Kill,
That Guawes her Bowels, and her blood does spill,
Can Irish Earth Kill all things vennemous,
And can she nurse such Vermin Mischievous:
Her own sons Native, worse then Strangers Borne,
They have their Mothers Entrails rent and torn,
Yet still her Indulgencie, harbors those,
And feeeds those Rebels that do breed her woes:
God (in thy Mercy) give her strength and Aid,
And courage, make her foes and ours dismayed,
Thou Lord of Hosts, thine own cause take in hand,
Thy foes (Thine Antichristian foes) withstand;
Defend thy truth, and all our Armies guide,
Our enemies to scatter and devide.
Thus leaving Ireland (with my hearty prayers)
To Britain back again my Muse repaires:
Where I perceive a Metamorphosis,
Is most preposterous, as the Picture is,
The world's turned upside down, from bad to worse,
Quite out of frame, The cart before the Horse.
The Fe^t-maker, and saucy stable Groom
Willd^re to Perch into the Preachers Room,
Each Ignorant, do of the Spirit Boast,
And prating fools brag of the Holy Ghost,
When Ignoramus will his Teacher Teach,
And Sow-gelders, and Cobblers dare to preach,
This shows, men's wits are monstrously disguised,
Or that our Country is Antipodis'd.
When holy Common Prayer, is by the Rabble
Accounted Porredge, and unfruitful Babble,
When our Belief is not so much as sed,
When as the Ten Commandments are not read,
When as the Lords Prayer is almost neglected,
When as all decency is quite rejected,
When to avoid a Romish Papists name,
A man must be unmannerly, past shame,
When he that does show Reverence, does offend,
And he seems best that will not bow or bend,
When he that into Gods House does not come,
As to a Stable, or a Tippling Room,
Is counted for a Popish favorite,
And branded so, despised, and scorned with spite.
When He that (of his waves) does conscience make,
And in his heart does world, flesh, feind forsake,
Loves God with all his soul; adores no pelf,
And loves his Neighbor, as he loves himself,
This man is Rare to find, yet this Rare man
Shall have the Hateful name of Puritan;
When execrations pierce the firmament,
And oaths do batter against Heavens Battlement:
When Imprecations, and damb'd Blasphemies,
In sundry cursed volleys scale the Skies,
When men more Brutish then the Horse or Mule,
Who know not to obey, presume to Rule,
Thus Church and Commonwealth, and men, all are
(Much like the Picture) out of frame or square.
And if 'twere possible our fathers old
Should live again, and tread upon this mould,
And see all things confused, overthrown,
They would not know this Country for their own.
For England has no likelihood, or show
Of what it was but seventy years ago;
Religion, manners, life and shapes of men,
Are much unlike the people that were then,
Nay Englands face and language is estranged,
That all is Metamorphis'd, chopped and changed,
For like as on the Poles, the World is whorl'd
So is this Land the Bedlam of the World;
That I amazed, and amated am,
To see Great Britain turned to Amsterdam,
Men's brains and wits (two simples beat together)
From thence (mixed and compounded) are sent hither.
For Amsterstam is landed (as I hear)
At Rye, or Hastings, or at Dover Peer,
At Harwich, Ipswich, Sandwich, or at Weymouth,
At Portsmouth, Dartmouth, Exmouth, Plymouth, Farmouth,
At Yarmouth, and at all the Ports to Tinmouth;
And westward unto Bristow and to Monmouth;
From all these Mouths and more, mad sects are sent,
Who have Religion all in pieces Rent,
One would have this, Another would have that,
And most of them would have they know not what.
God give us peace, and ease us of our pain,
And send those sects, from whence they came again,
The Papist, and the Schismatique; both grieves
The Church, for she is like Christ (Between two Thieves.)
I took the Protestation twice of Late,
Where I protested not to Innovate.
'Tavoide all Popish Rites, and to express
Obedience to what Englands Church profess,
My Loyalty unto my King is bent
With duty to the Peers and Parliament.
With Prayers, and my best service for them all,
That on them may Heavens chiefest blessings fall,
That with one heart, as one man, with one mind,
(For Gods great glory) they may be combinde,
And never vary, but go boldly on,
To end the good work, which they have begun.
This is the Sum (which never shall be forsook)
Of what I in the Protestation took.
But, for all this, I may be mannerly
In Gods House, and be free from Papistrie;
I hope I may put off my hat, and be
Allowed to Kneel, and Pray, and Bow my Knee,
When as divine Command bids, only then
I Will Bow to God, and not to Saints, or Men.
And from those duties I will never vary
Till death, or Order do command contrary.
The Almighties Name be ever praised and blessed,
That Romish superstition is suppressed,
We have no Abbyes, Abbots, Friars, or Monks,
Nor have we Nuns, or Stews allowed for Punks,
We have no Masses, or no Mass-Priests here,
But some are hanged, and some are fled for fear.
All those that are so bold to stay behind,
I wish they may like entertainment find;
Beads, Bables, Relliques, Tapers, Lamps or Lights,
We have no superstitious Romish Rites,
We seek our Pardons from our Heavenly Hope,
And not by works, or favor from the Pope;
To Saints we make no prayer, or Intercession,
And unto God alone we make Confession;
We hold no Real Presence in the Bread,
And we do know King Charles our supreme head
(Beneath God, who has placed him in his Throne)
For other Supreme, we acknowledge none.
No Purgatory, Image, Wood or Stone,
No Stock, or carved Block, we trust upon,
Nor is our Church discretion here so little,
As to Baptize with Cream, with salt and Spittle.
We have as many Sacraments, as Heaven
Ordained; which are but two, and Rome has seven.
We do not Christen Bells, and give them Names
Of Simon, Peter, Andrew, John and James;
We use no Pilgrimage, or Holy Water,
Nor in an unknown tongue our Prayers scatter;
All these, and many more, in Rome are used
Which are by us rejected and refused.
And yet too many faults, alas remains,
Which are the Churches, and the Kingdoms stains,
The Church Triumphant is not clear from spots,
The Poor Church Millitant has still some blots,
Here Is all unperfect, somthing's still amiss,
And nothing's blessed, but in Eternal Bliss.
Mean time, till we amend, and leave our crimes,
The Picture is the Emb^em of the Times.
FINIS.

